Other countries have initiated fifth-generation fighter development projects, with Russia's Sukhoi PAK FA and Mikoyan LMFS.
Rifle-caliber .30 and .303 in (7.62&nbsp;mm) caliber guns remained the norm, with larger weapons either being too heavy and cumbersome or deemed unnecessary against such lightly built aircraft.
The USAAF had ordered its first 13 mixed turboprop-turbojet-powered pre-production prototypes of the Consolidated Vultee XP-81 fighter, but this program was also canceled by VJ Day, with 80% of the engineering work completed.
"Half-generation" designs are either based on existing airframes or are based on new airframes following similar design theory as previous iterations; however, these modifications have introduced the structural use of composite materials to reduce weight, greater fuel fractions to increase range, and signature reduction treatments to achieve lower RCS compared to their predecessors.
The Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star (soon re-designated F-80) was less elegant than the swept-wing Me 262, but had a cruise speed () as high as the maximum speed attainable by many piston-engined fighters.
Top speeds for fighters rose steadily throughout World War II as more powerful piston engines were developed, and was approaching transonic flight speeds where the efficiency of propellers drops off, making further speed increases nearly impossible.
Most modern combat aircraft can carry at least a pair of air-to-air missiles.
Working through a series of prototypes, the La-120, La-126 and La-130, the Lavochkin design bureau sought to replace the La-7's wooden airframe with a metal one, as well as fit a laminar-flow wing to improve maneuver performance, and increased armament.
Most were biplanes and only rarely monoplanes or triplanes.
Moreover, if they encountered enemy fighters, their ordnance (which reduced lift and increased drag and therefore decreased performance) could be jettisoned and they could engage the enemy fighters, which eliminated the need for the fighter escorts that bombers required.
They quickly gained air superiority over the Allies, who at this stage of the war were often disorganized, under-trained and poorly equipped, and Japanese air power contributed significantly to their successes in the Philippines, Malaysia and Singapore, the Dutch East Indies and Burma.
Even with the tremendous advancement of air-to-air missiles in this era, internal guns were standard equipment.
Throughout the war, fighters performed their conventional role in establishing air superiority through combat with other fighters and through bomber interception, and also often performed roles such as tactical air support and reconnaissance.
The rifle-caliber machine guns that were common on prewar fighters could not easily down the more rugged warplanes of the era.
Between the wars, wood was largely replaced by steel tubing, then aluminium tubing, and finally aluminium stressed skin structures began to predominate.
With its small size it very effectively utilizes the key elements of surprise, lost cost and high reliability, and maneuverability.
The USSR experimented with a rocket-powered interceptor in the years immediately following World War II, the Mikoyan-Gurevich I-270.
Garros scored three victories in three weeks before he himself was downed on 18 April and his airplane, along with its synchronization gear and propeller was captured by the Germans.
Fighter-bombers could swing, between air superiority and ground-attack roles, and were often designed for a high-speed, low-altitude dash to deliver their ordnance.
Some modern military aircraft only require 10 man-hours of work per hour of flight time, and others are even more efficient.
India is also developing the Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA).
This era also saw an expansion in ground-attack capabilities, principally in guided missiles, and witnessed the introduction of the first truly effective avionics for enhanced ground attack, including terrain-avoidance systems.
The first rocket-powered aircraft was the Lippisch Ente, which made a successful maiden flight in March 1928.
The light or lower cost fighter concept is to be on the generally lower half of this range in order to project highly effective force per unit of budget via an efficient design with only essential features.
Aircraft designers began to incorporate composite materials in the form of bonded aluminum honeycomb structural elements and graphite epoxy laminate skins to reduce weight.
The main drawback of this type of aircraft was its lack of speed.
Only two were built.
In the later stages on the Eastern Front, Soviet training and leadership improved, as did their equipment.
Supercruise may or may not be featured; it permits flight at supersonic speeds without the use of the afterburner – a device that significantly increases IR signature when used in full military power.
The word "fighter" was first used to describe a two-seater aircraft with sufficient lift to carry a machine gun and its operator as well as the pilot.
During this period, passive-homing infrared-guided (IR) missiles became commonplace, but early IR missile sensors had poor sensitivity and a very narrow field of view (typically no more than 30°), which limited their effective use to only close-range, tail-chase engagements.
The small size would minimize drag and increase the thrust-to-weight ratio, while the larger wing would minimize wing loading; while the reduced wing loading tends to lower top speed and can cut range, it increases payload capacity and the range reduction can be compensated for by increased fuel in the larger wing.
Numerous solutions were tried.
Each ''Rotte'' was composed of a leader and a wingman.
A sixth-generation jet fighter is a conceptual airplane expected to enter service in the United States Air Force and United States Navy in 2025–30 timeframe.
Britain and America cooperated closely in the development of airborne radar, and Germany's radar technology generally lagged slightly behind Anglo-American efforts, while other combatants developed few radar-equipped fighters.
Shooting with this traditional arrangement was also easier for the further reason that the guns shot directly ahead in the direction of the aircraft's flight, up to the limit of the guns range; unlike wing-mounted guns which to be effective required to be harmonised, that is, preset to shoot at an angle by ground crews so that their bullets would converge on a target area a set distance ahead of the fighter.
A fighter's main purpose is to establish air superiority over a battlefield.
The first step was to find ways to reduce the aircraft's reflectivity to radar waves by burying the engines, eliminating sharp corners and diverting any reflections away from the radar sets of opposing forces.
The USAF seeks a new fighter for the 2030–50 period named the "Next Generation Tactical Aircraft"/"Next Gen TACAIR"  The US Navy looks to replace its F/A-18E/F Super Hornets beginning in 2025 with the Next Generation Air Dominance air superiority fighter.
It would serve well as an all-weather bomber, but lacked the performance to defeat other fighters.
In the dogfights over Spain, the latest Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighters did well, as did the Soviet Polikarpov I-16.
Infrared-homing AAMs saw their fields of view expand to 45°, which strengthened their tactical usability.
The F-16's sole reliance on electronics and wires to relay flight commands, instead of the usual cables and mechanical linkage controls, earned it the sobriquet of "the electric jet".
Key weapons technologies introduced include beyond-visual-range (BVR) AAMs; Global Positioning System (GPS)-guided weapons, solid-state phased-array radars; helmet-mounted sights; and improved secure, jamming-resistant datalinks.
Some air forces experimented with "heavy fighters" (called "destroyers" by the Germans).
This period also witnessed experimentation with jet-assisted piston engine aircraft.
In the 1950s, radar was fitted to day fighters, since pilots could no longer see far enough ahead to prepare for any opposition.
Fighter technology advanced rapidly during the Second World War.
Fourth-generation fighters continued the trend towards multirole configurations, and were equipped with increasingly sophisticated avionics and weapon systems.
The fifth generation was ushered in by the Lockheed Martin/Boeing F-22 Raptor in late 2005.
Currently the cutting edge of fighter design, fifth-generation fighters are characterized by being designed from the start to operate in a network-centric combat environment, and to feature extremely low, all-aspect, multi-spectral signatures employing advanced materials and shaping techniques.
The military '''scout''' airplane was not expected to carry serious armament, but rather to rely on its speed to reach the scout or reconnoiter location and return quickly to report&nbsp;– essentially an aerial horse.
The efforts of Boyd's "Fighter Mafia" would result in the General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon (now Lockheed Martin's).
The first victory for the ''Eindecker'' came on 1 July 1915, when ''Leutnant'' Kurt Wintgens, flying with the ''Feldflieger Abteilung 6'' unit on the Western Front, forced down a Morane-Saulnier Type L two-seat "parasol" monoplane just east of Luneville.
The Spanish Civil War also provided an opportunity for updating fighter tactics.
Guns remained the principal armament.
Honeycomb structures began to replace milled structures, and the first composite components began to appear on components subjected to little stress.
In Russia "I" was used (I-16), while the French continue to use "C" (Nieuport 17 C.1).
Medium- and long-range RF air-to-air missiles promised to open up a new dimension of "beyond-visual-range" (BVR) combat, and much effort was placed in further development of this technology.
Late-war Soviet designs such as the Yakovlev Yak-3 and Lavochkin La-7 had performance comparable to the German Bf-109 and Focke-Wulf Fw 190.
The de Havilland Sea Vampire was the Royal Navy's first jet fighter.
Maneuver performance remains important and is enhanced by thrust-vectoring, which also helps reduce takeoff and landing distances.
Other problems with Japan's fighter aircraft also became apparent as the war progressed, such as their lack of armor and light armament, which made them inadequate as bomber interceptors or ground-attack planes&nbsp;– roles Allied fighters excelled at.
The primary characteristics of this sub-generation are the application of advanced digital avionics and aerospace materials, modest signature reduction (primarily RF "stealth"), and highly integrated systems and weapons.
The McDonnell F-4 Phantom was designed around radar and missiles as an all-weather interceptor, but emerged as a versatile strike bomber nimble enough to prevail in air combat, adopted by the U.S. Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps.
Composite structures have become widespread, including major structural components, and have helped to counterbalance the steady increases in aircraft weight—most modern fighters are larger and heavier than World War II medium bombers.
Unlike interceptors of the previous eras, most fourth-generation air-superiority fighters were designed to be agile dogfighters (although the Mikoyan MiG-31 and Panavia Tornado ADV are notable exceptions).
E-M theory emphasized the value of aircraft specific energy maintenance as an advantage in fighter combat.
These semi-active radar homing (SARH) missiles could track and intercept an enemy aircraft "painted" by the launching aircraft's onboard radar.
French aircraft designer Raymond Saulnier patented a practical device in April 1914, but trials were unsuccessful because of the propensity of the machine gun employed to hang fire due to unreliable ammunition.
With a primary air defense role, emphasis was placed on the ability to intercept strategic bombers flying at high altitudes.
The success or failure of a belligerent's efforts to gain air supremacy hinges on several factors including the skill of its pilots, the tactical soundness of its doctrine for deploying its fighters, and the numbers and performance of those fighters.
Eventually, most fighters mounted cannons, sometimes in combination with machine guns.
These sensors, along with advanced avionics, glass cockpits, helmet-mounted sights (not currently on F-22), and improved secure, jamming-resistant LPI datalinks are highly integrated to provide multi-platform, multi-sensor data fusion for vastly improved situational awareness while easing the pilot's workload.
The design was never deployed in numbers sufficient to stop the Allied air campaign, and a combination of fuel shortages, pilot losses, and technical difficulties with the engines kept the number of sorties low.
Later variants of the Me 262 (C-1a and C-2b) were also fitted with rocket powerplants, while earlier models were fitted with rocket boosters, but were not mass-produced with these modifications.
Lanchester determined that the power of such a force is proportional not to the number of units it has, but to the square of the number of units.
In December 2010, it was discovered that China is developing the 5th generation fighter Chengdu J-20.
With the Luftwaffe largely cleared from the skies, Allied fighters increasingly served as attack aircraft.
Some early jet fighters required 50 man-hours of work by a ground crew for every hour the aircraft was in the air; later models substantially reduced this to allow faster turn-around times and more sorties in a day.
Fighter designs were significantly influenced by the Energy-Maneuverability (E-M) theory developed by Colonel John Boyd and mathematician Thomas Christie, based upon Boyd's combat experience in the Korean War and as a fighter tactics instructor during the 1960s.
Technological advances in aerodynamics, propulsion and aerospace building materials (primarily aluminium alloys) permitted designers to experiment with aeronautical innovations, such as swept wings, delta wings, and area-ruled fuselages.
By the end of the war, turbojet engines were replacing piston engines as the means of propulsion, further increasing aircraft speed.
Their light weight also enhances maneuverability.
It was considerably faster than contemporary piston-driven aircraft, and in the hands of a competent pilot, was quite difficult for Allied pilots to defeat.
Fighter development stagnated between the wars, especially in the United States and the United Kingdom, where budgets were small.
Air-to-surface missiles (ASM) equipped with electro-optical (E-O) contrast seekers – such as the initial model of the widely used AGM-65 Maverick – became standard weapons, and laser-guided bombs (LGBs) became widespread in effort to improve precision-attack capabilities.
Light fighters have tended to statistically enjoy the element of surprise more often than not due to smaller visual and radar signatures, which is a critical advantage since historically about 80% of air to air kills do occur by surprise.
Many programs were canceled during the first half of the 1990s, and those that survived were "stretched out".
One that did enter service – with the U.S. Navy in March 1945 – was the Ryan FR-1 Fireball; production was halted with the war's end on VJ-Day, with only 66 having been delivered, and the type was withdrawn from service in 1947.
Despite their advantages, the early jet fighters were far from perfect.
In the 1970s, turbofans replaced turbojets, improving fuel economy enough that the last piston engined support aircraft could be replaced with jets, making multi-role combat aircraft possible.
The U.S. government has defined 4.5 generation fighter aircraft as those that "(1) have advanced capabilities, including— (A) AESA radar; (B) high capacity data-link; and (C) enhanced avionics; and (2) have the ability to deploy current and reasonably foreseeable advanced armaments."
Since World War I, achieving and maintaining air superiority has been considered essential for victory in conventional warfare.
Wings were made thinner and swept back to reduce transonic drag, which required new manufacturing methods to obtain sufficient strength.
The rocket was the main engine for delivering the speed and height required for high-speed interception of high-level bombers and the turbojet gave increased fuel economy in other parts of flight, most notably to ensure the aircraft was able to make a powered landing rather than risking an unpredictable gliding return.
Nevertheless, in the first jet-versus-jet dogfight, which occurred during the Korean War on 8 November 1950, an F-80 downed two North Korean MiG-15s.
As a part of military nomenclature, a letter is often assigned to various types of aircraft to indicate their use, along with a number to indicate the specific aircraft.
Some attention has also been paid to reducing IR signatures, especially on the F-22.
As they are in general approximately as capable and sometimes more capable in air to air combat on a per plane basis as heavier twin engine fighters for many mission types, while being significantly lower in cost, they represent the opportunity to in many cases be more effective on a per budget basis.
As a result, its unit flyaway cost (FAC) is around US$150&nbsp;million.
Also, significant numbers of British, and later U.S., fighter aircraft were supplied to aid the Soviet war effort as part of Lend-Lease, with the Bell P-39 Airacobra proving particularly effective in the lower-altitude combat typical of the Eastern Front.
One of the innovations to result from the aerial warfare experience this conflict provided was the development of the "finger-four" formation by the German pilot Werner Mölders.
The world's navies also transitioned to jets during this period, despite the need for catapult-launching of the new aircraft.
As collective combat experience grew, the more successful pilots such as Oswald Boelcke, Max Immelmann, and Edward Mannock developed innovative tactical formations and maneuvers to enhance their air units' combat effectiveness.
Their standard early war fighters mounted eight  calibre machine guns, but by mid-war they often featured a combination of machine guns and 20&nbsp;mm cannons, and late in the war often only cannons.
The German design had considerably more room for development however and the lessons learned led to greatly improved models in World War II.
Each fighter squadron (German: ''Staffel'') was divided into several flights (''Schwärme'') of four aircraft.
This was just the opportunity the German ''Luftwaffe'', Italian ''Regia Aeronautica'', and the Soviet Union's Red Air Force needed to test their latest aircraft.
With the steady improvements in computers, defensive systems have become increasingly efficient.
4.5 generation fighters first entered service in the early 1990s, and most of them are still being produced and evolved.
While not a combatant themselves in Spain, they absorbed many of the lessons learned in time to use them.
The Su-30MKI and MiG-35 feature thrust vectoring engine nozzles to enhance maneuvering.
They differed little from their piston-engined counterparts in appearance, and many employed unswept wings.
This approach emphasized aircraft designs that were capable of performing "fast transients" – quick changes in speed, altitude, and direction – as opposed to relying chiefly on high speed alone.
Avionics suites rely on extensive use of very high-speed integrated circuit (VHSIC) technology, common modules, and high-speed data buses.
These criteria in order of importance are the ability to benefit from the element of surprise, to have numerical superiority in the air, to have superior maneuverability, and weapon systems effectiveness.
The first long-range active-radar-homing RF AAM entered service with the AIM-54 Phoenix, which solely equipped the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, one of the few variable-sweep-wing fighter designs to enter production.
Heavily armed and sturdily constructed fighters such as Germany's Focke-Wulf Fw 190, Britain's Hawker Typhoon and Hawker Tempest, and America's P-40, Corsair, P-47 and P-38 all excelled as fighter-bombers, and since the Second World War ground attack has been an important secondary capability of many fighters.
The success of the ''Eindecker'' kicked off a competitive cycle of improvement among the combatants, both sides striving to build ever more capable single-seat fighters.
They were armed with one or two Maxim or Vickers machine guns, which were easier to synchronize than other types, firing through the propeller arc.
Skins were no longer sheet metal riveted to a structure, but milled from large slabs of alloy.
The F-35, however, is designed to be a family of three aircraft, a conventional take-off and landing (CTOL) fighter, a short take-off and vertical landing (STOVL) fighter, and a Catapult Assisted Take Off But Arrested Recovery (CATOBAR) fighter, each of which has a different unit price and slightly varying specifications in terms of fuel capacity (and therefore range), size and payload.
During the invasion of Poland and the Battle of France, Luftwaffe fighters—primarily the Messerschmitt Bf 109—held air superiority, and the Luftwaffe played a major role in German victories in these campaigns.
In practice, while light, highly maneuverable aircraft did possess some advantages in fighter-versus-fighter combat, those could usually be overcome by sound tactical doctrine, and the design approach of the Italians and Japanese made their fighters ill-suited as interceptors or attack aircraft.
The prospect of a potential third world war featuring large mechanized armies and nuclear weapon strikes led to a degree of specialization along two design approaches: interceptors, such as the English Electric Lightning and Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21F; and fighter-bombers, such as the Republic F-105 Thunderchief and the Sukhoi Su-7B.
Television- and IR-guided air-to-surface missiles were introduced to augment traditional gravity bombs, and some were also equipped to deliver a nuclear bomb.
The operational lifespan of turbines were very short and engines were temperamental, while power could be adjusted only slowly and acceleration was poor (even if top speed was higher) compared to the final generation of piston fighters.
They have multifunction AESA radars with high-bandwidth, low-probability of intercept (LPI) data transmission capabilities.
Boyd perceived maneuverability as the primary means of getting "inside" an adversary's decision-making cycle, a process Boyd called the "OODA loop" (for "Observation-Orientation-Decision-Action").
Garros' modified monoplane was first flown in March 1915 and he began combat operations soon thereafter.
Larger numbers of fighters that are not too severely inferior can often defeat a smaller force of superior aircraft.
Each party sent numerous aircraft types to support their sides in the conflict.
Nevertheless, the low dogfight loss-exchange ratios experienced by American fighters in the skies over Vietnam led the U.S. Navy to establish its famous "TOPGUN" fighter weapons school, which provided a graduate-level curriculum to train fleet fighter pilots in advanced Air Combat Maneuvering (ACM) and Dissimilar Air Combat Training (DACT) tactics and techniques.
The development of second-generation fighters was shaped by technological breakthroughs, lessons learned from the aerial battles of the Korean War, and a focus on conducting operations in a nuclear warfare environment.
In-line engines often had a better power-to-weight ratio, but there were radial engines that kept working even after having suffered significant battle damage.
British scout aircraft, in this sense, included the Sopwith Tabloid and Bristol Scout.
World War II fighters also increasingly featured monocoque construction, which improved their aerodynamic efficiency while adding structural strength.
Detailed information on these signature-reduction techniques is classified, but in general includes special shaping approaches, thermoset and thermoplastic materials, extensive structural use of advanced composites, conformal sensors, heat-resistant coatings, low-observable wire meshes to cover intake and cooling vents, heat ablating tiles on the exhaust troughs (seen on the Northrop YF-23), and coating internal and external metal areas with radar-absorbent materials and paint (RAM/RAP).
Wintgens' aircraft, one of the five Fokker M.5K/MG production prototype examples of the ''Eindecker'', was armed with a synchronized, air-cooled aviation version of the Parabellum MG14 machine gun.
Several prototype fighter programs begun early in 1945 continued on after the war and led to advanced piston-engine fighters that entered production and operational service in 1946.
This in turn required the development of ejection seats so the pilot could escape and G-suits to counter the much greater forces being applied to the pilot during maneuvers.
The timeframes associated with each generation are inexact and are only indicative of the period during which their design philosophies and technology employment enjoyed a prevailing influence on fighter design and development.
With the later arrival of long range fighters, particularly the North American P-51 Mustang, American fighters were able to escort far into Germany on daylight raids and established control of the skies over Western Europe.
Unescorted Consolidated B-24 Liberators and Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress bombers, however, proved unable to fend off German interceptors (primarily Bf-109s and FW-190s).
Furthermore, stealth technology has advanced to the point where it can be employed without a tradeoff with aerodynamics performance, in contrast to previous stealth efforts.
Great care has been taken in designing its layout and internal structure to minimize RCS over a broad bandwidth of detection and tracking radar frequencies; furthermore, to maintain its VLO signature during combat operations, primary weapons are carried in internal weapon bays that are only briefly opened to permit weapon launch.
The debate between the sleek in-line engines versus the more reliable radial models continued, with naval air forces preferring the radial engines, and land-based forces often choosing in-line units.
The British designed several new jets, including the distinctive twin boom de Havilland Vampire which was sold to the air forces of many nations.
More modern Soviet designs, including the MiG-3, LaGG-3 and Yak-1, had not yet arrived in numbers and in any case were still inferior to the Messerschmitt Bf 109.
In most languages a fighter aircraft is known as a ''hunter'', or ''hunting aircraft'' (''avion de chasse, jagdflugzeuge, avión de caza'' etc.).
An alternative was to build a "pusher" scout such as the Airco DH.2, with the propeller mounted behind the pilot.
The ambitious project sought to create a versatile common fighter for many roles and services.
Attack roles were generally assigned to dedicated ground-attack aircraft such as the Sukhoi Su-25 and the A-10 Thunderbolt II.
By the end of the 1920s, however, those countries overspent themselves and were overtaken in the 1930s by those powers that hadn't been spending heavily, namely the British, the Americans and the Germans.
Altogether, the nine partner nations anticipate procuring over 3,000 Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II fighters at an anticipated average FAC of $80–85&nbsp;million.
Aircraft engines increased in power several-fold over the period, going from a typical  in the 1918 Fokker D.VII to  in the 1938 Curtiss P-36.
However, modern single engine light fighters such as the F-16 Fighting Falcon and the JAS 39 Gripen generally carry the same type of cannon and air to air missile weaponry as heavier twin engine fighters, simply not as much ammunition or as many missiles.
Dedicated ground-attack aircraft (like the Grumman A-6 Intruder, SEPECAT Jaguar and LTV A-7 Corsair II) offered longer range, more sophisticated night attack systems or lower cost than supersonic fighters.
Up until the mid-1930s, the majority of fighters in the US, the UK, Italy and Russia remained fabric-covered biplanes.
"All-aspect" IR AAM became standard air superiority weapons, which permitted engagement of enemy aircraft from any angle (although the field of view remained relatively limited).
Fighters were also increasingly fitted with bomb racks and air-to-surface ordnance such as bombs or rockets beneath their wings, and pressed into close air support roles as fighter-bombers.
Prime examples of such aircraft, which are based on new airframe designs making extensive use of carbon-fibre composites, include the Eurofighter Typhoon, Dassault Rafale, and Saab JAS 39 Gripen.
French equivalents included the Morane-Saulnier N.
The Americans began using jet fighters operationally post-war, the wartime Bell P-59 having proven itself a failure.
The British transferred the technology of the Rolls-Royce Nene jet engine to the Soviets, who soon put it to use in their advanced Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 fighter, which used fully swept wings that allowed flying closer to the speed of sound than straight-winged designs such as the F-80.
These changes soon paid dividends, as the Allied ability to deny Japan air superiority was critical to their victories at Coral Sea, Midway, Guadalcanal and New Guinea.
Fighters were developed in World War I to deny enemy aircraft and dirigibles the ability to gather information by reconnaissance.
Light fighters generally features a smaller and generally less expensive airframe, deliberately designed to be effective based on a high thrust-to-weight ratio, high maneuverability, high reliability, and moderate per unit cost.
Likewise, Full Authority Digital Engine Controls (FADEC) to electronically manage powerplant performance was introduced with the Pratt & Whitney F100 turbofan.
Growth in air combat capability focused on the introduction of improved air-to-air missiles, radar systems, and other avionics.
Additionally Britain's use of radar and the advantages of fighting above Britain's home territory allowed the RAF to deny Germany air superiority, saving the UK from possible German invasion and dealing the Axis a major defeat early in the Second World War.
Many of these proved ineffective as the pilot had to fly his airplane while attempting to aim a handheld weapon and make a difficult deflection shot.
Some of the most expensive fighters such as the US F-14 Tomcat, F-15 Eagle, F-22 Raptor and Russian Su-27 were employed as all-weather interceptors as well as air superiority fighter aircraft, while commonly developing air-to-ground roles late in their careers.
La-9 derivatives included examples fitted with two underwing auxiliary pulsejet engines (the La-9RD) and a similarly mounted pair of auxiliary ramjet engines (the La-138); however, neither of these entered service.
Although no stealthy fighters per se appeared among the fourth generation, some radar-absorbent coatings and other L-O treatments developed for these programs are reported to have been subsequently applied to fourth-generation fighters.
Additionally, Japanese pilots had received excellent training and many were combat veterans from Japan's campaigns in China.
The Americans, in contrast, had problems producing a native cannon design, so instead placed multiple .50&nbsp;caliber (12.7&nbsp;mm) heavy machine guns on their fighters.
This non-linear relationship favors the low cost and light fighter.
As a result, during the early months of these campaigns, Axis air forces destroyed large numbers of Red Air Force aircraft on the ground and in one-sided dogfights.
Several factors contributed to this shift.
The British epitomized this shift.
Aerodynamic innovations included variable-camber wings and exploitation of the vortex lift effect to achieve higher angles of attack through the addition of leading-edge extension devices such as strakes.
Another type of military aircraft was to form the basis for an effective "fighter" in the modern sense of the word.
Many squadrons of piston-engined fighters were retained until the early to mid-1950s, even in the air forces of the major powers (though the types retained were the best of the World War II designs).
The La-9 entered service in August 1946 and was produced until 1948; it also served as the basis for the development of a long-range escort fighter, the La-11 'Fang', of which nearly 1200 were produced 1947–1951.
Radar-guided (RF) missiles were introduced as well, but early examples proved unreliable.
As an interim measure, the propeller blades were armored and fitted with metal wedges to protect the pilot from ricochets.
Designs such as the Gloster Gladiator, Fiat CR.42, and Polikarpov I-15 were common even in the late 1930s, and many were still in service as late as 1942.
Allied fighters, by gaining air superiority over the European battlefield, played a crucial role in the eventual defeat of the Axis, which Reichmarshal Hermann Göring, commander of the German ''Luftwaffe'' summed up when he said: "When I saw Mustangs over Berlin, I knew the jig was up."
The Nieuport 11 of 1916 and Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5 of 1918 both used this system with considerable success; however, this placement made aiming difficult and the location made it difficult for a pilot to both maneuver and have access to the gun's breech.
By mid-1944, Allied fighters had gained air superiority throughout the theater, which would not be contested again during the war.
In France, Italy and Russia, where large budgets continued to allow major development, both monoplanes and all metal structures were common.
At the very end of the inter-war period in Europe came the Spanish Civil War.
In contrast, designers in the United Kingdom, Germany, the Soviet Union, and the United States believed that the increased speed of fighter aircraft would create ''g''-forces unbearable to pilots who attempted maneuvering dogfights typical of the First World War, and their fighters were instead optimized for speed and firepower.
The same year the Allies' only operational jet fighter, the Gloster Meteor, also entered service.
The Saunders-Roe SR.53 was a successful design, and was planned for production when economics forced the British to curtail most aircraft programs in the late 1950s.
Other innovative technologies introduced in fourth-generation fighters include pulse-Doppler fire-control radars (providing a "look-down/shoot-down" capability), head-up displays (HUD), "hands on throttle-and-stick" (HOTAS) controls, and multi-function displays (MFD), all now essential equipment.
E-M characteristics were first applied to the McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle, but Boyd and his supporters believed these performance parameters called for a small, lightweight aircraft with a larger, higher-lift wing.
