The British subjugated the islands as a colony in 1874, and the British brought over Indian contract labourers to work on the sugar plantations as the first governor of Fiji, Arthur Charles Hamilton-Gordon, adopted a policy disallowing the use of native labour or any interference in their culture or way of life.
The majority of Fiji's islands were formed through volcanic activity starting around 150 million years ago.
As President, Iloilo had been Head of State prior to his abrogation of the Constitution, but that position had been determined by the Constitution itself.
Trade between Fiji and neighbouring archipelagos long before European contact is testified by the canoes made from native Fijian trees found in Tonga and Tongan words being part of the language of the Lau group of islands.
Europeans settled on the islands permanently beginning in the 19th century.
Fiji's main airline was previously known as Air Pacific, but is now known as Fiji Airways.
Other islands and islandgroups include Taveuni and Kadavu (the third and fourth largest islands, respectively), the Mamanuca Group (just off Nadi) and Yasawa Group, which are popular tourist destinations, the Lomaiviti Group, off Suva, and the remote Lau Group.
His attack on the legislation, which continued unremittingly throughout May and into June and July, further strained his already tense relationship with the government.
Also, when a new boat, or ''drua'', was launched, if it was not hauled over men as rollers, crushing them to death, "it would not be expected to float long".
Fiji is currently ranked eleventh in the world by the IRB (as of 28 December 2015).
Bau Island was home to Seru Epenisa Cakobau, the chief who eventually became the self-proclaimed King of Fiji.
The repatriated salaries of its overseas stars have become an important part of some local economies.
Fiji is an archipelago of more than 330 islands, of which 110 are permanently inhabited, and more than 500 islets, amounting to a total land area of about .
The action was taken because Cdre.
Relationships between ethnic Fijians and Indo-Fijians in the political arena have often been strained, and the tension between the two communities has dominated politics in the islands for the past generation.
In 2016 they won Fiji's first ever Olympic medal in the Rugby sevens at the Summer Olympics, winning gold by comprehensively defeating Great Britain 43-7 in the final.
Inter-island ferries provide services between Fiji's principal islands and large vessels operate roll-on-roll-off services, transporting vehicles and large amounts of cargo between the main island of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, and other smaller islands.
Economic liberalisation in the years following the coup created a boom in the garment industry and a steady growth rate despite growing uncertainty regarding land tenure in the sugar industry.
Fiji consists of 332 islands (of which 106 are inhabited) and 522 smaller islets.
The archipelago is located between 176° 53′ east and 178° 12′ west.
Critics, however, claimed that he had suspended the constitution and was responsible for human rights violations by arresting and detaining opponents.
Aspects of Fijian culture are similar to the Melanesian culture of the western Pacific but have a stronger connection to the older Polynesian cultures.
Sugar exports and a rapidly growing tourist industry&nbsp;– with tourists numbering 430,800 in 2003 and increasing in the subsequent years&nbsp;– are the major sources of foreign exchange.
In 1992 Sitiveni Rabuka, the Lieutenant Colonel who had carried out the 1987 coup, became Prime Minister following elections held under the new constitution.
The Nadi International Airport is located  north of central Nadi and is the largest Fijian hub.
However, the military, especially the nation's top military commander, Frank Bainimarama, strongly opposed this bill.
After years of delays, a democratic election was held on 17 September 2014.
Bainimarama agreed to step down as interim PM immediately, along with his government, and president Iloilo was to appoint "a distinguished person independent of the parties to this litigation as caretaker Prime Minister, ...to direct the issuance of writs for an election."
In late November and early December 2006, Bainimarama was instrumental in the 2006 Fijian coup d'état.
However, there has been a housing boom due to declining commercial mortgage rates.
Rainfall is variable, with the warm season experiencing heavier rainfall, especially inland.
The first settlements in Fiji were started by voyaging traders and settlers from the west about 5000 years ago.
The national rugby union team is very successful given the size of the population of the country, and has competed at five Rugby World Cup competitions, the first being in 1987, where they reached the quarter-finals.
Cricket is a minor sport in Fiji.
The population density at the time was 45.8 inhabitants per square kilometre.
Deposed Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase reacted by stating that the name "Fijian" belonged exclusively to indigenous Fijians, and that he would oppose any change in legislation enabling non-indigenous Fijians to use it.
Fiji also defeated the British and Irish Lions in 1977.
Their ancestors originated from the Punjab region of India; they are a fairly recent wave of immigrants who did not live through the indenture system.
This reflects that much major Roman Catholic missionary activity was conducted through the former Apostolic Prefecture (created in 1863 from the Apostolic Vicariate of Central Oceania), then Apostolic Vicariate of Fiji, which has since been promoted to Archdiocese of Suva, which spans the whole of Fiji.
The "new legal order" did not depend on the Constitution, thus requiring a "reappointment" of the Head of State.
The coup was the culmination of weeks of speculation following conflict between the elected prime minister, Laisenia Qarase, and Commodore Bainimarama.
The main airport in the second largest island of Vanua Levu is Labasa Airport located at Waiqele, southwest of Labasa Town.
The Group Against Racial Discrimination (GARD) was formed to oppose the unilaterally imposed constitution and to restore the 1970 constitution.
The population is dominated by the 15–64 age segment.
More budget resorts are being opened in remote areas, which will provide more tourism opportunities.
The Fiji Islands developed many dialects, which may be classified in two major branches&nbsp;— eastern and western.
In addition, a significant number of former military personnel have served in the lucrative security sector in Iraq following the 2003 US-led invasion.
Since the 1930s the population of Fiji has increased at a rate of 1.1% per year.
Three years later, Rabuka established the Constitutional Review Commission, which in 1997 wrote a new constitution which was supported by most leaders of the indigenous Fijian and Indo-Fijian communities.
The Bahá'í Faith has over 21 local Spiritual Assemblies throughout Fiji, and Baha'is live in more than 80 localities.
They inspired awe amongst the Tongans, and all their Manufactures, especially bark cloth and clubs, were highly valued and much in demand.
The largest Christian denomination is the Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma.
Fijians today regard those times as "na gauna ni tevoro" (time of the devil).
Constitutionally, citizens of Fiji are referred to as "Fiji Islanders" though the term ''Fiji Nationals'' is used for official purposes.
The High Court ordered the reinstatement of the constitution, and in September 2001, to restore democracy, a general election was held which was won by interim Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase's Soqosoqo Duavata ni Lewenivanua party.
The highest point is Mount Tomanivi on Viti Levu.
Fiji was re-admitted to the Commonwealth of Nations.
Pots made in Fiji have been found in Samoa and even the Marquesas Islands.
Lapita pottery shards have been found at numerous excavations around the country.
A republic was declared in 1987, following a series of coups d'état.
Natural resources include timber, fish, gold, copper, offshore oil, and hydropower.
सुप्रभात (suprabhat)
The coup of 1987 caused further contraction.
Europeans visited Fiji from the 17th century, and, after a brief period as an independent kingdom, the British established the Colony of Fiji in 1874.
The islands are mountainous, with peaks up to 1,324 metres (4,341&nbsp;ft), and covered with thick tropical forests.
Long-term problems include low investment and uncertain property rights.
Winston destroyed tens of thousands of homes across the island, killing 44 people and causing an estimated FJ$2&nbsp;billion ($1&nbsp;billion USD) in damage.
Viti Levu's interior is sparsely inhabited due to its terrain.
(The general secretary is Revd Tuikilakila Waqairatu.)
Fiji's vital gold mining industry based in Vatukoula, which shut down in 2006, was reactivated in 2008.
Scarr also reported that the posts that supported the chief's house or the priest's temple would have sacrificed bodies buried underneath them, with the rationale that the spirit of the ritually sacrificed person would invoke the gods to help support the structure, and "men were sacrificed whenever posts had to be renewed".
In 2005, the Qarase government amid much controversy proposed a Reconciliation and Unity Commission with power to recommend compensation for victims of the 2000 coup and amnesty for its perpetrators.
The national team has been internationally competitive, at Netball World Cup competitions reaching 6th position in 1999, its highest level to date.
A particular issue was previously pending legislation to pardon those involved in the 2000 coup.
Muslims are mostly Sunni (96.4%) following the Hanafi school of jurisprudence, with a small Ahmadiyya minority (3.6%).
There are bus stops, and in rural areas buses are often simply hailed as they approach.
Viti Levu hosts the capital city of Suva, and is home to nearly three-quarters of the population.
The farthest island is Ono-i-Lau.
In the wake of the takeover, reports emerged of alleged intimidation of some of those critical of the interim regime.
For the 2000, 2008 and 2013 World Cups, the Bati were captained by Lote Tuqiri, Wes Naiqama and the legendary Petero Civoniceva respectively.
Ceva-i-Ra, an uninhabited reef, is located about  southwest of the main archipelago.
Airports Fiji Limited (AFL) is responsible for the operation of 15 public airports in the Fiji Islands.
Fijian is an Austronesian language of the Malayo-Polynesian family spoken in Fiji.
According to Deryck Scarr, "Ceremonial occasions saw freshly killed corpses piled up for eating.
He gave Qarase an ultimatum date of 4 December to accede to these demands or to resign from his post.
There are about 80,000 registered players from a total population of around 900,000.
Sugar processing makes up one-third of industrial activity.
Lower interest rates have so far not produced greater investment in exports.
The team also competes in the Pacific Cup.
Fiji won the Pacific Games football tournament in 1991 and 2003.
The two major islands, Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, account for 87% of the population of almost 860,000.
Other important towns include Nadi (the location of the international airport), and Lautoka, Fiji's second city with large sugar cane mills and a seaport.
Within Fiji, the term ''Fijian'' refers solely to indigenous Fijians: it denotes an ancestral ethnicity, not a nationality.
There is also a small Jewish population of about 60 people.
Commodore Frank Bainimarama assumed executive power after the resignation, possibly forced, of President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara.
Bainimarama was re-appointed as Interim Prime Minister; he, in turn, re-instated his previous cabinet.
He also announced a nationwide consultation process leading to a new Constitution under which the 2014 elections will be held.
On 1 September 2009, Fiji was suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations.
Executive power is exercised by the government, legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Fiji, and the judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
Members of the team are selected from a domestic Fijian competition, as well as from competitions held in New Zealand and Australia.
The total membership of other ethnic groups of Pacific Islanders is about 7,300.
The ferocity of the cannibal lifestyle deterred European sailors from going near Fijian waters, giving Fiji the name ''Cannibal Isles''; as a result, Fiji remained unknown to the rest of the world.
These include two international airports: Nadi international Airport, Fiji’s main international gateway, and Nausori Airport, Fiji’s domestic hub, and 13 outer island airports.
Today, the main sources of foreign exchange are its tourist industry and sugar exports.
The South Pacific Stock Exchange (SPSE) is the only licensed securities exchange in Fiji and is based in Suva.
The next day, Iloilo named Bainimarama as the interim prime minister, indicating that the military was still effectively in control.
The team won gold medals at the 2007 and 2015 Pacific Games.
Fiji U19 cricket team won the 2015 edition of the tournament, and consequently qualified for the 2016 Under-19 World Cup, becoming the first team outside of Papua New Guinea to qualify from the region.
The warm season is from November to April and the cooler season lasts from May to October.
Its vision is to become a regional exchange.
Primary school education in Fiji is compulsory, and free for eight years.
One of the problems for Fiji is simply getting their players to play for their home country, as many have contracts in Europe or with Super Rugby teams, where monetary compensation is far more rewarding.
Bainimarama's takeover of Qarase's government was lawful and declared the interim government to be illegal.
Bainimarama failed to hold elections by 2010 as the Commonwealth of Nations had demanded after the 2006 coup.
The Fiji national rugby union team is a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance (PIRA) formerly along with Samoa and Tonga.
The Fiji national rugby union sevens team is currently the reigning Sevens World Series Champions in World Rugby.
A general election took place on 17 September 2014.
The political turmoil in Fiji in the 1980s, the 1990s, and 2000 had a severe impact on the economy, which shrank by 2.8% in 2000 and grew by only 1% in 2001.
The tallest building in Fiji is the fourteen-storey Reserve Bank of Fiji Building in Suva, which was inaugurated in 1984.
Fiji's history was one of settlement but also of mobility.
It has competed in the Rugby League World Cup on three occasions, with their best results coming when they made consecutive semi-final appearances in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup and 2013 Rugby League World Cup.
The life expectancy in Fiji was 72.1 years.
In general, Fiji is a mid-range priced holiday/vacation destination with most of the accommodations in this range.
During the 19th century, Ratu Udre Udre is said to have consumed 872 people and to have made a pile of stones to record his achievement.
Fiji is highly dependent on tourism for revenue.
At the club level there are the Skipper Cup and Farebrother Trophy Challenge.
He then reappointed Bainimarama as prime minister under his "New Order" and imposed a "Public Emergency Regulation" limiting internal travel and allowing press censorship.
The Sikh religion comprises 0.9% of the Indo-Fijian population, or 0.4% of the national population in Fiji.
The proposal would change the English name of indigenous Fijians from "Fijians" to ''itaukei'', the Fijian language endonym for indigenous Fijians.
Fiji have also produced stars like Akuila Uate, Jarryd Hayne, Kevin Naiqama, Semi Tadulala, Marika Koroibete, Apisai Koroisau, Sisa Waqa and the Sims brothers Ashton Sims, Tariq Sims and Korbin Sims
Fiji has a significant number of soft coral reefs, and scuba diving is a common tourist activity.
Rotuma is located  north of the group,  from Suva, 12° 30′ south of the equator.
The Fiji national rugby league team, nicknamed the Bati (pronounced mˈbatʃi), represents Fiji in the sport of rugby league football and has been participating in international competition since 1992.
Taxis operating out of Fiji's international airport, Nadi charge a flagfall of F$5.
Fiji has one of the most developed economies in the Pacific due to an abundance of forest, mineral, and fish resources.
moce (Pronounced Mothe)
Bainimarama stated a need for more time to end a voting system that heavily favoured ethnic Fijians at the expense of the multi-ethnic minorities.
As of 2001, attendance was decreasing due to security concerns and the burden of school fees, often due to the cost of transport.
Across  from east to west, Fiji has been a nation of many languages.
Later in 2000, Fiji was rocked by two mutinies when rebel soldiers went on a rampage at Suva's Queen Elizabeth Barracks.
In a coup in 2006, Commodore Frank Bainimarama seized power.
Buses are the principal form of public transport and passenger movement between the towns on the main islands.
Fiji also is the base for the Anglican Diocese of Polynesia (part of the Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia).
About 1.2% are Rotuman—natives of Rotuma Island, whose culture has more in common with countries such as Tonga or Samoa than with the rest of Fiji.
Today, some geothermal activity still occurs on the islands of Vanua Levu and Taveuni.
Other Asian countries
Bainimarama named Jona Senilagakali as caretaker prime minister.
Bainimarama had repeatedly issued demands and deadlines to the prime minister.
Bus fares and routes are heavily regulated by the  Land Transport Authority (LTA).
The Fiji Bati rugby league team also gather in a huddle and perform the noqu masu before each match.
The Methodist Church, to which a large majority of indigenous Fijians belong, also reacted strongly to the proposal, stating that allowing any Fiji citizen to call themselves "Fijian" would be "daylight robbery" inflicted on the indigenous population.
Fiji's main attractions to tourists are primarily white sandy beaches and aesthetically pleasing islands with all-year-round tropical weather.
The elderly and Government welfare recipients are given a 20% discount on their taxi fares.
On 20 February 2016, Fiji was hit by the full force of Cyclone Winston, the only Category 5 tropical cyclone to make landfall in the nation.
The Fiji national sevens side is one of the most popular and successful rugby sevens teams in the world, and has won the Hong Kong Sevens a record fifteen times (and counting) since its inception in 1976.
If the proposal were adopted, all citizens of Fiji, whatever their ethnicity, would be called "Fijians".
When the High Court ruled in 2009 that the military leadership was unlawful, President Ratu Josefa Iloilo, whom the military had retained as the nominal Head of State, formally abrogated the Constitution and reappointed Bainimarama.
These and other denominations have small numbers of Indo-Fijian members; Christians of all kinds comprise 6.1% of the Indo-Fijian population.
Every year the Israeli Embassy organises a Passover celebration with about 50-60 people attending.
In addition, a significant number of players eligible to play for Fiji end up representing Australia or New Zealand; notable examples are Fiji-born cousins and former New Zealand All Blacks, Joe Rokocoko and Sitiveni Sivivatu, current All Blacks Waisake Naholo and Seta Tamanivalu as well as Australian Wallabies former winger, Lote Tuqiri and current Wallabies Tevita Kuridrani , Samu Kerevi and Henry Speight.
On 14 March 2014, the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group voted to change Fiji's full suspension from the Commonwealth of Nations to a suspension from the councils of the Commonwealth, allowing them to participate in a number of Commonwealth activities, including the 2014 Commonwealth Games.
Fiji competes in the Pacific Tri-Nations and the IRB Pacific Nations Cup.
Fiji qualified for the 2016 Summer Olympics men's tournament for the first time in history.
Furthermore, the Assemblies of God, the Seventh-day Adventists and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) are significant.
The Fiji Football Association is a member of the Oceania Football Confederation.
However, they have never reached a FIFA World Cup to date.
The year 2000 brought along another coup, instigated by George Speight, which effectively toppled the government of Mahendra Chaudhry, who in 1997 had become the country's first Indo-Fijian Prime Minister following the adoption of the new constitution.
About three-quarters of Fijians live on Viti Levu's coasts, either in Suva or in smaller urban centres like Nadi (tourism) or Lautoka (sugar cane industry).
Politics in Fiji normally take place in the framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic wherein the Prime Minister of Fiji is the head of government and the President the Head of State, and of a multi-party system.
Most visitors arriving to Fiji on short term basis are from the following countries or regions of residence:
yadra (Pronounced Yandra)
In an address to the nation during the constitutional crisis of April 2009, military leader and interim Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama, who has been at the forefront of the attempt to change the definition of "Fijian", stated:
was a proper ritual greeting from a commoner to a chief."
Nevertheless, it remains a member of the Forum.
The second 1987 coup saw both the Fijian monarchy and the Governor General replaced by a non-executive president and the name of the country changed from ''Dominion of Fiji'' to ''Republic of Fiji'' and then in 1997 to ''Republic of the Fiji Islands''.
In his 2010 New Year's address, Cdre.
Some progress was experienced by this sector when Marion M. Ganey, S.J., introduced credit unions to the islands in the 1950s.
Over the centuries, a unique Fijian culture developed.
The national football team defeated New Zealand 2–0 in the 2008 OFC Nations Cup, on their way to a joint-record third-place finish.
The level of political tension varies among different regions of the country.
This began the 2009 Fijian constitutional crisis.
Nausori International Airport is about  northeast of downtown Suva and serves mostly domestic traffic.
It also has a variety of world class five-star resorts and hotels.
The expiration of leases for sugar cane farmers (along with reduced farm and factory efficiency) has led to a decline in sugar production despite subsidies for sugar provided by the EU; Fiji has been the second largest beneficiary of sugar subsidies after Mauritius.
On 9 April 2009, the Court of Appeal overturned the High Court decision that Cdre.
The Suva Central Commercial Centre, which opened in November 2005, was planned to outrank the Reserve Bank building at seventeen stories, but last-minute design changes ensured that the Reserve Bank building remained the tallest.
The Fiji national side did not match that feat again until the 2007 Rugby World Cup when they upset Wales 38–34 to progress to the quarter-finals where they nearly beat the eventual Rugby World Cup winners, South Africa.
Although inflation is low, the policy indicator rate of the Reserve Bank of Fiji was raised by 1% to 3.25% in February 2006 due to fears of excessive consumption financed by debt.
In 2012, permission was granted by the government for Methodists to hold their annual conference, for the first time in four years, with the conditions that the conference not coincide with the national Hibiscus Festival and should only last for three days, and that no political matters were to be discussed, only church matters.
In 1875–76, an epidemic of measles killed over 40,000 Fijians, about one-third of the Fijian population.
There are also small but economically significant groups of Europeans, Chinese, and other Pacific island minorities.
In 2009, Samoa announced their departure from the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, leaving just Fiji and Tonga in the union.
Fiji has also won the Rugby World Cup Sevens twice — in 1997 and 2005 (coincidentally, the two times it has been held in Hong Kong).
Fijian is a VOS language.
On 10 April 2009, President Iloilo suspended the Constitution of Fiji, dismissed the Court of Appeal and, in his own words, "appointed himself as the Head of the State of Fiji under a new legal order".
Fiji's culture was showcased at the World Exposition held in Vancouver, Canada, in 1986 and more recently at the Shanghai World Expo 2010, along with other Pacific countries in the Pacific Pavilion.
Honeymoons are very popular as are romantic getaways in general.
The first Baha'i in the islands was a New Zealander who arrived in 1924.
Fijians first impressed themselves on European consciousness through the writings of the members of the expeditions of Cook who met them in Tonga.
Trade and investment with Fiji have been criticised due to the country's military dictatorship.
