When floppy disk media was first available this type of file system was adequate due to the relatively small amount of data space available.
Over the years, the file system has been expanded from FAT12 to FAT16 and FAT32.
Some file systems accept data for storage as a stream of bytes which are collected and stored in a manner efficient for the media.
The depth of path may need to be increased beyond the restrictions of the file system.
This structure required every file to have a unique name, even if it appeared to be in a separate folder.
These functional limits are a best-guess effort by the designer based on how large the storage systems are right now and how large storage systems are likely to become in the future.
Each additional file write requires updating the map and directory and writing the data, which may take several seconds to occur for each file.
Some of the most important features of file system utilities involve supervisory activities which may involve bypassing ownership or direct access to the underlying device.
File systems can be used on numerous different types of storage devices that use different kinds of media.
This requires complicated management of blocks of media usually separating key blocks and data blocks.
Such metadata includes information about unused regions—free space bitmap, block availability map—and information about bad sectors.
File locking can be used as a concurrency control mechanism for individual files, but it typically does not protect the directory structure or file metadata.
In non-Unix-like systems, such as TOPS-10 and other operating systems influenced by it, where the full filename or pathname of a file can include a device prefix, devices other than those containing file systems are referred to by a device prefix specifying the device, without anything following it.
Disk and digital tape devices were too expensive for hobbyists.
Some file systems defer operations such as reorganization of free space, secure erasing of free space, and rebuilding of hierarchical structures by providing utilities to perform these functions at times of minimal activity.
It processes physical blocks being read or written.
HFS Plus uses Unicode to store filenames.
Tape requires linear motion to wind and unwind potentially very long reels of media.
Third parties such as Digital Research have incorporated optional support for deletion tracking, and volume/directory/file-based multi-user security schemes to support file and directory passwords and permissions such as read/write/execute/delete access rights.
Either the software will be completely installed or the failed installation will be completely rolled back, but an unusable partial install will not be left on the system.
These may occur as a result of an operating system failure for which the OS was unable to notify the file system, power failure or reset.
Each one has different structure and logic, properties of speed, flexibility, security, size and more.
This in turn derived from CP/M in the 1970s, and ultimately from IBM's CP/CMS of 1967.
* In some situations, there is no need to mount certain file systems at boot time, although their use may be desired thereafter.
An inexpensive basic data storage system was devised that used common audio cassette tape.
The FAT file systems are therefore well-suited as a universal exchange format between computers and devices of most any type and age.
Originally CMS used fixed-length 800-byte blocks, but later versions used larger size blocks up to 4K.
File systems might store the file creation time, the time it was last accessed, the time the file's metadata was changed, or the time the file was last backed up.
Copying files with long names or located in paths of significant depth from one file system to another may cause undesirable results.
Consequently, a master file directory and usage map can be extremely slow and inefficient with tape.
The length of the data contained in a file may be stored as the number of blocks allocated for the file or as a byte count.
By 1964 it was in general use.
When a program retrieves the data, it specifies the size of a memory buffer and the file system transfers data from the media to the buffer.
VFAT, an optional extension to FAT12, FAT16 and FAT32, introduced in Windows 95 and Windows NT 3.5, allowed long file names (LFN) to be stored in the FAT file system in a backwards compatible fashion.
The new graphical installer of PC-BSD can handle ''/ (root) on ZFS'' and RAID-Z pool installs and disk encryption using Geli right from the start in an easy convenient (GUI) way.
Disk storage has continued to increase at near exponential rates (see Moore's law), so after a few years, file systems have kept reaching design limitations that require computer users to repeatedly move to a newer system with ever-greater capacity.
A file system stores all the metadata associated with the file—including the file name, the length of the contents of a file, and the location of the file in the folder hierarchy—separate from the contents of the file.
File system fragmentation occurs when unused space or single files are not contiguous.
OS X also supported the UFS file system, derived from the BSD Unix Fast File System via NeXTSTEP.
See comparison of file systems#Metadata for details on which file systems support which kinds of metadata.
For example, the path C:\WINDOWS represents a directory WINDOWS on the partition represented by the letter C. Drive C: is most commonly used for the primary hard disk drive partition, on which Windows is usually installed and from which it boots.
Examples include GFS2 from Red Hat, GPFS from IBM, SFS from DataPlow, CXFS from SGI and StorNext from Quantum Corporation.
Due to the Unix roots of OS X, Unix permissions were added to HFS Plus.
There are a number of research prototypes of transactional file systems for UNIX systems, including the Valor file system, Amino, LFS, and a transactional ext3 file system on the TxOS kernel, as well as transactional file systems targeting embedded systems, such as TFFS.
A ''disk file system'' takes advantages of the ability of disk storage media to randomly address data in a short amount of time.
Any file additions, changes, or removals require updating the directory and the used/free maps.
Examples in Unix-like systems include devfs and, in Linux 2.6 systems, udev.
An example is the file system defragmentation utilities.
This includes virus destruction of the ''system'' partition or even a system that will not boot.
File objects, along with other types of objects, form the basis of the As/400's support for an integrated relational database.
For example, a floppy disk that has been supermounted can be physically removed from the system.
Some file systems are used on local data storage devices; others provide file access via a network protocol (for example, NFS, SMB, or 9P clients).
This takes longer but a backup of the data is a nice side effect.
It handles buffering and memory management and is responsible for the physical placement of blocks in specific locations on the storage medium.
The ''logical file system'' is responsible for interaction with the user application.
A similar partition might be created for email.
Another approach is to partition the disk so that several file systems with different attributes can be used.
It provides the application program interface (API) for file operations &mdash; OPEN, CLOSE, READ, etc., and passes the requested operation to the layer below it for processing.
The anchor is a record called the ''Master File Directory'' (MFD), always located in the fourth block on the disk.
They are also capable of ''reading'' the newer NTFS file systems for Windows.
Different file systems have different limits on the depth of the path.
Tape file systems instead typically allow for the file directory to be spread across the tape intermixed with the data, referred to as ''streaming'', so that time-consuming and repeated tape motions are not required to write new data.
It was primitive, but it worked (a lot of the time).
Another partition, and file system might be created for the storage of audio or video files with a relatively large allocation.
On Windows, FAT and FAT32 file systems can be converted to NTFS via the convert.exe utility, but not the reverse.
Later versions of HFS Plus added journaling to prevent corruption of the file system structure and introduced a number of optimizations to the allocation algorithms in an attempt to defragment files automatically without requiring an external defragmenter.
Examples of network file systems include clients for the NFS, AFS, SMB protocols, and file-system-like clients for FTP and WebDAV.
In computing, a '''file system''' (or '''filesystem''') is used to control how data is stored and retrieved.
When a file is created the file system allocates space for the data.
Data on the AS/400 and its successors consists of system objects mapped into the system virtual address space in a single-level store.
File locking also cannot automatically roll back a failed operation, such as a software upgrade; this requires atomicity.
There are many different kinds of file systems.
The structure and logic rules used to manage the groups of information and their names is called a "file system".
All file systems have some functional limit that defines the maximum storable data capacity within that system.
Often such information about an allocation group is stored inside the allocation group itself.
As for the image files, one can easily "spin off" differential images which contain only "new" data written to the master (original) image.
SquashFS is a common compressed read-only file system.
Programs using local interfaces can transparently create, manage and access hierarchical directories and files in remote network-connected computers.
By 1961 the term was being applied to computerized filing alongside the original meaning.
The directory given to the operating system is called the ''mount point''&nbsp;– it might, for example, be /media.
Some programs need to update multiple files "all at once".
Linux supports numerous file systems, but common choices for the system disk on a block device include the ext* family (ext2, ext3 and ext4), XFS, JFS, ReiserFS and btrfs.
As a workaround, some database systems simply produce an archived state file containing all data up to that point, and the backup software only backs that up and does not interact directly with the active transactional databases at all.
File system utilities which require dedicated access can be effectively completed piecemeal.
If graphical, the metaphor of the ''folder'', containing documents, other files, and nested folders is often used (see also: directory and folder).
"This interface allows support for multiple concurrent instances of physical file systems, each of which is called a file system implementation."
This has the additional advantage of keeping the frantic activity of creating and deleting files typical of browser activity in a narrow area of the disk and not interfering with allocations of other files.
Unix-like systems assign a device name to each device, but this is not how the files on that device are accessed.
Around 1978 to 1988 Frank G. Soltis and his team at IBM Rochester have successfully designed and applied technologies like the database file system where others like Microsoft later failed to accomplish.
A ''shared disk file system'' is one in which a number of machines (usually servers) all have access to the same external disk subsystem (usually a SAN).
The ext4 file system resides in a disk image, which is treated as a file (or multiple files, depending on the hypervisor and settings) in the NTFS host file system.
Some file systems maintain multiple past revisions of a file under a single file name; the filename by itself retrieves the most recent version, while prior saved version can be accessed using a special naming convention such as "filename;4" or "filename(-4)" to access the version four saves ago.
The first file system to support arbitrary hierarchies of directories was used in the Multics operating system.
The physical file system interacts with the device drivers or with the channel to drive the storage device.
File utilities create, list, copy, move and delete files, and alter metadata.
The second optional layer is the ''virtual file system''.
* Progressive Unix-like systems have also introduced a concept called '''supermounting'''; see, for example,  the Linux supermount-ng project.
This may be implemented by associating the file name with an index in a table of contents or an inode in a Unix-like file system.
Some disk file systems are journaling file systems or versioning file systems.
Losing the seed means losing the data.
This depends on how the utility doing the copying handles the discrepancy.
The native file systems of Unix-like systems also support arbitrary directory hierarchies, as do, for example, Apple's Hierarchical File System, and its successor HFS+ in classic Mac OS (HFS+ is still used in Mac OS X), the FAT file system in MS-DOS 2.0 and later versions of MS-DOS and in Microsoft Windows, the NTFS file system in the Windows NT family of operating systems, and the ODS-2 (On-Disk Structure-2) and higher levels of the Files-11 file system in OpenVMS.
Unix-like systems can use a RAM disk or network shared resource as its root directory.
Generally, only the administrator (i.e.
There needs to be an interface provided by the operating system software between the user and the file system.
This interface can be textual (such as provided by a command line interface, such as the Unix shell, or OpenVMS DCL) or graphical (such as provided by a graphical user interface, such as file browsers).
Some file systems permit or require specifying an initial space allocation and subsequent incremental allocations as the file grows.
The user might have to listen to the sounds to find the right spot to begin playing the next data region.
Prior to the introduction of VSAM, OS/360 systems implemented an unusual hybrid file system.
The local tape catalog copy is usually discarded if not used for a specified period of time, at which point the tape must be re-scanned if it is to be used in the future.
Utilities have therefore been developed to detect the presence and availability of a medium and then mount that medium without any user intervention.
Another reason is to ensure data is modified in a controlled way so access may be restricted to a specific program.
Support in other operating systems is sparse since Microsoft has not published the specifications of the file system and implementing support for exFAT requires a license.
This is most commonly done in Unix-like operating systems, but devices are given file names in some non-Unix-like operating systems as well.
linear), or allow hierarchies where directories may contain subdirectories.
The IBM Conversational Monitor System (CMS) component of VM/370 uses a separate flat file system for each virtual disk (''minidisk'').
The file system must also record events to allow analysis of systemic issues as well as problems with specific files or directories.
For 64&nbsp;KB clusters, the average unused space is 32&nbsp;KB.
As of Mac OS X Lion UFS support was completely dropped.
This "tradition" has become so firmly ingrained that bugs exist in many applications which make assumptions that the drive that the operating system is installed on is C. The use of drive letters, and the tradition of using "C" as the drive letter for the primary hard disk drive partition, can be traced to MS-DOS, where the letters A and B were reserved for up to two floppy disk drives.
* An automounter will automatically mount a file system when a reference is made to the directory atop which it should be mounted.
Unix-like operating systems often include software and tools that assist in the mounting process and provide it new functionality.
The current PC-BSD 9.0+ 'Isotope Edition' has ZFS filesystem version 5 and ZFS storage pool version 28.
All Unix-like systems therefore provide a facility for mounting file systems at boot time.
Usually the intent is to prevent reading or modifying files by a user or group of users.
Directory structures may be flat (i.e.
The VTOC stores all metadata for the file.
It is responsible for arranging storage space; reliability, efficiency, and tuning with regard to the physical storage medium are important design considerations.
Multiple operating systems (including Solaris) may use Veritas Volume Manager.
The size of the allocation unit is chosen when the file system is created.
exFAT is the only file system that is fully supported on both OS&nbsp;X and Windows that can hold files bigger than 4&nbsp;GB.
File system complexity typically varies proportionally with the available storage capacity.
HFS Plus is a metadata-rich and case-preserving but (usually) case-insensitive file system.
The system was designed to easily support removable disk packs, so the information relating to all files on one disk (''volume'' in IBM terminology) is stored on that disk in a flat system file called the ''Volume Table of Contents'' (VTOC).
Examples include passwords stored in the metadata of the file or elsewhere and file permissions in the form of permission bits, access control lists, or capabilities.
These technologies are informally known as 'Fortress Rochester' and were in few basic aspects extended from early Mainframe technologies but in many ways more advanced from a technological perspective.
root user) may authorize the mounting of file systems.
Many file systems put only some of the metadata for a file in the directory table, and the rest of the metadata for that file in a completely separate structure, such as the inode.
When the data read was complete, the system would notify the user to press "STOP" on the cassette recorder.
Examples include FAT (FAT12, FAT16, FAT32), exFAT, NTFS, HFS and HFS+, HPFS, APFS, UFS, ext2, ext3, ext4, XFS, btrfs, ISO 9660, Files-11, Veritas File System, VMFS, ZFS, ReiserFS and UDF.
For raw flash without a flash translation layer (FTL) or Memory Technology Device (MTD), there are UBIFS, JFFS2 and YAFFS, among others.
This layer provides "file access, directory operations, and security and protection."
The FAT file system traces its roots back to an (incompatible) 8-bit FAT precursor in Standalone Disk BASIC and the short-lived MDOS/MIDAS project.
There are several mechanisms used by file systems to control access to data.
Transactions also provide the atomicity guarantee, ensuring that operations inside of a transaction are either all committed or the transaction can be aborted and the system discards all of its partial results.
Frequently the default allocation may provide reasonable usage.
Taking its name from the way paper-based information systems are named, each group of data is called a "file".
PC-BSD is a desktop version of FreeBSD, which inherits FreeBSD's ZFS support, similarly to FreeNAS.
The file system arbitrates access to that subsystem, preventing write collisions.
By separating the data into pieces and giving each piece a name, the information is easily isolated and identified.
Many types of AS/400 objects are defined including the directories and files found in other file systems.
* Very large file systems, embodied by applications like Apache Hadoop and Google File System, use some ''database file system'' concepts.
For example, a software installation may write program binaries, libraries, and configuration files.
The system automatically notices that the disk has changed and updates the mount point contents to reflect the new medium.
FAT32 addresses the limitations in FAT12 and FAT16, except for the file size limit of close to 4&nbsp;GB, but it remains limited compared to NTFS.
If the software installation fails, the program may be unusable.
The early Apple Macintosh also featured a flat file system, the Macintosh File System.
Writing data to a tape, erasing, or formatting a tape is often a significantly time-consuming process and can take several hours on large tapes.
Instead, to gain access to files on another device, the operating system must first be informed where in the directory tree those files should appear.
All that is usually necessary is to write an identifying media label to the tape before use, and even this can be automatically written by software when a new tape is used for the first time.
While simple, flat file systems become awkward as the number of files grows and makes it difficult to organize data into related groups of files.
The 9P protocol removes the difference between local and remote files.
This includes actions taken if a program modifying data terminates abnormally or neglects to inform the file system that it has completed its activities.
A recent addition to the flat file system family is Amazon's S3, a remote storage service, which is intentionally simplistic to allow users the ability to customize how their data is stored.
Writing typically involves reading the block usage map to find free blocks for writing, updating the usage map and directory to add the data, and then advancing the tape to write the data in the correct spot.
An alternative, when there is not sufficient space to retain the original file system until the new one is created, is to use a work area (such as a removable media).
Kernel extensions were added to Solaris to allow for bootable Veritas VxFS operation.
Windows uses a ''drive letter'' abstraction at the user level to distinguish one disk or partition from another.
), its owner user ID and group ID, its access permissions and other file attributes (e.g.
* Many Web content management systems use a relational DBMS to store and retrieve files.
This is free space fragmentation.
The user program can read, write and update records without regard to their location.
In a disk file system there is typically a master file directory, and a map of used and free data regions.
Common examples include USB flash drives, CD-ROMs, and DVDs.
In some cases, a file system may not make use of a storage device but can be used to organize and represent access to any data, whether it is stored or dynamically generated (e.g.
Most file systems also store metadata not associated with any one particular file.
The file system manages access to both the content of files and the metadata about those files.
There are some utilities for Unix-like systems that allow the mounting of predefined file systems upon demand.
Cataloged and non-cataloged datasets can still be accessed using information in the VTOC, bypassing the catalog,  if the required volume id is provided to the OPEN request.
With many data tape technologies it is not necessary to format the tape before over-writing new data to the tape.
FAT12, FAT16 and FAT32 also have a limit of eight characters for the file name, and three characters for the extension (such as .exe).
Depending on the underlying structure of the file system, they may provide a mechanism to prepend to, or truncate from, the beginning of a file, insert entries into the middle of a file or delete entries from a file.
This means that if there is a crash or power failure, after recovery, the stored state will be consistent.
However, as of Mac OS X Leopard, OS X could no longer be installed on a UFS volume, nor can a pre-Leopard system installed on a UFS volume be upgraded to Leopard.
Access to a data record requires two levels of indirection, where the file's directory entry (called a ''File Status Table'' (FST) entry) points to blocks containing a list of addresses of the individual records.
Methods for encrypting file data are sometimes included in the file system.
Finally, OS X supports reading and writing of the exFAT file system since Mac OS X Snow Leopard, starting from version 10.6.5.
This creates alternating used and unused areas of various sizes.
The only constructs are buckets (imagine a disk drive of unlimited size) and objects (similar, but not identical to the standard concept of a file).
It may be empty, or it may contain subdirectories for mounting individual devices.
whether the file is read-only, executable, etc.
* In many situations, file systems other than the root need to be available as soon as the operating system has booted.
As files are deleted the space they were allocated eventually is considered available for use by other files.
A ''special file system'' presents non-file elements of an operating system as files so they can be acted on using file system APIs.
If the installation is upgrading a key system utility, such as the command shell, the entire system may be left in an unusable state.
(PC&nbsp;DOS is an OEM version of MS-DOS, MS-DOS was originally based on SCP's 86-DOS.
One file system, for use as browser cache, might be configured with a small allocation size.
Some of these strategies have been coined "auto-mounting" as a reflection of their purpose.
System administrators define these file systems in the configuration file fstab (''vfstab'' in Solaris), which also indicates options and mount points.
However, they may have restrictions on the use of certain special characters, disallowing them within filenames; those characters might be used to indicate a device, device type, directory prefix, file path separator, or file type.
