The tank filler opening has a corresponding diameter; this prevents inadvertently using leaded fuel in an engine not designed for it, which can damage a catalytic converter.
The issue is not clear-cut as older diesels using completely mechanical injection can tolerate some gasoline — which has historically been used to "thin" diesel fuel in winter.
This pipe houses a number of smaller pipes for the individual fuel types.
This was partially reversed during December 2006 when Gordon Brown (UK Chancellor of the Exchequer) raised fuel duty by 1.25 pence per liter.
The provinces of Prince Edward Island (PEI), Newfoundland and Labrador, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia have instituted gasoline price regulation, which is intended to protect small rural gas stations from low profits due to low sales volume.
* engaging in misleading or deceptive practices.
Pre-payment, most commonly at the pump, is the norm in the U.S. Customers may typically pay either at the pump or inside the gas station's shop/pay station.
In Canada, prices are typically highest in the provinces of British Columbia and Quebec, and the lowest in the oil-producing province of Alberta.
The cash register system gives a limited control over the fuel dispenser, and is usually limited to allowing the clerks to turn the pumps on and off.
The town of Huntington, New York prohibits gasoline self-service to save jobs.
Prices for these items tend to be higher than they would be at a supermarket or discount store.
The first filling station was the city pharmacy in Wiesloch, Germany, where Bertha Benz refilled the tank of the first automobile on its maiden trip from Mannheim to Pforzheim and back in 1888.
Some stations are equipped with car washes.
In the UK, a 'service station' refers to much larger facilities, usually attached to motorways (see rest area) or major truck routes, which provide food outlets, large parking areas, and often other services such as hotels, arcade games, and shops in addition to 24-hour fuel supplies and a higher standard of restrooms.
UK service stations do not usually repair automobiles.
The law was introduced by Federal Deputy Aldo Rebelo, who claims it saved 300,000 fuel attendant jobs across the country.
Above this height, where most fuel filler necks are located, there is no expectation of an explosive concentration of gasoline vapor in normal operating conditions.
Likewise, the 1951 Oregon statute prohibiting self-service gasoline lists 17 different justifications, including the flammability of gas, the risk of crime from customers leaving their vehicles, the toxic fumes emitted by gasoline, and the jobs created by requiring mini service.
In some premium gas stations in large cities, such as Petrol China and SinoPec, RON 98 gas is sold for racing cars.
Where diesel fuel is provided, it is usually dispensed from a separate nozzle even if the various grades of gasoline share the same nozzle.
Some air compressor machines are free of charge, while others charge a small fee to use (typically 50 cents to a dollar in North America).
In the U.S., a filling station that also offers services such as oil changes and mechanical repairs to automobiles is called a '''service station'''.
Most gas stations try to compensate by selling higher-margin food products in their convenience stores.
'Super' is widely available at 97 RON (for example ''Shell V-Power'', ''BP Ultimate'').
Most tanks can be accessed through a service canal directly from the forecourt.
In the United Kingdom, the two largest are BP and Shell.
A vapor recovery system may be employed at the exhaust pipe.
The first "drive-in" filling station, Gulf Refining Company, opened to the motoring public in Pittsburgh on December 1, 1913 at Baum Blvd & St Clair's Street (Walter's Automotive Shop was located here on the 100th anniversary).
The "Big Four" supermarket chains, Morrisons, Sainsburys, Asda and Tesco, all operate filling stations, as well as some of the smaller supermarkets such as The Co-operative Group and Waitrose.
This last condition causes a rich vapor concentration in the ullage (the unfilled volume) of the gas can, and a discharge from the can to the grounded hanging hardware (the nozzle, hose, swivels and break-a-ways) can thus occur at a most inopportune point.
In Brazil, self-service fuel filling is illegal, due to a federal law enacted in 2000.
There is also help service or assisted service, for which customers must request assistance before it is given, and self-service, for which no assistance is available.
At high altitudes in the Mountain States and the Black Hills of South Dakota, regular unleaded can be as low as 85 octane; this practice is now increasingly controversial, since it was instituted when most cars had carburetors instead of the fuel injection and electronic engine controls standard in recent decades.
The forecourt is the part of a filling station where vehicles are refueled.
Some filling stations have pay-at-the-pump facilities.
In Canada it is against federal law to provide any gas pricing from a gas station via phone.
fuel cards) and may charge higher prices.
In Europe, gasoline is unleaded and available in 95 RON (''Eurosuper'') and, in nearly all countries, 98 RON (''Super Plus'') octanes; in some countries 91 RON octane gasoline is offered as well.
A filling station that sells only electric energy is also known as a charging station, while a typical filling station can also be known as a '''fuelling station''', '''garage''' (South Africa and United Kingdom), '''gasbar''' (Canada), '''gas station''' (United States and Canada), '''petrol pump''' or '''petrol bunk''' (India), '''petrol garage''', '''petrol station''' (Australia, Hong Kong, New Zealand, Singapore, South Africa and United Kingdom), '''service station''' (Australia, New Zealand and United Kingdom), '''a services''' (United Kingdom), or '''servo''' (Australia).
The customer fueling area, up to  above the surface, normally does not have explosive concentrations of vapors, but may from time to time.
In some U.S. states, beer, wine, and liquor are sold in gas stations, though this practice varies according to state law (''see Alcohol laws of the United States by state'').
Some stations offer 98 RON with lead substitute (often called "Lead-Replacement Petrol, or LRP).
In some cases, the car has to be scrapped because the cost of repairs exceeds its residual value.
Newer "high mileage" tires use more silica and can increase the buildup of static.
* List of filling stations in North America
Such websites allow users to share prices advertised at filling stations with each other by posting them to a central server.
Until the 1970s the vast majority of gas stations were service stations; now only a minority are.
Since 2007 petrol prices in the UK has risen by nearly 40 pence per liter, going from 97.3 pence per liter in 2007 to 136.8 pence per liter in 2012.
Fuel is usually offloaded from a tanker truck into the tanks through a separate valve, located on the filling station's perimeter.
Elsewhere in the English-speaking world, mainly in the Commonwealth, the fuel is known as "petrol", and the term "petrol station" or "petrol pump" is used.
Although urban legends persist that a mobile phone can cause sparks, this has not been duplicated under any controlled condition.
In the U.S., Pilot Flying J and TravelCenters of America are two of the most common full-service chains.
The problem with ungrounded gas cans results from a combination of vehicular static charge, the potential between the container and the vehicle, and the loose fit between the grounded nozzle and the gas can.
In Europe and Australia, the customer selects one of several color-coded nozzles depending on the type of fuel required.
It is quite common for customers to hand the cash to the attendant on the forecourt if they are paying for a set amount of fuel and have no change.
The converse is almost impossible because diesel pumps have a large nozzle with a diameter of  which does not fit the  filler, and the nozzles are protected by a lock mechanism or a liftable flap.
In much of Europe, including Britain, France and Germany, filling stations operated by large supermarket and hypermarket outlets usually price fuel lower than stand-alone filling stations.
From approximately 1920 to 1980, many service stations provided free road maps affiliated with their parent oil companies to customers.
With sensors directly in the fuel tank, the data is fed to a terminal in the back room, where it can be downloaded or printed out.
Some countries have only one brand of filling station.
''Discount brands'' are often smaller, regional chains or independent stations, offering lower prices on gasoline.
In New Zealand a filling station is often referred to as a service station, garage, or petrol station, even though the filling station may not offer mechanical repairs or assistance with dispensing fuel.
Prior to this, automobile drivers pulled into almost any general or hardware store, or even blacksmith shops in order to fill up their tanks.
Conversely, some car washes operate filling stations to supplement their businesses.
The constitutionality of the self-service bans has been disputed.
Modern gas stations have pay-at-the-pump capabilities — in most cases credit, debit, ATM cards, fuel cards and fleet cards are accepted.
This was also the first architect-designed station and the first to distribute free road maps.
In New Zealand, gasoline is unleaded, and most commonly available in 91 RON ("Regular") and 95 RON ("Premium").
Most purchase wholesale commodity gasoline from independent suppliers or from the major petroleum companies.
96 RON was replaced by 95 RON, and subsequently abolished in 2006.
This arrangement occurs on many toll roads and some interstate freeways and is called an oasis, service plaza, or truck stop.
The Petroleum Equipment Institute has recorded incidents of static-related ignition at refueling sites since early 2000.
Signs informing the customer of filling procedures and cautions are displayed on each pump.
This system collects the vapors, liquifies them and releases them back into the lowest grade fuel tank available.
It is prohibited to use open flames and, in some places, mobile phones on the forecourt of a filling station because of the risk of igniting gasoline vapor.
The first alternative fuel station was opened in San Diego, California by Pearson Fuels in 2003.
Above-ground modular filling stations were built in the 1980s in eastern Europe and especially in Soviet Union, but they were not built in other parts of Europe due to the stations' lack of safety in case of fire.
Fuel tanks, dispenser and nozzles used to fill car tanks employ vapor recovery systems, which prevents releases of vapor into the atmosphere with a system of pipes.
In recent years some service stations have required customers to purchase their fuel first.
Individual gas stations are unlikely to sell gasoline at a loss, and the profit margin—typically between 7 and 11 cents a  U.S.&nbsp;gallon—that they make from gasoline sales is limited by competitive pressures: a gas station which charges more than others will lose customers to them.
All stations in New Jersey and Oregon offer only full service and mini service; attendants are required to pump gas since customers are prohibited by law in both states from pumping gas themselves.
A driver who does not discharge static by contacting a conductive part of the car will carry it to the insulated handle of the nozzle and the static potential will eventually be discharged when this purposely-grounded arrangement is put into contact with the metallic filler neck of the vehicle.
The ban came into effect in the early 1970s during a recession.
In 1982 Oregon voters rejected a ballot measure sponsored by the service station owners, which would have legalized self-service gas.
In the UK a large-scale protest in August and September 2000, known as 'The Fuel Crisis', caused wide-scale havoc not only across the UK, but also in some other EU countries.
Many of them have fully automated pay-at-the-pump facilities.
The British government eventually backed down by indefinitely postponing a planned increase in fuel duty.
The filler pipe of unleaded fuel is smaller than the one for fuels for engines designed to take leaded fuel.
In some regions of Canada, the term "''gas bar''" is used.
The amount of discount varies depending on the amount spent on groceries at the supermarket, but normally starts at 4 cents a liter.
At some stations (such as Vons, Costco, BJ's Wholesale Club, or Sam's Club), consumers are required to hold a special membership card in order to be eligible for the discounted price, or pay only with the chain's cash card, debt card or a credit card issuer exclusive to that chain.
Gas stations must never hold discussions with other competitors regarding pricing policies and methods, terms of sale, costs, allocation of markets or boycotts of our petroleum products.
It's as much a cultural issue as an economic issue.
As a result, such areas often provide only minimal services such as restrooms and vending machines.
However, recent years have shown that this opinion might be changing, as a 2014 Public Policy Poll showed that although self-serve was favored by a narrow margin of all Oregonians, Oregonians under 45 favored self-serve gas by 53 percent to 33 percent.
This type of service is becoming uncommon in New Zealand, particularly Auckland.
The construction model for underground modular filling station makes the installation time shorter, designing easier and manufacturing less expensive.
In some regions of America and Australia, many filling stations have a mechanic on duty, but this is uncommon in other parts of the world.
In the U.S. the fire marshal is responsible for regulations at the gas pump.
A '''filling station''' is a facility that sells fuel and engine lubricants for motor vehicles.
Often, the state government maintains public rest areas directly connected to freeways, but does not rent out space to private businesses, as this is specifically prohibited by law via the Interstate Highway Act of 1956 which created the national Interstate Highway System, except sites on freeways built before January 1, 1960, and toll highways that are self-supporting but have Interstate designation, under a grandfather clause.
Larger restaurants are common at truck stops and toll road service plazas.
Individual gas stations in the United States have little if any control over gasoline prices.
In Mexico, where the oil industry is state-owned and prices are regulated, the country's main operator of filling stations is Pemex.
Some Canadians and Mexicans in communities close to the U.S. border drive into the United States to purchase cheaper gasoline.
Premium brand stations accept credit cards, often issue their own company cards (a.k.a.
New Jersey governor Jon Corzine sought to lift the ban on self-service for New Jersey.
In the United Kingdom and South Africa "garage" is still commonly used.
In Indian English, it is called a ''petrol pump'' or a ''petrol bunk''.
Customers can still enter a store or go to a booth to give payment to a person.
Fuel dispensers are placed on concrete plinths, as a precautionary measure.
Older stations tend to use a separate pipe for every kind of available fuel and for every dispenser.
Many stations, particularly in the United States, have a fast food outlet inside.
Further south of Auckland, many filling stations offer full service.
Private entrepreneurs develop additional facilities, such as restaurants, gas stations, and motels in clusters on private land adjacent to major interchanges.
The increase in automobile ownership after Henry Ford started to sell automobiles that the middle class could afford resulted in an increased demand for filling stations.
Most service stations allow the customer to pump the fuel before paying; this is particularly the case in the smaller towns and cities in New Zealand.
Labels on gasoline pumps in the U.S. typically describe this as the "(R+M)/2 Method".
Customers at the supermarket will receive a discount voucher which offers discounted fuel at their forecourt.
The wholesale price of gasoline is determined according to area by oil companies which supply the gasoline, and their prices are largely determined by the world markets for oil.
Occasionally, price rises trigger national protests.
The world's first purpose built gas station was constructed in St. Louis, Missouri in 1905 at 420 S. Theresa Avenue.
One commentator noted, "The joke is when babies are born in Oregon, the doctor slaps their bottom, 'No self-serve and no sales tax'...
Each afternoon, the prices for the next day are released to the public and the media, allowing consumers to decide when to fill up.
The convenience stores found in filling stations typically sell candy, soda/pop, snacks and, in some cases, a small selection of grocery items.
The maximum octane rating in California is generally 91.
In Japanese English, it is called a "''gasoline stand''".
Fuel dispensers are used to pump petrol/gasoline, diesel, Compressed natural gas, CGH2, HCNG, LPG, Liquid hydrogen, kerosene, alcohol fuel (like methanol, ethanol, butanol, propanol), biofuels (like straight vegetable oil, biodiesel), or other types of fuel into the tanks within vehicles and calculate the financial cost of the fuel transferred to the vehicle.
:The customer performs all required service.
The most common fuels sold in the 2010s are gasoline (''gasoline'' or ''gas'' in the U.S. and Canada, generally ''petrol'' elsewhere) and diesel fuel.
Diesel fuel in a gasoline engine — while creating large amounts of smoke — does not normally cause permanent damage if it is drained once the mistake is realized.
Similarly, in Australia, the term "service station" ("servo") describes any petrol station.
ExxonMobil uses its Exxon and Mobil brands but is still known as Esso (the forerunner company name, Standard Oil – S.
Many filling stations have integrated convenience stores which sell food, beverages, and often cigarettes, lottery tickets, motor oil, and auto parts.
Today, few stations advertise or provide full service.
Cars can build up static charge by driving on dry road surfaces.
In order to save money, some consumers in Canada and the United States inform each other about low and high prices through the use of gasoline price websites.
The first self-service station in the United States was in Los Angeles, opened in 1947 by Frank Urich.
If a filling station allows customers to pay at the register, the data from the dispensers may be transmitted via RS232, RS485 or Ethernet to the point of sale, usually inside the filling station's building, and fed into the station's cash register operating system.
Many have a pay at the pump system, where customers can enter their PIN prior to filling.
He asserted that it would be able to lower gas prices, but some New Jerseyans argued that it could cause drawbacks, especially unemployment.
It was operated by the independent company Henderson Thriftway Petroleum, owned by Bill Henderson.
Premium gas stations tend to be highly visible from highway and freeway exits, utilizing tall signs to display their brand logos.
Before 1970, full service was the norm, and self-service was rare.
Consumers then may check the prices listed in their geographic area in order to select the station with the lowest price available at the time.
In European Union countries leaded fuel is no longer available, with LRP (lead replacement petrol) being the only fuel available for engines which need it.
In Western Australia a  programme called Fuelwatch requires most WA filling stations to notify their "tomorrow prices" by 2pm each day; prices are changed at 6am each morning, and must be held for 24 hours.
Also, many filling stations incorporate a convenience store, which like most other buildings generally have electricity sockets; hence plug-in electric vehicles can be recharged.
Levels of service available include full service, for which assistance in dispensing fuel is offered, as well as offers to check tyre pressure or clean vehicle windscreens.
Motorists occasionally pump gasoline into a diesel car by accident.
Filling stations with ''premium brands'' sell well-recognized and often international brands of gasoline, including Exxon and its Esso brand, Phillips 66/Conoco/76, Hess, Chevron, QuikTrip, Mobil, Shell, Sinclair, Sunoco (US), BP, Valero and Texaco.
Some newer stations have separate nozzles for different types of fuel.
:Using cardlock (or pay-at-the-pump) system, these are completely unstaffed.
Early on, they were known to motorists as "filling stations".
However even a liter of petrol added to the tank of a modern diesel car can cause irreversible damage to the injection pump and other components through a lack of lubrication.
One suggested origin of this myth is said to have been started by gas station companies because the cell phone signal would interfere with the fuel counter on some older model fuel pumps causing it to give a lower reading.
Some nations describe fuels according to the traditional RON or MON ratings, so octane ratings cannot always be compared with the equivalent U.S. rating by the "(R+M)/2 method".
Proponents of the prohibition cite safety and jobs as reasons to keep the ban.
In most of mainland Europe, sales tax is lower on diesel fuel than on gasoline, and diesel is accordingly the cheaper fuel: in the UK and Switzerland, diesel has no tax advantage and retails at a higher price by quantity than gasoline (offset by its higher energy yield).
In the U.S. gasoline is described in terms of its "pump octane", which is the mean of their "RON" (Research Octane Number) and "MON" (Motor Octane Number).
Lower-priced gas stations are also found at some supermarkets (Albertsons, Kroger, Giant, Weis Markets, Safeway, Vons, Meijer, Loblaws/Real Canadian Superstore, and Giant Eagle), convenience stores (7-Eleven, Circle K, Cumberland Farms, Quick Chek, Road Ranger, Sheetz and Wawa), discount stores (Walmart, Canadian Tire) and warehouse clubs (Costco, Sam's Club, and BJ's Wholesale Club).
In Canada, the first self-service station opened in Winnipeg, Manitoba, in 1949.
In the past, filling stations in the United States offered a choice between ''full service'' and ''self service''.
In the Republic of Ireland, most filling stations allow customers to pump fuel before settling the bill.
Some television and radio stations also compile pricing information via viewer and listener reports of pricing or reporter observations and present it as a regular segment of their newscasts, usually before or after traffic reports.
It is a criminal offence to have written or verbal arrangements with competitors, suppliers or customers for:
Indian Oil operates approximately 15,000 filling stations in India.
The cost of full service is usually assessed as a fixed amount per U.S.&nbsp;gallon.
Newer stations may employ a single pipe for every dispenser.
The U.S. National Fire Protection Association does most of the research and code writing to address the potential for explosions of gasoline vapor.
Most localities ban smoking, open flames and running engines.
98 RON is available at selected BP ("Ultimate") and Mobil ("Synergy 8000") service stations instead of the standard 95 RON.
This practice fell out of favor due to the 1970s energy crisis.
The exhausts are placed as high as possible.
In most cases, a token provided by the attendant is used in lieu of coins.
These price observations must usually be made by reading the pricing signs outside stations, as many companies do not give their prices by telephone due to competitive concerns.
For every fuel tank, direct access must be available at all times.
In Oregon, "certain nonretail" customers may also pump their own fuel.
In New Jersey and Oregon, it is legal for customers to pump their own diesel (although not every station permits diesel customers to do so; truck stops typically do).
Besides fuel dispensers, one other significant device which is also found in filling stations and can refuel certain (compressed-air) vehicles is an air compressor, although generally these are just used to inflate car tyres.
In most stations in Canada and the USA, the pump has a single nozzle and the customer selects the desired octane grade by pushing a button.
Leaded fuel was abolished in 1996.
In the United States and Canada, there are generally two marketing types of filling stations: premium brands and discount brands.
Some also sell propane or butane and have added shops to their primary business.
However many tire compounds contain enough carbon black to provide an electrical ground which prevents charge build-up.
Fuel is typically more expensive from these outlets due to their premium locations.
In the United Kingdom these are called Motorway service areas.
Full service stations are more common in wealthy and upscale areas.
Afterwards the same system was used in Florida, USA.
These stations typically offered free air for inflating tyres, as compressed air was already on hand to operate the repair garage's pneumatic tools.
Some companies, such as Shell, use their brand worldwide, however, Chevron uses its inherited brand Caltex in Asia Pacific, Australia and Africa, and its Texaco brand in Europe and Latin America.
In the UK the most common gasoline grade (and lowest octane generally available) is 'Premium' 95 RON unleaded.
Conversely, some chain stores, such as supermarkets, discount superstores, warehouse clubs, or traditional convenience stores, have provided filling stations on the premises.
In the MythBusters episode "Cell Phone Destruction", investigators concluded that explosions attributed to cell phones could be caused by static discharges from clothing instead and also observed that such incidents seem to involve women more often than men.
Non-international premium brands include Petrobras, Petro-Canada (owned by Suncor Energy Canada), and Pemex.
In Japan, the main operators are Cosmo Oil, Idemitsu, Japan Energy (under the brand name JOMO), Nippon Oil (under the brand name ENEOS) and TonenGeneral (ja), although foreign brands such as Esso, Mobil (owned by TonenGeneral under its ExxonMobil Japan subsidiary) and Shell (Showa Shell Sekiyu) are also present.
In many U.S. states, state law requires that paying customers must be provided with free air compressor service.
* limiting or restraining competition unduly,
Vacuum cleaners, often coin-operated, are a common amenity to allow the cleaning of vehicle interiors, either by the customer or by an attendant.
Since 2008 the Bertha Benz Memorial Route commemorates this event.
