The violence was also more potent than in earlier noir films.
Films noir tend to revolve around heroes who are more flawed and morally questionable than the norm, often fall guys of one sort or another.
False suspicions and accusations of crime are frequent plot elements, as are betrayals and double-crosses.
Some of these are quintessentially self-aware neo-noirs—for example, ''Il Conformista'' (1969; Italy), ''Der Amerikanische Freund'' (1977; Germany), ''The Element of Crime'' (1984; Denmark), ''As Tears Go By'' (1988; Hong Kong), and ''El Aura'' (2005; Argentina).
''He Walked by Night'' (1948), shot by Alton and though credited solely to Alfred Werker, directed in large part by Mann, demonstrates their technical mastery and exemplifies the late 1940s trend of "police procedural" crime dramas.
By 1931, Curtiz had already been in Hollywood for half a decade, making as many as six films a year.
Though modestly budgeted, at the high end of the B movie scale, ''Stranger on the Third Floor'' still lost its studio, RKO, $56,000, almost a third of its total cost.
The 2015 film ''Ex Machina'' puts a film noir spin on the Frankenstein mythos, with the femme fatale sentient android Ava manipulating outsider Caleb to perform a crime against her creator Nathan.
The Coens referenced the noir tradition again with ''The Man Who Wasn't There'' (2001); a black-and-white crime melodrama set in 1949, it features a scene apparently staged to mirror the one from ''Out of the Past'' pictured above.
An important, and possibly influential, cinematic antecedent to classic noir was 1930s French poetic realism, with its romantic, fatalistic attitude and celebration of doomed heroes.
Four were independent productions distributed by United Artists, the "studio without a studio": ''Gun Crazy''; ''Kiss Me Deadly''; ''D.O.A.''
Wedding a style and story both with many noir characteristics, released the month before Lang's ''M'', ''City Streets'' has a claim to being the first major film noir.
Like ''Chinatown'', its more complex predecessor, Curtis Hanson's Oscar-winning ''L.A.
A prime example is ''Kiss Me Deadly'' (1955); based on a novel by Mickey Spillane, the best-selling of all the hardboiled authors, here the protagonist is a private eye, Mike Hammer.
The shadows of Venetian blinds or banister rods, cast upon an actor, a wall, or an entire set, are an iconic visual in noir and had already become a cliché well before the neo-noir era.
Directors such as Lang, Robert Siodmak, and Michael Curtiz brought a dramatically shadowed lighting style and a psychologically expressive approach to visual composition, or ''mise-en-scène'', with them to Hollywood, where they would make some of the most famous of classic noirs.
Film noir's aesthetics are deeply influenced by German Expressionism, an artistic movement of the 1910s and 1920s that involved theater, photography, painting, sculpture, and architecture, as well as cinema.
Some scholars believe film noir never really ended, but continued to transform even as the characteristic noir visual style began to seem dated and changing production conditions led Hollywood in different directions—in this view, post-1950s films in the noir tradition are seen as part of a continuity with classic noir.
The "Girl Hunt" ballet in Vincente Minnelli's ''The Band Wagon'' (1953) is a ten-minute distillation of—and play on—noir in dance.
The opportunities offered by the booming Hollywood film industry, and, later, the threat of growing Nazi power, led to the emigration of many important film artists working in Germany who had either been directly involved in the Expressionist movement or studied with its practitioners.
For much of the 1940s, one of the most prolific and successful authors of this often downbeat brand of suspense tale was Cornell Woolrich (sometimes under the pseudonym George Hopley or William Irish).
The film now most commonly cited as the first "true" film noir is ''Stranger on the Third Floor'' (1940), directed by Latvian-born, Soviet-trained Boris Ingster.
An A-level feature all the way, the film's commercial success and seven Oscar nominations made it probably the most influential of the early noirs.
Even before the beginning of the generally accepted classic period, there were films made far from Hollywood that can be seen in retrospect as film noirs, for example, the French productions ''Pépé le Moko'' (1937), directed by Julien Duvivier, and ''Le Jour se lève'' (1939), directed by Marcel Carné.
Of the others, one was a small-studio release:  ''Detour''.
In addition, Mexico experienced a vibrant film noir period from roughly 1946 to 1952, around the same time film noir was blossoming in the U.S.
It was in this way that accomplished noir actress Ida Lupino established herself as the sole female director in Hollywood during the late 1940s and much of the 1950s.
In author Nicholas Christopher's opinion, "it is as if the war, and the social eruptions in its aftermath, unleashed demons that had been bottled up in the national psyche."
Mann did some of his most celebrated work with cinematographer John Alton, a specialist in what James Naremore called "hypnotic moments of light-in-darkness".
Other well-known French films often classified as noir include ''Quai des Orfèvres'' (1947)  and ''Les Diaboliques'' (1955), both directed by Henri-Georges Clouzot; ''Casque d'Or'' (1952) and ''Touchez pas au grisbi'' (1954), both directed by Jacques Becker; and ''Ascenseur pour l'échafaud'' (1958), directed by Louis Malle.
Terence Fisher directed several low-budget thrillers in a noir mode for Hammer Film Productions, including ''The Last Page'' (a.k.a.
'''Classic-era film noirs in the National Film Registry'''
From the mid-1940s forward, location shooting became increasingly frequent in noir.
Still others focus on mood and attitude.
A crime investigation—by a private eye, a police detective (sometimes acting alone), or a concerned amateur—is the most prevalent, but far from dominant, basic plot.
Its visual intricacy and complex, voiceover-driven narrative structure are echoed in dozens of classic films noir.
The characteristic work of David Lynch combines film noir tropes with scenarios driven by disturbed characters such as the sociopathic criminal played by Dennis Hopper in ''Blue Velvet'' (1986) and the delusionary protagonist of ''Lost Highway'' (1997).
Neo-noirs as varied as ''The Element of Crime'' (surrealist), ''After Dark, My Sweet'' (retro), and ''Kiss Kiss Bang Bang'' (meta) have employed the flashback/voiceover combination.
The torments of ''The Machinist'' (2004), directed by Brad Anderson, evoke both ''Fight Club'' and ''Memento''.
The mainstreaming of neo-noir is evident in such films as ''Black Widow'' (1987), ''Shattered'' (1991), and ''Final Analysis'' (1992).
Director Jules Dassin of ''The Naked City'' (1948) pointed to the neorealists as inspiring his use of on-location photography with nonprofessional extras.
Noir parodies come in darker tones as well.
Though film noir is often identified with a visual style, unconventional within a Hollywood context, that emphasizes low-key lighting and unbalanced compositions, films commonly identified as noir evidence a variety of visual approaches, including ones that fit comfortably within the Hollywood mainstream.
Years earlier, working at Warner Bros., Hellinger had produced three films for Raoul Walsh, the proto-noirs ''They Drive by Night'' (1940), ''Manpower'' (1941) and ''High Sierra'' (1941), now regarded as a seminal work in noir's development.
"We'd be oversimplifying things in calling film noir oneiric, strange, erotic, ambivalent, and cruel&nbsp;…"—this set of attributes constitutes the first of many attempts to define film noir made by French critics Raymond Borde and Étienne Chaumeton in their 1955 book ''Panorama du film noir américain 1941–1953'' (''A Panorama of American Film Noir''), the original and seminal extended treatment of the subject.
In addition to the relatively looser constraints on character and message at lower budgets, the nature of B production lent itself to the noir style for economic reasons: dim lighting saved on electricity and helped cloak cheap sets (mist and smoke also served the cause); night shooting was often compelled by hurried production schedules; plots with obscure motivations and intriguingly elliptical transitions were sometimes the consequence of hastily written scripts, of which there was not always enough time or money to shoot every scene.
Some critics include ''Suspicion'' (1941), directed by Alfred Hitchcock, in their catalogues of noir; others ignore it.
are tales told by dead men.
Influential critic (and filmmaker) Paul Schrader wrote in a seminal 1972 essay that "''film noir'' is defined by tone", a tone he seems to perceive as "hopeless".
In Japan, the celebrated Akira Kurosawa directed several films recognizable as film noirs, including ''Drunken Angel'' (1948), ''Stray Dog'' (1949), ''The Bad Sleep Well'' (1960), and ''High and Low'' (1963).
While many critics refer to film noir as a genre itself, others argue that it can be no such thing.
Not only were Chandler's novels turned into major noirs—''Murder, My Sweet'' (1944; adapted from ''Farewell, My Lovely''), ''The Big Sleep'' (1946), and ''Lady in the Lake'' (1947)—he was an important screenwriter in the genre as well, producing the scripts for ''Double Indemnity'', ''The Blue Dahlia'' (1946), and ''Strangers on a Train'' (1951).
This new genre introduced innovations that were not available with the earlier noir films.
For instance, critics tend to define the model film noir as having a tragic or bleak conclusion, but many acknowledged classics of the genre have clearly happy endings (e.g., ''Stranger on the Third Floor,'' ''The Big Sleep,'' ''Dark Passage,'' and ''The Dark Corner''), while the tone of many other noir denouements is ambivalent.
Silver makes a case for how "side light is used&nbsp;... to reflect character ambivalence", while shots of characters in which they are lit from below "conform to a convention of visual expression which associates shadows cast upward of the face with the unnatural and ominous".
The signal film in this vein was ''Double Indemnity'', directed by Billy Wilder; setting the mold was Barbara Stanwyck's unforgettable femme fatale, Phyllis Dietrichson—an apparent nod to Marlene Dietrich, who had built her extraordinary career playing such characters for Sternberg.
Other films from the era readily identifiable as neo-noir (some retro, some more au courant) include director John Dahl's ''Kill Me Again'' (1989), ''Red Rock West'' (1992), ''The Last Seduction'' (1993), ''To Die For'' (1995), and ''A Perfect Murder'' (1998); four adaptations of novels by Jim Thompson—''The Kill-Off'' (1989), ''After Dark, My Sweet'' (1990), ''The Grifters'' (1990), and the remake of ''The Getaway'' (1994); and many more, including adaptations of the work of other major noir fiction writers: ''The Hot Spot'' (1990), from ''Hell Hath No Fury'', by Charles Williams; ''Miami Blues'' (1990), from the novel by Charles Willeford; and ''Out of Sight'' (1998), from the novel by Elmore Leonard.
Classical neo-noir examples in the 2010s include Kim Jee-woon’s ''I Saw the Devil'' (2010), Fred Cavaye’s ''Point Blank'' (2010), Na Hong-jin’s ''The Yellow Sea'' (2010) and Nicolas Winding Refn’s ''Drive'' (2011).
These incidents that occurred during the war as well as post-war incidents that ensued, functioned as an inspiration for a different "subgenre of Cold War Noir".
Examples of this sort of generic crossover have been dubbed ''teen noir''.
The iconic noir counterpart to the femme fatale, the private eye, came to the fore in films such as ''The Maltese Falcon'' (1941), with Humphrey Bogart as Sam Spade, and ''Murder, My Sweet'' (1944), with Dick Powell as Philip Marlowe.
Cartoons such as ''Garfield's Babes and Bullets'' (1989) and comic strip characters such as Tracer Bullet of ''Calvin and Hobbes'' have parodied both film noir and the kindred hardboiled tradition—one of the sources from which film noir sprang and which it now overshadows.
''The Hitch-Hiker'' |
The questions of what defines film noir, and what sort of category it is, provoke continuing debate.
Latter-day noir has been in the forefront of structural experimentation in popular cinema, as exemplified by such films as ''Pulp Fiction'', ''Fight Club'', and ''Memento''.
This semidocumentary approach characterized a substantial number of noirs in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
''Murder by Contract'' (1958), directed by Irving Lerner, is a deadpan joke on noir, with a denouement as bleak as any of the films it kids.
Walsh had no great name during his half-century as a director but his noirs ''White Heat'' (1949) and ''The Enforcer'' (1951) had A-list stars and are seen as important examples of the cycle.
On the other hand, definitive film noirs such as ''The Big Sleep'', ''The Lady from Shanghai'', ''Scarlet Street'' and ''Double Indemnity'' itself are famed for their hardboiled repartee, often imbued with sexual innuendo and self-reflexive humor.
''Poison Ivy'' (1992) makes use of similar devices executed in ''Basic Instinct'', including a shady, seductive femme-fatale with ulterior motives.
Other seminal noir sleuths served larger institutions, such as Dana Andrews' police detective in ''Laura'' (1944), Edmond O'Brien's insurance investigator in ''The Killers'', and Edward G. Robinson's government agent in ''The Stranger'' (1946).
The primary literary influence on film noir was the hardboiled school of American detective and crime fiction, led in its early years by such writers as Dashiell Hammett (whose first novel, ''Red Harvest'', was published in 1929) and James M. Cain (whose ''The Postman Always Rings Twice'' appeared five years later), and popularized in pulp magazines such as ''Black Mask''.
''The Lost Weekend''
Where Chandler, like Hammett, centered most of his novels and stories on the character of the private eye, Cain featured less heroic protagonists and focused more on psychological exposition than on crime solving; the Cain approach has come to be identified with a subset of the hardboiled genre dubbed "noir fiction".
Characters' faces may be partially or wholly obscured by darkness—a relative rarity in conventional Hollywood filmmaking.
''Force of Evil'' |
Independent production usually meant restricted circumstances but ''Sweet Smell of Success'', despite the plans of the production team, was clearly not made on the cheap, though like many other cherished A-budget noirs, it might be said to have a B-movie soul.
Flirting with splatter status even more brazenly, the Coens' ''Blood Simple'' is both an exacting pastiche and a gross exaggeration of classic noir.
Film noirs tend to have unusually convoluted story lines, frequently involving flashbacks and other editing techniques that disrupt and sometimes obscure the narrative sequence.
Italian neorealism of the 1940s, with its emphasis on quasi-documentary authenticity, was an acknowledged influence on trends that emerged in American noir.
While ''City Streets'' and other pre-WWII crime melodramas such as ''Fury'' (1936) and ''You Only Live Once'' (1937), both directed by Fritz Lang, are categorized as full-fledged noir in Alain Silver and Elizabeth Ward's film noir encyclopedia, other critics tend to describe them as "proto-noir" or in similar terms.
''Scarlet Street'' was a semi-independent, cosponsored by Universal and Lang's Diana Productions, of which the film's co-star, Joan Bennett, was the second biggest shareholder.
In the eyes of many critics, the city is presented in noir as a "labyrinth" or "maze".
The most commercially successful neo-noir of this period has been ''Sin City'' (2005), directed by Robert Rodriguez in extravagantly stylized black and white with the odd bit of color.
There was more visual experimentation than in Hollywood filmmaking as a whole: the Expressionism now closely associated with noir and the semi-documentary style that later emerged represent two very different tendencies.
Of the twenty-six National Film Registry noirs, in only four does the star play a private eye: ''The Maltese Falcon'', ''The Big Sleep'', ''Out of the Past'', and ''Kiss Me Deadly''.
Based on the novel by Raymond Chandler, it features one of Bogart's most famous characters, but in iconoclastic fashion: Philip Marlowe, the prototypical hardboiled detective, is replayed as a hapless misfit, almost laughably out of touch with contemporary mores and morality.
The classic film noirs ''The Maltese Falcon'' (1941) and ''The Glass Key'' (1942) were based on novels by Hammett; Cain's novels provided the basis for ''Double Indemnity'' (1944), ''Mildred Pierce'' (1945), ''The Postman Always Rings Twice'' (1946), and ''Slightly Scarlet'' (1956; adapted from ''Love's Lovely Counterfeit'').
Bars, lounges, nightclubs, and gambling dens are frequently the scene of action.
A slew of now-renowned noir "bad girls" would follow, such as those played by Rita Hayworth in ''Gilda'' (1946), Lana Turner in ''The Postman Always Rings Twice'' (1946), Ava Gardner in ''The Killers'' (1946), and Jane Greer in ''Out of the Past'' (1947).
The term ''film noir'', French for "black film" (literal) or "dark film" (closer meaning), first applied to Hollywood films by French critic Nino Frank in 1946, was unrecognized by most American film industry professionals of that era.
Crime, usually murder, is an element of almost all films noir; in addition to standard-issue greed, jealousy is frequently the criminal motivation.
The noir stories that are regarded as most characteristic tell of people trapped in unwanted situations (which, in general, they did not cause but are responsible for exacerbating), striving against random, uncaring fate, and frequently doomed.
In 1945, while at PRC, he directed a noir cult classic, ''Detour''.
Otto Preminger's success with ''Laura'' (1944) made his name and helped demonstrate noir's adaptability to a high-gloss 20th Century-Fox presentation.
A substantial trend within latter-day noir—dubbed "film soleil" by critic D. K. Holm—heads in precisely the opposite direction, with tales of deception, seduction, and corruption exploiting bright, sun-baked settings, stereotypically the desert or open water, to searing effect.
With ultra-violent films such as ''Sympathy for Mr. Vengeance'' (2002) and ''Thirst'' (2009), Park Chan-wook of South Korea has been the most prominent director outside of the United States to work regularly in a noir mode in the new millennium.
Movies with budgets a step up the ladder, known as "intermediates" by the industry, might be treated as A or B pictures depending on the circumstances.
Night-for-night shooting, as opposed to the Hollywood norm of day-for-night, was often employed.
The film was directed by Richard Fleischer, who two decades before had directed several strong B noirs, including ''Armored Car Robbery'' (1950) and ''The Narrow Margin'' (1952).
Such films have long been colloquially known as B movies.
Successful films in that genre such as ''Little Caesar'' (1931), ''The Public Enemy'' (1931), and ''Scarface'' (1932) demonstrated that there was an audience for crime dramas with morally reprehensible protagonists.
Some refer to such latter-day works as neo-noir.
Examples of British noir from the classic period include ''Brighton Rock'' (1947), directed by John Boulting; ''They Made Me a Fugitive'' (1947), directed by Alberto Cavalcanti; ''The Small Back Room'' (1948), directed by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger; ''The October Man'' (1950), directed by Roy Ward Baker; and ''Cast a Dark Shadow'' (1955), directed by Lewis Gilbert.
While noir is often associated with an urban setting, many classic noirs take place in small towns, suburbia, rural areas, or on the open road; so setting cannot be its genre determinant, as with the Western.
Cinema historians and critics defined the category retrospectively.
An ultra-low-budget Columbia Pictures production, it may qualify as the first intentional example of what is now called a neo-noir film; it was likely a source of inspiration for both Melville's ''Le Samouraï'' and Scorsese's ''Taxi Driver''.
Fincher's feature debut was ''Alien 3'' (1992), which evoked the classic noir jail film ''Brute Force''.
They regard true film noir as belonging to a temporally and geographically limited cycle or period, treating subsequent films that evoke the classics as fundamentally different due to general shifts in filmmaking style and latter-day awareness of noir as a historical source for allusion.
Anime television series with science fiction noir themes include ''Ghost in the Shell'', ''Cowboy Bebop'' (1998), ''The Big O'' (1999), and ''Noir'' (2001).
(This was not even the first screen version of Cain's novel, having been preceded by the French ''Le Dernier Tournant'' in 1939.)
The tendency was at its peak during the late 1980s and 1990s, with films such as ''Dead Calm'' (1989), ''After Dark, My Sweet'' (1990), ''The Hot Spot'' (1990), ''Delusion'' (1991), ''Red Rock West'' (1993) and the television series ''Miami Vice''.
The cynical and stylish perspective of classic film noir had a formative effect on the cyberpunk genre of science fiction that emerged in the early 1980s; the film most directly influential on cyberpunk was ''Blade Runner'' (1982), directed by Ridley Scott, which pays evocative homage to the classic noir mode (Scott would subsequently direct the poignant noir crime melodrama ''Someone to Watch Over Me'' 1987).
''The Cheap Detective'' (1978), starring Peter Falk, is a broad spoof of several films, including the Bogart classics ''The Maltese Falcon'' and ''Casablanca''.
British-born director Christopher Nolan's black-and-white debut, ''Following'' (1998), was an overt homage to classic noir.
The most distinctive films of Phil Karlson (''The Phenix City Story'' 1955 and ''The Brothers Rico'' 1957) tell stories of vice organized on a monstrous scale.
The British miniseries ''The Singing Detective'' (1986), written by Dennis Potter, tells the story of a mystery writer named Philip Marlow; widely considered one of the finest neo-noirs in any medium, some critics rank it among the greatest television productions of all time.
''The Asphalt Jungle'' |
Another comic book adaptation with similar style and elements is ''The Spirit'' (2008).
Classic film noir has been associated by many critics with the American social landscape of the era—in particular, with a sense of heightened anxiety and alienation that is said to have followed World War II.
The Vienna-born but largely American-raised Josef von Sternberg was directing in Hollywood at the same time.
Before he was forced abroad by political persecution, Jules Dassin made two classic noirs that also straddled the major–independent line: ''Brute Force'' (1947) and the influential documentary-style ''The Naked City'' were developed by producer Mark Hellinger, who had an "inside/outside" contract with Universal similar to Wanger's.
Scholar Jamaluddin Bin Aziz has observed how "the shadow of Philip Marlowe lingers on" in such other "future noir" films as ''12 Monkeys'' (1995), ''Dark City'' (1998) and ''Minority Report'' (2002).
Framing the entire primary narrative as a flashback is also a standard device.
The film also demonstrates how neo-noir's polychrome palette can reproduce many of the expressionistic effects of classic black-and-white noir.
They emphasize that not every film noir embodies all five attributes in equal measure—one might be more dreamlike; another, particularly brutal.
Written by Robert Towne, it is set in 1930s Los Angeles, an accustomed noir locale nudged back some few years in a way that makes the pivotal loss of innocence in the story even crueler.
Giving Expressionist-affiliated filmmakers particularly free stylistic rein were Universal horror pictures such as ''Dracula'' (1931), ''The Mummy'' (1932)—the former photographed and the latter directed by the Berlin-trained Karl Freund—and ''The Black Cat'' (1934), directed by Austrian émigré Edgar G. Ulmer.
''The Thirteenth Floor'' (1999), like ''Blade Runner'', is an explicit homage to classic noir, in this case involving speculations about virtual reality.
While black-and-white cinematography is considered by many to be one of the essential attributes of classic noir, the color films ''Leave Her to Heaven'' (1945) and ''Niagara'' (1953) are routinely included in noir filmographies, while ''Slightly Scarlet'' (1956), ''Party Girl'' (1958), and ''Vertigo'' (1958) are classified as noir by varying numbers of critics.
This film is adapted from the comic book of the same name originally created by cartoonist Will Eisner.
The most acclaimed of the neo-noirs of the era was director Roman Polanski's 1974 ''Chinatown''.
Along with neorealism, the style had a homegrown precedent, specifically cited by Dassin, in director Henry Hathaway's ''The House on 92nd Street'' (1945), which demonstrated the parallel influence of the cinematic newsreel.
Scholar Andrew Spicer argues that British film noir evidences a greater debt to French poetic realism than to the expressionistic American mode of noir.
In the 1990s and 2000s, critics have increasingly turned their attention to that diverse field of films called neo-noir; once again, there is even less consensus about the defining attributes of such films made outside the classic period.
Before the notion was widely adopted in the 1970s, many of the classic ''films noir'' were referred to as "melodramas".
Although ''film noir'' was originally associated with American productions, films now so described have been made around the world.
David Cronenberg's ''Crash'' (1996), an adaptation of the speculative novel by J. G. Ballard, has been described as a "film noir in bruise tones".
Although the term "film noir" was originally coined to describe Hollywood movies, film noir was an international phenomenon.
Among characters of every stripe, cigarette smoking is rampant.
The commercial and critical success of Sternberg's silent ''Underworld'' (1927) was largely responsible for spurring a trend of Hollywood gangster films.
Belying its parodic strain, ''The Long Goodbye''s final act is seriously grave.
Put out, like other Mann-Alton noirs, by the small Eagle-Lion company, it was the inspiration for the ''Dragnet'' series, which debuted on radio in 1949 and television in 1951.
''The Naked City'' |
Just four others readily qualify as detective stories: ''Laura'', ''The Killers'', ''The Naked City'', and ''Touch of Evil''.
The television series ''The Fugitive'' (1963–67) brought classic noir themes and mood to the small screen for an extended run.
Burnett's characteristic narrative approach fell somewhere between that of the quintessential hardboiled writers and their noir fiction compatriots—his protagonists were often heroic in their way, a way just happening to be that of the gangster.
Among Hollywood's most celebrated directors of the era, arguably none worked more often in a noir mode than Preminger; his other noirs include ''Fallen Angel'' (1945), ''Whirlpool'' (1949), ''Where the Sidewalk Ends'' (1950) (all for Fox) and ''Angel Face'' (1952).
A substantial number of latter-day noirs flout such conventions: vice emerges triumphant in films as varied as the grim ''Chinatown'' and the ribald ''Hot Spot''.
Similarly, while the private eye and the femme fatale are character types conventionally identified with noir, the majority of film noirs feature neither; so there is no character basis for genre designation as with the gangster film.
No survey of classic noir's identifying characteristics can therefore be considered definitive.
The characteristic protagonists of noir are described by many critics as "alienated"; in the words of Silver and Ward, "filled with existential bitterness".
In other common plots the protagonists are implicated in heists or con games, or in murderous conspiracies often involving adulterous affairs.
Fritz Lang's ''M'' (1931), shot only a few years before his departure from Germany, is among the first major crime films of the sound era to join a characteristically noirish visual style with a noir-type plot, one in which the protagonist is a criminal (as are his most successful pursuers).
The neo-noir film genre developed mid-way into the Cold War.
Perhaps no director better displayed that spirit than the German-born Robert Siodmak, who had already made a score of films before his 1940 arrival in Hollywood.
''The Big Combo'' was shot by John Alton and took the shadowy noir style to its outer limits.
The prevalence of the private eye as a lead character declined in film noir of the 1950s, a period during which several critics describe the form as becoming more focused on extreme psychologies and more exaggerated in general.
''Sesame Street'' (1969–curr.)
The low-key lighting schemes of many classic film noirs are associated with stark light/dark contrasts and dramatic shadow patterning—a style known as chiaroscuro (a term adopted from Renaissance painting).
''In a Lonely Place'' (1950) was Nicholas Ray's breakthrough; his other noirs include his debut, ''They Live by Night'' (1948) and ''On Dangerous Ground'' (1952), noted for their unusually sympathetic treatment of characters alienated from the social mainstream.
That same year, Deanna Durbin was the singing lead in the comedic noir ''Lady on a Train'', which makes fun of Woolrich-brand wistful miserablism.
Detective series, prevalent on American television during the period, updated the hardboiled tradition in different ways, but the show conjuring the most noir tone was a horror crossover touched with shaggy, ''Long Goodbye''–style humor: ''Kolchak: The Night Stalker'' (1974–75), featuring a Chicago newspaper reporter investigating strange, usually supernatural occurrences.
Though several late classic noirs, ''Kiss Me Deadly'' in particular, were deeply self-knowing and post-traditional in conception, none tipped its hand so evidently as to be remarked on by American critics at the time.
Film noirs, especially those of the 1950s and the height of the Red Scare, are often said to reflect cultural paranoia; ''Kiss Me Deadly'' is the noir most frequently marshaled as evidence for this claim.
Film noir is often said to be defined by "moral ambiguity", yet the Production Code obliged almost all classic noirs to see that steadfast virtue was ultimately rewarded and vice, in the absence of shame and redemption, severely punished (however dramatically incredible the final rendering of mandatory justice might be).
Film noir similarly embraces a variety of genres, from the gangster film to the police procedural to the gothic romance to the social problem picture—any example of which from the 1940s and 1950s, now seen as noir's classical era, was likely to be described as a "melodrama" at the time.
The ''Twin Peaks'' cycle, both TV series (1990–91) and film, ''Fire Walk with Me'' (1992), puts a detective plot through a succession of bizarre spasms.
On television, ''Remington Steele'' (1982–87) and ''Moonlighting'' (1985–89) paid homage to classic noir while demonstrating an unusual appreciation of the sense of humor often found in the original cycle.
It would be turned into a hit for Warner Bros. in 1931; the following year, Burnett was hired to write dialogue for ''Scarface'', while ''The Beast of the City'' (1932) was adapted from one of his stories.
Two RKO productions starring Robert Mitchum take film noir over the border into self-parody: ''The Big Steal'' (1949), directed by Don Siegel, and ''His Kind of Woman'' (1951).
Where Polanski and Towne raised noir to a black apogee by turning rearward, director Martin Scorsese and screenwriter Paul Schrader brought the noir attitude crashing into the present day with ''Taxi Driver'' (1976), a crackling, bloody-minded gloss on bicentennial America.
Nor does film noir rely on anything as evident as the monstrous or supernatural elements of the horror film, the speculative leaps of the science fiction film, or the song-and-dance routines of the musical.
The former—whose screenplay was written by the blacklisted Dalton Trumbo, disguised by a front—features a bank hold-up sequence shown in an unbroken take of over three minutes that was influential.
Film noir is often described as essentially pessimistic.
Where Altman's subversion of the film noir mythos was so irreverent as to outrage some contemporary critics, around the same time Woody Allen was paying affectionate, at points idolatrous homage to the classic mode with ''Play It Again, Sam'' (1972).
During the classic period, there were many films produced in Europe, particularly in France, that share elements of style, theme, and sensibility with American film noirs and may themselves be included in the genre's canon.
Adapted by director Robinson Devor from a novel by Charles Willeford, ''The Woman Chaser'' (1999) sends up not just the noir mode but the entire Hollywood filmmaking process, with seemingly each shot staged as the visual equivalent of an acerbic Marlowe wisecrack.
Certain archetypal characters appear in many films noir—hardboiled detectives, femme fatales, corrupt policemen, jealous husbands, intrepid claims adjusters, and down-and-out writers.
To support their categorization of certain films as noirs and their rejection of others, many critics refer to a set of elements they see as marking examples of the mode.
In addition to ''The Killers'', Burt Lancaster's debut and a Hellinger/Universal co-production, Siodmak's other important contributions to the genre include 1944's ''Phantom Lady'' (a top-of-the-line B and Woolrich adaptation), the ironically titled ''Christmas Holiday'' (1944), and ''Cry of the City'' (1948).
''The Chase'' (1946) takes oneirism and fatalism as the basis for its fantastical narrative system, redolent of certain horror stories, but with little precedent in the context of a putatively realistic genre.
Director David Fincher followed the immensely successful neo-noir ''Seven'' (1995) with a film that developed into a cult favorite after its original, disappointing release: ''Fight Club'' (1999) is a ''sui generis'' mix of noir aesthetic, perverse comedy, speculative content, and satiric intent.
In other media, the television series ''Sledge Hammer!''
''The Manchurian Candidate'' examined the situation of American prisoners of war (POWs) during the Korean War.
Lang's follow-up, ''Scarlet Street'' (1945), was one of the few classic noirs to be officially censored: filled with erotic innuendo, it was temporarily banned in Milwaukee, Atlanta and New York State.
In ''Criss Cross'', Siodmak achieved these effects with purpose, wrapping them around Yvonne De Carlo, playing the most understandable of femme fatales, Dan Duryea, in one of his many charismatic villain roles and Lancaster as an ordinary laborer turned armed robber, doomed by a romantic obsession.
(1950), directed by Rudolph Maté and ''Sweet Smell of Success'' (1957), directed by Alexander Mackendrick.
Lynch's ''Mulholland Drive'' (2001) continued in his characteristic vein, making the classic noir setting of Los Angeles the venue for a noir-inflected psychological jigsaw puzzle.
Raymond Chandler, who debuted as a novelist with ''The Big Sleep'' in 1939, soon became the most famous author of the hardboiled school.
''Out of the Past'' |
Film noir is often associated with an urban setting, and a few cities—Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York, and Chicago, in particular—are the location of many of the classic films.
Concerning films made either before or after the classic period, or outside of the United States at any time, consensus is even rarer.
Samuel Fuller's brutal, visually energetic films such as ''Pickup on South Street'' (1953) and ''Underworld U.S.A.'' (1961) earned him a unique reputation; his advocates praise him as "primitive" and "barbarous".
Among big-budget auteurs, Michael Mann has worked frequently in a neo-noir mode, with such films as ''Thief'' (1981) and ''Heat'' (1995) and the TV series ''Miami Vice'' (1984–89) and ''Crime Story'' (1986–88).
Amnesia is fairly epidemic—"noir's version of the common cold", in the words of film historian Lee Server.
Narrative structures sometimes involved convoluted flashbacks uncommon in non-noir commercial productions.
The climaxes of a substantial number of films noir take place in visually complex, often industrial settings, such as refineries, factories, trainyards, power plants—most famously the explosive conclusion of ''White Heat'', set at a chemical plant.
The authors' caveats and repeated efforts at alternative definition have been echoed in subsequent scholarship: in the more than five decades since, there have been innumerable further attempts at definition, yet in the words of cinema historian Mark Bould, film noir remains an "elusive phenomenon&nbsp;… always just out of reach".
Opinion is divided on the noir status of several Alfred Hitchcock thrillers from the era; at least four qualify by consensus: ''Shadow of a Doubt'' (1943), ''Notorious'' (1946), ''Strangers on a Train'' (1951) and ''The Wrong Man'' (1956).
