A person can both be part of a film's cast and crew, such as Woody Allen, who directed and starred in ''Take the Money and Run''.
During projection of traditional films, a rotating shutter causes intervals of darkness as each frame in turn is moved into position to be projected, but the viewer does not notice the interruptions because of an effect known as persistence of vision, whereby the eye retains a visual image for a fraction of a second after the source has been removed.
Upon seeing how successful their new invention, and its product, was in their native France, the Lumières quickly set about touring the Continent to exhibit the first films privately to royalty and publicly to the masses.
Digital methods have also been used to restore films, although their continued obsolescence cycle makes them (as of 2006) a poor choice for long-term preservation.
They may also be works of political protest, as in the films of Wajda, or more subtly, the films of Andrei Tarkovsky.
"Silent films" need not be utterly silent, but are films and movies without an audible dialogue, including those that have a musical accompaniment.
"Film theory" seeks to develop concise and systematic concepts that apply to the study of film as art.
''Bride of Frankenstein'' is an early example.
The expense of the process was daunting, but favorable public response in the form of increased box office receipts usually justified the added cost.
Improvements since the late 19th century include the mechanization of cameras&nbsp;– allowing them to record at a consistent speed, quiet camera design&nbsp;– allowing sound recorded on-set to be usable without requiring large "blimps" to encase the camera, the invention of more sophisticated filmstocks and lenses, allowing directors to film in increasingly dim conditions, and the development of synchronized sound, allowing sound to be recorded at exactly the same speed as its corresponding action.
Dedicated theaters and companies formed specifically to produce and distribute films, while motion picture actors became major celebrities and commanded huge fees for their performances.
Sub-industries can spin off from film, such as popcorn makers, and film-related toys (e.g., ''Star Wars'' figures).
Journalist film critics are sometimes called film reviewers.
However, historic films have problems in terms of preservation and storage, and the motion picture industry is exploring many alternatives.
The film may be exhibited directly to the public either through a movie theater (historically the main way films were distributed) or television for  personal home viewing (including on DVD-Video or Blu-ray Disc, video-on-demand, online downloading, television programs through broadcast syndication etc.).
Film may be propaganda, in whole or in part, such as the films made by Leni Riefenstahl in Nazi Germany, US war film trailers during World War II, or artistic films made under Stalin by Eisenstein.
The "credits," or "end credits," is a list that gives credit to the people involved in the production of a film.
Occasionally the word can also be used to refer to the fame of other members of the crew, such as a director or other personality, such as Martin Scorsese.
There is also a large industry for educational and instructional films made in lieu of or in addition to lectures and texts.
The Oberammergau Passion Play of 1898  was the first commercial motion picture ever produced.
These approaches are preferred by some film-makers, especially because footage shot with digital cinema can be evaluated and edited with non-linear editing systems (NLE) without waiting for the film stock to be processed.
Modern digital video cameras and digital projectors are gaining ground as well.
Technologies such as DVDs, FireWire connections and a wide variety of professional and consumer-grade video editing software make film-making relatively affordable.
By the end of the 1880s, the introduction of lengths of celluloid photographic film and the invention of motion picture cameras, which could photograph an indefinitely long rapid sequence of images using only one lens, allowed several minutes of action to be captured and stored on a single compact reel of film.
A cinema usually refers to an arena designed specifically to exhibit films, where the screen is affixed to a wall, while a theater usually refers to a place where live, non-recorded action or combination thereof occurs from a podium or other type of stage, including the amphitheater.
On the business side, the costs of big-budget studio films also leads to conservative choices in cast and crew.
When there are more films than one with the same characters, story arcs, or subject themes, these movies become a "series," such as the James Bond series.
More recent analysis spurred by Jacques Lacan's psychoanalysis and Ferdinand de Saussure's semiotics among other things has given rise to psychoanalytical film theory, structuralist film theory, feminist film theory and others.
Teasers are a much shorter preview or advertisement that lasts only 10 to 30 seconds.
The name "film" originates from the fact that photographic film (also called film stock) has historically been the medium for recording and displaying motion pictures.
These new technologies provided audio and visuals that in the past only local cinemas had been able to provide: a large, clear widescreen presentation of a film with a full-range, high-quality multi-speaker sound system.
A '''film''', also called a '''movie''', '''motion picture''', '''theatrical film''' or '''photoplay''', is a series of still images which, when shown on a screen, creates the illusion of moving images due to the phi phenomenon.
The revolution they wrought was swift.
Stock widths and the film format for images on the reel have had a rich history, though most large commercial films are still shot on (and distributed to theaters) as 35&nbsp;mm prints.
In the United States, much of the film industry is centered around Hollywood, California.
Directors developed a theory of montage, beginning with Eisenstein and the complex juxtaposition of images in his film ''Battleship Potemkin''.
The necessary steps for almost any film can be boiled down to conception, planning, execution, revision, and distribution.
Digital technology has been the driving force for change throughout the 1990s and into the 2000s.
Despite this, critics have an important impact on the audience response and attendance at films, especially those of certain genres.
For many decades, tape was solely an analog medium onto which moving images could be either recorded or transferred.
From 1931 to 1956, film was also the only image storage and playback system for television programming until the introduction of videotape recorders.
Digital 3D projection largely replaced earlier problem-prone 3D film systems and has become popular in the early 2010s.
Film trailers are also common on DVDs and Blu-ray Discs, as well as on the Internet and mobile devices.
The resulting sound films were initially distinguished from the usual silent "moving pictures" or "movies" by calling them "talking pictures" or "talkies."
The number of films made in color slowly increased year after year.
However, the nature and structure of film prevents an "apples-to-apples" comparison with regard to resolution.
As a medium, film is not limited to motion pictures, since the technology developed as the basis for photography.
Film is used for a range of goals, including education and propaganda.
A hopeful director is almost never given the opportunity to get a job on a big-budget studio film unless he or she has significant industry experience in film or television.
Some important mainstream Hollywood films were still being made in black-and-white as late as the mid-1960s, but they marked the end of an era.
Communication between ''production'' and ''crew'' generally passes through the director and his/her staff of assistants.
For prestige films such as most dramas, and art films, the influence of reviews is important.
The cinema now faces a new challenge from home video from the high definition (HD) format known as Blu-ray, which can provide full HD 1080p video playback.
Films recorded in a photochemical form traditionally included an analogous optical soundtrack, which is a graphic recording of the spoken words, music and other sounds that accompany the images.
However, while the means of production may be democratized, financing, distribution, and marketing remain difficult to accomplish outside the traditional system.
Film stock consists of transparent celluloid, acetate, or polyester base coated with an emulsion containing light-sensitive chemicals.
In early years, the word ''sheet'' was sometimes used instead of ''screen''.
''Crew'' are distinguished from ''cast'', who are the actors who appear in front of the camera or provide voices for characters in the film.
In a typical production cycle of a Hollywood-style film, these main stages are defined as:
Examples are recordings of academic lectures and experiments, or a film based on a classic novel.
Preceding film in origin by thousands of years, early plays and dances had elements common to film: scripts, sets, costumes, production, direction, actors, audiences, storyboards, and scores.
Originally moving picture film was shot and projected at various speeds using hand-cranked cameras and projectors; though 1000 frames per minute (16⅔ frame/s) is generally cited as a standard silent speed, research indicates most films were shot between 16 frame/s and 23 frame/s and projected from 18 frame/s on up (often reels included instructions on how fast each scene should be shown).
Typically, two glass slides, one with the stationary part of the picture and the other with the part that was to move, would be placed one on top of the other and projected together, then the moving slide would be hand-operated, either directly or by means of a lever or other mechanism.
Like independent filmmaking, open source filmmaking takes place outside of Hollywood, or other major studio systems.
In the mid-19th century, inventions such as Joseph Plateau's phenakistoscope and the later zoetrope demonstrated that a carefully designed sequence of drawings, showing phases of the changing appearance of objects in motion, would appear to show the objects actually moving if they were displayed one after the other at a sufficiently rapid rate.
After the test audience responded very negatively to the death of the main character, a Vietnam veteran, at the end of the film, the company wrote and re-shot a new ending in which the character survives.
Various New Wave movements (including the French New Wave, Indian New Wave, Japanese New Wave and New Hollywood) and the rise of film-school-educated independent filmmakers contributed to the changes the medium experienced in the latter half of the 20th century.
Other techniques such as camera movement were developed as effective ways to tell a story with film.
Fields of academic study have been created that are derivative or dependent on the existence of film, such as film criticism, film history, divisions of film propaganda in authoritarian governments, or psychological on subliminal effects (e.g., of a flashing soda can during a screening).
The plot summary and description of a film and the assessment of the director's and screenwriters' work that makes up the majority of most film reviews can still have an important impact on whether people decide to see a film.
Currently the super-16 format is seeing use as a capture medium, with digital scanning and post-production providing good results.
Later, when theaters added more screens or new theaters were built with a lot of screens, all different trailers were shown even if they weren't going to play that film in that theater.
Back in the early days of cinema, with theaters that had only one or two screens, only certain trailers were shown for the films that were going to be shown there.
"Motion pictures" and "moving pictures" are frequently used terms for film and movie productions specifically intended for theatrical exhibition, such as, for instance, ''Batman''.
By contrast, in the United States, "movie" is the predominant form.
One might propose "going to the cinema" when referring to the activity, or sometimes "to the pictures" in British English, whereas the U.S. expression is usually "going to the movies."
A preview performance refers to a showing of a film to a select audience, usually for the purposes of corporate promotions, before the public film premiere itself.
Color television receivers had been available in the US since the mid-1950s, but at first they were very expensive and few broadcasts were in color.
The third year, ''post-production'' and ''distribution''.
Terms for the field in general include ''the big screen'', ''the silver screen'', ''the movies'' and ''cinema''; the latter is commonly used in scholarly texts and critical essays, especially by European writers.
The sensitivity was gradually improved and in the late 1870s Eadweard Muybridge created the first animated image sequences photographed in real-time.
Limited animation is a way of increasing production and decreasing costs of animation by using "short cuts" in the animation process.
Both production and post-production costs have been significantly lowered; in the 2000s, the hardware and software for post-production can be installed in a commodity-based personal computer.
Theaters can still screen movies in them, though the theater would be retrofitted to do so.
An "independent" is a film made outside of the conventional film industry.
From then onward, a film's credits usually appear at the end of most films.
The second year comprises ''preproduction'' and ''production''.
Until sound film became commercially practical in the late 1920s, motion pictures were a purely visual art, but these innovative silent films had gained a hold on the public imagination.
Films are cultural artifacts created by specific cultures.
A "preview" is a screening in advance of the main release.
Some films have become popular worldwide attractions by using dubbing or subtitles to translate the dialog into the language of the viewer.
Some studios save color films through the use of separation masters: three B&W negatives each exposed through red, green, or blue filters (essentially a reverse of the Technicolor process).
The same film may be considered educational by some, and propaganda by others as the categorization of a film can be subjective.
As these were all filmed separately, and perhaps with different actors, the final version is called a montage.
Each sequence was limited to a small number of drawings, usually twelve, so it could only show endlessly repeating cyclical motions.
Because animation is very time-consuming and often very expensive to produce, the majority of animation for TV and films comes from professional animation studios.
By the late 1880s, the last major device of this type, the praxinoscope, had been elaborated into a form that employed a long coiled band containing hundreds of images painted on glass and used the elements of a magic lantern to project them onto a screen.
An open content film is much like an independent film, but it is produced through open collaborations; its source material is available under a license which is permissive enough to allow other parties to create fan fiction or derivative works, than a traditional copyright.
A "short" is a film that is not as long as a feature-length film, often screened with other shorts, or preceding a feature-length film.
Films from before the 1970s usually start a film with credits, often ending with only a title card, saying "The End" or some equivalent, often an equivalent that depends on the language of the production.
Although most animation studios are now using digital technologies in their productions, there is a specific style of animation that depends on film.
By 1930, silent film was practically extinct in the US and already being referred to as "the old medium."
In the early 1950s, the proliferation of black-and-white television started seriously depressing North American theater attendance.
However, the act of shooting images with other visual media, such as with a digital camera, is still called "filming" and the resulting works often called "films" as interchangeable to "movies," despite not being shot on film.
Owing to the lack of any technology for doing so, the moving images and sounds could not be recorded for replaying as with film.
The ''crew'' interacts with but is also distinct from the ''production staff,'' consisting of producers, managers, company representatives, their assistants, and those whose primary responsibility falls in pre-production or post-production phases, such as screenwriters and film editors.
A cinema usually shows a mass-marketed movie using a front-projection screen process with either a film projector or, more recently, with a digital projector.
Film is considered to be an important art form, a source of popular entertainment, and a powerful medium for educating—or indoctrinating—citizens.
Film distribution is the process through which a film is made available for viewing by an audience.
Trailers or previews are advertisements for films that will be shown in 1 to 3 months at a cinema.
Filmmakers can conceivably shoot a film with a digital video camera and edit the film, create and edit the sound and music, and mix the final cut on a high-end home computer.
But the advent of consumer camcorders in 1985, and more importantly, the arrival of high-resolution digital video in the early 1990s, have lowered the technology barrier to film production significantly.
But, cinemas may also show theatrical movies from their home video transfers that include Blu-ray Disc, DVD, and videocassette when they possess sufficient projection quality or based upon need, such as movies that exist only in their transferred state, which may be due to the loss or deterioration of the film master and prints from which the movie originally existed.
Normally they only see any given film once and have only a day or two to formulate their opinions.
In the 1920s, the development of electronic sound recording technologies made it practical to incorporate a soundtrack of speech, music and sound effects synchronized with the action on the screen.
Incorporation of musical and visual counterpoint, and scene development through mise en scene, editing and effects, has led to more complex techniques comparable to those used in opera and ballet.
André Bazin reacted against this theory by arguing that film's artistic essence lay in its ability to mechanically reproduce reality not in its differences from reality, and this gave rise to realist theory.
This is normally the task of a professional film distributor, who would determine the marketing strategy of the film, the media by which a film is to be exhibited or made available for viewing, and may set the release date and other matters.
The first year is taken up with ''development''.
The pivotal innovation was the introduction of the three-strip version of the Technicolor process, first used for animated cartoons in 1932, then also for live-action short films and isolated sequences in a few feature films, then for an entire feature film, Becky Sharp, in 1935.
Around the turn of the 20th century, films started stringing several scenes together to tell a story.
A "release" is the distribution and often simultaneous screening of a film.
The use of sequences of photographs in such devices was initially limited to a few experiments with subjects photographed in a series of poses, because the available emulsions were not sensitive enough to allow the short exposures needed to photograph subjects that were actually moving.
Films were originally recorded onto plastic film through a photochemical process, and then shown through a movie projector onto a large screen.
Formalist film theory, led by Rudolf Arnheim, Béla Balázs, and Siegfried Kracauer, emphasized how film differed from reality, and thus could be considered a valid fine art.
The first public screenings of films at which admission was charged was made in 1895 by the American Woodville Latham and his sons, using films produced by their company, and by the - arguably better known - French brothers Auguste and Louis Lumière with ten of their own productions.
A "crew" is usually interpreted as the people involved in a film's physical construction outside of cast participation, and it could include directors, film editors, photographers, grips, gaffers, set decorators, prop masters, and costume designers.
The rise of European cinema was interrupted by the outbreak of World War I, while the film industry in the United States flourished with the rise of Hollywood, typified most prominently by the innovative work of D. W. Griffith in The Birth of a Nation (1915) and Intolerance (1916).
The contemporary definition of cinema is the art of simulating experiences to communicate ideas, stories, perceptions, feelings, beauty or atmosphere by the means of recorded or programmed moving images along with other sensory stimulations.
James Monaco wrote a classic text on film theory, titled "How to ''Read'' a Film," that addresses this.
They reflect those cultures, and, in turn, affect them.
Film critics working for newspapers, magazines, and broadcast media mainly review new releases.
These devices relied on the phenomenon of persistence of vision to make the display appear continuous even though the observer's view was actually blocked as each drawing rotated into the location where its predecessor had just been glimpsed.
Local cinemas will be changing in the 21st century and moving towards digital projectors, a new approach which will allow for easier and quicker distribution of films (via satellite or hard disks).
Muybridge used his system to analyze the movements of a wide variety of animal and human subjects.
Many other terms exist for an individual motion picture, including ''picture'', ''picture show'', ''moving picture'', ''photoplay'' and ''flick''.
After the advent of theatrical film as an industry, the television industry began using videotape as a recording medium.
Revenue in the industry is sometimes volatile due to the reliance on blockbuster films released in movie theaters.
Most contemporary films are now fully digital through the entire process of production, distribution, and exhibition from start to finish.
Teasers are used to get patrons excited about a film coming out in the next six to twelve months.
Video formats are gradually catching up with the resolutions and quality that film offers; 1080p in Blu-ray offers a pixel resolution of 1920×1080, a leap from the DVD offering of 720×480 and the 330×480 offered by the first home video standard, VHS.
A post-credits scene is a scene shown after the end of the credits.
The word, "Talkies," refers to the earliest sound films created to have audible dialogue recorded for playback along with the film, regardless of a musical accompaniment.
A film that portrays events occurring earlier in a timeline with those in another film, but is released after that film, is sometimes called a "prequel," an example being ''Butch and Sundance: The Early Days''.
Trailers are now shown before the film (or the A film in a double feature program) begins.
Preservation is generally a higher concern for nitrate and single-strip color films, due to their high decay rates; black-and-white films on safety bases and color films preserved on Technicolor imbibition prints tend to keep up much better, assuming proper handling and storage.
Sub-industries of pre-existing industries may deal specifically with film, such as product placement and other advertising within films.
"Sales" and "at the box office" refer to tickets sold at a theater, or more currently, rights sold for individual showings.
Film has also been incorporated into multimedia presentations, and often has importance as primary historical documentation.
24 frames per second was chosen because it was the slowest (and thus cheapest) speed which allowed for sufficient sound quality.
The bigger the production, the more resources it takes, and the more important financing becomes; most feature films are artistic works from the creators' perspective (e.g., film director, cinematographer, screenwriter) and for-profit business entities for the production companies.
Some observers claim that movie marketing in the 2000s is so intense, well-coordinated and well financed that reviewers cannot prevent a poorly written or filmed blockbuster from attaining market success.
The "Hollywood style" includes this narrative theory, due to the overwhelming practice of the rule by movie studios based in Hollywood, California, during film's classical era.
Other ways of distributing a film include rental or personal purchase of the film in a variety of media and formats, such as VHS tape or DVD, or Internet downloading of streaming using a computer.
The impact of a reviewer on a given film's box office performance is a matter of debate.
Medium-to-large crews are generally divided into departments with well defined hierarchies and standards for interaction and cooperation between the departments.
"Widescreen" refers to a larger width to height in the frame, compared to earlier historic aspect ratios.
In British English, a "film showing" happens at a cinema (never a "theatre", which is a different medium and place altogether).
Creative, business, and technological reasons have all contributed to the growth of the indie film scene in the late 20th and early 21st century.
Though the expense involved in making films has led cinema production to concentrate under the auspices of movie studios, recent advances in affordable film making equipment have allowed independent film productions to flourish.
The process of filmmaking is both an art and an industry.
Of the ten billion videos watched online annually in 2008, film trailers ranked third, after news and user-created videos.
''Ferris Bueller's Day Off'' has a post-credit scene in which Ferris tells the audience that the film is over and they should go home.
A film crew is a group of people hired by a film company, employed during the "production" or "photography" phase, for the purpose of producing a film or motion picture.
On the other hand, critics from the analytical philosophy tradition, influenced by Wittgenstein, try to clarify misconceptions used in theoretical studies and produce analysis of a film's vocabulary and its link to a form of life.
"Film" and "filming" refer to the photochemical medium that chemically records a visual image and the act of recording respectively.
The terminology used for describing motion pictures varies considerably between British and American English.
The concept of film as an art-form began with Ricciotto Canudo's ''The Birth of the Sixth Art''.
Others were intended for a projector, mechanically similar to the camera and sometimes actually the same machine, which was used to shine an intense light through the processed and printed film and into a projection lens so that these "moving pictures" could be shown tremendously enlarged on a screen for viewing by an entire audience.
Once again industry analysts predicted the demise of the local cinema.
Film is considered to have its own language.
The more involved the production, the more significant each of the steps becomes.
A film is created by photographing actual scenes with a motion picture camera; by photographing drawings or miniature models using traditional animation techniques; by means of CGI and computer animation; or by a combination of some or all of these techniques and other visual effects.
However, the field of independent animation has existed at least since the 1950s, with animation being produced by independent studios (and sometimes by a single person).
The credits appearing at or near the beginning of a film are usually called "titles" or "beginning titles."
This method was pioneered by UPA and popularized by Hanna-Barbera in the United States, and by Osamu Tezuka in Japan, and adapted by other studios as cartoons moved from movie theaters to television.
In general, these works can be divided into two categories: academic criticism by film scholars and journalistic film criticism that appears regularly in newspapers and other media.
The Academy Awards (also known as "the Oscars") are the most prominent film awards in the United States, providing recognition each year to films, based on their artistic merits.
An independent film (or indie film) is a film initially produced without financing or distribution from a major film studio.
The visual basis of film gives it a universal power of communication.
The individual images that make up a film are called frames.
During the 1960s, prices gradually came down, color broadcasts became common, and sales boomed.
Some films in recent decades have been recorded using analog video technology similar to that used in television production.
Fan films vary tremendously in length, from short faux-teaser trailers for non-existent motion pictures to rarer full-length motion pictures.
The perception of motion is due to a psychological effect called phi phenomenon.
Cellulose nitrate was the first type of film base used to record motion pictures, but due to its flammability was eventually replaced by safer materials.
A row of cameras was used, each in turn capturing one image on a photographic glass plate, so the total number of images in each sequence was limited by the number of cameras, about two dozen at most.
Critics who take a more academic approach to films, through publishing in film journals and writing books about films using film theory or film studies approaches, study how film and filming techniques work, and what effect they have on people.
Hand-painted images based on the photographs were projected as moving images by means of his zoopraxiscope.
Yet many filmmakers strive to create works of lasting social significance.
A fan film is a film or video inspired by a film, television program, comic book or a similar source, created by fans rather than by the source's copyright holders or creators.
The making and showing of motion pictures became a source of profit almost as soon as the process was invented.
Generating such a film is very labor-intensive and tedious, though the development of computer animation has greatly sped up the process.
This production cycle usually takes three years.
While the advent of sound films quickly made silent films and theater musicians obsolete, color replaced black-and-white much more gradually.
Teasers may be produced even before the film production is completed.
This describes another theory of film, the 180-degree rule, as a visual story-telling device with an ability to place a viewer in a context of being psychologically present through the use of visual composition and editing.
In other countries, the place where movies are exhibited may be called a cinema or movie theatre.
It can be used to present a progressive sequence of still images in the form of a slideshow.
A "film goer," "movie goer," or "film buff" is a person who likes or often attends films and movies, and any of these, though more often the latter, could also see oneself as a student to films and movies or the filmic process.
