Relatively little is known about the historical and current population levels of the Southern fin whale.
However, the whales just as often circle to the left.
The Natural History Museum of Slovenia in Ljubljana, Slovenia, houses a  female fin whale skeleton&nbsp;– the specimen had been found floating in the Gulf of Piran in the spring of 2003.
He based this on a single physically mature  female caught in the Antarctic in 1947–48, the smaller average size (a few feet) of sexually and physically mature fin whales caught by the Japanese around 50°S, and smaller, darker sexually immature fin whales caught in the Antarctic which he believed were a "migratory phase" of his proposed subspecies.
Of the more than 16,000 fin whales caught by the Japanese whaling fleet in the Southern Hemisphere between 1961 and 1965 that contained food in their stomachs, 99.4% fed on euphausiids, 0.5% on fish, and 0.1% on amphipods.
Several thousand individuals were hunted from various stations mainly along coasts of Hokkaido, Sanriku, and the Gotō Islands.
Off West Greenland, 75% of the fin whales caught between July and October had consumed krill (family Euphausiidae), 17% capelin (''Mallotus'') and 8% sand lance (''Ammodytes sp.'').
The introduction of factory ships with stern slipways in 1925 substantially increased the number of whales taken per year.
A light V-shaped marking, the chevron, begins behind the blowholes and extends back and then forward again.
Coastal groups in northeast Asian waters, along with many other baleen species, were likely driven into serious perils or functional extinctions by industrial catches by Japan covering wide ranges of China and Korean EEZ within very short period in 20th century.
Surveys during the summers of 1987 and 1989 estimated of 10,000 to 11,000 between eastern Greenland and Norway.
The International Whaling Commission (IWC) issued a moratorium on commercial hunting of this whale, although Iceland and Japan have resumed hunting.
In the North Pacific, they feed on euphausiids in the genera ''Euphausia'', ''Thysanoessa'', and ''Nyctiphanes'', large copepods in the genus ''Neocalanus'', small schooling fish (e.g.
They are regularly sighted in the summer and fall in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the Gulf of Maine, the Bay of Fundy, the Bay of Biscay, Strait of Gibraltar, the Mediterranean.
They occur in high densities in the northern Gulf of Alaska and southeastern Bering Sea between May and October, with some movement through the Aleutian passes into and out of the Bering Sea.
It is found in all the major oceans, from polar to tropical waters.
inermis'', and ''T.
Prey varied by region in the Kuril Islands area, with euphausiids (''T.
Cruise ships en route to and from the Antarctic Peninsula sometimes encounter fin whales in the Drake Passage.
Their recovery is confirmed vicinity to various subantarctic islands such as South Georgia and Falkland, but unknown in other historical habitats including Campbell Island, Kermadec to Chatham Islands, Tristan da Cunha, and Gough Island.
From 1953–54 to 1961–62, the catch averaged over 30,000 per year.
p. physalus'' was not composed of a single subspecies.
Size of the local population migrating to Hawaiian Archipelago is unknown.
Breiwick estimated that the "exploitable" (above the legal size limit of 50&nbsp;ft) component of the Nova Scotia population was 1,500 to 1,600 animals in 1964, reduced to only about 325 in 1973.
Based on stomach content analysis of over 19,500 fin whales caught by the Japanese whaling fleet in the North Pacific from 1952 to 1971, 64.1% contained only krill, 25.5% copepods, 5.0% fish, 3.4% krill and copepods and 1.7% squid.
In the Southern Hemisphere, they feed almost exclusively on euphausiids (mainly the genera ''Euphausia'' and ''Thysanoessa''), as well as taking small amounts of amphipods (e.g.
cristatus'') being the main prey in the northern area and Japanese flying squid (''Todarodes pacificus pacificus'') and small schooling fish (e.g.
In the Southern California Bight, fin whales are encountered year-round, with the best sightings between November and March.
In the 19th century, the fin whale was occasionally hunted by open-boat whalers, but it was relatively safe, because it could easily outrun ships of the time and often sank when killed, making the pursuit a waste of time for whalers.
In June 2012, a pod of killer whales was seen in La Paz Bay, in the Gulf of California, chasing a fin whale for over an hour before finally killing it and feeding on its carcass.
In 1865, German naturalist Hermann Burmeister described a roughly  specimen found near Buenos Aires about 30 years earlier as ''Balaenoptera patachonicus''.
p. patachonica'', Burmeister, 1865) that is purportedly darker in colour and has black baleen.
A single median ridge stops well short of the rostrum tip.
Fin whales have been observed feeding 250 miles south of Hawaii in mid-May, and several winter sightings have been made there.
In 1937–38 alone, over 29,000 fin whales were taken.
The population around Iceland appears to have fared much better, and in 1981, appeared to have undergone only a minor decline since the early 1960s.
Of the 1,609 fin whale stomachs examined at the Hvalfjörður whaling station in southwestern Iceland from 1967 to 1989 (caught between June and September), 96% contained only krill, 2.5% krill and fish, 0.8% some fish remains, 0.7% capelin (''M.
Protected species' meats can also be found on markets even today which are mostly "byproducts" of entanglements, and one case scientifically revealed that at least some humpbacks with other species were illegally hunted in EEZ of antiwhaling nations such as off Mexico or South Africa, and tried to import into Japan by hiring vessels from other countries and even trying to go on overland routes within other nations.
In the Southern Ocean they mainly consume ''E.
Studies of historical catches suggest several resident groups once existed in the North Pacific - the Baja California group and the Yellow Sea–East China Sea (including Ryukyu Islands and western Kyusyu) group.
The DNA profile of a sampling of whale meat in the Japanese market found evidence of blue/fin hybrids.
After the cease of exploiting Asian stocks, Japan kept mass commercial and illegal hunts until 1975.
Recent DNA evidence indicates the fin whale may be more closely related to the humpback whale (''Megaptera novaeangliae'') and in at least one study the gray whale (''Eschrichtius robustus''), two whales in different genera, than it is to members of its own genus, such as the minke whales.
In 1846, British taxonomist John Edward Gray described a  specimen from the Falkland Islands as ''Balaenoptera australis''.
They first investigated the possibilities that the sounds were due to equipment malfunction, geophysical phenomena, or even part of a Soviet Union scheme for detecting enemy submarines.
Possibilities of whales seen in Commander Islands might mix with other populations among Asian and eastern Pacific populations has been considered.
An Icelandic company, Hvalur, caught over a hundred fin whales in 2014, and exported a record quantity of 2071 tonnes in a single shipment in 2014.
This type of asymmetry is seen in Omura's whale and occasionally in minke whales.
The highest population density occurs in temperate and cool waters.
It was thought to have evolved because the whale swims on its right side when surface lunging and it sometimes circles to the right while at the surface above a prey patch.
Since 2006, Hvalur has caught more than 500 fin whales and exported more than 5000 tonnes of whale meat to Japan.
The species is also hunted by Greenlanders under the IWC's Aboriginal Subsistence Whaling provisions.
Other estimates cite current size to be between 15,000 (1983) and 38,000 (1997).
The fin whale is a large baleen whale that belongs to the Cetacean order, which includes all species of whale, dolphin and porpoise.
Females reproduce every 2 or 3 years, with as many as six fetuses being reported, but single births are far more common.
Major F. A. Spencer, while whaling inspector of the factory ship ''Southern Princess'' (1936–38), confirmed the length of a  female caught in the Antarctic, south of the Indian Ocean;  scientist David Edward Gaskin also measured a 25.9&nbsp;m female as whaling inspector of the British factory ship ''Southern Venturer'' in the Southern Ocean in the 1961–62 season.
The location of winter breeding areas is still unknown, since these whales tend to migrate in the open ocean.
Like other whales, males make long, loud, low-frequency sounds.
It has paired blowholes on a prominent splashguard and a broad, flat, V-shaped rostrum.
The total historical North Pacific population was estimated at 42,000 to 45,000 before the start of whaling.
Historically, several other wintering grounds were scattered in the North Pacific in the past, such as off the Northern Mariana Islands, Bonin Islands, and Ryukyu Islands (for other possible habitats, see blue whale as their habitat preferences may correspond).
*Fin whales in Yellow Sea could have been a unique form from outer Pacific populations due to their smaller size of around 20m or more at near maximum, and breeding season in these regions was mainly in winter.
Of the krill sampled between 1979 and 1989, the vast majority (over 99%) was northern krill (''Meganyctiphanes norvegica''); only one stomach contained ''Thysanoessa longicaudata''.
North Atlantic fin whales are defined by the International Whaling Commission to exist in one of seven discrete population zones: Nova Scotia-New England, Newfoundland-Labrador, western Greenland, eastern Greenland-Iceland, North Norway, West Norway-Faroe Islands, and Ireland-Spain-United Kingdom-Portugal.
In 1804, Bernard Germain de Lacépède reclassified the species as ''Balaenoptera rorqual'', based on a specimen that had stranded on Île Sainte-Marguerite (Cannes, France) in 1798.
One whale can consume up to  of food a day, leading scientists to conclude that the whale spends about three hours a day feeding to meet its energy requirements, roughly the same as humans.
His proposal is not widely accepted and  no genetic evidence for their existence is available.
The whale bore numerous tooth rakes over its back and dorsal fin; several killer whales flanked it on either side, with one individual visible under water biting at its right lower jaw.
A steel armature supports the skeleton, which is accompanied by sculpted flukes.
Fin whales caught off California between 1959 and 1970 fed on the pelagic euphausiid ''Euphausia pacifica'' (86% of sampled individuals), the more neritic euphausiid ''Thysanoessa spinifera'' (9%), and the northern anchovy (''Engraulis mordax'') (7%); only trace amounts (<0.5% each) were found of Pacific saury (''C.
In the North Atlantic, they prey on euphausiids in the genera ''Meganyctiphanes'', ''Thysanoessa'' and ''Nyctiphanes'' and small schooling fish (e.g.
Each plate is made of keratin that frays out into fine hairs on the ends inside the mouth near the tongue.
Arctic krill (''Thysanoessa raschii'') was the only species of euphausiid found in the stomachs of fin whales in the northern Bering Sea.
Very little information has been revealed about the ecology of current migration from Antarctic waters are unknown, but small increases in sighting rates are confirmed off New Zealand, such as off Kaikoura, and wintering grounds may exist in further north such as in Papua New Guinea, Fiji, and off East Timor.
Ship collisions frequently occur in Tsushima Strait and result in damaging all of whales, passengers, and vessels, hence the Japanese Coast Guard has started visual recordings of large cetaceans in Tsushima Strait to inform operating vessels in the areas.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the longest reported for each sex were , while the longest measured by Mackintosh and Wheeler (1929) were .
It is found in all the world's major oceans and in waters ranging from the polar to the tropical.
Direct association of these vocalizations with the reproductive season for the species and that only males make the sounds point to these vocalizations as possible reproductive displays.
Results of mark-and-recapture surveys have indicated that some movement occurs across the boundaries of these zones, suggesting that they are not entirely discrete and that some immigration and emigration does occur.
The minimum estimate for the California-Oregon-Washington population, as defined in the ''U.S.
If prey ''patches'' are not sufficiently dense, or are located too deep in the water, the whale has to spend a larger portion of its day searching for food.
The three groups mix at most rarely.
They fed on its sinking carcass for about 15 minutes before leaving the area.
This shows a substantial recovery when compared to a survey in 1976 showing an estimate of 6,900, which was considered to be a "slight" decline since 1948.
The vocalizations of blue and fin whales are the lowest-frequency sounds made by any animal.
Whales possibly used to migrated into Seto Inland Sea.
They usually flee and offer little resistance to attack.
In the North Pacific, over 74,000 fin whales were caught between 1910 and 1975.
The only modern record among Ryukyu Islands was of a rotten carcass beached on Ishigaki Island in 2005.
Both the current and historical estimates should be considered as poor estimates because the methodology and data used in the study are known to be flawed.
Most sounds are frequency-modulated (FM) down-swept infrasonic pulses from 16 to 40&nbsp;hertz frequency (the range of sounds that most humans can hear falls between 20&nbsp;hertz and 20&nbsp;kilohertz).
Full physical maturity is attained between 25 and 30 years.
An individual over  is estimated to weigh in excess of .
In southern Ireland, they are seen inshore from June to February, with peak sightings in November and December.
Mating occurs in temperate, low-latitude seas during the winter, followed by an 11- to 12-month gestation period.
Its flippers are small and tapered and its tail is wide, pointed at the tip, and notched in the centre.
In 1830, Louis Companyo described a specimen that had stranded near Saint-Cyprien, southern France, in 1828 as ''Balaena musculus''.
In the Southern Hemisphere, they reported taking nearly 53,000 between 1948 and 1973, when the true total was a little over 41,000.
Of that number, 8,000 to 9,000 would have resided in the Newfoundland and Nova Scotia areas, with whales summering in U.S. waters south of Nova Scotia presumably omitted.
Off eastern Newfoundland, they chiefly feed on capelin, but also take small quantities of euphausiids (mostly ''T.
When feeding, they blow 5–7 times in quick succession, but while traveling or resting will blow once every minute or two.
An emaciated  female fin whale, which stranded along the Belgian coast in 1997, was found to be infected with lesions of ''Morbillivirus''.
Finbacks are also relatively abundant along the coast of Peru and Chile (in Chile, most notably off Los Lagos region such as Gulf of Corcovado in Chiloé National Park, Punta de Choros, port of Mejillones, and Caleta Zorra.
Satellite tracking revealed that those found in Pelagos Sanctuary migrate southward to off Tunisia, Malta, Pantelleria, and Sicily, and also possibly winter off coastal southern Italy, Sardinia, within the Strait of Messina, Aeolian Islands, and off Libya, Kerkennah Islands, Lampedusa, and whales may recolonize out of the Ligurian Sea to other areas such as in Ionian and in Adriatic Sea.
In July 1908, a whaler reportedly saw two killer whales attack and kill a fin whale off western Greenland.
Science North, a science museum in Greater Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, has a  fin whale skeleton collected from Anticosti Island hanging from the fourth floor of its main building.
Confirmations in Rarotonga have been increased recently where interactions with humpback whales occur on occasions.
The remora ''Remora australis'' and occasionally the amphipod ''Cyamus balaenopterae'' can also be found on fin whales, both feeding on the skin.
Southern fin whales migrate seasonally from relatively high-latitude Antarctic feeding grounds in the summer to low-latitude breeding and calving areas in the winter.
Some researchers have suggested that the whales migrate into Hawaiian waters primarily in the autumn and winter.
No accepted hypothesis explains the asymmetry.
The fin whale was first described by Friderich Martens in 1675 and then again by Paul Dudley in 1725.
Females reach sexual maturity between 6 and 12 years of age at lengths of  in the Northern Hemisphere and  in the Southern Hemisphere.
''Themisto gaudichaudii'') and various species of fish.
The animal feeds by opening its jaws while swimming at some  in one study, which causes it to engulf up to  of water in one gulp.
Fin whales are rorquals, members of the family Balaenopteridae, which also includes the humpback whale, the blue whale, Bryde's whale, the sei whale, and the minke whales.
The proposal for 2007–2008 and the subsequent 12 seasons allows taking 50 per year.
In the Southern Hemisphere, Japan permits annual takes of 10 fin whales under its Antarctic Special Permit whaling program for the 2005–2006 and 2006–2007 seasons.
Recent sightings of large whales exceeding 20 m in length, likely to be fin whales, as blue whales in coastal northeast Asia are considered to be extinct, indicate that remnants of the Sea of Japan or the Yellow– ohai Sea groups still pass through the Tsushima Strait where all the larger cetaceans are under threats of being struck by high-speed vessels.
p. physalus'' (Linnaeus 1758) inhabits the North Atlantic and the '''southern fin whale''', ''B.
Fin whales live to 94 years of age, although specimens have been found aged at an estimated 135–140 years.
The Cambridge University Museum of Zoology, in Cambridge, United Kingdom, exhibits a nearly  male fin whale skeleton, which had stranded at Pevensey, East Sussex, in November 1865.
By 1975–76, fewer than 1,000 fin whales were being caught each year.
The average feeding dive off California and Baja lasts 6 minutes, with a maximum of 17 minutes; when traveling or resting they usually dive for only a few minutes at a time.
In January 2011, a  emaciated adult male fin whale stranded dead on the Tyrrhenian coastline of Italy was found to be infected with  ''Morbillivirus'' and the protozoa ''Toxoplasma gondii'', as well as carrying heavy loads of organochlorine pollutants.
It then dives to depths of up to  when feeding or a few hundred feet when resting or traveling.
On the right lower jaw is a white or light gray "right mandible patch", which sometimes extends out as a light "blaze" laterally and dorsally unto the upper jaw and back to just behind the blowholes.
The only known predator of the fin whale is the killer whale, with at least 20 eyewitness and second-hand accounts of attack or harassment.
In general, fin whales are more common north of approximately 30°N latitude, but considerable confusion arises about their occurrence south of 30°N latitude because of the difficulty in distinguishing fin whales from Bryde's whales.
p. quoyi'' (Fischer 1829) occupies the Southern Ocean.
Over the past 100 years, the dramatic increase in ocean noise from shipping and naval activity may have slowed the recovery of the fin whale population, by impeding communications between males and receptive females.
As of 2006, there is no scientifically accepted estimate of current population or trends in abundance.
In the Ligurian-Corsican-Provençal Basin in the Mediterranean Sea they make dives as deep as  to feed on the euphausiid ''Meganyctiphanes norvegica'', while off the island of Lampedusa, between Tunisia and Sicily, they have been observed in mid-winter feeding on surface swarms of the small euphausiid ''Nyctiphanes couchi''.
Several fin whale skeletons are exhibited in North America.
Southward migrations to Taiwan or East and South China Seas may still occur, but the whole scale of current migrations along Eurasian continent including population size is unclear.
The fin whale is brownish to dark or light gray dorsally and white ventrally.
All populations worldwide remain listed as endangered species by the US National Marine Fisheries Service and the International Conservation Union Red List.
Fin whales are regularly encountered on whale-watching excursions worldwide.
The fin whale is on Appendix 1 of CITES.
American naturalist Roy Chapman Andrews called the fin whale "the greyhound of the sea... for its beautiful, slender body is built like a racing yacht and the animal can surpass the speed of the fastest ocean steamship."
It was primarily hunted for its blubber, oil, and baleen.
A newborn fin whale measures about  in length and weighs about .
The oral cavity of  the fin whale has a very stretchy or extensible nerve system which aids them in feeding.
Infestations of the giant nematode ''Crassicauda boopis'' can cause inflammation of the renal arteries and potential kidney failure, while the smaller ''C.
Several fin whale skeletons are also exhibited in Europe.
Terence Wise, who worked as a winch operator aboard the British factory ship ''Balaena'', claimed that "the biggest fin he ever saw" was a  specimen caught near Bouvet Island in January 1958.
Recently discovered, possible resident group exist in waters of Cape Verde Islands, uniquely being feasted by cookiecutter sharks.
villosus''), and 0.1% sandeel (family Ammodytidae); a small proportion of (mainly juvenile) blue whiting (''Micromesistius poutassou'') were also found.
Surveys in coastal waters of British Columbia in summers 2004 and 2005 produced abundance estimates of approximately 500 animals.
The fin whale's body is long and slender, coloured brownish-grey with a paler underside.
Pacific saury, ''Cololabis saira''; and Japanese anchovy, ''Engraulis japonicus'') dominating the diet in the southern area.
Fin whales might have started returning to the coastal waters off British Columbia (a sighting occurred in Johnstone Strait in 2011) and Kodiak Island.
Extensive ship surveys have led researchers to conclude that the summer feeding range of fin whales in the western North Atlantic is mainly between 41°20'N and 51°00'N, from shore seaward to the  contour.
The vocal sequences have source levels of up to 184–186&nbsp;decibels relative to 1&nbsp;micropascal at a reference distance of one metre and can be detected hundreds of miles from their source.
Only a few confirmed fatalities have occurred.
Two aerial surveys in Canadian waters since the early 1970s gave numbers of 79 to 926 whales on the eastern Newfoundland-Labrador shelf in August 1980, and a few hundred in the northern and central Gulf of Saint Lawrence in August 1995&nbsp;– 1996.
In the Pacific, migration patterns are poorly characterized.
It then closes its jaws and pushes the water back out of its mouth through its baleen, which allows the water to leave while trapping the prey.
Several whales tagged between November and January off southern California were killed in the summer off central California, Oregon, British Columbia, and in the Gulf of Alaska.
They are known to make mixed groups with other rorquals such as blue whales and sei whales.
In some areas, they cause a substantial portion of large whale strandings.
longipes'') were the predominant prey around the Aleutian Islands and in the Gulf of Alaska.
Most experts consider the fin whales of the North Pacific to be a third, as yet unnamed subspecies&nbsp;– this was supported by a 2013 study, which found that the Northern Hemisphere ''B.
It is absent only from waters close to the ice pack at the poles and relatively small areas of water away from the open ocean.
A newborn weans from its mother at 6 or 7 months of age when it is  in length, and the  accompanies the mother to the summer feeding ground.
The highest population density occurs in temperate and cool waters.
The IWC officially estimates that the Southern Hemisphere pre-whaling population was 400,000 whales and that the population in 1979 (at the cessation of Antarctic large scale whaling) was 85,200.
Surveys near the Pribilof Islands in the Bering Sea indicated a substantial increase in the local abundance of fin whales between 1975–1978 and 1987–1989.
The former description was used as the primary basis of the species ''Balaena physalus'' by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.
There had been congregation areas among Sea of Japan to Yellow Sea such as in East Korea Bay, along eastern coasts of Korean Peninsula, and Ulleungdo, although recent occurrences into these locations are of unclear due to locational disorders.
Summer distribution of fin whales in the North Pacific is the immediate offshore waters from central Baja California to Japan and as far north as the Chukchi Sea bordering the Arctic Ocean.
In the Gulf of California, they have been observed feeding on swarms of the euphausiid ''Nyctiphanes simplex''.
Dark, oval-shaped areas of pigment called "flipper shadows" extend below and posterior to the pectoral fins.
Although some fin whales are apparently present year-round in the Gulf of California, there is a significant increase in their numbers in the winter and spring.
In October 2006, Iceland's fisheries ministry authorized the hunting of 9 fin whales through August 2007.
Its food consists of small schooling fish, squid, and crustaceans including copepods and krill.
Meat and other products from whales killed in these hunts are widely marketed within Greenland, but export is illegal.
While 10 fin whales were caught in the 2005–06 season and three in the 2006–07 season, none was caught in the 2007–2008 season.
The Soviet Union engaged in the illegal killing of protected whale species in the North Pacific and Southern Hemisphere, over-reporting fin whale catches to cover up illegal takes of other species.
It is the second-largest animal after the blue whale.
A Spanish NASS survey in 1989 of the France-Portugal-Spain sub-area estimated a summer population range at 17,355.
In addition, the fin whale is covered by the Agreement on the Conservation of Cetaceans in the Black Sea, Mediterranean Sea and Contiguous Atlantic Area (ACCOBAMS) and the Memorandum of Understanding for the Conservation of Cetaceans and Their Habitats in the Pacific Islands Region (Pacific Cetaceans MOU).
The whale has a series of 56–100 pleats or grooves along the bottom of the body that run from the tip of the chin to the navel that allow the throat area to expand greatly during feeding.
Migrations of the species into Japanese EEZ and in East China Sea were likely to be exterminated relatively earlier, as the last catch records on Amami Oshima was between the 1910s and 1930s.
The fin whale is one of the fastest cetaceans and can sustain speeds between  and  and bursts up to  have been recorded, earning the fin whale the nickname "the greyhound of the sea".
raschii'') and copepods (''Neocalanus plumchrus'' and ''N.
A single fin whale was caught in both the 2008–09 and 2009–10 seasons, two were taken in the 2010–11 season, and one was taken in the 2011–12 season.
One or more populations of fin whales are thought to remain year-round in high latitudes, moving offshore, but not southward in late autumn.
Off Kamchatka, they appeared to primarily feed on herring.
Pacific Marine Mammal Stock Assessments: 2005'', is about 2,500.
Sergeant suggested a "primeval" aggregate total of 30,000 to 50,000 throughout the North Atlantic.
The North Atlantic fin whale has an extensive distribution, occurring from the Gulf of Mexico and Mediterranean Sea, northward to Baffin Bay and Spitsbergen.
Each sound lasts one to two seconds, and various sound combinations occur in patterned sequences lasting 7 to 15 minutes each.
The animal's large size aids in identification, and it is usually only confused with the blue whale, the sei whale, or, in warmer waters, Bryde's whale.
Over 725,000 fin whales were reportedly taken from the Southern Hemisphere between 1905 and 1976, as of 1997 only 38,000 survived.
the genera ''Engraulis'', ''Mallotus'', ''Clupea'', and ''Theragra''), and squid.
Global population estimates range from less than 100,000 to roughly 119,000.
In the northern Bering Sea (north of 58°N), their main prey species were capelin (''Mallotus villosus''), Alaska pollock (''Theragra chalcogramma'') and Pacific herring (''Clupea pallasii''); they also consumed saffron cod (''Eleginus gracilis'').
In 1984, the entire population was estimated to be less than 38% of its historic carrying capacity.
It is absent only from waters close to the ice pack at both the north and south extremities and relatively small areas of water away from the large oceans, such as the Red Sea and the Baltic Sea.
