Finnish foods often use wholemeal products (rye, barley, oats) and berries (such as bilberries, lingonberries, cloudberries, and sea buckthorn).
As result many former state institutions were driven to collect funding from private sector contributions and partnerships.
In 2006, the energy market was around 90 terawatt hours and the peak demand around 15 gigawatts in winter.
As a result, the old sea bottom turns little by little into dry land: the surface area of the country is expanding by about  annually.
Each minister heads his or her ministry, or, in some cases, has responsibility for a subset of a ministry's policy.
Finland also has urbanised regions with many cultural events and activities.
Irrigation was generally not necessary, but drainage systems were often needed to remove excess water.
It is headed by the Prime Minister of Finland, and consists of him or her, of other ministers, and of the Chancellor of Justice.
Overall, they chartered more than 40 airplanes.
A lack of a national agreement in an industry is considered an exception.
Phytogeographically, Finland is shared between the Arctic, central European, and northern European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom.
According to ISSP survey data (2008), 8% consider themselves "highly religious", and 31% "moderately religious".
During the late 1960s and 1970s, Finnish rock musicians increasingly wrote their own music instead of translating international hits into Finnish.
This was also the fate of the rock and roll group Hurriganes.
The native language of 90% of the population is Finnish, which is part of the Finnic subgroup of the Uralic languages.
Worldwide, Finns, along with other Nordic peoples and the Japanese, spend the most time reading newspapers.
In 1899 he composed ''Finlandia'', which played its important role in Finland gaining independence.
Finland was rapidly industrialized after the Second World War, achieving GDP per capita levels equal to that of Japan or the UK in the beginning of the 1970s.
Finnish popular music also includes various kinds of dance music; tango, a style of Argentine music, is also popular.
Since the 1980s the social security has been cut back, but still the system is one of the most comprehensive in the world.
'''Finland''' (;  ;  ), officially the '''Republic of Finland''', is a sovereign state in Europe.
Voluntary post-conscription overseas peacekeeping service is popular, and troops serve around the world in UN, NATO, and EU missions.
In 1984, the government published the Forest 2000 plan, drawn up by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry.
Of some seventy species of freshwater fish, the northern pike, perch, and others are plentiful.
Refugees from Karelia contributed to foods in eastern Finland.
Youth unemployment rate rose from 16.5% in 2007 to 20.5% in 2014.
According to Invest in Finland, private consumption grew by 3% in 2006 and consumer trends included durables, high quality products, and spending on well-being.
Folk high schools are a distinctly Nordic institution.
However, the United States provided secret development aid and helped the (non-communist) Social Democratic Party in hopes of preserving Finland's independence.
Finnish Romani is spoken by some 5,000–6,000 people.
New elections were conducted, in which right-wing parties won a slim majority.
Finland is highly productive in scientific research.
The actual boundary, which followed the Torne River and the Muonio River to the fells Saana and Halti in the northwest, was a compromise.
In response to the climate, farmers have relied on quick-ripening and frost-resistant varieties of crops, and they have cultivated south-facing slopes as well as richer bottomlands to ensure production even in years with summer frosts.
There are 307 residents for each doctor.
HIM's 2005 album ''Dark Light'' went gold in the United States.
At Finland's northernmost point, in the heart of summer, the Sun does not completely set for 73 consecutive days.
Today, Finland has a very lively classical music scene and many of Finland's important composers are still alive, such as Magnus Lindberg, Kaija Saariaho, Kalevi Aho, and Aulis Sallinen.
The Lutheran Church estimates that approximately 1.8% of its members attend church services weekly.
According to the OECD, only four EU-15 countries have less regulated product markets (UK, Ireland, Denmark and Sweden) and only one has less regulated financial markets (Denmark).
The Whites, who were supported by Imperial Germany, prevailed over the Reds.
The Helsinki-Tallinn route, one of the busiest passenger sea routes in the world, has also been served by a helicopter line.
The autonomous province of Åland, which forms a federacy with Finland, elects one member to the parliament, who traditionally joins the parliamentary group of the Swedish People's Party of Finland.
In the late eighteenth century a politically active portion of the Finnish nobility became convinced that, due to Sweden and Russia's repeated use of Finland as a battlefield, it would be in the country's best interests to seek autonomy.
A recent study by The Lancet medical journal found that Finland has the lowest stillbirth rate out of 193 countries, including UK, France, and New Zealand.
Yle, the Finnish Broadcasting Company, operates five television channels and thirteen radio channels in both national languages.
In 2008, renewable energy  (mainly hydropower and various forms of wood energy) was high at 31% compared with the EU average of 10.3% in final energy consumption.
The Bronze Age (1500–500&nbsp;BCE) and Iron Age (500&nbsp;BCE–1200&nbsp;CE) were characterised by extensive contacts with other cultures in the Fennoscandian and Baltic regions.
Commercial cruises between major coastal and port cities in the Baltic region, including Helsinki, Turku, Tallinn, Stockholm, and Travemünde, play a significant role in the local tourism industry.
The earliest people were hunter-gatherers, using stone tools.
According to archaeological evidence, the area now comprising Finland was settled at the latest around 8500&nbsp;BCE during the Stone Age as the ice sheet of the last ice age receded.
Finnish cuisine is notable for generally combining traditional country fare and ''haute cuisine'' with contemporary style cooking.
One of the most common reasons for work disability are due to mental disorders, in particular depression.
Finland has an average population density of 18 inhabitants per square kilometre.
The boundary between the new Grand Duchy of Finland and the remaining part of Sweden could have been drawn along the river Kemijoki, the boundary at the time between Västerbotten County and Österbotten County (Ostrobothnia) — as proposed by the Swedes  in the peace negotiations — or along the river Kalix, thereby including the Finnish-speaking part of Meänmaa — as proposed by the Russians.
However, the majority of Lutherans attend church only for special occasions like Christmas ceremonies, weddings, and funerals.
Finland had around 1.52 million broadband Internet connections by the end of June 2007 or around 287 per 1,000 inhabitants.
Even though many or most schools were started as private schools, today only around 3 percent of students are enrolled in private schools (mostly specialist language and international schools), much less than in Sweden and most other developed countries.
Nokia), metrology (Vaisala), transport fuels (Neste), chemicals (Kemira), engineering consulting (Pöyry), and information technology (e.g.
In 2005, Finland had the fourth most scientific publications per capita of the OECD countries.
The two nearly equally powerful political blocs, the right-wing parties and the social democratic party, were highly antagonized.
In addition to the regular courts, there are a few special courts in certain branches of administration.
The border guard is under the Ministry of the Interior but can be incorporated into the Defence Forces when required for defence readiness.
The composers are accompanied by a large number of great conductors such as Esa-Pekka Salonen, Osmo Vänskä, Jukka-Pekka Saraste, and Leif Segerstam.
The judicial system of Finland is a civil law system divided between courts with regular civil and criminal jurisdiction and administrative courts with jurisdiction over litigation between individuals and the public administration.
A universal male conscription is in place, under which all male Finnish nationals above 18 years of age serve for 6 to 12 months of armed service or 12 months of civilian (non-armed) service.
Podzol profile development is seen in most forest soils except where drainage is poor.
After Finland became independent, there was a rise of modernist writers, most famously the Finnish-speaking Mika Waltari and Swedish-speaking Edith Södergran.
German, French, and Russian can be studied as second foreign languages from the eighth grade (at 14 years of age; some schools may offer other options).
This was followed by the Lapland War of 1944–1945, when Finland fought against the retreating German forces in northern Finland.
About 70% of workers were occupied in agriculture and 10% in industry.
Finnish is closely related to Karelian and Estonian and more remotely to the Sami languages and Hungarian.
The army consists of a highly mobile field army backed up by local defence units.
The Sami languages that are spoken in Finland are Northern Sami, Inari Sami, and Skolt Sami.
A day fine system is in effect and also applied to offenses such as speeding.
The main Lutheran and Orthodox churches are national churches of Finland with special roles such as in state ceremonies and schools.
After the 1917 February Revolution, the position of Finland as part of the Russian Empire was questioned, mainly by Social Democrats.
It was detached from the state as a separate judicial entity when the new church law came to force in 1869.
English language is important in Finnish education.
Many Finnish metal bands have gained international recognition.
Milk and its derivatives like buttermilk are commonly used as food, drink, or in various recipes.
The change caused deep rooted discussions among the academic circles.
Alternatively, the Indo-European word *''gʰm-on'' "man" (cf.
The forest consists of pine, spruce, birch, and other species.
In 2010 a new law was enacted considering the universities, which defined that there are 16 of them as they were excluded from the public sector to be autonomous legal and financial entities, however enjoying special status in the legislation.
The average size is 2.1 persons; 40% of households consist of a single person, 32% two persons and 28% three or more persons.
The rights of minority groups (in particular Sami, Swedish speakers, and Romani people) are protected by the constitution.
As an autonomous Grand Duchy under Russia 1809–1917, Finland retained the Lutheran State Church system, and a state church separate from Sweden, later named the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, was established.
Rovio, known for Angry Birds), and is no longer dominated by the two sectors of metal and forest industry.
During the Russian era, the Finnish language began to gain recognition.
Created almost entirely during the first three decades after World War II, the social security system was an outgrowth of the traditional Nordic belief that the state was not inherently hostile to the well-being of its citizens, but could intervene benevolently on their behalf.
After fighting a major Soviet offensive in June/July 1944 to a standstill, Finland reached an armistice with the Soviet Union.
Finland's population is 5.5 million (2014), staying roughly on the same level over the past two decades.
However, the President still leads the nation's foreign politics together with the Council of state and is the chief-in-command of the Defence Forces.
Most pre-tertiary education is arranged at municipal level.
Private sector employees amount to 1.8 million, out of which around a third with tertiary education.
Their lowest common total of MPs, 121, was reached in the 2011 elections.
Finland's climate and soils make growing crops a particular challenge.
The first known written appearance of the name Finland is thought to be on three rune-stones.
Architect Alvar Aalto is regarded as among the most important twentieth-century designers in the world; he helped bring functionalist architecture to Finland, but soon was a pioneer in its development towards an organic style.
Of the total area 10% is lakes, rivers and ponds, and 78% forest.
Many children are diagnosed with type 2 diabetes.
In 1811, Alexander I incorporated Russian Vyborg province into the Grand Duchy of Finland.
This means that the energy consumption per capita is around 7.2 tons of oil equivalent per year.
The most severe winter days in Lapland can see the temperature fall down to .
Finland had a long tradition of adult education, and by the 1980s nearly one million Finns were receiving some kind of instruction each year.
Women are allowed to serve in all combat arms including front-line infantry and special forces.
Almost the whole population, some 400,000 people, fled these areas.
74% of households had a car.
However, the Finnish economy has diversified, with expansion into fields such as electronics (e.g.
Even in the south, the harshest winter nights can see the temperatures fall to  although on coastal areas like Helsinki, temperatures below  are very rare.
In 2007, 1,801 patents were filed in Finland.
Christian holidays include Christmas, New Year's Day, Epiphany, Easter, Ascension Day, Pentecost, Midsummer Day (St. John's Day), and All Saints' Day, while secular holidays include May Day, Independence Day, New Year's Day, and Midsummer.
In 1906, Finland became the second nation in the world to give the right to vote to all adult citizens and the first in the world to give all adult citizens the right to run for public office.
What was signed over to Russia in 1809 was not so much "Finland" as six counties, Åland, and a small part of Västerbotten County.
For example, the universal suffrage was, in practice, virtually meaningless, since the tsar did not have to approve any of the laws adopted by the Finnish parliament.
Much of Finland is pristine and virgin as it contains 37 national parks from the Southern shores of the Gulf of Finland to the high fells of Lapland.
In the same survey, 28% reported themselves as "agnostic" and 29% as "non-religious".
The GDP per capita was still half of that of the United States and a third of that of Britain.
However, the relationship between the Grand Duchy and the Russian Empire soured when the Russian government made moves to restrict Finnish autonomy.
The Finnish landscape is covered with thick pine forests and rolling hills, and complemented with a labyrinth of lakes and inlets.
Oulu Airport is the second largest, whilst another 25 airports have scheduled passenger services.
The YYA Treaty (Finno-Soviet Pact of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance) gave the Soviet Union some leverage in Finnish domestic politics.
Approximately 500 women choose voluntary military service every year.
The Finnish Defence Forces consist of a cadre of professional soldiers (mainly officers and technical personnel), currently serving conscripts, and a large reserve.
The 2007 IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook ranked Finland 17th most competitive.
Immigrant languages include Russian (1.1%), Estonian (0.6%), Somali, English, and Arabic.
Pacius also wrote the music to the poem ''Maamme/Vårt land'' (Our Country), Finland's national anthem.
The 200-member unicameral Parliament of Finland called Eduskunta exercises supreme legislative authority.
Lifestyle-related diseases are on the rise.
According to the statistics, red meat consumption has risen, but still Finns eat less beef than many other nations, and more fish and poultry.
Energy companies are about to increase nuclear power production, as in July 2010 the Finnish parliament granted permits for additional two new reactors.
Many writers of the national awakening wrote in Swedish, such as the national poet Johan Ludvig Runeberg and Zachris Topelius.
More than 30% of tertiary graduates are in science-related fields.
It has the inscription ''finlandi'' (G 319) and dates from the 13th century.
A scandal revolving around campaign finance of the 2007 parliamentary elections broke out in spring 2008.
As a matter of fact, at this time the Finnish peasantry was outraged by the actions of their elite and almost exclusively supported Gustav's actions against the conspirators.
(The province also holds elections for its own permanent regional council, and in the 2011 elections, Åland Centre was the largest party.)
The World Economic Forum ranks Finland's tertiary education No.
Primary school takes normally six years and lower secondary school three years.
What the term actually refers to can vary between sources, additionally, the boundaries to the east and the north were not exact.
In the 15th century, "Finland" became a common name for the whole land area to the east of the Bothnian Sea, possibly even including Åland, when the archipelago was seen as belonging to Åbo (Turku).
Establishing trade with the Western powers, such as the United Kingdom, and the reparations to the Soviet Union caused Finland to transform itself from a primarily agrarian economy to an industrialised one.
Finland is also one of the most successful nations in bandy, being the only nation beside Russia and Sweden to win a Bandy World Championship.
After the prime minister, the most powerful minister is the minister of finance, the incumbent Minister of Finance is Alexander Stubb.
In northern Finland, particularly in Lapland, the winters are long and cold, while the summers are relatively warm but short.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland is one of the largest Lutheran churches in the world, although its share of the country's population has declined by roughly one percent annually in recent years.
It is estimated that almost an entire generation of young men was lost during the Great Wrath, due namely to the destruction of homes and farms, and to the burning of Helsinki.
Norwegian and, to some extent, Danish are mutually intelligible with Swedish and are thus understood by a significant minority, although studied only slightly in school.
The country lies between latitudes 60°N and 70°N, and has severe winters and relatively short growing seasons that are sometimes interrupted by frosts.
Three of the more striking birds are the whooper swan, a large European swan and the national bird of Finland; the capercaillie, a large, black-plumaged member of the grouse family; and the European eagle-owl.
This is shown in its penetration throughout the country's population.
While the manufacturing sector is thriving, the OECD points out that the service sector would benefit substantially from policy improvements.
The word originally referred only to the province of Finland Proper, and later to the northern coast of Gulf of Finland, with northern regions such as Ostrobothnia still sometimes being excluded until later.
It has become the emblem of the Finnish Association for Nature Conservation.
He maintained an effective monopoly on Soviet relations from 1956 on, which was crucial for his continued popularity.
No part of Finland has Arctic tundra, but Alpine tundra can be found at the fells Lapland.
Finland is rated the least corrupted country in the world in the Corruption Perceptions Index and 13th in the Ease of Doing Business Index.
Various parliament committees listen to experts and prepare legislation.
Forests play a key role in the country's economy, making it one of the world's leading wood producers and providing raw materials at competitive prices for the crucial wood-processing industries.
In the 2011 elections, the True Finns achieved exceptional success, increasing its representation from 5 to 39 seats, and thus surpassing the Centre Party.
As a part of Northern Crusades Swedish kings established their rule in Finland gradually during 12th and 13th centuries with first, second and third crusade against Finns proper, Tavastians and Karelians.
The level of protection in commodity trade has been low, except for agricultural products.
The Finnish climate is suitable for cereal farming only in the southernmost regions, while the northern regions are suitable for animal husbandry.
By this time Finland was the predominant term for the whole area from the Gulf of Bothnia to the Russian border.
The most common type of rock is granite.
The winter of the north lasts for about 200 days with permanent snow cover from about mid-October to early May.
In 1950, 46% of Finnish workers worked in agriculture and a third lived in urban areas.
Study centres allowed groups to follow study plans of their own making, with educational and financial assistance provided by the state.
Through this arrangement, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland lost its position as a state church but gained a constitutional status as a national church alongside the Finnish Orthodox Church, whose position however is not codified in the constitution.
Since the head of state was the tsar of Russia, it was not clear who the chief executive of Finland was after the revolution.
At Finland's northernmost point, the sun does not set for 73 consecutive days during summer, and does not rise at all for 51 days during winter.
Fish and meat play a prominent role in traditional Finnish dishes from the western part of the country, while the dishes from the eastern part have traditionally included various vegetables and mushrooms.
Christian Democrats
The highest mountain whose peak is entirely in Finland is Ridnitsohkka at 1,316&nbsp;m (4,318&nbsp;ft), directly adjacent to Halti.
The Greater Helsinki area generates around a third of GDP.
In the 18th century, wars between Sweden and Russia twice led to the occupation of Finland by Russian forces, times known to the Finns as the Greater Wrath (1714–1721) and the Lesser Wrath (1742–1743).
Its highest point, the Halti at , is found in the extreme north of Lapland at the border between Finland and Norway.
About a quarter of them speak a Sami language as their mother tongue.
The landscape is covered mostly by coniferous taiga forests and fens, with little cultivated land.
Finnish law forces all workers to obey the national contracts that are drafted every few years for each profession and seniority level.
Even with the introduction of agriculture, hunting and fishing continued to be important parts of the subsistence economy.
Over 1.4 million people live in the Greater Helsinki metropolitan area, which produces a third of the country's GDP.
The female employment rate is high.
HIM and Nightwish are some of Finland's most internationally known bands.
The standard readiness strength is 34,700 people in uniform, of which 25% are professional soldiers.
During the Protestant Reformation, the Finns gradually converted to Lutheranism.
These parties have enjoyed approximately equal support, and their combined vote has totalled about 65–80% of all votes.
The fertility rate in 2014 stood at 1,71 children born/per woman and has been below the replacement rate of 2.1 since 1969.
The glaciers were thicker and lasted longer in Fennoscandia compared with the rest of Europe.
After a brief attempt to establish a kingdom, the country became a republic.
The largest industries in 2007 were electronics (22%); machinery, vehicles, and other engineered metal products (21.1%); forest industry (13%); and chemicals (11%).
Due to the electoral system of proportional representation, and the relative reluctance of voters to switch their support between parties, the relative strengths of the parties have commonly varied only slightly from one election to another.
In 1918, the fledgling state was divided by civil war, with the Bolshevik-leaning "Reds" supported by the equally new Soviet Union, fighting the "Whites", supported by the German Empire.
To maintain the country's comparative advantage in forest products, Finnish authorities moved to raise lumber output toward the country's ecological limits.
The gross domestic product peaked in 2008. , the country's economy is at 2006 level.
Among the biggest of these are the three Salpausselkä ridges that run across southern Finland.
Climatic summers (when mean daily temperature remains above ) in southern Finland last from about late May to mid-September, and in the inland, the warmest days of July can reach over  .
The world's biggest cruise ships are built in Finnish shipyards.
These services are branded as "Allegro" trains.
