The type of fireworks sold in the United States range from those permitted under federal law to illegal explosive devices and professional fireworks sold on the black market.
In Nebraska the sale and use of all consumer fireworks are prohibited in Omaha, while in Lincoln there is a two-day selling period and in other parts of the state all of the permitted types can be sold and used by residents.
Although some firecracker items may be called "M-80's", "M-1000's", "Cherry bombs" or "Silver Salutes" by the manufacturer, they must contain less than 50 milligrams of flash or other explosive powder in order to be legally sold to consumers in the United States.
These are commonly arranged in fan shapes or crisscrossing shapes, at a closer proximity to the audience.
Sodium imparts a gold or yellow color to fireworks, however, the color is often so bright that it frequently masks other, less intense colors.
A shell containing a fast burning tailed or charcoal star that is burst very hard so that the stars travel in a straight and flat trajectory before slightly falling and burning out.
Fireworks in New Zealand are available from the 2nd to the 5th November, around Guy Fawkes Day, and may be purchased only by those 18 years of age and older (up from 14 years pre-2007).
''Music for the Royal Fireworks'' was composed by George Frideric Handel in 1749 to celebrate the Peace treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, which had been declared the previous year.
For example: Missouri permits all types of consumer fireworks to be sold to residents with two selling seasons; June 20–July 10 and December 20–January 2.
The rapid bursts of gas from the fuel vibrate the air many hundreds of times per second causing the familiar whistling sound.
A code number and suffix (such as '''1.3G''') is not enough to fully describe a material and how it is regulated, especially in '''Shipping Class 1.4G'''.
Although requirements vary from state to state, licensed operators and their crew are typically required to have hours of extensive training in the  Safe use of display fireworks.
Such rocket technology has also been used for the delivery of mail by rocket and is used as propulsion for most model rockets.
** Any single-shot or reloadable aerial shell/mine/comet/tube with over 60&nbsp;grams of pyrotechnic composition
Copper compounds produce blue colors in fireworks.
Potassium compounds help to oxidize firework mixtures.
A shell containing a relatively few large comet stars arranged in such a way as to burst with large arms or tendrils, producing a palm tree-like effect.
On the other hand, states such as South Dakota, South Carolina and Tennessee allow most or all legal consumer fireworks to be sold and used throughout the year.
The event was organized by Kure Commemorative Centennial Events Committee, and lit on 9 February 2003 at Gohara-cho, Hiroshima, Japan, as part of a traditional ceremony to encourage good health and a generous harvest.
Calcium is used to deepen firework colors.
Two firework displays on All Hallows' Eve in the United States are the annual "Happy Hallowishes" show at Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom "Mickey's Not-So-Scary Halloween Party" event, which began in 2005, and the "Halloween Screams" at Disneyland Park, which began in 2009.
Two states (Hawaii and Nevada) allow each county to establish their own regulations.
Residents of other states, and Pennsylvania residents with a permit, can buy such fireworks.
A dense burst of glittering silver or gold stars which leave a heavy glitter trail and are very shiny in the night's sky.
The very first celebration of Independence Day was in 1777, six years before Americans knew whether the new nation would survive the war; fireworks were a part of all festivities.
Lithium is a metal that is used to impart a red color to fireworks.
Fireworks and black ash were used to celebrate important events long before the American Revolutionary War.
Setup of these fireworks involves the placement and securing of mortars on wooden or wire racks; loading of the shells; and if electronically firing, wiring and testing.
In 1789, George Washington's inauguration was also accompanied by a fireworks display.
Clubs secure permission to fire items otherwise banned by state or local ordinances.
They are often cylindrical in shape to allow for a larger payload of flash powder, but ball shapes are common and cheaper as well.
While there are currently no federal drinking water standards for perchlorate, some states have established public health goals, or action levels, and some are in the process of establishing state maximum contaminant levels.
Often an alloy of both metals called magnalium is used.
They can be made by hand, most firework factories use machinery to manufacture tubes.
California has also issued guidance regarding perchlorate use.
* '''Class 1.4S ''' (Minor Explosion Hazard Confined To Package: Packed As To Not Hinder Nearby Firefighters) '''UN0336''' Fireworks (Consumer or Common Fireworks)
Being '''Shipping Class 1.4''', they can now be sold to the general public and are unregulated by the BATF.
Chlorine is an important component of many oxidizers in fireworks.
The BATFE and most states performed a direct substitution of '''Shipping Class 1.3''' for '''Class B''', and '''Shipping Class 1.4''' for '''Class C'''.
People are also injured by projectiles fired from fireworks, often due to incorrect use.
In June 2007, the ERD approved circular firing sites for use with vertically fired mortars with a safety distance of at least 175&nbsp;meter radius, plus distance adjustments for wind speed and direction.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission has guidelines concerning the standard of consumer fireworks sold in the US.
Indians throughout the world celebrate with fireworks as part of their popular "festival of lights" (Diwali) in Oct-Nov every year.
A cake is a cluster of individual tubes linked by fuse that fires a series of aerial effects.
However, many users travel to neighboring states such as Indiana, Missouri, Kentucky, and Wisconsin to obtain fireworks for use in Illinois.
Many Native American Tribes have consumer fireworks stores on reservation lands that are exempt from state and local authority and will sell to people that are not in the tribe.
The United States government has classified fireworks and similar devices according to their potential hazards.
The aerial shell, however, is the backbone of today's commercial aerial display, and a smaller version for consumer use is known as the festival ball in the United States.
A shell containing several large stars that travel a short distance before breaking apart into smaller stars, creating a crisscrossing grid-like effect.
Since commercial-grade fireworks are so much larger and more powerful, setup and firing crews are always under great pressure to ensure they safely set up, fire, and clean up after a show.
* '''Class 1.3G''' (Fire, Minor Blast:Pyrotechnics) '''UN0335''' Fireworks (Most Display Fireworks) Current federal law states that without appropriate ATF license/permit, the possession or sale of any display/professional fireworks is a felony punishable by up to 5 years in prison.
California issued drinking water standards in 2007.
Hailed as a "tribute to the 200th anniversary of the Norwegian constitution", the display incorporated 540,382 individual firework effects in a spectacular 90 minute show.
The vast majority of fireworks are "Category 3, (Display Fireworks)" all of which state that spectators must be at least 25 metres away when the firework is fired.
(The color green, for instance, may be produced by adding the various compounds and salts of Barium, some of which are toxic, and some of which are not.)
In Norway, fireworks can only be purchased and used by people 18 or older.
For example, in 2003, a federal district court in California found that Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) applied because perchlorate is ignitable and therefore a "characteristic" hazardous waste.
While currently non-competitive in nature, the organizer has plans to introduce a competitive element in the future.
America's earliest settlers brought their enthusiasm for fireworks to the United States.
KNO3 (potassium nitrate)
The initial burst scatters the shells across the sky before they explode.
Even today, men and women attend these events wearing the traditional Yukata, summer Kimono, or Jinbei (men only), collecting in large social circles of family or friends to sit picnic-like, eating and drinking, while watching the show.
Variations include smiley faces, hearts, and clovers.
In Switzerland Fireworks are often used on the 1st of August, which is a national celebration day.
Lithium (medium red)
Improper use of fireworks may be dangerous, both to the person operating them (risks of burns and wounds) and to bystanders; in addition, they may start fires after landing on flammable material.
The Lily Fireworks Factory, Mqabba, Malta currently possesses this record, burning a Catherine Wheel with a diameter of , on June 18, 2011.
CsNO3 (cesium nitrate)
Fireworks were invented in ancient China in the 12th century to scare away evil spirits, as a natural extension of the Four Great Inventions of ancient China of gunpowder.
Tube diameters can range in size from ¼ inch to 4&nbsp;inches, and a single cake can have over 1,000 shots.
Ground fireworks, although less popular than Aerial ones, create a stunning exhibition.
Others argue that alleged concern over pollution from fireworks constitutes a red herring, since the amount of contamination from fireworks is minuscule in comparison to emissions from sources such as the burning of fossil fuels.
Not all compounds that produce a colored flame are appropriate for coloring fireworks, however.
Fireworks tubes are made by rolling thick paper tightly around a former, such as a dowel.
Enthusiasts in the United States have formed clubs which unite hobbyists and professionals.
Rubidium compounds produce a violet-red color in fireworks.
In 1758, the Jesuit missionary Pierre Nicolas le Chéron d'Incarville, living in Beijing, wrote about the methods and composition on how to make many types of Chinese fireworks to the Paris Academy of Sciences, which revealed and published the account five years later.
** Multi-tube devices containing over 500&nbsp;grams of pyrotechnic composition and without 1/2" space between each tube
Guinness World Record adjudicators were on hand to confirm the breaking of the previous record held by Dubai.
The largest are in the cities of Belfast, Derry and Dublin.
Several other states, including Arizona, Maryland, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, and Texas have established non-enforceable, advisory levels for perchlorate.
In the Republic the maximum punishment for possessing fireworks without a licence, or lighting fireworks in a public place, is a €10,000 fine  and a five-year prison sentence.
Pyrotechnical competitions involving fireworks are held in many countries.
If the setup is wired electrically, the electrical matches are usually plugged into a "firing rail" or "breakout box" which runs back to the main firing board; from there, the Firing Board is simply hooked up to a car battery, and can proceed with firing the show when ready.
What is not disputed is that most consumer fireworks leave behind a considerable amount of solid debris, including both readily biodegradable components as well as nondegradable plastic items.
Then Supervisor level 1, which allows you to independently use and fire most commercial grade pyrotechnics.
Levels peaked about 24 hours after the display, and then decreased to the pre-fireworks background within 20- to 80 days.
They may be designed to burn with colored flames and sparks including red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, and silver.
When a shell contains smaller shells of the same size and type, the effect is usually referred to as "Thousands".
Four states (Delaware, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York) ban the sale of all consumer fireworks including novelties and sparklers by the general public.
The stakes are high and much planning is put into the show.
The sale of fireworks is strongly restricted in the Republic of Ireland, though many illegal fireworks are sold throughout October or smuggled from Northern Ireland.
The current Guinness World Records as of 30 November 2014 are:
It may be a component of a firework's fuel.
Typically, these jurisdictions will require a licensed operator to discharge the show.
The variety of effects within individual cakes is often such that they defy descriptive titles and are instead given cryptic names such as "Bermuda Triangle", "Pyro Glyphics", "Waco Wakeup", and "Poisonous Spider", to name a few.
The World Pyro Olympics is an annual competition amongst the top fireworks companies in the world.
In Iceland, the Icelandic law states that anyone may purchase and use fireworks during a certain period around New Year's Eve.
Some companies within the U.S. fireworks industry claim they are working with Chinese manufacturers to reduce and ultimately hope to eliminate of the pollutant perchlorate.
The annual festival has grown in magnitude, from 4,000 rounds used in 2004, 6,000 in 2005, to over 9,100 in 2006.
A spherical break of colored stars, similar to a peony, but with stars that leave a visible trail of sparks.
Many states have laws which further restrict access to and use of consumer fireworks, and some of these states such as New Jersey vigorously enforce them.
Unlike their consumer counterpart, commercial-grade fireworks function differently, and come in a wide range of sizes from 50&nbsp;mm (2&nbsp;inches) up to 300&nbsp;mm (12&nbsp;inches) or more in diameter.
Maine only allows sparklers.
Magnesium burns a very bright white, so it is used to add white sparks or improve the overall brilliance of a firework.
"Shock" adverts have been used for many years in an attempt to restrict injuries from fireworks, especially targeted at young people.
Scientists long suspected community fireworks displays were another source, but few studies had been done on the topic.
Rockets are not allowed.
Calcium salts produce orange fireworks.
Titanium metal can be burned as powder or flakes to produce silver sparks.
Shot from a mortar like a shell, a mine consists of a canister with the lift charge on the bottom with the effects placed on top.
The carbon used in fireworks is produced from wood and does not lead to more carbon dioxide in the air.
From March 2008 any firework with over 5% flashpowder per tube will be classified 1.3G.
Titanium, aluminium, beryllium, or magnesium powders
For example, Clark County, Nevada, where Las Vegas is located, allows residents to purchase and use only non-explosive and non-aerial consumer fireworks during Independence Day, while other counties permit all types of consumer fireworks.
For example: California has very specific requirements for the types of consumer fireworks that can be sold to and used by residents.
The event is held in Port Hercule, beginning at around 9:30pm every night, depending on the sunset.
Here are some ''common'' fireworks classes:
At the time most purchases and use of all of these explosives, with specific exceptions for high explosives purchased and used in state, black powder used for sporting purposes and common fireworks, required a license or permit to purchase and use from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF or BATFE), or the state, or a local authority.
These guidelines are explained in the NFPA 1123 fireworks code.
Rubidium compounds help to oxidize firework mixtures.
Professional displays, on the other hand, remain popular around the world.
Other categories include "Category 2 (Garden Fireworks)" for which spectators must be at least 8 metres away, and "Category 4 - Professional Use Only", which may only be used by professional pyrotechnists and must not be sold to the general public.
Similar to a '''chrysanthemum''', but with long-burning silver or gold stars that produce a soft, dome-shaped weeping willow-like effect.
Some fisherman have noticed and reported to environmental authorities that firework residues can hurt fish and other water-life because some may contain toxic compounds such as antimony sulfide.
During the summer in Japan,  are held nearly everyday someplace in the country, in total numbering more than 200 during August.
The fireworks were used to accompany many festivities.
Critics and safety advocates point to the numerous injuries and accidental fires that are attributed to fireworks as justification for banning or at least severely restricting access to fireworks.
This is a subject of much debate due to the fact that large-scale pollution from other sources makes it difficult to measure the amount of pollution that comes specifically from fireworks.
Wisconsin also allows the purchase of aerial explosive fireworks, but only allows their launch in designated areas in each county.
** Any Roman candle or rocket with over 20&nbsp;grams of pyrotechnic composition
A Roman candle is a long tube containing several large stars which fire at a regular interval.
Most places that sell fireworks in Iceland make their own rules about age of buyers, usually it is around 16.
Strontium salts impart a red color to fireworks.
The most common feature of fireworks is a paper or pasteboard tube or casing filled with the combustible material, often pyrotechnic stars.
In addition to large public displays, people often buy small amounts of fireworks for their own celebrations.
SrCO3 (strontium carbonate)
A Syrian named Hasan al-Rammah wrote of rockets, fireworks, and other incendiaries, using terms that suggested he derived his knowledge from Chinese sources, such as his references to fireworks as "Chinese flowers".
Municipalities may have stricter laws than their counties or states do.
Nineteen states (California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Kentucky, Idaho, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Utah, Virginia, Wisconsin, West Virginia, and the District of Columbia) allow residents to purchase and use non-aerial and non-explosive fireworks like novelties, fountains and sparklers.
Setup of mortars in Canada for an oblong firing site require that a mortar be configured at an angle of 10 to 15&nbsp;degrees down-range with a safety distance of at least 200&nbsp;meters down-range and 100&nbsp;meters surrounding the mortars, plus distance adjustments for wind speed and direction.
The first fireworks festival in Japan was held in 1733.
On August 24, 2009 the ACT Government announced a complete ban on backyard fireworks.
Differences in legislation among states have led many to many fireworks suppliers being located shop along state borders to sell to customers from neighboring states where fireworks are restricted.
Strontium compounds are also important for stabilizing fireworks mixtures.
His writings would be translated in 1765, resulting in the popularization of fireworks and further attempts to uncover the secrets of Chinese fireworks.
For example, common consumer fireworks are '''UN0336''', or '''Shipping Class 1.4G UN0336'''.
Another magnificent competition is  Le Festival d'Art Pyrotechnique held in the summer annually at the Bay of Cannes in Côte d'Azur, France.
Displays are common throughout the world and are the focal point of many cultural and religious celebrations.
* '''Class 1.4G ''' (Minor Explosion Hazard Confined To Package:Pyrotechnics) '''UN0431''' ARTICLES, PYROTECHNIC for technical purposes (Proximate Pyrotechnics)
** Smoke and novelty items
For example, the US Environmental Protection Agency have studied the impacts of perchlorate on the environment as well as drinking water.
Each August the PGI conducts its annual week-long convention, where some the world's biggest and best fireworks displays occur.
The Malta International Fireworks Festival is also held annually.
than twice as large as the largest shell usually seen in the US, and shells as large as  are frequently fired.
Fireworks competitions are also regularly held at a number of places.
Fireworks take many forms to produce the four primary effects: noise, light, smoke, and floating  materials (confetti for example).
Meanwhile, those who support more liberal firework laws look at the same statistics as the critics and conclude that, when used properly, consumer fireworks are a safer form of recreation than riding bicycles or playing soccer.
Despite the restriction on when fireworks may be sold, there is no restriction regarding when fireworks may be used.
The types of fireworks allowed for sale is restricted to quieter fireworks, which can only be used at the address provided to the seller.
The people of Reykjavík spend enormous sums of money on fireworks, most of which are fired as midnight approaches on December 31.
The most common use of a firework is as part of a fireworks display (also called a fireworks show or pyrotechnics), a display of the effects produced by firework devices.
The peony is the most commonly seen shell type.
These by-products of fireworks combustion will vary depending on the mix of ingredients of a particular firework.
Chinese people originally believed that the fireworks could expel evil spirits and bring about luck and happiness.
In the Netherlands, fireworks cannot be sold to anyone under the age of 16.
Li2CO3 (lithium carbonate)
In 1994 a shell of  in diameter was fired during the convention, more
The week ends with the Grand Public Display on Friday night, which gives the chosen display company a chance to strut their stuff in front of some of the world's biggest fireworks aficionados.
In the US some states and local governments restrict the use of fireworks in accordance with the Clean Air Act which allows laws relating to the prevention and control of outdoor air pollution to be enacted.
Coal fueled electricity generation alone is a much greater source of heavy metal contamination in the environment than fireworks.
For anything that has a large explosion or gets airborne, users need to register for a Type 2 Licence.
The groups provide safety instruction and organize meetings and private "shoots" at remote premises where members shoot commercial fireworks as well as fire pieces of their own manufacture.
The color of a compound in a firework will be the same as its color in a flame test (shown at right).
Fireworks have also been noted as a source of perchlorate in lakes.
Few governmental entities, by contrast, effectively limit pollution from burning fossil fuels such as diesel fuel or coal.
Carbon provides the fuel for a firework.
In Chile, the manufacture, importation, possession and use of fireworks is prohibited to unauthorized individuals; only certified firework companies can legally use fireworks.
States such as New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts, and Delaware ban all consumer fireworks completely.
Since commercial-grade fireworks are shells which are loaded into separate mortars by hand, there is danger in every stage of the setup.
The advantages of compressed air launch are a reduction in fumes, and much greater accuracy in height and timing.
LiCl (lithium chloride)
Vendors, competitors, and club members come from around the US and from various parts of the globe to enjoy the show and to help out at this all-volunteer event.
In the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland there are many fireworks displays, during the Halloween season.
This early fascination with their noise and color continues today.
In 2004 single shot Air Bombs and Bottle Rockets were banned, and rocket sizes were limited.
Types include firecrackers, rockets, cakes (multishot aerial fireworks) and smoke balls.
** Single-shot aerial tubes
Lev Izmailov, ambassador of Peter the Great, once reported from China: "They make such fireworks that no one in Europe has ever seen."
Others are simply quantities of 2.5"-4" shells fused together in single-shot tubes.
Wiring the shells is a painstaking process; whether the shells are being fired manually or electronically, any "chain fusing" or wiring of electrical ignitors, care must be taken to prevent the fuse (an electrical match, often incorrectly called a squib) from igniting.
** Any multiple tube fountains with over 500&nbsp;grams of pyrotechnic composition and without 1/2" space between each tube
Proper palm shells feature a thick rising tail that displays as the shell ascends, thereby simulating the tree trunk to further enhance the "palm tree" effect.
Salute shells usually contain flash powder, producing a quick flash followed by a very loud report.
The event is one of the largest and most intense international fireworks competitions.
Potassium nitrate, potassium chlorate, and potassium perchlorate are all important oxidizers.
Rubidium (violet-red)
Wilkin's group has now established fireworks displays as a source of perchlorate contamination by analyzing water in an Oklahoma lake before and after fireworks displays in 2004, 2005 and 2006.
Salutes are also called Maroons.
Titanium may be added to the flash powder mix to produce a cloud of bright sparks around the flash.
