Carbon tetrachloride was suitable for liquid and electrical fires and the extinguishers were fitted to motor vehicles.
Most modern extinguishers of this type are designed to make a loud noise upon deployment.
Fire extinguisher installations are also limited to protruding no more than 4 inches into the adjacent path of travel.
It was discovered by the Germans in WWII that a heavy oil could be applied to burning magnesium chips to cool and smother them, and was easy to apply from a pressurized extinguisher, which was made by the German firm Total.
It is widely used in Russia and parts of Asia, and it was used by Kidde's Italian branch, marketed under the name "Fluobrene".
The foam was a combination of the products of the chemical reactions: sodium and aluminium salt-gels inflated by the carbon dioxide.
* Maintenance inspection: All types of extinguishers should be inspected at least once a year.
They are heavier than halon, require a larger bottle because they are less effective, and have greenhouse gas potential.
Some jurisdictions require more frequent service for fire extinguishers.
It is impossible to properly install or remove a collar without depressurizing the extinguisher.
Halon 2402 is a liquid agent (dibromotetrafluoroethane) which has had limited use in the West due to its higher toxicity than 1211 or 1301.
There are two main types of fire extinguishers: stored-pressure and cartridge-operated.
*CO2, a clean gaseous agent which displaces oxygen.
File:Halon 1211 Fire Extinguisher.jpg|thumb|left|Halon 1211 Fire Extinguisher
This is a powder based agent that extinguishes by separating the four parts of the fire tetrahedron.
File:FE-36 Cleanguard fire extinguisher.jpg|thumb|FE-36 Cleanguard fire extinguisher
A reflective material will only return ambient light for as long as the light source is supplied, rather than storing energy and releasing it over a period of time.
Installations made prior to 2012 at the 54-inch height are not required to be changed.
* Trimethoxyboroxine(TMB)liquid is a boron compound dissolved in methanol to give it proper fluidity and allow it to be discharged from a portable fire extinguisher.
** Stored-pressure dry chemical mounted on vehicles - annually
The servicer places a tag on the extinguisher to indicate the type of service performed (annual inspection, recharge, new fire extinguisher).
The ball can be placed in a fire prone area and will deploy automatically if a fire develops, being triggered by heat.
** Halon and clean agents - every 6 years.
Pale yellow in color.
As with gaseous fire suppressants, condensed aerosol suppressants use clean agents to suppress the fire.
*Potassium chloride, or Super-K, dry chemical was developed in an effort to create a high efficiency, protein-foam compatible dry chemical.
"Pyromet" is a trade name that refers to two separate agents.
Fire extinguishers are further divided into handheld and cart-mounted (also called wheeled extinguishers).
** Foam - every 3 years
* Internal maintenance:
The number preceding the B indicates the size of fire in square feet that an ordinary user should be able to extinguish.
The main tank contained a solution of sodium bicarbonate in water, whilst the inner container (somewhat larger than the equivalent in a soda-acid unit) contained a solution of aluminium sulphate.
Manually applied dry agents such as graphite for class D (metal) fires had existed since WWII, but it wasn't until 1949 that Ansul introduced a pressurized extinguisher using an external CO2 cartridge to discharge the agent.
The soda-acid extinguisher was first patented in 1866 by Francois Carlier of France, which mixed a solution of water and sodium bicarbonate with tartaric acid, producing the propellant CO2 gas.
However, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) also needs to be followed within the United States.
In the heat of a fire, it releases a cloud of carbon dioxide that smothers the fire.
Because of this, the foam was discharged directly from the unit, with no need for an aspirating branchpipe (as in newer mechanical foam types).
TMB was used experimentally by the US Air Force, specifically with regard to B-52 engine assemblies, and was tested in modified 10-gallon wheeled CBM extinguishers.
The height limit rule of 48&nbsp;in is primarily related to access by people with wheelchairs, but it is also related to other disabilities as well.
Classes B:C for 1301 and smaller 1211 fire extinguishers (2.3&nbsp;kg; under 9&nbsp;lbs) and A:B:C for larger units ().
Halotron-1 fire extinguisher
It is unique as an extinguishing agent in that the agent itself is a flammable liquid.
This consisted of a glass sphere filled with CTC, that was intended to be hurled at the base of a fire (early ones used salt-water, but CTC was more effective).
Invented by Pyrene Co. Ltd. (UK) in the 1960s, it was originally a sodium chloride formulation with monoammonium phosphate, protein, clay and waterproofing agents.
The cartridge-operated extinguisher was invented by Read & Campbell of England in 1881, which used water or water-based solutions.
CO2 is still popular today as it is an ozone-friendly clean agent and is used heavily in film and television production to extinguish burning stuntmen.
It was more effective and slightly less toxic than carbon tetrachloride and was used until 1969.
Ordinary solid combustibles
It consisted of a copper cylinder with an internal CO2cartridge.
Condensed aerosol fire suppression is a particle-based form of fire extinction similar to gaseous fire suppression or dry chemical fire extinction.
In the 1800s, glass fire grenades filled with suppressant liquids were popular.
Key features were a screw-down stopper that kept the liquids from mixing until it was manually opened, carrying straps, a longer hose, and a shut-off nozzle.
Dry chemical, dry powder, halon, and clean agents, every 12 years.
Cartridge-operated extinguishers contain the expellant gas in a separate cartridge that is punctured prior to discharge, exposing the propellant to the extinguishing agent.
*Potassium aerosol particle-generator, contains a form of solid potassium salts and other chemicals referred to as aerosol-forming compounds (AFC).
They are dependent on the user's strength to produce a decent discharge stream for firefighting.
They are manually operated by rolling or throwing into a fire.
Halon gases are banned from new production under the Montreal Protocol, as of January 1, 1994 as its properties contribute to ozone depletion and long atmospheric lifetime, usually 400 years.
*Potassium bicarbonate (principal constituent of Purple-K), used on class B and C fires.
All components are disassembled, inspected, cleaned, lubricated, or replaced if defective.
These extinguishers were made by the Ansul Chemical Co. utilizing TMB agent manufactured by the Callery Chemical Company, and were modified 2.5-gallon water extinguishers (Ansul used re-branded Elkhart extinguishers at the time), with a variable-stream nozzle that could deliver a straight stream or spray at the squeeze of a lever.
Handheld extinguishers weigh from , and are hence, easily portable by hand.
Special versions were made for rough service, and vehicle mounting, known as apparatus of fire department types.
Halon was completely banned in Europe and Australia except for critical users like law enforcement and aviation, resulting in stockpiles either being destroyed via high heat incineration or being sent to the United States for reuse.
CO2 types have the test information stamped on the cylinder, all other types get a sticker on the back of the cylinder.
The agent can be delivered by means of mechanical operation, electric operation, or combined electro-mechanical operation.
Typically, a fire extinguisher consists of a hand-held cylindrical pressure vessel containing an agent which can be discharged to extinguish a fire.
Will cling to a vertical surface.
This agent was problematic in that it had a shelf life of only six months to a year once the extinguisher was filled, since the methanol is extremely hydroscopic (absorbs moisture from the air), which causes corrosion to the extinguisher and renders its use on fire dangerous.
Stored pressure fire extinguishers are the most common type.
If a water-based extinguisher has passed the 35 kV test it will also bear the same electrical pictogramme - however, any water-based extinguisher is only recommended for inadvertent use on electrical fires.
pump-type chlorobromomethane (CB or CBM), 1960s, UK
Photoluminescent fire extinguisher signs are made with nontoxic  photoluminescent phosphor that absorbs ambient light and releases it slowly in dark conditions—the sign "glows in the dark".
Cools burning material.
), and dry powder (class D) types in the rest of the world.
Halon 1211 was the most successful, and the combined TMB pressurized with halon 1211 and nitrogen was called Boralon was used experimentally by the Los Alamos National Laboratory for use on atomic metals, using sealed cylinder extinguishers made by Metalcraft and Graviner which eliminated the moisture contamination problem.
While liquid and gas fires do not usually store much heat in their fuel source, solid fires do.
Several modern ball or grenade-style extinguishers are on the market.
In the United States, fire extinguishers in all buildings other than houses are generally required to be serviced and inspected by a fire protection service company at least annually.
One used a plunger to break the acid vial, while the second released a lead stopple that held the vial closed.
*MET-L-KYL / PYROKYL is a specialty variation of sodium bicarbonate for fighting pyrophoric (ignites on contact with air) liquid fires.
*E-36 Cryotec, a type of high concentration, high pressure wet chemical (potassium acetate and water), it is being used by the U.S. Military in applications like the Abrams tank to replace the aging halon 1301 units previously installed.
This also alerts maintenance to check an extinguisher for usage so that it may be replaced if it has been used.
Fire department types were often private label versions of major brands, sold by apparatus manufacturers to match their vehicles.
In the 1940s, Germany invented the liquid chlorobromomethane (CBM) for use in aircraft.
More effective than all other powders due to its ability to decrepitate (where the powder breaks up into smaller particles) in the flame zone creating a larger surface area for free radical inhibition.
Prior to 2012, the height limit was  for side-reach by wheel chair accessible installations.
File:Du Gas dry chemical fire extinguisher, 1945.jpg|thumb|Du Gas cartridge-operated dry chemical extinguisher, 1945.
** Wet chemical, and  - every 5 years
* For additional US UL rating information see Fast Flow Extinguishers
OEM equipment must be used for replacement parts for the extinguisher to maintain its UL rating.
** Cartridge-operated dry chemical or dry powder - annually
It consists of a mixture of three powdered salts: sodium, potassium and barium chloride.
*Sodium bicarbonate, ''regular'' or ''ordinary'' used on class B and C fires, was the first of the dry chemical agents developed.
Varying classes of competition vehicles require fire extinguishing systems, the simplest requirements being a 1A:10BC hand-held portable extinguisher mounted to the interior of the vehicle.
The height limit for installation, as determined by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), is  for fire extinguishers weighing less than .
This type is not as common, used primarily in areas such as industrial facilities, where they receive higher-than-average use.
backpack pump tank for wildland firefighting.jpg|thumb|Indian 5-gal.
As was typical of this era, some glass extinguishers contained the toxic carbon tetrachloride.
Models available in Europe come in smaller sizes as well, and some even carry a Class F rating for commercial kitchens, essentially using steam to smother the fire and the water content to cool the oil.
* Graphite-based (G-Plus, G-1, Lith-X, Chubb Pyromet or METAL.FIRE.XTNGSHR) contains dry graphite that smothers burning metals.
A '''fire extinguisher''', or '''extinguisher''', is an active fire protection device used to extinguish or control small fires, often in emergency situations.
Pump type water extinguishers are often used where freezing conditions may occur, as they can be economically freeze-protected with calcium carbonate (except stainless steel models), such as barns, out buildings and unheated warehouses.
If  any part of the extinguisher is replaced with a part from another manufacturer, then the extinguisher will lose its fire rating.
Halon 1301 had been developed by DuPont and the US Army in 1954.
Unlike other clean agents, this one has the advantage of being a liquid at atmospheric pressure, and can be discharged as a stream or a rapidly vaporizing mist, depending on application.
is quite toxic, due to the barium chloride content, and for this reason is no longer used in the UK, and was never used in the US aside from radioactive material handling glove boxes, where its toxicity was not an issue due their confined nature.
This was connected with a system of fuses which were ignited, exploding the gunpowder and scattering the solution.
These extinguishers come in 1-3/4 and 2-1/2 gallon sizes, painted white in the United States.
It is a low-pressure gas that works by inhibiting the chain reaction of the fire and is the most toxic of the vaporizing liquids, used until the 1960s.
The rest of the industry has moved to halon alternatives, nevertheless, halon 1211 is still vital to certain military and industrial users, so there is a need for it.
File:Halon 1301 Fire Extinguisher.jpg|thumb|right|Halon 1301 Fire Extinguisher
In the United States, APW units contain  of water in a tall, stainless steel cylinder.
In stored pressure units, the expellant is stored in the same chamber as the firefighting agent itself.
Fire extinguishers manufactured with non-cylindrical pressure vessels also exist, but are less common.
They are also useful where many, frequent spot fires may occur, such as during fire watch for hot work operations.
Sodium bicarbonate was very common in commercial kitchens before the advent of wet chemical agents, but now is falling out of favor, as it is much less effective than wet chemical agents for class K fires, less effective than Purple-K for class B fires, and is ineffective on class A fires.
This characteristic is well known and has led to the widespread misuse of carbon dioxide extinguishers to rapidly cool beverages, especially beer.
Such signs are independent of an external power supply, and so offer a low-cost, reliable means of indicating the position of emergency equipment in dark or smoky conditions.
Backback models exist for wildland firefighting, and may be solid material such as metal or fiberglass, or collapsible vinyl or rubber bags for ease of storage.
The pressurized water was forced from the canister through a nozzle or short length of hose.
A 6-inch fluorescent orange band with the letters "TMB" stenciled in black identified TMB from other extinguishers.
The gas expelled the foam in the form of a jet.
*Halocarbon replacements, HCFC Blend B (Halotron I, American Pacific Corporation), HFC-227ea (FM-200, Great Lakes Chemicals Corporation), and HFC-236fa (FE-36, DuPont), have been approved by the FAA for use in aircraft cabins in 2010.
Considerations for halon replacement include human toxicity when used in confined spaces, ozone depleting potential, and greenhouse warming potential.
Fire extinguishing capacity is rated in accordance with ANSI/UL 711: Rating and Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishers.
After a thorough internal and external visual inspection, the cylinder is filled with water, placed inside a safety cage, and pressurized to the specified test pressure (varies with the type, age, and cylinder material) for the specified time period.
In 1910, The Pyrene Manufacturing Company of Delaware filed a patent for using carbon tetrachloride (CTC, or CCl4) to extinguish fires.
*Halon (including Halon 1211 and Halon 1301), are gaseous agents that inhibit the chemical reaction of the fire.
Some metals, such as elemental lithium, will react explosively with water, therefore water-based chemicals should never be used on such fires due to the possibility of a violent reaction.
EN3 does not recognise a separate electrical class - however there is an additional feature requiring special testing (35 kV dielectric test per EN 3-7:2004).
Similar signs are available for other fire equipment (including fire blankets and fire hose reels/racks), and for other emergency equipment (such as first aid kits).
They later invented a carbon tetrachloride model called the "Petrolex" which was marketed toward automotive use.
Note: these are the required intervals for normal service conditions, if the extinguisher has been exposed to excessive heat, vibration, or mechanical damage it may need to be tested sooner.
The majority of installed currently are fixed units due to the possibility of harm to the user from the heat generated by the AFC generator.
CO2 Fire Extinguisher.jpg|thumb|Amerex 10lb.
They are also often fitted to motor vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft - this is required by law in many jurisdictions, for identified classes of vehicles.
In addition to sodium bicarbonate, it also contains silica gel particles.
The ratings are described using numbers preceding the class letter, such as 1-A:10-B:C. The number preceding the A multiplied by 1.25 gives the equivalent extinguishing capability in gallons of water.
The 4-inch protrusion rule was designed to protect people with low-vision and those who are blind.
For B and C fires, white in color.
Limited use on other metals.
The extinguisher is then re-filled and recharged, after a "verification of service" collar is placed around the cylinder neck.
The agent is emptied and depressurized and the valve is removed.
is still widely used in India, despite toxicity, while the West uses chiefly sodium chloride, graphite, and copper types of powder and considers T.E.C.
One benefit of this type is that it may be used for passive suppression.
Another type of carbon tetrachloride extinguisher was the '''fire grenade'''.
This agent is not generally effective on class A fires because the agent is expended and the cloud of gas dissipates quickly, and if the fuel is still sufficiently hot, the fire starts up again.
During combustion, the fuel breaks down into free radicals, which are highly reactive fragments of molecules that react with oxygen.
The current SOP is to use water fog and cool/burn out the burning metal.
Useful on most alkali metals including sodium and potassium, and other metals including magnesium, titanium, aluminum, and zirconium.
It receives its class A rating from the agent's ability to melt and flow at  to smother the fire.
* Hydrostatic testing: Water, foam, wet chemical, and CO2, every 5 years.
CO2 is not suitable for use on fires containing their own oxygen source, metals or cooking media.
CO2 fire extinguisher made for Bell Telephone, 1928.jpg|thumb|Bell Telephone CO2 extinguisher made by Walter Kidde, 1928.
In the past, extinguishers were marked with colored geometric symbols, and some extinguishers still use both symbols.
*: Note: Cartridge-operated extinguishers should be visually examined, but do not require a verification of service collar.
The system must also constantly monitor an extinguisher’s physical presence, internal pressure and whether an obstruction exists that could prevent ready access.
Fire extinguishers are typically fitted in buildings at an easily  accessible location, such as against a wall in a high-traffic area.
Colored violet to distinguish it.
Smothers and forms a crust.
The cylinder is then emptied of water and thoroughly dried, and labeled with the test date and company that performed the test.
The modern fire extinguisher was invented by British Captain George William Manby in 1818; it consisted of a copper vessel of 3 gallons (13.6 liters) of pearl ash (potassium carbonate) solution contained within compressed air.
Additionally, when used on a fire, the heat can convert CTC to phosgene gas, formerly used as a chemical weapon.
These glass fire grenade bottles are sought by collectors.
Like copper extinguishers, the graphite powder acts as a heat sink as well as smothering the metal fire.
The vapor and combustion by-products of all vaporizing liquids were highly toxic, and could cause death in confined spaces.
* Ternary eutectic chloride (T.E.C.)
Developed in the 60s, prior to Purple-K, it was never as popular as other agents since, being a salt, it was quite corrosive.
These wheeled models are most commonly found at construction sites, airport runways, heliports, as well as docks and marinas.
Once dry, the units are recharged.
In the event that any of the above conditions are found, the system must send an alert to officials so they can immediately rectify the situation.
Extinguishers are marked with pictograms depicting the types of fires that the extinguisher is approved to fight.
*Novec 1230 fluid (AKA ''dry water'', or Saffire fluid), a fluorinated ketone that works by removing massive amounts of heat.
Research continues to find better alternatives.
Halon types are often given new o-rings and valve stems at every internal maintenance to minimize any leakage potential.
Effective on class A fires, it has the advantage of being inexpensive, harmless, and relatively easy to clean up.
If no failure, bulges, or leaks are detected, the cylinder passes.
The first type developed, designed for magnesium, works on other metals as well.
Both 1211 and 1301 work by inhibiting the chain reaction of the fire, and in the case of Halon 1211, cooling class A fuels as well.
The Photoluminescent Safety Products Association (PSPA) has guidance classifications for luminance performance to help users with applications under "International Maritime Organization Emergency Equipment and Life-saving Appliance Location Requirements," and world-wide industrial fire-safety management requirements.
* Copper-based (Copper Powder Navy 125S) developed by the U.S. Navy in the 1970s for hard-to-control lithium and lithium-alloy fires.
His extinguisher used the reaction between sodium bicarbonate solution and sulfuric acid to expel pressurized water onto a fire.
Flammable liquids and gases
* Buffalo M-X liquid was a short-lived oil-based extinguishing agent for magnesium fires, made by Buffalo in the 1950s.
Recently the National Fire Protection Association and ICC voted to allow for the elimination of the 30-day inspection requirement so long as the fire extinguisher is monitored electronically.
When TMB contacts the fire, the methanol ignites and  burns with a greenish flame due to the boron.
Unlike stored pressure types, these extinguishers use compressed carbon dioxide instead of nitrogen, although nitrogen cartridges are used on low temperature (-60 rated) models.
Europe, and Australia have severely restricted its use, since the Montreal Protocol of 1987.
*Air-pressurized water (APW) cools burning material by absorbing heat from burning material.
Methyl bromide was discovered as an extinguishing agent in the 1920s and was used extensively in Europe.
* Sodium chloride (Super-D, Met-L-X, M28, Pyrene Pyromet* or METAL.FIRE.XTNGSHR) contains sodium chloride salt, which melts to form an oxygen-excluding crust over the metal.
* Overhaul: CO2 extinguishers, due to their high operating pressure, are subject to pressure vessel safety legislation, and must be hydraulic pressure tested, inspected internally and externally, and date stamped every 10 years.
The first fire extinguisher of which there is any record was patented in England in 1723 by Ambrose Godfrey, a celebrated chemist at that time.
Halon may be recycled and used to fill newly manufactured cylinders, however, only Amerex continues to do this.
It consisted of a cask of fire-extinguishing liquid containing a pewter chamber of gunpowder.
This was the first agent available for large-scale three-dimensional liquid and pressurized gas fires, and was but remained largely a specialty type until the 1950s, when small dry chemical units were marketed for home use.
Once the acid was mixed with the bicarbonate solution, carbon dioxide gas was expelled and thereby pressurized the water.
Although it can be rather successful on a person on fire, its use should be avoided where possible as it can cause frostbite and suffocation.
Examples include the Fire Blockade and FireAde brands of suppressant.
