A musket of several centuries ago is still similar in principle to a modern-day assault rifle&mdash;using the expansion of gases to propel projectiles over long distances&mdash;albeit less accurately and rapidly.
Importation of machine guns for civilian sale in the U.S. was banned by the Gun Control Act of 1968.
However, it also came with some disadvantages.
Non-prohibited automatic weapons can be legally owned by civilians who pay a $200 tax to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (BATFE), pass a background investigation, and, in some jurisdictions, receive approval from local law enforcement.
One disadvantage was if it was raining the match could not be kept lit to fire the weapon.
Cartridges with built-in percussion caps (called "primers") continue to this day to be the standard in firearms.
Muzzle-loading muskets (smooth-bored long guns) were among the first firearms developed.
The use of such weapons is tightly restricted to the film industry under direct supervision of the master of arms holding the permit, and the weapons are often altered so they will not fire "factory" ammunition, but rather only special "light-primer" blank cartridges produced specifically for the film industry.
The bullpup design, by mounting the magazine behind the trigger, unifies the accuracy and firepower of the traditional assault rifle with the compact size of the submachine gun (though submachine guns are still used); examples are the French FAMAS and the British SA80.
The oldest surviving gun, made of bronze, has been dated to 1288 because it was discovered at a site in modern-day Acheng District, Heilongjiang, China, where the ''Yuan Shi'' records that battles were fought at that time.
Muzzleloaders have to be manually reloaded after each shot; a skilled archer could fire multiple arrows faster than most early muskets could be reloaded and fired, although by the mid-18th century, when muzzleloaders became the standard small armament of the military, a well-drilled soldier could fire six rounds in a minute using prepared cartridges in his musket.
Later, German forces fielded the Sturmgewehr 44 during World War II, a light automatic rifle firing a reduced power "intermediate cartridge".
Modern U.S. civilian carbines include compact customizations of the AR-15, Ruger Mini-14, Beretta Cx4 Storm, Kel-Tec SUB-2000, bolt-action rifles generally falling under the specifications of a scout rifle, and aftermarket conversion kits for popular pistols including the M1911 and Glock models.
Sometimes the Chinese troops would place small projectiles within the barrel that would also be projected when the gunpowder was lit, but most of the explosive force would create flames.
The word ''firearms'' usually is used in a sense restricted to small arms (weapons that can be carried by a single person), whereas the word ''artillery'' covers larger gunpowder-fired weapons.
This form of loading has several disadvantages, such as a slow rate of fire and having to expose oneself to enemy fire to reload as the weapon had to be pointed upright so the powder could be poured through the muzzle into the breech followed by the ramming the projectile into the breech.
That said, the basic principle behind firearm operation remains unchanged to this day.
Generally speaking, military and police forces use semi-automatic pistols due to their high magazine capacities and ability to rapidly reload by simply removing the empty magazine and inserting a loaded one.
Between trigger pulls, the firearm's action must be reloaded or charged via an internal mechanism.
Examples include revolver speedloaders, the stripper clip used to aid loading rifles such as the Lee–Enfield or Mauser 98, and the en-bloc clip used in loading the M1 Garand.
Modern designs call for compact weapons retaining firepower.
An extremely limited number of U.S. citizens have special permits from the BATFE to buy, and even import, automatic weapons produced and registered after 1986.
A firearm that automatically re-cocks and reloads the next round with each trigger pull is considered a semi-automatic or autoloading firearm.
Despite its many faults, the wheellock was a significant improvement over the matchlock in terms of both convenience and safety, since it eliminated the need to keep a smoldering match in proximity to loose gunpowder.
The first primitive firearms originated in 13th-century China when the one-person-portable fire lance was combined with projectiles.
Such FMJ bullets are less likely to fragment on impact and are more likely to traverse through a target while imparting less energy.
A single shot firearm can only be fired once per equipped barrel before it must be reloaded or charged via an external mechanism or series of steps.
Both rifles and shotguns come in single- and double-barreled varieties; however due to the expense and difficulty of manufacturing, double-barreled rifles are rare.
together with the usual means of deportment (hand-held or mechanical mounting).
In contrast, modern light machine guns such as the FN Minimi are often wielded by a single infantryman.
"Machine gun" is therefore largely synonymous with "automatic weapon" in the U.S. civilian parlance, covering all automatic firearms.
Firearms that have internal magazines are usually, but not always, rifles.
It operated using a small wheel much like that on cigarette lighters which was wound up with a key before use and which, when the trigger was pulled, spun against a flint, creating the shower of sparks that ignited the powder in the touch hole.
The technology gradually spread through the rest of East Asia, South Asia, the Middle East and then into Europe.
The first "rapid firing" firearms were usually similar to the 19th century Gatling gun, which would fire cartridges from a magazine as fast as and as long as the operator turned a crank.
The earliest depiction of a firearm is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan, China.
Early long arms, from the Renaissance up to the mid-19th century, were generally smoothbore firearms that fired one or more ball shot, called muskets.
As a rule, centerfire cartridges are more powerful than rimfire cartridges, operating at considerably higher pressures than rimfire cartridges.
As the trigger (often actually a lever) was pulled, the match was brought into the open end of a "touch hole" at the base of the gun barrel, which contained a very small quantity of gunpowder, igniting the main charge of gunpowder in the gun barrel.
Eventually single-shot weapons were replaced by the following repeater type weapons.
12 ga.); by the type of action employed (muzzle, breech, lever, bolt, pump, revolver, semi-automatic, automatic etc.)
The force of a projectile is related to the kinetic energy imparted to it, given by the formula  where  is the mass and  is the velocity of the projectile.
The Hughes Amendment to the Firearm Owners Protection Act now prohibits United States civilian ownership or transfer of automatic weapons unless they were registered before May 19, 1986.
their bore diameter; this is given in millimeters or inches e.g.
Detachable magazines can be removed from the weapon without disassembling the firearms, usually by pushing the magazine release.
Because of their small size and limited projectile penetration compared to high-power rifle rounds, submachine guns are commonly favored by military, paramilitary and police forces for close-quarters engagements such as inside buildings, in urban areas or in trench complexes.
The MP5 is actually designated as a "machine pistol" by Heckler & Koch (MP5 stands for ''Maschinenpistole 5'', or Machine Pistol 5), although some reserve this designation for even smaller submachine guns such as the MAC-10 and Glock 18, which are about the size and shape of pistols.
A benefit of the pan and arm swivel being moved to the side of the gun was it gave a clear line of fire.
These belts were more tolerant to exposure to solvents and oil.
Very large and powerful calibers are normal for these firearms.
This is practically impossible with most centerfire cartridges.
The development behind firearms accelerated during the 19th and 20th centuries.
Modern firearms are usually described by their caliber (i.e.
Machine guns of this type were originally defensive firearms crewed by at least two men, mainly because of the difficulties involved in moving and placing them, their ammunition, and their tripod.
Swiss Arms of Switzerland produces the SIG SG 550 assault rifle used by France, Chile, and Spain among others, and Steyr Mannlicher produces the AUG, a bullpup rifle in use in Austria, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, and Saudi Arabia among other nations.
A rifle is so named for the spiral fluting (rifling) carved into the inner surface of its barrel, which imparts a self-stabilizing spin to the single bullets it fires.
Machine guns are often mounted on vehicles or helicopters, and have been used since World War I as offensive firearms in fighter aircraft and tanks (e.g.
Certain designs of auto-loading pistol appeared beginning in the 1870s and had largely supplanted revolvers in military applications by the end of World War I.
Hence, FMJ bullets impart less tissue damage than non-jacketed bullets that expand.
Breech-loading became more or less a universal standard for the reloading of most hand-held firearms and continues to be so with some notable exceptions (such as mortars).
This arrangement allows weapons first produced after 1986 to be used by actors in films and T.V.
Once struck, the flame from the cap in turn ignited the main charge of gunpowder, as with the flintlock, but there was no longer any need to charge the touch hole with gunpowder, and even better, the touch hole was no longer exposed to the elements.
Before then, effectiveness of muzzleloaders was hindered by both the low reloading speed and, before the firing mechanism was perfected, the very high risk posed by the firearm to the person attempting to fire it.
A semi-automatic, or self-loading, firearm is one that performs all steps necessary to prepare the it to discharge again after firing—assuming cartridges remain in the weapon's feed device or magazine.
Many firearms are "single shot": i.e., each time a cartridge is fired, the operator must manually re-cock the firearm and load another cartridge.
The hand cannons were replaced by lighter carriage-mounted artillery pieces, and ultimately the arquebus.
Before this, a "cartridge" was simply a premeasured quantity of gunpowder together with a ball in a small cloth bag (or rolled paper cylinder), which also acted as wadding for the charge and ball.
Many modern firearms use what are called detachable or box magazines as their method of chambering a cartridge.
Revolvers are very common among handgun hunters because revolver cartridges are usually more powerful than similar caliber semi-automatic pistol cartridges (which are designed for self-defense) and the strength, simplicity and durability of the revolver design is well-suited to outdoor use.
This was a muzzleloader in which multiple charges and balls were loaded one on top of the other, with a small hole in each ball to allow the subsequent charge to be ignited after the one ahead of it was ignited.
"The Europeans certainly had firearms by the first half of the 14th century.
The FN P90 and Heckler & Koch MP7 are examples.
regulations in the U.S., it lacks the mechanism that permits fully automatic fire.
Using the matchlock mechanism, the powder in the gun barrel was ignited by a piece of burning cord called a "match".
The classic single-barreled shotgun is a good example.
There are three common types of handguns: single-shot pistols (more common historically), revolvers, and semi-automatic pistols.
7.5mm, .357) or in the case of shotguns their gauge (e.g.
Both rifles and shotguns also come in break-action varieties that do not have any kind of reloading mechanism at all but must be hand-loaded after each shot.
The flintlock action was a major innovation in firearm design.
Another issue with the match was it could give away the position of soldiers because of the glow, sound, and smell.
Instead of loading individual rounds into weapons, magazines holding multiple munitions were adopted&mdash;these aided rapid reloading.
The main parts to the matchlock firing mechanism are the pan, match, arm and trigger.
A repeating firearm can be fired multiple times, but can only be fired once with each subsequent pull of the trigger.
Soviet engineer Mikhail Kalashnikov quickly adapted the German concept, using a less-powerful 7.62×39mm cartridge derived from the standard 7.62×54mmR Russian battle rifle round, to produce the AK-47, which has become the world's most widely used assault rifle.
Polymers and alloys in firearm construction made weaponry progressively lighter and thus easier to deploy.
* By increasing the projectile's velocity, through better or larger propellant charges, through better manufacturing tolerances and materials in bullet and barrel, or through longer barrels.
Carbines, like rifles, can be single-shot, repeating-action, semi-automatic or select-fire/fully automatic, generally depending on the time period and intended market.
The brass cartridge also opened the way for modern repeating arms, by uniting the bullet, gunpowder and primer into one assembly that could be fed reliably into the breech by a mechanical action in the firearm.
The military later designated the AR-15 as the "M16".
Double-barreled rifles are typically intended for African big-game hunts where the animals are dangerous, ranges are short, and speed is of the essence.
The first weapon generally considered in this category is the Gatling gun, originally a carriage-mounted, crank-operated firearm with multiple rotating barrels that was fielded in the American Civil War.
An automatic (or "fully automatic") firearm is one that automatically re-cocks, reloads, and fires as long as the trigger is depressed.
Some additionally or exclusively load from a magazine that holds multiple cartridges.
Belts were originally composed of canvas or cloth with pockets spaced evenly to allow the belt to be mechanically fed into the gun.
Most early firearms were muzzle-loading.
The most notable and revolutionary weapons of this period appeared during the U.S. Civil War and they were the Spencer and Henry repeating rifles.
The M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle was the first U.S. infantry weapon of this type, and was generally used for suppressive or support fire in the role now usually filled by the light machine gun.
Most automatic weapons are classed as long guns (as the ammunition used is of similar type as for rifles, and the recoil of the weapon's rapid fire is better controlled with two hands), but handgun-sized automatic weapons also exist, generally in the "submachine gun" or "machine pistol" class.
Automatic and semi-automatic firing mechanisms meant that a single soldier could fire many more rounds in a minute than a vintage weapon could fire over the course of a battle.
Both used fixed tubular magazines, the former having the magazine in the buttstock and the latter under the barrel which allowed a larger capacity.
The main technical advantage of the brass cartridge case was the effective and reliable sealing of high pressure gasses at the breech, as the gas pressure forces the cartridge case to expand outward, pressing it firmly against the inside of the gun barrel chamber.
Although not widely fielded until World War I, early machine guns were being used by militaries in the second half of the 19th century.
Conversely, rifle bullets can pierce light armor and are easier to shoot accurately, but even a carbine such as the Colt M4 is larger and/or longer than a submachine gun, making it harder to maneuver in close quarters.
In the United States, the assault rifle design was later in coming; the replacement for the M1 Garand of WWII was another John Garand design chambered for the new 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge; the select-fire M14, which was used by the U.S. military until the 1960s.
Later belt designs used permanently connected metal links to retain the cartridges during feeding.
Prior to the 19th century, all handguns were single-shot muzzleloaders.
In the current M16A2 and M16A4 variants of the U.S.-made M16, continuous fully automatic fire is not possible, having been replaced by an automatic burst of three cartridges (this conserves ammunition and increases controllability).
They provide a large ammunition capacity and a high rate of fire, and are typically used to give suppressing fire during infantry movement.
(The spring-loaded arm that holds a piece of flint or pyrite is referred to as a cock because of its resemblance to a rooster.)
Other early automatic rifles include the Fedorov Avtomat and the Huot Automatic Rifle.
hunting rifle), or to the commonly accepted name for a particular variation (e.g.
The modern trigger-actuated machine gun began with various designs developed in the late 19th century and fielded in World War I, such as the Maxim gun, Lewis Gun, and MG 08 "Spandau".
These two types of action are almost exclusively used by rifles.
A machine gun is a fully automatic emplaceable weapon, most often separated from other classes of automatic weapon by the use of belt-fed ammunition (though some designs employ drum, pan or hopper magazines), generally in a rifle-inspired caliber ranging between 5.56×45mm NATO (.223 Remington) for a light machine gun to as large as .50 BMG or even larger for crewed or aircraft weapons.
As effective methods of sealing the breech were developed through the development of sturdy, weatherproof, self-contained metallic cartridges, muzzle-loaders were replaced by single-shot breech loaders.
Each press of the trigger fires a cartridge, using the energy of the cartridge to activate the mechanism so that the next cartridge may be fired immediately.
Automatic rifles such as the Browning Automatic Rifle were in common use by the military during the early part of the 20th century, and automatic rifles that fired handgun rounds, known as submachine guns, also appeared in this time.
An automatic firearm is capable of firing multiple rounds with one pull of the trigger.
A submachine gun is desirable for its compact size and ammunition capacity, however a pistol round lacks the penetrating capability of a rifle round.
Neither the amount of gunpowder, nor the consistency in projectile dimensions were controlled, with resulting inaccuracy in firing due to windage, and due to the difference in diameter between the bore and the shot.
Further classification may make reference to the type of barrel used (rifled) and to the barrel length (19 inch), to the design's primary intended use (e.g.
Firearms are also categorized by their functioning cycle or "action" which describes its loading, firing, and unloading cycle.
The primer charge is at the base of the cartridge, either within the rim (a "rimfire" cartridge) or in a small percussion cap embedded in the center of the base (a "centerfire" cartridge).
Shotguns have a large impact area with considerably less range and accuracy.
Generally, assault rifles have mechanisms that allow the user to select between single shots, fully automatic bursts, or fully automatic fire.
While the rifle variety of semi-automatic firearms may resemble military-style firearms they are not equally classified with the former as "Assault Weapons".
Most modern long guns are either rifles or shotguns.
In the latter half of the 20th century, submachine guns were being miniaturized to the point of being only slightly larger than some large handguns.
A belt or ammunition belt is a device used to retain and feed cartridges into a firearm commonly used on machine guns.
Many firearms made in the late 19th century through the 1950s used internal magazines to load the cartridge into the chamber of the weapon.
The match usually had to be relit after each firing.
However, the larger impact area can compensate for reduced accuracy, since shot spreads during flight; consequently, in hunting, shotguns are generally used for flying game.
This fuse was lit, causing the gunpowder to ignite and propel the cannonball.
This early form of cartridge had to be rammed into the muzzleloader's barrel, and either a small charge of gunpowder in the touch hole or an external percussion cap mounted on the touch hole ignited the gunpowder in the cartridge.
By the end of the 20th century, most handguns carried regularly by military, police and civilians were semi-automatic, although revolvers were still widely used.
Many modern military firearms have a selective fire option, which is a mechanical switch that allows the firearm be fired either in the semi-automatic or fully automatic mode.
In military use, the standard hand cannon was tremendously powerful, while also being somewhat useless due to relative inability of the gunner to aim the weapon, or control the ballistic properties of the projectile.
Later weapons used fixed box magazines that could not be removed from the weapon without dissembling the weapon itself.
Percussion caps (caplock mechanisms), coming into wide service in the 19th century, were a dramatic improvement over flintlocks.
* By increasing the mass of the bullet, either by increasing caliber (and thus size and weight), or by using denser materials like uranium or tungsten.
One interesting solution to the reloading problem was the "Roman Candle Gun" with superposed loads.
A major innovation in firearms and light artillery came in the second half of the 19th century when ammunition, previously delivered as separate bullets and powder, was combined in a single metallic (usually brass) cartridge containing a percussion cap, powder, and a bullet in one weatherproof package.
A carbine is a firearm similar to a rifle in form and intended usage, but generally shorter or smaller than the typical "full-size" hunting or battle rifle of similar time period, and sometimes using a smaller or less-powerful cartridge.
A smaller version of the M16A2, the M4 carbine, is widely used by U.S. and NATO tank and vehicle crews, airbornes, support staff, and in other scenarios where space is limited.
In the case of percussion caps the hammer was hollow on the end to fit around the cap in order to keep the cap from fragmenting and injuring the shooter.
Soon after World War II, the Automatic Kalashnikov AK-47 assault rifle began to be fielded by the Soviet Union and its allies in the Eastern Bloc, as well as by nations such as China, North Korea, and North Vietnam.
Some specialized rifles in the larger calibers are claimed to have an accurate range of up to about , although most have considerably less.
Especially in the past century has particular attention been devoted to accuracy and sighting to make firearms altogether far more accurate than ever before.
Because they fire pistol ammunition, they have limited long-range use, but in close combat can be used in fully automatic in a controllable manner due to the lighter recoil of the pistol ammunition.
(Dougherty and Eidt, 2009) This led to their adoption for military use by countries adhering to the Hague Convention in 1899.
An assault rifle is usually slightly smaller than a battle rifle such as the Karabiner 98k, but the chief differences defining an assault rifle are select-fire capability and the use of a rifle round of lesser power, known as an intermediate cartridge.
Ammunition changed over the centuries from simple metallic ball-shaped projectiles that rattled down the barrel to bullets and cartridges manufactured to high precision.
Some notable weapons that use belts are the M240, the M249, the M134 Minigun, and the PK Machine Gun.
A clip is used to transfer cartridges into the magazine.
Usually, large game are hunted with rifles (although shotguns can be used, particularly with slugs), while birds are hunted with shotguns.
Rifles have a very small impact area but a long range and high accuracy.
Matchlocks were the first and simplest firearms firing mechanisms developed.
The National Firearms Act and Firearm Owners Protection Act define a "machine gun" in the United States code ''Title 26, Subtitle E, Chapter 53, Subchapter B, Part 1, § 5845'' as:
Centerfire cartridges are also safer, as a dropped rimfire cartridge has the potential to discharge if its rim strikes the ground with sufficient force to ignite the primer.
With the invention of the revolver in 1818, handguns capable of holding multiple rounds became popular.
Shotguns are also capable of firing single slugs, or specialty (often "less lethal") rounds such as bean bags, tear gas or breaching rounds.
In some countries, rifle marksmanship is still a matter of national pride.
for air combat or suppressing fire for ground troop support).
These designs were prone to malfunctions due to the effects of oil and other contaminants altering the belt.
(The hammer is roughly the same as the cock found on flintlocks except that it doesn't clamp onto anything.)
More than any single factor though, firearms have proliferated due to the advent of mass production&mdash;enabling arms manufacturers to produce large quantities of weaponry to a consistent standard.
In World War II, Germany introduced the StG 44, and brought to the forefront of firearm technology what eventually became the class of firearm most widely adopted by the military, the assault rifle.
Carbines are also common in law enforcement and among civilian owners where similar size, space and/or power concerns may exist.
Eventually, the "rapid" firing mechanism was perfected and miniaturized to the extent that either the recoil of the firearm or the gas pressure from firing could be used to operate it, thus the operator needed only to pull a trigger (which made the firing mechanisms truly "automatic").
Some magazines, such as that of most centerfire hunting rifles and all revolvers, are internal to and inseparable from the firearm, and are loaded by using a "clip".
Revolvers have a number of firing chambers or "charge holes" in a revolving cylinder; each chamber in the cylinder is loaded with a single cartridge or charge.
An automatic rifle is a magazine-fed firearm, wielded by a single infantryman, that is chambered for rifle cartridges and capable of automatic fire.
There are a variety of types of rifles and shotguns based on the method they are reloaded.
In military use, bolt-action rifles with high-power scopes are common as sniper rifles, however by the Korean War the traditional bolt-action and semi-automatic rifles used by infantrymen had been supplemented by select-fire designs known as "automatic rifles".
Some notable weapons that use internal magazines include the Mosin–Nagant, the Mauser Kar 98k, the Springfield M1903, the M1 Garand, and the SKS.
The cap was fastened to the touch hole of the gun (extended to form a "nipple") and ignited by the impact of the gun's "hammer".
Recoil could be absorbed by bracing the barrel against the ground using a wooden support, the forerunner of the stock.
Rifles have been in nationally featured marksmanship events in Europe and the United States since at least the 18th century, when rifles were first becoming widely available.
Semi-automatic pistols have a single fixed firing chamber machined into the rear of the barrel, and a magazine so they can be used to fire more than one round.
An ''automatic'' firearm is generally defined as one that continues to load and fire cartridges from its magazine as long as the trigger is depressed (or until the magazine is depleted).
The civilian version of the M16 continues to be known as the AR-15 and looks exactly like the military version, although to conform to B.A.T.F.E.
A submachine gun is a magazine-fed firearm, usually smaller than other automatic firearms, that fires pistol-caliber ammunition; for this reason certain submachine guns can also be referred to as ''machine pistols'', especially when referring to handgun-sized designs such as the Škorpion vz.
This reduces recoil allowing for controllable bursts at short range like a submachine gun, while retaining rifle-like accuracy at medium ranges.
Some purpose-built sniper rifles are accurate to ranges of more than .
This is opposed to "double-action" revolvers which accomplish the same end using a mechanical action linked to the trigger pull.
They are also extremely inexpensive and simple to build in time of war, enabling a nation to quickly arm its military.
Generally, kinetic energy can be enhanced in two ways:
Some say the first primitive firearms were invented about 1250 A.D. in China when the man-portable fire lance (a bamboo or metal tube that could shoot ignited gunpowder) was combined with projectiles such as scrap metal, broken porcelain, or darts/arrows.
A long gun is generally any firearm that is larger than a handgun and is designed to be held and fired with both hands, either from the hip or the shoulder.
The Koreans adopted firearms from the Chinese in the 14th century, but the Japanese did not acquire them until the 16th century, and then from the Portuguese rather than the Chinese."
Smith says that Greek fire predates the early Chinese technology by 600 years and that the origin of gunpowder and firearms are unknown because records have been mistranslated and misquoted.
Originally it consisted of paper or bamboo barrels that would have incendiary gunpowder within it, that could be lit one time and would project flames at the enemy.
Manipulation of the bolt or the lever causes the spent cartridge to be removed, the firing mechanism recocked, and a fresh cartridge inserted.
Permission must be received directly from the BATFE to move a machine gun between states, even if it does not change ownership.
The IMI Galil, an Israeli-designed weapon based on the action of the AK-47, is in use by Israel, Italy, Burma, the Philippines, Peru, and Colombia.
The accurate range of pistols generally does not exceed , while most rifles are accurate to  using iron sights, or to longer ranges using optical sights (firearm rounds may be dangerous or lethal well beyond their accurate range; the minimum distance for safety is much greater than specified range).
In this sense, "magazines" and "clips", though often used synonymously, refer to different types of devices.
A '''firearm''' is a portable gun - a barreled weapon that launches one or more projectiles, often driven by the action of an explosive force.
Long guns typically have a barrel between 10 and 30 inches (there are restrictions on minimum barrel length in many jurisdictions; maximum barrel length is usually a matter of practicality), that along with the receiver and trigger group is mounted into a wood, plastic, metal or composite ''stock'', composed of one or more pieces that form a foregrip, rear grip, and optionally (but typically) a shoulder mount called the ''butt''.
Some exceptions to this include the Mauser C96 pistol, which uses an internal magazine, and the Breda 30, an Italian light machine gun.
