The other way referred to an incremental change in the internal state of the system, and did not expect the process to be cyclic.
The transfer of energy between an open system and a single contiguous subsystem of its surroundings is considered also in non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
Likewise, the term work energy for  means "that amount of energy gained or lost as the result of work".
In 1865, after some hestitation, Clausius began calling his state function  "energy".
This principle allows a composite isolated system to be derived from two other component non-interacting isolated systems, in such a way that the total energy of the composite isolated system is equal to the sum of the total energies of the two component isolated systems.
It might be called the "mechanical approach".
Here the ''X''i are the generalized forces corresponding to the external variables ''x''i.
Then walls of interest fall into two classes, (a) those such that arbitrary systems separated by them remain independently in their own previously established respective states of internal thermodynamic equilibrium; they are defined as adiabatic; and (b) those without such independence; they are defined as non-adiabatic.
Similarly, a difference in chemical potential between groups of particles in the system drives a chemical reaction that changes the numbers of particles, and the corresponding product is the amount of chemical potential energy transformed in process.
It may be allowed that the wall between the system and the subsystem is not only permeable to matter and to internal energy, but also may be movable so as to allow work to be done when the two systems have different pressures.
... We must therefore admit that the statement which we have enunciated here, and which is equivalent to the first law of thermodynamics, is not well founded on direct experimental evidence."
This usage is also followed by Glansdorff and Prigogine in their 1971 text about continuous-flow systems.
The process of development of the first law of thermodynamics was by way of much investigative trial and error over a period of about half a century.
This again requires the existence of adiabatic enclosure of the entire process, system and surroundings, though the separating wall between the surroundings and the system is thermally conductive or radiatively permeable, not adiabatic.
They write: "Again the flow of internal energy may be split into a convection flow  and a conduction flow.
::::::For any finite process, whether reversible or irreversible,
A respected text disregards the Carathéodory's exclusion of mention of heat from the statement of the first law for closed systems, and admits heat calorimetrically defined along with work and internal energy.
In the case of a closed system in which the particles of the system are of different types and, because chemical reactions may occur, their respective numbers are not necessarily constant, the fundamental thermodynamic relation for d''U'' becomes:
The problem of definition arises also in this case.
Then the law of conservation of energy requires that
When the system evolves with transfer of energy as heat, without energy being transferred as work, in an adynamic process, the heat transferred to the system is equal to the increase in its internal energy:
Sometimes the concept of internal energy is not made explicit in the statement.
Nevertheless, the first law still holds and provides a check on the measurements and calculations of the work done irreversibly on the system, , and the heat transferred irreversibly to the system, , which belong to the same particular process defined by its particular irreversible path, , through the space of thermodynamic states.
The '''first law of thermodynamics''' is a version of the law of conservation of energy, adapted for thermodynamic systems.
It is irrelevant if the work is electrical, mechanical, chemical,... or if done suddenly or slowly, as long as it is performed in an adiabatic way, that is to say, without heat transfer into or out of the system.
It is nowadays, however, taken to provide the definition of heat via the law of conservation of energy and the definition of work in terms of changes in the external parameters of a system.
That article considered this statement to be an expression of the law of conservation of energy for such systems.
When a system expands in a fictive quasistatic process, the work done by the system on the environment is the product, , &nbsp;of pressure, , and volume change, , whereas the work done ''on'' the system is .&nbsp; Using either sign convention for work, the change in internal energy of the system is:
Still there can be a distinction between bulk flow of internal energy and diffusive flow of internal energy in this case, because the internal energy density does not have to be constant per unit mass of material, and allowing for non-conservation of internal energy because of local conversion of kinetic energy of bulk flow to internal energy by viscosity.
This is one aspect of the law of conservation of energy and can be stated:
Largely through the influence of Max Born, it is often regarded as theoretically preferable because of this conceptual parsimony.
Taking  as a change in internal energy, one writes
The case of  a wall that is permeable to matter and can move so as to allow transfer of energy as work is not considered here.
Next, the system is returned to its initial state, isolated again, and the same amount of work is done on the tank using different devices (an electric motor, a chemical battery, a spring,...).
Rigorously, they are defined only when the system is in its own state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium.
This is a statement of the first law of thermodynamics for a transfer between two otherwise isolated open systems, that fits well with the conceptually revised and rigorous statement of the law stated above.
For an open system, there is a wall that allows penetration by matter.
For any closed homogeneous component of an inhomogeneous closed system, if  denotes the total energy of that component system, one may write
In particular, he referred to the work of Constantin Carathéodory, who had in 1909 stated the first law without defining quantity of heat.
According to Münster (1970), "A somewhat unsatisfactory aspect of Carathéodory's theory is that a consequence of the Second Law must be considered at this point in the statement of the first law, i.e.
This excludes isochoric work.
For such systems, the principle of conservation of energy is expressed in terms not only of internal energy as defined for homogeneous systems, but also in terms of kinetic energy and potential energies of parts of the inhomogeneous system with respect to each other and with respect to long-range external forces.
The reason for this is given as the second law of thermodynamics and is not considered in the present article.
There is a generalized "force" of condensation that drives vapor molecules out of the vapor.
A thermodynamic process might be initiated by a thermodynamic operation in the surroundings, that mechanically increases in the controlled volume of the vapor.
::::::For a given system we let  large-scale mechanical energy,  large-scale potential energy, and  total energy.
it is impossible to construct an engine which will work in a cycle and produce continuous work, or kinetic energy, from nothing.
Indeed, within its scope of applicability, the law is so reliably established, that, nowadays, rather than experiment being considered as testing the accuracy of the law, it is more practical and realistic to think of the law as testing the accuracy of experiment.
Investigations into the nature of heat and work and their relationship began with the invention of the first engines used to extract water from mines.
A useful idea from mechanics is that the energy gained by a particle is equal to the force applied to the particle multiplied by the displacement of the particle while that force is applied.
Apparently in a different frame of thinking from that of the above-mentioned paradoxical usage in the earlier sections of the historic 1947 work by Prigogine, about discrete systems, this usage of Gyarmati is consistent with the later sections of the same 1947 work by Prigogine, about continuous-flow systems, which use the term "heat flux" in just this way.
This physical statement is restricted neither to closed systems nor to systems with states that are strictly defined only for thermodynamic equilibrium; it has meaning also for open systems and for systems with states that are not in thermodynamic equilibrium.
These authors actually use the symbol  to refer to total energy, including kinetic energy of bulk flow."
::''In all cases in which work is produced by the agency of heat, a quantity of heat is consumed which is proportional to the work done; and conversely, by the expenditure of an equal quantity of work an equal quantity of heat is produced.''
There is a sense in which this kind of additivity expresses a fundamental postulate that goes beyond the simplest ideas of classical closed system thermodynamics; the extensivity of some variables is not obvious, and needs explicit expression; indeed one author goes so far as to say that it could be recognized as a fourth law of thermodynamics, though this is not repeated by other authors.
In an open system, by definition hypothetically or potentially, matter can pass between the system and its surroundings.
According to one textbook, "The most common device for measuring  is an '''adiabatic bomb calorimeter'''."
The paper goes on to base its main argument on the possibility of quasi-static adiabatic work, which is essentially reversible.
The first explicit statement of the first law of thermodynamics, by Rudolf Clausius in 1850, referred to cyclic thermodynamic processes.
But when, in a particular case, the process of interest involves only hypothetical or potential but no actual passage of matter, the process can be considered as if it were for a closed system.
Conceptually essential here is that the internal energy transferred with the transfer of matter is measured by a variable that is mathematically independent of the variables that measure heat and work.
Then the heat and work transfers may be difficult to calculate, and irreversible thermodynamics is called for.
A significant result of this distinction is that a given internal energy change  can be achieved by, in principle, many combinations of heat and work.
Then the work and heat transfers can occur and be calculated simultaneously.
Except under the special, and strictly speaking, fictional, condition of reversibility, only one of the processes &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; or &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;is empirically feasible by a simple application of externally supplied work.
It is defined as a residual difference between change of internal energy and work done on the system, when that work does not account for the whole of the change of internal energy and the system is not adiabatically isolated.
His law was later recognized as a consequence of the first law of thermodynamics, but Hess's statement was not explicitly concerned with the relation between energy exchanges by heat and work.
These versions follow the traditional approach that is now considered out of date, exemplified by that of Planck (1897/1903).
Equation (2) is known as the fundamental thermodynamic relation for a closed system in the energy representation, for which the defining state variables are  and , with respect to which  and  are partial derivatives of .
:''The internal energy of an isolated system remains constant.''
On occasions, authors make their various respective arbitrary assignments.
Jointly primitive with this notion of heat were the notions of empirical temperature and thermal equilibrium.
The path taken by a thermodynamic system through a chemical or physical change is known as a thermodynamic process.
In this example, kinetic energy of bulk flow and potential energy with respect to long-range external forces such as gravity are both considered to be zero.
Carathéodory's 1909 version of the first law of thermodynamics was stated in an axiom which refrained from defining or mentioning temperature or quantity of heat transferred.
If, in a process of change of state of a closed system, the energy transfer is not under a practically zero temperature gradient and practically frictionless, then the process is irreversible.
The two most familiar pairs are, of course, pressure-volume, and temperature-entropy.
In 1882 it was named as the ''internal energy'' by Helmholtz.
Consequently, the energy transfer that accompanies the transfer of matter between the system and its surrounding subsystem cannot be uniquely split into heat and work transfers to or from the open system.
The parameters ''X''i are independent of the size of the system and are called intensive parameters and the ''x''i are proportional to the size and called extensive parameters.
That axiom stated that the internal energy of a phase in equilibrium is a function of state, that the sum of the internal energies of the phases is the total internal energy of the system, and that the value of the total internal energy of the system is changed by the amount of work done adiabatically on it, considering work as a form of energy.
Largely through Born's influence, this revised conceptual approach to the definition of heat came to be preferred by many twentieth-century writers.
Throughout the course of the fictional limiting quasi-static process, the internal intensive variables of the system are equal to the external intensive variables, those that describe the reactive forces exerted by the surroundings.
Properly, for closed systems, one speaks of transfer of internal energy as heat, but in general, for open systems, one can speak safely only of transfer of internal energy.
In contrast to the case of closed systems, for open systems, in the presence of diffusion, there is no unconstrained and unconditional physical distinction between convective transfer of internal energy by bulk flow of matter, the transfer of internal energy without transfer of matter (usually called heat conduction and work transfer), and change of various potential energies.
When energy flows from one system or part of a system to another otherwise than by the performance of mechanical work, the energy so transferred is called ''heat''."
Another respected text defines heat exchange as determined by temperature difference, but also mentions that the Born (1921) version is "completely rigorous".
Two previously isolated systems can be subjected to the thermodynamic operation of placement between them of a wall permeable to matter and energy, followed by a time for establishment of a new thermodynamic state of internal equilibrium in the new single unpartitioned system.
He describes this as paradoxical.
Though it does not explicitly say so, this statement refers to closed systems, and to internal energy  defined for bodies in states of thermodynamic equilibrium, which possess well-defined temperatures.
The first law is often formulated by stating that the change in the internal energy of a closed system is equal to the amount of heat supplied to the system, minus the amount of work done by the system on its surroundings.
Münster instances that no adiabatic process can reduce the internal energy of a system at constant volume.
In these terms, , the system's temperature, and , its pressure, are partial derivatives of  with respect to  and .
We may say, with respect to this work term, that a pressure difference forces a transfer of volume, and that the product of the two (work) is the amount of energy transferred out of the system as a result of the process.
Moreover, that paper was critical of the early work of Joule that had by then been performed.
There are three relevant kinds of wall here: purely diathermal, adiabatic, and permeable to matter.
According to Truesdell (1980), Julius Robert von Mayer in 1841 made a statement that meant that "in a process at constant pressure, the heat used to produce expansion is universally interconvertible with work", but this is not a general statement of the first law.
Then, mechanical work is given by  and the quantity of heat added can be expressed as .
Another expression of this view is "...&nbsp;no systematic precise experiments to verify this generalization directly have ever been attempted."
This approach derives the notions of transfer of energy as heat, and of temperature, as theoretical developments, not taking them as primitives.
Work and heat are expressions of actual physical processes of supply or removal of energy, while the internal energy  is a mathematical abstraction that keeps account of the exchanges of energy that befall the system.
:It is in no way possible, either by mechanical, thermal, chemical, or other devices, to obtain perpetual motion, i.e.
It has an early origin in the nineteenth century, for example in the work of Helmholtz, but also in the work of many others.
This definition may be regarded as expressing a conceptual revision, as follows.
Of particular interest for single cycle of a cyclic process are the net work done, and the net heat taken in (or 'consumed', in Clausius' statement), by the system.
Only when these two "forces" (or chemical potentials) are equal is there equilibrium, and the net rate of transfer zero.
Because there are physically separate connections that are permeable to energy but impermeable to matter, between the system and its surroundings, energy transfers between them can occur with definite heat and work characters.
Often nowadays, however, writers use the IUPAC convention by which the first law is formulated with work done on the system by its surroundings having a positive sign.
Examples are friction and viscosity.
This is a serious difficulty for attempts to define entropy for time-varying spatially inhomogeneous systems.
If two of the kinds of wall are left unsealed, then energy transfer can be shared between them, so that the two remaining permitted terms do not correspond precisely.
By one author, this framework has been called the "thermodynamic" approach.
Another helpful account is given by Tschoegl.
According to one respected scholar: "Unfortunately, it does not seem that experiments of this kind have ever been carried out carefully.
The removal of the partition in the surroundings initiates a process of exchange between the system and its contiguous surrounding subsystem.
::''In a thermodynamic process involving a closed system, the increment in the internal energy is equal to the difference between the heat accumulated by the system and the work done by it.''
According to another textbook, "Calorimetry is widely used in present day laboratories."
Moreover, it deals to some extent with the problem of lack of direct experimental evidence that the time order of stages of a process does not matter in the determination of internal energy.
Nevertheless, if the material constitution is of several chemically distinct components that can diffuse with respect to one another, the system is considered to be open, the diffusive flows of the components being defined with respect to the center of mass of the system, and balancing one another as to mass transfer.
In general, when there is transfer of energy associated with matter transfer, work and heat transfers can be distinguished only when they pass through walls physically separate from those for matter transfer.
This can be taken to justify the formula
Most careful textbook statements of the law express it for closed systems.
For the special fictive case of quasi-static transfers, there is a simple correspondence.
Classical thermodynamics is initially focused on closed homogeneous systems (e.g.
It also postulates that energy can be transferred from one thermodynamic system to another adiabatically as work, and that energy can be held as the internal energy of a thermodynamic system.
Sometimes the existence of the internal energy is made explicit but work is not explicitly mentioned in the statement of the first postulate of thermodynamics.
But it is desired to study also systems with distinct internal motion and spatial inhomogeneity.
An experimental result that seems to violate the law may be assumed to be inaccurate or wrongly conceived, for example due to failure to account for an important physical factor.
The law is of great importance and generality and is consequently thought of from several points of view.
If we isolate the tank thermally, and move the paddle wheel with a pulley and a weight, we can relate the increase in temperature with the distance descended by the mass.
The author then explains how heat is defined or measured by calorimetry, in terms of heat capacity, specific heat capacity, molar heat capacity, and temperature.
If only adiabatic processes were of interest, and heat could be ignored, the concept of internal energy would hardly arise or be needed.
An example is evaporation.
The first law of thermodynamics for closed systems was originally induced from empirically observed evidence, including calorimetric evidence.
The 1909 Carathéodory statement of the law in axiomatic form does not mention heat or temperature, but the equilibrium states to which it refers are explicitly defined by variable sets that necessarily include "non-deformation variables", such as pressures, which, within reasonable restrictions, can be rightly interpreted as empirical temperatures, and the walls connecting the phases of the system are explicitly defined as possibly impermeable to heat or permeable only to heat.
Clausius also stated the law in another form, referring to the existence of a function of state of the system, the internal energy, and expressed it in terms of a differential equation for the increments of a thermodynamic process.
The reference adiabatic work process may be chosen arbitrarily from amongst the class of all such processes.''
Because the internal energy transferred with matter is not in general uniquely resolvable into heat and work components, the total energy transfer cannot in general be uniquely resolved into heat and work components.
where  and  denote the changes in internal energy of the system and of its surroundings respectively.
One way referred to cyclic processes and the inputs and outputs of the system, but did not refer to increments in the internal state of the system.
A cyclic process is one that can be repeated indefinitely often, returning the system to its initial state.
They should be logically coherent and consistent with one another.
Carathéodory's paper asserts that its statement of the first law corresponds exactly to Joule's experimental arrangement, regarded as an instance of adiabatic work.
::::::The first law in a form that involves the principle of conservation of energy more generally is
This convention follows physicists such as Max Planck, and considers all net energy transfers to the system as positive and all net energy transfers from the system as negative, irrespective of any use for the system as an engine or other device.
The work done on the system is defined and measured by changes in mechanical or quasi-mechanical variables external to the system.
The constant of proportionality is universal and independent of the system and in 1845 and 1847 was measured by James Joule, who described it as the ''mechanical equivalent of heat''.
Carathéodory's celebrated presentation of equilibrium thermodynamics refers to closed systems, which are allowed to contain several phases connected by internal walls of various kinds of impermeability and permeability (explicitly including walls that are permeable only to heat).
For this, it is supposed that the system has multiple areas of contact with its surroundings.
where  denotes the infinitesimal increment of heat supplied to the system from its surroundings.
There are pistons that allow adiabatic work, purely diathermal walls, and open connections with surrounding subsystems of completely controllable chemical potential (or equivalent controls for charged species).
It regards calorimetry as a derived theory.
It was also independently recognized in 1850 by Rankine, who also denoted it  ; and in 1851 by Kelvin who then called it "mechanical energy", and later "intrinsic energy".
A complementary observable aspect of the first law is about heat transfer.
Therefore:  where  denotes the internal energy per unit mass.
With such independence of variables, the total increase of internal energy in the process is then determined as the sum of the internal energy transferred from the surroundings with the transfer of matter through the walls that are permeable to it, and of the internal energy transferred to the system as heat through the diathermic walls, and of the energy transferred to the system as work through the adiabatic walls, including the energy transferred to the system by long-range forces.
In a non-cyclic process, the change in the internal energy of a system is equal to net energy added as heat to the system minus the net work done by the system, both being measured in mechanical units.
The first law of thermodynamics for a closed system was expressed in two ways by Clausius.
Thus, some may regard it as a principle more abstract than a law.
There can be pathways to other systems, spatially separate from that of the matter transfer, that allow heat and work transfer independent of and simultaneous with the matter transfer.
This means that the internal energy  is a function of state and that the internal energy change  between two states is a function only of the two states.
Some mechanical work will be done within the surroundings by the vapor, but also some of the parent liquid will evaporate and enter the vapor collection which is the contiguous surrounding subsystem.
In general, matter in diffusive motion carries with it some internal energy, and some microscopic potential energy changes accompany the motion.
In a cyclic process in which the system does net work on its surroundings, it is observed to be physically necessary not only that heat be taken into the system, but also, importantly, that some heat leave the system.
Moreover, the flow of matter is zero into or out of the cell that moves with the local center of mass.
This kind of evidence, of independence of sequence of stages, combined with the above-mentioned evidence, of independence of qualitative kind of work, would show the existence of an important state variable that corresponds with adiabatic work, but not that such a state variable represented a conserved quantity.
Equivalently, perpetual motion machines of the first kind are impossible.
Then, for a suitable fictive quasi-static transfer, one can write
This statement by Crawford, for , uses the sign convention of IUPAC, not that of Clausius.
According to Max Born, the transfer of matter and energy across an open connection "cannot be reduced to mechanics".
This usage is described by Bailyn as stating the non-convective flow of internal energy, and is listed as his definition number 1, according to the first law of thermodynamics.
The law of conservation of energy states that the total energy of an isolated system is constant; energy can be transformed from one form to another, but cannot be created or destroyed.
The calibration allows comparison of calorimetric measurement of quantity of heat transferred with quantity of energy transferred as work.
In each case, an unmeasurable quantity (the internal energy, the atomic energy level) is revealed by considering the difference of measured quantities (increments of internal energy, quantities of emitted or absorbed radiative energy).
This account first considers processes for which the first law is easily verified because of their simplicity, namely adiabatic processes (in which there is no transfer as heat) and adynamic processes (in which there is no transfer as work).
In effect, in this description, one is dealing with a system effectively closed to the transfer of matter.
In this case, the transfer of energy as heat is not defined.
The distinction between internal and kinetic energy is hard to make in the presence of turbulent motion within the system, as friction gradually dissipates macroscopic kinetic energy of localised bulk flow into molecular random motion of molecules that is classified as internal energy.
The following is an account in terms of changes of state of a closed system through compound processes that are not necessarily cyclic.
If two of those kinds of wall are sealed off, leaving only one that permits transfers of energy, as work, as heat, or with matter, then the remaining permitted terms correspond precisely.
The return to the initial state is not conducted by doing adiabatic work on the system.
The difference is the heat converted by the cycle into work.
The history of statements of the law for closed systems has two main periods, before and after the work of Bryan (1907), of Carathéodory (1909), and the approval of Carathéodory's work given by Born (1921).
This is so regardless of the path of the process of interest, and regardless of whether it is an adiabatic or a non-adiabatic process.
In many properly conducted experiments it has been precisely supported, and never violated.
For the thermodynamics of closed systems, the distinction between transfers of energy as work and as heat is central and is within the scope of the present article.
Bailyn likens it to the energy states of an atom, that were revealed by Bohr's energy relation ''hν'' = ''E''''n'' − ''E''''n''.
This is not the ''ad hoc'' definition of "reduced heat flux" of Haase.
These variables are important throughout thermodynamics, though not necessary for the statement of the first law.
The concept of internal energy is considered by Bailyn to be of "enormous interest".
The first full statements of the law came in 1850 from Rudolf Clausius and from William Rankine; Rankine's statement was perhaps not quite as clear and distinct as was Clausius'.
Except for the special case mentioned above when there is no actual transfer of matter, which can be treated as if for a closed system, in strictly defined thermodynamic terms, it follows that transfer of energy as heat is not defined.
No qualitative kind of adiabatic work has ever been observed to decrease the temperature of the water in the tank.
::::::Here  and  are heat and work added, with no restrictions as to whether the process is reversible, quasistatic, or irreversible.Warner, ''Am.
Work transfer is practically reversible when it occurs so slowly that there are no frictional effects within the system; frictional effects outside the system should also be zero if the process is to be globally reversible.
Basing his thinking on the mechanical approach, Born in 1921, and again in 1949, proposed to revise the definition of heat.
Such statements of the first law for closed systems assert the existence of internal energy as a function of state defined in terms of adiabatic work.
In the limit of infinitely slow performance, the dissipation tends to zero and then the limiting process, though fictional rather than actual, is notionally reversible, and is called quasi-static.
There are several other accounts of this, in apparent mutual conflict.
According to one opinion, "Most thermodynamic data come from calorimetry..." According to another opinion, "The most common method of measuring "heat" is with a calorimeter."
