in comparison: a deep bending rod will demand less power from the fisherman, but deliver more fighting power to the fish.
Fly rods are used to cast artificial flies, spinning rods and bait casting rods are designed to cast baits or lures.
To entice fish, bait or lures are impaled on one or more hooks attached to the line.
Many different types of glue held these sections together, most commonly Irish glue and bone glue.
Trolling rods are designed to drag bait or lures behind moving boats.
Boron and Graphite rods came around in the 1960s and 1970s when the United States and United Kingdom invested considerable research into developing the new technologies.
Tenkara rods have no guides.
Modern ice rods are typically very short spinning rods, varying between  in length.
Power is often an indicator of what types of fishing, species of fish, or size of fish a particular pole may be best used for.
Furthermore, the process of wrapping graphite fibre sheets to build a rod creates imperfections that result in rod twist during casting.
Fly rods, thin, flexible fishing rods designed to cast an artificial fly, usually consisting of a hook tied with fur, feathers, foam, or other lightweight material.
In fly rods, exceeding weight ratings may warp the blank or have casting difficulties when rods are improperly loaded.
Various grade eyes available in conventional rods are also available in telescopic fishing rods.
Tenkara rods are a type of fly rod used for tenkara fishing in Japan.
Traditionally rods are made from bamboo, while contemporary rods are usually made from fibreglass or carbon fibre.
Slower rods are easier to cast, create lighter presentations but create a wider loop on the forward cast that reduces casting distance and is subject to the effects of wind.
When the load used greatly exceeds a rod's specifications a rod may break during casting, if the line doesn't break first.
Some anglers experience this kind of fitting as superior to a one piece rod.
Some rods are joined through a metal bus.
While the so-called 'fast action'-rods are in fact stiff rods (with absence of any action) which end in a soft or slow tip section.
Split-cane rods were later independently produced after Phillippe started to sell the imported rods to a New York retailer and then copied by  Americans Charles Orvis, Hiram Leonard and Englishman William Hardy in the 1870s and mass production methods made these rods accessible to the public.
The industry also became commercialized – rods and tackle were sold at the haberdashers store.
Some of these are specialized rods, including shark rods, and marlin rods, and are for use with very heavy equipment.
A common way today to describe a rod's bending properties is the Common Cents System.
The fisherman's second and third fingers straddle the "leg" of the reel where it is attached to the reel seat on the rod, and the weight of the reel hangs beneath the rod, which makes for a more comfortable way to fish for extended periods.
Guides are available in steel and titanium with a wide variety of high-tech metal alloy inserts replacing the classic agate inserts of earlier rods.
This translates to further casting, stronger fish fighting abilities, and less breaking of the rod.
In practice, this is misleading, as top quality rods are very often fast action rods, bending from tip to butt.
Some ultra-light rods are capable of casting lures as light as 1/64th of an ounce (0.4&nbsp;g) – typically small spinners, wet flies, crappie jigs, tubes, or bait such as trout worms.
Spin casting rods are rods designed to hold a spin casting reel, which are normally mounted above the handle.
The only difference being that one should not open the telescopic rod in manner that whips a closed rod into the open position rapidly.
Midsections were generally made from Iron wood because it was a thicker strong woods.
Custom rod building is an active hobby among fly fishermen.
Casting rods are typically viewed as somewhat more powerful than their spinning rod counterparts – they can use heavier line and can handle heavier cover.
Judging by stone inscriptions dating back to 2000 BC,  fishing rods go back to ancient Egypt, China, Greece, Trinidad and Tobago, Rome and medieval England.
Action is also subjectively used by anglers, as an angler might compare a given rod as "faster" or "slower" than a different rod.
Often the rods come with tip covers to protect the tip and guides.
Fly Rods : Guide to Fly Rod Flex & Action.
Some manufacturers list the power value of the rod as its action.
On a full progressive rod, the power is distributed most evenly over the whole rod.
Telescopic fishing rods are made from the same materials as conventional multi-piece rods.
are trade names for particular graphite produced by the Hexcel Corporation.
Many times carbon fibre and graphite are used together in the rod making process.
As Great Lakes sportfishing in particular becomes more popular with each passing year, all rod manufacturers continue to expand their lines of dedicated "trolling" rods, though as noted, for most inland lake and stream fishing, a good casting or spinning rod is perfectly adequate for trolling.
The butts were frequently made of maple, with bored bottom; this butt outlasted several tops.
The term 'fast action' is used for rods where only the tip is bending, and 'slow action' for rods bending from tip to butt.
Some surfcasters use powerful rods to cast up to six ounces or more of lead weight, artificial lures, and/or bait over one hundred yards.
Fishing rods can be constructed out of a vast number of materials.
They are mostly popular with the new and young anglers, as well as anglers who cannot afford the generally more expensive graphite rods.
Reel seats are often of graphite-reinforced plastic, aluminium, or wood.
Tenkara fishing is very popular in Japan, where these rods can be found in every major tackle shop.
At best, they allow you to compare the quality of the material used to build different rods by the same manufacturer: an IM7 rod would use better graphite than an IM6 rod if both are made by the same manufacturer.
The art of fly fishing took a great leap forward after the English Civil War, where a newly found interest in the activity left its mark on the many books and treatises that were written on the subject at the time.
Today, fishing rods are identified by their weight (meaning the weight of line or lure required to flex a fully loaded rod) and action (describing the speed with which the rod returns to its neutral position).
These are ultra-light and very portable telescopic rods (read more about telescopic below).
Additionally, extra care must be taken not to get dirt or sand in the joints; due to their design this can easily damage this style of rod.
Ultra-Heavy rods are used in deep sea fishing, surf fishing, or for heavy fish by weight.
In theory, for light and medium freshwater gamefishing, any casting or spinning rod (with the possible exception of ultralight rods) can be used for trolling.
Perhaps the extreme in this philosophy was reached during the 1940s and early 1950s, when the now-defunct True Temper corporation – a maker of garden tools – marketed a line of trolling rods of 4.5 to 5&nbsp;ft length made of tempered steel which were square in cross section.
As of both IM and modulus, the higher rating, the stiffer the carbon fibres in the rod, together with this stiffness, the carbon also becomes more brittle and show more wear over time.
In practice, this leverage effect often misleads fisherman.
Today's most popular rod tends to be graphite for its light weight characteristics and its ability to allow for further and more accurate cast.
Spinning rods are also widely used for trolling and still fishing with live bait.
Split bamboo rods are generally considered the most beautiful, the most "classic", and are also generally the most fragile of the styles, and they require a great deal of care to last well.
A parabolic action is often used to note a progressive bending curve, in fact this term comes from a series of splitcane fly rods built by Pezon & Michel in France since the late 1930s, which had a progressive bending curve.
The line is generally stored on a reel which reduces tangles and assists in landing a fish.
When fighting a fish,
They are found on specialised hand-built rods.
Various types of fishing rods are designed for specific types of fishing.
A mixture of the rods in the other categories, they are carbon rods, fly rods and telescopic rods all in one.
In between is what is called a progressive tapering which loads smooth from top to butt, adding in power the deeper the rod is bent.
Even today, Tonkin split-bamboo rods are still popular in fly fishing.
There are several specifications manufacturers use to delineate rod uses.
Generally between 10 and 14 feet (3 – 4 m) in length, surf casting rods need to be longer in order for the user cast the lure or bait beyond the breaking surf where fish tend to congregate, and sturdy enough to cast heavy weighted lures or bait needed to hold the bottom in rough water.
Since the 1980s, with the advent of flexible, yet stiff graphite ferrules, travel rod technology has greatly advanced, and multi-piece travel rods that can be transported in a suitcase or backpack constitute a large share of the market.
This makes the rods very easy to transport to remote areas or travel on buses, compact cars, or public buses and subways.
More eyes means better weight and stress distribution throughout the parabolic arc.
In casting and spinning rods, designations such as "8-15 lb.
A rod may also be described by the weight of lure or hook that the rod is designed to support.
This also allows the rod to be held in the fisherman's dominant hand (the handle on most modern spinning reels is reversible) which greatly increases control and nuance applied to the rod itself.
Back- or butt-rests can also be used with modern fishing rods to make it easier to pull big fish off the water.
A "medium" action bamboo rod may have a faster action than a "fast" fibreglass rod.
The most common type of sea rods are for surf casting.
Often it is believed that a hard, stiff rod puts more control and power on the fish to fight, while it is actually the fish who is putting the power on the fisherman.
Originally made of yew, green hart, and later split bamboo (Tonkin cane), most modern fly rods are constructed from man-made composite materials, including fibreglass, carbon/graphite, or graphite/boron composites.
Line weight for a rod is expressed as a range that the rod is designed to support.
Rods were generally made in three pieces called a butt, midsection, and tip.
Ice fishing rods are designed to fish through small holes in ice covered lakes.
Cork is light, durable, keeps warm and tends to transmit rod vibrations better than synthetic materials, although EVA foam is also used.
''See also'' Fly fishing.
Any fish can theoretically be caught with any rod, of course, but catching panfish on a heavy rod offers no sport whatsoever, and successfully landing a large fish on an ultralight rod requires supreme rod handling skills at best, and more frequently ends in broken tackle and a lost fish.
Ultra-light spinning and casting rods are generally shorter ( is common) lighter, and more limber than normal rods.
"Action" refers to the speed with which the rod returns to its neutral position.
Hewitt and Howald were the first to come up with a way to lay the fibers into the shape of a fishing rod by wrapping them around a piece of balsa wood.
The other components that go into a quality rod can also add significantly to the cost.
These are fork-like supports that help keep the rod in position, providing leverage and counteracting tensions caused by a caught fish.
Buying a rod based solely on the modulus rating is a mistake because other factors must be considered, for example, if the fisherman does not want the stiffest rod for light line techniques or cranking.
Until the mid-1800s rods were generally made in England.
Fly rods tend to have a single, large-diameter line guide (called a stripping guide), with a number of smaller looped guides (aka ''snake'' guides) spaced along the rod to help control the movement of the relatively thick fly line.
Rods with a fast action combined with a full progressive bending curve allows the fisherman to make longer casts, given that the cast weight and line diameter is correct.
Horton Manufacturing Company first introduced an all steel rod in 1913.
When a cast weight exceeds the specifications lightly, a rod becomes slower, slightly reducing the distance.
Trolling is a fishing method of casting the lure or bait to the side of, or behind, a moving boat, and letting the motion of the boat pull the bait through the water.
Similar to western fly-rods tenkara rods also have cork, and sometimes even wooden handles, with wooden handles (such as red-pine, and phoenix-tree wood) being the more prized rods due to their increased sensitivity to fish bites and the heavier feel that helps balance the rods.
They are long, (around 4 metres on average), extremely thick, and feature huge and heavy tips, eyes, and handles.
Carbon fibre is less flexible (stiffer) than glass fibre and more brittle and prone to breakage when misused, while carbon fibre allows for longer and faster rods.
This may potentially cause breakage, making a fiberglass rod more preferable for some anglers due to its higher durability and affordability compared to graphite rods.
Popular targets for spinning in the UK and European continent are pike, perch, eel and zander (walleye).
A '''fishing rod ''' is a long, flexible rod used to catch fish.
In the US, tenkara is beginning to grow in popularity.
Unlike bait casting and spin casting reels, the spinning reel hangs beneath the rod rather than sitting on top, and is held in place with a sliding or locking reel seat.
Onesimus Ustonson established his trading shop in 1761, and his establishment remained as a market leader for the next century.
In the last 30 years, most manufacturers have developed a complete line of generally long, heavily built rods sold as "Trolling Rods", and aimed generally at ocean anglers and Great Lakes salmon and steelhead fishermen.
In commercial fishing practice, big and strong fish are often just pulled in on the line itself without much effort, which is possible because the absence of the leverage effect.
Fishing rods come in many sizes, actions, lengths and configurations depending on whether they are to be used for small, medium or large fish or in different fresh or salt water situations.
The rod tapers from one end to the other and the degree of taper determines how much of the rod flexes when stressed.
For that reason they are almost never to be found on commercial fishing rods.
While rods were at one time offered as specific "spin casting" or "bait casting" rods, this has become uncommon, as the rod design is suited to either fishing style, and today they are generally called simply "casting rods", and are usually offered with no distinction as to which style they are best suited for in use.
Each has its purpose in the fishing industry and both improve an anglers chances of being successful when the blanks are used for the right purposes.
They are very similar to bait casting rods, to the point where either type of reel may be used on a particular rod.
It acts like a stiff pole.
The renowned officer in the Parliamentary army, Robert Venables, published in 1662 ''The Experienced Angler, or Angling improved, being a general discourse of angling, imparting many of the aptest ways and choicest experiments for the taking of most sorts of fish in pond or river''.
Longer spinning rods with elongated grip handles for two-handed casting are frequently employed for saltwater or steelhead and salmon fishing.
In theory, an ideal rod should gradually taper from butt to tip, be tight in all its joints (if any), and have a smooth, progressive taper, without 'dead spots'.
Modern design and fabrication techniques, along with advanced materials such as graphite, boron and fiberglass composites as well as stainless steel(see Emmrod)- have allowed rod makers to tailor both the shape and action of fishing rods for greater casting distance, accuracy, and fish-fighting qualities.
Fishing line weight is described in pounds of tensile force before the line parts.
Apart from adding the correct mass, depending on the kind of rod, this fitting also is the strongest known fitting, but also the most expensive one.
Other materials used, were Tonkin bamboo Calcutta reed, ash wood, hickory, iron wood, maple, lancewood, or malacca cane.
The action of tenkara rods has been standardized as a ratio of "how many parts are stiffer : how many tip parts bend more easily".
Originally produced to bring more excitement to the sport, ultra-light spin fishing is now widely used for crappie, trout, bass, bluegill ,Roach, Perch, Bream,Pumpkin-seed, Tench and other types of pan fish.
Jointed rods became common from the middle of the century and bamboo came to be used for the top section of the rod, giving it a much greater strength and flexibility.
They acted as excellent trolling rods, though the action was much too stiff for sportsmanlike playing of fish once hooked.
When the load is significantly less than the rod's recommended range the casting distance is significantly reduced, as the rod's action cannot launch the load.
Typically, a monofilament segment called a "leader" is tied to the fly line on one end and the fly on the other.
However, some rod & blank manufacturers try to simplify things towards their customers by describing the bending curve by associating them with their action.
The larger amount of the rod that flexes the 'slower' the rod.
Bamboo rods are the heaviest of the three, but people still use it for its feel.
However, by 1977, boron fiber technology had been muscled out by the cheaper material graphite and was no longer competitive in the market.
Also the bending lessens the effect of the leverage by shortening the distance of the lever (the rod).
Rods are best suited to the type of fishing they are intended for.
A stiff rod will demand lot's of power of the fisherman, while actually less power is put on the fish.
To prevent interference with casting movements, most fly rods usually have little or no butt section (handle) extending below the fishing reel.
This was until hilton glue, or cement  glue, was introduced because of its waterproof qualities.
Two-piece rods, joined by a ferrule, are very common, and if well engineered (especially with tubular glass or carbon fibre rods), sacrifice very little in the way of natural feel.
Spinning rods and reels are widely used in fishing for popular North American sport fish including bass, trout, pike and walleye.
These products were light, tough, and pliable.
Fly rods are, in modern manufacture, almost always built out of carbon graphite.
Generally there are three types of rods used today graphite, fiberglass, and bamboo rods.
The action can be influenced by the tapering of a rod, the length and the materials used for the blank.
Surf casting rods resemble oversized spinning or bait casting rods with long grip handles intended for two-handed casting techniques.
The bending curve isn't easily described by terms.
When a bite is registered and the fisherman strikes, the bending of the rod will dampen the strike to avoid line failure.
More modern flies are also tied with synthetic materials.
This changed in 1846 when American Samuel Phillippe introduced an imported fishing rod  the first six strips of Calcutta cane made in Bavaria where Phillippe was importing Violins that he passed off as his own hand work.
A carbon fibre rod is not necessarily better than a glass fibre rod; the two fibres have different properties, with their own tradeoffs.
Graphite, carbon, and sometimes fibreglass, or composites of these materials, are designed to slip into each other so that they open and close.
Handles and grips were generally of cork, wood, or wrapped cane.
Rods may be classified as Ultra-Light, Light, Medium-Light, Medium, Medium-Heavy, Heavy, Ultra-Heavy, or other similar combinations.
They are more commonly found among those anglers that fish in rugged areas such as on rocks or piers where potentially knocking the rod on hard objects is a greater possibility.
It is more difficult to say the same about rods from two different companies, since they could be made from material from completely different manufacturers.
Spin casting rods also have small eyes and, frequently, a forefinger grip trigger.
An action may be slow, medium, fast, or anything in between (e.g.
A rod can bend in different curves.
In this practice, there is no straight relationship anymore between the actual tapering and the bending curve.
The eyes on the spinning rods are generally, but not always, a special design to aid in making the end of each section stronger.
After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch which became a centre of production of fishing related products from the 1730s.
These rods usually carry 1 to 6 pound (4.5 to 27&nbsp;N) test fishing line.
Sometimes the term parabolic is more specific used to note the specific type of progressive bending curve as was found in the Parabolic series.
One of the most common flies used in tenkara fishing is the Sakasa Kebari.
Classic ice rods – still widely used – are simply stiff rod-like pieces of wood, usually with a carved wooden handle, a couple of line guides, and two opposing hooks mounted ahead of the handle to hand-wind the line around.
Modulus refers to the stiffness of the graphite, not the amount of material used or the number of graphite fibres incorporated into the sheets.
Running rings began to appear along the fishing rods, which gave anglers greater control over the cast line.
Care for telescopic fishing rods is much the same as other rods.
Spinning rods are made from graphite or fiberglass with a cork or PVC foam handle, and tend to be between 5 and 8.5 feet (1.5–2.6 m) in length.
Very often action is misused to note the bending curve instead of the speed.
In addition, other qualities must be incorporated in the graphite itself and the rod must be designed correctly to ensure the best performance and durability of the rod.
Lure weight is usually expressed in ounces or grams.
A rod with fast action can as easily have a progressive bending curve (from tip to butt) as a top only bending curve.
The eyes decrease in size from the handle to the tip, with the one nearest the handle usually much larger than the rest to allow less friction as the coiled line comes off the reel, and to gather the very large loops of line that come off the spinning reel's spool.
The rods themselves were also becoming increasingly sophisticated and specialized for different roles.
Typically a rod which uses a glass fibre composite blank is slower than a rod which uses a carbon fibre composite blank.
A carbon fibre rod is also much lighter than a glass fibre rod allowing for longer days of fishing.
The eyeless Tenkara style rods are also of this type and are typically made from carbon and/or graphite.
''Compleat Angler'' was written by Izaak Walton in 1653 (although Walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century) and described the fishing in the Derbyshire Wye.
When closing the rods make a slight twisting motion while pushing the sections together.
The graphite fibres are laid down in increasingly sophisticated patterns to keep the rod from flattening when stressed (usually referred to as hoop strength).
Ice rods are used to fish through holes in the cover ice of frozen lakes and ponds.
Fiberglass rods are the heaviest of the new chemically made material rods.
In simplified terms, a fast taper will bend a lot more in the tip area and not much in the butt part, a slow taper will tend to bend too much at the butt and delivers a weak rod.
A fishing rod's main function is to bend and deliver a certain resistance or power: While casting, the rod acts as a catapult: by moving the rod forward, the inertia of the mass of the bait or lure & rod itself, will load (bend) the rod and launch the lure or bait.
Graphite rods tend to be more sensitive, allowing the user to feel bites from fish easier.
the bending of the rod not only enables the fisherman to keep the line under tension, but the bending of the rod will also keep the fish under a constant pressure which will exhaust the fish and enable the fisherman to actually catch the fish.
The construction of a progressive bending, fast action rod is more difficult and more expensive to achieve.
See Fly rod building.
Rods for travelers were made with nickel-silver metal joints, or ferrules, that could be inserted into one another forming the rod.
The largest of sea rods are for use with sport fishing boats.
and each weight represents a standard weight in grains for the first 30 feet of the fly line established by the American Fishing Tackle Manufacturing Association.
Contrary to how it is often presented, action does not refer to the bending curve.
Also known as "power value" or "rod weight."
It was a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse; 6 verses were quoted from John Dennys's earlier work.
