File:ManamocBoats.JPG|A jukung with stabilising outriggers on a beach at Manamoc in the Philippines
While nearly  all decked vessels were mechanized, only one-third of the undecked fishing boats were powered, usually with outboard engines.
It was a massive round-bilged keel ship with a bluff bow and stern, the latter relatively high, and with a gallery.
The International Maritime Organization, convened in 1959 by the United Nations, is responsible for devising measures aimed at the prevention of accidents, including standards for ship design, construction, equipment, operation and manning.
It is difficult to estimate how many recreational fishing boats there are, although the number is high.
The seine net is stored and shot from the stern, and they may carry a power block.
According to the FAO, there are currently (2004) four million commercial fishing vessels.
Usually some form of fishing tackle is brought on board, such as hooks, lines, sinkers or nets.
The earliest purpose built fishing vessels were designed and made by David Allan in Leith in March 1875, when he converted a drifter to steam power.
Just about anything that will stay afloat can be called a recreational fishing boat, so long as a fisher periodically climbs aboard with the intent to catch a fish.
By 1000 A.D. the Norsemen were pre-eminent on the oceans.
During the 17th century, the British developed the dogger, an early type of sailing trawler or longliner, which commonly operated in the North Sea.
The net is stowed in a net bin at the stern, and is set over the stern from this position.
They used woven straps to lash planks together, and reeds or grass stuffed between the planks to seal the seams.
File:Coming in...two blues!
Twenty-one boats were completed at Granton, his last vessel being ''Degrave'' in 1886.
File:Small sport fishing boat.jpg|Small sport fishing boat
Unlike most commercial fishing vessels, recreational fishing boats are often not dedicated just to fishing.
The only difference is that, whereas the anchor seiner has the coiler and winch mounted transversally amidships, the Scottish seiner has them mounted transversally in the forward part of the vessel.
According to the FAO, in 2004 the world's fishing fleet consisted of 4 million vessels.
They range in size from small dinghies to large charter cruisers, and unlike commercial fishing vessels, are often not dedicated just to fishing.
They could carry a tonne of bait, three tonnes of salt, half a tonne each of food and firewood for the crew, and return with six tonnes of fish.
They are usually fitted with an outboard motor and a trolling motor.
* Fishing kayaks have gained popularity in recent years.
Then the bottom of the net is pursed (closed) underneath the fish shoal by hauling a wire running from the vessel through rings along the bottom of the net and then back to the vessel.
The rest were open vessels, of which two-thirds were traditional craft propelled by sails and oars.
Doggers were slow but sturdy, capable of fishing in the rough conditions of the North Sea.
The fifie was also used as a herring drifter along the east coast of Scotland from the 1850s until well into the 20th century.
** Tuna purse seiners are large purse seiners, normally over 45 metres, equipped to handle large and heavy purse seines for tuna.
Some feature rigid frames derived from the white water rafting industry.
* Freshwater fishing boats account for approximately one third of all registered boats in the USA.
They were well designed for the crew with a large building that contained the wheelhouse and the deckhouse.
An example of their skill is the Khufu ship, a  vessel  in length entombed at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza around 2,500 BC and found intact in 1954.
Although fishing vessel designed increasingly began to converge around the world, local conditions still often led the development of different types of fishing boats.
** European seiners have their bridge and accommodation located more to the after part of the vessel with the working deck amidships.
** Anchor seiners have the wheelhouse and accommodation aft and the working deck amidships, thus resembling side trawlers.
In the 15th century, the Dutch developed a type of seagoing herring drifter that became a blueprint for European fishing boats.
By contrast, nearly all decked vessels were mechanized.
These ships served as a basis for the expansion of 'super trawlers' around the world in the following decades.
''Lord Nelson'' followed in 1961, installed with vertical plate freezers that had been researched and built at the Torry Research Station.
File:Madagascar - Traditional fishing pirogue.jpg|Traditional fishing pirogue with sail from Madagascar
The facilities incorporated many innovations of the time - the dock gates and cranes were operated by hydraulic power, and the  Grimsby Dock Tower was built to provide a head of water with sufficient pressure by William Armstrong.
These early vessels had limited capability; they could float and move on water, but were not suitable for use any great distance from the shoreline.
** Drum seiners have the same layout as American seiners except a drum is mounted on the stern and used instead of the power block.
Steam trawlers were introduced at Grimsby and Hull in the 1880s.
It also had a steam capstan on the foredeck near the mast for hauling nets.
These boats are used by artisan fishers.
Big game fishing started as a sport after the invention of the motorized boat.
With the tremendous expansion in the fishing industry, the Grimsby Dock Company was formed in 1846.
* Bass boats are small aluminium or fibreglass boats used in lakes and rivers in the U.S. for fishing bass and other panfish.
Scandinavians continued to develop better ships, incorporating iron and other metal into the design and developing oars for propulsion.
The steam drifter was not used in the herring fishery until 1897.
The great trawling fleet that built up at Brixham, earned the village the title of 'Mother of Deep-Sea Fisheries'.
File:First known photo of Koreans 1871.jpg|Fishing junk, 1871
The development of fishing boats took place in parallel with the development of boats built for trade and war.
For example, yoles from the Orkney island of Stroma were built in the same way as the Norse boats.
They were usually about  than the sailing vessels so they could carry more nets and catch more fish.
They weighed 40-50 tons and travelled at .
Large numbers of artisan fishing boats are still in use, particularly in developing countries with long productive marine coastlines.
The Manx nobby was used around the Isle of Man as a herring drifter.
Nearly all of these decked vessels are mechanised, and  40,000 of them are over 100 tons.
They could travel faster and further and with greater freedom from weather, wind and tide.
A crew of some two dozen paddled the wooden Hjortspring boat across the Baltic Sea long before the rise of the Roman Empire.
The elegant Brixham trawler spread across the world, influencing fishing fleets everywhere.
File:Drawing of a large purse seiner.gif|Large purse seiner
The ship was about 20 metres long and displaced between 60 and 100 tons.
** Asian seiners – In Asia, the seine netter usually has the wheelhouse forward and the working deck aft, in the manner of a stern trawler.
They were designed to be carried on mother ships and used for fishing cod at the Grand Banks.
Steam fishing boats had many advantages.
These records often omit smaller boats where registration is not required or where fishing licences are granted by provincial or municipal authorities.
Decked areas forward and aft probably provided accommodation, storage and a cooking area.
Before the First World War, building costs were between £3,000 and £4,000, at least three times the cost of the sail boats.
Allan built a total of ten boats at Leith between 1877 and 1881.
It is difficult to estimate the number of recreational fishing boats.
File:Saint-Cassien pecheur.jpg|Angling from a small inflatable on Saint-Cassien's lake, France
Trading boats, such as the knarrs, were wide to allow large cargo storage.
File:Jantar.jpg|Indian clinker fishing boats
The dock covered  and was formally opened by Queen Victoria in 1854 as the first modern fishing port.
The kayak has long been a means of accessing fishing grounds.
Early fishing vessels included rafts, dugout canoes, and boats constructed from a frame covered with  hide or tree bark, along the lines of a coracle.
Raiding boats, such as the longship, were long and narrow and very fast.
Many have sails, but they do not usually use much, or any mechanised or electronic gear.
During the Cold War, some countries fitted fishing trawlers with additional electronic gear so they could be used as spy ships to monitor the activities of other countries.
Commercial fishing is a high risk industry, and countries are introducing regulations governing the construction and operation of fishing vessels.
The term is fluid, since most recreational boats are also used for fishing from time to time.
Their engines were mechanically inefficient and took up much space, while fuel and fitting out costs were very high.
The Brixham trawler that evolved there was of a sleek build and had a tall gaff rig, which gave the vessel sufficient speed to make long distance trips out to the fishing grounds in the ocean.
In 1878 he completed ''Forward'' and ''Onward'', steam-powered trawlers for sale.
They are usually equipped with a skiff.
The pursing winch is normally positioned at the forward part of the working deck.
The vessels they used for fishing were scaled down versions of their cargo boats.
They are mainly used in Canada and USA.
She was of wooden construction with two masts and carried a gaff rigged main and mizen using booms, and a single foresail.
As the herring fishing industry declined, steam boats became too expensive.
The following classification follows the FAO, who classify commercial fishing vessels by the gear they use.
Sport fishing boats range from 25 to 80 feet or more, and can be powered by large outboard engines or inboard diesels.
(2).jpg|A larger charter big game rig in Bermuda.
Around 4000 B.C., Egyptians were building long narrow boats powered by many oarsmen.
Because less time was spent travelling to and from the fishing grounds, more time could be spent fishing.
The first purpose built stern trawler was ''Fairtry'' built in 1953 at Aberdeen.
A crows nest or tuna tower is positioned at the top of the mast, outfitted with the control and manoeuvre devices.
File:Catamaran india.jpg|Indian split-log fishing canoe
The 200-mile fishing limit has changed fishing patterns and, in recent times, fishing boats are becoming more specialised and standardised.
File:Albatun Dod.jpg|The Spanish tuna purse seiner, ''Albatun Dos'', near Victoria, Seychelles
The power block is usually attached to a boom from a mast located behind the superstructure.
On the deck are three drum purse seine winches and a power block, with other specific winches to handle the heavy boom and net.
American seiners use Triplerollers.
These figures for small fishing vessels are probably under reported.
The first herring buss was probably built in Hoorn around 1415.
According to the FAO, at the end of 2004, the world fishing fleet consisted of about 4 million vessels, of which 2.7 million were undecked (open) boats.
Of the decked vessels, 86 percent are found in Asia, 7.8 percent in Europe, 3.8 percent in North and Central America, 1.3 percent in Africa, 0.6 percent in South America and 0.4 percent in Oceania.
* Pontoon boats have also become popular in recent years.
They have swivel chairs for the anglers, storage bins for fishing tackle, and a tank with recirculating water for caught fish.
The seiner circles the shoal with a deep curtain of netting, possibly using bow thrusters for better manoeuvrability.
The boats built in the 20th century only had a mizzen sail, which was used to help steady the boat when its nets were out.
At the other extreme, two-thirds (1.8 million) of the undecked boats are traditional craft of various types, powered only by sail and oars.
Prior to the 1950s there was little standardisation of fishing boats.
The Philippines have reported a similar number of small fishing boats.
There are also specialised gears that can target demersal species.
About 1.3 million of these are decked vessels with enclosed areas.
Many of the boats in this area are double-outrigger craft, consisting of a narrow main hull with two attached outriggers, commonly known as ''jukung'' in Indonesia and ''banca'' in the Philippines.
They were small, shallow-draft boats, usually about five to seven metres (15 to 22&nbsp;feet) long.
Many localities around the world have developed their own traditional types of fishing boats, adapted to use local materials suitable for boat building and to the specific requirements of the fisheries and sea conditions in their area.
Fibreglass is used increasingly in smaller fishing vessels up to 25 metres (100 tons), while steel is usually used on vessels above 25 metres.
The higher expenses meant that more steam drifters were company-owned or jointly owned.
A purse line winch is located amidships near the hauling station, near the side where the rings are taken on board.
The boats had narrow, high funnels so that the steam and thick coal smoke was released high above the deck and away from the fishermen.
European seiners are most common in waters fished by European nations.
* Saltwater fishing boats vary widely in size and can be specialized for certain species of fish.
The Banks dories appeared in the 1830s.
The main disadvantage of the steam boats, though, was their high operating costs.
This revolutionary design made large scale trawling in the ocean possible for the first time, resulting in a massive migration of fishermen from the ports in the South of England, to villages further north, such as Scarborough, Hull, Grimsby, Harwich and Yarmouth, that were points of access to the large fishing grounds in the Atlantic Ocean.
Over the next 1,000 years, they made a series of remarkable advances in boat design.
The earliest steam powered fishing boats first appeared in the 1870s and used the trawl system of fishing as well as lines and drift nets.
As the ship pulled its nets over the stern, it could lift out a much greater haul of up to 60 tons.
To cover these high costs, they needed to fish for longer seasons.
Larger boats, purpose-built with recreational fishing in mind, usually have large, open cockpits at the stern, designed for convenient fishing.
These boats had a crew of twelve made up of a skipper, driver, fireman (to look after the boiler) and nine deck hands.
The Scandinavian innovations influenced fishing boat design long after the Viking period came to an end.
Twelve trawlers went on to form the nucleus of the German fishing fleet.
In western Europe, fishing vessel design is focused on compact boats with high catching power.
According to a newspaper report at that time, the  ''Crete'' had "a deep cockpit, a chair fitted for landing big fish and leather pockets for placing the pole."
The main types of purse seiners are the American seiners, the European seiners and the Drum seiners.
Sophisticated electronics, such as echosounders, sonar, and track plotters, may be used are used to search for and track schools; assessing their size and movement and keeping in touch with the school while it is surrounded with the seine net.
File:Baleteshore.JPG|Traditional Philippines fishing boat with outriggers
These canoes were often cut from coniferous tree logs, using simple stone tools.
They were also sufficiently robust to be able to tow large trawls in deep water.
The ship was much larger than any other trawlers then in operation and inaugurated the era of the 'super trawler'.
Flounder boats, for example, have flat bottoms for a shallow draft and are used in protected, shallow waters.
The remaining 1.8 million boats were traditional craft of various types, operated by sail and oars.
The ship type buss has a long history.
Typically 8–12&nbsp;ft in length, these inflatable craft can be assembled quickly and easily.
The busses used long drifting gill nets to catch the herring.
The small village of Grimsby grew to become the 'largest fishing port in the world' by the mid 19th century.
These boats allow one or two fishermen to get into small rivers or lakes that would have difficulty accommodating larger boats.
The common coastal boat of the time was the wherry and the merging of the wherry design with the simplified flat bottom of the bateau resulted in the birth of the dory.
** American seiners have their bridge and accommodation placed forward with the working deck aft.
For example, Indonesia has reported about 700,000 fishing boats, 25 percent of which are dugout canoes, and half of which are without motors.
These were large boats, usually  in length with a beam of around .
It was known around 1000 AD in Scandinavia as a ''bǘza'', a robust variant of the Viking longship.
File:Vietnamese fishing boat 05.jpg|Traditional Vietnamese fishing boat
These funnels were nicknamed ''woodbines'' because they looked like the popular brand of cigarette.
File:The 'Blue Aquarius' off Bangor - geograph.org.uk - 1024552.jpg|
Fish are caught for recreational purposes from boats which range from dugout canoes, kayaks, rafts, pontoon boats and small dinghies to runabouts, cabin cruisers and cruising yachts to large, hi-tech and luxurious big game rigs.
The nets would be retrieved at night and the crews of eighteen to thirty men would set to gibbing, salting and barrelling the catch on the broad deck.
Purpose built game fishing boats appeared shortly after.
This vessel was ''Pioneer LH854''.
A very heavy boom which carries the power block is fitted at the mast.
Then they built boats large enough to cross the oceans.
In 1890 it was estimated that there were 20,000 men on the North Sea.
The oldest boats found by archaeological excavation are dugout canoes dating back to the Neolithic Period around 7,000-9,000 years ago.
They developed cotton-made sails to help their boats go faster with less work.
These boats had sails and oarsmen, and were used for travel and trade.
Designs could vary between ports and boatyards.
* Purse seiners are very effective at targeting aggregating pelagic species near the surface.
Lightweight and versatile, with high sides, a flat bottom and sharp bows, they were easy and cheap to build.
They were used mainly for fishing and hunting.
This was important, as the market was growing quickly at the beginning of the 20th century.
The Lancashire nobby was used down the north west coast of England as a shrimp trawler from 1840 until World War II.
The dogger would also have carried a small open boat for maintaining lines and rowing ashore.
Their size can range widely depending on the type of trips run and the geographical location.
** Scottish seiners are basically configured the same as anchor seiners.
File:Gambian fishing boats.jpg|Fishing boats in Gambia.
An anchor would have allowed extended periods fishing in the same spot, in waters up to 18 metres deep.
Most other types of boats end up being used for fishing on occasion.
In recent decades, commercial fishing vessels have been increasingly equipped with electronic aids, such as radio navigation aids and fish finders.
In 1877, he built the first screw propelled steam trawler in the world.
Of these, 1.3 million were decked vessels with enclosed areas.
These trawlers were sold to fishermen around Europe, including from the Netherlands and Scandinavia.
* Charter boats are often privately operated, purpose-built fishing boats, and host fishing trips for paying clients.
File:Jangada-Tibau.jpg|The elegant jangada on the coast off Mossoró in Brazil
They were skilled seamen and boat builders, with clinker-built boat designs that varied according to the type of boat.
Most of these were sold to foreign owners in France, Belgium, Spain and the West Indies.
A precursor to the dory type was the early French bateau type, a flat bottom boat with straight sides used as early as 1671 on the Saint Lawrence River.
Charles Frederick Holder, a marine biologist and early conservationist, is credited with founding the sport in 1898.
Dories appeared in New England fishing towns sometime after the early 18th century.
People living near Kongens Lyngby in Denmark, came up with the idea of segregated hull compartments, which allowed the size of boats to gradually be increased.
The FAO compiles these figures largely from national registers.
Artisan fishing boats are usually small traditional fishing boats, appropriately designed for use on their local inland waters or coasts.
A 7000-year-old seagoing boat made from reeds and tar has been found in Kuwait.
