In 1898 Dutch and French were declared equal languages in laws and Royal orders.
Ghent, Bruges, Ypres and the Franc of Bruges formed the Four Members, a form of parliament that exercised considerable power in Flanders.
In 1556 Charles V abdicated due to ill health (he suffered from crippling gout).
A study in 1918 demonstrated that in the first 88 years of its existence, 80% of the Belgian GNP was invested in Wallonia.
The southern bourgeoisie mainly was Roman Catholic, in contrast to the mainly Protestant north; large parts of the southern bourgeoisie also primarily spoke French rather than Dutch.
; Rise of the Flemish Movement
However, there's freedom of education in Flanders, which doesn't only mean that every pupil can choose his/her preferred school, but also that every organisation can found a school, and even be subsidised when abiding the different rules.
The demonym associated with Flanders is Fleming, while the corresponding adjective is Flemish.
Extensions to personal matters less directly associated with language comprise sports, health policy (curative and preventive medicine), and assistance to individuals (protection of youth, social welfare, aid to families, immigrant assistance services, etc.)
Eddy Merckx is regarded as one of the greatest cyclists of all time, with five victories in the Tour de France and numerous other cycling records.
The significance of the County of Flanders and its counts eroded through time, but the designation remained in a very broad sense.
The (Belgian) ''laicist'', or secularist, constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the various governments in general respect this right in practice.
The remaining parts of Flanders came under the rule of the counts of neighbouring Hainaut in 1191.
The resulting suffering is still remembered by Flemish organizations during the yearly Yser pilgrimage in Diksmuide at the monument of the Yser Tower.
The only parts of historical Flanders situated within modern-day Flanders are the provinces West Flanders and East Flanders.
The Dutch (as they later became known) had managed to reclaim enough of Spanish-controlled Flanders to close off the river Scheldt, effectively cutting Antwerp off from its trade routes.
During the 19th and 20th centuries, it became increasingly commonplace to refer to the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium as "Flanders".
Jean-Marie Pfaff, a former Belgian goalkeeper, is considered one of the greatest in the history of football (soccer).
Lastly, Concentra publishes Gazet van Antwerpen and Het Belang van Limburg.
Mostly students claim to be proud of their nationality, with 90% of them staying so.
These entities were merged, although geographically the Flemish Community, which has a broader cultural mandate, covers Brussels, whereas the Flemish Region does not.
Antwerp, Ghent, Bruges and Leuven are the largest cities of the Flemish Region.
The other three ones were directed by Stijn Coninx.
In the future county of Flanders, the main Belgic tribe in Roman times was the Menapii, but also on the coast were the Marsacii and Morini.
''dat zeggen en dat zweren wij:''
For example, the Dutch word "punaise" (English: ''Drawing pin'') is derived directly from the French language.
But it was not until 1878 that Dutch was allowed to be used for official purposes in Flanders (see language legislation in Belgium), although French remained the only official language in Belgium.
Flanders and Brabant, due to these events, went into a period of relative decline from the time of the Thirty Years War.
Roughly, the Flemish Region is responsible for territorial issues in a broad sense, including economy, employment, agriculture, water policy, housing, public works, energy, transport, the environment, town and country planning, nature conservation, credit, and foreign trade.
As a result, up until this day Flemish Nationalism is often associated with right-wing and sometimes fascist ideologies.
After the defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte at the 1815 Battle of Waterloo in Waterloo, Brabant, sovereignty over the Austrian Netherlands – Belgium minus the East Cantons and Luxembourg – was given by the Congress of Vienna (1815) to the United Netherlands (Dutch: ''Verenigde Nederlanden''), the state that briefly existed under Sovereign Prince William I of Orange Nassau, the latter King William I of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, after the French Empire was driven out of the Dutch territories.
It borders France to the west, the Netherlands to the north and east, and Wallonia to the south.
'''Original''' from ''kleengedichtjes'' (1860?)
Voeren is an exclave of Flanders between Wallonia and the Netherlands, while Baarle-Hertog in Flanders forms a complicated series of enclaves and exclaves with Baarle-Nassau in the Netherlands.
Mirroring the historical political conflicts between the freethought and Catholic segments of the population, the Flemish educational system is split into a secular branch controlled by the communities, the provinces, or the municipalities, and a subsidised religious—mostly Catholic—branch.
Particularly the Flemish Block/Flemish Interest has seen electoral success roughly around the turn of the century, and the New Flemish Alliance during the last few elections, becoming even the largest party in the 2010 federal elections.
Since independence, Catholicism, counterbalanced by strong freethought movements, has had an important role in Belgium's politics, since the 20th century in Flanders mainly via the Christian trade union ACV and the Christian Democratic and Flemish party (CD&V).
The Antwerp-based BASF plant is the largest BASF-base outside Germany, and accounts on its own for about 2% of Belgian exports.
The five most successful Flemish films were ''Loft'' (2008; 1,186,071 visitors), ''Koko Flanel'' (1990; 1,082,000 tickets sold), ''Hector'' (1987; 933,000 tickets sold), ''Daens'' (1993; 848,000 tickets sold) and ''De Zaak Alzheimer'' (2003; 750,000 tickets sold).
Flemish provinces each have up to two TV channels as well.
The County of Flanders started to take control of the neighbouring County of Brabant during the life of Louis II, Count of Flanders (1330-1384), who fought his sister-in-law Joanna, Duchess of Brabant for control of it.
Initially, the modernization relied heavily on food processing and textile.
Other industrial and service activities in Antwerp include car manufacturing, telecommunications, photographic products.
The occupying German authorities took several Flemish-friendly measures.
By the first century BC Germanic languages had become prevalent.
The entire area passed in 1384 to the dukes of Burgundy, in 1477 to the Habsburg dynasty, and in 1556 to the kings of Spain.
The main imports are food products, machinery, rough diamonds, petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals, clothing and accessories, and textiles.
Several Flemish parties still advocate for more Flemish autonomy, some even for Flemish independence (see Partition of Belgium), whereas the French-speakers would like to keep the current state as it is.
For example, the term "Flemish Primitives", now outdated in English but used in French, Flemish and other languages, is a synonym for "Early Netherlandish painting", and it is not uncommon to see Mosan art categorized as Flemish art.
The Reformation resulted in consecutive but overlapping waves of reform: a Lutheran, followed by a militant Anabaptist, then a Mennonite, and finally a Calvinistic movement.
Steiner, Montessori, or Freinet) or serve the Jewish and Protestant minorities.
The steel industry remained in relatively good shape.
It supervises the provinces, municipalities, and intercommunal utility companies.
The Brussels Capital Region is an enclave within the Flemish Region.
; French Revolution and Napoleonic France (1795–1815)
The Protestant King of the Netherlands, William I rapidly started the industrialisation of the southern parts of the Kingdom.
''’t en zal, ’t en zal,''
They were followed by a younger generation, including Paul van Ostaijen and Gaston Burssens, who ''activated'' the Flemish Movement.
Brussels is a part of Flanders as far as community matters are concerned, but does not belong to the Flemish Region.
In Flemish, there are also less vowels pronounced as diphthongs.
Belgium is a founding member of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, which evolved into the present-day European Union.
Roughly, the Flemish Community exercises competences originally oriented towards the individuals of the Community's language: culture (including audiovisual media), education, and the use of the language.
The rest of the border is shared with the Netherlands (Zeelandic Flanders, North Brabant and Limburg) in the north and east, and with France (French Flanders) and the North Sea in the west.
The 1920 Summer Olympics were held in Antwerp.
It should however be noted that—at least for the Catholic schools—the religious authorities have very limited power over these schools, neither do the schools have a lot of power on their own.
Kim Gevaert and Tia Hellebaut are notable track and field stars from Flanders.
Those polls are not yet representative, but they point to a significant long-term trend.
Widely read by the older generations, they are considered somewhat old-fashioned by present-day critics.
Flemish language purists have lobbied to accept the word "duimspijker" (literally: ''thumb spike'') as official Dutch, though the Dutch Language Union never accepted it as official Dutch.
The highest population density is found in the area circumscribed by the Brussels-Antwerp-Ghent-Leuven agglomerations that surround Mechelen and is known as the Flemish Diamond, in other important urban centres as Bruges and Kortrijk to the west, and notable centres Turnhout and Hasselt to the east.
On 17 August 1585, Antwerp fell.
In 2012, the Flemish government drafted a "Charter for Flanders" (''Handvest voor Vlaanderen'') of which the first article says ''"Vlaanderen is een deelstaat van de federale Staat België en maakt deel uit van de Europese Unie."''
Still widely read and translated into other languages (including English) are the novels of authors such as Willem Elsschot, Louis Paul Boon and Hugo Claus.
Although arts remained at a relatively impressive level for another century with Peter Paul Rubens (1577–1640) and Anthony van Dyck, Flanders experienced a loss of its former economic and intellectual power under Spanish, Austrian, and French rule, with heavy taxation and rigid imperial political control compounding the effects of industrial stagnation and Spanish-Dutch and Franco-Austrian conflict.
In the second half of the 20th century, however, Flanders' economy modernised rapidly, and today Flanders is significantly more wealthy than its southern counterpart.
In French Flanders, French is now the native language of the majority of the population and the only official language.
French is widely known in Flanders, with 59% claiming to know French according to a survey conducted by the Université catholique de Louvain in Louvain-la-Neuve and published in June 2006.
One of the first was the nationalist People's Union, of which the right nationalist Flemish Block (now Flemish Interest) split off, and which later dissolved into the now-defunct Spirit or Social Liberal Party, moderate nationalism rather left of the spectrum, on the one hand, and the New Flemish Alliance (N-VA), more conservative but independentist, on the other hand.
However, sociological studies show no parallel between the rise of nationalist parties and popular support for their agenda.
The Tungri especially were thought to have links to Germanic tribes east of the Rhine.
Linguistically, the tribes in this area were under Celtic influence in the south, and Germanic influence in the east, but there is disagreement about what language was spoken locally, which may even have been an intermediate "Nordwestblock" language related to both.
The French-speaking bourgeoisie showed very little respect for the Dutch-speaking part of the population.
At the creation of the Belgian state, French was the only official language.
Historically it was a Dutch-speaking region and there is still a minority of Dutch-speakers living there.
However, during the last half century, many new political parties were founded in Flanders.
This resulted also in some smaller school systems follow 'methodical pedagogies' (e.g.
The largest Muslim group is the Moroccans, while the second largest is the Turks.
Sovereignty over Zeeuws Vlaanderen, south of the Westerscheldt river delta, was left with the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which was allowed to levy a toll on all traffic to Antwerp harbour until 1863.
Meanwhile, Protestantism had reached the Low Countries.
These were the most northerly continental provinces of the Roman empire.
Flanders shares its borders with Wallonia in the south, Brussels being an enclave within the Flemish Region.
Polders are areas of land, close to or below sea level that have been reclaimed from the sea, from which they are protected by dikes or, a little further inland, by fields that have been drained with canals.
In the Early modern period, the term Flanders was associated with the southern part of the Low Countries: the Southern Netherlands.
Other parties are the leftist alternative/ecological Green party; the short-lived anarchistic libertarian spark ROSSEM and more recently the conservative-right liberal List Dedecker, founded by Jean-Marie Dedecker, and the socialist Workers' Party.
Resentment grew both between the Roman Catholics from the south and the Protestants from the north and among the powerful liberal bourgeoisie from the south and their more moderate colleagues from the north.
Created in the year 862 as a feudal fief in West Francia, the County of Flanders was divided when its western districts fell under French rule in the late 12th century.
''Kvraagetaan'' by the Fixkes holds the current record for longest time at #1 on the chart.
French enjoys a limited official recognition in a dozen municipalities along the borders with French-speaking Wallonia, and a large recognition in the bilingual Brussels Region.
Most municipalities are made up of several former municipalities, now called ''deelgemeenten''.
Brussels, an enclave within the province of Flemish Brabant, is not divided into any province nor is it part of any.
The ''Beeldenstorm'' started in what is now French Flanders, with open-air sermons () that spread through the Low Countries, first to Antwerp and Ghent, and from there further east and north.
The German-speaking Community of Belgium, also close to Voeren, does not border Flanders either.
Per capita GDP at purchasing power parity was 23% above the EU average.
Recent governments (such as Verhofstadt I Government) have transferred certain federal competences to the regional governments.
This ended the Eighty Years' War for the (from now on) Southern Netherlands.
With a writer of Hendrik Conscience's stature, Flemish literature rose ahead of French literature in Belgium's early history.
Flemish weavers had gone over to Worstead and North Walsham in Norfolk in the 12th century and established the woolen industry.
First the fall of Antwerp to the Spanish and later also the closing of the Scheldt were causes of a considerable emigration of Antverpians.
As mentioned above, Flemish institutions such as the Flemish Parliament and Government, represent the Flemish Community and the Flemish Region.
According to Luc-Normand Tellier "It is estimated that the port of Antwerp was earning the Spanish crown seven times more revenues than the Americas."
While the Dutch prefer to stick with French spelling, as it differentiates Dutch more from the neighbouring German.
Its main trading partners are Germany, the Netherlands, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, the United States, and Spain.
All of these events led to a silent uprising in Flanders against the French-speaking domination.
For the subsidised schools, the main costs such as the teacher's wages and building maintenance completely borne by the Flemish government.
Luther, an Augustinian himself, had taught some of the monks, and his works were in print by 1518.
In 1930 the first Flemish university was opened.
Since 1922, Belgium and Luxembourg have been a single trade market within a customs and currency union—the Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union.
Resulting in the ethnic differences and the well-known waterfall system: pupils start high in the perceived hierarchy, and then drop towards more professional oriented directions or "easier" schools when they can't handle the pressure any longer.
In cycling, the Tour of Flanders is considered one of the five "Monuments".
The government consists of up to a maximum of eleven members and is presided by a Minister-President, currently Geert Bourgeois (New Flemish Alliance) leading a coalition of his party (N-VA) with Christen-Democratisch en Vlaams (CD&V) and Open Vlaamse Liberalen en Democraten (Open VLD).
Popular TV series are for example ''Thuis'' and ''F.C.
But the current lack of French outside the educational context makes it hard to maintain a decent level of French.
In the central part of modern Belgium were the Nervii and in the east were the Tungri.
The 2012 provincial and municipal elections however continued the trend of N-VA becoming the biggest party in Flanders.
The French-speaking officers often gave orders in French only, followed by "et pour les Flamands, la même chose!
Belgium was one of the centres of the 19th century industrial revolution but Flanders was at first overtaken by French-speaking Wallonia.
Over the first half of the 16th century Antwerp grew to become the second-largest European city north of the Alps by 1560.
Flanders has figured prominently in European history.
("Flanders is a component state of the federal State of Belgium and is part of the European Union").
Flanders has two main geographical regions: the coastal Yser basin plain in the north-west and a central plain.
While Spain was at war with England, the rebels from the north, strengthened by refugees from the south, started a campaign to reclaim areas lost to Philip II's Spanish troops.
In the Northern Netherlands however, the mass emigration from Flanders and Brabant became an important driving force behind the Dutch Golden Age.
Flanders is home to several science and technology institutes, such as IMEC, VITO, Flanders DC and Flanders DRIVE.
The trend continued during the 2009 regional elections, where CD&V and N-VA were the clear winners in Flanders, and N-VA became even the largest party in Flanders and Belgium during the 2010 federal elections, followed by the longest-ever government formation after which the Di Rupo I Government was formed excluding N-VA.
; The Eighty Years' War and its consequences
The '''Flemish Community''' covers both the Flemish Region and, together with the French Community, the Brussels-Capital Region.
Now, Flanders extends over the northern part of Belgium, including Belgian Limburg (corresponding closely to the medieval County of Loon), and the Belgian parts of the medieval Duchy of Brabant.
''This we hope, for this we hanker:''
Much of Flanders is agriculturally fertile and densely populated, with a population density of almost 500 people per square kilometer (1,200 per square mile).
(The commune of Plombières, majority French speaking, lies between them.)
Under the Roman empire this became an administrative province, but much of modern Belgium eventually became part of Germania Inferior.
''It shan't, It shan't,''
After World War II, the differences between Dutch-speaking and French-speaking Belgians became clear in a number of conflicts, such as the Royal Question, the question whether King Leopold III should return (which most Flemings supported but not the Walloons) and the use of Dutch in the Catholic University of Leuven.
The United Provinces (the Northern Netherlands) fought on until 1648 – the Peace of Westphalia.
After the war, collaborators (or people who were ''Zwart'', "Black" during the war) were prosecuted and punished, among them many Flemish Nationalists whose main political goal had been the emancipation of Flanders.
But the northern part of the provinces signed the Union of Utrecht and settled in 1581 the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands.
The area of the Flemish Community is represented on the maps above, including the area of the Brussels-Capital Region (hatched on the relevant map).
", meaning "and for the Flemish, the same thing!"
Some famous Flemish writers of the early 20th century wrote in French, including Nobel Prize winners (1911) Maurice Maeterlinck and Emile Verhaeren.
The nobility, mainly coming from the south, became more and more estranged from their northern colleagues.
The Flemish economy is strongly export-oriented, in particular of high value-added goods.
Supporters of the Flemish Movement even call it a nation and pursue Flemish independence, but most people (approximately 75%) living in Flanders say they are proud to be Belgian and opposed to the dissolution of Belgium.
Since these parties were promised more rights for the Flemings by the German government during World War II, many of them collaborated with the Nazi regime.
Flemish pupils are also obligated to follow English lessons as their third language.
He inherited the Seventeen Provinces (1506), Spain (1516) with its colonies and in 1519 was elected Holy Roman Emperor.
Members of the Flemish Parliament who were elected in the Brussels Region cannot vote on affairs belonging to the competences of the Flemish Region.
Flanders now became part of the Kingdom of Belgium, which was recognized by the major European Powers on 20 January 1831.
Healthcare is a federal matter, but the Flemish Government is responsible for care, health education and preventive care.
''this we say and this we vow:''
Nevertheless, during the 19th and 20th centuries it became increasingly commonplace to use the term "Flanders" to refer to the entire Dutch-speaking part of Belgium, stretching all the way to the River Maas.
Philip II, a devout Catholic and self-proclaimed protector of the Counter-Reformation, suppressed Calvinism in Flanders, Brabant and Holland (what is now approximately Belgian Limburg was part of the Bishopric of Liège and was Catholic ''de facto'').
Its secondary school students consistently rank among the top three for mathematics and science.
It is one of the communities, regions and language areas of Belgium.
Historically, the name referred to the County of Flanders (Flandria), which around AD 1000 stretched from the Strait of Dover to the Scheldt estuary.
This makes the Flemish people very proficient in English (only Sweden and Malta have a better knowledge of English as a second language).
The official language for all Flemish institutions is Dutch.
Its nine ''deelgemeenten'' have a special status and are called districts, which have an elected council and a college.
The ambiguity between this wider area and that of the County (or the Belgian parts thereof), still remains.
At first sight, ''Flemish culture'' is defined by its language and its gourmandic mentality, as compared to the more Calvinistic Dutch culture.
Other "Flanders Classics" races include ''Dwars door Vlaanderen'' and Gent–Wevelgem.
French became the only official language in Belgium and all secondary and higher education in the Dutch language was abolished.
There is still a French-speaking minority in Flanders, especially in the municipalities with language facilities, along the language border and the Brussels periphery (Vlaamse Rand), though many of them are French-speakers that migrated to Flanders in recent decades.
The front line at the end of this war stabilized and became the current border between present-day Belgium and the Netherlands.
The United Kingdom of the Netherlands was born.
The County of Loon, approximately the modern Flemish province of Limburg, remained independent under the lordship of the Archbishop of Liège until the French Revolution, but surrounded by the Burgundians.
They exert, among others, all those cultural competences that outside Brussels fall under the provinces.
Though interpreted by many Flemish nationalists as a statement, this phrase is merely a quotation from the Belgian constitution and has no further legal value whatsoever.
''Dat hopen, dat begeren wij:''
The Flemish government agency for sports is Bloso.
Because of the contribution of the Flemish exiles to this transformation, the exodus is sometimes described as "''creating a new Antwerp''".
These institutions are independent from the educational, cultural and social institutions that depend directly on the Flemish Government.
Many Flemings are also able to speak French, children in Flanders generally get their first French lessons in the 5th primary year (normally around 10 years).
Among the wealthy traders of Antwerp, the Lutheran beliefs of the German Hanseatic traders found appeal, perhaps partly for economic reasons.
The schools get certain reputations amongst parents and employers.
Kim Clijsters (as well as the French-speaking Belgian Justine Henin) was Player of the Year twice in the Women's Tennis Association as she was ranked the number one female tennis player.
Since 2006, certain polls have started showing Flemish independence.
Obligatory (French) army service for all men aged 16–25 was one of the main reasons for the people's uprising against the French in 1798, known as the ''Boerenkrijg'' (''Peasants' War''), with the heaviest fighting in the Campine area.
On 25 August 1830 (after the showing of the opera 'La Muette de Portici' of Daniel Auber in Brussels) the Belgian Revolution sparked off and became a fact.
As such, the proficiency of French is declining.
The public radio and television broadcaster in Flanders is VRT, which operates the TV channels één, Canvas, Ketnet, OP12 and (together with the Netherlands) BVN.
As a consequence, a very sophisticated culture developed, with impressive achievements in the arts and architecture, rivaling those of northern Italy.
However, by the 1840s the textile industry of Flanders was in severe crisis and there was famine in Flanders (1846–50).
In practice, the Flemish Community and Region together form a single body, with its own parliament and government, as the Community legally absorbed the competences of the Region.
All the political parties that advocated a significant increase of Flemish autonomy gained votes as well as seats in the Belgian federal parliament.
This resulted also in the establishment of a Flemish Parliament and Government.
In 1815 the Dutch Senate was reinstated (Dutch: ''Eerste Kamer der Staaten Generaal'').
Other, much smaller ports are Ghent, Bruges-Zeebrugge and Ostend, the last two being located at the Belgian coast.
; United Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815–1830)
as a teacher), these unofficial purist translations are found more often in Flemish texts.
Antwerp has a population of more than 500,000 citizens and is the largest city, Ghent has a population of 250,000 citizens, followed by Bruges with 120,000 citizens and Leuven counts almost 100,000 citizens.
