We girls are at our wits' end to know what to do."
She would be expected to keep a low profile on social occasions and ought not to be the object of male attention.
To enhance the view, some flappers applied rouge to their knees.
It wasn’t until the Wall Street stock market crash of 1929 that the roaring 20’s era of glitz and glamour came to an end, and with it, the flapper dress.
Under this influence, the meaning of the term changed somewhat, to apply to "independent, pleasure-seeking, khaki-crazy young women".
Women wanted to look fit, sporty, and, above all, healthy.
Therefore, young women wanted to spend their youth enjoying their life and freedom rather than just staying home and waiting for a man to marry them.
According to a report in 1922, some banks across the United States started to regulate the dress and deportment of young female employees who were considered to be "flappers".
Flapper dresses were straight and loose, leaving the arms bare (sometimes no straps at all) and dropping the waistline to the hips.
Flappers had their origins in the liberal period of the Roaring Twenties, the social, political turbulence and increased transatlantic cultural exchange that followed the end of World War I, as well as the export of American jazz culture to Europe.
The incident was duly reported to the officials of the bank, and rules adopted regarding requirements in dress for female employees.
She refused the traditional moral code.
No longer restrained by a tight waist and long trailing skirts, the modern woman of the 1920s was an independent thinker, who no longer followed the conventions of those before her.
With time, came the development of dance styles then considered shocking, such as the Charleston, the Shimmy, the Bunny Hug, and the Black Bottom.
Women have been willingly invited to dance, for drinks, for entrances up to jewelry and clothing.
By the mid-1930s in Britain, although still occasionally used, the word "flapper" had become associated with the past.
Horn-rimmed glasses were also popular.
The flapper was an extreme manifestation of changes in the lifestyles of American women made visible through dress.
Campaigns such as the “Make do and Mend” slogan were becoming prevalent to ensure there was no overconsumption throughout society.
Among actresses closely identified with the style were Tallulah Bankhead, Olive Borden, Clara Bow, Louise Brooks, Joan Crawford, Bebe Daniels, Billie Dove, Leatrice Joy, Helen Kane, Laura La Plante, Dorothy Mackaill, Colleen Moore, Norma Shearer, Norma Talmadge, Olive Thomas, and Alice White.
Carolyn Van Wyck ran a column in ''Photoplay'', an upmarket magazine that featured articles on pop culture, advice on fashion, and even articles on helping readers channel their inner celebrity.
Other actresses, such as Clara Bow, Louise Brooks, Colleen Moore and Joan Crawford would soon build their careers on the same image, achieving great popularity.
The short skirt and bobbed hair were likely to be used as a symbol of emancipation.
Hats were still required wear and popular styles included the newsboy cap and cloche hat.
and saying "I'm sure that I don't want to marry anyone who is too slow to want to pet.
Favored shoe styles were Mary Janes and T-straps in classic black, gold, silver, or nude shades.
Even though many young women in the 1920s saw flappers as the symbol of a brighter future, some also questioned the flappers’ more extreme behavior.
The use of the word increased during World War I, perhaps due to the visible emergence of young women into the workforce to supply the place of absent men; a ''Times'' article on the problem of finding jobs for women made unemployed by the return of the male workforce is headed "The Flapper's Future".
Significantly, the flappers removed the corset from female fashion, raised skirt and gown hemlines, and popularized short hair for women.
Unable to afford the latest trends and lifestyle, the once vibrant flapper women returned to their dropped hemlines.
Signs of the moral revolution consisted of premarital sex, birth control, drinking, and contempt for older values.
In youthful imagination, it gave the lie to the old clichés of "the only man" and "the only girl".
The freedom to choose her role in society was created.
Writers in the United States such as F. Scott Fitzgerald and Anita Loos and illustrators such as Russell Patterson, John Held, Jr., Ethel Hays and Faith Burrows popularized the flapper look and lifestyle through their works, and flappers came to be seen as attractive, reckless, and independent.
Hence, flat chests became appealing to women, although flappers were the most common to wear such bras.
Pins, rings, and brooches came into style.
Also, many women had more working opportunity and even taken the male jobs, who became doctor, lawyer, engineer and pilots.
Although they earned money from work, they still wanted to earn some more for them to live.
Women had started swearing and smoking publicly, using contraceptives, raising their skirts above the knee and rolling their hose below it.
No longer were party dresses adorned with decorative embellishments or made brightly colored.
In polite society at the time, a teenage girl who had not "come out" would still be classed as a child.
The slang word "flap" was used for a young prostitute as early as 1631.
So, among the readers of The Flapper, parts of them were celebrated for flappers’ spirit and appropriation of male privilege, while parts of them acknowledged the dangers of emulating flappers too faithfully, with some even confessing to violating their own codes of ethics so as to live up to all the hype.
In 1922, a small-circulation magazine --The Flapper, located in Chicago -- celebrated the flapper’s appeal.
However, it may derive from an earlier use in northern England to mean "teenage girl", referring to one whose hair is not yet put up and whose plaited pigtail "flapped" on her back; or from an older word meaning "prostitute".
But I want to discover what is right.
“Flappers prized style over substance, novelty over tradition, and pleasure over virtue.”  Ruth Gillettes, a 1920s singer, had a song called “Oh Say!
Also reflective of their preoccupations were phrases to express approval, such as "That's so Jake",  "That's the bee's knees", and the popular "the cat's meow" or "cat's pyjamas".
Tiller's use of the phrase "come out" means "to make a formal entry into 'society' on reaching womanhood".
In March 1926 an anonymous young woman wrote in describing petting as a problem, explaining "The boys all seem to do it and don't seem to come back if you don't do it also.
Therefore, in 1923, the magazine began asking for true stories from its readers for a new column called "Confessions of a Flapper."
A lot of young men did not return home from the war, which left many women alone in their home.
World War I reduced the grip of the class system on both sides of the Atlantic, encouraging different classes to mingle and share their sense of freedom.
Flappers also advocated voting and women's rights.
Being liberated from restrictive dress, from laces that interfered with breathing, and from hoops that needed managing suggested liberation of another sort.
So, some people would call them “charity girls” to differentiated them from prostitute as the girls claimed that they did not accept money in their sexual encounters with men.
Among those who criticized the flapper craze was writer-critic Dorothy Parker, who penned "Flappers: A Hate Song" to poke fun at the fad.
By at least 1913, the association between slim adolescence and a certain characteristic look became fixed in the public's mind.
'''Flappers''' were a generation of young Western women in the 1920s who wore short skirts, bobbed their hair, listened to jazz, and flaunted their disdain for what was then considered acceptable behavior.
Called ''garçonne'' in French ("boy" with a feminine suffix), flapper style made girls look young and boyish: short hair, flattened breasts, and straight waists accentuated it.
As far back as the 1890s, French actress Polaire pioneered a look which included short, disheveled hair, emphatic mouth and huge eyes heavily outlined in kohl.
It began with a complaint of a mother in New Jersey who felt dissatisfied because her son did business only with a young female employee, who she considered illegally attractive.
Transitioning into the thirties was no easy task.
Finger waving was used as a means of styling.
In the English media they were stereotyped as pleasure-loving, reckless and prone to defy convention by initiating sexual relationships.
Originally, pale skin was considered most attractive.
The word appeared in print as early as 1903 in the United Kingdom and 1904 in the United States, when novelist Desmond Coke used it in his college story of Oxford life, ''Sandford of Merton'': "There's a stunning flapper".
In 1936 a ''Times'' journalist grouped it with terms such as "blotto" as out-dated slang:  "(blotto) evokes a distant echo of glad rags and flappers ...
Lillian Nordica, commenting on New York fashions that year, referred to
The New Woman was pushing the boundaries of gender roles, representing sexual and economic freedom.
Skirts rose to just below the knee by 1927, allowing flashes of leg to be seen when a girl danced or walked through a breeze, although the way they danced made any long loose skirt flap up to show their legs.
They were active, sporting, rode bicycles, drove cars, and openly drank alcohol, a defiant act in the American period of Prohibition.
In the United States, popular contempt for Prohibition was a factor in the rise of the flapper.
The flapper stands as one of the most enduring images of youth and new women in the twentieth century, and is viewed by Americans as something of a cultural heroine nowadays.
After that, the anti-flapper code soon spread to the Federal Reserve, where female employees were firmly told that there was no time for them to beautifying themselves during office hours.
Women finally won the right to vote in the United States on August 26, 1920.
Women were now becoming more assertive and less willing to keep the home fires burning.
Before the War, a lady did not set foot in a saloon; after the War a woman, though no more "a lady", entered a speakeasy as casually as she would go into a railroad station.
At this early date, it seems that the style associated with a flapper already included the boyish physique and close-fitting hat, but a hobble skirt rather than one with a high hemline.
Jewelry usually consisted of art deco pieces, especially many layers of beaded necklaces.
The flappers' costume was seen as sexual and raised deeper questions of the behavior and values it symbolized.
With legal saloons and cabarets closed, back alley speakeasies became prolific and popular.
They also wore new, softer and suppler corsets that reached to their hips, smoothing the whole frame, giving women a straight up and down appearance, as opposed to the old corsets which slenderized the waist and accented the hips and bust.
The flapper lifestyle and look disappeared in America after the Wall Street Crash and the following Great Depression.
High heels also came into vogue at the time, reaching 2–3&nbsp;inches (5–8&nbsp;cm) high.
Flappers also began working outside the home and challenging women's traditional societal roles.
Artificial fabrics were used instead of elegant fabrics, like silk, which were so popular in the early 1900s.
The flapper was an example of the prevailing conceptions of women and her role during the Roaring 1920s.
Without the old restrictive corsets, flappers wore simple bust bodices to restrain their chest when dancing.
However, tanned skin became increasingly popular after Coco Chanel showed off a tan after a holiday – it suggested a life of leisure, without the onerous need to work.
Many readers thought that flappers had gone too far in their quest for adventure.
For example, customs, technology, and manufacturing all moved quickly into the 20th century after the interruption of the war The rise of the automobile was an important factor in flapper culture, as cars meant a woman could come and go as she pleased, travel to speakeasies and other entertainment venues, and use the large vehicles of the day for their popular activity, petting parties.
By 1911, a newspaper review indicates the mischievous and flirtatious "flapper" was an established stage-type.
They wanted to be treated as a man and go smoking and drinking.
Beginning in the early 1920s, flappers began appearing in newspaper comic strips; Blondie Boopadoop and Fritzi Ritz – later depicted more domestically, as the wife of Dagwood Bumstead and aunt of Nancy, respectively – were introduced as flappers.
This discrepancy between the law-abiding, religion-based temperance movement and the actual ubiquitous consumption of alcohol led to widespread disdain for authority.
It recalls a past which is not yet 'period'."
The physically demanding jobs called for the creation and social acceptance of women’s pants in society.
This type of bra was made to pull in the back to flatten the chest.
However, back in the 1920s, many Americans regarded flappers as threatening to conventional society, representing a new moral order.
Although most of them were the daughters of the middle class, they flouted middle-class values.
Popular dress styles included the Robe de style.
Flappers did away with corsets and pantaloons in favor of "step-in" panties.
Blush came into vogue now that it was no longer a messy application process.
Dorothy Dunbar Bromley, a noted liberal writer at the time, summed up this dichotomy by describing flappers as "truly modern", "New Style" feminists who "admit that a full life calls for marriage and children" and also "are moved by an inescapable inner compulsion to be individuals in their own right".
The new-found freedom to breathe and walk encouraged movement out of the house, and the flapper took full advantage.
Some of these were lighthearted stories of girls getting the better of those who underestimated them, but others described girls betraying their own standards of behavior in order to live up to the image of flappers.
In fact, older suffragettes, who fought for the right for women to vote, viewed flappers as vapid and in some ways unworthy of the enfranchisement they had worked so hard to win.
Thomas starred in a similar role in 1917, though it was not until ''The Flapper'' that the term was used.
Also, the horror of the war, and the Spanish flu epidemic which struck in 1918, inspired in young people a feeling that life is short and could end at any moment.
There were several examples, a newlywed confessed to having cheated on her husband, a college student described being told by a boyfriend that she wasn't "the marrying kind" because of the sexual liberties she had permitted him, and a minister's daughter recounted the humiliation of being caught in the lie of pretending she was older and more sophisticated than she was.
A sudden serious tone washed over the public with the appearance of The Great Depression.
By 1908, newspapers as serious as ''The Times'' used it, although with careful explanation: "A 'flapper', we may explain, is a young lady who has not yet been promoted to long frocks and the wearing of her hair 'up'".
A report in ''The Times'' of a 1915 Christmas entertainment for troops stationed in France described a soldier in drag burlesquing feminine flirtatiousness while wearing "short skirts, a hat of Parisian type and flapper-like hair".
The lack of curves of a corset promoted a boyish look.
Their language sometimes reflected their feelings about dating, marriage and drinking habits: "I have to see a man about a dog" at this period often meant going to buy whiskey; and a "handcuff" or "manacle" was an engagement or wedding ring.
In 1907 English actor George Graves explained it to Americans as theatrical slang for acrobatic young female stage performers.
Women wanted to be men’s social equals.
Flappers also used the word "jazz" in the sense of anything exciting or fun.
Van Wyck sympathized with the problem the writer faced and added, "It seems to me much better to be known as a flat tire and keep romance in one's mind than to be called a hot date and have fear in one's heart."
Can I See You Tonight?” which expresses the new behavior of girls in the 1920s.
The first appearance of the word and image in the United States came from the popular 1920 Frances Marion film, ''The Flapper'', starring Olive Thomas.
Although the era of the flapper had vanished almost overnight, its symbol for women’s liberation would live on.
Also, flappers defended them by contrasting themselves with earlier generations of women whom they called "clinging vines."
In Germany teenage girls were called "''Backfisch''", which meant a young fish not yet big enough to be sold in the market.
The slang word "flapper", describing a young woman, is sometimes supposed to refer to a young bird flapping its wings while learning to fly.
Although the concept of "''Backfisch''" was known in England by the late 1880s, the term was understood to mean a very demure social type unlike the flapper, who was typically rebellious and defiant of convention.
Flappers were associated with the use of a number of slang words, including "junk", "necker", "heavy petting", and "necking parties", although these words existed before the 1920s.
Modesty, chastity, morality, and traditional concepts of masculinity and femininity were seemingly ignored.
Although the appearance typically associated now with flappers (straight waists, short hair and a hemline above the knee) did not fully emerge until about
With the invention of the metal lipstick container as well as compact mirrors, bee stung lips came into vogue.
In her final movies, she was seen as the flapper image.
The ever-popular bobbed haircut was the cause for some women being fired from their jobs.
On the opening page of its first issue, it proudly declared flappers break with traditional values.
A Harvard psychologist reported that flappers had "the lowest degree of intelligence" and constituted "a hopeless problem for educators".
They did not even acknowledge that the previous generation of female activists had made the flappers' freedom possible.
They were considered a significant challenge to traditional Victorian gender roles, devotion to plain-living, hard work and religion.
Even though many opposed the radical era, one can see how the flapper dress helped bridge a gap between genders in society, ultimately leading in the direction of women’s rights.
This was typical on college campuses, where young people "spent a great deal of unsupervised time in mixed company".
Another writer, Lynne Frame, said in her book that a large number of scientists and health professionals have analyzed and reviewed the degree of femininity of flappers’ appearance and behavior, given the "boyishness" of the flapper look and behavior.
The evolving image of flappers was of independent young women who went by night to jazz clubs where they danced  provocatively, smoked cigarettes and dated freely, perhaps indiscriminately.
Flappers' behavior was considered outlandish at the time and redefined women's roles.
Modern clothing was lighter and more flexible, better suiting the modern woman such as the flapper who wanted to engage in active sport.
The flapper was making an appeal to authority and was being attached to the impending "demoralization" of the country.
There were two more slangs that reflected flapper’s behaviors or lifestyles, which were “treating” and “charity girls”.
And for the ‘return-service’, women granted any kind of erotic or sexual interaction from flirting to sexual intercourse.
The flappers' ideal was motion with characteristics of intensity, energy, and volatility.
By 1920, the term had taken on the full meaning of the flapper generation style and attitudes.
1926, there was an early association in the public mind between unconventional appearance, outrageous behavior, and the word "flapper".
In April 1908, the fashion section of London's ''The Globe and Traveler'' contained a sketch entitled "The Dress of the Young Girl" with the following explanation: Americans, and those fortunate English folk whose money and status permit them to go in freely for slang terms ... call the subject of these lines the 'flapper.'
Flappers were seen as brash for wearing excessive makeup, drinking, treating sex in a casual manner, smoking, driving automobiles, and otherwise flouting social and sexual norms.
In Frame’s book, she also wrote that the appearance of flappers, like the short hair and short dress, distracted attention from feminine curves to the legs and body.
They shrugged off their chaperones, danced suggestively, and openly flirted with boys.
Increasingly, women discarded old, rigid ideas about roles and embraced consumerism and personal choice, and were often described in terms of representing a "culture war" of old versus new.
No longer would a woman have to be a homemaker.
By the 1890s, the word "flapper" was emerging in England as popular slang both for a very young prostitute, and in a more general – and less derogatory sense – of any lively mid-teenage girl.
Although the word was still largely understood as referring to high-spirited teenagers gradually in Britain it was being extended to describe any impetuous immature woman.
Other women envied flappers for their flat chests and bought the Symington Side Lacer to enhance the same look; large breasts were commonly regarded as a trait of unsophistication.
The sketch is of a girl in a frock with a long skirt,"which has the waistline quite high and semi-Empire, ... quite untrimmed, its plainness being relieved by a sash knotted carelessly around the skirt."
One cause of the change in young women's behavior was World War I which ended in November 1918.
Some gynecologists gave the opinion that women were less "marriageable" if they were less "feminine", as the husband would be unhappy in his marriage.
The rise of consumerism promoted the ideals of "fulfilment and freedom"  that encouraged women to have their own thoughts on garments, career, social activities.
In this manner, flappers were a result of larger social changes – women were able to vote in the United States in 1920, and religious society had been rocked by the Scopes trial.
The Victorian American conception of sexuality and other roles of men and women in society and to one another were being challenged.
Some have suggested that the flapper concept as a stage of life particular to young women was imported to England from Germany, where it originated "as a sexual reaction against the over-fed, under-exercised monumental woman, and as a compromise between pederasty and normal sex".
She cut her hair short and took to loose-fitting clothing and low cut dresses.
The secretary of labor denounced the "flippancy of the cigarette smoking, cocktail-drinking flapper".
Women were now competing with men in the business world and obtaining financial independence and, therefore, other kinds of independence from men.
By November 1910, the word was popular enough for A. E. James to begin a series of stories in the ''London Magazine'' featuring the misadventures of a pretty fifteen-year-old girl and titled "Her Majesty the Flapper".
Dark eyes, especially kohl-rimmed, were the style.
One 23 years old "ex-vamp" declared: "In my opinion, the average flappers from 15 to 19 were brainless, inconsiderate of others, and easy to get into serious trouble."
Boyish cuts were in vogue, especially the bob cut, Eton crop, and shingle bob.
By 1912, the London theatrical impresario John Tiller, defining the word in an interview he gave to the ''New York Times'', described a "flapper" as belonging to a slightly older age group, a girl who has "just come out".
Silk or rayon stockings were held up by garters.
In his lecture that year on Britain's surplus of young women caused by the loss of young men in war, Dr. R. Murray-Leslie criticized "the social butterfly type... the frivolous, scantily-clad, jazzing flapper, irresponsible and undisciplined, to whom a dance, a new hat, or a man with a car, were of more importance than the fate of nations".
In the 1950s, ''Life'' magazine depicted petting parties as "that famed and shocking institution of the '20s", and commenting on the ''Kinsey Report'', said that they have been "very much with us ever since".
They mocked the confining fashions and demure passivity of older women and reveled in their own freedom.
"Petting parties", where petting ("making out" or foreplay) was the main attraction, became popular.
While hemlines rose, numerous states took action, making laws that restricted woman to wear skirts with hemlines no shorter than three inches above the ankle.
These attributes were not only a fashion trend but also the expression of a blurring of gender roles.
Despite the scandal flappers generated, their look became fashionable in a toned-down form among respectable older women.
Flapper independence was also a response to the Gibson girls of the 1890s.
Instead, women headed to work to take over men’s roles while they were at war.
The appropriateness of this term does not move me to such whole-hearted admiration of the amazing powers of enriching our language which the Americans modestly acknowledge they possess ..., and in fact, would scarcely merit the honour of a moment of my attention, but for the fact that I seek in vain for any other expression that is understood to signify that important young person, the maiden of some sixteen years.
As the adoption of the term in America coincided with a fashion among teenage girls in the early 1920s for wearing unbuckled galoshes, a widespread false etymology held that they were called "flappers" because they flapped when they walked, as they wore their overshoes or galoshes unfastened, showing that they defied convention in a manner similar to the 21st century fad for untied shoelaces.
In this way, societal changes helped to advance the flapper culture.
Although that pre-war look does not resemble the flapper style, their independence may have led to the flapper wise-cracking tenacity 30 years later.
Also, the economic boom allowed more people the time and money to golf, play tennis and take vacations, which required clothing adapted to their strenuous activities; the flapper's slender silhouette was very suitable for movement.
Petting became more common than in the Victorian era.
However, this practice was easily mistaken for prostitution.
Changes in fashion were interpreted as signs of deeper changes in the American feminine ideal.
In addition to their irreverent behavior, flappers were known for their style, which largely emerged as a result of French fashions, especially those pioneered by Coco Chanel, the effect on dress of the rapid spread of American jazz, and the popularization of dancing that accompanied it.
Fabric choices were among the many items to be cut back on during this poverty-stricken time.
Society changed quickly after World War I.
For all the concern about women stepping out of their traditional roles, however, some say many flappers weren't  engaged in politics.
But in the 1920s, many girls seem to play a leading role in boy-girl relationships, actively asking boys out or even coming to their homes.
Those rules included the dresses should not have pattern, it should be bought from a specific stores, it must be worn in either black, blue or brown, its sleeves must not be shortened above the elbow, and its hem must not be worn higher than twelve inches from the ground.
The evolving flapper look required "heavy makeup" in comparison to what had previously been acceptable outside of professional usage in the theater.
The high-spirited attitude and hedonism were less acceptable during the economic hardships of the 1930s.
Adding an even more boyish look, the Symington Side Lacer was invented and became a popular essential as an everyday bra.
