Weapon-mounted lights may have remote switches for convenience in operation.
When the batteries are depleted or the bulb fails, the entire product is discarded.
Many other materials including drawn steel, plated brass, copper, silver, even wood and leather have been used.
Another common type of switch relies on twisting the head of the light.
On January 10, 1899, British inventor David Misell obtained U.S. Patent No.
Others use incandescent bulbs mounted in reflectors.
Flashlights approved for flammable gas areas will have markings indicating the approving agency (MSHA, ATEX, UL etc.)
The working distance is from the point of view of the user of the flashlight.
Miniature lamps developed for flashlight and automotive uses became an important sector of the incandescent lamp manufacturing business.
617,592, assigned to American Electrical Novelty and Manufacturing Company.
LEDs are also less fragile than glass lamps.
In 1922 there were an estimated 10 million flashlight users in the United States, with annual sales of renewal batteries and flashlights at $20 million, comparable to sales of many line-operated electrical appliances.
Consequently, they could be used only in brief flashes, hence the common North American name "flashlight".
LED flashlights may consume 1 watt or much more from the battery, producing heat as well as light.
and symbols for the conditions that were tested.
These are supported and protected by a case.
Some are powered by the user turning a crank or shaking the lamp, and some have solar panels to recharge a battery.
A beam width (containing most of the power of the beam, or "hot spot") of a few degrees corresponds to a spot light, useful for searching for distant objects; beam widths of 20 degrees or more are described as flood lights, suitable for lighting a wide nearby area.
The first mass-produced dry cell batteries came in 1896, and the invention of portable electric lights soon followed.
Aluminum, either plain, painted or anodized, is a popular choice.
This voluntary standard defines test procedures and conditions for total light output, beam intensity, working distance, impact and water resistance, and battery running time to 10% of initial light output.
Colored lenses placed over the end of the flashlight are used for signalling, for example, in railway yards.
Even the same LED or lamp in different optical systems will show different beam characteristics.
Incandescent flashlights use incandescent light bulbs which consists of a glass bulb and a tungsten filament.
HID lamps produce more light than an incandescent flashlight using the same amount of electricity.
Certain accessories for a flashlight allow the color of the light to be altered or allow light to be dispersed differently.
Electric lanterns are used for lighting the broad area immediately around the lantern, as opposed to forming a narrow beam; they can be set down on a level surface or attached to supports.
The FL1 standard requires measurements reported on the packaging to be made with the type of batteries packaged with the flashlight, or with an identified type of battery.
Many smartphones have a button or software application available to turn up their screen backlights to full intensity, or to switch on the camera flash or video light, providing a "flashlight" function.
Some flashlights can be used underwater or in flammable atmospheres.
Where used for inspecting the interior of tanks containing flammable liquids, the inspection lights may also be rated as flame-proof (explosion-proof) so that they cannot ignite liquids or vapors.
Early flashlights used vulcanized fiber or hard rubber tubes with metal end caps.
Today flashlights use mostly incandescent lamps or light-emitting diodes and run on disposable or rechargeable batteries.
The result is reported in meters or feet.
The Fulton MX991/U Flashlight was an angle-head flashlight issued to US military personnel; similar style lights remain popular.
Some types use the dynamo to charge a capacitor or battery, while others only light while the dynamo is moving.
Some types of lithium primary cell can be stored for years with less risk of leakage compared with zinc-type batteries.
Since the LED has a long life compared to the usual life of a flashlight, very often it is permanently installed.
The working distance is defined as the distance at which the maximum light falling on a surface (illuminance) would fall to 0.25 lux.
The standard recommends particular graphic symbols and wording for the product package, so that the consumer can identify products tested to the standard.
The capacitor can be recharged more rapidly than a battery and can be recharged many times without loss of capacity; however, the running time is limited by the relative bulk of capacitors compared to electrochemical batteries.
A penlight is a small, pen-sized flashlight, often containing two AA batteries or AAA batteries.
Outdoors, search and rescue, caving, night orienteering, high-speed bicycle use, diving
They are small enough to be easily rail-mounted to a gun barrel.
The distance is calculated from the square root of (the beam intensity in candelas divided by 0.25 lux); for example, a beam intensity of 1000 candelas produces a working range rating of the square root of (1000/0.25), or 63 meters.
Metal cases provide better heat dissipation for the LED, but plastics are not electrically conductive and may resist corrosion and wear.
Some rechargeable flashlights have indicators for the state of charge of the battery.
Modern flashlights are generally made of plastic or aluminum.
Some flashlights electronically regulate the current through the LEDs to stabilize light output as the batteries discharge.
Colored light is occasionally useful for hunters tracking wounded game after dusk, or for forensic examination of an area.
Typically even a flashlight beam with a small hot spot will have some light visible as "spill" around the spot.
The flashlight may require approval by an authority for the particular service and particular gases or dusts expected.
A common combination is a slide switch that allows the light to be left on for an extended time, combined with a momentary button for intermittent use or signalling.
Flashlights used for extended periods every day may be more economically operated on rechargeable (secondary) batteries.
It could be instantly turned on and off, and avoided fire risk.
Industrial, marine, public safety and military organizations develop specifications for flashlights in specialized roles.
Flashlights intended for use in hazardous areas with flammable gas or dust are tested to ensure they cannot set off an explosion.
Regulated LED flashlights may also have user-selectable levels of output appropriate to a task, for example, low light for reading a map and high output for checking a road sign.
Because these early flashlights also used energy-inefficient carbon-filament bulbs, "resting" occurred at short intervals.
Impact resistance is measured by dropping the flashlight in six different orientations and observing that it still functions and has no large cracks or breaks in it; the height used in the test is reported.
The light measurements are more directly related to the use of flashlights than is the nominal power input to the lamp (watts), since different LED and incandescent lamp types vary widely in the amount of light produced per watt.
Similar to the headlamp, an angle-head flashlight emits light perpendicular to the length of the battery tube; it can be clipped to a headband, belt, or webbing or set on a flat surface.
As well as utilitarian flashlights, novelty, toy and ornamental portable electric lights have been made in a myriad of shapes; in the 1890s, one of the earliest portable battery light applications was a type of novelty porcelain tie pin with a concealed bulb and battery.
An HID lamp requires a short warm-up time before it reaches full output.
LED penlights are becoming increasingly common.
In addition to the general-purpose hand-held flashlight, many forms have been adapted for special uses.
A less common type of flashlight uses a High Intensity Discharge (HID) lamp as the light source.
Flashlights for hazardous areas may be designed to automatically disconnect the lamp if the bulb is broken, to prevent ignition of flammable gas.
This is comparable to a full moon on a clear night.
Electronic controls allow the user to select variable output levels or different operating modes such as pre-programmed flashing beacon or strobe modes.
Low-cost units may be disposable with no provision to replace batteries or bulbs, and are sometimes imprinted with advertising for promotional purposes.
Unlike previous batteries, it used a paste electrolyte instead of a liquid.
It is electrically conductive, can be easily machined, and dissipates heat well.
The FL1 standard gives definitions for terms used in marketing flashlights, with the intention of allowing the consumer to compare products tested to the standard.
One popular make of rechargeable focusing flashlight uses a halogen lamp and produces 218 lumens.
The original 1890's flashlights used a metal ring around the fiber body of the flashlight as one contact of a switch, and the second contact was a moveable metal loop that could be flipped down to touch the ring, completing the circuit.
LEDs generally must have some kind of control to limit current through the diode.
Since voltages and currents are low, switch design is limited only by the available space and desired cost of production.
A typical HID flashlight would have a 35 watt lamp and produce more than 3000 lumens.
A two D-cell flashlight using a common prefocus-style miniature lamp will produce on the order of 15 to 20 lumens of light  and a beam of about 200 candlepower.
The external temperature rise of the flashlight must not exceed the autoignition point of the gas, so substitution of more powerful lamps or batteries may void the approval.
Variable focus "zoom" or "flood to throw" lights may move the reflector or lens or they may move the emitter; moving the emitter presents the designer with the problem of maintaining heat dissipation for the LED.
Flashlights designed for rechargeable batteries may  allow charging without removing the batteries; for example, a light kept in a vehicle may be trickle-charged and always ready when needed.
Many resembled lanterns, consisting of a battery box with a handle and the lamp and reflector attached to the front.
Lithium primary batteries have a lower internal resistance than zinc primary batteries and so are more efficient in high-drain flashlights.
At least one manufacturer allows user programming of the features of the flashlight through a USB port.
The standard does not evaluate the behavior of the flashlight output during run time.
Shaking the flashlight will charge a capacitor or a rechargeable battery that supplies current to a light source.
The light output of an incandescent lamp in a flashlight varies widely depending on the type of lamp.
Primary cells are most economical for infrequent use.
Although most flashlights are designed for user replacement of the batteries and the bulb as needed, fully sealed disposable flashlights, such as inexpensive keyring lights, are made.
One type of mechanically powered flashlight has a winding crank and spring connected to a small electrical generator (dynamo).
ANSI standard FL1 does not specify measurements of the beam width angle but the candela intensity and total lumen ratings can be used by the consumer to assess the beam characteristics.
Regulations for ships and aircraft will specify the number and general properties of flashlights included as part of the standard safety equipment of the vessel.
, or lights using a single 5&nbsp;mm LED, may only produce a couple of lumens.
Flashlights using a "total internal reflection" assembly have a transparent optical element (light pipe) to guide light from the source into a beam; no reflector surface is required.
Water resistance, if specified, is evaluated after impact testing; no water is to be visible inside the unit and it must remain functional.
The choice of batteries will play a determining role in the size, weight, run time, and shape of the flashlight.
People working in hazardous areas with significant concentrations of flammable gases or dusts, such as mines, engine rooms of ships, chemical plants or grain elevators, use "non-incendive", "intrinsically safe" or "explosion proof"  flashlights constructed so that any spark in the flashlight is not likely to set off an explosion outside the light.
The company donated some of these devices to the New York City police, who responded favorably to them.
Others generate electricity using electromagnetic induction.
Some models of flashlight include an acceleration sensor to allow them  to respond to shaking, or to select modes based on direction the light is held at switch on.
Heat dissipation for the LED often dictates that small high-power LED flashlights have aluminium or other high heat conductivity bodies, reflectors and other parts, to dissipate heat; they can become warm during use.
Some electric lanterns use miniature fluorescent lamps for higher efficacy than incandescent bulbs.
Head or helmet-mounted flashlights designed for miners and campers leave the hands free.
Such marshalling wands are frequently used for directing automobiles or aircraft at night.
Flashlights may be tested for impact resistance, water and chemical resistance, and for the life span of the control switch.
In contrast to tungsten filaments, which must be hot to produce light, both the light output and the life of an LED decrease with temperature.
LED flashlights may be specified to be compatible with night vision devices.
Typically, light output, overall dimensions, battery compatibility and durability are required to meet minimum limits.
Switches may be covered with a flexible rubber boot to exclude dirt and moisture.
A flashlight may have a red LED intended to preserve dark adaption of vision.
Usually, the source of the light is an incandescent light bulb or light-emitting diode (LED).
In the United States, ANSI in 2009 published ''FL1 Flashlight basic performance standard''.
A reflector forms a narrow beam called the "throw", while light emitted forward misses the reflector and forms a wide flood or "spill" of light.
Zinc can be die-cast into intricate shapes.
Many flashlights are cylindrical in design, with the lamp assembly attached to one end.
However, they are much more expensive, due to the ballast circuit required to start and operate the lamp.
At least one manufacturer makes a rechargeable flashlight that uses a supercapacitor to store energy.
The bulbs are under vacuum or filled with argon, krypton or xenon.
A miniature keychain lamp produces one or two lumens.
The lamp will last longer and is more shock resistant than a regular incandescent bulb, since it lacks the relatively fragile electrical filament found in incandescent bulbs.
Several standard alloys of aluminum are used.
Diving lamps must be watertight under pressure and are used for night diving and supplemental illumination where surface light cannot reach.
Flashlights using one or two disposable 1.5 volt cells require a boost converter to provide the higher voltage required by a white LED, which need around 3.4 volts to function.
Because LEDs emit most light in a hemisphere, lens lights with the LED facing forward or reflector lights with it facing backwards radiate less spill.
Solar powered flashlights use energy from a solar cell to charge an on-board battery for later use.
Plastics are often injection molded into nearly final shape, requiring only a few more process steps to complete assembly.
The battery pack may be attached at the back of the head or in a pocket to improve balance.
The invention of the dry cell and miniature incandescent electric light bulbs made the first battery-powered flashlights possible around 1899.
An LED flashlight will have a longer battery life than an incandescent flashlight with comparable output.
Since this is a measure of all the light emitted in a solid angle (the "cone" of light in a particular direction), the beam intensity is independent of distance.
Very small flashlights may not have a reflector or lens separate from the lamp.
However, early designs came in a variety of other shapes.
Testing may be carried out by the manufacturer itself or by a third-party test laboratory.
This "electric device" designed by Misell was powered by "D" batteries laid front to back in a paper tube with the light bulb and a rough brass reflector at the end.
By comparison, a 60-watt household incandescent lamp will produce about 900 lumens.
Reflectors may be made of polished metal, or glass or plastic with an aluminized reflective finish.
Ratings are given in IP Code terms, where jet spray corresponds to IP X6, brief immersion to IPX7, 30 minutes immersion at 1 meter or more is IP X8; (the depth is reported if greater than 1 meter).
Multifunction portable devices may include a flashlight as one of their features; for example, a portable radio/flashlight combination.
Initial light output is measured with an integrating sphere photometer, 30 seconds after the light is switched on with fresh (or newly charged) batteries.
Otoscopes and ophthalmoscopes are medical instruments that combine a hand-held light source and magnifying lenses for examination of the ear canal and eyes, respectively.
LEDs maintain nearly constant color temperature regardless of input voltage or current, while the color temperature of an incandescent bulb rapidly declines as the battery discharges, becoming redder and less visible.
Tactical lights are sometimes mounted to a handgun or rifle.
Other metals include copper, stainless steel, and titanium, which can be polished to provide a decorative finish.
Run time is measured using the supplied or specified batteries and letting the light run until the intensity of the beam has dropped to 10% of the value 30 seconds after switching on.
The electric lamp was odorless, smokeless, and emitted less heat than combustion-powered lighting.
A '''flashlight''' (often called a '''torch''' outside North America) is a portable hand-held electric light.
The luminous efficacy or lumens produced per watt of input of flashlight bulbs varies over the approximate range of 8 to 22 lumens/watt, depending on the size of the bulb and the fill gas, with halogen-filled 12 volt lamps having the highest efficacy.
Dynamo-powered flashlights were popular during the Second World War since replacement batteries were difficult to obtain.
Flashlights using three or more dry cells may only use a resistor to limit current.
Where multiple LEDs are used, each one may be put in its own parabolic reflector.
Flashlight users may prefer a common battery type to simplify replacement.
The total light emitted is reported in lumens.
Electronic controls may be operated by buttons, sliders, magnets, rotating heads, or rotating control rings.
A light directly pointed at an observer may be visible against a dark background for many times this distance, especially if the observer has night-vision equipment.
Some manufacturers use a pebbled or "orange peel", instead of a smooth, reflector, to improve the uniformity of the light beam emitted.
Metals may be drawn into a tubular shape, or tubular extruded stock can be machined to add threads for the head and tail cap, knurling for grip, and decorative and functional flats or holes in the body.
LEDs are highly efficient at producing colored light compared with incandescent lamps and filters.
The lens or reflector cover must resist impacts and the heat of the lamp, and must not lose too much of the transmitted light to reflection or absorption.
Inspection flashlights have permanently mounted light guides containing optical fibers or plastic rods.
Translucent colored plastic cones slipped over the lens of a flashlight increase the visibility when looking at the side of the light.
Infrared LEDs can be used for illuminators for night vision systems.
In 1887, the first dry cell battery was invented.
LED flashlights may have cooling fins machined into their metal cases.
A desirable plastic for manufacturing flashlights allows for ease of molding and adequate mechanical properties of the finished flashlight case.
An HID gas discharge lamp uses a mixture of metal halide salts and argon as a filler.
Portable hand-held electric spotlights can provide larger reflectors and lamps, and more powerful batteries than tubular flashlights meant to fit in a pocket.
In some types the incandescent light bulb has an integral lens that focuses the light, so no reflector is built into the penlight.
They use a strong permanent magnet that can freely slide up and down a tube, passing through a coil of wire as it does.
Luminous intensity is determined by measuring the brightest spot in the beam produced by the flashlight, in candelas.
Some types allow the user to adjust the angle of the head.
Magnesium and its alloys provide strength and heat dissipation similar to aluminum with less weight, but they corrode easily.
LED lamps have different spectra of light compared to incandescent sources, and are made in several ranges of color temperature and color rendering index.
Where two flashlights have similar total light (lumen) measures, the unit with the higher candela rating produces a more concentrated beam of light, suitable for lighting distant objects; it will also have a higher working distance.
An LED flashlight may contain different LEDs for white and colored light, selectable by the user for different purposes.
Lithium primary batteries are also useful at lower temperatures than zinc batteries, all of which have water-based electrolytes.
By 1922 several types were available; the tubular hand-held variety, a lantern style that could be set down for extended use, pocket-size lamps for close work, and large reflector searchlight-type lamps for lighting distant objects.
Tactical lights must withstand the impact of recoil, and must be easily controlled while holding the weapon.
The most powerful LED flashlights produce more than one thousand lumens and may use multiple power LEDs.
This would be difficult to do with a single incandescent bulb since efficacy of the lamp drops rapidly at low output.
This was the first battery suitable for portable electrical devices, as it did not spill or break easily and worked in any orientation.
An IP X8 rating by FL1 does not imply that the lamp is suitable for use as a diver's light since the test protocol examines function of the light only after immersion, not during immersion.
A wide variety of mechanical switch designs using slide switches, rocker switches, or side-mounted or end-mounted pushbuttons have been used in flashlights.
A headlamp is designed to be worn on the head, often having separate lamp and battery components.
The visibility of objects depends on many factors as well as the amount of light emitted by the flashlight.
A red filter helps preserve night vision after the flashlight is turned off, and can be useful to observe animals (such as nesting Loggerhead sea turtles) without disturbing them.
Manufacturers of headlamps may use a different standard which rates run times until light output falls to 1 lux at 2 meters distance; this value is not comparable to the FL 1 runtime measurement.
Secondary, rechargeable, types include lead acid batteries, NiMH, NiCd batteries and lithium ion batteries.
Plastics range from low-cost polystyrene and polyethylene to more complex mixtures of ABS or glass-reinforced epoxies.
Some flashlights allow the user to adjust the relative position of the lamp and reflector, giving a variable-focus effect from a wide floodlight to a narrow beam.
Ultraviolet LEDs may be used for inspection lights, for example, detecting fluorescent dyes added to air conditioning systems to detect leakage, examining paper currency, or checking UV-fluorescing marks on laundry or event ticket holders.
Early flashlights ran on zinc-carbon batteries, which could not provide a steady electric current and required periodic "rest" to continue functioning.
Flashlights for small boats may be required to be waterproof and to float.
Some manufacturers have proprietary plastic formulations for their products.
A headlamp can be clipped to the brim of a hat, or built to mount on a hard hat, instead of using straps; other types resemble eyeglass frames.
Detachable light guides, consisting of rigid bent plastic rods or semi-rigid or flexible tubes containing optical fibers, are available for some flashlights for inspection inside tanks, or within walls or structures; when not required the light guide can be removed and the light used for other purposes.
Power-failure lights are designed to keep their batteries charged from a wall plug and to automatically turn on after an AC power failure; the power-failure light can be removed from the wall socket and used as a portable flashlight.
An electronic control may also provide an indication of remaining battery capacity, or automatic step-down of brightness as the battery nears full discharge.
If two lights have similar candela ratings, the light with higher lumen value will produce a wider beam and will light a wider area overall.
