NIGH also works to rekindle awareness about the important issues highlighted by Florence Nightingale, such as preventive medicine and holistic health.
The first official nurses' training programme, her Nightingale School for Nurses, opened in 1860.
An extremely rare photograph of her, taken at Embley on a visit to her family home in May 1858, was discovered in 2006 and is now at the Florence Nightingale Museum in London.
They were deployed about  across the Black Sea from Balaklava in the Crimea, where the main British camp was based.
Sailing up the Nile as far as Abu Simbel in January 1850, she wrote of the Abu Simbel temples, "Sublime in the highest style of intellectual beauty, intellect without effort, without suffering … not a feature is correct—but the whole effect is more expressive of spiritual grandeur than anything I could have imagined.
She wrote very little during that period due to blindness and declining mental abilities, though she still retained an interest in current affairs.
In 1912, the International Committee of the Red Cross instituted the Florence Nightingale Medal, which is awarded every two years to nurses or nursing aides for outstanding service.
In 1883, Nightingale was awarded the Royal Red Cross by Queen Victoria.
Nightingale also much later had strong relations with academic Benjamin Jowett, who may have wanted to marry her.
Upon the centenary of Nightingale's death in 2010, and to commemorate her connection with Malvern, the Malvern Museum held a Florence Nightingale exhibit with a school poster competition to promote some events.
In her youth she was respectful of her family's opposition to her working as a nurse, only announcing her decision to enter the field in 1844.
The family moved back to England in 1821, with Nightingale being brought up in the family's homes at Embley, Hampshire and
She wrote a work of theology: ''Suggestions for Thought'', her own theodicy, which develops her heterodox ideas.
She regarded the experience as a turning point in her life, and issued her findings anonymously in 1851; ''The Institution of Kaiserswerth on the Rhine, for the Practical Training of Deaconesses, etc.''
He and Nightingale became lifelong close friends.
Florence Nightingale's image appeared on the reverse of £10 Series D banknotes issued by the Bank of England from 1975 until 1994.
She rejected their life of thoughtless comfort for the world of social service.
She set an example of compassion, commitment to patient care and diligent and thoughtful hospital administration.
From 1857 onwards, Nightingale was intermittently bedridden and suffered from depression.
In 1858 and 1859, she successfully lobbied for the establishment of a Royal Commission into the Indian situation.
Her Crimean War statistics had convinced her that non-medical approaches were more effective given the state of knowledge at the time.
Nightingale scholar Lynn McDonald has dismissed these criticisms as "often preposterous", arguing they are not supported by the primary sources.
She generally rejected female company and spent her time with male intellectuals.
The god gave her the gift of prophecy; when she refused his advances, he cursed her so that her prophetic warnings would go unheeded.
In 1911, Edward Tyas Cook was authorised by Nightingale's executors to write the official life, published in two volumes in 1913.
Following this, she used a solid Russian-built carriage, with a waterproof hood and curtains.
In 1860, Nightingale laid the foundation of professional nursing with the establishment of her nursing school at St Thomas' Hospital in London.
Most authorities today accept that Nightingale suffered from a particularly extreme form of brucellosis, the effects of which only began to lift in the early 1880s.
The Florence Nightingale Declaration Campaign, established by nursing leaders throughout the world through the Nightingale Initiative for Global Health (NIGH), aims to build a global grassroots movement to achieve two United Nations Resolutions for adoption by the UN General Assembly of 2008.
Much of her writing, including her extensive work on religion and mysticism, has only been published posthumously.
and in several of its rooms, relics and reproductions related to Florence Nightingale and her nurses are on exhibition.
The carriage was damaged when the hospital was bombed during the Second World War.
Hospitals were places of last resort where the floors were laid with straw to soak up the blood.
A public house named after her stands close to the DRI.
In the 1870s, Nightingale mentored Linda Richards, "America's first trained nurse", and enabled her to return to the United States with adequate training and knowledge to establish high-quality nursing schools.
In 1936, Kay Francis played Nightingale in the film titled ''The White Angel''.
Nightingale was assisted in Paris by her friend Mary Clarke.
The Nightingale-Macmillan continuing care unit is now at the Royal Derby Hospital, formerly known as The City Hospital, Derby.
Her ideas inspired the volunteer body of the United States Sanitary Commission.
During the Vietnam War, Nightingale inspired many US Army nurses, sparking a renewal of interest in her life and work.
During her first winter at Scutari, 4,077 soldiers died there.
She left a large body of work, including several hundred notes that were previously unpublished.
Her most persistent suitor was the politician and poet Richard Monckton Milnes, but after a nine-year courtship she rejected him, convinced that marriage would interfere with her ability to follow her calling to nursing.
A stained glass window was commissioned for inclusion in the Derbyshire Royal Infirmary chapel in the late 1950s.
She preferred the friendship of powerful men, insisting they had done more than women to help her attain her goals, writing: "I have never found one woman who has altered her life by one iota for me or my opinions."
In Istanbul, the northernmost tower of the Selimiye Barracks building is now the Florence Nightingale Museum.
Sidney Herbert served as honorary secretary of the fund and the Duke of Cambridge was chairman.
There are three statues of Nightingale in Derby – one outside the London Road Community Hospital formerly known as the Derbyshire Royal Infirmary (DRI), one in St Peter's Street, and one above the Nightingale-Macmillan Continuing Care Unit opposite the Derbyshire Royal Infirmary.
She detailed the health conditions, physical descriptions, dietary information, and other vital details of patients whom she directed there.
Her team found that poor care for wounded soldiers was being delivered by overworked medical staff in the face of official indifference.
She disliked the role the 19th century Church of England would sometimes play in worsening the oppression of the poor.
Florence's older sister Frances Parthenope had similarly been named after her place of birth, ''Parthenope'', a Greek settlement now part of the city of Naples.
This meant that sick paupers were no longer being cared for by other, able-bodied paupers, but by properly trained nursing staff.
While better known for her contributions in the nursing and mathematical fields, Nightingale is also an important link in the study of English feminism.
It did not portray her as an entirely sympathetic character and draws much characterisation from Lytton Strachey's biography of her in ''Eminent Victorians''.
Her father had given her an annual income of £500 (roughly £40,000/US$65,000 in present terms), which allowed her to live comfortably and to pursue her career.
Nightingale still believed that the death rates were due to poor nutrition, lack of supplies, stale air and overworking of the soldiers.
The book served as the cornerstone of the curriculum at the Nightingale School and other nursing schools, though it was written specifically for the education of those nursing at home.
Cassandra was a princess of Troy who served as a priestess in the temple of Apollo during the Trojan War.
Her writings on Egypt in particular are testimony to her learning, literary skill and philosophy of life.
Her behaviour was said to be exasperating and eccentric and she had no respect for upper-class British women, whom she regarded generally as inconsequential.
Nightingale questioned the goodness of a God who would condemn souls to hell, and was a believer in universal reconciliation – the concept that even those who die without being saved will eventually make it to Heaven.
Stephen Paget in the ''Dictionary of National Biography'' asserted that Nightingale reduced the death rate from 42% to 2%, either by making improvements in hygiene herself, or by calling for the Sanitary Commission.
Nightingale underwent the first of several experiences that she believed were calls from God in February 1837 while at Embley Park, prompting a strong desire to devote her life to the service of others.
The first biography of Nightingale was published in England in 1855.
The work also reflects her fear of her ideas being ineffective, as were Cassandra's.
As she sorted out her thoughts, she wrote ''Suggestions for Thought to Searchers after Religious Truth''.
It was adapted as a film of the same name in 1951.
According to Caroline Worthington, director of the Florence Nightingale Museum, “When she Nightingale started out there was no such thing as nursing.
She used methods such as the pie chart, which had first been developed by William Playfair in 1801.
Bostridge points out that in the early 1880s Nightingale wrote an article for a textbook in which she advocated strict precautions designed, she said, to kill germs.
An appeal is being considered for the former Derbyshire Royal Infirmary hospital in Derby, England to be named after Nightingale.
A nurse who posed for the top right panel in 1959 attended the rededication service in October 2010.
While taken for granted now, it was at the time a relatively novel method of presenting data.
This theory held that diseases could only be transmitted by touch.
William's mother Mary ''née'' Evans was the niece of Peter Nightingale, under the terms of whose will William inherited his estate at Lea Hurst, and assumed the name and arms of Nightingale.
The suggested new name will be either Nightingale Community Hospital or Florence Nightingale Community Hospital.
It is recognised as the knowledge which every one ought to have – distinct from medical knowledge, which only a profession can have".
As a young woman, Nightingale was described as attractive, slender and graceful.
Later in life, she kept up a prolonged correspondence with Irish nun Sister Mary Clare Moore, with whom she had worked in Crimea.
Adrienne Rich wrote that "...Eleanor Taylor has brought together the waste of women in society and the waste of men in wars and twisted them inseparably."
An effort to correct this was made with a 2008 publication by Wilfrid Laurier University, as volume 11 of a 16 volume project, the ''Collected Works of Florence Nightingale''.
Apparently, the writing served its original purpose of sorting out thoughts; Nightingale left soon after to train at the Institute for deaconesses at Kaiserswerth.
Nightingale continued her travels (now with Charles and Selina Bracebridge) as far as Greece and Egypt.
At Thebes, she wrote of being "called to God", while a week later near Cairo she wrote in her diary (as distinct from her far longer letters that her elder sister Parthenope was to print after her return): "God called me in the morning and asked me would I do good for him alone without reputation."
When the chapel was demolished the window was removed and installed in the replacement chapel.
Florence Nightingale's most famous contribution came during the Crimean War, which became her central focus when reports got back to Britain about the horrific conditions for the wounded.
In 1912, a biographical silent film titled ''The Victoria Cross'', starring Julia Swayne Gordon as Nightingale, was released, followed in 1915 by another silent film, ''Florence Nightingale'', featuring Elisabeth Risdon.
The Union government approached her for advice in organising field medicine.
In 2009, a stage musical play representation of Nightingale entitled ''The Voyage of the Lass'' was produced by the Association of Nursing Service Administrators of the Philippines.
The best known of these essays, called "Cassandra", was previously published by Ray Strachey in 1928.
The award, established in 1973, is given in recognition of meritorious services of nursing professionals characterised by devotion, sincerity, dedication and compassion.
Nightingale was a prodigious and versatile writer.
Florence was stubborn, opinionated and forthright but she had to be those things in order to achieve all that she did."
Richards went on to become a nursing pioneer in the US and Japan.
Her parents were William Edward Nightingale, born William Edward Shore (1794–1874) and Frances ("Fanny") Nightingale ''née'' Smith (1789–1880).
As Mark Bostridge has demonstrated, one of Nightingale's signal achievements was the introduction of trained nurses into the workhouse system in Britain from the 1860s onwards.
Despite the intense anger and distress of her mother and sister, she rebelled against the expected role for a woman of her status to become a wife and mother.
The work features nine panels, of the original ten, depicting scenes of hospital life, Derby townscapes and Nightingale herself.
A recent biography cites brucellosis and associated spondylitis as the cause.
Consequently, she reduced peacetime deaths in the army and turned her attention to the sanitary design of hospitals and the introduction of sanitation in working-class homes (see Statistics and Sanitary Reform, below).
She had access to people in high places and she used it to get things done.
With overcrowding, defective sewers and lack of ventilation, the Sanitary Commission had to be sent out by the British government to Scutari in March 1855, almost six months after Nightingale had arrived.
Nightingale made a comprehensive statistical study of sanitation in Indian rural life and was the leading figure in the introduction of improved medical care and public health service in India.
The first trained Nightingale nurses began work on 16 May 1865 at the Liverpool Workhouse Infirmary.
Her birthday is now celebrated as International CFS Awareness Day.
She later transferred to a mule cart and was reported to have escaped serious injury when the cart was toppled in an accident.
Nightingale wrote "Every day sanitary knowledge, or the knowledge of nursing, or in other words, of how to put the constitution in such a state as that it will have no disease, or that it can recover from disease, takes a higher place.
After Nightingale sent a plea to ''The Times'' for a government solution to the poor condition of the facilities, the British Government commissioned Isambard Kingdom Brunel to design a prefabricated hospital that could be built in England and shipped to the Dardanelles.
The Nightingale Pledge is a modified version of the Hippocratic Oath which nurses have recited at their "pinning" ceremony which takes place at the end of their training.
The carriage was returned to England by Alexis Soyer after the war and subsequently given to the Nightingale training school.
In 1907, she became the first woman to be awarded the Order of Merit.
She often referred to herself in the masculine, as for example "a man of action" and "a man of business".
There was no equipment to process food for the patients.
Nightingale wrote ''Notes on Nursing'' (1859).
And flit from room to room.
Nightingale argued that secular hospitals usually provided better care than their religious counterparts.
A black-and-white photograph taken in about 1907 by Lizzie Caswall Smith at Nightingale's London home in South Street, Park Lane, was auctioned on 19 November 2008 by Dreweatts auction house in Newbury, Berkshire, England, for £5,500.
Despite her symptoms, she remained phenomenally productive in social reform.
Nevertheless, critics agree on the decisive importance of her follow-up achievements in professionalising nursing roles for women.
Her admirers include Country Joe of Country Joe and the Fish, who has assembled an extensive website in her honour.
The President of India honours nursing professionals with the "National Florence Nightingale Award" every year on International Nurses Day.
The Dickens character Sarah Gamp, who was more interested in drinking gin than looking after her patients, was only a mild exaggeration.
It was restored and transferred to the Army Medical Services Museum, now in Mytchett, Surrey, near Aldershot.
Nightingale's lasting contribution has been her role in founding the modern nursing profession.
While she held that the ideal health professional should be inspired by a religious as well as professional motive, she said that in practice many religiously motivated health workers were concerned chiefly in securing their own salvation, and that this motivation was inferior to the professional desire to deliver the best possible care.
The offer of burial in Westminster Abbey was declined by her relatives and she is buried in the graveyard at St Margaret's Church in East Wellow, Hampshire, near Embley Park.
When I am no longer even a memory, just a name, I hope my voice may perpetuate the great work of my life.
While her demeanour was often severe, she was said to be very charming and possess a radiant smile.
This experience influenced her later career, when she advocated sanitary living conditions as of great importance.
The strengthened legislation was enacted in the Public Health Acts of 1874 and 1875.
"Cassandra" protests the over-feminisation of women into near helplessness, such as Nightingale saw in her mother's and older sister's lethargic lifestyle, despite their education.
Medicines were in short supply, hygiene was being neglected, and mass infections were common, many of them fatal.
She later became an honorary member of the American Statistical Association.
On 22 August 1853, Nightingale took the post of superintendent at the Institute for the Care of Sick Gentlewomen in Upper Harley Street, London, a position she held until October 1854.
The Royal Sanitary Commission of 1868–9 presented Nightingale with an opportunity to press for compulsory sanitation in private houses.
She said that if given the choice between being a woman or a galley slave, then she would choose the freedom of the galleys.
She recorded that "Clarkey" was a stimulating hostess who did not care for her appearance, and while her ideas did not always agree with those of her guests, "she was incapable of boring anyone."
During her bedridden years, she also did pioneering work in the field of hospital planning, and her work propagated quickly across Britain and the world.
In the introduction to the 1974 edition, Joan Quixley of the Nightingale School of Nursing wrote: "The book was the first of its kind ever to be written.
She criticised early women's rights activists for decrying an alleged lack of careers for women at the same time that lucrative medical positions, under the supervision of Nightingale and others, went perpetually unfilled.
In the following year she was given the Honorary Freedom of the City of London.
Nightingale's output slowed down considerably in her last decade.
She was a strong opponent of discrimination both against Christians of different denominations, and against those of non-Christian religions.
Yet the real God is far more merciful than any human creature ever was or can ever imagine."
By 1882, several Nightingale nurses had become matrons at several leading hospitals, including, in London (St Mary's Hospital, Westminster Hospital, St Marylebone Workhouse Infirmary and the Hospital for Incurables at Putney) and throughout Britain (Royal Victoria Hospital, Netley; Edinburgh Royal Infirmary; Cumberland Infirmary and Liverpool Royal Infirmary), as well as at Sydney Hospital in New South Wales, Australia.
During 1850 and 1852, she was struggling with her self-definition and the expectations of an upper-class marriage from her family.
Lytton Strachey based much of his chapter on Nightingale in ''Eminent Victorians'' on Cook, and Cecil Woodham-Smith also relied heavily on Cook's ''Life'' in her 1950 biography, though she did have access to new family material preserved at Claydon.
Indeed, Nightingale is described as "a true pioneer in the graphical representation of statistics", and is credited with developing a form of the pie chart now known as the polar area diagram, or occasionally the '''Nightingale rose diagram''', equivalent to a modern circular histogram, to illustrate seasonal sources of patient mortality in the military field hospital she managed.
Although much of Nightingale's work improved the lot of women everywhere, Nightingale was of the opinion that women craved sympathy and were not as capable as men.
Clarke demonstrated that women could be equals to men, an idea that Florence had not obtained from her mother.
Death rates were sharply reduced, but she never claimed credit for helping to reduce the death rate.
A memorial monument to Nightingale was created in Carrara marble by Francis William Sargant in 1913 and placed in the cloister of the Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence.
She wrote some 200 books, pamphlets and articles throughout her life.
However she was often critical of organised religion.
As of 2016, the Florence Nightingale Declaration has been signed by over 25,000 signatories from 106 countries.
Since 1965, International Nurses Day has been celebrated on her birthday (12 May) each year.
In October 2010, £6,000 was raised to reposition the window in St Peter's Church, Derby.
Some of her tracts were written in simple English so that they could easily be understood by those with poor literary skills.
Strachey included it in ''The Cause'', a history of the women's movement.
At the same time she combined with the retired sanitary reformer Edwin Chadwick to persuade Stansfeld to devolve powers to enforce the law to Local Authorities, eliminating central control by medical technocrats.
The area in which the hospital lies in Derby has recently been referred to as the "Nightingale Quarter".
Influenced from an early age by the Wesleyan tradition, Nightingale felt that genuine religion should manifest in active care and love for others.
The book has, inevitably, its place in the history of nursing, for it was written by the founder of modern nursing".
It appeared at a time when the simple rules of health were only beginning to be known, when its topics were of vital importance not only for the well-being and recovery of patients, when hospitals were riddled with infection, when nurses were still mainly regarded as ignorant, uneducated persons.
The result was Renkioi Hospital, a civilian facility that, under the management of Dr Edmund Alexander Parkes, had a death rate less than 1/10th that of Scutari.
Later in 1850, she visited the Lutheran religious community at Kaiserswerth-am-Rhein in Germany, where she observed Pastor Theodor Fliedner and the deaconesses working for the sick and the deprived.
Despite her intense personal devotion to Christ, Nightingale believed for much of her life that the pagan and eastern religions had also contained genuine revelation.
Florence transformed nursing when she got back from Crimea.
In 2008, Mark Bostridge published a major new life of Nightingale, almost exclusively based on unpublished material from the Verney Collections at Claydon and from archival documents from about 200 archives around the world, some of which had been published by Lynn McDonald in her projected sixteen-volume edition of the ''Collected Works of Florence Nightingale'' (2001 to date).
In addition to the continued operation of the Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery at King's College London, the Nightingale Building in the School of Nursing and Midwifery at the University of Southampton is also named after her.
Another museum devoted to her is at her sister's family home, Claydon House, now a property of the National Trust.
In Rome in 1847, she met Sidney Herbert, a politician who had been Secretary at War (1845–1846) who was on his honeymoon.
She became Herbert's key adviser throughout his political career, though she was accused by some of having hastened Herbert's death from Bright's Disease in 1861 because of the pressure her programme of reform placed on him.
File:Flornce Nightingale exhibit.jpg|Florence Nightingale exhibit at Malvern Museum 2010
Before the experiments of the mid-1860s by Pasteur and Lister, hardly anyone took germ theory seriously; even afterwards, many medical practitioners were unconvinced.
Florence Nightingale exhibited a gift for mathematics from an early age and excelled in the subject under the tutorship of her father.
Her most beloved confidante was Mary Clarke, an Englishwoman she met in 1837 and kept in touch with throughout her life.
In 1972 the poet Eleanor Ross Taylor wrote "Welcome Eumenides," a poem written in Nightingale's voice and quoting frequently from Nightingale's writings.
She also helped popularise the graphical presentation of statistical data.
Nightingale's father educated her.
She would sometimes comfort those in her care with this view.
Florence Nightingale.
''Notes on Nursing'' also sold well to the general reading public and is considered a classic introduction to nursing.
It makes the impression upon one that thousands of voices do, uniting in one unanimous simultaneous feeling of enthusiasm or emotion, which is said to overcome the strongest man."
She made extensive use of coxcombs to present reports on the nature and magnitude of the conditions of medical care in the Crimean War to Members of Parliament and civil servants who would have been unlikely to read or understand traditional statistical reports.
Though Nightingale is sometimes said to have denied the theory of infection for her entire life, a 2008 biography disagrees, saying that she was simply opposed to a precursor of germ theory known as contagionism.
For example, a dying young prostitute being tended by Nightingale was concerned she was going to hell and said to her 'Pray God, that you may never be in the despair I am in at this time'.
Nightingale had £45,000 at her disposal from the Nightingale Fund to set up the Nightingale Training School at St. Thomas' Hospital on 9 July 1860.
Historians now believe that both drainage and devolved enforcement played a crucial role in increasing average national life expectancy by 20 years between 1871 and the mid-1930s during which time medical science made no impact on the most fatal epidemic diseases.
She remained in the Church of England throughout her life, albeit with unorthodox views.
All the figures, who are said to be modelled on prominent Derby town figures of the early sixties, surround and praise a central pane of the triumphant Christ.
In the Crimea on 29 November 1855, the Nightingale Fund was established for the training of nurses during a public meeting to recognise Nightingale for her work in the war.
The Agostino Gemelli Medical School in Rome, the first university-based hospital in Italy and one of its most respected medical centres, honoured Nightingale's contribution to the nursing profession by giving the name "Bedside Florence" to a wireless computer system it developed to assist nursing.
Nightingale worked hard to educate herself in the art and science of nursing, in the face of opposition from her family and the restrictive social code for affluent young English women.
The Florence Nightingale Museum at St Thomas' Hospital in London reopened in May 2010 in time for the centenary of Nightingale's death.
Her social reforms include improving healthcare for all sections of British society, advocating better hunger relief in India, helping to abolish prostitution laws that were over-harsh to women, and expanding the acceptable forms of female participation in the workforce.
They will declare: The International Year of the Nurse–2010 (the centennial of Nightingale's death); The UN Decade for a Healthy World–2011 to 2020 (the bicentennial of Nightingale's birth).
She concluded that the health of the army and the people of India had to go hand in hand and so campaigned to improve the sanitary conditions of the country as a whole.
On 13 August 1910, at the age of 90, she died peacefully in her sleep in her room at 10 South Street, Mayfair, London.
