It has been estimated that just under one-third of tourists are Italians, the remainder comprising Americans (20%), Germans (13%), Japanese (8%), Britons (7.8%), French (5.7%) and Spaniards (5%).
Lorenzo de' Medici was considered a political and cultural mastermind of Italy in the late 15th century.
In 2008, the city had the 17th highest average income in Italy.
The municipality of Florence is subdivided into five administrative Boroughs (''Quartieri'').
The originals are now housed in the Museum dell'Opera del Duomo, just to the east of the Cathedral.
Lorenzo was a great patron of the arts, commissioning works by Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and Botticelli.
He seized the opportunity to carry through political reforms leading to a more democratic rule.
It was built in the style of an army camp with the main streets, the ''cardo'' and the ''decumanus'', intersecting at the present ''Piazza della Repubblica''.
An estimated 6,000 Chinese live in the city.
Florence Airport is one of two main airports in the Tuscany region, the other being Galileo Galilei International Airport in Pisa.
* In 1504, Michelangelo's David (now replaced by a replica, since the original was moved in 1873 to the Galleria dell'Accademia) was installed in front of the Palazzo della Signoria (also known as Palazzo Vecchio).
More recently, the Bolgheri region (about  southwest of Florence) has become celebrated for its "Super Tuscan" reds such as Sassicaia and Ornellaia.
Florence has been a setting for numerous works of fiction and movies, including the novels and associated films, such as ''Light in the Piazza'', ''Calmi Cuori Appassionati'', ''Hannibal'', ''A Room with a View'', ''Tea with Mussolini'' and ''Virgin Territory''.
Individual tickets, or a pass called the Carta Agile with multiple rides (10, 21 or 35), may be used on ATAF&Li-nea buses, Tramvia, and 2nd class local trains, only within city railway stations.
Visitors also include thousands of day-trippers brought in by cruise ships (to Livorno) and by road and rail.
In front of it is the medieval Baptistery.
Following Lorenzo de' Medici's death in 1492, he was succeeded by his son Piero&nbsp;II.
The Palazzo della Signoria facing it is still home of the municipal government.
When he broke this ban, he was excommunicated.
Florentines were one of the driving forces behind the Age of Discovery.
All the members of the plot who could be apprehended were seized by the Florentines and hanged from the windows of the palace.
Florence replaced Turin as Italy's capital in 1865 and, in an effort to modernise the city, the old market in the Piazza del Mercato Vecchio and many medieval houses were pulled down and replaced by a more formal street plan with newer houses.
Florence is represented by ACF Fiorentina, which plays in Serie A, the top league of Italian football.
The city also contains numerous museums and art galleries, such as the Uffizi Gallery and the Palazzo Pitti, and still exerts an influence in the fields of art, culture and politics.
Between 1500 and 1650 the population was around 70,000.
Florence became a musical centre during the Middle Ages and music and the performing arts remain an important part of its culture.
Other local railways connect Florence with Borgo San Lorenzo in the Mugello area (Faentina railway) and Siena.
Among the desserts, "schiacciata alla fiorentina" ("white flatbread cake") is one of the most popular; it is a very soft cake, prepared with extremely simple ingredients as it is peculiar of the florentine cuisine, and it is typically eaten on Carnival time.
The current Italian Prime Minister, Matteo Renzi, served as mayor from 2009 to 2014.
A series of matches are held between four teams representing each ''quartiere ''(quarter) of Florence during late June and early July.
The nearby Campanile (partly designed by Giotto) and the Baptistery buildings are also highlights.
The average age of Florence resident is 49 compared to the Italian average of 42.
Such include the Via Camillo Cavour, one of the main roads of the northern area of the historic centre; the Via Ghibellina, one of central Florence's longest streets; the Via dei Calzaiuoli, one of the most central streets of the historic centre  which links ''Piazza del Duomo'' to ''Piazza della Signoria'', winding parallel to via Roma and ''Piazza della Repubblica''; the Via de' Tornabuoni, a luxurious street in the city centre that goes from Antinori square to ponte Santa Trinita, across Piazza Santa Trinita, characterised by the presence of fashion boutiques; the Viali di Circonvallazione, 6-lane boulevards surrounding the northern part of the historic centre; as well as others, such as Via Roma, Via degli Speziali, Via de' Cerretani, and the Viale dei Colli.
Studies by Euromonitor International have concluded that cultural and history-oriented tourism is generating significantly increased spending throughout Europe.
Florence contains several palaces and buildings from various eras.
Polo di Novoli and Polo Scientifico di Sesto Fiorentino as well as in the Research Area of Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche.
With his exile in 1494, the first period of Medici rule ended with the restoration of a republican government.
Via del Parione and Via Roma are other streets that are also well known for their high-end fashion stores.
The Odeon Cinema of the Palazzo dello Strozzino is one of the oldest movie theatres in the city.
The city is home to renowned Italian actors and actresses, such as Roberto Benigni, Leonardo Pieraccioni and Vittoria Puccini.
Today the palace is used for international expositions like the annual antique show (founded as the Biennale del'Antiquariato in 1959), fashion shows and other cultural and artistic events.
The fact that the Medici were bankers to the pope also contributed to their ascendancy.
They play their games at the Stadio Artemio Franchi, which currently holds 47,282.
The architectural firms Foster + Partners and Lancietti Passaleva Giordo and Associates designed this new rail station.
Cosimo was succeeded by his son Piero, who was, soon after, succeeded by Cosimo's grandson, Lorenzo in 1469.
Florence was conquered by Charlemagne in 774 and became part of the Duchy of Tuscany, with Lucca as capital.
The gallery is articulated in many halls, cataloged by schools and chronological order.
The Galleria dell'Accademia has Michelangelo's David – perhaps the best-known work of art anywhere, plus the unfinished statues of the slaves Michelangelo created for the tomb of Pope Julius II.
These made the Florentines rebel and they expelled Piero&nbsp;II.
During this period, the Dominican friar Girolamo Savonarola had become prior of the San Marco monastery in 1490.
But when he realized the size of the French army at the gates of Pisa, he had to accept the humiliating conditions of the French king.
This large Romanesque crenellated fortress-palace overlooks the Piazza della Signoria with its copy of Michelangelo's David statue as well the gallery of statues in the adjacent Loggia dei Lanzi.
Florentine bankers financed Henry the Navigator and the Portuguese explorers who pioneered the route around Africa to India and the Far East.
In addition to the Medici collection, the palace's galleries contain many Renaissance works, including several by Raphael and Titian, large collections of costumes, ceremonial carriages, silver, porcelain and a gallery of modern art dating from the 18th century.
Established from 1920 to 1922 in a wing of the Palazzo dello Strozzino, it used to be called the ''Cinema Teatro Savoia'' (Savoy Cinema-Theatre), yet was later called ''Odeon''.
A temporary arena is constructed, with bleachers and a sand-covered playing field.
The exterior of the baptistery was reworked in Romanesque style between 1059, and 1128.
Nearby is the Uffizi Gallery, one of the finest art museums in the world – founded on a large bequest from the last member of the Medici family.
The Florentines, tired of his extreme teachings, turned against him and arrested him.
At the heart of the city, in Piazza della Signoria, is Bartolomeo Ammanati's Fountain of Neptune (1563–1565), which is a masterpiece of marble sculpture at the terminus of a still functioning Roman aqueduct.
Most bundled routes are Firenze—Pisa, Firenze—Viareggio and Firenze-Arezzo (along the main line to Rome).
Lorenzo was an accomplished musician and brought composers and singers to Florence, including Alexander Agricola, Johannes Ghiselin, and Heinrich Isaac.
Antipasti include ''crostini toscani'', sliced bread rounds topped with a chicken liver-based pâté, and sliced meats (mainly prosciutto and salame, often served with melon when in season).
Florence is known as the "cradle of the Renaissance" (''la culla del Rinascimento'') for its monuments, churches, and buildings.
The rules shift during the tourist-filled summers, putting more restrictions on where one can get in and out.
Later on he is joined by Beatrice, who guides him through Heaven.
They are filled with the creations of Donatello, Verrochio, Desiderio da Settignano, Michelangelo and others.
Florence has a humid subtropical climate (''Cfa''), slightly tending to Mediterranean (''Csa'').
Starting from the late Middle Ages, Florentine money—in the form of the gold florin—financed the development of industry all over Europe, from Britain to Bruges, to Lyon and Hungary.
The cathedral, topped by Brunelleschi's dome, dominates the Florentine skyline.
At the end of World War II in Europe, in May 1945, the U.S. Army's Information and Educational Branch was ordered to establish an overseas university campus for demobilized American service men and women in Florence, Italy.
A museum recording the destruction stands nearby today.
Historically, the locals have had a love-hate relationship with the Arno – which alternated between nourishing the city with commerce, and destroying it by flood.
By the year 1300 Florence had become a center of textile production in Europe.
The Vasari Corridor is another gallery, built connecting the Palazzo Vecchio with the Pitti Palace passing by the Uffizi and over the Ponte Vecchio.
, the population of the city proper is 370,702, while Eurostat estimates that 696,767 people live in the urban area of Florence.
and it was here that the Florentine Camerata convened in the mid-16th century and experimented with setting tales of Greek mythology to music and staging the result—in other words, the first operas, setting the wheels in motion not just for the further development of the operatic form, but for later developments of separate "classical" forms such as the symphony.
The central railway station, Santa Maria Novella railway station, is about  northwest of the Piazza del Duomo.
The urban organization is governed by the Italian Constitution (art.
This line is  long and has 14 stops.
The Golden Age of Florentine art began around this time.
In other words, Machiavelli was a sort of political thinker, perhaps most renowned for his political handbook, titled The Prince, which is about ruling and the exercise of power.
In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Florence grew by 3.22 percent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56 percent.
Artists associated with Florence range from Arnolfo di Cambio and Cimabue to Giotto, Nanni di Banco, and Paolo Uccello; through Lorenzo Ghiberti, and Donatello and Massaccio and the della Robbia family; through Fra Angelico and Botticelli and Piero della Francesca, and on to Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci.
The Medici reigned as Grand Dukes of Tuscany, starting with Cosimo I de' Medici in 1569 and ending with the death of Gian Gastone de' Medici in 1737.
It is the only bridge in the city to have survived World War&nbsp;II intact.
It was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1982.
The two buildings incorporate in their decoration the transition from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance.
Tourism is the most significant industry in central Florence.
This area is commonly referred to as the ZTL (''Zona Traffico Limitato''), which is divided into five subsections.
Here also is the seat of the Istituto Nazionale del Rinascimento and the noted Gabinetto Vieusseux, with the library and reading room.
Cars without permits are allowed to enter after 7.30&nbsp;pm, or before 7.30&nbsp;am.
Manufacturing and commerce, however, still remain highly important.
Within  to the west is the Carmignano area, also home to flavorful sangiovese-based reds.
Engendered by the Medici family's artistic collections through the centuries, it houses works of art by various painters and artists.
The Galleria dell' Accademia houses a Michelangelo collection, including the David.
This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners).
Furthermore, there is the Piazza Santa Trinita, a square near the Arno that mark the end of the Via de' Tornabuoni street.
The Florence-Prato-Pistoia industrial districts and areas were known as the 'Third Italy' in the 1990s, due to the exports of high-quality goods and automobile (especially the Vespa) and the prosperity and productivity of the Florentine entrepreneurs.
The construction of a second line began on 5 November 2011, construction was stopped due to contractors' difficulties but should restart in a few months, completion is now previewed in 2017.
In 1944, the retreating Germans demolished the bridges along the Arno linking the district of Oltrarno to the rest of the city, making it difficult for the British troops to cross.
Firenze Santa Maria Novella railway station is the main national and international railway station in Florence and is used by 59&nbsp;million people every year.
One of the bridges in particular stands out — the Ponte Vecchio (''Old Bridge''), whose most striking feature is the multitude of shops built upon its edges, held up by stilts.
When the French king Charles&nbsp;VIII invaded northern Italy, Piero&nbsp;II chose to resist his army.
Minors (children aged 18 and less) totalled 14.10 percent of the population compared to pensioners, who numbered 25.95 percent.
, 87.46% of the population was Italian.
The Chianti region is just south of the city, and its Sangiovese grapes figure prominently not only in its Chianti Classico wines but also in many of the more recently developed Supertuscan blends.
A third line (from Santa Maria Novella to the Careggi area, where are the most important hospitals of Florence) has gained governmental approval, its construction will follow the second line's timeline.
In recent years, most of the important works of art from the two buildings – and from the nearby Giotto's Campanile, have been removed and replaced by copies.
There are four teams: Azzurri (light blue), Bianchi (white), Rossi (red) and Verdi (green).
There are two other important stations: Campo Di Marte and Rifredi.
The event originates from the Middle Ages, when the most important Florentine nobles amused themselves playing while wearing bright costumes.
Tuscany became a region of the Kingdom of Italy in 1861.
It was well known for its stone masonry that includes rustication and ashlar.
From 1865 to 1871 the city was the capital of the recently established Kingdom of Italy.
There is also a collection of works by the modern sculptor, Marino Marini, in a museum named after him.
The extinction of the Medici dynasty and the accession in 1737 of Francis Stephen, duke of Lorraine and husband of Maria Theresa of Austria, led to Tuscany's temporary inclusion in the territories of the Austrian crown.
Although the original bridge was constructed by the Etruscans, the current bridge was rebuilt in the 14th century.
In 1200 the city was home to 50,000 people.
(A round plate in the ground marks the spot where he was hanged)
The Uffizi is located at the corner of Piazza della Signoria, a site important for being the centre of Florence's civil life and government for centuries.
The first American University for service personnel was established in June 1945 at the School of Aeronautics in Florence, Italy.
In 854, Florence and Fiesole were united in one county.
Florence has large numbers of art-filled churches, such as San Miniato al Monte, San Lorenzo, Santa Maria Novella, Santa Trinita, Santa Maria del Carmine, Santa Croce, Santo Spirito, the Annunziata, Ognissanti and numerous others.
It has a collection of Russian icons and works by various artists and painters.
Many of the rich families in Renaissance Florence were major purchasers of locally produced fine clothing, and the specialists of fashion in the economy and culture of Florence during that period is often underestimated.
However, traditional and local products, such as antiques, handicrafts, glassware, leatherwork, art reproductions, jewelry, souvenirs, elaborate metal and iron-work, shoes, accessories and high fashion clothes also dominate a fair sector of Florence's economy.
In November 1966, the Arno flooded parts of the centre, damaging many art treasures.
It is linked to the Uffizi and the Palazzo Pitti through the Corridoio Vasariano.
He was convicted as a heretic and burned at the stake on the Piazza della Signoria on 23 May 1498.
The executive body is the City Committee (''Giunta Comunale''), composed by 7 assessors, that is nominated and presieded over by a directly elected Mayor.
Near the cart there is a model of a dove, which, according to legend, is a symbol of good luck for the city: at the end of the Easter mass, the dove emerges from the nave of the Duomo and ignites the fireworks on the cart.
In 1013, construction began on the Basilica di San Miniato al Monte.
A turbulent political history includes periods of rule by the powerful Medici family, and numerous religious and republican revolutions.
Each Borough is governed by a Council (''Consiglio'') and a President, elected contextually to the city Mayor.
The Palazzo Vecchio as well as the Duomo, or the city's Cathedral, are the two buildings which dominate Florence's skyline.
The population began to grow again and commerce prospered.
This gives Florentines a highly recognizable accent (the so-called gorgia toscana).
Several monuments are located in Florence: the Florence Baptistery with its mosaics; the Cathedral with its sculptures, the medieval churches with bands of frescoes; public as well as private palaces: Palazzo Vecchio, Palazzo Pitti, Palazzo Medici Riccardi, Palazzo Davanzati; monasteries, cloisters, refectories; the "Certosa".
''Calcio Storico Fiorentino'' ("Historic Florentine Football"), sometimes called ''Calcio in costume'', is a traditional sport, regarded as a forerunner of soccer, though the actual gameplay most closely resembles rugby.
* Campo di Marte; population: 88,588;
The celebrated Chianti Rufina district, geographically and historically separated from the main Chianti region, is also few kilometres east of Florence.
Florence is a major production and commercial centre in Italy, where the Florentine industrial complexes in the suburbs produce all sorts of goods, from furniture, rubber goods, chemicals, and food.
Florence is an important city in Italian fashion, being ranked in the top 51 fashion capitals of the world; furthermore, it is a major national economic centre, as well as a tourist and industrial hub.
Rainfall in summer is convectional, while relief rainfall dominates in the winter.
The birth rate of Florence is 7.66 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.
The transit companies also accommodate travellers from the Amerigo Vespucci Airport, which is  west of the city centre, and which has scheduled services run by major European carriers.
The whole animal was traditionally eaten; tripe (''trippa'') and stomach (''lampredotto'') were once regularly on the menu and still are sold at the food carts stationed throughout the city.
The first line began operation on 14 February 2010 and connects Florence's primary intercity railway station (Santa Maria Novella) with the southwestern suburb of Scandicci.
It is the first example in the western world of a bridge built using segmental arches, that is, arches less than a semicircle, to reduce both span-to-rise ratio and the numbers of pillars to allow lesser encumbrance in the riverbed (being in this much more successful than the Roman Alconétar Bridge).
Aside from such monuments, Florence contains numerous major squares (''piazze'') and streets.
Food and wine have long been an important staple of the economy.
Instead, an equally historic area of streets directly to the south of the bridge, including part of the Corridoio Vasariano, was destroyed using mines.
His style of writing has since become known as ''Petrarchism''.
The Boroughs have the power to advise the Mayor with nonbinding opinions on a large spectrum of topics (environment, construction, public health, local markets) and exercise the functions delegated to them by the City Council; in addition they are supplied with an autonomous founding in order to finance local activities.
Cosimo de' Medici was the first Medici family member to essentially control the city from behind the scenes.
He blamed the exile of the Medicis as the work of God, punishing them for their decadence.
Commissioned by the Medici, Machiavelli also wrote the Florentine Histories, the history of the city.
The Etruscans initially formed a small settlement in 200&nbsp;BC as the settlement of Fiesole (Faesulae in Latin), which was destroyed by Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 80&nbsp;BC in reprisal for supporting the populares faction in Rome.
Florence has served as the home of the Italian fashion company Salvatore Ferragamo since 1928.
He is first guided by the Roman poet Virgil, whose non-Christian beliefs damned him to Hell.
The dome, 600 years after its completion, is still the largest dome built in brick and mortar in the world.
The country's second capital city was superseded by Rome six years later, after the withdrawal of the French troops made its addition to the kingdom possible.
The Allied soldiers who died driving the Germans from Tuscany are buried in cemeteries outside the city (Americans about  south of the city, British and Commonwealth soldiers a few kilometres east of the centre on the right bank of the Arno).
These principles became known as ''Machiavellianism''.
Others include Benvenuto Cellini, Andrea del Sarto, Benozzo Gozzoli, Domenico Ghirlandaio, Filippo Lippi, Bernardo Buontalenti, Orcagna, Pollaiuolo, Filippino Lippi, Verrocchio, Bronzino, Desiderio da Settignano, Michelozzo, the Rossellis, the Sangallos, and Pontormo.
The present city of Florence was established by Julius Caesar in 59&nbsp;BC as a settlement for his veteran soldiers and was named originally ''Fluentia'', owing to the fact that it was built between two rivers, which was later changed to ''Florentia'' ("flowering").
In 2007, the city ranked as the world's 59th most visited city, with over 1.729&nbsp;million arrivals for the year.
The bridge also carries Vasari's elevated corridor linking the Uffizi to the Medici residence (Palazzo Pitti).
The most important match was played on 17 February 1530, during the siege of Florence.
All of this is written in a series of 100 distinct novellas.
This development was unpopular and was prevented from continuing by the efforts of several British and American people living in the city.
The majority of dishes are based on meat.
Since then the bridges have been restored to their original forms using as many of the remaining materials as possible, but the buildings surrounding the Ponte Vecchio have been rebuilt in a style combining the old with modern design.
The centre additionally contains several streets.
The city additionally contains the Orthodox Russian church of Nativity, and the Great Synagogue of Florence, built in the 19th century.
The Piazza della Signoria is the location of a number of statues by other sculptors such as Donatello, Giambologna, Ammannati and Cellini, although some have been replaced with copies to preserve the originals.
It became a secundogeniture of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty, who were deposed for the House of Bourbon-Parma in 1801, themselves deposed in December 1807 when Tuscany was annexed by France.
The project proposed by Brunelleschi in the 14th century was the largest ever built at the time, and the first major dome built in Europe since the two great domes of Roman times – the Pantheon in Rome, and Hagia Sophia in Constantinople.
* In 1301, Dante Alighieri was sent into exile from here (commemorated by a plaque on one of the walls of the Uffizi).
In an effort to reduce air pollution and car traffic in the city, a multi-line tram network called ''Tramvia'' is under construction.
Due to Florence's artistic and architectural heritage, it has been ranked by ''Forbes'' as one of the most beautiful cities in the world.
Although the city was technically a democracy of sorts, his power came from a vast patronage network along with his alliance to the new immigrants, the ''gente nuova'' (new people).
* Centro storico (Historic Centre); population: 67,170;
Another theatre is the Teatro Comunale (or ''Teatro del Maggio Musicale Fiorentino''), originally built as the open-air amphitheatre, the ''Politeama Fiorentino Vittorio Emanuele'', which was inaugurated on 17 May 1862 with a production of Donizetti's ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' and which seated 6,000 people.
It has hot summers with moderate or light rainfall and cool, damp winters.
Florence lies in a basin formed by the hills of Careggi, Fiesole, Settignano, Arcetri, Poggio Imperiale and Bellosguardo (Florence).
The building acquired its current name when the Medici duke's residence was moved across the Arno to the Palazzo Pitti.
The Uffizi is one of these, having a very large collection of international and Florentine art.
Catherine de Medici married king Henry II of France and, after his death in 1559, reigned as regent in France.
By 1300 the population of the city proper was 120,000, with an additional 300,000 living in the Contado.
Despite Latin being the main language of the courts and the Church, writers such as Dante Alighieri and many others used their own language, the Florentine dialect, in composing their works.
Residents of one section, therefore, will only be able to drive in their district and perhaps some surrounding ones.
Adjoining the palace are the Boboli Gardens, elaborately landscaped and with numerous sculptures.
The ''bistecca alla fiorentina'' is a large (the customary size should weigh around 1200 grams – "40&nbsp;oz.")
The main bus station is next to Santa Maria Novella railway station.
The Azzurri are from the quarter of Santa Croce, Bianchi from the quarter of Santo Spirito, Verdi are from San Giovanni and Rossi from Santa Maria Novella.
In 2013, Florence was listed as the second best world city by ''Condé Nast Traveler''.
But when Savonarola publicly accused Pope Alexander VI of corruption, he was banned from speaking in public.
Florence was the prefecture of the French département of Arno from 1808 to the fall of Napoleon in 1814.
