The Democratic Party has maintained an edge in voter registration, both statewide and in 40 of the 67 counties, including Miami-Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach counties, the state's three most populous.
2008 marked the first time since 1932, when Franklin D. Roosevelt carried the state, that Florida was carried by a Northern Democrat for president.
National Basketball Association
Spain continued to dispute the area, though the United States gradually increased the area it occupied.
The basic structure, duties, function, and operations of the government of the state of Florida are defined and established by the Florida Constitution, which establishes the basic law of the state and guarantees various rights and freedoms of the people.
Agriculture is the second largest industry in the state.
In 1968 Edward J. Gurney, also a white conservative, was elected as the state's first post-reconstruction Republican US Senator.
* , which traverses the panhandle, connecting Pensacola, Tallahassee, Lake City, and Jacksonville, with interchanges with I-75 in Lake City and I-95 in Jacksonville.
This Association reported that their member institutions served over 121,000 students in the fall of 2006.
* Birds: peregrine falcon, bald eagle, northern caracara, snail kite, osprey, white and brown pelicans, sea gulls, whooping and sandhill cranes, roseate spoonbill, Florida scrub jay (state endemic), and others.
Florida is one of the largest states east of the Mississippi River, and only Alaska and Michigan are larger in water area.
File:Babyleatherbackseaturtle.jpg|Leatherback sea turtle
Since the late 20th century, the voting results in this area, containing 40% of Florida voters, has often determined who will win the state of Florida in presidential elections.
Soil work began in July 2010 and construction of the line was slated to begin in 2011, with the initial Tampa-Orlando phase completed by 2014.
Florida gained its first permanent major-league professional sports team in 1966 when the American Football League added the Miami Dolphins.
Out of the 22.5%, the largest groups were 6.5% (1,213,438) Cuban, 4.5% (847,550) Puerto Rican, 3.3% (629,718) Mexican, and 1.6% (300,414) Colombian.
The state was admitted as a slave state, although initially its population grew slowly.
Because of this, the area has consistently voted as one of the most Democratic areas of the state.
Until the mid-20th century, Florida was the least populous Southern state.
The second phase, would have extended the line to Miami.
About half of all Major League Baseball teams conduct spring training in the state, with teams informally organized into the "Grapefruit League".
In 2008, delegates of both the Republican Florida primary election and Democratic Florida primary election were stripped of half of their votes when the conventions met in August due to violation of both parties' national rules.
Southern accents are common in northern Florida.
Only two metropolitan areas showed a decrease in homes sold: Panama City and Brevard County.
Three of the Arena Football League's teams are in Florida.
The Daytona Beach area is similar demographically and the city of Orlando has a large Hispanic population, which has often favored Democrats.
Spanning two time zones, it extends to the northwest into a panhandle, extending along the northern Gulf of Mexico.
The state is a wintering location for many species of eastern North American birds.
The fast-growing I-4 corridor area, which runs through Central Florida and connects the cities of Daytona Beach, Orlando, and Tampa/St.
Extended systems of underwater caves, sinkholes and springs are found throughout the state and supply most of the water used by residents.
Economic prosperity in the 1920s stimulated tourism to Florida and related development of hotels and resort communities.
Another major economic engine in Florida is the United States military.
In 1832, the  Treaty of Payne's Landing promised to the Seminoles lands west of the Mississippi River if they agreed to leave Florida.
By 1860 Florida had only 140,424 people, of whom 44% were enslaved.
The population of Florida in the 2010 census was 18,801,310.
Some reference materials may show only 66 because Duval County is consolidated with the City of Jacksonville.
Tallahassee is the state capital.
The legislature's redistricting, announced in 2012, was quickly challenged in court, on the grounds that it had unfairly benefited Republican interests.
The PGA of America is headquartered in Palm Beach Gardens, the PGA Tour is headquartered in Ponte Vedra Beach, and the LPGA is headquartered in Daytona Beach.
Devastating hurricanes in 1926 and 1928, followed by the Great Depression, brought that period to a halt.
American Airlines Arena
As a result, according to Brent Staples, based on data from The Sentencing Project, the effect of Florida's law is such that in 2014 "more than one in ten Floridians – and nearly one in four African-American Floridians – are shut out of the polls because of felony convictions."
While there has been a great deal of conjecture over the cause of the toxic algae bloom, there is no evidence that it is being caused by pollution or that there has been an increase in the duration or frequency of red tides.
3 (2006, 2012,  2013)
Motorists have the 45th lowest rate of car insurance in the U.S. 24% are uninsured.
At the end of the third quarter in 2008, Florida had the highest mortgage delinquency rate in the U.S., with 7.8% of mortgages delinquent at least 60 days.
Green iguanas have also established a firm population in the southern part of the state.
In 1972, the state made personal injury protection auto insurance mandatory for drivers, becoming the second in the nation to enact a no-fault insurance law.
The state also had the second-highest credit card delinquency rate, with 1.45% of cardholders in the state more than 90 days delinquent on one or more credit cards.
After meetings beginning in June, rebels overcame the Spanish garrison at Baton Rouge (now in Louisiana), and unfurled the flag of the new republic: a single white star on a blue field.
'''65.32%''' ''2,730,350
The Miami metropolitan area is the eighth-largest metropolitan area in the United States.
The first section, from Fort Pierce south to the Golden Glades Interchange was completed in 1957.
In 2010, illegal immigrants constituted an estimated 5.7% of the population.
File:Gville UF Century Tower01.jpg|University of FloridaGainesville
43 of Florida's 67 counties are in a MSA.
This law was passed in 1987.
Jacksonville is the most populous city in Florida, and the largest city by area in the contiguous United States.
In the 2010 elections, Republicans solidified their dominance statewide, by winning the governor's mansion, and maintaining firm majorities in both houses of the state legislature.
In 2010, over 2.5 million Floridians were on food stamps, up from 1.2 million in 2007.
The water boundary is  offshore in the Atlantic Ocean and  offshore in the Gulf of Mexico.
In 2010, Florida had the highest percentage of West Indians in the United States, with 2.0% (378,926) from Haitian ancestry, and 1.3% (236,950) Jamaican.
Since the first European contact was made in 1513 by Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León&nbsp;– who named it ''La Florida'' ( "land of flowers") upon landing there in the Easter season, ''Pascua Florida''&nbsp;– Florida was a challenge for the European colonial powers before it gained statehood in the United States in 1845.
Florida has been listed as a swing state in Presidential elections since 1950, voting for the losing candidate once in that period of time.
Seminoles harbored runaway blacks, known as the Black Seminoles, and clashes between whites and Indians grew with the influx of new settlers.
In the third quarter of 2009, there were 278,189 delinquent loans, 80,327 foreclosures.
Florida attracted numerous Africans and African-Americans from adjacent British colonies who sought freedom from slavery.
Major League Soccer
Following the American Civil War, Florida's congressional representation was restored on June 25, 1868, albeit forcefully after Radical Reconstruction and the installation of unelected government officials under the final authority of federal military commanders.
Daytona also has the Coke Zero 400 NASCAR race weekend around Independence Day in July.
The cost of caring for 2.3 million clients in 2010 was $18.8 billion.
Florida has the second largest Puerto Rican population after New York, as well as the fastest-growing in the nation.
In 2010, the center of population of Florida was located between Fort Meade and Frostproof.
The Florida panther is close to extinction.
This would be the first permanent English-speaking population in what is now Duval County, Baker County, St. Johns County and Nassau County.
As a result, Florida is second only to Texas in the percentage of its citizens without health insurance.
Earthquakes are rare because Florida is not located near any tectonic plate boundaries.
From the 1930s through much of the 1960s, Florida was essentially a one-party state dominated by white conservative Democrats, who together with other Democrats of the Solid South, exercised considerable control in Congress.
Sinkhole damage claims on property in the state exceeded a total of $2 billion from 2006 through 2010.
Sales of existing homes for February 2010 was 11,890, up 21% from the same month in 2009.
In 1900 its population was only 528,542, of whom nearly 44% were African American, the same proportion as before the Civil War.
Citrus canker continues to be an issue of concern.
File:OldU.S.PostOfficeandCourthouse.jpg|The Downtown Miami Historic District has some of the oldest buildings in Miami
The population exceeded 19.7 million by December 2014, surpassing the population of the state of New York for the first time.
The Florida Department of Transportation was preparing to build a high-speed rail between Tampa, Lakeland and Orlando.
Combined with its sudden elevation in profile was the Florida land boom of the 1920s, which brought a brief period of intense land development.
+ '''Presidential elections results'''
Citrus greening disease is incurable.
Jacksonville Jaguars
'''51.03%''' ''4,282,074
Major League Baseball
'''50.01%''' ''4,237,756
Florida is served by two additional Amtrak trains (the Silver Star and the Silver Meteor), which operate between New York City and Miami.
In the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections, Barack Obama carried the state as a northern Democrat, attracting high voter turnout especially among the young, Independents, and minority voters, of whom Hispanics comprise an increasingly large proportion.
It is the only state that borders both the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico.
File:Florida Scrub Jay.jpg|The Florida scrub jay is found only in Florida.
Similarly reflecting generations of migrants from the Midwest, the population of the west coast of Florida has a midwestern accent.
In February 2011, the state's unemployment rate was 11.5%.
Florida's interstates, state highways, and U.S.
A number of non-native snakes and lizards have been released in the wild.
The American alligator, American crocodile, Florida panther, and manatee can be found in the Everglades National Park.
The most common accent throughout Florida is general American English, but there are a variety of English-language accents and dialects in Florida.
The current Governor of Florida is Rick Scott.
In 1988 English was affirmed as the state's official language in the Florida Constitution.
Puerto Ricans are more widespread throughout the state, though the heaviest concentrations are in the Orlando area of Central Florida.
The political make-up of congressional and legislative districts has enabled Republicans to control the governorship and most statewide elective offices, and 17 of the state's 27 seats in the 2012 House of Representatives.
Very soon, 'many smokes' appeared 'along the whole coast', billowing against the sky, when the Native ancestors of the Seminole spotted the newcomers and spread the alarm by signal fires".
In 2015, the Florida Supreme Court ruled on appeal that the congressional districts had to be redrawn because of the legislature's violation of the Fair District Amendments to the state constitution passed in 2010; it accepted a new map in early December 2015.
Twenty-seven percent of Florida's population reports speaking a mother language other than English, and more than 200 first languages other than English are spoken at home in the state.
There are 24 military bases in the state, housing three Unified Combatant Commands; United States Central Command in Tampa, United States Southern Command in Doral, and United States Special Operations Command in Tampa.
Florida has 4 cities in the top 25 cities in the U.S. with the most credit card debt.
Republicans, made up mostly of white conservatives, have dominated throughout much of the rest of Florida, particularly in the more rural and suburban areas.
The English attacked St. Augustine, burning the city and its cathedral to the ground several times.
A 2009 list of national housing markets that were hard hit in the real estate crash included a disproportionate number in Florida.
The story that he was searching for the Fountain of Youth is a myth.
File:Hemingwayhouse.jpg|Key West Historic District
The center of population has moved less than  to the east and approximately  to the north between 1980 and 2010 and has been located in Polk County since the 1960 census.
Because of many migrants from the Northeast who have settled on the east coast of Florida, many have a northeastern accent.
On December 2, 2015, a 5-2 majority of the Court accepted a new map of congressional districts, some of which was drawn by challengers.
He named the region ''La Florida'' ("land of flowers").
They won four previously Democratic-held seats to create a 19–6 Republican-majority delegation representing Florida in the federal House of Representatives.
Twenty percent of the population speak Spanish as their first language.
At  above mean sea level, Britton Hill is the highest point in Florida and the lowest highpoint of any U.S. state.
The Atlantic beaches that are vital to the state's economy are being washed out to sea due to rising sea levels caused by climate change.
Florida has attracted many writers such as Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings, Ernest Hemingway and Tennessee Williams, and continues to attract celebrities and athletes.
Raymond James Stadium
Although not directly related to the issue of slavery, the ordinance declared Florida's secession from the Union, allowing it to become one of the founding members of the Confederate States, a looser union of states.
Some native white Floridians, especially those who have descended from long-time Florida families, may refer to themselves as "Florida crackers"; others see the term as a derogatory one.
There were an estimated 675,000 illegal immigrants in the state in 2010.
This would be the first introduction of much of the English-derived legal system which Florida still has today including trial by jury, habeas corpus and county-based government.
The major contributors to the state's gross output in 2007 were general services, financial services, trade, transportation and public utilities, manufacturing and construction respectively.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Florida in 2010 was $748 billion.
Therefore, it is susceptible to rising sea levels associated with global warming.
Today, Florida is distinctive for its large Cuban expatriate community and high population growth, as well as for its increasing environmental issues.
Nearly 80% of Cuban Americans live in Florida, especially South Florida where there is a long-standing and affluent Cuban community.
NASCAR (headquartered in Daytona Beach) begins all three of its major auto racing series in Florida at Daytona International Speedway in February, featuring the Daytona 500, and ends all three Series in November at Homestead-Miami Speedway.
The boll weevil devastated cotton crops.
Chief Executive Magazine name Florida the third "Best State for Business" in 2011.
Some 109,390 U.S. military personnel stationed in Florida, contributing, directly and indirectly, $52 billion a year to the state's economy.
18.4% of children 18 and younger were living in poverty.
In 2010 the state created a hunting season for Burmese and Indian pythons, African rock pythons, green anacondas, and Nile monitor lizards.
* 73%&nbsp;— English
File:Flagler College - Lobby inside Ponce de Leon Hotel.JPG|Flagler CollegeSaint Augustine
In the closely contested 2000 election, the state played a pivotal role.
Both the Spanish and French established settlements in Florida, with varying degrees of success.
Florida is one of seven states that do not impose a personal income tax.
The Florida Department of Education is required by law to train educators in teaching English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL).
In 1830, the U.S. Congress passed the Indian Removal Act and as settlement increased, pressure grew on the United States government to remove the Indians from Florida.
Many of these were of English or Scotch-Irish descent; however, their families have lived in the state for so long, that they choose to identify as having "American" ancestry or do not know their ancestry.
'''60.87%''' ''2,618,885
Florida has three NFL teams, two MLB teams, two NBA teams, two NHL teams, and one MLS team.
The area is often seen as a merging point of the conservative northern portion of the state and the liberal southern portion, making it the biggest swing area in the state.
Florida requires felons to have completed sentencing, parole and/or probation, and then seven years later, to apply individually for restoration of voting privileges.
In 2009, the US Census Bureau estimated that Floridians spent an average 49.1% of personal income on housing-related costs, the third highest percentage in the U.S.
The governor has proposed adding $2.6 billion to care for the expected 300,000 additional patients in 2011.
Forty thousand blacks, roughly one-fifth of their 1900 population, left the state in the Great Migration.
In 2009, 44% of highway fatalities involved alcohol.
There are 379 cities in Florida (out of 411) that report regularly to the Florida Department of Revenue, but there are other incorporated municipalities that do not.
File:Everglades National Park Florida Panther.jpg|Florida panther, native of South Florida
Miami is the sixth poorest big city in the United States.
'''Florida'''  (Spanish for "land of flowers") is a state located in the southeastern region of the United States.
Florida has 22 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) defined by the United States Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
Much of the state is at or near sea level and is characterized by sedimentary soil.
According to the Federal Trade Commission, Florida has the highest per capita rate of both reported fraud and other types of complaints and reported including identity theft complaints.
White Americans of all European backgrounds are present in all areas of the state.
They have had "the luxury of voting for presidential candidates who pledge to cut taxes and halt the expansion of government while knowing that their congressional delegations will continue to protect federal spending."
Being of early importance as a regional center of banking and finance, the architecture of Jacksonville displays a wide variety of styles and design principles.
A notable collection of these styles can be found in St. Augustine, the oldest continuously occupied European-established settlement within the borders of the United States.
There is also a sizable Jewish community, located mainly in South Florida; this is the largest Jewish population in the South and the third-largest in the U.S. behind those of New York and California.
Andrew Jackson, on behalf of the U.S. federal government, served as a military commissioner with the powers of governor of the newly acquired territory for a brief period.
On March 3, 1845, Florida became the 27th state to join the United States of America.
It is estimated that approximately 4% of energy in the state is generated through renewable resources.
Florida has a large and diverse Hispanic population, with Cubans and Puerto Ricans being the largest groups in the state.
In 2011, Florida's per capita personal income was $39,563, ranking 27th in the nation.
The public has a right to beach access under the public trust doctrine, but some areas have access effectively blocked by private owners for a long distance.
The Spanish introduced Christianity, cattle, horses, sheep, the Spanish language, and more to Florida.
+ Florida major league professional sports teams
The federal military was the top employer in three counties.
Seminole Indians based in East Florida began raiding Georgia settlements, and offering havens for runaway slaves.
Florida's Hispanic population includes large communities of Cuban Americans in Miami and Tampa, Puerto Ricans in Orlando and Tampa, and Mexican/Central American migrant workers.
The state of Florida has given professional sports franchises some subsidies in the form of tax breaks since 1991.
National Football League
The busiest Amtrak train stations in Florida in 2011 were: Sanford (259,944), Orlando (179,142), Tampa Union Station (140,785), Miami (94,556), and Jacksonville (74,733).
Today, large concentrations of black residents can be found in northern and central Florida.
About 95% of commercial orange production in the state is destined for processing (mostly as orange juice, the official state beverage).
Out of the 57.9%, the largest groups were 12.0% German (2,212,391), 10.7% Irish (1,979,058), 8.8% English (1,629,832), 6.6% Italian (1,215,242), 2.8% Polish (511,229), and 2.7% French (504,641).
A peninsula between the Gulf of Mexico, the Atlantic Ocean, and the Straits of Florida, it has the longest coastline in the contiguous United States, approximately , and is the only state that borders both the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean.
National Hockey League
Some sections of the state feature architectural styles including Spanish revival, Florida vernacular, and Mediterranean Revival.
The state has a program for those not covered by Medicaid.
The first post-Reconstruction era Republican elected to Congress from Florida was William C. Cramer in 1954 from Pinellas County on the Gulf Coast, where demographic changes were underway.
According to The Sentencing Project, the effect of Florida's felony disenfranchisement law is such that in 2014, "more than one in ten Floridians – and nearly one in four African-American Floridians –  are were shut out of the polls because of felony convictions," although they had completed sentences and parole/probation requirements.
As of 2011, 57.0% of Florida's children under the age of 1 belonged to minority groups.
School boards employ nearly 1 of every 30 workers in the state.
'''48.02%''' ''2,546,870
There are about 500,000 feral pigs in Florida.
The Florida results were contested and a recount was ordered by the court, with the results settled in a court decision.
A few hundred Seminole remained in Florida in the Everglades.
Petersburg, has had a fairly even breakdown of Republican and Democratic voters.
* , which enters the state near Jacksonville and continues along the Atlantic Coast through Daytona Beach, the Melbourne/Titusville, Palm Bay, Vero Beach, Fort Pierce, Port Saint Lucie, Stuart, West Palm Beach, and Fort Lauderdale, before terminating in Downtown Miami, with interchanges with I-10 in Jacksonville and I-4 in Daytona Beach.
