This occurs as biochemical changes take place to change cellular differentiation of leaf, bud and stem tissues into tissue that will grow into the reproductive organs.
Many perennial and most biennial plants require vernalization to flower.
A stereotypical flower consists of four kinds of structures attached to the tip of a short stalk.
Flowers are also dried, freeze dried and pressed in order to create permanent, three-dimensional pieces of flower art.
But plants soon evolved methods of protecting these copies to deal with drying out and other abuse which is even more likely on land than in the sea.
Many flowers rely on simple proximity between flower parts to ensure pollination.
The first step of the transition is the transformation of the vegetative stem primordia into floral primordia.
It can represent a taxon, usually giving ranges of the numbers of different organs, or particular species.
A flower develops on a modified shoot or ''axis'' from a determinate apical meristem (''determinate'' meaning the axis grows to a set size).
These protuberances develop into the sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels.
Flowers may facilitate outcrossing (fusion of sperm and eggs from different individuals in a population) or allow selfing (fusion of sperm and egg from the same flower).
The most primitive flowers are thought to have had a variable number of flower parts, often separate from (but in contact with) each other.
Flowers can also be made into herbal teas.
The primary purpose of a flower is reproduction.
Many flowers have important symbolic meanings in Western culture.
In those species that have more than one flower on an axis, the collective cluster of flowers is termed an ''inflorescence''.
The latter flower types, which have chemical barriers to their own pollen, are referred to as self-sterile or self-incompatible.
Some flowering plants also have a limited ability to modulate areas of absorption.
These gene functions are called A, B and C-gene functions.
Some species of orchids, for example, produce flowers resembling female bees in color, shape, and scent.
In the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Australia and Canada, red poppies are worn to commemorate soldiers who have died in times of war.
Instead the allergen is usually the pollen of the contemporary bloom of anemophilous ragweed (''Ambrosia''), which can drift for many kilometers.
Not all flower scents are appealing to humans; a number of flowers are pollinated by insects that are attracted to rotten flesh and have flowers that smell like dead animals, often called Carrion flowers, including ''Rafflesia'', the titan arum, and the North American pawpaw (''Asimina triloba'').
Most genes central in this model belong to the MADS-box genes and are transcription factors that regulate the expression of the genes specific for each floral organ.
A '''flower''', sometimes known as a bloom or blossom, is the reproductive structure found in plants that are floral (plants of the division Magnoliophyta, also called angiosperms).
Each of these kinds of parts is arranged in a whorl on the receptacle.
Connate petals may have distinctive regions: the cylindrical base is the tube, the expanding region is the throat and the flaring outer region is the limb.
Flowers are also specialized in shape and have an arrangement of the stamens that ensures that pollen grains are transferred to the bodies of the pollinator when it lands in search of its attractant (such as nectar, pollen, or a mate).
The flowers would have tended to grow in a spiral pattern, to be bisexual (in plants, this means both male and female parts on the same flower), and to be dominated by the ovary (female part).
This symbiotic relationship, with a hypothetical wasp bearing pollen from one plant to another much the way fig wasps do today, could have eventually resulted in both the plant(s) and their partners developing a high degree of specialization.
This close relationship is often given as an example of coevolution, as the flower and pollinator are thought to have developed together over a long period of time to match each other's needs.
In Hindu mythology, flowers have a significant status.
''Entomophilous'': flowers attract and use insects, bats, birds or other animals to transfer pollen from one flower to the next.
In the sea, plants—and some animals—can simply scatter out genetic clones of themselves to float away and grow elsewhere.
Edible flowers include nasturtium, chrysanthemum, carnation, cattail, honeysuckle, chicory, cornflower, canna, and sunflower.
Whereas the pollen of animal-pollinated flowers tends to be large-grained, sticky, and rich in protein (another "reward" for pollinators), anemophilous flower pollen is usually small-grained, very light, and of little nutritional value to animals.
A chemical used by plants to defend their flowers, oleanane, has been detected in fossil plants that old, including gigantopterids, which evolved at that time and bear many of the traits of modern, flowering plants, though they are not known to be flowering plants themselves, because only their stems and prickles have been found preserved in detail; one of the earliest examples of petrification.
Flowering plants by contrast are able to shift the transition point wavelength between absorption and reflection.
The study of pollination by insects is called ''anthecology''.
Because of their varied and colorful appearance, flowers have long been a favorite subject of visual artists as well.
In pursuing this attractant from many flowers of the same species, the pollinator transfers pollen to the stigmas—arranged with equally pointed precision—of all of the flowers it visits.
* Daisies are a symbol of innocence.
Flowers that reflect the full range of visible light are generally perceived as ''white'' by a human observer.
As flowers grew more advanced, some variations developed parts fused together, with a much more specific number and design, and with either specific sexes per flower or plant, or at least "ovary inferior".
Once this process begins, in most plants, it cannot be reversed and the stems develop flowers, even if the initial start of the flower formation event was dependent of some environmental cue.
orange blossom honey, clover honey and tupelo honey.
Many modern, domesticated flowers used to be simple weeds, which only sprouted when the ground was disturbed.
In some families, like Ranunculaceae, the petals are greatly reduced and in many species the sepals are colorful and petal-like.
Many cultures do draw a connection between flowers and life and death, and because of their seasonal return flowers also suggest rebirth, which may explain why many people place flowers upon graves.
If unisex flowers are found on the same individual plant but in different locations, the species is said to be ''monoecious''.
The apex of a flowering stem forms a terminal swelling which is called the ''torus'' or receptacle.
The use of schematic diagrams can replace long descriptions or complicated drawings as a tool for understanding both floral structure and evolution.
There is much confusion about the role of flowers in allergies.
If it is assumed that the visual systems of most pollinators view the visible spectrum as circular then it may be said that flowering plants produce color by absorbing the light in one region of the spectrum and reflecting the light in the other region.
Some species of orchids, for example, produce flowers resembling female bees in color, shape, and scent.
Unisexual male and female flowers on the same plant may not appear or mature at the same time, or pollen from the same plant may be incapable of fertilizing its ovules.
Recent DNA analysis (molecular systematics) shows that ''Amborella trichopoda'', found on the Pacific island of New Caledonia, is the sister group to the rest of the flowering plants, and morphological studies suggest that it has features which may have been characteristic of the earliest flowering plants.
Conversely, many species of plants have ways of preventing self-fertilization.
For example, the showy and entomophilous goldenrod (''Solidago'') is frequently blamed for respiratory allergies, of which it is innocent, since its pollen cannot be airborne.
The flowers of plants that make use of biotic pollen vectors commonly have glands called nectaries that act as an incentive for animals to visit the flower.
Some flowers lack one or the other reproductive organ and called ''imperfect'' or ''unisexual''.
Many plants are dependent upon external factors for pollination, including: wind and animals, and especially insects.
Pollen can be scattered without bright colors and obvious shapes, which would therefore be a liability, using the plant's resources, unless they provide some other benefit.
* Irises/Lily are used in burials as a symbol referring to "resurrection/life".
Many Viola species and some Salvia have these types of flowers.
Some of them tended to grow with human crops, and the prettiest did not get plucked because of their beauty, developing a dependence upon and special adaptation to human affection.
The four main whorls (starting from the base of the flower or lowest node and working upwards) are as follows:
is favorable for fertilization and the formation of seeds, hence ensuring maximal reproductive success.
In the third whorl, B and C genes interact to form stamens and in the center of the flower C-genes alone give rise to carpels.
Anemophilous flowers use the wind to move pollen from one flower to the next.
Flowers provide less food than other major plants parts (seeds, fruits, roots, stems and  leaves) but they provide several important foods and spices.
Other flowers use mimicry to attract pollinators.
Flowers of the dandelion and elder are often made into wine.
The extreme case of self-fertilization occurs in flowers that always self-fertilize, such as many dandelions.
Flowering plants usually face selective pressure to optimize the transfer of their pollen, and this is typically reflected in the morphology of the flowers and the behaviour of the plants.
Many flowers, for example, attract only one specific species of insect, and therefore rely on that insect for successful reproduction.
Some inflorescences are composed of many small flowers arranged in a formation that resembles a single flower.
Ragweed is the major culprit, but other important sources are sagebrush, redroot pigweed, lamb's quarters, Russian thistle (tumbleweed), and English plantain.
Some plants make use of abiotic vectors&nbsp;— namely wind (anemophily) or, much less commonly,  water (hydrophily).
These flowers are also known to be actinomorphic or regular, e.g.
In a simple model, three gene activities interact in a combinatorial manner to determine the developmental identities of the organ primordia within the floral meristem.
Note that the wasp example is not incidental; bees, apparently evolved specifically for symbiotic plant relationships, are descended from wasps.
A single ragweed plant can generate a million grains of pollen per day.
Other flowers have modified stamens that are petal-like; the double flowers of Peonies and Roses are mostly petaloid stamens.
Flowers have specific designs which encourages the transfer of pollen from one plant to another of the same species.
Some flowers have patterns, called nectar guides, that show pollinators where to look for nectar; they may be visible only under ultraviolet light, which is visible to bees and some other insects.
The essential parts of a flower can be considered in two parts: the vegetative part, consisting of petals and associated structures in the perianth, and the reproductive or sexual parts.
Sexual reproduction produces genetically unique offspring, allowing for adaptation.
Flowers also attract pollinators by scent and some of those scents are pleasant to our sense of smell.
With CMYK, color is produced as a function of the amplitude of the broad regions of absorption.
Flowers show great variation and plant scientists describe this variation in a systematic way to identify and distinguish species.
Apart from the association with Vishnu, the Hindu tradition also considers the lotus to have spiritual significance.
Honey consists of bee-processed flower nectar and is often named for the type of flower, e.g.
The practice of assigning meanings to flowers is known as floriography.
Bee pollen, pollen collected from bees, is considered a health food by some people.
Some of the most celebrated paintings from well-known painters are of flowers, such as Van Gogh's sunflowers series or Monet's water lilies.
Recently discovered angiosperm fossils such as ''Archaefructus'', along with further discoveries of fossil gymnosperms, suggest how angiosperm characteristics may have been acquired in a series of steps.
The biological function of a flower is to effect reproduction, usually by providing a mechanism for the union of sperm with eggs.
Many flowering plants reflect as much light as possible within the range of visible wavelengths of the pollinator the plant intends to attract.
Pollen may be transferred between plants via a number of 'vectors'.
Rich and powerful women in ancient Egypt would wear floral headdresses and necklaces upon their death as representations of renewal and a joyful afterlife, and the Mexicans to this day use flowers prominently in their Day of the Dead celebrations in the same way that their Aztec ancestors did.
The color model used by human color reproduction technology (CMYK) relies on the modulation of pigments that divide the spectrum into broad areas of absorption.
Hundreds of fresh flowers are edible but few are widely marketed as food.
In fact, anthers typically consist of four microsporangia and an ovule is an integumented megasporangium.
If each type of unisex flower is found only on separate individuals, the plant is ''dioecious''.
In addition to facilitating the reproduction of flowering plants, flowers have long been admired and used by humans to beautify their environment, and also as objects of romance, ritual, religion, medicine and as a source of food.
An inflorescence may include specialized stems and modified leaves known as bracts.
While there is only hard proof of such flowers existing about 130 million years ago, there is some circumstantial evidence that they did exist up to 250 million years ago.
Detailed developmental studies, however, have shown that stamens are often initiated more or less like modified stems (caulomes) that in some cases may even resemble branchlets.
Still other flowers use mimicry to attract pollinators.
To meet these needs a plant is able to interpret important endogenous and environmental cues such as changes in levels of plant hormones and seasonable temperature and photoperiod changes.
This is how early plants reproduced.
Many flowers have evolved to be attractive to animals, so as to cause them to be vectors for the transfer of pollen.
An important feature of white flowers is that they reflect equally across the visible spectrum.
The general assumption is that the function of flowers, from the start, was to involve animals in the reproduction process.
The stem or stalk subtending a flower is called a peduncle.
Cleistogamous flowers are self-pollinated, after which they may or may not open.
Pollination is the movement of pollen from the anthers to the stigma.
snapdragon or most orchids.
The most expensive spice, saffron, consists of dried stigmas of a crocus.
Specific terminology is used to describe flowers and their parts.
Both types of spores develop into gametophytes inside sporangia.
For example, it figures in the Hindu stories of creation.
Such diagrams may show important features of flowers, including the relative positions of the various organs, including the presence of fusion and symmetry, as well as structural details.
Squash flowers are dipped in breadcrumbs and fried.
It is also associated with stars (sun) and its petals blooming/shining.
The principal purpose of a flower is the reproduction of the individual and the species.
Humans observers will perceive this as degrees of saturation (the amount of ''white'' in the color).
The structure of a flower can also be expressed by the means of ''floral diagrams''.
The Greek goddess of spring, flowers and nature is Chloris.
Many flowers have close relationships with one or a few specific pollinating organisms.
The extinction of either member in such a relationship would mean almost certain extinction of the other member as well.
The fertilized ovules produce seeds that are the next generation.
This close relationship compounds the negative effects of extinction.
Once the process begins, even if that cue is removed the stem will continue to develop a flower.
The joining of the sperm to the ovules is called fertilization.
Some plants make use of multiple vectors, but many are highly specialised.
After fertilization, the ovary of the flower develops into fruit containing seeds.
Some endangered plant species are so because of shrinking pollinator populations.
In fact, only florists, gardeners, and others who have prolonged, close contact with flowers are likely to be sensitive to pollen from these plants.
Many Viola and some Salvia species are known to have these types of flowers.
Others, such as the ''Sarracenia'' or lady-slipper orchids, have elaborate designs to ensure pollination while preventing self-pollination.
Early seed-bearing plants include the ginkgo and conifers.
It is, however, a relatively rare cause of allergy because the types of allergens in pine pollen appear to make it less allergenic.
Scientists have collected samples of ragweed pollen 400 miles out at sea and 2 miles high in the air.
The common example of this is most members of the very large composite (Asteraceae) group.
Island genetics is believed to be a common source of speciation, especially when it comes to radical adaptations which seem to have required inferior transitional forms.
A single daisy or sunflower, for example, is not a flower but a flower ''head''—an inflorescence composed of numerous flowers (or florets).
Flower vegetables include broccoli, cauliflower and artichoke.
Flowers have been used since as far back as 50,000 years in funeral rituals.
The apparently sudden appearance of relatively modern flowers in the fossil record posed such a problem for the theory of evolution that it was called an "abominable mystery" by Charles Darwin.
In the second whorl both A- and B-genes are expressed, leading to the formation of petals.
Floral formulae have been developed in the early 19th century and their use has declined since.
Some of the more common examples include:
It has compressed internodes, bearing structures that in classical plant morphology are interpreted as highly modified leaves.
The similarity in leaf and stem structure can be very important, because flowers are genetically just an adaptation of normal leaf and stem components on plants, a combination of genes normally responsible for forming new shoots.
For many species of flowering plant, it is the transition point that characterizes the color that they produce.
Some flowers produce diaspores without fertilization (parthenocarpy).
Most people have little contact with the large, heavy, waxy pollen grains of such flowering plants because this type of pollen is not carried by wind but by insects such as butterflies and bees.
Flowers within art are also representative of the female genitalia, as seen in the works of artists such as Georgia O'Keeffe, Imogen Cunningham, Veronica Ruiz de Velasco, and Judy Chicago, and in fact in Asian and western classical art.
Marigold flowers are fed to chickens to give their egg yolks a golden yellow color, which consumers find more desirable; dried and ground marigold flowers are also used as a spice and colouring agent in Georgian cuisine.
Referring to "fusion," as it is commonly done, appears questionable because at least some of the processes involved may be non-fusion processes.
The period of time during which this process can take place (the flower is fully expanded and functional) is called ''anthesis''.
A ''floral formula'' is a way to represent the structure of a flower using specific letters, numbers and symbols, presenting substantial information about the flower in a compact form.
Flowering plants by contrast produce color by modifying the frequency (or rather wavelength) of the light reflected.
Often they are specialized in shape and have an arrangement of the stamens that ensures that pollen grains are transferred to the bodies of the pollinator when it lands in search of its attractant (such as nectar, pollen, or a mate).
In pursuing this attractant from many flowers of the same species, the pollinator transfers pollen to the stigmas—arranged with equally pointed precision—of all of the flowers it visits.
In ancient times the Greeks would place a crown of flowers on the head of the deceased as well as cover tombs with wreaths and flower petals.
For example, when there is a loss of B-gene function, mutant flowers are produced with sepals in the first whorl as usual, but also in the second whorl instead of the normal petal formation.
The great variety of delicate and beautiful flowers has inspired the works of numerous poets, especially from the 18th-19th century Romantic era.
Flower evolution continues to the present day; modern flowers have been so profoundly influenced by humans that many of them cannot be pollinated in nature.
Some flowers are self-pollinated and use flowers that never open or are self-pollinated before the flowers open, these flowers are called cleistogamous.
Vishnu, one of the three major gods in the Hindu system, is often depicted standing straight on a lotus flower.
Most flowers absorb light in the blue to yellow region of the spectrum and reflect light from the green to red region of the spectrum.
Several groups of extinct gymnosperms, particularly seed ferns, have been proposed as the ancestors of flowering plants but there is no continuous fossil evidence showing exactly how flowers evolved.
Famous examples include William Wordsworth's ''I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud'' and William Blake's ''Ah!
For example, pine tree pollen is produced in large amounts by a common tree, which would make it a good candidate for causing allergy.
Flowers may be directly attached to the plant at their base (sessile—the supporting stalk or stem is highly reduced or absent).
It is common to hear people say they are allergic to colorful or scented flowers like roses.
When petals are fused into a tube or ring that falls away as a single unit, they are sympetalous (also called '''gamopetalous''').
Other flower spices are cloves and capers.
Others use biotic vectors including insects (entomophily), birds (ornithophily), bats (chiropterophily) or other animals.
Male bees move from one such flower to another in search of a mate.
The molecular interpretation of these signals is through the transmission of a complex signal known as florigen, which involves a variety of genes, including CONSTANS, FLOWERING LOCUS C and FLOWERING LOCUS T. Florigen is produced in the leaves in reproductively favorable conditions and acts in buds and growing tips to induce a number of different physiological and morphological changes.
Many flowers lack some parts or parts may be modified into other functions and/or look like what is typically another part.
As with all heterosporous plants, the gametophytes also develop inside the spores (are endosporic).
* Red roses are given as a symbol of love, beauty, and passion.
In the third whorl the lack of B function but presence of C-function mimics the fourth whorl, leading to the formation of carpels also in the third whorl.
Growth of the central part of the stem tip stops or flattens out and the sides develop protuberances in a whorled or spiral fashion around the outside of the stem end.
Flowers with connate petals or sepals may have various shaped corolla or calyx, including campanulate, funnelform, tubular, urceolate, salverform or rotate.
See also The ABC Model of Flower Development.
In the first floral whorl only A-genes are expressed, leading to the formation of sepals.
Botanists describe these flowers as being ''perfect'' or ''bisexual'' and the species as ''hermaphroditic''.
All flowering plants are ''heterosporous'', producing two types of spores.
Some flowers with both stamens and a pistil are capable of self-fertilization, which does increase the chance of producing seeds but limits genetic variation.
Likewise, most fruit used in plant reproduction comes from the enlargement of parts of the flower.
This fruit is frequently a tool which depends upon animals wishing to eat it, and thus scattering the seeds it contains.
Male and female reproductive organs are generally found in separate flowers, the male flowers having a number of long filaments terminating in exposed stamens, and the female flowers having long, feather-like stigmas.
Taking into account the whole diversity in the development of the androecium of flowering plants, we find a continuum between modified leaves (phyllomes), modified stems (caulomes), and modified branchlets (shoots).
The protection became the seed, though it had not yet evolved the flower.
