They also tend to be noisier - a possible concern for residential settings.
While the higher water pressure employed by a flushometer valve does scour the bowl more efficiently than a gravity-driven system, and while fewer blockages typically occur as a result of this higher water pressure, flushometer systems still require approximately the same amount of water as a gravity system to operate (1.6 gpf).
A flush cycle begins each time a user flushes the bowl.
In the siphon-flush-valve system, the user pushes a lever or button, forcing the water up into the tank siphon passageway which then empties the water in the tank into the bowl.
The fresh water supply line requires routine firestopping.
Partial clogging is particularly insidious, as it is usually not discovered immediately, but only later by an unsuspecting user trying to flush a loaded toilet.
Contrary to popular legend, Sir Thomas Crapper did not invent the flush toilet.
The siphoning toilet is perhaps the most popular design in North America for residential and light commercial toilet installations.
Some would argue, however, that any system of regulating the flow of a fluid is still technically a ''valve''.
Some HETs are ''pressure-assisted'' (or ''power-assisted'' or ''pump-assisted'' or ''vacuum-assisted'').
They can be easily identified by their distinctive chrome pipe-work, and by the absence of a toilet tank or cistern, wherever they are employed.
This type of toilet is used on most older style Russian trains, made in Eastern Germany ( factory, design dated probably to the 1950s), employing a pan-like shutter valve discharging waste directly onto the trackbed below.
In western countries, instructions have been put up in some public toilets on the correct use of a sitting-style toilet.
This full siphon tube starts the toilet's siphonic action.
Flush toilets can be designed for sitting (in which case they are also called "Western" toilets) or for squatting, in the case of squat toilets.
Manufacturers responded to consumers' complaints by improving the toilets.
On a two-piece toilet with a separate tank, the flushing mechanism may only be placed into the tank, with final assembly at installation.
These were the first public pay toilets (free ones did not appear until later), and they caused great excitement.
For this reason, rooms with flush toilets may be designed as wet rooms, with a second drain on the floor, and a shower head capable of reaching the whole floor area.
Tanks near the ceiling are flushed by means of a dangling pull chain, often with a large ornate handle, connected to a flush lever on the cistern itself.
The village's design used a river and connecting drainage system to wash waste away.
In many Asian countries and China in particular, "WC" is used as a universal name for the toilet; many Chinese people will make a hand sign with the forefinger and thumb held in the shape of a "C" while the remaining 3 fingers of the same hand are extended to represent a "W", thus indicating where they are going or perhaps to explain where someone has gone.
Valve holes for rapid water entry into the toilet are cut into the rim pieces.
To flush the toilet, the user pushes a lever, which lifts the flush valve from the valve seat.
The valve then floats clear of the seat, allowing the tank to empty quickly into the bowl.
Crapper popularized the siphon system for emptying the tank, replacing the earlier floating valve system which was prone to leaks.
No proven cases of infection have been found, and the risk is unknown.
As the water level drops, the floating flush valve descends back to the bottom of the tank and covers the outlet pipe again.
The concentric design has only existed since 1957, but is gradually becoming more popular than the side-float design.
A very well-preserved example are the latrines at Housesteads on Hadrian's Wall in Britain.
The first such examples may have been the three "waterclosets" installed in the new town house of banker ''Nicolay August Andresen'' on 6 Kirkegaten in Christiania, insured in January 1859.
Since they have no tank, they have zero recharge time, and can be used immediately by the next user of the toilet.
After a few hours, the casting is self-supporting, and is called greenware.
In retrofit installations, a self-contained battery-powered or hard-wired unit can be added to an existing manual flushometer to flush automatically when a user departs.
The leading companies of the period issued catalogues, established showrooms in department stores and marketed their products around the world.
Finally in 1888, he applied for a patent protection for his "after flush" chamber; the device allowed for the basin to be refilled by a lower quantity of clean water in reserve after the water closet was flushed.
The high end of MaP scores is 1000.
Toilet bowls are mounted in any one of three basic manners: above-floor mounted (pedestal), wall mounted (cantilever), or in-floor mounted (squat toilet).
The earliest type of toilet, the valve closet is now rarely used for water-flush toilet systems.
Overflowing of the water mixed with excrement may then occur, depending on the bowl volume, tank capacity and severity of clogging.
Washout toilets have a flat platform with a shallow pool of water.
The siphon action quickly (4–7 seconds) “pulls” nearly all of the water and waste in the bowl and the on-rushing tank water down the drain — it flushes.
The term "water closet" was probably adopted because in the late 19th century, with the advent of indoor plumbing, a toilet displaced an early clothes closet, closets being renovated to easily accommodate the spatial needs of a commode.
The low end of MaP scores is 250 (250&nbsp;grams of simulated fecal matter).
In the UK, the terms "bathroom" and "toilet" are used to indicate distinct functions, even though bathrooms in modern homes often include toilets.
One disadvantage of this design is that it may require the more intense use of a toilet brush to remove bits of feces that may have left marks on the shelf.
If it can be heard to suck air down the drain at the end of a flush, then it is a true siphoning toilet.
This has the advantages of not needing an additional toilet seat and also being more convenient for cultures where people use water to wash their genitals instead of toilet paper.
Another early watercloset on the European continent, dating from 1860, was imported from Britain to be installed in the rooms of Queen Victoria in Ehrenburg Palace (Coburg, Germany); she was the only one who was allowed to use it.
A toilet bowl is most often made of a ceramic, but can sometimes be made of stainless steel or composite plastics.
Throughout the 1880s he submitted further patents for improvements to the flushing rim and the outlet.
In response to the Act, manufacturers produced ''low-flow'' toilets, which many consumers did not like because they often required more than one flush to remove solids.
However, Jennings persuaded the organisers to keep them open, and the toilet went on to earn over £1000 a year.
Twyford had showrooms for water closets in Berlin, Germany; Sydney, Australia; and Cape Town, South Africa.
Toilets in multi-story buildings, located on fire-resistance rated floors typically require at least two through-penetrations, which can compromise the rating of the floor if left untreated.
Such toilets did not flush in the modern sense, but had a continuous stream of running water to wash away waste.
An advantage of the design is that users will not get splashed from below.
To flush the toilet the user activates a flushing mechanism (see above), which pours a large quantity of water quickly into the bowl.
Some flushometer models require the user to either depress a lever or press a button, which in turn opens a flush valve allowing mains-pressure water to flow directly into the toilet bowl or urinal.
The flushing mechanism provides a large flow of water into the bowl (which is described later in this article).
Designs which increase the velocity of flushed water or improve the travel path can improve low-flow reliability.
Since flush toilets are typically not designed to handle waste on site, their drain pipes must be connected to waste conveyance and waste treatment systems.
The design had a flush valve to let water out of the tank, and a wash-down design to empty the bowl.
Flush toilets, if plumbed for it, may also use greywater (water previously used for washing dishes, laundry and bathing) for flushing rather than potable water (drinking water).
As the clay body dries further it hardens more and continues to shrink.
The company Caroma in Australia developed the Duoset cistern with two buttons and two flush volumes as a water-saving measure in 1980.
Philip Haas of Dayton, Ohio, made some significant developments, including the flush rim toilet with multiple jets of water from a ring and the water closet flushing and recycling mechanism similar to those in use today.
In America, the chain-pull indoor toilet was introduced in the homes of the wealthy and in hotels, soon after its invention in England in the 1880s.
For large scale production pieces, these steps may be automated.
Towards the end of the flush the aspirator ceases being covered in water, thus allowing air into the cavity between traps to break the siphon without the noise while the final flush water fills the pan.
Stool capacity varies among toilet designs and is based on the size of the drainage pipe, the capacity of the water tank, the velocity of a flush, and the method by which the water attempts to vacate the bowl of its contents.
Other flushometer models are electronically triggered, using an infrared sensor to initiate the flushing process.
The toilets were probably imported from Britain, as they were referred to by the English term "waterclosets" in the insurance ledger.
The concentric-float fill valve is also designed to signal to users automatically when there is a leak in the tank, by making much more noise when a leak is present than the older style side-float fill valve, which tends to be nearly silent when a slow leak is present.
Therefore, homes and public washrooms have squat toilets, with the toilet bowl installed in the floor.
After flushing, the flapper valve in the water tank closes; water lines and valves connected to the water supply refill the toilet tank and bowl.
At this point, the toilet parts without their molds look like and are about as strong as soft clay.
See also Hydraulic engineering of the Indus Valley Civilization.
With the onset of the Industrial Revolution and related advances in technology, the flush toilet began to emerge into its modern form.
Recently this flush system has also become available in the UK due to a change in regulations.
He received a patent in 1852 for an improved construction of water-closet, in which the pan and trap were constructed in the same piece, and so formed that there was always a small quantity of water retained in the pan itself, in addition to that in the trap which forms the water-joint.
The mechanism usually incorporates one or more parts of the following designs:
The double trap siphonic toilet is a less common type that is exceptionally quiet when flushed.
This device uses the standing water to seal the outlet of the bowl, preventing the escape of foul air from the sewer.
Even with the best of intentions, it would be difficult for the firestopper to install a sealant, because the installer is not allowed to remove the flange, which is partially used to support the drain pipe below during the installation process.
They seldom clog, but the pressurized tanks require replacement about once every 10 years.
When more modern close-coupled cistern and bowl combinations were first introduced, these were first referred to as "low suite combinations".
In many parts of Asia, people traditionally use the toilet in a squatting position.
From there, the water flow removes it into the sewage system.
Waste is cleared out from this pool of water by being swept over into the trap (usually either a P-trap or an S-trap) and then beyond into a sewer by water from the flush.
In addition, some people modify their existing high flush toilet to use less water by placing a brick or water bottle into the toilet's water tank.
A similar German expression is ''Wasser ziehen'' ("to pull water").
By 1879, Twyford had devised his own type of the "wash out" trap water closet, he titled it the "National", and became the most popular wash-out water closet.
When the exhibition finished and moved to Sydenham, the toilets were to be closed down.
If clogging occurs, it is usually the result of an attempt to flush unsuitable items, or too much toilet paper.
A typical flush toilet is a vitreous, ceramic bowl containing water, plus plumbing to rapidly fill it with more water.
The design was arguably the first practical flush toilet, and production continued well into the 19th century, used mainly on boats.
They are flushed by a jet of water from the back that drives excreta into the trap below.
The bowl plus rim is then inverted, and the toilet bowl is set upside down on the top rim mold to hold the pieces together as they dry.
At the top of the toilet bowl is a rim with many angled drain holes that are fed from the tank, which fill, rinse, and induce swirling in the bowl when it is flushed.
Pressure-assist toilets from several companies use  to  per flush.
This water pours through the holes in the rim and a siphon jet hole about  diameter in the bottom of the toilet.
This applies to defecation and urination by males and females.
In recent decades the close coupled tank/bowl combination has become the most popular residential system, as it has been found by ceramic engineers that improved waterway design is a more effective way to enhance the bowl's flushing action than high tank mounting.
Similar toilets were in use throughout the Roman Empire from the 1st through 5th centuries AD.
American plumbing codes still refer to a toilet as a "Water Closet" or a "WC".
In other designs, a segmented flush pushbutton is used; pressing the smaller section releases less water.
The valves are of two main designs: the side-float design and the concentric-float design.
The performance of a flush-toilet may be rated by a Maximum Performance (MaP) score.
George Jennings established a business manufacturing water closets, salt-glaze drainage, sanitary pipes and sanitaryware at Parkstone Pottery in the 1840s, where he popularized the flush toilet to middle class.
Washout pans were amongst the first types of ceramic toilets invented and since the early 1970s are now only found in a decreasing number of localities in continental Europe.
This system uses water main pressure to pre-pressurize a plastic tank located inside  what otherwise appears to be the more typical ceramic flush tank.
The 1870s proved to be a defining period for the sanitary industry and the water closet; the debate between the simple water closet trap basin made entirely of earthenware and the very elaborate, complicated and expensive mechanical water closet would fall under public scrutiny and expert opinion.
This additional torque required at the tank lever is due to the fact that a user must forcefully lift a certain amount of water up into the siphon passageway in order to initiate the siphon action in the tank.
A flush toilet is different from a urinal, which is designed to handle only liquid waste; or from a bidet, which can be used for personal cleansing after toilet use.
He installed one for his godmother Queen Elizabeth I at Richmond Palace.
When most of the water has drained out of the bowl, the continuous column of water up and over the bottom of the upside-down U-shaped drain pipe (the siphon) is broken when air enters the siphon tube.
Usage of this toilet is permitted only while the train is moving, and outside of major cities.
These valves can sometimes be more difficult to operate than a "flapper"-based flush valve because the lever requires more torque than a flapper-flush-valve system.
In countries such as Israel, Singapore or Germany which either have limitations on water consumption or where people are keen to save water, dual flush toilets are now common in both homes and public washrooms.
The other through-penetration is for the drain pipe.
Similar designs are found in some early toilets in the US, one particular brand being labeled the "Grand Niagara", as the flushing of the shelf created a waterfall effect into the drain chamber.
Mounted above the toilet is a large holding tank with approximately  of water in modern designs.
Some other terms for these types of toilets are "siphon jet", "siphon wash", and in North America, "wash down".
After about one hour the top core mold (interior of toilet) is removed.
Older installations, known as "high suite combinations", used a high-level cistern (tank), fitted above head height, that was operated by pulling a chain hanging down from a lever attached to the cistern.
The waterways in these toilets are designed with slightly smaller diameters than a non-siphoning toilet, so that the waterway will naturally fill up with water, each time it is flushed, thus creating the siphon action.
A two-piece attaching seat and toilet bowl lid are typically mounted over the bowl to allow covering the toilet when it is not in use and to provide seating comfort.
Twyford's "Unitas" model was free standing and made completely of earthenware.
Sometimes, three to four flushes periodically during the use of a low-flush toilet may be required to prevent clogging, thus using more water than larger-tanked toilets.
Pressure-assist toilets are sometimes found in both private (single, multiple, and lodging) bathrooms as well as light commercial installations (such as offices).
In collaboration with a Mr Allen, he improved the design by replacing the usual slide valve with a hinged flap that sealed the bottom of the bowl.
When a user flushes a toilet, a "toilet flapper valve" (not to be confused with a type of check valve) opens and allows water from a reservoir tank to quickly enter the toilet bowl.
Flush toilets were introduced in the 1890s.William Elvis Sloan invented the Flushometer in 1906, which used pressurized water directly from the supply line for faster recycle time between flushes.
By the 1880s, the free-standing water closet was sold and quickly gained popularity; the free-standing water closet was able to be cleaned more easily and was therefore a more hygienic water closet.
Dual flush toilets allow the user to select between a flush for urine or feces, saving a significant amount of water over conventional units.
Common means to remedy clogging include use of a toilet plunger, drain cleaner or a plumber's snake.
He also developed a float valve system for the flush tank.
He also improved the construction of valves, drain traps, forcing pumps and pump-barrels.
Thus a  pipe at minimum, or preferably a  pipe, must be used, but as the high volume is used only for a short duration, very little water is used for the amount of flushing efficacy delivered.
The toilet then gives its characteristic gurgle as the siphonic action ceases and no more water flows out of the toilet.
The term "water closet" is still used today in some places, but it often refers to a room that has both a toilet and other plumbing fixtures such as a sink or a bathtub.
The most common use for valve closets is now in portable closets for caravans, camping, trains, and aircraft, where the flushing fluid is recycled.
In India, the "Anglo-Indian" design allows the same toilet to be used in the sitting or the squatting position.
The Royal Spanish Academy Dictionary accepts "váter" as a name for a toilet or bathroom, which is derived from the British term "water closet".
After a user flushes and the water in the pre-pressurized tank has finished emptying into the bowl, the outlet valve in the plastic tank shuts.
During the exhibition, 827,280 visitors paid one penny to use them; for the penny they got a clean seat, a towel, a comb, and a shoe shine.
In some countries, clogging has become more frequent due to regulations that require the use of small-tanked low-flush toilets in attempt to conserve water.
Although flush toilets first appeared in Britain, they soon spread to the Continent.
Heads (on ships) are typically flushed with seawater.
The term "water closet" was coined in England around 1870.
This design is also much quieter than other pressure-assist or flushometer toilets.
Such systems are used in places such as the majority of cities and towns in Hong Kong (see water supply and sanitation in Hong Kong), Gibraltar, and Avalon, California, United States.
Examples of this type of toilet can be found in Australia, Austria, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands, and some regions of Poland, although it is becoming less common.
After the molds are removed, workers use hand tools and sponges to smooth the edges and surface of the greenware, and to remove the mold joints or roughness: this process is called "fettling".
In 1992, the United States Congress passed the Energy Policy Act of 1992, which mandated that beginning in 1994 common flush toilets use only .
The side-float design has existed for over a hundred years.
This system is common in homes in the US and in continental Europe.
The side-float design uses a float on the end of a lever to control the fill valve.
More complicated in design than other toilets, this design has lower reliability and is more difficult to maintain or repair.
During the firing in the kiln, the greenware and glaze are vitrified as one solid finished unit.
A washout toilet is a kind of flush toilet which were once predominantly used in Germany, Austria and France.
Originally, the term "bath-room" referred only to the room where the bathtub was located (usually a separate room not housing a toilet), but this connotation has changed in common North American usage.
HETs may be ''single-flush'' or ''dual-flush''.
A "true siphoning toilet" can be easily identified by the noise it makes.
A crucial advance in plumbing, was the S-trap, invented by the Scottish mechanic Alexander Cumming in 1775, and still in use today.
Later, all the rest of the mold pieces are removed.
After being sprayed with glaze, the toilet bowls, tanks, and lids are placed in stacks on a conveyor belt or "car" that slowly goes through a large kiln to be fired.
They also appear in Knossos and Akrotiri of the ancient Minoan civilization from the 2nd millennium BC.
As the side-float rises, so does the side-float-arm.
Modern versions of the Duoset are now available worldwide, and save the average household 67% of their normal water usage.
His flush toilets were designed by inventor Albert Giblin, who received a British patent for the "Silent Valveless Water Waste Preventer", a siphon discharge system.
This system, invented by Albert Giblin and common in the UK, uses a storage tank similar to that used in the flapper-flush-valve system above.
Another pioneering manufacturer was Thomas William Twyford, who invented the single piece, ceramic flush toilet.
Once a flushometer valve has been flushed, and after a preset interval, the flushometer mechanism closes the valve and stops the flow.
The float was originally made from copper sheet, but it is now usually plastic.
HETs possess an effective flush volume of  or less.
The newer concentric-float fill valve consists of a tower which is encircled by a plastic float assembly.
At The Great Exhibition at Hyde Park held from 1 May to 15 October 1851, George Jennings installed his Monkey Closets in the Retiring Rooms of The Crystal Palace.
In 1875, the "wash-out" trap water closet was first sold and was found as the public's preference for basin type water closets.
Many designs are available, some including a holder to enclose the brush when it is not in use.
Methods used to make up for the inadequacies of low flow toilets include using thinner toilet paper, plungers, and adding extra cups of water to the bowl manually.
The arm connects to the fill valve that blocks the water flow into the toilet tank, and thus maintains a constant level in the tank.
One opening is for the fresh water supply to flush and/or fill the water tank.
His design had a sliding valve in the bowl outlet above the trap.
This molding process allows the formation of intricate internal waste lines in the fixture; the drain's hollow cavities are poured out as slip.
The oldest neolithic village in Britain, dating from circa 31st century BC, Skara Brae, Orkney, used a form of hydraulic technology for sanitation.
In tanks using a flapper-flush valve, the outlet at the bottom of the tank is covered by a buoyant (plastic or rubber) cover, or flapper, which is held in place against a fitting (the ''flush valve seat'') by water pressure.
The drain pipe, however, is exempt from firestopping in many building codes, particularly when noncombustible piping is used, because the penetration terminates on the unexposed side in a ceramic bowl filled with water, which can withstand significant fires.
Transiting the kiln takes glaze-covered greenware around 23–40 hours.
Intumescent firestops are often used, in the event plastic pipes are used for toilet drains, so that the melting plastic pipe is choked off in the event of an accidental fire.
The cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro had a flush toilet in almost every house, attached to a sophisticated sewage system.
When a toilet is flushed, the wastewater flows into a septic tank or sewage system and from there to a sewage treatment plant.
After the pieces are removed from the kiln and fully cooled, they are inspected for cracks or other defects.
Studies have shown that aerosol droplets are produced by flushing the toilet, which enter the air of the surroundings.
Then the high pressure water from the main refills the plastic tank.
the feces do not fall directly into standing water).
The float is located to one side of the main valve tower at the end of a rod or arm.
The toilet bowl, rim, tank and tank lid require separate molds.
The exposed top of the bowl piece is then covered with a thick slip and the still-uncured rim is attached on top of the bowl so that the bowl and hollow rim are now a single piece.
