Khunung Eshei/Khuland Eshei is an ancient folk song of Meiteis of Manipur who have maintained it for thousands of years.
Some believe that folk music originated as art music that was changed and probably debased by oral transmission, while reflecting the character of the society that produced it.
Further south, in Shantou, Hakka and Chaozhou, erxian and zheng ensembles are popular.Sizhu ensembles use flutes and bowed or plucked string instruments to make harmonious and melodious music that has become popular in the West among some listeners.
The musical style emerged shortly afterwards in Spain and other areas of Latin America where it came to be known under similar names.
One meaning often given is that of "old songs, with no known composers", another is that of music that has been submitted to an evolutionary "process of oral transmission.... the fashioning and re-fashioning of the music by the community that give it its folk character."
The English term "folklore", to describe traditional folk music and dance, entered the vocabulary of many continental European nations, each of which had its folk-song collectors and revivalists.
Some traditional song narratives recall supernatural events or mysterious deaths.
Part of this mosaic is supplied by the folk songs of Canada brought by European and Anglo-Saxon settlers to the new land."
The Nueva Canción movement of the 1970s revived the genre across Latin America and bought it to places where it was unknown or forgotten.
For example, the late Alam Lohar is a good example of a classical South Asian folk singer of great repute.
It is possible to group together the Baltic states (or, sometimes, only Estonia) and parts of northwest Russia as sharing cultural similarities, contrasted with Norway, Sweden, Denmark and the Atlantic islands of, Iceland and the Faroe Islands.
Vocal and instrumental traditions in Sweden have tended to share tunes historically, though they have been performed separately.
It ran most year from 1959 to 1970, and 1985 to the present, with an attendance of approximately 10,000 persons.
While in urban music clubs of the dance hall/vaudeville variety became popular, followed by jazz, rural Canada remained mostly a land of traditional music.
In folk music, a ''tune'' is a short instrumental piece, a melody, often with repeating sections, and usually played a number of times.
Thus, over time we would expect each traditional song to become aesthetically ever more appealing&nbsp;— it would be collectively composed to perfection, as it were, by the community.
Slovene folk music in Upper Carniola and Styria also originated from the Alpine traditions.
Musical types include:
The ''Latviju dainas'' are extensively used in the classical choral works of Andrejs Jurāns, Jānis Cimze, and Emilis Melngailis.
For example, the words of "I'm a Man You Don't Meet Every Day" (Roud 975) are known from a broadside in the Bodleian Library.
One of the most extensive was perhaps the work done in Riga by Krisjanis Barons, who between the years 1894 and 1915 published six volumes that included the texts of 217,996 Latvian folk songs, the ''Latvju dainas''.
The genre of Sri Lankan music is known as Oriental music.
In terms of music, academics do not speak of a Canadian tradition, but rather ethnic traditions (Acadian music, Irish-Canadian music, Blackfoot music, Innu music, Inuit music, Métis fiddle, etc.)
It is sometimes claimed that the earliest folk festival was the Mountain Dance and Folk Festival, 1928, in Asheville, North Carolina, founded by Bascom Lamar Lunsford.
This is used in festivals such as the Sinhalese New Year and ceremonies such as weddings.
Traditional folk music often includes sung words, although folk instrumental music occurs commonly in dance music traditions.
These composers, like many of their predecessors, both made arrangements of folk songs and incorporated traditional material into original classical compositions.
It reduced the boredom of repetitive tasks, it kept the rhythm during synchronized pushes and pulls, and it set the pace of many activities such as planting, weeding, reaping, threshing, weaving, and milling.
This completed a process to where "folk music" no longer meant only traditional folk music.
The popularity of "contemporary folk" recordings caused the appearance of the category "Folk" in the Grammy Awards of 1959: in 1970 the term was dropped in favor of "Best Ethnic or Traditional Recording (including Traditional Blues)", while 1987 brought a distinction between "Best Traditional Folk Recording" and "Best Contemporary Folk Recording".
Cueca is a family of musical styles and associated dances from Chile, Bolivia, Peru, and Argentina.
The traditional drama, music and songs are typically Sri Lankan.
Their music had a profound impact on bluegrass, country, Southern Gospel, pop and rock musicians.
The earliest American folk music scholars were with The American Folklore Society (AFS), which emerged in the late 1800s.
Han traditional weddings and funerals usually include a form of oboe called a suona and apercussive ensembles called a chuigushou.
They are sung by a woman accompanied by a xiao and a pipa, as well as other traditional instruments.
One strong theme amongst folk scholars in the early decades of the 20th century was regionalism, the analysis of the diversity of folk music (and related cultures) based on regions of the US rather than based on a given song's historical roots.
The conch-shell (Hakgediya) is another form of a natural instrument, and the player blows it to announce the opening of ceremonies of grandeur.
The traditional forms include many aspects of performance and musical instrumentation unique to particular regions or Indigenous Australian groups.
"In his collections of folk songs, Sandburg added a class dynamic to popular understandings of American folk music.
Three primary schools of thought emerged: "Traditionalists" (e.g.
This music tells stories, myths and legends.
This is important to note because the Sinhalese dance is not set to music as the western world knows it; rhythm is king.
The principal strings are two: one of steel and the other of a set of horsehair.
and was arguably the most prominent US folk music scholar of his time, notably during the beginnings of the folk music revival in the 1930s and early 1940s.
Laments for lost battles and wars, and the lives lost in them, are equally prominent in many traditions; these laments keep alive the cause for which the battle was fought.
Swedish folk music is a genre of music based largely on folkloric collection work that began in the early 19th century in Sweden.
This process and period is called the (second) folk revival and reached a zenith in the 1960s.
In the American armed forces, a lively oral tradition preserves jody calls ("Duckworth chants") which are sung while soldiers are on the march.
Nueva canción renewed traditional Latin American folk music, and was soon associated with revolutionary movements, the Latin American New Left, Liberation Theology, hippie and human rights movements due to political lyrics.
*Gajaga Wannama&nbsp;– The dance of the elephant
The Hungarian ''táncház'' movement, started in the 1970s, involves strong cooperation between musicology experts and enthusiastic amateurs.
Around this time, composers of classical music developed a strong interest in collecting traditional songs, and a number of outstanding composers carried out their own field work on traditional music.
The most common form for tunes in folk music is AABB, also known as binary form.
Similar activity was also under way in other countries.
The Canmore Folk Music Festival is Alberta's longest running folk music festival.
This earlier collection—which includes the famous Jelly Roll Morton, Woody Guthrie, Lead Belly, and Muddy Waters sessions, as well as Lomax’s prodigious collections made in Haiti and Eastern Kentucky (1937)&nbsp;— is the provenance of the American Folklife Center" at the library of Congress.
Neighbors gathered, exchanged and created songs and dances; this is a part of the roots of the modern intertribal powwow.
The large Rabana has to be placed on the floor like a circular short-legged table and several people (especially the womenfolk) can sit around it and beat on it with both hands.
Another important instrument is the sheng, pipes, an ancient instrument that is ancestor of all Western free reed instruments, such as the accordion.
Charles Seeger and Lawrence Gellert) emphasized music's role "in 'people's' struggles for social and political rights."
Later, a dynamic of class and circumstances was added to this.
Many epic poems of various cultures were pieced together from shorter pieces of traditional narrative verse, which explains their episodic structure, repetitive elements, and their frequent ''in medias res'' plot developments.
The folk music movement, festivals, and the wartime effort were seen as forces for social goods such as democracy, cultural pluralism, and the removal of culture and race-based barriers.
The many regions of the Nordic countries share certain traditions, many of which have diverged significantly.
French classical composers, from Bizet to Ravel, also drew upon Spanish themes, and distinctive Spanish genres became universally recognized.
Professional sailors made similar use of a large body of sea shanties.
However, traditional Hungarian folk music and folk culture barely survived in some rural areas of Hungary, and it has also begun to disappear among the ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania.
The music is of several types and uses only a few types of instruments.
In Ireland, The Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem (although its members were all Irish-born, the group became famous while based in New York's Greenwich Village), The Dubliners, Clannad, Planxty, The Chieftains, The Pogues, The Corrs, The Irish Rovers, and a variety of other folk bands have done much over the past few decades to revitalise and re-popularise Irish traditional music.
The songs basically detailed the hardness of life of those who work in the country.
But the emergence of the term "folk" coincided with an "outburst of national feeling all over Europe" that was particularly strong at the edges of Europe, where national identity was most asserted.
The songs tell personal stories of life in the wide open country of Australia.
The event hosts contemporary and traditional artists in genres including World/Fusion, Celtic, Singer/Songwriter, Folk Rock, Country, Klezmer, and Dance.
Eastern Europe is also the origin of the Jewish Klezmer tradition.
The most prominent regionalists were literary figures with a particular interest in folklore.
Even prior to liberalizing its immigration laws in the 1960s, Canada was ethnically diverse with dozens of different Indigenous and European groups present.
Several collectors have catalogued the songs including John Meredith whose recording in the 1950s became the basis of the collection in the National Library of Australia.
In Norway the work of collectors such as Ludvig Mathias Lindeman was extensively used by Edvard Grieg in his ''Lyric Pieces'' for piano and in other works, which became immensely popular.
Cajun music is often mentioned in tandem with the Creole-based, Cajun-influenced zydeco form, both of Acadiana origin.
In 1985 The Pogues took it full circle by restoring all the Irish references.
He also collected songs in his travels and, in 1927, published them in a book ''American Songbag''.
For Scholes, as well as for Cecil Sharp and Béla Bartók, there was a sense of the music of the country as distinct from that of the town.
Starting in the mid-20th century a new form of popular folk music evolved from traditional folk music.
It is held annually on the third weekend in August.
Nursery rhymes and nonsense verse used to amuse or quiet children also are frequent subjects of traditional songs.
Nueva cancion first surfaced during the 1960s as "The Chilean New Song" in Chile.
In North America, during the 1930s and 1940s, the Library of Congress worked through the offices of traditional music collectors Robert Winslow Gordon, Alan Lomax and others to capture as much North American field material as possible.
English Elizabethan and Stuart composers had often evolved their music from folk themes, the classical suite was based upon stylised folk-dances, and Joseph Haydn's use of folk melodies is noted.
The 1930s saw the beginnings of larger scale themes, commonalities, themes and linkages in folk music developing in the populace and practitioners as well, often related to the Great Depression.
Because variants proliferate naturally, it is naïve to believe that there is such a thing as the single "authentic" version of a ballad such as "Barbara Allen".
*The Ravanahatha (ravanhatta, rawanhattha, ravanastron or ravana hasta veena) is a bowed fiddle popular in Western India.
Modern Spanish folk artists abound (Mil i Maria, Russian Red, et al.)
Traditional songs such as ''Green grow the rushes, O'' present religious lore in a mnemonic form, as do Western Christmas carols and similar traditional songs.
Mexican immigrants began to reach Oklahoma in the 1870s, bringing beautiful canciones and corridos love songs, waltzes, and ballads along with them.
modernizing while respecting the traditions of their forebears.
It would gain great popularity throughout Latin America, and is regarded as a precursor to Rock en español.
Manuel de Falla (1876–1946) became interested in the cante jondo of Andalusian flamenco, the influence of which can be strongly felt in many of his works, which include ''Nights in the Gardens of Spain'' and ''Siete canciones populares españolas'' ("Seven Spanish Folksongs", for voice and piano).
Some artists visited India to learn music and later started introducing light music.
However, the loss of traditional music is slowed in nations or regions where traditional folk music is a badge of cultural or national identity, for instance in the case of Bangladesh, Hungary, India, Ireland, Pakistan, Scotland, Latvia, Turkey, Portugal, Brittany, and Galicia, Greece and Crete.
It arose from earlier developments, perhaps combined with changes in the nature of British identity, led to a much more intensive and academic attempt to record what was seen as a vanishing tradition, and is now usually referred to as the first English or British folk revival.
Later Asians contributed to the musical mix.
Their studies expanded to include Native American music, but still treated folk music as a historical item preserved in isolated societies as well.
A consistent definition of traditional folk music is elusive.
Folk song traditions were taken to Australia by early settlers from England, Scotland and Ireland and gained particular foothold in the rural outback.
Folk music festivals proliferated during the 1930s.
But the term does not cover a song, dance, or tune that has been taken over ready-made and remains unchanged."
These traditions include Irish, Scottish, Manx, Cornish, Welsh, Breton traditions.
Although there are some upbeat songs, most of them are nostalgic and melancholic.
They are extensions of the term ''folklore'', which was coined in 1846 by the English antiquarian William Thoms to describe "the traditions, customs, and superstitions of the uncultured classes."
None can reliably claim to be the original, and it is possible that the "original" version ceased to be sung centuries ago.
Composers such as Fernando Sor and Francisco Tarrega established the guitar as Spain's national instrument.
There are six common types of drums falling within 3 styles (one faced.
It relied on biblical text for much of its direction, and the use of metaphors and imagery was common.
Other instruments include:
Throughout most of human prehistory and history, listening to recorded music was not possible.
Nueva canción (Spanish for 'new song') is a movement and genre within Latin American and Iberian music of folk music, folk-inspired music and socially committed music.
"Gospel developed after the Civil War (1861–65).
He also advanced some significant theories concerning the workings of oral-aural tradition.
Folk music was already, "...seen as the authentic expression of a way of life now past or about to disappear (or in some cases, to be preserved or somehow revived)," particularly in "a community uninfluenced by art music" and by commercial and printed song.
Love poetry, often of a tragic or regretful nature, prominently figures in many folk traditions.
In 1958 the song was recorded in Canada (My Name is Pat and I'm Proud of That).
In these terms folk music may be seen as part of a "schema comprising four musical types: 'primitive' or 'tribal'; 'elite' or 'art'; 'folk'; and 'popular'."
These artists have also been commercially successful in continental Europe and North America.
"Shape-note or sacred harp singing developed in the early 19th century as a way for itinerant singing instructors to teach church songs in rural communities.
*The flutes of metal such as silver & brass produce shrill music to accompany Kandyan Dances, while the plaintive strains of music of the reed flute may pierce the air in devil-dancing.
Narrative verse looms large in the traditional folk music of many cultures.
Lomax spent the last 20 years of his life working on an interactive multimedia educational computer project he called the Global Jukebox, which included 5,000 hours of sound recordings, 400,000 feet of film, 3,000 videotapes, and 5,000 photographs.
Literary interest in the popular ballad form dates back at least to Thomas Percy and William Wordsworth.
"Stomp dance" remains at its core, a "call and response" form; instrumentation is provided by rattles or shackles worn on the legs of women.
Polka is still a popular genre of folk music in many European countries and is performed by folk artists in Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, Czech Republic, Netherlands, Croatia, Slovenia, Germany, Hungary, Austria, Switzerland, Italy, Ukraine, Belarus, Russia and Slovakia.
Two related developments were the U.S. Communist Party's interest in folk music as a way to reach and influence Americans, and politically active prominent folk musicians and scholars seeing communism as a possible better system, through the lens of the Great Depression.
*Local drama music includes Kolam, Nadagam and Noorthy types.
*African American folk music in the area has roots in slavery and emancipation.
Dance troupes from Russia and Poland toured non-communist Europe from about 1937 to 1990.
The drum is central to the music of the southern plains Indians.
Under the sponsorship of the Washington Post, the festival was held in Washington, DC at Constitution Hall from 1937-1942.
Traditional ''Volksmusik'' is not to be confused with commercial ''Volkstümliche Musik'' variations, strongly related to German Schlager music.
Like American Indian communities, each rite of passage in Hispanic communities is accompanied by traditional music.
Moda de viola is the name designed to Brazilian folk music.
Andean music comes from the general area inhabited by Quechuas, Aymaras and other peoples that roughly in the area of the Inca Empire prior to European contact.
Beginning with the folk music revival of the 1970s, vocalists and instrumentalists have also begun to perform together in folk music ensembles.
These included Percy Grainger and Ralph Vaughan Williams in England and Béla Bartók in Hungary.
(See also Hedy West)
The National Folk Festival (USA) is an itinerant folk festival in the United States.
The Cambridge Folk Festival in Cambridge, England is noted for having a very wide definition of who can be invited as folk musicians.
Phillippu Singho from Negombo in 1824 Performed “Harishchandra Nadagama” in Hnguranketha which was originally written in Telingu language.
Local varieties of this dance are also found in the Nordic countries, United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland, Latin America (especially Mexico), and in the United States.
It is believed to have originated among the Hela civilisation of Sri Lanka in the time of King Ravana.
As of March 2012 this has been accomplished.
the Woodford Folk Festival, National Folk Festival and Port Fairy Folk Festival are amongst Australia's largest major annual events, attracting top international folk performers as well as many local artists.
Gospel is a "joyful noise," sometimes accompanied by instrumentation and almost always punctuated by hand clapping, toe tapping, and body movement."
An important part of the whole Balkan folk music is the music of the local Romani ethnic minority.
Nueva canción, a similar evolution of a new form of socially committed music occurred in several Spanish speaking countries.
Nationalist composers emerged in Central Europe, Russia, Scandinavia, Spain and Britain: the music of Dvořák, Smetana, Grieg, Rimsky-Korsakov, Brahms, Liszt, de Falla, Wagner, Sibelius, Vaughan Williams, Bartók, and many others drew upon folk melodies.
Several Appalachian musicians obtained renown during the folk revival of the 1950s and 1960s, including Jean Ritchie, Roscoe Holcomb, Ola Belle Reed, Lily May Ledford, and Doc Watson.
American traditional music is also called roots music.
Tourism revenue can provide a potent incentive to preserve local cultural distinctives, as when tourist agencies brand some regions of Britain as Celtic".
Ensembles consisting of mouth organs (sheng), shawms (suona), flutes (dizi) and percussion instruments (especially yunluo gongs) are popular in northern villages; their music is descended from the imperial temple music of Beijing, Xi'an, Wutai shan and Tianjin.
The culture of the Torres Strait Islanders is related to that of adjacent parts of New Guinea and so their music is also related.
The term is further derived from the German expression ''Volk'', in the sense of "the people as a whole" as applied to popular and national music by Johann Gottfried Herder and the German Romantics over half a century earlier.
*Appalachian music is the traditional music of the region of Appalachia in the Eastern United States.
It is considered "roots music" because it served as the basis of music later developed in the United States, including rock and roll, contemporary folk music, rhythm and blues, and jazz.
*The "Thalampata" - 2 small cymbals joined together by a string.
A collection of tunes with structural similarities is known as a tune-family.
The term "folk", by the start of the 21st century, could cover singer songwriters, such as Donovan from Scotland and American Bob Dylan, who emerged in the 1960s and much more.
The most prominent and influential example of the latter (to the extent that it is usually called "''the'' folk music revival") is the folk revival of the mid 20th century, centered in the English-speaking world which gave birth to contemporary folk music.
Their recordings of such songs as "Wabash Cannonball" (1932), "Will the Circle Be Unbroken" (1935), "Wildwood Flower" (1928), and "Keep On the Sunny Side" (1928) made them country standards.
Stan Rogers is a lasting fixture of the Canadian folk festival Summerfolk, held annually in Owen Sound, Ontario, where the main stage and amphitheater are dedicated as the "Stan Rogers Memorial Canopy".
The CBC promoted Canadian music, including traditional music, on its radio and later television services, but the mid-century craze for all things "modern" led to the decline of folk music relative to rock and pop.
Andean music is popular to different degrees across Latin America, having its core public in rural areas and among indigenous populations.
It is derived from various European and African influences, including English ballads, Irish and Scottish traditional music (especially fiddle music), hymns, and African-American blues.
The classical Sinhalese Orchestra consists of five categories of instruments, but among the percussion instruments, the drum is essential for dance.
Most Swedish instrumental folk music is dance music; the signature music and dance form within Swedish folk music is the polska.
Nueva cancion is recognized as having played a powerful role in the social upheavals in Portugal, Spain and Latin America during the 1970s and 1980s.
The date is almost certainly before 1900, and it seems to be Irish.
The post–World War II folk revival in America and in Britain started a new genre, contemporary folk music, and brought an additional meaning to the term "folk music": newly composed songs, fixed in form and by known authors, which imitated some form of traditional music.
The Saami of Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia have their own unique culture, with ties to the neighboring cultures.
This is not normally used for the dances.
Contemporaneously with Child, the Reverend Sabine Baring-Gould and later Cecil Sharp worked  to preserve a great body of English rural traditional song, music and dance, under the aegis of what became and remains the English Folk Dance and Song Society (EFDSS).
During this time folk music began to become enmeshed with political and social activism themes and movements.
Parades led by Western-type brass bands are common, often competing in volume with a shawm/chuigushou band.
Later the blues tradition developed, with roots in and parallels to sacred music.
*The Carter Family was a traditional American folk music group that recorded between 1927 and 1956.
The event now hosts approximately 12,000 visitors, presenting bands on 6 stages.
two faced, and flat faced):
She describes how the French colony at Québec brought French immigrants, followed before long by waves of immigrants from Great Britain, Germany, and other European countries, all bringing music from their homelands, some of which survives into the present day.
Sacred harp singing became popular in many Oklahoma rural communities, regardless of ethnicity."
Ritchie, living in a time when the Appalachians had opened up to outside influence, was university educated and ultimately moved to New York City, where she made a number of classic recordings of the family repertoire and published an important compilation of these songs.
The four-day Philadelphia Folk Festival began in 1962.
The festival is firmly fixed in tradition, with Rogers' song "The Mary Ellen Carter" being sung by all involved, including the audience and a medley of acts at the festival.
In Spain, Isaac Albéniz (1860–1909) produced piano works reflect his Spanish heritage, including the ''Suite Iberia'' (1906–1909).
The National Folk Festival is Australia’s premier folk festival event and is attended by over 50,000 people.
Kolam music is based on low country tunes primarily to accomapany mask dance in exorcism rituals.
The term originated in the 19th century but is often applied to music that is older than that.
It is limited to approximately 3–4 notes and is used by the ordinary people for pleasure and entertainment.
Lomax was the first prominent scholar to study distinctly American folk music such as that of cowboys and southern blacks.
This type of folk music also includes fusion genres such as folk rock, folk metal, electric folk, and others.
This is a companion drum to the afore mentioned Dawula.
Sarah Gertrude Knott and John Lomax) emphasized the preservation of songs as artifacts of deceased cultures.
