Amidst a deafening discord, Ben screams at all the figures from his past and collapses as he cries out for Phyllis.
The piece has enjoyed a number of major revivals, and several of its songs have become standards, including "Broadway Baby", "I'm Still Here", "Too Many Mornings", "Could I Leave You?
The director and choreographer was Casey Nicholaw.
"), and Hattie Walker performs her old showstopping number ("Broadway Baby").
Chapin confirms this: "Alas ... final word came from Capitol that they would not go for two records.... Dick Jones now had to propose cuts throughout the score in consultation with Steve."
Brantley, reviewing the 2007 Encores!
The resulting album was more complete than the original cast album.
Roscoe, the old master of ceremonies, introduces the former showgirls ("Beautiful Girls").
PS Classics co-founder Tommy Krasker said: "We've never had the kind of reaction that we've had for 'Follies'.
"I was reluctantly happy to comply, my only serious balk being at his request that I cut "The Road You Didn't Take" ...
concert for ''The New York Times'', wrote: "I have never felt the splendid sadness of 'Follies' as acutely as I did watching the emotionally transparent concert production...At almost any moment, to look at the faces of any of the principal performers...is to be aware of people both bewitched and wounded by the contemplation of who they used to be.
It was originally performed in one act.
The net result was four new songs...For reasons which I've forgotten, I rewrote "Loveland" for the London production.
Ted Chapin explains: "Today, ''Follies'' is rarely performed twice in exactly the same version.
James Goldman's widow made the observation that the show has morphed throughout its entire life...The London production had new songs and dialogue.
The Broadway production opened on April 4, 1971, directed by Harold Prince and Michael Bennett, and with choreography by Bennett.
For commercial reasons, the cast album was cut from two LPs to one early in production.
A production also ran from March to April 1995 at the Theatre Under the Stars, Houston, Texas and in April to May 1995 at the 5th Avenue Theatre, Seattle with Constance Towers (Phyllis), Judy Kaye (Sally), Edie Adams, Denise Darcel, Virginia Mayo and Karen Morrow (Carlotta).
They pass through the spectral showgirls without seeing them.
''Variety'' gave a very favorable review to the "lavish and entirely satisfying production", saying that Schaeffer directs "in methodical fashion, building progressively to a crescendo exactly as Sondheim does with so many of his stirring melodies.
The cast included Lorna Luft, Millicent Martin, Mary Millar, Dave Willetts, Trevor Jones Bryan Smyth, Alex Sharpe, Christine Scarry, Aidan Conway and Enda Markey.
Peter Marks of ''The Washington Post'' wrote that the revival "takes an audience halfway to paradise."
He praised a "broodingly luminous Jan Maxwell" and Burstein's "hapless onetime stage-door Johnny", as well as "the show's final 20 minutes, when we ascend with the main characters into an ironic vaudeville dreamscape of assorted neuroses - the most intoxicating articulation of the musical's 'Loveland' sequence that I've ever seen."
To extend the show, it would have been necessary to negotiate new contracts with the entire company ... because of the Belasco's limited seating, it wasn't deemed financially feasible to do so."
Ben admits to Phyllis his admiration for her, and Phyllis shushes him and helps Ben regain his dignity before they leave.
She then tells Ben that their marriage can't continue the way it has been.
The song was "One More Kiss", and the compromise was that if there was time, it would be recorded, even if Jones couldn't promise it would end up on the album.
It followed a similar presentation at the 1995 Melbourne Festival of Arts.
Rich later wrote that audiences at the original production were baffled and restless.
Rich, in his review, noted that "As performed at Avery Fisher Hall, the score emerged as an original whole, in which the 'modern' music and mock vintage tunes constantly comment on each other, much as the script's action unfolds simultaneously in 1971 (the year of the reunion) and 1941 (the year the Follies disbanded)."
Songs cut prior to the Broadway premiere include: "All Things Bright and Beautiful" (used in the prologue), "Can That Boy Foxtrot!
Phyllis Newman and Liliane Montevecchi reprised the roles they played in the Lincoln Center production.
The production's run was extended, and its grosses exceeded expectations, but it did not recoup its investment.
Some of the Follies numbers imitate the style of particular composers of the early 20th century:  ''Losing My Mind'' is in the style of a George Gershwin ballad "The Man I Love".
Sondheim's songs aren't parodies or deconstructions; they are evocations that recognize the power of a love song.
Phyllis Rogers Stone, a stylish and elegant woman, also arrives with her husband Ben, a renowned philanthropist and politician.
Walter Kerr wrote in ''The New York Times'' about the original production: "Follies is intermissionless and exhausting, an extravaganza that becomes so tedious... because its extravaganzas have nothing to do with its pebble of a plot."
Buddy then appears, dressed in "plaid baggy pants, garish jacket and a shiny derby hat", and performs a high-energy vaudeville routine depicting how he is caught between his love for Sally and Margie's love for him.
Ben drunkenly propositions Carlotta, with whom he once had a fling, but she has a young lover and coolly turns him down.
(It did get recorded but didn't make its way onto the album until the CD reissue years later.)"
Not only has it already outsold every other album at our website, but the steady stream of emails from customers has been amazing."
The show and the score have a double vision: simultaneously squinting at the messes people make of their lives and wide-eyed at the lingering grace and lift of the music they want to hear.
The cast recording of the 2011 Broadway revival, by PS Classics, was officially released on November 29, 2011, and also was in pre-sale prior to the store release.
Solange proves she is still fashionable at what she claims is 66 ("Ah, Paris!
According to Sondheim, the producer Cameron Mackintosh asked for changes for the 1987 London production.
Barnes also called the story shallow and Sondheim's words a joy "...even when his music sends shivers of indifference up your spine."
He asked author and playwright James Goldman to join him as bookwriter for a new musical.
When they sing, in voices layered with ambivalence and anger and longing, it is clear that it is their past selves whom they are serenading."
The show starred Toni Lamond (Sally), Jill Perryman, Judi Connelli, Terence Donovan, Ron Haddrick, Todd McKenney, and Leonie Page.
"Follies contains two scores: the Follies pastiche numbers and the book numbers."
In the foreword to "Everything Was Possible", Frank Rich wrote: "From the start, critics have been divided about ''Follies'', passionately pro or con but rarely on the fence... Is it really a great musical, or merely the greatest of all cult musicals?"
He had agreed to work on ''The Girls Upstairs'' if Sondheim would agree to work on ''Company''; Michael Bennett, the young choreographer of ''Company'', was also brought onto the project.
Goldman's revised book offered some small improvements over the original."
); and Carlotta Campion, a film star who has embraced life and benefited from every experience.
Sally appears next, dressed as a torch singer, singing of her passion for Ben from the past- and her obsession with him now ("Losing My Mind").
She accuses him of having affairs while he is on the road, and he admits he has a steady girlfriend, Margie, in another town, but always returns home.
Prince made a mistake by giving the recording rights of ''Follies'' to Capitol Records, which in order to squeeze the unusually long score onto one disc, mutilated the songs by condensing some and omitting others."
A concert was held at Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London, on December 8, 1996, and broadcast on BBC Radio 2 on February 15, 1997.
Ben denies this, but still wants Phyllis out.
The production was the premiere attraction at the newly constructed 1,800-seat theatre, which, coincidentally, was itself razed thirty years later (in 2002, in order to build a new office building), thus mirroring the ''Follies'' plot line upon which the musical is based.
He feigns disinterest; there is an underlying tension in their relationship.
The cast also included Anne Rogers, Jo Anne Worley and Philip Bosco.
At its best moments—and there are many—it is the most imaginative and original new musical that Broadway has seen in years."
Ben Brantley, reviewing the 1998 Paper Mill Playhouse production in ''The New York Times'', concluded that it was a "...fine, heartfelt production, which confirms ''Follies'' as a landmark musical and a work of art..."
Christine Baranski played Carlotta, and Lucine Amara sang Heidi.
New York City Center's Encores!
He thinks she’s very neurotic, and she is very neurotic, so he said to me, 'Congratulations.
As the ghosts of the young showgirls slowly drift through the theatre, a majordomo enters with his entourage of waiters and waitresses.
The once resplendent theatre is now little but planks and scaffolding (Prologue/Overture).
The good news is that it also features some of the most exciting musical moments Broadway has seen in several seasons.
The cast featured Charlotte Page (Sally), Liz Robertson (Phyllis), Graham Bickley (Ben), Jérôme Pradon (Buddy), Nicole Croisille (Carlotta), Julia Sutton (Hattie) and Fra Fee (Young Buddy)
Sally and Phyllis were showgirls in the Follies.
After previews from August 3, 2002, it opened officially on August 6, and closed on August 31, 2002.
Phyllis and Sally were roommates while in the Follies, and Ben and Buddy were best friends at school in New York.
Also featured were Rosalind Elias as Heidi, Régine as Solange, Susan Watson as Emily, and Terri White as Stella.
However, the August 23, 2011 Broadway preview performance was performed without an intermission.
Polly Bergen stops everything cold with "I’m Still Here," bringing a rare degree of introspection to a song that is too often a mere belt-fest....
The musical was nominated for eleven Tony Awards and won seven.
Former MGM and onetime Broadway star Betty Garrett, best-known to younger audiences for her television work, played Hattie.
These plans also did not work out, and finally Harold Prince, who had worked previously with Sondheim, became the producer and director.
According to the Associated Press (AP) reviewer, "A revised version of the Broadway hit "Follies" received a standing ovation from its opening-night audience and raves from British critics, who said the show was worth a 16-year wait."
The producer Cameron Mackintosh did not like "that there was no change in the characters from beginning to end....
Terry Teachout of the ''Wall Street Journal'' noted that "One of the signal achievements of this 'Follies' is that it succeeds in untangling each and every strand of the show's knotty plot... Mr. Schaeffer is clearly unafraid of the darkness of 'Follies', so much so that the first act is bitter enough to sting.
The production starred Bob Gunton (Ben), Warren Berlinger (Dimitri Weismann), Patty Duke (Phyllis), Vikki Carr (Sally), Harry Groener (Buddy), Carole Cook (Hattie), Carol Lawrence (Vanessa), Ken Page (Roscoe), Liz Torres (Stella), Amanda McBroom (Solange), Grover Dale (Vincent), Donna McKechnie (Carlotta), Carole Swarbrick (Christine), Stella Stevens (Dee Dee), Mary Jo Catlett (Emily), Justine Johnston (Heidi), Jean Louisa Kelly (Young Sally), Austin Miller (Young Buddy), Tia Riebling (Young Phyllis), Kevin Earley (Young Ben), Abby Feldman (Young Stella), Barbara Chiofalo (Young Heidi), Trevor Brackney (Young Vincent), Melissa Driscoll (Young Vanessa), Stephen Reed (Kevin),and Billy Barnes (Theodore).
Their ghostly younger selves appear, watching them go.
Phyllis begins wondering at her younger self, who worked so hard to become the socialite that Ben needed.
Directed by Matthew Warchus with choreography by Kathleen Marshall, it starred Blythe Danner (Phyllis), Judith Ivey (Sally), Treat Williams (Buddy), Gregory Harrison (Ben), Marge Champion, Polly Bergen (Carlotta), Joan Roberts (the original Laurey from the original Broadway production of ''Oklahoma!
Martin Gottfried wrote: "The concept behind 'Follies' is theater nostalgia, representing the rose-colored glasses through which we face the fact of age ... the show is conceived in ghostliness.
The musical numbers "Ah, But Underneath" (replacing "The Story of Lucy and Jessie"), "Country House", "Make the Most of Your Music" (replacing "Live, Laugh, Love"), "Social Dancing" and a new version of "Loveland" have been incorporated into various productions.
Each of the four is shaken at the realization of how life has changed them.
The production will be directed by Dominic Cooke and will star Janie Dee as Phyllis and Imelda Staunton as Sally.
Heidi Schiller, joined by her younger counterpart, performs "One More Kiss", her aged voice a stark contrast to the sparkling coloratura of her younger self.
Buddy, a traveling salesman, is having an affair with a girl on the road; Sally is still as much in love with Ben as she was years ago; and Ben is so self-absorbed that Phyllis feels emotionally abandoned.
Most songs were therefore heavily abridged and several were left entirely unrecorded.
He noted, though, that "I'm sorry the cast was reduced from 52 to 38, the orchestra from 26 players to 14...To appreciate the revival, you must buy into James Goldman's book, which is peddling a panoramically bleak take on marriage."
Other new cast members included Carol Neblett as Heidi, Sammy Williams as Theodore and Obba Babatunde as Max.
It was Prince who changed the title to ''Follies''; he was "intrigued by the psychology of a reunion of old chorus dancers and loved the play on the word 'follies'".
''Follies'' was performed in concert at the Sydney Opera House with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra in February 1998 as the highlight of the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras and had three performances.
More information will be announced in the National Theatre's autumn press conference on 11 October 2016.
As more guests arrive, Sally’s husband, Buddy, enters.
"Loveland" has dissolved back into the reality of the crumbling and half-demolished theatre; dawn is approaching.
For its first production in France, ''Follies ''was presented at the Toulon Opera House in March, 2013.
Bernadette Peters quoted Sondheim on the character of "Sally": "He said early on that Sally is off balance, to put it mildly.
It starred Alexis Smith (Phyllis), John McMartin (Ben), Dorothy Collins (Sally), Gene Nelson (Buddy), along with several veterans of the Broadway and vaudeville stage.
The production transferred to Broadway at the Marquis Theatre in a limited engagement starting previews on August 7, 2011, with the official opening on September 12, and closing on January 22, 2012 after 151 performances and 38 previews.
Buddy and Phyllis join their spouses and the foursome reminisces about the old days of their courtship and the theatre, their memories vividly coming to life in the apparitions of their young counterparts ("Waiting For The Girls Upstairs").
After exiting, Buddy escorts the emotionally devastated Sally back to their hotel with the promise to work things out later.
"), as they are mirrored by their younger selves.
Both couples are deeply unhappy with their marriages.
Several of the former showgirls perform their old numbers, sometimes accompanied by the ghosts of their former selves.
"Ah, But Underneath" was substituted for "The Story of Lucy and Jessie" in order to accommodate non-dancer Hoty.
There have been five recordings of ''Follies'' released: the original 1971 Broadway cast album; ''Follies in Concert'', Avery Fisher Hall (1985); the original London production (1987); and the Paper Mill Playhouse (1998).
The cast featured Diana Rigg (Phyllis), Daniel Massey (Ben), Julia McKenzie (Sally), David Healy (Buddy), Lynda Baron, Leonard Sachs, Maria Charles, Pearl Carr & Teddy Johnson.
''The New York Times'' critic wrote: "The initial critics' reviews ranged from unqualified raves to some doubts whether the reworked book of James Goldman is up to the inventiveness of Sondheim's songs.
The cast starred Bernadette Peters as Sally, Jan Maxwell as Phyllis, Elaine Paige as Carlotta, Linda Lavin as Hattie, Ron Raines as Ben and Danny Burstein as Buddy.
When Sally sees Ben, her former lover, she greets him self-consciously ("Don't Look at Me").
Resplendent in top hat and tails, Ben begins to offer his devil-may-care philosophy ("Live, Laugh, Love"), but stumbles and anxiously calls to the conductor for the lyrics, as he frantically tries to keep going.
''Follies'' is a blend of both, and the new production is rounded out with production numbers celebrating love's simple hope for young lovers, its extravagant fantasies for Ziegfeld aficionados, and its fresh lesson for the graying principals."
The majority of the Broadway cast reprised their roles, with the exception of Bernadette Peters, who had prior concert commitments and was replaced by Victoria Clark in the role of Sally, a role she has previously played in New York.
In a jazzy dance number, accompanied by a squadron of chorus boys, Phyllis reflects on the two sides of her personality, one naive and passionate and the other jaded and sophisticated and her desire to combine them ("The Story of Lucy and Jessie").
The Paper Mill Playhouse production used some elements from London but stayed close to the original.
He further commented: "In part, the show is a tribute to musical stage history, in which the 57-year-old Mr. Sondheim is steeped, for he first learned song writing at the knee of Oscar Hammerstein II and became the acknowledged master songwriter who bridged past musical stage romance into the modern musical era of irony and neurosis.
Frank Rich, in reviewing the 1985 concert in ''The New York Times'', wrote: "Friday's performance made the case that this Broadway musical... can take its place among our musical theater's very finest achievements."
Sally is bitter and has never been happy with Buddy, although he has always adored her.
According to Craig Zadan, "It's generally felt that ...
At its very start, ghosts of Follies showgirls stalk the stage, mythic giants in winged, feathered, black and white opulence.
The book "was extensively reworked by James Goldman, with Sondheim's cooperation and also given an intermission."
But it is clear that Sally is still in love with Ben – even though their affair ended badly when Ben decided to marry Phyllis.
'''''Follies''''' is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and a book by James Goldman.
The two younger couples sing in counterpoint of their hopes for the future ("You're Gonna Love Tomorrow/Love Will See Us Through").
Afterward, Phyllis and Ben angrily discuss their lives and relationship, which has become numb and emotionless.
Variety singer and performer Joan Savage sang "Broadway Baby".
According to Joanne Gordon, "When 'Follies' opened in London...it had an entirely different, and significantly more optimistic, tone.
''Time Magazine'' wrote about the original Broadway production: "At its worst moments, Follies is mannered and pretentious, overreaching for Significance.
The four principal performers reprised their roles, as well as Paige as Carlotta.
The Broadway production won the Drama League Award, Distinguished Production of a Musical Revival for 2011-12 and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Revival of a Musical, Outstanding Actor in a Musical (Burstein) and Outstanding Costume Design (Barnes).
This production conducted by Julian Kelly featured the original Broadway score.
Similarly, ghosts of Twenties shows slip through the evening as the characters try desperately to regain their youth through re-creations of their performances and inane theater sentiments of their past."
Since you don't get those moments from the production, the book or the leads, that leaves the featured ensemble, and in Follies that amounts to a small army.
Stephen Sondheim attended one of the performances.
The producer was Cameron Mackintosh, direction was by Mike Ockrent, with choreography by Bob Avian and design by Maria Bjornson.
", "Little White House", "So Many People", "It Wasn't Meant to Happen", "Pleasant Little Kingdom", and "Uptown Downtown".
Ben confides to Sally that his life is empty.
All the voices begin speaking and yelling at each other.
Sally Durant Plummer, "blond, petite, sweet-faced" and at 49 "still remarkably like the girl she was thirty years ago", a former Weismann girl is the first guest to arrive; her ghostly youthful counterpart moves towards her.
The 2011 Broadway and Kennedy Center production transferred to the Ahmanson Theatre, Los Angeles, California, in a limited engagement, from May 3, 2012 through June 9.
"One More Kiss" was omitted from the final release but was restored for CD release.
The musical was written in one act, and the original director, Prince, did not want an intermission, while the co-director, Bennett, wanted two acts.
He predicted that the show eventually would achieve recognition as a Broadway classic.
She shakes loose from the memory and begins to dance with Ben, who is touched by the memory of the Sally he once cast aside.
A Broadway revival opened at the Belasco Theatre on April 5, 2001 and closed on July 14, 2001 after 117 performances and 32 previews.
The production was directed by Eric Schaeffer, with choreography by Warren Carlyle, costumes by Gregg Barnes, set by Derek McLane and lighting by Natasha Katz.
"Loveland" features a string of vaudeville-style numbers, reflecting the leading characters' emotional problems, before returning to the theatre for the end of the reunion party.
("The God-Why-Don't-You-Love-Me Blues").
Buddy warns Phyllis that Sally is still in love with Ben, and she is shaken by how the past threatens to repeat itself.
Phyllis kisses a waiter and confesses to him that she had always wanted a son.
''Follies'' was voted ninth in a BBC Radio 2 listener poll of the UK's "Nation's Number One Essential Musicals."
He tells Sally that he's done, but she is lost in a fantasy world, and tells him that Ben has asked her to marry him.
Chapin relates that "there was one song that Dick Jones producer of the cast album didn't want to include on the album but which Steve Sondheim most definitely did.
Dolores Gray was praised as Carlotta, continuing to perform after breaking her ankle, although in a reduced version of the part.
However, the show did not do well in its Los Angeles engagement and plans for a tour ended.
Julia McKenzie returned to the production for the final four performances.
Prince planned to present the musical on the West Coast and then on a national tour.
Buddy tells her she must be either crazy or drunk, but he's already supported Sally through rehab clinics and mental hospitals and cannot take any more.
Jayne Houdyshell as Hattie, Mary Beth Peil as Solange LaFitte, and Don Correia as Theodore joined the Broadway cast.
Other cast replacements included Millicent Martin as Phyllis.
Frank Rich, for many years the chief drama critic for ''The New York Times'', had first garnered attention, while an undergraduate at Harvard University, with a lengthy essay for the ''Harvard Crimson'' about the show, which he had seen during its pre-Broadway run in Boston.
The production played to 95% capacity.
Before she has a chance to really let loose, they are both called on to participate in another performance – Stella Deems and the ex-chorines line up to perform an old number ("Who's That Woman?
This English-language production, using the full original orchestration, was directed by Olivier Bénézech and conducted by David Charles Abell.
According to ''Variety Magazine'', the production was a "total financial failure, with a cumulative loss of $792,000."
Former Weismann performers at the reunion include Max and Stella Deems, who lost their radio jobs and became store owners in Miami; Solange La Fitte, a coquette, who is vibrant and flirtatious even at 66; Hattie Walker, who has outlived five younger husbands; Vincent and Vanessa, former dancers who now own an Arthur Murray franchise; Heidi Schiller, for whom Franz Lehár once wrote a waltz (or was it Oscar Straus?
The 1987 West End, 2005 Barrington Stage Company, the 2001 Broadway revival and Kennedy Center 2011 productions were performed in two acts.
A staged concert at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, was performed on September 6 and 7, 1985.
This show recreated the original Broadway score.
The ''theatermania.com'' reviewer wrote that "The result is an album that, more so than any of the other existing recordings, allows listeners to re-experience the heartbreaking collision of past and present that's at the core of the piece."
The cast starred Julia McKenzie (Sally), Donna McKechnie (Phyllis), Denis Quilley (Ben) and Ron Moody (Buddy).
It was directed by Prince and starred Dorothy Collins (Sally; replaced by Janet Blair), Alexis Smith (Phyllis), John McMartin (Ben; replaced by Edward Winter), Gene Nelson (Buddy), and Yvonne De Carlo (Carlotta) reprising their original roles.
"Great American Musicals in Concert" series featured ''Follies'' as its 40th production for six performances in February 2007 in a sold out semi-staged concert.
", and "Losing My Mind".
Sondheim noted that the song "The God-Why-Don't-You-Love-Me Blues" is "another generic pastiche: vaudeville music for chases and low comics, but with a patter lyric...I tried to give it the sardonic knowingness of Lorenz Hart or Frank Loesser."
Sally is awed by Ben’s apparently glamorous life, but Ben wonders if he made the right choices and considers how things might have been ("The Road You Didn't Take").
Finally, Weismann enters to greet his guests.
The musical played in the West End at the Shaftesbury Theatre on July 21, 1987 and closed on February 4, 1989 after 644 performances.
Ben replies by saying that he wants a divorce, and Phyllis assumes the request is due to his love for Sally.
Goldman continued to revise the book of the musical right up to his death, which occurred shortly before the 1998 Paper Mill Playhouse production.
The 1998 Paper Mill Playhouse production (Millburn, New Jersey) was directed by Robert Johanson with choreography by Jerry Mitchell and starred Donna McKechnie (Sally), Dee Hoty (Phyllis), Laurence Guittard (Ben), Tony Roberts (Buddy), Kaye Ballard (Hattie ), Eddie Bracken (Weismann), and Ann Miller (Carlotta).
Major changes were made for the original production in London, which attempted to establish a lighter tone and favored a happier ending than the original Broadway production.
However, he thought that it was "wonderful" that, at the end of the first act, "the principal characters recognized their younger selves and were able to acknowledge them throughout the last thirty minutes of the piece."
The ''Time Magazine'' reviewer wrote of the 2001 Broadway revival: "Even in its more modest incarnation, ''Follies'' has, no question, the best score on Broadway."
Other notable performers in the original productions were: Fifi D'Orsay as Solange LaFitte, Justine Johnston as Heidi Schiller, Mary McCarty as Stella Deems, Arnold Moss as Dimitri Weismann, Ethel Shutta as Hattie Walker, and Marcie Stringer and Charles Welch as Emily and Theodore Whitman.
The concert starred Barbara Cook (Sally), George Hearn (Ben), Mandy Patinkin (Buddy), and Lee Remick (Phyllis), and featured Carol Burnett (Carlotta), Betty Comden (Emily), Adolph Green (Theodore), Liliane Montevecchi (Solange LaFitte), Elaine Stritch (Hattie Walker), Phyllis Newman (Stella Deems), Jim Walton (Young Buddy), Howard McGillin (Young Ben), Liz Callaway (Young Sally), Daisy Prince (Young Phyllis), Andre Gregory (Dmitri), Arthur Rubin (Roscoe), and Licia Albanese (Heidi Schiller).
Portions of the concert were seen by audiences worldwide in the televised documentary about the making of the concert, also released on videotape and DVD, of '' 'Follies' in Concert''.
Inspired by a ''New York Times'' article about a gathering of former showgirls from the Ziegfeld Follies, they decided upon a story about ex-showgirls.
The emotional highpoint comes when Joan Roberts sings 'One More Kiss'."
Sally, Phyllis, Ben and Buddy show their "real and emotional lives" in "a sort of group nervous breakdown."
The musical was produced at The Muny, St. Louis, Missouri in July 1972 and then transferred to the Shubert Theatre, Century City, California, running from July 22, 1972 through October 1, 1972.
Principal cast included Kim Crosby (Sally), Leslie Denniston (Phyllis), Jeff McCarthy (Ben), Lara Teeter (Buddy), Joy Franz (Solange), Marni Nixon (Heidi), and Donna McKechnie (Carlotta).
The reason the final curtain came down Saturday was because, being a production by the Roundabout Theatre Company – a subscription-based 'not-for-profit' theater company – it was presented under special Equity terms, with its actors paid a minimal fee.
As their younger counterparts approach them, Phyllis comments to Ben about their past.
