*** Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH)
Three of the FDA restrictions under analysis are the permitting of new drugs and devices, the control of manufacturer speech, and the imposition of prescription requirements.
Concerns about the length of the drug approval process were brought to the fore early in the AIDS epidemic.
The FDA has its headquarters in unincorporated White Oak, Maryland.
Because of these complexities, the 1984 Hatch-Waxman Act did not include biologics in the Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA) process, in essence precluding the possibility of generic drug competition for biotechnology drugs.
The committee was composed of 16 experts, including leaders in clinical medicinemedical research, economics, biostatistics, law, public policy, public health, and the allied health professions, as well as current and former executives from the pharmaceutical, hospital, and health insurance industries.
As of 2011, Risk Minimization Action Plans (RiskMAPS) have been created to ensure risks of a drug never outweigh the benefits of that drug within the postmarketing period.
Up until the 20th century, there were few federal laws regulating the contents and sale of domestically produced food and pharmaceuticals, with one exception being the short-lived Vaccine Act of 1813.
In 1989, a major scandal erupted involving the procedures used by the FDA to approve generic drugs for sale to the public.
OCI receives cases from a variety of sources—including ORA, local agencies, and the FBI—and works with ORA Investigators to help develop the technical and science-based aspects of a case.
For many drugs, children represented such a small proportion of the potential market, that drug manufacturers did not see such testing as cost-effective.
In addition, excessive regulation is blamed for the rising costs of health care and the creation of monopolies, as potential competitors are unable to get FDA approval to enter the market to compete and keep health care costs down.
The example of Vioxx has been prominent in an ongoing debate over whether new drugs should be evaluated on the basis of their absolute safety, or their safety relative to existing treatments for a given condition.
This name was shortened to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) three years later.
The resulting proposed law was unable to get through the Congress of the United States for five years, but was rapidly enacted into law following the public outcry over the 1937 Elixir Sulfanilamide tragedy, in which over 100 people died after using a drug formulated with a toxic, untested solvent.
"The order in which new generic drugs were approved was set by the FDA employees even before drug manufacturers submitted applications" and, according to Mylan, this illegal procedure was followed to give preferential treatment to certain companies.
The serum was originally collected from a horse named Jim, who had contracted tetanus.
In the Pediatric Research Equity Act of 2003, Congress codified the FDA's authority to mandate manufacturer-sponsored pediatric drug trials for certain drugs as a "last resort" if incentives and publicly funded mechanisms proved inadequate.
***** Office of Informatics & Technology Innovation
CDRH also conducts limited amounts of direct product testing.
*** Office of Regulatory Affairs
Some of the committee's recommendations have been incorporated into drafts of the PDUFA IV bill, which was signed into law in 2007.
The 1902 Biologics Control Act was put in place after a diphtheria antitoxin--derived from tetanus-contaminated serum--was used to produce a vaccine that caused the deaths of thirteen children in St. Louis, Missouri.
*** Office of Foods and Veterinary Medicine
Overall, the authors called for an increase in the regulatory powers, funding, and independence of the FDA.
Of the 113 devices recalled, 35 were for cardiovascular health purposes.
New biologics are required to go through a premarket approval process called a Biologics License Application (BLA), similar to that for drugs.
Specific standards the FDA exercises differ from one category to the next.
Charges of corruption in generic drug approval first emerged in 1988, in the course of an extensive congressional investigation into the FDA.
Wiley's advocacy came at a time when the public had become aroused to hazards in the marketplace by muckraking journalists like Upton Sinclair, and became part of a general trend for increased federal regulations in matters pertinent to public safety during the Progressive Era.
In 1997, the FDA proposed a rule to require pediatric drug trials from the sponsors of New Drug Applications.
*** Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
In 1959, the thalidomide tragedy, in which thousands of European babies were born deformed after their mothers took that drug – marketed for treatment of nausea – during their pregnancies, Considering the US was largely spared that tragedy because Dr. Frances Oldham Kelsey of the FDA refused to authorize the medication for market, the 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendment to the FD&C Act was passed, which represented a "revolution" in FDA regulatory authority.
Districts are based roughly on the geographic divisions of the federal court system.
In 1927, the Bureau of Chemistry's regulatory powers were reorganized under a new USDA body, the Food, Drug, and Insecticide organization.
OCI Special Agents often come from other criminal investigations backgrounds, and work closely with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Assistant Attorney General, and even Interpol.
*** Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN)
The definition of a medical device is given in the FD&C Act, and it includes products from the simple toothbrush to complex devices such as implantable neurostimulators.
Vioxx was approved by the FDA in 1999, and was initially hoped to be safer than previous NSAIDs, due to its reduced risk of intestinal tract bleeding.
Each district comprises a main district office and a number of Resident Posts, which are FDA remote offices that serve a particular geographic area.
*** Office of Global Regulatory Operations and Policy (GO)
Inspection observations are documented on Form 483.
Prior to the 1990s, only 20% of all drugs prescribed for children in the United States were tested for safety or efficacy in a pediatric population.
These include blood and blood products, vaccines, allergenics, cell and tissue-based products, and gene therapy products.
The Office of Regulatory Affairs is divided into five regions, which are further divided into 20 districts.
A drug is considered "new" if it is made by a different manufacturer, uses different excipients or inactive ingredients, is used for a different purpose, or undergoes any substantial change.
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the new Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) into law on June 24, 1938.
The Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research is the branch of the FDA responsible for ensuring the safety and efficacy of biological therapeutic agents.
OCI agents pursue and develop cases where individuals and companies have committed criminal actions, such as fraudulent claims, or knowingly and willfully shipping known adulterated goods in interstate commerce.
Overall, the authors called for an increase in the regulatory powers, funding, and independence of the FDA.
Along with these Acts, the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act applies to all biologic products, as well.
The FDA has collected a large amount of data through decades.
The Risk Minimization Action Plans are set in place depending on the overall level of risk a prescription drug is likely to pose to the public.
These developments confirmed extensive powers for the FDA to enforce post-marketing recalls of ineffective drugs.
Originally, the entity responsible for regulation of biological products resided under the National Institutes of Health; this authority was transferred to the FDA in 1972.
Hence, materials like Polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon) are not, and cannot be, considered as FDA Approved, rather, they are "FDA Compliant" or "FDA Acceptable."
In some cases, the FDA requires risk management plans for some drugs that may provide for other kinds of studies, restrictions, or safety surveillance activities.
CDRH also oversees the safety performance of non-medical devices that emit certain types of electromagnetic radiation.
A change to over-the-counter (OTC) status is a separate process, and the drug must be approved through an NDA first.
This has led to the call for more robust and enduring reforms that would allow patients, under the care of their doctors, access to drugs that have passed the first round of clinical trials.
This act has been credited with in essence creating the modern generic drug industry.
The priority review voucher is a provision of the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (HR 3580) signed by President George W. Bush signed the bill in September 2007 which awards a transferable "priority review voucher" to any company that obtains approval for a treatment for a neglected tropical diseases.
In 2012, President Obama signed into law the FDA Safety and Innovation Act which includes Section 908 the "Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher Incentive Program".
The FDA's requirements to prevent the spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy are also administered by CVM through inspections of feed manufacturers.
Often local and state government agencies also work with the FDA to provide regulatory inspections and enforcement action.
The Act prohibited, under penalty of seizure of goods, the interstate transport of food that had been "adulterated."
The programs for safety regulation vary widely by the type of product, its potential risks, and the regulatory powers granted to the agency.
Also, because children were thought to be ethically restricted in their ability to give informed consent, there were increased governmental and institutional hurdles to approval of these clinical trials, as well as greater concerns about legal liability.
This drug was used as a treatment for cancer, but scientific studies both before and after this legislative trend found it to be ineffective.
The requested budget authority was an increase of $50.7 million more than the FY 2008 funding – about a three percent increase.
However, in an indicator that the FDA may be too lax in their approval process, in particular for medical devices, a 2011 study by Dr. Diana Zuckerman and Paul Brown of the National Research Center for Women and Families, and Dr. Steven Nissen of the Cleveland Clinic, published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, showed that most medical devices recalled in the last five years for "serious health problems or death" had been previously approved by the FDA using the less stringent, and cheaper, 510(k) process.
For example, the FDA regulates almost every facet of prescription drugs, including testing, manufacturing, labeling, advertising, marketing, efficacy, and safety—yet FDA regulation of cosmetics focuses primarily on labeling and safety.
This guidance distinguishes the apps subjected to regulation based on the marketing claims of the apps.
According to an analysis published on the website of the libertarian Mercatus Center as well as published statements by economists, medical practitioners, and concerned consumers, many feel the FDA oversteps its regulatory powers and undermines small business and small farms in favor of large corporations.
In June 1906, President Theodore Roosevelt signed into law the Food and Drug Act, also known as the "Wiley Act" after its chief advocate.
* Department of Health and Human Services
In a few cases the devices had been deemed so low-risk that they did not need FDA regulation.
**** Office of Equal Employment Opportunity
ORA also includes the Agency's network of regulatory laboratories, which analyze any physical samples taken.
This marked the start of the FDA approval process in its modern form.
This became a major concern of pediatricians as evidence accumulated that the physiological response of children to many drugs differed significantly from those drugs' effects on adults.
***** Office of Information Management
*** Office of Operations
About $2 billion of this budget is generated by user fees.
The agency also has 223 field offices and 13 laboratories located throughout the 50 states, the United States Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico.
The most rigorous requirements apply to ''new molecular entities'': drugs that are not based on existing medications.
The act applied similar penalties to the interstate marketing of "adulterated" drugs, in which the "standard of strength, quality, or purity" of the active ingredient was not either stated clearly on the label or listed in the ''United States Pharmacopoeia'' or the ''National Formulary.''
The US Supreme Court declined to hear the case, and the final decision denied the existence of a right to unapproved medications.
The FDA's research efforts include the areas of biologics, medical devices, drugs, women's health, toxicology, food safety and applied nutrition, and veterinary medicine.
The site was renamed from the White Oak Naval Surface Warfare Center to the Federal Research Center at White Oak.
*** Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM)
In the early 1990s, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filed securities fraud charges against the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company, a major generic manufacturer based in Long Island, New York.
Approved requests are for items that are new or substantially different and need to demonstrate "safety and efficacy", for example it may be inspected for safety in case of new toxic hazards.
Incorporation of the guidelines during the development phase of such app has been proposed for expedite market entry and clearance.
The FDA regulates cosmetics labeling, and cosmetics that have not been safety tested must bear a warning to that effect.
In April 1989, the FDA investigated 11 manufacturers for irregularities; and later brought that number up to 13.
**** Office of Human Resources
Only one original building from the naval facility was kept.
The first wave was the legalization by 27 states of laetrile in the late 1970s.
Dozens of drugs were eventually suspended or recalled by manufacturers.
Companies are required to place a warning note on their products if they have not been tested.
In many cases, OCI pursues cases involving Title 18 violations (e.g., conspiracy, false statements, wire fraud, mail fraud), in addition to prohibited acts as defined in Chapter III of the FD&C Act.
Most federal laws concerning the FDA are part of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, (first passed in 1938 and extensively amended since) and are codified in Title 21, Chapter 9 of the United States Code.
In 2008, the FDA began to post employees to foreign countries, including China, India, Costa Rica, Chile, Belgium, and the United Kingdom.
Both aspects need to be proved or provided by the submitter to ensure proper procedures are followed.
*** Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)
However, all color additives must be specifically FDA approved before manufacturers can include them in cosmetic products sold in the U.S.
While this debate was unfolding, Congress used the 1997 Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act to pass incentives that gave pharmaceutical manufacturers a six-month patent term extension on new drugs submitted with pediatric trial data.
However, these limited reforms were targeted for AIDS drugs, not for the broader market.
As a result, the FDA's powers and decisions are carefully monitored by several governmental and non-governmental organizations.
In the wake of the Vioxx recall, there were widespread calls by major newspapers, medical journals, consumer advocacy organizations, lawmakers, and FDA officials for reforms in the FDA's procedures for pre- and post- market drug safety regulation.
In 2013, a guidance was issued to regulate mobile medical applications and protect users from their unintended use.
In addition to its regulatory functions, the FDA carries out research and development activities to develop technology and standards that support its regulatory role, with the objective of resolving scientific and technical challenges before they become impediments.
** '''Food and Drug Administration'''
An initial attempt by the FDA to address this issue was the 1994 FDA Final Rule on Pediatric Labeling and Extrapolation, which allowed manufacturers to add pediatric labeling information, but required drugs that had not been tested for pediatric safety and efficacy to bear a disclaimer to that effect.
In November 2011, Federal judge Richard Leon of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia temporarily halted the new labels, likely delaying the requirement that tobacco companies display the labels.
For approval of a generic drug, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires scientific evidence that the generic drug is interchangeable with or therapeutically equivalent to the originally approved drug.
The FDA does not approve applied coatings used in the food processing industry.
The FDA subdivides substances that it regulates as food into various categories—including foods, food additives, added substances (man-made substances that are not intentionally introduced into food, but nevertheless end up in it), and dietary supplements.
The Office of Criminal Investigations was established in 1991 to investigate criminal cases.
Experts in cosmetic ingredient reviews also play a role in monitoring safety through influence on the use of ingredients, but also lack legal authority.
However, this rule failed to motivate many drug companies to conduct additional pediatric drug trials.
The FDA frequently works with other federal agencies, including the Department of Agriculture, Drug Enforcement Administration, Customs and Border Protection, and Consumer Product Safety Commission.
**** Office of Security Operations
Though Virginia passed a law with limited effect in 1979, a more widespread trend began in California in 1996.
Much of these expenditures are for goods imported into the United States; the FDA is responsible for monitoring imports.
Some very rare limited exceptions to this multi-step process involving animal testing and controlled clinical trials can be granted out of compassionate use protocols, as was the case during the 2015 Ebola epidemic with the use, by prescription and authorization, of ZMapp and other experimental treatments, and for new drugs that can be used to treat debilitating and/or very rare conditions for which no existing remedies or drugs are satisfactory, or where there has not been an advance in a long period of time.
Cosmetic products are not, in general, subject to premarket approval by the FDA unless they make "structure or function claims" that make them into drugs (see Cosmeceutical).
OCI is a smaller branch, comprising about 200 agents nationwide.
A $1.8 million 2006 Institute of Medicine report on pharmaceutical regulation in the U.S. found major deficiencies in the current FDA system for ensuring the safety of drugs on the American market.
The authors found major deficiencies in the current FDA system for ensuring the safety of drugs on the American market.
New drugs are available only by prescription by default.
Under Harvey Washington Wiley, appointed chief chemist in 1883, the Division began conducting research into the adulteration and misbranding of food and drugs on the American market.
The case won an initial appeal in May 2006, but that decision was reversed by a March 2007 rehearing.
In recent years, the agency began undertaking a large-scale effort to consolidate its 25 operations in the Washington Metropolitan Area, moving from its main headquarters in Rockville and several fragmented office buildings to the former site of the Naval Ordnance Laboratory in the White Oak area of Silver Spring, Maryland.
Soon after passage of the 1938 Act, the FDA began to designate certain drugs as safe for use only under the supervision of a medical professional, and the category of "prescription-only" drugs was securely codified into law by the 1951 Durham-Humphrey Amendment.
In many cases these responsibilities are shared with other federal agencies.
The FDA's federal budget request for fiscal year (FY) 2008 (October 2007 through September 2008) totaled $2.1 billion, a $105.8 million increase from what it received for fiscal year 2007.
Pharmaceutical firms pay the majority of these fees, which are used to expedite drug reviews.
Nine FDA scientists appealed to then president-elect Barack Obama over pressures from management, experienced during the George W. Bush presidency, to manipulate data, including in relation to the review process for medical devices.
Unlike ORA Investigators, OCI Special Agents are armed, and don't focus on technical aspects of the regulated industries.
The nine new graphic warning labels were announced by the FDA in June 2011 and were scheduled to be required to appear on packaging by September 2012.
****** Director: Taha A. Kass-Hout (also holds post of Chief Health Informatics Officer for the FDA)
The Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) is the branch of the FDA responsible for the premarket approval of all medical devices, as well as overseeing the manufacturing, performance and safety of these devices.
Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of New York, which sought approval of a generic version of the drug Dyazide, a medication for high blood pressure, submitted Dyazide, rather than its generic version, for the FDA tests.
The act reauthorizing these provisions, the 2002 Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act, allowed the FDA to request NIH-sponsored testing for pediatric drug testing, although these requests are subject to NIH funding constraints.
New drugs receive extensive scrutiny before FDA approval in a process called a New Drug Application (NDA).
*** Office of the Commissioner
When its application to manufacture generics were subjected to repeated delays by the FDA, Mylan, convinced that it was being discriminated against, soon began its own private investigation of the agency in 1987.
The original authority for government regulation of biological products was established by the 1902 Biologics Control Act, with additional authority established by the 1944 Public Health Service Act.
The FDA has also been criticized from the opposite viewpoint, as being too tough on industry.
In 2014, the FDA added an Ebola treatment being developed by Canadian pharmaceutical company Tekmira to the Fast Track program, but halted the phase 1 trials in July pending the receipt of more information about how the drug works.
*** National Center for Toxicological Research (NCTR)
This includes $466 billion in food sales, $275 billion in drugs, $60 billion in cosmetics and $18 billion in vitamin supplements.
In February 2008, the FDA announced that the Bush Administration's FY 2009 budget request for the agency was just under $2.4 billion: $1.77 billion in budget authority (federal funding) and $628 million in user fees.
The implementation date is uncertain, due to ongoing proceedings in the case of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. v. U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Dr. Robert M. Califf, MD is the current commissioner, who took over in February 2016 for Dr. Stephen Ostroff, who had been acting since April 2015.
Faced with numerous lawsuits, the manufacturer voluntarily withdrew it from the market.
The FDA's federal budget request for fiscal year (FY) 2012 totaled $4.36 billion, while the proposed 2014 budget is $4.7 billion.
In the mid- and late 1980s, ACT-UP and other HIV activist organizations accused the FDA of unnecessarily delaying the approval of medications to fight HIV and opportunistic infections.
Through their governing of processes, however, the FDA does have a set of regulations that cover the formulation, manufacturing, and use of nonstick coatings.
Overall the organization has reviewed about 1,200 ingredients and has suggested that several hundred be restricted, but there is no standard or systemic method for reviewing chemicals for safety and a clear definition of what is meant by 'safety' so that all chemicals are tested on the same basis.
Mylan eventually filed suit against two former FDA employees and four drug-manufacturing companies, charging that corruption within the federal agency resulted in racketeering and in violations of antitrust law.
All of the initial drugs approved for the treatment of HIV/AIDS were approved through these accelerated approval mechanisms.
One of the most important statutes in establishing the modern American pharmaceutical market was the 1984 Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act, more commonly known as the "Hatch-Waxman Act" after its chief sponsors.
The FDA has regulatory oversight over a large array of products that affect the health and life of American citizens.
Though samples are usually food-related, some laboratories are equipped to analyze drugs, cosmetics, and radiation-emitting devices.
Characterized as "corrupted and distorted by current FDA managers, thereby placing the American people at risk," these concerns were also highlighted in the 2006 report on the agency as well.
Wiley used these new regulatory powers to pursue an aggressive campaign against the manufacturers of foods with chemical additives, but the Chemistry Bureau's authority was soon checked by judicial decisions, which narrowly defined the bureau's powers and set high standards for proof of fraudulent intent.
As of 2012 80% of all FDA approved drugs are available in generic form.
Frank Young, the commissioner of the FDA was behind the Action Plan Phase II, established in August 1987 for quicker approval of AIDS medication.
In February 2007, identical bills were introduced into the House to create an ANDA process for the approval of generic biologics, but were not passed.
The Commissioner reports to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
These reforms had the effect of increasing the time, and the difficulty, required to bring a drug to market.
In June 2008, Congress gave the agency an emergency appropriation of $150 million for FY 2008 and another $150 million.
The FDA is led by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The oversight subcommitee of the United States House Energy and Commerce Committee resulted from a complaint brought against the FDA by Mylan Laboratories Inc. of Pittsburgh.
Furthermore, legislation had granted the FDA a variety of means to address violations of standards for a given substance category.
R.J. Reynolds, Lorillard, Commonwealth Brands Inc., Liggett Group LLC and Santa Fe Natural Tobacco Company Inc. have filed suit in Washington, D.C. federal court claiming that the graphic labels are an unconstitutional way of forcing tobacco companies to engage in anti-smoking advocacy on the government's behalf.
**** Office of Finance, Budget and Acquisition
CVM's primary focus is on medications that are used in food animals and ensuring that they do not affect the human food supply.
Examples of CDRH-regulated devices include cellular phones, airport baggage screening equipment, television receivers, microwave ovens, tanning booths, and laser products.
The FDA regulates most products with a set of published standards enforced by a modest number of facility inspections.
The Critical Path Initiative is FDA's effort to stimulate and facilitate a national effort to modernize the sciences through which FDA-regulated products are developed, evaluated, and manufactured.
However, any exceptions to the aforementioned process are subject to strict review and scrutiny and conditions, and are only given if a substantial amount of research and at least some preliminary human testing has shown that they are believed to be somewhat safe and possibly effective.
There were several reasons that not many medical trials were done with children.
A 2006 court case, ''Abigail Alliance v. von Eschenbach'', would have forced radical changes in FDA regulation of unapproved drugs.
Partly in response to these criticisms, the FDA issued new rules to expedite approval of drugs for life-threatening diseases, and expanded pre-approval access to drugs for patients with limited treatment options.
Thus, for decades, most medicines prescribed to children in the U.S. were done so in a non-FDA-approved, "off-label" manner, with dosages "extrapolated" from adult data through body weight and body-surface-area calculations.
For generic manufacturers, the Act created a new approval mechanism, the Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA), in which the generic drug manufacturer need only demonstrate that their generic formulation has the same active ingredient, route of administration, dosage form, strength, and pharmacokinetic properties ("bioequivalence") as the corresponding brand-name drug.
All other buildings are new construction.
CDRH regulatory powers include the authority to require certain technical reports from the manufacturers or importers of regulated products, to require that radiation-emitting products meet mandatory safety performance standards, to declare regulated products defective, and to order the recall of defective or noncompliant products.
The studies are progressively longer, gradually adding more individuals as they progress from stage I to stage III, normally over a period of years, and normally involve drug companies, the government and its laboratories, and often medical schools and hospitals and clinics.
The FDA also requires milk to be pasteurized to remove bacteria.
The project is slated to be completed by 2017, assuming future Congressional funding
Other significant laws enforced by the FDA include the Public Health Service Act, parts of the Controlled Substances Act, the Federal Anti-Tampering Act, as well as many others.
The FDA regulates more than US$ worth of consumer goods, about 25% of consumer expenditures in the United States.
This is seen as increasingly important in the face of a major outbreak of the disease in West Africa that began in late March 2014 and continued .
Furthermore, it was discovered that several manufacturers had falsified data submitted in seeking FDA authorization to market certain generic drugs.
**** Office of Facilities Engineering and Mission Support Services
