Within a few years the NRFU rules had started to diverge from the RFU, most notably with the abolition of the ''line-out''.
Following the first meeting, the public schools were invited to join the association.
Some historians have theorised that ''Marn Grook'' was one of the origins of Australian rules football.
It is usually regarded as the first game of American intercollegiate football.
Wills and others involved in these early matches formed the Melbourne Football Club (the oldest surviving Australian football club) on May 14, 1859.
By the 1870s, Rugby and Association football had started to become popular in Ireland.
There is no conclusive evidence for either explanation.
The word "''football'', when used in reference to a specific game can mean any one of those described above.
American football still however remained a violent sport where collisions often led to serious injuries and sometimes even death.
Several of the football codes are the most popular team sports in the world.
They could only dribble with their feet, or advance the ball in a ''scrum'' or similar ''formation''.
There was no serious attempt to unify and codify Irish varieties of football, until the establishment of the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) in 1884.
Rugby league rules diverged significantly from rugby union in 1906, with the reduction of the team from 15 to 13 players.
This is the earliest reference to football.
They remained largely "mob football" style games, with huge numbers of players attempting to advance the ball into a goal area, often by any means necessary.
It is one in which young men, in country sport, propel a huge ball not by throwing it into the air but by striking it and rolling it along the ground, and that not with their hands but with their feet... kicking in opposite directions" The chronicler gives the earliest reference to a football pitch, stating that: "the boundaries have been marked and the game had started.
Football faced armed opposition in the 18th Century when used as a cover for violent protest against the enclosure act.
Rules were simple, violence and injury were common.
So, effectively, what the word "football" means usually depends on where one says it.
B. Thompson and Thomas H. Smith met with the intention of forming a set of rules that would be widely adopted by other clubs.
It existed during the Han Dynasty, the second and third centuries BC.
The first side to play a passing combination game was the Royal Engineers AFC in 1869/70 By 1869 they were "working well together", "backing up" and benefiting from "cooperation".
This is the first description of a "kicking game" and the first description of dribbling: "the game at which they had met for common recreation is called by some the foot-ball game.
The code was responsible for many innovations that later spread to association football.
Of the 45 national FIFA (Fédération Internationale de Football Association) affiliates in which English is an official or primary language, most currently use ''Football'' in their organisations' official names; the FIFA affiliates in Canada and the United States use ''Soccer'' in their names.
Globally, association football is played by over 250 million players in over 200 nations, and has the highest television audience in sport, making it the most popular in the world, American football is the most popular sport in the United States, with the annual Super Bowl game accounting for seven of the top eight of the most watched broadcasts in U.S. television history.
The first detailed description of what was almost certainly football in England was given by William FitzStephen in about 1174–1183.
On November 6, 1869, Rutgers faced Princeton in a game that was played with a round ball and, like all early games, used improvised rules.
The Middle Ages saw a huge rise in popularity of annual Shrovetide football matches throughout Europe, particularly in England.
There is an alternative explanation, which is that football originally referred to a variety of games in medieval Europe, which were played ''on foot''.
In 1880, Yale coach Walter Camp, who had become a fixture at the Massasoit House conventions where the rules were debated and changed, devised a number of major innovations.
* Two ''teams'' of usually between 11 and 18 players; some variations that have fewer players (five or more per team) are also popular.
In 1862, J. C. Thring, who had been one of the driving forces behind the original Cambridge Rules, was a master at Uppingham School and he issued his own rules of what he called "The Simplest Game" (these are also known as the Uppingham Rules).
Davin's rules showed the influence of games such as hurling and a desire to formalise a distinctly Irish code of football.
Marshall: "Oh, fie, go away naughty boy, I don't play with boys who can’t afford to take a holiday for football any day they like!"
This further assisted the spread of the Rugby game.
In 1966, rugby league officials borrowed the American football concept of ''downs'': a team was allowed to retain possession of the ball for four tackles (rugby union retains the original rule that a player who is tackled and brought to the ground must release the ball immediately).
They also included the try, where touching the ball over the line allowed an attempt at goal, though drop-goals from marks and general play, and penalty conversions were still the main form of contest.
The rules clearly favour the kicking game.
Though it was underutilised for years, this proved to be one of the most important rule changes in the establishment of the modern game.
A Chinese game called Tsu' Chu, Cuju or Zuqiu has been recognised by FIFA as the first version of the game with regular rules.
During the twentieth century, several of the various kinds of football grew to become some of the most popular team sports in the world.
File:Children in the background are playing a football game, possibly ''Woggabaliri''.
It is not certain that the ball was being struck between members of the same team.
Access date: March 15, 2007.)
Club members Wills, William Hammersley, J.
Herman had been headmaster at Eton and Winchester colleges and his Latin textbook includes a translation exercise with the phrase "We wyll playe with a ball full of wynde".
In Britain, by 1870, there were about 75 clubs playing variations of the Rugby school game.
In New Zealand, "football" historically referred to rugby union, but more recently may be used unqualified to refer to association football.
Contemporary codes of football can be traced back to the codification of these games at English public schools during the nineteenth century.
An early reference to a ball game that was probably football comes from 1280 at Ulgham, Northumberland, England:  "Henry... while playing at ball.. ran against David".
Mulcaster's "footeball" had evolved from the disordered and violent forms of traditional football:
He said: "hacking is the true football".
* Players using only their body to move the ball.
In 1867, Princeton used rules based on those of the English Football Association.
In 1895, following a dispute about a player being paid broken time payments, which replaced wages lost as a result of playing rugby, representatives of the northern clubs met in Huddersfield to form the Northern Rugby Football Union (NRFU).
* ''Scoring'' ''goals'' or ''points'' by moving the ball to an opposing team's end of the field and either into a goal area, or over a line.
In 1580, Count Giovanni de' Bardi di Vernio wrote ''Discorso sopra 'l giuoco del Calcio Fiorentino''.
In 1907, a New Zealand professional rugby team toured Australia and Britain, receiving an enthusiastic response, and professional rugby leagues were launched in Australia the following year.
Unqualified, the word ''football'' is understood to refer to whichever form of football is the most popular in the regional context in which the word appears.
The first known codes – in the sense of a set of rules – were those of Eton in 1815  and Aldenham in 1825.)
For example, ''calcio'' players could punch, shoulder charge, and kick opponents.
This reference is in Dame Juliana Berners' ''Book of St Albans''.
''Mauls'' were stopped once the ball carrier was held, being replaced by a play-the ball-ruck.
After the final meeting on 8 December, the FA published the "Laws of Football", the first comprehensive set of rules for the game later known as Association Football.
Depiction on an Attic Lekythos, Piraeus, 400-375 BC.
On the Australian continent several tribes of indigenous people played kicking and catching games with stuffed balls which have been generalised by historians as ''Marn Grook'' (Djab Wurrung for "game ball").
The Roman politician Cicero (106–43&nbsp;BC) describes the case of a man who was killed whilst having a shave when a ball was kicked into a barber's shop.
One of the participants in the game involving University of Toronto students was (Sir) William Mulock, later Chancellor of the school.
An eight-hour meeting produced what amounted to the first set of modern rules, known as the ''Cambridge rules''.
At this time a series of rule changes by both the London and Sheffield FAs gradually eroded the differences between the two games until the adoption of a common code in 1877.
Body tackles are less central to the game, and players are freer to move around the field (''offside'' laws are typically less strict).
* a pair of football boots was ordered by King Henry VIII of England in 1526.
During the game, the two teams alternated between the rugby-based rules used by McGill and the Boston Game rules used by Harvard.
This allowed for the preparation of modern ovals, playing fields, pitches, grass courts, etc.
In francophone Quebec, where Canadian football is more popular, the Canadian code is known as ''football'' while American football is known as '''' and association football is known as ''.''
The early forms of football played in England, sometimes referred to as "mob football", would be played between neighbouring towns and villages, involving an unlimited number of players on opposing teams who would clash ''en masse'', struggling to move an item, such as inflated animal's bladder to particular geographical points, such as their opponents' church, with play taking place in the open space between neighbouring parishes.
However, the main sources of modern football codes appear to lie in western Europe, especially England.
By the end of the nineteenth century, distinct regional codes were already developing: Gaelic football, for example, deliberately incorporated the rules of local traditional football games in order to maintain their heritage.
By the 1870s they became the dominant code in the north and midlands of England.
The oldest surviving soccer trophy is the Youdan Cup (1867) and the oldest national soccer competition is the English FA Cup (1871).
In 1888, The Football League was founded in England, becoming the first of many professional football competitions.
Both agree that his wife died when inflating pig's bladders.
The aim of the Association was to establish a single unifying code and regulate the playing of the game among its members.
Players were not allowed to pass the ball forward, either by foot or by hand.
Roman ball games already knew the air-filled ball, the follis.
File:Marn grook illustration 1857-crop.jpg|An illustration from the 1850s of Australian Aboriginal hunter gatherers.
creating the ball in 1870 (ref:  Guardian article).
Blows below the belt were allowed.
In particular, they devised the first ''offside'' rules, during the late 18th century.
Various forms of football can be identified in history, often as popular peasant games.
First of all, the evidence suggests that they were important in taking football away from its "mob" form and turning it into an organised team sport.
* women playing a form of football was first described in 1580 by Sir Philip Sidney in one of his poems: "a tyme there is for all, my mother often sayes, When she, with skirts tuckt very hy, with girles at football playes."
The Melbourne football rules were widely distributed and gradually adopted by the other Victorian clubs.
Feast day football played on the streets was in decline.
Within a few years, Harvard had both adopted McGill's rules and had persuaded other U.S. university teams to do the same.
The first rules share similarities with these games, and were shaped to suit to Australian conditions.
He also mentions tactics ("leaving some of their best players to guard the goal"); scoring ("they that can strike the ball through their opponents' goal first win") and the way teams were selected ("the players being equally divided according to their strength and nimbleness").
The violence of these mob-style games led to widespread protests and a decision to abandon them.
While football continued to be played in various forms throughout Britain, its public schools (known as private schools in other countries) are widely credited with four key achievements in the creation of modern football codes.
During the early 1860s, there were increasing attempts in England to unify and reconcile the various public school games.
These games appear to have resembled rugby football.
This reinforces the idea that the games played at the time did not necessarily involve a ball being kicked.
Mulcaster's writings refer to teams ("sides" and "parties"), positions ("standings"), a referee ("judge over the parties") and a coach "(trayning maister)".
Games played in Mesoamerica with rubber balls by indigenous peoples are also well-documented as existing since before this time, but these had more similarities to basketball or volleyball, and no links have been found between such games and modern football sports.
In July 1858, Tom Wills, an Australian-born cricketer educated at Rugby School in England, wrote a letter to ''Bell's Life in Victoria & Sporting Chronicle'', calling for a "foot-ball club" with a "code of laws" to keep cricketers fit during winter.
A game known as "football" was played in Scotland as early as the 15th century: it was prohibited by the Football Act 1424 and although the law fell into disuse it was not repealed until 1906.
The rules were updated several times during the 1860s to accommodate the rules of other influential Victorian football clubs.
However, at the beginning of the fourth meeting, attention was drawn to the recently published Cambridge Rules of 1863.
During the second half of 20th century, the rules changed further.
They tend to use throwing and running as the main ways of moving the ball, and only kick on certain limited occasions.
The major impetus for this was the patenting of the world's first lawnmower in 1830.
The game spread quickly to other Australian colonies.
For example, in 1586, men from a ship commanded by an English explorer named John Davis, went ashore to play a form of football with Inuit (Eskimo) people in Greenland.
H. C. A. Harrison, a seminal figure in Australian football, recalled that his cousin Wills wanted "a game of our own".
Handling was only allowed ''when a player catches the ball directly from the foot'' entitling them to a free kick and there was a primitive offside rule, disallowing players from "loitering" around the opponents' goal.
One sentence states in the original 1930 translation "Throw yourself against him" (Age, objice te illi).
Carew described how goals were made: "they pitch two bushes in the ground, some eight or ten foote asunder; and directly against them, ten or twelue twelve score off, other twayne in like distance, which they terme their Goales".
Another reference to a football game comes in 1321 at Shouldham, Norfolk, England: "during the game at ball as he kicked the ball, a lay friend of his... ran against him and wounded himself".
* Goals or points resulting from players putting the ball between two ''goalposts''.
The Ancient Greeks and Romans are known to have played many ball games, some of which involved the use of the feet.
Most of the delegates supported this, but F. M. Campbell, the representative from Blackheath and the first FA treasurer, objected.
In particular, goals from ''marks'' were abolished, kicks directly ''into touch'' from outside the ''22 metre'' line were penalised, new laws were put in place to determine who had possession following an inconclusive ''ruck'' or ''maul'', and the lifting of players in ''line-outs'' was legalised.
This is sometimes said to be the earliest code of rules for any football game.
In all codes, common skills include passing, tackling, evasion of tackles, catching and kicking.
The solution to this problem was usually that the match be divided into two halves, one half played by the rules of the host "home" school, and the other half by the visiting "away" school.
At the Freemasons' Tavern, Great Queen Street, London on the evening of October 26, 1863, representatives of several football clubs in the London Metropolitan area met for the inaugural meeting of The Football Association (FA).
However, offside laws began to diverge and develop differently at each school, as is shown by the rules of football from Winchester, Rugby, Harrow and Cheltenham, during between 1810 and 1850.
In the earliest manifestations of these rules, players were "off their side" if they simply stood between the ball and the goal which was their objective.
This was not very different from what had occurred ten years earlier in soccer in Northern England but the authorities reacted very differently in the RFU, attempting to alienate the working class support in Northern England.
The first Gaelic football rules were drawn up by Maurice Davin and published in the ''United Ireland'' magazine on February 7, 1887.
There is also an account in Latin from the end of the 15th century of football being played at Cawston, Nottinghamshire.
These games and others may well go far back into antiquity.
Before 1850, many British children had to work six days a week, for more than twelve hours a day.
In ''kemari'' several people stand in a circle and kick a ball to each other, trying not to let the ball drop to the ground (much like keepie uppie).
It fell to associations from seven other European countries: France, Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland, to form an international association.
There were also "rugby" clubs in Ireland, Australia, Canada and New Zealand.
Professionalism had already began to creep into the various codes of football.
Traditional forms of ''caid'' had begun to give way to a "rough-and-tumble game" which allowed tripping.
The earliest evidence that games resembling football were being played at English public schools – mainly attended by boys from the upper, upper-middle and professional classes – comes from the ''Vulgaria'' by William Herman in 1519.
The ''Fédération Internationale de Football Association'' (FIFA) was founded in Paris on May 21, 1904.
The GAA sought to promote traditional Irish sports, such as hurling and to reject imported games like Rugby and Association football.
* The goal or line being ''defended'' by the opposing team.
( William Hone, 1825–26, ''The Every-Day Book'', "February 15."
Some schools favoured a game in which the ball could be carried (as at Rugby, Marlborough and Cheltenham), while others preferred a game where kicking and dribbling the ball was promoted (as at Eton, Harrow, Westminster and Charterhouse).
The gates are called Goals."
Canadian football then implemented the legal forward pass in 1929.
The expanse of the British Empire allowed these rules of football to spread to areas of British influence outside of the directly controlled Empire.
In 1633, David Wedderburn, a teacher from Aberdeen, mentioned elements of modern football games in a short Latin textbook called ''Vocabula.''
All of them declined, except Charterhouse and Uppingham.
As was the case in Britain, by the early 19th century, North American schools and universities played their own local games, between sides made up of students.
These different variations of football are known as '''football codes'''.
With the advent of full-time professionals in the early 1990s, and the consequent speeding up of the game, the five metre off-side distance between the two teams became 10&nbsp;metres, and the replacement rule was superseded by various interchange rules, among other changes.
In 1314, Nicholas de Farndone, Lord Mayor of the City of London issued a decree banning football in the French used by the English upper classes at the time.
Outside of its heartland in southern Australia the code experienced a significant period of decline following World War I but has since grown throughout Australia and in other parts of the world, and the Australian Football League emerged as the dominant professional competition.
In early October 1863 another new revised version of the Cambridge Rules was drawn up by a seven member committee representing former pupils from Harrow, Shrewsbury, Eton, Rugby, Marlborough and Westminster.
In 1584 and 1602 respectively, John Norden and Richard Carew referred to "goals" in Cornish hurling.
There are later accounts of an Inuit game played on ice, called ''Aqsaqtuk''.
* Players being required to move the ball—depending on the code—by kicking, carrying, or hand-passing the ball.
Through publicity and personal contacts Wills was able to co-ordinate football matches in Melbourne that experimented with various rules, the first of which was played on July 31, 1858.
One of the longest running football fixture is the Cordner-Eggleston Cup, contested between Melbourne Grammar School and Scotch College, Melbourne every year since 1858.
The Māori in New Zealand played a game called Ki-o-rahi consisting of teams of seven players play on a circular field divided into zones, and score points by touching the 'pou' (boundary markers) and hitting a central 'tupu' or target.
These changes mean that working class children had more time for games, including various forms of football.
The committee debated rules used in English public school games; Wills pushed for various rugby football rules he learnt during his schooling.
:''The game was this: he who at any time got the ball into his hands, run sic with it till overtaken by one of the opposite part; and then, if he could shake himself loose from those on the opposite side who seized him, he run on; if not, he threw the ball from him, unless it was wrested from him by the other party'', but no person was allowed to kick it.
Sports commonly called 'football' in certain places include: association football (known as soccer in some countries); gridiron football (specifically American football or Canadian football); Australian rules football; rugby football (either rugby league or rugby union); and Gaelic football.
Over the years, Canada absorbed some of the developments in American football in an effort to distinguish it from a more rugby-oriented game.
Other firsts in the mediæval and early modern eras:
Most of the very early references to the game speak simply of "ball play" or "playing at ball".
Common rules among the sports include:
Body tackling is a major skill, and games typically involve short passages of play of 5–90 seconds.
After the third meeting, a draft set of rules were published.
The need for a single body to oversee association football had become apparent by the beginning of the 20th century, with the increasing popularity of international fixtures.
Football was played in Ireland in 1308, with a documented reference to John McCrocan, a spectator at a "football game" at Newcastle, County Down being charged with accidentally stabbing a player named William Bernard.
The first official RFU rules were adopted in June 1871.
American and Canadian football remain different codes, stemming from rule changes that the American side of the border adopted but the Canadian side has not.
In 1363, King Edward III of England issued a proclamation banning "...handball, football, or hockey; coursing and cock-fighting, or other such idle games", showing that "football" – whatever its exact form in this case – was being differentiated from games involving other parts of the body, such as handball.
English public schools were the first to codify football games.
In 1845, three boys at Rugby school were tasked with codifying the rules then being used at the school.
File:Tepantitla mural, Ballplayer B Cropped.jpg|Paint of a Mesoamerican ballgame player of the Tepantitla murals in Teotihuacan.
In England, by the 1890s, a long-standing Rugby Football Union ban on ''professional'' players was causing regional tensions within rugby football, as many players in northern England were working class and could not afford to take time off to train, travel, play and recover from injuries.
Public schools' dominance of sports in the UK began to wane after the ''Factory Act'' of 1850, which significantly increased the recreation time available to working class children.
However, within two years, NRFU players could be paid, but they were required to have a job outside sport.
There are a number of references to traditional, ancient, or prehistoric ball games, played by indigenous peoples in many different parts of the world.
The Cambridge rules differed from the draft FA rules in two significant areas; namely running with (carrying) the ball and hacking (kicking opposing players in the shins).
He is the first to describe a "law" of football: "they must not strike an opponent's leg higher than the ball".
A few FIFA affiliates have recently "normalised" to using "Football", including:
He is also the first to describe goalkeepers and passing of the ball between players.
The code was distinctive in the prevalence of the mark, free kick, tackling, lack of an offside rule and that players were specifically penalised for throwing the ball.
Miller: "Yes, that's just you to a T; you’d make it so that no lad whose father wasn’t a millionaire could play at all in a really good team.
The caricatures are of Rev.
Frank Marshall, an arch-opponent of player payments, and James Miller, a long-time opponent of Marshall.
He described the activities of London youths during the annual festival of Shrove Tuesday:
The iconic ball with a regular pattern of hexagons and pentagons (see truncated icosahedron) did not become popular until the 1960s, and was first used in the World Cup in 1970.
The various codes of football share certain common elements:  Players in American football, Canadian football, rugby union and rugby league take up positions in a limited area of the field at the start of the game.
In 1855, the U.S. inventor Charles Goodyear – who had patented vulcanised rubber – exhibited a spherical football, with an exterior of vulcanised rubber panels, at the Paris ''Exhibition Universelle''.
Inter-school sporting competitions became possible.
* the first references to ''goals'' are in the late 16th and early 17th centuries.
These were the first set of written rules (or code) for any form of football.
The separate Lancashire and Yorkshire competitions of the NRFU merged in 1901, forming the ''Northern Rugby League'', the first time the name rugby league was used officially in England.
