When particle A emits (creates) or absorbs (annihilates) virtual particle B, a momentum conservation results in recoil of particle A making impression of repulsion or attraction between particles A A' exchanging by B.
For example, friction is caused by the gradients of numerous electrostatic potentials between the atoms, but manifests as a force model that is independent of any macroscale position vector.
The fact that the Earth's magnetic field is aligned closely with the orientation of the Earth's axis causes compass magnets to become oriented because of the magnetic force pulling on the needle.
they exclude each other from their places much as if there was a repulsive force), and vice versa, i.e.
Analysis of the characteristics of forces ultimately culminated in the work of Archimedes who was especially famous for formulating a treatment of buoyant forces inherent in fluids.
For example, a basketball thrown from the ground moves in a parabola, as it is in a uniform gravitational field.
The kilogram-force is not a part of the modern SI system, and is generally deprecated; however it still sees use for some purposes as expressing aircraft weight, jet thrust, bicycle spoke tension, torque wrench settings and engine output torque.
Combining Newton's Second and Third Laws, it is possible to show that the linear momentum of a system is conserved.
By connecting the same string multiple times to the same object through the use of a set-up that uses movable pulleys, the tension force on a load can be multiplied.
: where  is the angular momentum of the particle.
Einstein tried and failed at this endeavor, but currently the most popular approach to answering this question is string theory.
Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell demonstrated that electric and magnetic forces were unified through one consistent theory of electromagnetism.
This means that in a closed system of particles, there are no internal forces that are unbalanced.
The third law means that all forces are ''interactions'' between different bodies, and thus that there is no such thing as a unidirectional force or a force that acts on only one body.
Galileo was instrumental in describing the characteristics of falling objects by determining that the acceleration of every object in free-fall was constant and independent of the mass of the object.
where  is the distance between the two objects' centers of mass and  is the unit vector pointed in the direction away from the center of the first object toward the center of the second object.
which is the conservation of linear momentum.
Aristotle misinterpreted this motion as being caused by the applied force.
Conservative forces include gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the spring force.
Through the work of leading theoretical physicists, a new theory of electromagnetism was developed using quantum mechanics.
through the use of four-vectors.
Nonconservative forces other than friction include other contact forces, tension, compression, and drag.
It is a common misconception to ascribe the stiffness and rigidity of solid matter to the repulsion of like charges under the influence of the electromagnetic force.
The gravitational foot-pound-second English unit of force is the pound-force (lbf), defined as the force exerted by gravity on a pound-mass in the standard gravitational field of .
Choosing a set of orthogonal basis vectors is often done by considering what set of basis vectors will make the mathematics most convenient.
electrons) have a ''symmetric'' spin function (e.g.
Simple experiments showed that Galileo's understanding of the equivalence of constant velocity and rest were correct.
This description applies to all forces arising from fundamental interactions.
Newton's First Law of Motion states that objects continue to move in a state of constant velocity unless acted upon by an external net force or ''resultant force''.
This explanation demands a continuum like air for change of place in general.
Even for use in relativity, however, one can restore the form of
Particles experiencing:
Not applicable to quarks
Since forces are perceived as pushes or pulls, this can provide an intuitive understanding for describing forces.
He showed that the bodies were accelerated by gravity to an extent that was independent of their mass and argued that objects retain their velocity unless acted on by a force, for example friction.
Similar to the electric field, the magnetic field can be used to determine the magnetic force on an electric current at any point in space.
For instance, knowledge of the masses of planets along with the accelerations of their orbits allows scientists to calculate the gravitational forces on planets.
where ''m'' is the mass and  is the velocity.
A specific instance of such a force that is associated with dynamic pressure is fluid resistance: a body force that resists the motion of an object through a fluid due to viscosity.
Using such tools, some quantitative force laws were discovered: that the force of gravity is proportional to volume for objects of constant density (widely exploited for millennia to define standard weights); Archimedes' principle for buoyancy; Archimedes' analysis of the lever; Boyle's law for gas pressure; and Hooke's law for springs.
This is often due to macrophysical considerations that yield forces as arising from a macroscopic statistical average of microstates.
Free-body diagrams can be used as a convenient way to keep track of forces acting on a system.
These forces are considered fictitious because they do not exist in frames of reference that are not accelerating.
, he actually wrote down a different form for his second law of motion that did not use differential calculus.
Property/Interaction
The shortcomings of Aristotelian physics would not be fully corrected until the 17th century work of Galileo Galilei, who was influenced by the late Medieval idea that objects in forced motion carried an innate force of impetus.
Newton's contribution to gravitational theory was to unify the motions of heavenly bodies, which Aristotle had assumed were in a natural state of constant motion, with falling motion observed on the Earth.
An alternative unit of force in a different foot-pound-second system, the absolute fps system, is the poundal, defined as the force required to accelerate a one-pound mass at a rate of one foot per second squared.
The units of slug and poundal are designed to avoid a constant of proportionality in Newton's Second Law.
The origin of electric and magnetic fields would not be fully explained until 1864 when James Clerk Maxwell unified a number of earlier theories into a set of 20 scalar equations, which were later reformulated into 4 vector equations by Oliver Heaviside and Josiah Willard Gibbs.
where  is the relevant cross-sectional area for the volume for which the stress-tensor is being calculated.
Subsequent mathematicians and physicists found the construct of the ''electric field'' to be useful for determining the electrostatic force on an electric charge at any point in space.
This relation is correct in relativity when  is the four-force,  is the invariant mass, and  is the four-acceleration.
High-energy particle physics observations made during the 1970s and 1980s confirmed that the weak and electromagnetic forces are expressions of a more fundamental electroweak interaction.
Likewise, Newton's Second Law of Motion can be used to derive an analogous equation for the instantaneous angular acceleration of the rigid body:
Newton, however, realized that since all celestial bodies followed the same laws of motion, his law of gravity had to be universal.
Other arcane units of force include the sthène, which is equivalent to 1000&nbsp;N, and the kip, which is equivalent to 1000&nbsp;lbf.
Conservative forces are equivalent to the gradient of a potential while nonconservative forces are not.
The strong force is today understood to represent the interactions between quarks and gluons as detailed by the theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD).
A conservative force that acts on a closed system has an associated mechanical work that allows energy to convert only between kinetic or potential forms.
: is the speed of light
A force has both magnitude and direction, making it a vector quantity.
Aristotle was aware of this problem and proposed that the air displaced through the projectile's path carries the projectile to its target.
This provides a definition for the moment of inertia, which is the rotational equivalent for mass.
A newton is thus equal to 100,000&nbsp;dynes.
In general, as long as all forces are due to the interaction of objects with mass, it is possible to define a system such that net momentum is never lost nor gained.
In an extended body, each part usually applies forces on the adjacent parts; the distribution of such forces through the body is the so-called mechanical stress.
The kinetic friction force () is independent of both the forces applied and the movement of the object.
Similarly, the forces in springs, modeled by Hooke's law, are the result of electromagnetic forces and the Exclusion Principle acting together to return an object to its equilibrium position.
The connection between electricity and magnetism allows for the description of a unified ''electromagnetic force'' that acts on a charge.
The time derivative of the changing momentum of the object is what we label as "gravitational force".
Some astrophysicists predicted the existence of another planet (Vulcan) that would explain the discrepancies; however, despite some early indications, no such planet could be found.
The word "weak" derives from the fact that the field strength is some 1013 times less than that of the strong force.
This standard model of particle physics posits a similarity between the forces and led scientists to predict the unification of the weak and electromagnetic forces in electroweak theory subsequently confirmed by observation.
In QED, photons are the fundamental exchange particle, which described all interactions relating to electromagnetism including the electromagnetic force.
In this simple one-dimensional example, without knowing the direction of the forces it is impossible to decide whether the net force is the result of adding the two force magnitudes or subtracting one from the other.
Meanwhile, the Lorentz force of magnetism was discovered to exist between two electric currents.
For example, Isaac Newton unified the force responsible for objects falling at the surface of the Earth with the force responsible for the orbits of celestial mechanics in his universal theory of gravitation.
Newton's Second Law
This formula was powerful enough to stand as the basis for all subsequent descriptions of motion within the solar system until the 20th century.
: is the angular acceleration of the body.
temperature), the intuitive understanding of forces is quantified using precise operational definitions that are consistent with direct observations and compared to a standard measurement scale.
Centrifugal forces are acceleration forces that arise simply from the acceleration of rotating frames of reference.
If two identical fermions (e.g.
For a situation with no movement, the static friction force ''exactly'' balances the applied force resulting in no acceleration.
This shows that exchanging momentum between constituent objects will not affect the net momentum of a system.
As a consequence of Newton's First Law of Motion, there exists rotational inertia that ensures that all bodies maintain their angular momentum unless acted upon by an unbalanced torque.
From the perspective of the person in the car, the vehicle and everything inside of it is at rest: It is the outside world that is moving with a constant speed in the opposite direction.
Albert Einstein extended the principle of inertia further when he explained that reference frames subject to constant acceleration, such as those free-falling toward a gravitating object, were physically equivalent to inertial reference frames.
As well as being added, forces can also be resolved into independent components at right angles to each other.
Force can also be described by intuitive concepts such as a push or a pull.
Not until 1798 was Henry Cavendish able to make the first measurement of  using a torsion balance; this was widely reported in the press as a measurement of the mass of the Earth since knowing  could allow one to solve for the Earth's mass given the above equation.
For instance, the gravitational force acting upon an object can be seen as the action of the gravitational field that is present at the object's location.
Matter and anti-matter particles are identical except for their direction of propagation through the Feynman diagram.
Graviton (not yet observed)
However, a residual of the force is observed between hadrons (the best known example being the force that acts between nucleons in atomic nuclei) as the nuclear force.
The rotational inertia of planet Earth is what fixes the constancy of the length of a day and the length of a year.
The strong force only acts ''directly'' upon elementary particles.
Instead of a force, often the mathematically related concept of a potential energy field can be used for convenience.
All other forces in nature derive from these four fundamental interactions.
In such situations, idealized models can be utilized to gain physical insight.
's most famous equation is
If  is the displacement, the force exerted by an ideal spring equals:
Equivalently, the differential form of Newton's Second Law provides an alternative definition of torque:
When two forces act on a point particle, the resulting force, the ''resultant'' (also called the ''net force''), can be determined by following the parallelogram rule of vector addition: the addition of two vectors represented by sides of a parallelogram, gives an equivalent resultant vector that is equal in magnitude and direction to the transversal of the parallelogram.
Thus in the case of two fermions there is a strictly negative correlation between spatial and spin variables, whereas for two bosons (e.g.
When their electron clouds overlap, Pauli repulsion (due to fermionic nature of electrons) follows resulting in the force that acts in a direction normal to the surface interface between two objects.
Aristotelian physics began facing criticism in Medieval science, first by John Philoponus in the 6th century.
However, when this experiment is actually conducted, the cannonball always falls at the foot of the mast, as if the cannonball knows to travel with the ship despite being separated from it.
For situations where lattice holding together the atoms in an object is able to flow, contract, expand, or otherwise change shape, the theories of continuum mechanics describe the way forces affect the material.
This is the definition of dynamic equilibrium: when all the forces on an object balance but it still moves at a constant velocity.
The concept of inertia can be further generalized to explain the tendency of objects to continue in many different forms of constant motion, even those that are not strictly constant velocity.
: is the moment of inertia of the body
Galileo realized that simple velocity addition demands that the concept of an "absolute rest frame" did not exist.
While sophisticated mathematical descriptions are needed to predict, in full detail, the accurate result of such interactions, there is a conceptually simple way to describe such interactions through the use of Feynman diagrams.
They can be combined with ideal pulleys, which allow ideal strings to switch physical direction.
Note that  is undefined for an object with a non-zero rest mass at the speed of light, and the theory yields no prediction at that speed.
With some justification, Newton's second law can be taken as a quantitative definition of ''mass'' by writing the law as an equality; the relative units of force and mass then are fixed.
The connection between macroscopic nonconservative forces and microscopic conservative forces is described by detailed treatment with statistical mechanics.
Combining these ideas gives a formula that relates the mass () and the radius () of the Earth to the gravitational acceleration:
If  is very small compared to , then  is very close to 1 and
Further, Newton realized that the acceleration due to gravity is proportional to the mass of the attracting body.
Here the strong force acts indirectly, transmitted as gluons, which form part of the virtual pi and rho mesons, which classically transmit the nuclear force (see this topic for more).
It has the same mathematical character as Coulomb's Law with the proviso that like currents attract and unlike currents repel.
The frictional force is directly related to the normal force that acts to keep two solid objects separated at the point of contact.
This phenomenon is called color confinement.
If both of these pieces of information are not known for each force, the situation is ambiguous.
These were all formulated and experimentally verified before Isaac Newton expounded his Three Laws of Motion.
For most surface interfaces, the coefficient of kinetic friction is less than the coefficient of static friction.
In the early history of relativity, the expressions  and  were called longitudinal and transverse mass.
The notion "force" keeps its meaning in quantum mechanics, though one is now dealing with operators  instead of classical variables and though the physics is now described by the Schrödinger equation instead of Newtonian equations.
For certain physical scenarios, it is impossible to model forces as being due to gradient of potentials.
Examples of this follow:
By substituting the definition of acceleration, the algebraic version of Newton's Second Law is derived:
This means that forces follow a different set of mathematical rules than physical quantities that do not have direction (denoted scalar quantities).
Resolving force vectors into components of a set of basis vectors is often a more mathematically clean way to describe forces than using magnitudes and directions.
For so-called "Stokes' drag" the force is approximately proportional to the velocity, but opposite in direction:
However, in real life, matter has extended structure and forces that act on one part of an object might affect other parts of an object.
Summing these component forces using vector addition yields the original force.
: is a constant that depends on the properties of the fluid and the dimensions of the object (usually the cross-sectional area), and
This results in zero net force, but since the object started with a non-zero velocity, it continues to move with a non-zero velocity.
For example, when determining what happens when two forces act on the same object, it is necessary to know both the magnitude and the direction of both forces to calculate the result.
This has the consequence that the results of a measurement are now sometimes "quantized", i.e.
Newton came to realize that the effects of gravity might be observed in different ways at larger distances.
He distinguished between the innate tendency of objects to find their "natural place" (e.g., for heavy bodies to fall), which led to "natural motion", and unnatural or forced motion, which required continued application of a force.
A consistent electroweak theory has also been developed, which shows that electromagnetic forces and the weak force are indistinguishable at a temperatures in excess of approximately 1015&nbsp;kelvins.
Thus, the straight line path in space-time is seen as a curved line in space, and it is called the ''ballistic trajectory'' of the object.
Newton's Third Law is a result of applying symmetry to situations where forces can be attributed to the presence of different objects.
Newton's Second Law asserts the direct proportionality of acceleration to force and the inverse proportionality of acceleration to mass.
This theory, based on the everyday experience of how objects move, such as the constant application of a force needed to keep a cart moving, had conceptual trouble accounting for the behavior of projectiles, such as the flight of arrows.
parallel spins) the spatial variables must be ''antisymmetric'' (i.e.
This final modification to electromagnetic theory ultimately led to quantum electrodynamics (or QED), which fully describes all electromagnetic phenomena as being mediated by wave–particles known as photons.
Fully stated, this is the law:
In Aristotle's view, the terrestrial sphere contained four elements that come to rest at different "natural places" therein.
Some forces are consequences of the fundamental ones.
When the electrons in a material are densely packed together, there are not enough lower energy quantum mechanical states for them all, so some of them must be in higher energy states.
The relativistic expression relating force and acceleration for a particle with constant non-zero rest mass  moving in the  direction is:
In free-fall, this force is unopposed and therefore the net force on the object is its weight.
For example, a Feynman diagram can describe in succinct detail how a neutron decays into an electron, proton, and neutrino, an interaction mediated by the same gauge boson that is responsible for the weak nuclear force.
Philosophers in antiquity used the concept of force in the study of stationary and moving objects and simple machines, but thinkers such as Aristotle and Archimedes retained fundamental errors in understanding force.
The mechanical advantage given by a simple machine allowed for less force to be used in exchange for that force acting over a greater distance for the same amount of work.
Torque is the rotation equivalent of force in the same way that angle is the rotational equivalent for position, angular velocity for velocity, and angular momentum for momentum.
The place where the archer moves the projectile was at the start of the flight, and while the projectile sailed through the air, no discernible efficient cause acts on it.
The failure of many searches for free quarks has shown that the elementary particles affected are not directly observable.
The electromagnetic force acts between electric charges, and the gravitational force acts between masses.
This linear relationship was described by Robert Hooke in 1676, for whom Hooke's law is named.
Since there is no experiment that can distinguish whether it is the vehicle that is at rest or the outside world that is at rest, the two situations are considered to be physically indistinguishable.
The equation then becomes
However, while kinematics are well-described through reference frame analysis in advanced physics, there are still deep questions that remain as to what is the proper definition of mass.
General relativity offers an equivalence between space-time and mass, but lacking a coherent theory of quantum gravity, it is unclear as to how or whether this connection is relevant on microscales.
This formalism includes pressure terms associated with forces that act normal to the cross-sectional area (the matrix diagonals of the tensor) as well as shear terms associated with forces that act parallel to the cross-sectional area (the off-diagonal elements).
See force gauge, spring scale, load cell
Historically, forces were first quantitatively investigated in conditions of static equilibrium where several forces canceled each other out.
An ideal spring is taken to be massless, frictionless, unbreakable, and infinitely stretchable.
In this work Newton set out three laws of motion that to this day are the way forces are described in physics.
where  is the momentum of the system, and  is the net (vector sum) force.
Ideal strings transmit tension forces instantaneously in action-reaction pairs so that if two objects are connected by an ideal string, any force directed along the string by the first object is accompanied by a force directed along the string in the opposite direction by the second object.
However, the potentials V(x,y,z) or fields, from which the forces generally can be derived, are treated similar to classical position variables, i.e., .
This law is sometimes referred to as the ''action-reaction law'', with '''''F''''' called the "action" and −'''''F''''' the "reaction".
By making ''rest'' physically indistinguishable from ''non-zero constant velocity'', Newton's First Law directly connects inertia with the concept of relative velocities.
Most of the previous misunderstandings about motion and force were eventually corrected by Galileo Galilei and Sir Isaac Newton.
Newton's Second Law can be used to measure the strength of forces.
Such temperatures have been probed in modern particle accelerators and show the conditions of the universe in the early moments of the Big Bang.
The use of Newton's Second Law as a ''definition'' of force has been disparaged in some of the more rigorous textbooks, because it is essentially a mathematical truism.
The electrostatic force was first described in 1784 by Coulomb as a force that existed intrinsically between two charges.
According to the Second law of thermodynamics, nonconservative forces necessarily result in energy transformations within closed systems from ordered to more random conditions as entropy increases.
But in order to be conserved, relativistic momentum must be redefined as:
The weak force is due to the exchange of the heavy W and Z bosons.
This principle of equivalence was one of the foundational underpinnings for the development of the general theory of relativity.
It thus requires more force to accelerate it the same amount than it did at a lower velocity.
For a system that includes objects 1 and 2,
The pound-force provides an alternative unit of mass: one slug is the mass that will accelerate by one foot per second squared when acted on by one pound-force.
However, already in quantum mechanics there is one "caveat", namely the particles acting onto each other do not only possess the spatial variable, but also a discrete  intrinsic angular momentum-like variable called the "spin", and there is the Pauli principle relating the space and the spin variables.
For example, an object suspended on a vertical spring scale experiences the force of gravity acting on the object balanced by a force applied by the "spring reaction force", which equals the object's weight.
The magnitude of the resultant varies from the difference of the magnitudes of the two forces to their sum, depending on the angle between their lines of action.
During that time, sophisticated methods of perturbation analysis were invented to calculate the deviations of orbits due to the influence of multiple bodies on a planet, moon, comet, or asteroid.
For example, friction is a manifestation of the electromagnetic force acting between the atoms of two surfaces, and the Pauli exclusion principle, which does not permit atoms to pass through each other.
The two people could be pulling against each other as in tug of war or the two people could be pulling in the same direction.
: is the velocity of the object.
A simple case of dynamic equilibrium occurs in constant velocity motion across a surface with kinetic friction.
