Some metals may be forged cold, but iron and steel are almost always hot forged.
A lubricant is used when forging to reduce friction and wear.
Another variation follows the same process as outlined above, except the preform is produced by the spraying deposition of metal droplets into shaped collectors (similar to the Osprey process).
For example, by optimizing the preform geometries the local effective strains can be influenced to reduce local overheating for a more homogeneous temperature distribution.
*Adequate draft is provided; usually at least 3° for aluminium and 5° to 7° for steel.
The hammer is generally in contact with the workpiece on the scale of milliseconds.
Open-die forging gets its name from the fact that the dies (the surfaces that are in contact with the workpiece) do not enclose the workpiece, allowing it to flow except where contacted by the dies.
The first impression is used to distribute the metal into the rough shape in accordance to the needs of later cavities; this impression is called an "edging", "fullering", or "bending" impression.
The main reason for this is excess energy (energy that isn't used to deform the workpiece) that isn't released as heat or sound needs to be transmitted to the foundation.
Drop-hammer forging usually only deforms the surfaces of the work piece in contact with the hammer and anvil; the interior of the workpiece will stay relatively undeformed.
For industrial processes steel alloys are primarily forged in hot condition.
Press forging works by slowly applying a continuous pressure or force, which differs from the near-instantaneous impact of drop-hammer forging.
The operator therefore needs to orient and position the workpiece to get the desired shape.
Owing to the massiveness of large forging hammers and presses and the parts they can produce, as well as the dangers inherent in working with hot metal, a special building is frequently required to house the operation.
It is then descaled with rollers, sheared into blanks, and transferred through several successive forming stages, during which it is upset, preformed, final forged, and pierced (if necessary).
The main advantage of press forging, as compared to drop-hammer forging, is its ability to deform the complete workpiece.
is a similar process that thins out sections of the forging using a convex shaped die.
Flash can account for 20 to 45% of the starting material.
File:Forging-edging.svg|Edging
If the basic disciplines are not met, subsequent material removal operations will likely be necessary to remove material defects found at non-destructive testing inspection.
The initial workpiece is usually wire or rod, but some machines can accept bars up to  in diameter and a capacity of over 1000 tons.
The downside is that this process is only feasible on smaller symmetric parts and cost; the initial investment can be over $10 million, so large quantities are required to justify this process.
The advantage of this process is there is no flash and it imparts a favorable grain structure into the workpiece.
After forging, the flash is removed.
*The various sections are balanced to avoid extreme difference in metal flow.
Production forging involves significant capital expenditure for machinery, tooling, facilities and personnel.
Impression-die forging has been improved in recent years through increased automation which includes induction heating, mechanical feeding, positioning and manipulation, and the direct heat treatment of parts after forging.
Moreover, a large machine base is needed to absorb the impacts.
Drop-hammers usually operate in a vertical position.
*Ribs are low and wide.
Impression-die forging is also called "closed-die forging".
There are two types of drop forging: open-die drop forging and closed-die drop forging.
Based on number of pieces produced, this is the most widely used forging process.
Traditionally, forging was performed by a smith using hammer and anvil, though introducing water power to the production and working of iron in the 12th century allowed the use of large trip hammers or power hammers that exponentially increased the amount and size of iron that could be produced and forged easily.
We specifically know what kind of strain can be put on the part, because the compression rate of the press forging operation is controlled.
The automatic hot forging process involves feeding mill-length steel bars (typically  long) into one end of the machine at room temperature and hot forged products emerge from the other end.
To provide good forming conditions a homogeneous temperature distribution in the entire workpiece is necessary.
Other advantages include less noise, heat and vibration.
One variation of impression-die forging is called "flashless forging", or "true closed-die forging".
The main variations between drop-hammers are in the way the hammer is powered; the most common being air and steam hammers.
Precision forging also requires less of a draft, 1° to 0°.
The operation also creates closer tolerances.
The final shape is forged in a "final" or "finisher" impression cavity.
There is no flash produced so material savings are between 20 and 30% over conventional forging.
Forging can produce a piece that is stronger than an equivalent cast or machined part.
The workpiece will cool faster because the dies are in contact with workpiece; the dies facilitate drastically more heat transfer than the surrounding atmosphere.
Roll forging is a process where round or flat bar stock is reduced in thickness and increased in length.
The parts can be solid or hollow, round or symmetrical, up to , and up to  in diameter.
In impression-die forging, the metal is placed in a die resembling a mold, which is attached to an anvil.
Open-die forging may also orient the grain to increase strength in the required direction.
* Continuous grain flow
The final product is a consistent  so air cooling will result in a part that is still easily machinable (the advantage being the lack of annealing required after forging).
* Reduced chance of voids
*The dies part along a single, flat plane whenever possible.
The downside of this process is its cost, therefore it is only implemented if significant cost reduction can be achieved.
Also, press forgings can often be done in one closing of the dies, allowing for easy automation.
This also forces the metal to completely fill the die cavity.
It is commonly used to work a piece of raw material to the proper thickness.
Therefore, heated dies are usually used to reduce heat loss, promote surface flow, and enable the production of finer details and closer tolerances.
The press forging operation can be done either cold or hot.
The standard upsetting machine employs split dies that contain multiple cavities.
The workpiece may also need to be reheated.
Another advantage to the process includes the knowledge of the new part's strain rate.
Common forging processes include: roll forging, swaging, cogging, open-die forging, impression-die forging, press forging, automatic hot forging and upsetting.
* Better fatigue resistance
If not, the parting plane follows the contour of the part.
Hot forging prevents the work hardening that would result from cold forging, which would increase the difficulty of performing secondary machining operations on the piece.
Forging has been done by smiths for millennia; the traditional products were kitchenware, hardware, hand tools, edged weapons, and jewellery.
non-destructive testing by way of a dye-penetrant inspection technique, it is crucial that basic forging process disciplines be implemented.
Another advantage is that the operation can be used to create any size part because there is no limit to the size of the press forging machine.
These rules must be followed when designing parts to be upset forged:
The flash cools more rapidly than the rest of the material; this cool metal is stronger than the metal in the die, so it helps prevent more flash from forming.
The flash is trimmed, then the part is quench hardened.
Smaller power hammers,  or less reciprocating weight, and hydraulic presses are common in art smithies as well.
The following cavities are called "blocking" cavities, in which the piece is working into a shape that more closely resembles the final product.
The dies are usually flat in shape, but some have a specially shaped surface for specialized operations.
Cold forging typically results in work hardening of the piece.
There are a few disadvantages to this process, most stemming from the workpiece being in contact with the dies for such an extended period of time.
Today, forging is a major worldwide industry.
Open-die forging lends itself to short runs and is appropriate for art smithing and custom work.
Additionally, forgings can target a lower total cost when compared to a casting or fabrication.
The principle behind the machine is simple: raise the hammer and drop it or propel it into the workpiece, which rests on the anvil.
Dies must be impact resistant, wear resistant, maintain strength at high temperatures, and have the ability to withstand cycles of rapid heating and cooling.
These hammers may have reciprocating weights in the thousands of pounds.
Most forging operations use metal-forming dies, which must be precisely machined and carefully heat-treated to correctly shape the workpiece, as well as to withstand the tremendous forces involved.
Upset forging increases the diameter of the workpiece by compressing its length.
Open-die forgings can be worked into shapes which include discs, hubs, blocks, shafts (including step shafts or with flanges), sleeves, cylinders, flats, hexes, rounds, plate, and some custom shapes.
Forging is one of the oldest known metalworking processes.
Near net shape forging is most common when parts are forged without heating the slug, bar or billet.
*Lengths of stock greater than three times the diameter may be upset successfully, provided that the diameter of the upset is not more than 1.5 times the diameter of the stock.
Depending on the size and complexity of the part, the hammer may be dropped multiple times in quick succession.
The hammer is then dropped on the workpiece, causing the metal to flow and fill the die cavities.
Alloys that are amenable to precipitation hardening, such as most aluminium alloys and titanium, can be hot forged, followed by hardening.
File:Forging-fullering.svg|Fullering
Since the Industrial Revolution, forged parts are widely used in mechanisms and machines wherever a component requires high strength; such '''forgings''' usually require further processing (such as machining) to achieve a finished part.
The operation is a time-consuming process due to the amount and length of steps.
The dies open enough to allow the workpiece to move from one cavity to the next; the dies then close and the heading tool, or ram, then moves longitudinally against the bar, upsetting it into the cavity.
These processes prepare the workpieces for further forging processes.
The process is called "edging" because it is usually carried out on the ends of the workpiece. ""
New press forging techniques have been able to create a higher degree of mechanical and orientation integrity.
To achieve a low-cost net shape forging for demanding applications that are subject to a high degree of scrutiny, i.e.
Once the proper thickness is achieved the proper width is achieved via "edging".
Forging dies are usually made of high-alloy or tool steel.
Multidirectional Forging is forming of a work piece in a single step in several directions.
Manual transmission gears are an example of automatic hot forging used in conjunction with cold working.
One method incorporates casting a forging preform from liquid metal.
*Dimensional tolerances are not closer than necessary.
In hammer forging a lot of the work is absorbed by the machinery, when in press forging, the greater percentage of work is used in the work piece.
Roll forging is performed using two cylindrical or semi-cylindrical rolls, each containing one or more shaped grooves.
The disadvantages of this process include additional cost due to a more complex die design and the need for better lubrication and workpiece placement.
The main advantages to this process are its high output rate and ability to accept low-cost materials.
Forging is often classified according to the temperature at which it is performed: cold forging (a type of cold working), warm forging, or hot forging (a type of hot working).
Tool life is nearly double that of conventional forging because contact times are on the order of 0.06-second.
*In an upset requiring stock length greater than three times the diameter of the stock, and where the diameter of the cavity is not more than 1.5 times the diameter of the stock, the length of unsupported metal beyond the face of the die must not exceed the diameter of the bar.
This process can also be coupled with high-speed cold-forming operations.
The machines are usually set up to work in the horizontal plane, to facilitate the quick exchange of workpieces from one station to the next, but upsetting can also be done in a vertical crank press or a hydraulic press.
Examples of parts made by this process are: wheel hub unit bearings, transmission gears, tapered roller bearing races, stainless steel coupling flanges, and neck rings for LP gas cylinders.
Tolerances are usually ±, surfaces are clean, and draft angles are 0.5 to 1°.
However, it has low recurring costs for each part, thus forgings become more economical with more volume.
The multidirectional forming takes place through constructive measures of the tool.
A heated bar is inserted into the rolls and when it hits a spot the rolls rotate and the bar is progressively shaped as it is rolled through the machine.
It also produces a distinctly different flow pattern.
In some cases, open-die forging may be employed to rough-shape ingots to prepare them for subsequent operations.
Example disciplines are: die-lubricant management (Use of uncontaminated and homogeneous mixtures, amount and placement of lubricant).
Another reason forgings are common in these industrial sectors is that forgings generally have about a 20 percent higher strength-to-weight ratio compared to cast or machined parts of the same material.
In modern times, industrial forging is done either with presses or with hammers powered by compressed air, electricity, hydraulics or steam.
As the names imply, the difference is in the shape of the die, with the former not fully enclosing the workpiece, while the latter does.
In order to produce a better, more economical die the following standards are maintained:
The amount of time the dies are in contact with the workpiece is measured in seconds (as compared to the milliseconds of drop-hammer forges).
Usually, the hammer die is shaped as well.
Both of these machines can be used for open-die or closed-die forging.
The vertical movement of the press ram is redirected using wedges which distributes and redirects the force of the forging press in horizontal directions.
Excess metal is squeezed out of the die cavities, forming what is referred to as "flash".
By the constraint of oxidation to the outer layers of the part, reduced levels of microcracking occur in the finished part.
In the case of hot forging, a high-temperature furnace (sometimes referred to as the forge) is required to heat ingots or billets.
The main advantage of hot forging is that it can be done faster and more precise, and as the metal is deformed work hardening effects are negated by the recrystallization process.
Generally, the cold forming operation will do the finishing stage so that the advantages of cold-working can be obtained, while maintaining the high speed of automatic hot forging.
Therefore, the control of the tool temperature has a major influence to the process.
These stages usually impart the workpiece with generous bends and large fillets.
The casting is removed after it has solidified, but while still hot.
Cost savings are gained from the use of less material, and thus less scrap, the overall decrease in energy used, and the reduction or elimination of machining.
Forged parts can range in weight from less than a kilogram to hundreds of metric tons.
Upset forging is usually done in special high-speed machines called ''crank presses''.
Due to the narrow temperature range and high thermal conductivity, aluminium forging can only be realized in a particular process window.
For example, a die may have a round, concave, or convex surface or be a tool to form holes or be a cut-off tool.
Examples of products produced using this method include axles, tapered levers and leaf springs.
This process is also known as ''precision forging''.
The high-strength alloy AlZnMgCu1,5 is mainly used for aerospace applications.
Some steam hammers remain in use, but they became obsolete with the availability of the other, more convenient, power sources.
This allows the machine to work horizontally and have a smaller base.
Minus tolerance mm (in)
It was developed to minimize cost and waste associated with post-forging operations.
*Generous fillets and radii are used.
The dimensional tolerances of a steel part produced using the impression-die forging method are outlined in the table below.
As the workpiece cools it becomes stronger and less ductile, which may induce cracking if deformation continues.
High-strength aluminium alloys have the tensile strength of medium strong steel alloys while providing significant weight advantages.
* Improved microstructure
'''Forging''' is a manufacturing process involving the shaping of metal using localized compressive forces.
aluminum is a common material that can be cold forged depending on final shape.
In a counterblow machine both the hammer and anvil move and the workpiece is held between them.
"" is the successive deformation of a bar along its length using an open-die drop forge.
Lubrication of the parts being formed is critical to crease the die life of the mating dies.
Therefore, aluminium forged parts are mainly used in aerospace, automotive industry and many other fields of engineering especially in those fields, where highest safety standards against failure by abuse, by shock or vibratory stresses are needed.
If all of the cavities are utilized on every cycle, then a finished part will be produced with every cycle, which makes this process advantageous for mass production.
It is also used as a thermal barrier to restrict heat transfer from the workpiece to the die.
When you consider all the costs that are involved in a product’s lifecycle from procurement to lead time to rework, then factor in the costs of scrap, downtime and further quality issues, the long-term benefits of forgings can outweigh the short-term cost-savings that castings or fabrications might offer.
Closed-die forging has a high initial cost due to the creation of dies and required design work to make working die cavities.
Drop forging is a forging process where a hammer is raised and then "dropped" onto the workpiece to deform it according to the shape of the die.
*Full advantage is taken of fiber flow lines.
A few examples of common parts produced using the upset forging process are engine valves, couplings, bolts, screws, and other fasteners.
"" is the process of concentrating material using a concave shaped open-die.
This all occurs rapidly; small parts can be made at a rate of 180 parts per minute (ppm) and larger can be made at a rate of 90 ppm.
All of the following forging processes can be performed at various temperatures, however they are generally classified by whether the metal temperature is above or below the recrystallization temperature.
Here excess energy becomes recoil.
It is then finished in a single cavity die.
When done in high productivity, press forging is more economical than hammer forging.
'''Advantages of open-die forging'''
Hence low-cost parts will not be achievable.
Little labor is required to operate the machinery.
In this type of forging, the die cavities are completely closed, which keeps the workpiece from forming flash.
*The parting surface is a plane through the center of the forging and not near an upper or lower edge.
+ Dimensional tolerances for impression-die forgings
In open-die forging, a hammer strikes and deforms the workpiece, which is placed on a stationary anvil.
Such parts are for example chassis parts, steering components and brake parts.
The major advantage to this process is that less metal is lost to flash.
Impression-die press forging usually requires less draft than drop forging and has better dimensional accuracy.
To overcome some shortcomings of the drop-hammer, the ''counterblow machine'' or ''impactor'' is used.
The blows are delivered with a hammer (often a power hammer) or a die.
The piece is then transferred to the next set of grooves or turned around and reinserted into the same grooves.
Tight control of die temperatures and surface finish / friction.
*The length of unsupported metal that can be upset in one blow without injurious buckling should be limited to three times the diameter of the bar.
Dimensions that are completely contained within a single die segment or half can be maintained at a significantly greater level of accuracy.
If the temperature is above the material's recrystallization temperature it is deemed ''hot forging''; if the temperature is below the material's recrystallization temperature but above 30% of the recrystallization temperature (on an absolute scale) it is deemed ''warm forging''; if below 30% of the recrystallization temperature (usually room temperature) then it is deemed ''cold forging''.
Therefore, the final product from a precision forging needs little or no final machining.
For the latter two, the metal is heated, usually in a forge.
Open-die forging is also known as ''smith forging''.
There are other variations of part formation that integrate impression-die forging.
This continues until the desired shape and size is achieved.
Finally, the lubricant acts as a parting compound to prevent the part from sticking in the dies.
The smithy or forge has evolved over centuries to become a facility with engineered processes, production equipment, tooling, raw materials and products to meet the demands of modern industry.
