In addition, elements of allocatable arrays are contiguous, and aliasing is not an issue for optimization of array references, allowing compilers to generate faster code than in the case of pointers.)
Vendors of high-performance scientific computers (''e.g.,'' Burroughs, Control Data Corporation (CDC), Cray, Honeywell, IBM, Texas Instruments, and UNIVAC) added extensions to Fortran to take advantage of special hardware features such as instruction cache, CPU pipelines, and vector arrays.
These features would eventually be incorporated into the Fortran 90 standard.
Also the Compare considered −0 and +0 to be different values while the Transfer Zero and Transfer Not Zero considered them to be the same.
IBM later provided a FORTRAN IV compiler for the 1400 series of computers, described in  IBM document C24-3322.
The Monte Carlo technique is documented in Backus et al.
IF (IA) 777, 777, 701
Some early compilers, e.g., the IBM 650's, had additional restrictions due to limitations on their card readers.
The capitalization has been dropped in referring to newer versions beginning with Fortran 90.
Fortran encompasses a lineage of versions, each of which evolved to add extensions to the language while usually retaining compatibility with prior versions.
Another important supplement to Fortran 95 was the ISO technical report ''TR-15580: Floating-point exception handling'', informally known as the ''IEEE TR.''
+        13H SQUARE UNITS)
SQRT also accepts arguments of other types, such as COMPLEX or REAL*16 ).
* Direct-access file I/O
An IBM 519 could be used to copy a program deck and add sequence numbers.
* IMPLICIT NONE variant of the IMPLICIT statement
A WATFOR student could submit their batch FORTRAN job and, if there were no syntax errors, the program would move straight to execution.
However, the method proposed was to eliminate the letter from the character set entirely (thereby retaining 48 as the number of lexical characters, which the colon had increased to 49).
It was noted that this "might invalidate some existing programs" but that most of these "probably were non-conforming, anyway".
C AREA OF A TRIANGLE WITH A STANDARD SQUARE ROOT FUNCTION
if (number_of_points > 0) average_points = sum(points) / number_of_points
* Hollerith constants and Hollerith data, such as       GREET = 12HHELLO THERE!
* 6 was a continuation field: a non-blank character here caused the card to be taken as a continuation of the statement on the prior card.
'''Fortran 6''' or Visual Fortran 2001 was licensed to Compaq by Microsoft.
Significantly, the increasing popularity of FORTRAN spurred competing computer manufacturers to provide FORTRAN compilers for their machines, so that by 1963 over 40 FORTRAN compilers existed.
write (*,*) "Input number of points to average:"
* IF (a) n1, n2, n3
The permissible statements were:
* CALL, RETURN, PAUSE, and STOP statements
* GO TO (n1, n2, ..., nm), i
Despite advances in the Fortran language, preprocessors continue to be used for conditional compilation and macro substitution.
For numerical calculations, it is important to take account of the characteristics of the arithmetic.
* Transfer of control out of and back into the range of a DO loop (also known as "Extended Range")
* 1 to 5 were the label field: a sequence of digits here was taken as a label for use in DO or GO TO control statements, or to refer to a FORMAT in a WRITE or READ statement.
An important supplement to Fortran 95 was the ISO technical report ''TR-15581: Enhanced Data Type Facilities'', informally known as the ''Allocatable TR.''
C INPUT ERROR DISPLAY ERROR OUTPUT CODE 1 IN JOB CONTROL LISTING
A down side to this simplified environment was that WATFOR was not a good choice for programmers needing the expanded abilities of their host processor(s), e.g., WATFOR typically had very limited access to I/O devices.
Later compilers relaxed most fixed format restrictions and the requirement was eliminated in the Fortran 90 standard.
read  (*,*) number_of_points
Backus' historic FORTRAN team consisted of programmers Richard Goldberg, Sheldon F. Best, Harlan Herrick, Peter Sheridan, Roy Nutt, Robert Nelson, Irving Ziller, Lois Haibt, and David Sayre.
C MUST BE GREATER THAN THE THIRD SIDE, SO WE CHECK FOR THAT, TOO
On the other hand, more modern code generally uses large program libraries such as PETSc or Trilinos for linear algebra capabilities, METIS for graph partitioning, deal.II or FEniCS for mesh and finite element support, and other generic libraries.
* Assignment statement
Read in some numbers and take the average
It is currently planned to include further interoperability between Fortran and C, additional parallel features, and "the removal of simple deficiencies in and discrepancies between existing facilities."
Lahey and Fujitsu teamed up to create Fortran for the Microsoft .NET Framework.
* DO loop statement
Silverfrost FTN95 is also capable of creating .NET code.
* Logical IF and arithmetic (three-way) IF statements
* Submodules – additional structuring facilities for modules; supersedes ISO/IEC TR 19767:2005
Three passes were required to translate source code to the "IT" language, then to compile the IT statements into SOAP assembly language, and finally to produce the object program, which could then be loaded into the machine to run the program (using punched cards for data input, and outputting results onto punched cards).
Such uses include ALLOCATABLE arrays as derived type components, in procedure dummy argument lists, and as function return values.
Over the next few years, FORTRAN II would also add support for the DOUBLE PRECISION and COMPLEX data types.
* IMPLICIT statement, to override implicit conventions that undeclared variables are INTEGER if their name begins with I, J, K, L, M, or N (and REAL otherwise)
This allowed omitting spaces between tokens for brevity, or including spaces within identifiers for clarity.
705 IF (IB+IC-IA) 777, 777, 799
As with Fortran 95, this is a minor upgrade, incorporating clarifications and corrections to Fortran 2003, as well as introducing a select few new capabilities.
* 7 to 72 served as the statement field.
Popular preprocessors included FLECS, iftran, MORTRAN, SFtran, S-Fortran, Ratfor, and Ratfiv.
Also apparent is the use of descriptive variable names and general code formatting that conform with contemporary programming style.
704 IF (IA+IC-IB) 777, 777, 705
'''Fortran''' (formerly '''FORTRAN''', derived from "Formula Translation") is a general-purpose, imperative programming language that is especially suited to numeric computation and scientific computing.
They are similar to Ada private child subunits.
It kept the program in memory and loaded overlays that gradually transformed it, in place, into executable form, as described by Haines.
The FORTRAN defined by the first standard, officially denoted X3.9-1966, became known as ''FORTRAN 66'' (although many continued to term it FORTRAN IV, the language on which the standard was largely based).
It is the primary language for some of the most intensive supercomputing tasks, such as astronomy, weather and climate modeling, numerical linear algebra (LAPACK), numerical libraries (IMSL and NAG), structural engineering, hydrological modeling,  optimization, satellite simulation and data analysis, computational fluid dynamics, computational chemistry, computational economics and computational physics.
Portability was a problem in the early days because there was no agreed standard not even IBM's reference manual and computer companies vied to differentiate their offerings from others by providing incompatible features.
Ratfor and Ratfiv, for example, implemented a C-like language, outputting preprocessed code in standard FORTRAN 66.
The arithmetic IF statement was similar to a three-way branch instruction on the IBM 704.
This capability is often referred to as "CoCo".
FOR TRANSIT statements were limited to columns 7 through 56, only.
In Fortran 77, variable names beginning with the letters I-N had a default type of integer, while variables starting with any other letters defaulted to real, although programmers could override the defaults with an explicit declaration.
It is a popular language for high-performance computing and is used for programs that benchmark and rank the world's fastest supercomputers.
integer                         :: number_of_points
WRITE OUTPUT TAPE 6, 601, IA, IB, IC, AREA
* Generic names for intrinsic functions (e.g.
A draft specification for ''The IBM Mathematical Formula Translating System'' was completed by mid-1954.
The F programming language was designed to be a clean subset of Fortran 95 that attempted to remove the redundant, unstructured, and deprecated features of Fortran, such as the EQUIVALENCE statement.
An important supplement to Fortran 2008 is the ISO Technical Specification (TS) 29113 on ''Further Interoperability of Fortran with C'', which has been submitted to ISO in May 2012 for approval.
The resulting deck of cards would be fed into a card reader to be compiled.
This specification defined support for IEEE floating-point arithmetic and floating point exception handling.
The widespread (now almost universal) adoption of the IEEE 754 standard for binary floating-point arithmetic has essentially removed this problem.
The following program illustrates dynamic memory allocation and array-based operations, two features introduced with Fortran 90.
Consequently, a growing fraction of scientific code is also written in these languages.
* Bit manipulation intrinsic functions, based on similar functions included in Industrial Real-Time Fortran (ANSI/ISA S61.1 (1976))
C FURTHERMORE, THE SUM OF TWO SIDES OF A TRIANGLE
in the context of the 1966 standard by the ''PORT'' library.
For example, one of IBM's FORTRAN compilers (''H Extended IUP'') had a level of optimization which reordered the machine code instructions to keep multiple internal arithmetic units busy simultaneously.
C AREA OF THE TRIANGLE
When assumed-length arrays were being added, there was a dispute as to the appropriate character to separate upper and lower bounds.
C USING HERON'S FORMULA WE CALCULATE THE
Successive versions have added support for structured programming
Before the development of disk files, text editors and terminals, programs were most often entered on a keypunch keyboard onto 80 column punched cards, one line to a card.
This specification, developed by the U.S. Department of Defense, standardized a number of features implemented by most FORTRAN 77 compilers but not included in the ANSI FORTRAN 77 standard.
I didn't like writing programs, and so, when I was working on the IBM 701, writing programs for computing missile trajectories, I started work on a programming system to make it easier to write programs."
C OUTPUT - LINE PRINTER UNIT 6, REAL OUTPUT
If A, B, and C cannot represent the sides of a triangle in plane geometry, then the program's execution will end with an error code of "STOP 1".
(Troublesome '''FORMAT''' statements would also be eliminated.)
Two versions existed for the 650s with a 2000 word memory drum:  FOR TRANSIT I (S) and FOR TRANSIT II, the latter for machines equipped with indexing registers and automatic floating point decimal (bi-quinary) arithmetic.
Otherwise, an output line will be printed showing the input values for A, B, and C, followed by the computed AREA of the triangle as a floating-point number with 2 digits after the decimal point.
The 1966 standard provided a reference syntax and semantics, but vendors continued to provide incompatible extensions.
Early versions of FORTRAN provided by other vendors suffered from the same disadvantage.
During the same Fortran standards committee meeting at which the name "FORTRAN 77" was chosen, a satirical technical proposal was incorporated into the official distribution bearing the title, "Letter O Considered Harmful".
An important practical extension to FORTRAN 77 was the release of MIL-STD-1753 in 1978.
701 IF (IB) 777, 777, 702
Take the average by summing points and dividing by number_of_points
This table is obtained by running the program once in Monte-Carlo fashion, in which the outcome of conditional transfers arising out of IF-type statements and computed GO TO'S is determined by a random number generator suitably weighted according to whatever FREQUENCY statements have been provided.
Nevertheless, if a standard-conforming Fortran does provide such options, then they "must be provided in accordance with the description of those facilities in the appropriate Part of the Standard."
Punched card codes included no lower case letters or many special characters, and special versions of the IBM 026 keypunch were offered that would correctly print the repurposed special characters used in Fortran.
For example, AVG OF X was a valid identifier, equivalent to AVGOFX, and 10101DO101I=1,101 was a valid statement, equivalent to
IBM Research Labs also developed an extended FORTRAN-based language called ''VECTRAN'' for processing vectors and matrices.
For this reason, facilities for interoperation with C were added to Fortran 2003, and enhanced by ISO/IEC technical specification 29113, which will be incorporated into Fortran 2015.
This simplification allowed students to concentrate on their program's syntax and semantics, or execution logic flow, rather than dealing with submission Job Control Language (JCL), the compile/link-edit/execution successive process(es), or other complexities of the mainframe/minicomputer environment.
The first manual for FORTRAN appeared in October 1956, with the first FORTRAN compiler delivered in April 1957.
The COMMON statement provided a way for subroutines to access common (or global) variables.
* The CONTIGUOUS attribute – to specify storage layout restrictions
In this revision of the standard, a number of features were removed or altered in a manner that might invalidate formerly standard-conforming programs.
The official language standards now refer to the language as "Fortran" rather than all-caps "FORTRAN".
The new standard, called ''FORTRAN 77'' and officially denoted X3.9-1978, added a number of significant features to address many of the shortcomings of FORTRAN 66:
if (count(points > 0.)
and in  IBM document C24-1455.
This proposal purported to address the confusion that sometimes arises between the letter "O" and the numeral zero, by eliminating the letter from allowable variable names.
/ count(points > 0.)
C INPUT - TAPE READER UNIT 5, INTEGER INPUT
Many years later, the FREQUENCY statement had no effect on the code, and was treated as a comment statement, since the compilers no longer did this kind of compile-time simulation.
real, dimension(:), allocatable :: points
* SUBROUTINE, FUNCTION, and END
In late 1953, John W. Backus submitted a proposal to his superiors at IBM to develop a more practical alternative to assembly language for programming their IBM 704 mainframe computer.
While this may not be desired behavior, it keeps this example simple
The compiler could be run from tape, or from a 2200-card deck; it used no further tape or disk storage.
While the community was skeptical that this new method could possibly outperform hand-coding, it reduced the number of programming statements necessary to operate a machine by a factor of 20, and quickly gained acceptance.
write (*,*) "Enter the points to average:"
* Block IF and END IF statements, with optional ELSE and ELSE IF clauses, to provide improved language support for structured programming
The name is a pun on the earlier Fortran IV.
IBM also developed a ''FORTRAN III'' in 1958 that allowed for inline assembly code among other features; however, this version was never released as a product.
* Identifiers of up to six characters in length
allocate (points(number_of_points))
's paper on this original implementation, ''The FORTRAN Automatic Coding System'':
It was available for Sun, Iris, iPSC, and nCUBE, but is no longer supported.
* SAVE statement for persistent local variables
So much exists in Fortran that it seems unlikely that scientists will change to Pascal, Modula-2, or whatever."
Originally developed by IBM in the 1950s for scientific and engineering applications, Fortran came to dominate this area of programming early on and has been in continuous use for over half a century in computationally intensive areas such as numerical weather prediction, finite element analysis, computational fluid dynamics, computational physics, crystallography and computational chemistry.
The inclusion of a complex number data type in the language made Fortran especially suited to technical applications such as electrical engineering.
Otherwise, the columns of the card were divided into four fields
Object-Oriented Fortran was an object-oriented extension of Fortran, in which data items can be grouped into objects, which can be instantiated and executed in parallel.
The FREQUENCY statement in FORTRAN was used originally (and optionally) to give branch probabilities for the three branch cases of the arithmetic IF statement.
One new extension, Coarray Fortran, is intended to support parallel programming.
This allows the specification and implementation of a module to be expressed in separate program units, which improves packaging of large libraries, allows preservation of trade secrets while publishing definitive interfaces, and prevents compilation cascades.
and processing of character-based data (FORTRAN 77), array programming, modular programming and generic programming (Fortran 90), high performance Fortran (Fortran 95), object-oriented programming (Fortran 2003) and concurrent programming (Fortran 2008).
However, the 704 branch instructions all contained only one destination address (e.g., TZE Transfer AC Zero, TNZ Transfer AC Not Zero, TPL Transfer AC Plus, TMI Transfer AC Minus).
However, none of these restrictions make a source program written for FOR TRANSIT incompatible with the FORTRAN system for the 704.
FORTRAN 66 effectively became the first industry-standard version of FORTRAN.
Fortran 5 was marketed by Data General Corp in the late 1970s and early 1980s, for the Nova, Eclipse, and MV line of computers.
It is now possible (and relatively easy) to write an entirely portable program in Fortran, even without recourse to a preprocessor.
LRLTRAN was developed at the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory to provide support for vector arithmetic and dynamic storage, among other extensions to support systems programming.
Within the statement field, whitespace characters (blanks) were generally ignored.
Rather than offer two processors, essentially every compiler eventually had at least an option to diagnose extensions.
An optimizing compiler like FORTRAN would most likely select the more compact and usually faster Transfers instead of the Compare (use of Transfers also allowed the FREQUENCY statement to optimize IFs, which could not be done using the Compare).
* PARAMETER statement for specifying constants
As written, if there are no data points, an average of zero is returned
It had an optimizing compiler that was quite good for minicomputers of its time.
While most of the 24 items in the conflict list (see Appendix A2 of X3.9-1978) addressed loopholes or pathological cases permitted by the prior standard but rarely used, a small number of specific capabilities were deliberately removed, such as:
Its concepts included easier entry of equations into a computer, an idea developed by J. Halcombe Laning and demonstrated in the Laning and Zierler system of 1952.
The IEEE 1003.9 POSIX Standard, released in 1991, provided a simple means for FORTRAN 77 programmers to issue POSIX system calls.
The resulting two standards, approved in March 1966, defined two languages, ''FORTRAN'' (based on FORTRAN IV, which had served as a de facto standard), and ''Basic FORTRAN'' (based on FORTRAN II, but stripped of its machine-dependent features).
The new capabilities include:
* DATA statement for specifying initial values
Standards have improved portability.
The FORTRAN system was designed for a more complex  machine than the 650, and consequently some of the 32 statements found in the FORTRAN Programmer's Reference Manual are not acceptable to the FOR TRANSIT system.
WATFOR was succeeded by WATFIV and its later versions.
Such machine-specific extensions have either disappeared over time or have had elements incorporated into the main standards.
Another example is ''CFD'', a special variant of Fortran designed specifically for the ILLIAC IV supercomputer, running at NASA's Ames Research Center.
After the release of the FORTRAN 66 standard, compiler vendors introduced several extensions to ''Standard Fortran'', prompting ANSI committee X3J3 in 1969 to begin work on revising the 1966 standard, under sponsorship of  CBEMA, the Computer Business Equipment Manufacturers Association (formerly BEMA).
Appendix A of the manual included wiring diagrams for the IBM 533 card reader/punch control panel.
This specification defined enhanced use of ALLOCATABLE arrays, prior to the availability of fully Fortran 2003-compliant Fortran compilers.
This was the first optimizing compiler, because customers were reluctant to use a high-level programming language unless its compiler could generate code with performance comparable to that of hand-coded assembly language.
703 IF (IA+IB-IC) 777, 777, 704
This has been addressed by incorporation of C interoperability into the 2003 standard.
* 73 to 80 were ignored (the IBM 704's card reader only used 72 columns)
if (count(points  0) then
In a comment examining these arguments, Dr. Walt Brainerd penned an article entitled, "Astronomy vs. Gastroenterology"
Perhaps the most significant development in the early history of FORTRAN was the decision by the ''American Standards Association'' (now American National Standards Institute (ANSI)) to form a committee sponsored by BEMA, the Business Equipment Manufacturers Association, to develop an ''American Standard Fortran''.
The precise characteristics and syntax of Fortran 95 are discussed in Fortran 95 language features.
Like the 704 FORTRAN and FORTRAN II, FORTRAN III included machine-dependent features that made code written in it unportable from machine to machine.
They have licensed Compaq Visual Fortran and have provided the Visual Studio 5 environment interface for Compaq v6 up to v6.1.
* READ, WRITE, BACKSPACE, REWIND, and ENDFILE statements for sequential I/O
The specification adds support for accessing the array descriptor from C and allows ignoring the type and rank of arguments.
negative_average = sum(points, points
''(Removal was the only allowable alternative to X3J3 at that time, since the concept of "deprecation" was not yet available for ANSI standards.)''
Hollerith strings, originally allowed only in FORMAT and DATA statements, were prefixed by a character count and the letter H (e.g., 26HTHIS IS ALPHANUMERIC DATA.
Large collections of library software that could be described as being loosely related to engineering and scientific calculations, such as graphics libraries, have been written in C, and therefore access to them presented a portability problem.
Keypunches could be programmed to tab to column 7 and skip out after column 72.
601 FORMAT (4H A= ,I5,5H  B= ,I5,5H  C= ,I5,8H  AREA= ,F10.2,
* A set of intrinsics (LGE, LGT, LLE, LLT) for lexical comparison of strings, based upon the ASCII collating sequence.
Although a 1968 journal article by the authors of BASIC already described Fortran as "old-fashioned", since Fortran has been in use for many decades, there is a vast body of Fortran software in daily use throughout the scientific and engineering communities.
702 IF (IC) 777, 777, 703
At about this time FORTRAN IV had started to become an important educational tool and implementations such as the University of Waterloo's WATFOR and WATFIV were created to simplify the complex compile and link processes of earlier compilers.
Prior to FORTRAN 77, a number of preprocessors were commonly used to provide a friendlier language, with the advantage that the preprocessed code could be compiled on any machine with a standard FORTRAN compiler.
Reflecting punched card input practice, Fortran programs were originally written in a fixed column format, with the first 72 columns read into twelve 36-bit words.
The main enhancement was to support procedural programming by allowing user-written subroutines and functions which returned values, with parameters passed by reference.
