The boulevard is a popular attraction for locals and visitors, being ideally situated close to Fort Lauderdale beach, Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport and Port Everglades.
This intersection is the "ground zero" of Fort Lauderdale Beach, and is the site of the Elbo Room bar featured in the 1960 film ''Where the Boys Are'', which led in large measure to the city's former reputation as a spring break mecca.
Major League Baseball's Miami Marlins, the National Football League's Miami Dolphins and the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association all play in neighboring Dade County.
Fort Lauderdale is also home to the Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Complex, which is located at the International Swimming Hall of Fame.
The tires posed a particular threat after breaking free from their restraints.
* Florida International University FIU (satellite campus)
2007 Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT) results for Fort Lauderdale's public schools were mixed; while ten (of sixteen) elementary schools and one (of four) middle schools received "A" or "B" grades, Sunland Park Elementary School and Arthur Ashe Middle School received failing grades.
It is Florida's deepest port, and is an integral petroleum receiving point.
After the war ended, service members returned to the area, spurring an enormous population explosion which dwarfed the 1920s boom.
The construction cost of $50 million per mile is considerably higher than other recently built streetcar projects, in part due to the challenges of building an electric transit system over the 3rd Avenue drawbridge.
On 11 July 1962 a verdict by Ted Cabot went against the city's policy of racial segregation of public beaches.
All Aboard Florida is constructing a new station in downtown Fort Lauderdale for its Brightline rail service connecting Miami and Orlando, Florida.
Administrative functions are performed by a city manager, who is appointed by the city commission.
17.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.4% were married couples living together, 12.3% have a female head of household with no husband present, and 52.4% were non-families.
The hurricane season is between June 1 and November 30 with major hurricanes most likely to affect the city or state in September and October.
The following are images of some of the remaining historical structures in Fort Lauderdale.
He was arrested and being transported to a Miami jail when police were run off the road by a mob.
A 1967 report estimated that the city was approximately 85% developed, and the 1970 population figure was 139,590.
* The Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale
An additional 25–30 neighborhoods exist without official recognition, although the city's neighborhood map displays them as well.
It is considered to be South Florida's most architecturally unique, authentic, and eclectic shopping and dining district.
Fort Lauderdale has an official program for designating and recognizing neighborhoods.
The hospital serves as a major training site for medical students from Nova Southeastern University's College of Osteopathic Medicine, as well as nursing and paramedic programs from throughout the area.
In 2013, the county welcomed about 1.3 million LGBT travelers who spent about $1.5 billion in area restaurants, hotels, attractions and shops, according to the Greater Fort Lauderdale Convention & Visitors Bureau.
Like South Florida in general, Fort Lauderdale has many residents who can speak languages other than English, although its proportion is lower than the county average.
For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 113.1 males.
* Broward College BC (Willis Holcombe Downtown Center)
Summers from May through October are hot, humid, and wet with average high temperatures of  and lows of .
The 1926 Miami Hurricane and the Great Depression of the 1930s caused a great deal of economic dislocation.
The Fort Lauderdale Main Post Office is located at 1900 West Oakland Park Boulevard in the city of Oakland Park.
The district is anchored in the West by the Broward Center for the Performing Arts, and runs through the city to the intersection of Las Olas and A1A.
This section of Fort Lauderdale borders the cities of Tamarac and Oakland Park on its south side.
Fort Lauderdale is home to Port Everglades, the nation's third busiest cruise port.
His body was riddled with some twenty bullets.
However, rainfall occurs in all months, even during the drier months from November through April, mainly as short-lived heavy afternoon thunderstorms.
Greater Fort Lauderdale has over 4,000 restaurants, 63 golf courses, 12 shopping malls, 16 museums, 132 nightclubs, 278 parkland campsites, and 100 marinas housing 45,000 resident yachts.
Speakers of Spanish were 9.43%, French Creole (mostly Haitian Creole) 7.52%, French 2.04%, Portuguese 1.02%, Italian 0.82%, and German at 0.80%.
However, in the rugged and corrosive environment of the ocean, nylon straps used to secure the tires wore out, cables rusted, and tires broke free.
Broward County (BCT) has committed to operating the system for the first 10 years at an expected annual cost of $2 million, and has guaranteed funding to cover any shortfall in ridership revenues.
It is a principal city of the Miami metropolitan area, which was home to an estimated 6,012,331 people at the 2015 census.
Average monthly temperatures are always above  and average monthly precipitation is above .
Fort Lauderdale has an average of 143 rain days and 250 sunshine days annually.
There is a convention center located west of the beach and southeast of downtown, with  of space, including a  main exhibit hall.
After 1970, as Fort Lauderdale became essentially built out, growth in the area shifted to suburbs to the west.
Broward County Public Schools operates 23 public schools in Fort Lauderdale.
The site was listed on the National Register of Historic places in 1984 and declared a historic landmark by the City of Fort Lauderdale in 2002.
A Coast Guard base at Port Everglades was also established.
On January 6, 1836, while Cooley was leading an attempt to salvage a wrecked ship, a band of Seminoles attacked his farm, killing his wife and children, and the children's tutor.
Broward County is served by three major Interstate Highways (I-75, I-95, I-595) and U.S.
Winters from November through April are warm and mostly dry with average high temperatures of  and lows of .
Post offices within the city limits include Alridge, Colee, Coral Ridge, Gateway Station, Melrose Vista, and Southside Station.
The United States Postal Service operates post offices in Fort Lauderdale.
The forts took their name from Major William Lauderdale (1782–1838), younger brother of Lieutenant Colonel James Lauderdale.
The Wave (streetcar), a new  electric streetcar system costing $125 million, is being planned for the downtown.
Fort Lauderdale is served by English-language newspapers ''South Florida-Sun Sentinel'' and ''The Miami Herald'', Spanish-language newspapers ''El Sentinel'' and ''El Nuevo Herald'', alternative newspaper ''New Times Broward-Palm Beach and city monthly Fort Lauderdale Magazine.''
The city is also known as a popular vacation spot for gays and lesbians, with many LGBT or LGBT-friendly hotels and guesthouses.
There are numerous services available to bring visitors from Fort Lauderdale Beach to the Everglades.
However, development of the city did not begin until 50 years after the forts were abandoned at the end of the conflict.
Four railroads serve Fort Lauderdale.
When World War II began, Fort Lauderdale became a major US base, with a Naval Air Station to train pilots, radar operators, and fire control operators.
Along Riverwalk, the brick-lined meandering promenade, discover the Broward Center for the Performing Arts, Museum of Discovery and Science with its AutoNation 3D IMAX Theater, Florida Grand Opera, Fort Lauderdale Historical Center, Stranahan House and the Museum of Art.
Henry E. Kinney Tunnel on U.S. Route 1 is the only tunnel on a state road in the state of Florida.
Greater Fort Lauderdale which takes in all of Broward County hosted 12 million visitors in 2012, including 2.8 million international visitors.
The 1960 Census counted 83,648 people in the city, about 230% of the 1950 figure.
During this period, more than half of summer days may bring afternoon or evening thunderstorms.
The downtown area is the largest in Broward County, although there are other cities in the county with commercial centers.
As of 2010, there were 74,786 occupied households, while 19.7% were vacant.
Hugh Taylor Birch came to Florida in 1893.
BCT provides for connections with the bus systems in other parts of the metropolitan area: Metrobus in Dade County and Palm Tran in Palm Beach County.
It is also home to Chris Evert Children's Hospital and a Heart Center of Excellence.
Most of the construction funding will come from federal ($62.5 million), state ($37 million) and city taxpayers ($10.5 million), with approximately $15 million from assessments on properties located within the Downtown Development Authority.
Although Fort Lauderdale does not host any top division professional sports teams, the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League play at BB&T Center in suburban Sunrise.
As of the 2010 census, the city had a population of 165,521.
The first United States stockade named Fort Lauderdale was built in 1838, and subsequently was a site of fighting during the Second Seminole War.
In recent years, thousands of tires have also washed up on nearby beaches, especially during hurricanes.
Companies based in the Fort Lauderdale area include AutoNation, Citrix Systems, DHL Express, Spirit Airlines, and National Beverage Corporation.
Office buildings and highrises include Las Olas River House, Las Olas Grand, 110 Tower (formerly AutoNation Tower), Bank of America Plaza, One Financial Plaza, Broward Financial Center, One East Broward Boulevard, Barnett Bank Plaza, PNC Center, New River Center, One Corporate Center, SunTrust Centre, 101 Tower, and SouthTrust Tower.
About 13.1% of families and 18.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.3% of those under age 18 and 12.5% of those aged 65 or over.
Broward General is a 716-bed acute care facility which is designated as a Level I trauma center.
Fort Lauderdale's economy has diversified over time.From the 1940s through the 1980s, the city was known as a spring break destination for college students.
While some rain does fall in winter, the majority of precipitation is received during the summer months (see climate chart below).
Nine institutions of higher learning have main or satellite campuses in the city:
Off the coast of Fort Lauderdale is the Osborne Reef, an artificial reef made of discarded tires that has proven to be an ecological disaster.
Highways such as U.S. 1, US 27 and US 441.
It was previously the home of the original Fort Lauderdale Strikers, which played in the previous version of the North American Soccer League.
On 4 July 1961 African Americans started a series of protests,  wade-ins, at beaches that were off-limits to them, to protest "the failure of the county to build a road to the Negro beach".
Although control of the area changed between Spain, United Kingdom, the United States, and the Confederate States of America, it remained largely undeveloped until the 20th century.
The city and its suburbs host over 4,100 restaurants and over 120 nightclubs, many of them in the arts and entertainment district.
This qualifies the city's climate as a tropical climate, and the city does not have a true dry season.
The largest employers in the county are Tenet Healthcare, which employs 5,000 people; American Express, which employs 4,200; The Continental Group, which employs 3,900; Motorola, which employs 3,000, and Maxim Integrated Products, which employs 2,000.
The greater portion of Fort Lauderdale in the south is bordered, along its north side by Wilton Manors.
Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, in neighboring Dania Beach, Florida, is the city's main airport and is the fastest-growing major airport in the country.
Las Olas Boulevard is a popular thoroughfare in downtown Fort Lauderdale that runs from Andrews Avenue in the Central Business District to A1A and Fort Lauderdale Beach.
Today, Fort Lauderdale is a major yachting center, one of the nation's largest tourist destinations, and the center of a metropolitan division with 1.8 million people.
In 2010, 21.3% of the city's population was foreign-born.
* University of Phoenix (Cypress Creek Learning Center)
Fort Lauderdale is a major manufacturing and maintenance center for yachts.
The most recent storms to directly affect the city were Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Wilma, both of which struck the city in 2005.
The Bonnet House is a historic home in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, United States.
It is also served by Florida's Turnpike and State Highway 869, also known as the Sawgrass Expressway.
He purchased ocean-front property for about a dollar per acre, he eventually owned a 3.5-mile stretch of beachfront.
Fort Lauderdale is named after a series of forts built by the United States during the Second Seminole War.
Just minutes from the beach is the Riverwalk Arts and Entertainment District in downtown Fort Lauderdale, home to cultural attractions, shops, parks and restaurants.
The city is also sometimes referred to as "Fort Liquordale" because of its beaches, bars, nightclubs, and history as a spring break location, back in the 1960s and 1970s, for tens of thousands of college students.
The city is also the setting for the 1986 movie ''Flight of the Navigator'', and host of Langerado, an annual music festival.
The Miami Fusion of Major League Soccer played at this stadium from 1998 to 2001.
The fort was abandoned in 1842, after the end of the war, and the area remained virtually unpopulated until the 1890s.
'''Fort Lauderdale'''  (frequently abbreviated as '''Ft.
Miami International Airport and Palm Beach International Airport also serve the city.
Oakland Park also borders Fort Lauderdale on the west side of its northeastern portion.
In 2000, Fort Lauderdale had the twenty-sixth highest percentage of Haitian residents in the US, at 6.9% of the city's population, and the 127th highest percentage of Cuban residents, at 1.7% of the city's residents.
As of 2010, the median income for a household in the city was $49,818, and the median income for a family was $59,238.
The murder was subsequently used by the press in Nazi Germany to discredit US critiques of its own persecution of Jews, Communists, and Catholics.
Fort Lauderdale Fire-Rescue Department provides Fire and Emergency Medical Services.
Fort Lauderdale's first major development began in the 1920s, during the Florida land boom of the 1920s.
Contact with Spanish explorers in the 16th century proved disastrous for the Tequesta, as the Europeans unwittingly brought with them diseases, such as smallpox, to which the native populations possessed no resistance.
The other farms in the settlement were not attacked, but all the white residents in the area abandoned the settlement, fleeing first to the Cape Florida Lighthouse on Key Biscayne, and then to Key West.
It was not until Frank Stranahan arrived in the area in 1893 to operate a ferry across the New River, and the Florida East Coast Railroad's completion of a route through the area in 1896, that any organized development began.
Forty six cruise ships sailed from Port Everglades in 2012.
For every 100 females there were 111.8 males.
The New York Yankees, Baltimore Orioles, and Kansas City Royals used to conduct spring training in the city at Fort Lauderdale Stadium, and NCAA Division I college sports teams of Florida International University and University of Miami play in Dade County.
Under the Neighborhood Organization Recognition Program, more than 60 distinct neighborhoods have received official recognition from the city.
Lauderdale''') is a city in the U.S. state of Florida,   north of Miami.
It is the county seat of Broward County.
It contains two  by 50-meter competition pools, as well as one 20 by  diving well.
Lockhart Stadium in Fort Lauderdale, is the current home of the Fort Lauderdale Strikers which play in the current incarnation of the North American Soccer League.
For the Tequesta, disease, coupled with continuing conflict with their Calusa neighbors, contributed greatly to their decline over the next two centuries.
Three forts named "Fort Lauderdale" were constructed; the first was at the fork of the New River, the second at Tarpon Bend on the New River between the Colee Hammock and Rio Vista neighborhoods, and the third near the site of the Bahia Mar Marina.
Local authorities are now working to remove the 700,000 tires, in cooperation with the U.S. Army, Navy and Coast Guard.
Approximately 30% of the city's 10 million annual visitors attend conventions at the center.
The record high temperature of  was recorded on June 22, 2009.
Since 2000, Fort Lauderdale has gained slightly over 18,000 residents through annexation of seven neighborhoods in unincorporated Broward County.
Boyd Anderson High School, which is located in Lauderdale Lakes but whose attendance zone includes part of Fort Lauderdale, also received a failing grade.
The city, along with adjacent small cities Oakland Park and Wilton Manors, is known for its large LGBT community and has one of the highest ratios of gay men and lesbians, with gay men being more largely present, in the United States.
Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood is an emerging international gateway for the Caribbean and Latin America.
The downtown area, especially around Las Olas Boulevard, first underwent redevelopment starting in 2002  and now hosts many new hotels and high-rise condominium developments.
Fort Lauderdale features a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen ''Af'') with little seasonal variation in temperature.
The interchange between I-95 and I-595/SR 862 is known as the Rainbow Interchange.
Of foreign-born residents, 69.6% were born in Latin America and 15.3% were born in Europe, with smaller percentages from North America, Africa, Asia, and Oceania.
Florida Atlantic University's athletic programs are located in neighboring Palm Beach County.
Males had a median income of $46,706 versus $37,324 for females.
The area in which the city of Fort Lauderdale would later be founded was inhabited for more than two thousand years by the Tequesta Indians.
Imperial Point Medical Center is a 204-bed facility with a hyperbaric medicine program.
The mayor of Fort Lauderdale now serves a three-year term and cannot serve more than three consecutive terms.
The Fort Lauderdale metropolitan area foreclosures increased 127.4% from 2006 to 2007, or one filing per 48 households in the quarter.
Fort Lauderdale has a Commission-Manager form of government.
With its many canals, and proximity to the Bahamas and Caribbean, it is also a popular yachting vacation stop, and home port for 42,000 boats, and approximately 100 marinas and boatyards.
The Florida Atlantic University Owls football team played its home games at Lockhart Stadium from 2003 through 2010.
In November 2006, Broward County voters rejected a one-cent-per-hundred sales tax increase intended to fund transportation projects such as light rail and expansion of the bus system.
As is true of many parts of Florida, the city's population has a strong seasonal variation, as snowbirds from the northern United States, Canada, and Europe north spend the winter and early spring in Florida.
The city and county in 2012 collected $43.9 million from the 5% bed tax it charges, after hotels in the area recorded an occupancy rate for the year of 72.7 percent and an average daily rate of $114.48.
The tires then migrated shoreward and ran into a living reef tract, washed up on its slope and killed many things in their path.
It was constructed in 1960, and its  length travels underneath the New River and Las Olas Boulevard.
According to 2000 census data, 79.0% of the city's population aged 25 or older were high school graduates, slightly below the national figure of 80.4%.
Holy Cross Hospital, a 571-bed hospital operated by the Sisters of Mercy, was named by HealthGrades as one of the 50 best hospitals in the country for 2007.
Fort Lauderdale hosts the Stonewall Library & Archives, and in neighboring Wilton Manors there is a large LGBT community center, the Pride Center, and the World AIDS Museum and Educational Center.
The district has 561 hotels and motels comprising nearly 35,000 rooms.
In 2010, the city population was spread out with 17.6% under the age of 18, 8.1% from 18 to 24, 28.4% from 25 to 44, 30.6% from 45 to 64, and 15.3% who were 65 years of age or older.
27.9% held at least a baccalaureate, slightly higher than the national figure of 24.4%.
Fort Lauderdale's arts and entertainment district, otherwise known as the Riverwalk Arts & Entertainment District, runs east-west along Las Olas Boulevard, from the beach to the heart of downtown.
The city is a popular tourist destination, with an average year-round temperature of , and 3,000 hours of sunshine per year.
The median age was 42.2 years.
A group of 100 white men proceeded to hang Stacy from a tree near the scene of his alleged robbery.
Other direct hits were Hurricane Cleo in 1964, Hurricane King in 1950, and the 1947 Fort Lauderdale Hurricane.
Annual average precipitation is , with most of it occurring during the wet season from May through October.
The northwestern section of Fort Lauderdale is separate from the remainder of the city, connected only by the Cypress Creek Canal as it flows under I-95.
He succeeds the longest serving mayor, Jim Naugle, 1991-2009.
As cities such as Coral Springs, Miramar, and Pembroke Pines experienced explosive growth, Fort Lauderdale's population stagnated, and the city actually shrank by almost 4,000 people between 1980, when the city had 153,279 people, and 1990, when the population was 149,377.
The city had an estimated 350,000 college visitors for spring break 1985; by 2006, that number had declined to about 10,000.
Local bus transportation is provided by Broward County Transit (BCT), the county bus system.
William Cooley, the local Justice of the Peace, was a farmer and wrecker, who traded with the Seminole Indians.
However, the college crowd has since dwindled, with the city now attracting wealthier tourists.
Fort Lauderdale is served by Broward General Medical Center and Imperial Point Medical Center, which are operated by Broward Health, the third largest hospital consortium in the United States.
However, the city has actively discouraged college students from visiting the area since the mid-1980s, passing strict laws aimed at preventing the mayhem that regularly occurred each year in the 1970's and 1980's.
An Online Trading Academy center is also located in the city.
William Lauderdale was the commander of the detachment of soldiers who built the first fort.
The dumping began in the 1960s, with the intent to provide habitat for fish while disposing of trash from the land.
A slight rebound brought the population back up to 152,397 at the 2000 census.
Additionally, the Davenport, Iowa-based Kaplan University's Corporate headquarters and an academic support center are located in the city.
* Florida Atlantic University FAU (satellite campus)
This is, in part, attributable to service by low-cost carriers such as Spirit Airlines, JetBlue, Southwest Airlines and Virgin America, resulting in lower airfares than nearby Miami International Airport.
* Nova Southeastern University NSU (satellite campus)
Rare frosts occur every few decades.
In July 1935, an African-American man named Rubin Stacy was accused of robbing a white woman at knife point.
Fort Lauderdale ranks fourth in the list of top 10 metropolitan areas ranked by foreclosure filings per household for the third quarter of 2007.
The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 3.00.
Cruise ships and nautical recreation provide the basis for much of the revenue raised by tourism.
Since the 1990's, Fort Lauderdale has increasingly become a location that caters to those seeking the resort lifestyle seasonally or year round and is often a host city to many professional venues, concerts, and art shows.
During the dry season (winter), brush fires can be a concern in many years.
The boating industry is responsible for over 109,000 jobs in the county.
Hugh Taylor Birch State Park is a  park along the beach, with nature trails, camping and picnicking areas, canoeing, and features the Terramar Visitor Center, with exhibits about the ecosystem of the park.
* Keiser University
The city was incorporated in 1911, and in 1915 was designated the county seat of newly formed Broward County.
Some are listed in the National Register of Historic Places:
In 1998, the municipal code was amended to limit the mayoral term.
By 1763, there were only a few Tequesta left in Florida, and most of them were evacuated to Cuba when the Spanish ceded Florida to the British in 1763, under the terms of the Treaty of Paris (1763), which ended the Seven Years' War.
The current mayor is John P. "Jack" Seiler.
In the 1830s there were approximately 70 settlers living along the New River.
As of 2000, 75.63% of the population spoke only English at home, while 24.37% spoke other first languages.
Gulfstream International Airlines, a commuter airline, is headquartered in nearby Dania Beach.
