When he returned he began building a vast Garden à la française with fountains at Peterhof.
File:RomaBerniniFontanaApi.JPG|Fontana delle Api (Fountains of the Bees) (1644)
Roman engineers built aqueducts and fountains throughout the Roman Empire.
In Rome, Pope Nicholas V (1397–1455), himself a scholar who commissioned hundreds of translations of ancient Greek classics into Latin, decided to embellish the city and make it a worthy capital of the Christian world.
In this garden, the fountain played a central role.
Lighting is often submerged and must be suitably designed.
It is not known if Hero made working models of any of his designs.
Mechanical pumps replaced gravity and allowed fountains to recycle water and to force it high into the air.
The first fountain in New York City, in City Hall Park, opened in 1842, and the first fountain in Boston was turned on in 1848.
Some were solemn, and others were whimsical.
Following the ideas of Hero of Alexandria, the Fountain of the Owl used a series of bronze pipes like flutes to make the sound of birds.
File:Fountain in the Parc de Versailles (2519388110).jpg
The fountains of Rome, built from the Renaissance through the 18th century, took their water from rebuilt Roman aqueducts which brought water from lakes and rivers at a higher elevation than the fountains.
The aqueduct he restored, with modifications and extensions, eventually supplied water to the Trevi Fountain and the famous baroque fountains in the Piazza del Popolo and Piazza Navona.
The great Medici Villa at Castello, built for Cosimo by Benedetto Varchi, featured two monumental fountains on its central axis; one showing with two bronze figures representing Hercules slaying Antaeus, symbolizing the victory of Cosimo over his enemies; and a second fountain, in the middle of a circular labyrinth of cypresses, laurel, myrtle and roses, had a bronze statue by Giambologna which showed the goddess Venus wringing her hair.
The ''Samuel Francis Dupont Memorial Fountain'', in Dupont Circle, Washington D.C., was designed and created by Henry Bacon and Daniel Chester French, the architect and sculptor of the Lincoln Memorial, in 1921, in a pure neoclassical style.
The medieval romance The ''Roman de la Rose'' describes a fountain in the center of an enclosed garden, feeding small streams bordered by flowers and fresh herbs.
The Organ Fountain fell into ruins, but it was recently restored and plays music again.
The planet Venus was governed by Capricorn, which was the emblem of Cosimo; the fountain symbolized that he was the absolute master of Florence.
These splash pads are often located in public pools, public parks, or public playgrounds (known as "spraygrounds").
The Triton fountain benefited from its location in a valley, and the fact that it was fed by the Aqua Felice aqueduct, restored in 1587, which arrived in Rome at an elevation of  above sea level (fasl), a difference of  in elevation between the source and the fountain, which meant that the water from this fountain jetted sixteen feet straight up into the air from the conch shell of the triton.
:From a marvelous faucet of gold pours a wave
A water fountain or drinking fountain is designed to provide drinking water and has a basin arrangement with either continuously running water or a tap.
Louis built an enormous pumping station, the Machine de Marly, with fourteen water wheels and 253 pumps to raise the water three hundred feet from the River Seine, and even attempted to divert the River Eure to provide water for his fountains, but the water supply was never enough.
Other water, passing through a wheel, strikes in a certain order the keyboard of the organ.
Designed by Catalan artist Jaume Plensa, it opened in July 2004.
The fountain in the Court of the Lions of the Alhambra, built from 1362 to 1391, is a large vasque mounted on twelve stone statues of lions.
File:Fountain in the Parc de Versailles (2519408544).jpg|
The fountains, located in a basin forty meters in diameter, were given color by plates of colored glass inserted over the lamps.
Wrote historians Maria Ann Conelli and Marilyn Symmes, "On many levels the Trevi altered the appearance, function and intent of fountains and was a watershed for future designs."
Its design, based on an earlier Roman model, with a circular vasque on a pedestal pouring water into a basin below, became the model for many other fountains in Rome, and eventually for fountains in other cities, from Paris to London.
Fountains built in the United States between 1900 and 1950 mostly followed European models and classical styles.
Many jurisdictions require water fountains to be wheelchair accessible (by sticking out horizontally from the wall), and to include an additional unit of a lower height for children and short adults.
The ancient Greeks were apparently the first to use aqueducts and gravity-powered fountains to distribute water.
According to ancient historians,
The first famous American decorative fountain was the Bethesda Fountain in Central Park in New York City, opened in 1873.
It had nine large cannons, or spouts, which supplied drinking water to local residents.
In Germany, some courts and palace gardens were situated in flat areas, thus fountains depending on pumped pressurized water were developed at a fairly early point in history.
The fountain at Dundas Square features 600 ground nozzles arranged in groups of 30 (3 rows of 10 nozzles).
The fountains at the Nymphenburg Palace initially were fed by water pumped to water towers, but as from 1803 were operated by the water powered Nymphenburg Pumping Stations which are still working.
King Henry IV of France made an important contribution to French fountains by inviting an Italian hydraulic engineer, Tommaso Francini, who had worked on the fountains of the villa at Pratalino, to make fountains in France.
Reciprocating motion was first described in 1206 by Iraqi engineer and inventor al-Jazari when the kings of the Artuqid dynasty in Turkey commissioned him to manufacture a machine to raise water for their palaces.
It was fed by water from the Paola aqueduct, restored in 1612, whose source was  above sea level, which meant it could shoot water twenty feet up from the fountain.
The excavations of Pompeii also showed that the homes of wealthy Romans often had a small fountain in the atrium, or interior courtyard, with water coming from the city water supply and spouting into a small bowl or basin.
Beginning in the 19th century, fountains ceased to be used for drinking water and became purely ornamental.
The Piazza Navona became a grand theater of water, with three fountains, built in a line on the site of the Stadium of Domitian.
Fall by German artist Julius Popp (2005) uses digital technologies to spell out words with water.
The Persian engineers also used the principle of the syphon (called ''shotor-gelu'' in Persian, literally 'neck of the camel) to create fountains which spouted water or made it resemble a bubbling spring.
The Romans were able to make fountains jet water into the air, by using the pressure of water flowing from a distant and higher source of water to create hydraulic head, or force.
fountains existed in Athens, Corinth, and other ancient Greek cities in the 6th century BC as the terminating points of aqueducts which brought water from springs and rivers into the cities.
The Roman engineers used lead pipes instead of bronze to distribute the water throughout the city.
Greek fountains were made of stone or marble, with water flowing through bronze pipes and emerging from the mouth of a sculpted mask that represented the head of a lion or the muzzle of an animal.
File:Samson and Lion Fountain.jpg|Samson and the Lion fountain at Peterhof Palace, Russia (1800–1802)
In illuminated manuscripts like the ''Tres Riches Heures du Duc de Berry'' (1411–1416), the Garden of Eden was shown with a graceful gothic fountain in the center (see illustration).
The water flowed into a basin, where the courses of a banquet were served in floating dishes shaped like boats.
In the Ottoman Empire, rulers often built fountains next to mosques so worshippers could do their ritual washing.
Roman fountains were decorated with bronze or stone masks of animals or heroes.
At the southern end is Il Moro, possibly also a figure of Neptune riding a fish in a conch shell.
Later, after the death of Henry II, his widow, Catherine de Medici, expelled Diane de Poitiers from Chenonceau and built her own fountain and garden there.
The fountain called Bit.
The ''Fountain of Prometheus,'' built at the Rockefeller Center in New York City in 1933, was the first American fountain in the Art-Deco style.
A carved stone basin, dating to around 2000&nbsp;BC, was discovered in the ruins of the ancient Sumerian city of Lagash in modern Iraq.
In addition to providing drinking water, fountains were used for decoration and to celebrate their builders.
The gardens also featured ''giochi d'acqua'', water jokes, hidden fountains which suddenly soaked visitors.
The other centerpiece of the Gardens, at the intersection of the main axes of the Gardens of Versailles, is the Bassin d'Apollon (1668–71), designed by Charles Le Brun and sculpted by Jean Baptiste Tuby.
In these fountains, sculpture became the principal element, and the water was used simply to animate and decorate the sculptures.
The garden was decorated with the Pope's famous collection of classical statues, and with fountains.
The fountains of Piazza Navona had one drawback - their water came from the Acqua Vergine, which had only a  drop from the source to the fountains, which meant the water could only fall or trickle downwards, not jet very high upwards.
Then 320 nozzles inject the water into electromagnetic valves.
In the mid-nineteenth century the first fountains were built in the United States, connected to the first aqueducts bringing drinking water from outside the city.
The Exposition Universelle (1900) in Paris featured fountains illuminated by colored lights controlled by a keyboard.
In Provence, a typical village fountain consisted of a pipe or underground duct from a spring at a higher elevation than the fountain.
From the Middle Ages onwards, fountains in villages or towns were connected to springs, or to channels which brought water from lakes or rivers.
In 1453, he began to rebuild the Acqua Vergine, the ruined Roman aqueduct which had brought clean drinking water to the city from eight miles (13&nbsp;km) away.
During the Italian Renaissance, the most famous musical fountains were located in the gardens of the Villa d'Este, in Tivoli.
The second and third parts depict the arch of the dragon's back coming out of the pavement.
The palaces of Moorish Spain, particularly the Alhambra in Granada, had famous fountains.
Image:Bellagio fountains night.jpg|The musical fountain of the Bellagio Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas, with pivoting nozzles to vary the patterns of the water, controlled by computers and accompanied by music (1998)
Those fountains with a high source of water, such as the Triton Fountain, could shoot water  in air.
Today some of the best-known musical fountains in the world are at the Bellagio Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas, (2009); the Dubai Fountain in the United Arab Emirates; the World of Color at Disney California Adventure Park (2010) and Aquanura at the Efteling in the Netherlands (2012).
Pei, (1989), the Buren Fountain by sculptor Daniel Buren,  Les Sphérades fountain, both in the Palais-Royal, and the fountains of Parc André-Citroën.
More than one hundred fountains were built in Paris in the 1980s, mostly in the neighborhoods outside the center of Paris, where there had been few fountains before These included the Fontaine Cristaux, homage to Béla Bartók by Jean-Yves Lechevallier (1980);  the Stravinsky Fountain next to the Pompidou Center, by sculptors Niki de Saint Phalle and Jean Tinguely (1983); the fountain of the Pyramid of the Louvre by I.M.
In 1800–1802 the Emperor Paul I of Russia and his successor, Alexander I of Russia, built a new fountain at the foot of the cascade depicting Samson prying open the mouth of a lion, representing Peter's victory over Sweden in the Great Northern War in 1721.
Salvi compensated for this problem by sinking the fountain down into the ground, and by carefully designing the cascade so that the water churned and tumbled, to add movement and drama.
At the royal Château de Fontainebleau, he built another fountain with a bronze statue of Diane, goddess of the hunt, modeled after Diane de Poitiers.
The excavations at Pompeii, which revealed the city as it was when it was destroyed by Mount Vesuvius in 79&nbsp;AD, uncovered free-standing fountains and basins placed at intervals along city streets, fed by siphoning water upwards from lead pipes under the street.
The most famous feature of the garden was the great Organ Fountain.
Examples can be found today in the ruins of Roman towns in Vaison-la-Romaine and Glanum in France, in Augst, Switzerland, and other sites.
These fountains are designed to allow easy access, and feature nonslip surfaces, and have no standing water, to eliminate possible drowning hazards, so that no lifeguards or supervision is required.
The gardens of the Counts of Artois at the Château de Hesdin, built in 1295, contained famous fountains, called ''Les Merveilles de Hesdin'' ("The Wonders of Hesdin") which could be triggered to drench surprised visitors.
They were crowded with allegorical figures, and filled with emotion and movement.
The baroque decorative fountains of Rome in the 17th and 18th centuries marked the arrival point of restored Roman aqueducts and glorified the Popes who built them.
One of the first new fountains to be built in Rome during the Renaissance was the fountain in the piazza in front of the church of Santa Maria in Trastevere (1472), which was placed on the site of an earlier Roman fountain.
Besides these two monumental fountains, the Gardens over the years contained dozens of other fountains, including thirty-nine animal fountains in the labyrinth depicting the fables of Jean La Fontaine.
Water was carried by a pipe into the palace from a source at a higher elevation.
Between 1546 and 1549, the merchants of Paris built the first Renaissance-style fountain in Paris, the Fontaine des Innocents, to commemorate the ceremonial entry of the King into the city.
They introduced the first fountains illuminated by gas lights (Philadelphia in 1876); and the first fountains illuminated by electric lights (London in 1884 and Paris in 1889).
Fountains are used today to decorate city parks and squares; to honor individuals or events; for recreation and for entertainment.
Francini became a French citizen in 1600, built the Medici Fountain, and during the rule of the young King Louis XIII, he was raised to the position of Intendant général des Eaux et Fontaines of the king, a position which was hereditary.
Louis XIV created the idea of the modern musical fountain by staging spectacles in the Gardens of Versailles, using music and fireworks to accompany the flow of the fountains.
More recently, in 2010, the FindaFountain campaign was launched in the UK to encourage people to use drinking fountains instead of environmentally damaging bottled water.
After being used for washing, the same water then ran through a channel to the town's kitchen garden.
It shows a dragon, in stainless steel, glass and plastic, emerging and submerging from the pavement of the square.
The water may need chlorination or anti-algal treatment, or may use biological methods to filter and clean water.
The original garden was split in two by the construction of the Vatican Library in the 16th century, but a new fountain by Carlo Maderno was built in the Cortile del Belvedere, with a jet of water shooting up from a circular stone bowl on an octagonal pedestal in a large basin.
This was a reminder of how French peasants had abused Louis's mother, Anne of Austria, during the uprising called the Fronde in the 1650s.
(See Musical fountain below).
The new fountains were expressions of the new Baroque art, which was officially promoted by the Catholic Church as a way to win popular support against the Protestant Reformation; the Council of Trent had declared in the 16th century that the Church should counter austere Protestantism with art that was lavish, animated and emotional.
Each of the major fountains was connected to two different aqueducts, in case one was shut down for service.
After some improvements, it reached a height of some 35&nbsp;m in 1721 which made it the highest fountain in European courts.
File:Dubai Fountain 1.JPG|Dubai Fountain in the United Arab Emirates (2009) can shoot water 150 meters in the air, or present computer-choreographed water dancing to music
Each "room" contains a cascade or waterfall; the cascade in the third room illustrates the turbulence of the years of the World War II.
:The turquoise and silver form ribbons in the basin
(See Fountains of International Expositions).
Floating fountains are also popular for ponds and lakes; they consist of a float pump nozzle and water chamber.
Islamic gardens after the 7th century were traditionally enclosed by walls and were designed to represent paradise.
Historians Mary Anne Conelli and Marilyn Symmes wrote, "Designed for dramatic effect and to flatter the king, the fountain is oriented so that the Sun God rises from the west and travels east toward the chateau, in contradiction to nature."
One surviving example is the Fountain of Tears (1764) at the Bakhchisarai Palace, in Crimea; which was made famous by a poem of Alexander Pushkin.
The first of the Fountains of St. Peter's Square, by Carlo Maderno, (1614) was one of the earliest Baroque fountains in Rome, made to complement the lavish Baroque façade he designed for St. Peter's Basilica behind it.
Each group of 30 nozzles is located beneath a stainless steel grille.
Dancing water was combined with music and fireworks to form a grand spectacle.
File:Parque de la exposicion1.jpg|Fountains in the Park of the Reserve, Lima, Peru
This statue shows a theme also depicted in the painted decoration in the Hall of Mirrors of the Palace of Versailles: Apollo in his chariot about to rise from the water, announced by Tritons with seashell trumpets.
The program uses rasterization and bitmap technologies to synchronize the valves so drops of water form an image of the words as they fall.
The highest fountain today in the King Fahd's Fountain in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
The Mitterrand-Chirac fountains had no single style or theme.
In the 9th century, the Banū Mūsā brothers, a trio of Arab Inventors, were commissioned by the Caliph of Baghdad to summarize the engineering knowledge of the ancient Greek and Roman world.
He used fountains to demonstrate the power of man over nature, and to illustrate the grandeur of his rule.
The Villa of Hadrian in Tivoli featured a large swimming basin with jets of water.
In 1884 a fountain in Britain featured electric lights shining upward through the water.
Low-voltage lighting, typically 12 volt direct current, is used to minimise electrical hazards.
Fountains with a lower source, such as the Trevi Fountain, could only have water pour downwards.
Two fountains were the centerpieces of the Gardens of Versailles, both taken from the myths about Apollo, the sun god, the emblem of Louis XIV, and both symbolizing his power.
Over the whole structure is a  Egyptian obelisque, crowned by a cross with the emblem of the Pamphili family, representing Pope Innocent X, whose family palace was on the piazza.
which were created between 1550 and 1572.
This part of the dragon is opaque.
Henry constructed an Italian-style garden with a fountain shooting a vertical jet of water for his favorite mistress, Diane de Poitiers, next to the Château de Chenonceau (1556–1559).
Water fountains are usually found in public places, like schools, rest areas, libraries, and grocery stores.
It was built beginning in 1730 at the terminus of the reconstructed Acqua Vergine aqueduct, on the site of Renaissance fountain by Leon Battista Alberti.
It was designed by the French-Chinese sculptor Chen Zhen (1955–2000)
According to Sextus Julius Frontinus, the Roman consul who was named ''curator aquarum'' or guardian of the water of Rome in 98&nbsp;AD, Rome had nine aqueducts which fed 39 monumental fountains and 591 public basins, not counting the water supplied to the Imperial household, baths and owners of private villas.
The musical fountain combines moving jets of water, colored lights and recorded music, controlled by a computer, for dramatic effects.
A splash fountain or bathing fountain is intended for people to come in and cool off on hot summer days.
During the Middle Ages, Roman aqueducts were wrecked or fell into decay, and many fountains throughout Europe stopped working, so fountains existed mainly in art and literature, or in secluded monasteries or palace gardens.
In the 6th century BC the Athenian ruler Peisistratos built the main fountain of Athens, the ''Enneacrounos'', in the Agora, or main square.
The Fountain of Progress gave its show three times each evening, for twenty minutes, with a series of different colors.
This fountain is part of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in Washington D.C., which has four outdoor "rooms" illustrating his Presidency.
The patio of the Sultan in the gardens of Generalife in Granada (1319) featured spouts of water pouring into a basin, with channels which irrigated orange and myrtle trees.
The central figure is Oceanus, the personification of all the seas and oceans, in an oyster-shell chariot, surrounded by Tritons and Sea Nymphs.
The garden of Fin, near Kashan, used 171 spouts connected to pipes to create a fountain called the ''Howz-e jush'', or "boiling basin".
Few new fountains have been built in Paris since 2000.
Even with the Machine de Marly, the fountains used so much water that they could not be all turned on at the same time.
The most famous fountain built by Louis Napoleon was the Fontaine Saint-Michel, part of his grand reconstruction of Paris boulevards.
n 1709, he began constructing a larger palace, Peterhof Palace, alongside the Gulf of Finland, Peter visited France in 1717 and saw the gardens and fountains of Louis XIV at Versailles, Marly and Fontainebleau.
The first fountain in Philadelphia, at Centre Square, opened in 1809, and featured a statue by sculptor William Rush.
Most Greek fountains flowed by simple gravity, but they also discovered how to use principle of a siphon to make water spout, as seen in pictures on Greek vases.
The theme of a fountain with statues symbolizing great rivers was later used in the Place de la Concorde (1836–40) and in the Fountain of Neptune in the Alexanderplatz in Berlin (1891).
File:Multimedia Fountain Kangwon Land Resort.jpg|Multimedia Fountain Kangwon Land is considered Asia’s largest musical fountain.
The Ghent Altarpiece by Jan van Eyck, finished in 1432, also shows a fountain as a feature of the adoration of the mystic lamb, a scene apparently set in Paradise.
The fountains were fed by reservoirs in the upper garden, while the Samson fountain was fed by a specially-constructed aqueduct four kilometers in length.
A Splash pad or spray pool allows city residents to enter, get wet and cool off in summer.
The drinker bends down to the stream of water and swallows water directly from the stream.
The water flowing within the dragon is under pressure and is illuminated at night.
In some splash fountains, such as Dundas Square in Toronto, Canada, the water is heated by solar energy captured by the special dark-colored granite slabs.
The central feature of the garden was a water cascade, modeled after the cascade at the Château de Marly of Louis XIV, built in 1684.
The Trevi Fountain is the largest and most spectacular of Rome's fountains, designed to glorify the three different Popes who created it.
After World War II, fountains in the United States became more varied in form.
The ancient Assyrians constructed a series of basins in the gorge of the Comel River, carved in solid rock, connected by small channels, descending to a stream.
File:Inventions_Show_Multimedia_Fountain_Roshen.jpg|Multimedia Fountain Roshen is the only one in Ukraine and the largest floating fountain in Europe, built in the river Southern Buh in Vinnytsia City near Festivalny Isle (Kempa Isle)
Weather permitting, the water operates from May to October, intermittently cascading down the two towers and spouting through a nozzle on each tower's front face.
(See International Exposition Fountains, above.)
As King Louis XIV built more fountains, he was forced to construct an enormous complex of pumps, called the Machine de Marly, with fourteen water wheels and 220 pumps, to raise water 162&nbsp;meters above the Seine River to the reservoirs to keep his fountains flowing.
These parts of the dragon are transparent, and water under pressure flows within, and is illuminated at night.
The water must be regularly topped up to offset water lost to evaporation, and allowance must be made to handle overflow after heavy rain.
Between 1981 and 1995, during the terms of President François Mitterrand and Culture Minister Jack Lang, and of Mitterrand's bitter political rival, Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac (Mayor from 1977 until 1995), the city experienced a program of monumental fountain building that exceeded that of Napoleon Bonaparte or Louis Philippe.
The most important ones built during that period were on the edges of the city, on the west, just outside the city limits, at La Défense, and to the east at the Bois de Vincennes.
The Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne (1937) had combined arches and columns of water from fountains in the Seine with light, and with music from loudspeakers on eleven rafts anchored in the river, playing the music of the leading composers of the time.
Once inside the palace or garden it came up through a small hole in a marble or stone ornament and poured into a basin or garden channels.
The most famous fountains of the Renaissance, at the Villa d'Este in Tivoli, were located on a steep slope near a river; the builders ran a channel from the river to a large fountain at top of the garden, which then fed other fountains and basins on the levels below.
Fountains in the Middle Ages were associated with the source of life, purity, wisdom, innocence, and the Garden of Eden.
File:Villa d'Este 01.jpg|The Organ Fountain at the Villa d'Este, Tivoli (1550–1572)
A map showing the location of UK drinking water fountains is published on the FindaFountain website.
The paradise gardens, were laid out in the form of a cross, with four channels representing the rivers of paradise, dividing the four parts of the world.
High wattage lighting (incandescent and halogen) either as submerged lighting or accent lighting on waterwall fountains have been implicated in every documented Legionnaires' disease outbreak associated with fountains.
The Jet d'Eau in Lake Geneva, built in 1951, shoots water  in the air.
Examples include the Fountain of Qasim Pasha (1527), Temple Mount, Jerusalem, an ablution and drinking fountain built during the Ottoman reign of Suleiman the Magnificent; the Fountain of Ahmed III (1728) at the Topkapı Palace, Istanbul, another Fountain of Ahmed III in Üsküdar (1729) and Tophane Fountain (1732).
La Danse de la fontaine emergente, Place Augusta-Holmes, Paris (13th arrondissement) (2008), is the newest fountain in Paris.
The fountain is composed of a black granite reflecting pool placed between a pair of glass brick towers.
The sebil was a decorated fountain that was often the only source of water for the surrounding neighborhood.
In 1503, Pope Julius II decided to recreate a classical pleasure garden in the same place.
The garden was modified over the centuries – the jets of water which cross the canal today were added in the 19th century.
The Ancient Romans built an extensive system of aqueducts from mountain rivers and lakes to provide water for the fountains and baths of Rome.
A bas-relief of the dragon is fixed on the wall of the structure of the water-supply plant, and the dragon seems to be emerging from the wall and plunging underground.
:whose clarity is more pure than a soul;
File:Le Chateau d'eau and plaza, Exposition Universal, 1900, Paris, France.jpg|The Château d'eau and plaza of the Paris Universal Exposition of 1900.
The skin of the dragon is transparent, showing the water flowing within.
It is constructed of stainless steel, glass, and plastic.
The invention of steam pumps meant that water could be supplied directly to homes, and pumped upward from fountains.
He commissioned the architect Leon Battista Alberti to build a wall fountain where the Trevi Fountain is now located.
Pei, Claes Oldenburg and Daniel Buren, who had radically different ideas of what a fountain should be.
