In April 1204, they captured and brutally sacked the city, and set up a new Latin Empire as well as partitioning other Byzantine territories among themselves.
Constantinople was considered as a bastion of Christianity that defended Europe from the advancing forces of Islam, and the Fourth Crusade's sack of the city dealt an irreparable blow to this eastern bulwark.
Doge Dandolo was a fierce supporter of the plan; however, in his earlier capacity as an ambassador to Byzantium and someone who knew the finer details of how Byzantine politics worked, it is likely he knew the promises were false and there was no hope of any Byzantine emperor raising the money promised, let alone raising the troops and giving the church to the Holy See.
Led by Reynold of Montmirail, those who refused to take part in the scheme to attack Constantinople sailed on to Syria.
To take the city by force, the crusaders first needed to cross the Bosphorus.
Byzantine resistance based in unconquered sections of the empire such as Nicaea, Trebizond, and Epirus ultimately recovered Constantinople in 1261.
The churchmen used inflammatory language and claimed that "the Greeks were worse than the Jews", and they invoked the authority of God and the pope to take action.
Bartholomew said his acceptance came in the spirit of Pascha.
The intention of the crusaders was then to continue to the Holy Land with promised Byzantine financial and military assistance.
During the co-emperor's absence in August, rioting broke out in the city and a number of Latin residents were killed.
His call was largely ignored by the European monarchs: the Germans were struggling against Papal power, and England and France were still engaged in warfare against each other.
This agreement was ratified by Pope Innocent, with a solemn ban on attacks on Christian states.
There was also a French cultural work, notably the production of a collection of laws, the ''Assises de Romanie''.
Most of the rest of the crusade's leaders, encouraged by bribes from Dandolo, eventually accepted the plan as well.
Its planned location made Constantinople not only the capital of the surviving eastern part of the Roman Empire but also a commercial centre that dominated trade routes from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea, China, India and Persia.
Crusaders also seized the breakaway Byzantine province of Cyprus; rather than return it to the Empire, Richard I of England sold the island to the Knights Templar.
At its height, the city held an estimated population of about half a million people behind thirteen miles of triple walls.
Alexios V's army stayed in the city to fight, along with the imperial bodyguard, the Varangians, but Alexios V himself fled during the night.
The citizens of Constantinople were not concerned with the cause of the deposed emperor and his exiled son; hereditary right of succession had never been adopted by the empire and a palace coup between brothers was not considered illegitimate in the way it would have been in the West.
When the Byzantine emperor refused, the Crusaders assaulted the city once again.
"We receive with gratitude and respect your cordial gesture for the tragic events of the Fourth Crusade.
The remaining 500,000 silver marks were secretly kept back by many crusader knights.
By May 1202, the bulk of the crusader army was collected at Venice, although with far smaller numbers than expected: about 12,000 (4–5,000 knights and 8,000 foot soldiers) instead of 33,500.
The crusade had also been marked by a significant escalation in long standing tensions between the feudal states of western Europe and the Byzantine Empire, centered in Constantinople.
The Kingdom had been established 88 years before, after the capture and sack of Jerusalem in the First Crusade.
When Innocent III heard of the sack, he sent a letter to the crusaders excommunicating them and ordering them to return to their holy vows and head for Jerusalem.
On 14 April 1205, one year after the conquest of the city, Emperor Baldwin was decisively defeated and captured at the Battle of Adrianople by the Bulgarians.
Boniface and the other leaders sent envoys to Venice, Genoa, and other city-states in 1200 to negotiate a contract for transport to Egypt, the object of their crusade; one of the envoys was the future historian Geoffrey of Villehardouin.
On 23 June 1203 the main crusader fleet reached Constantinople.
Alexios III's army of about 8,500 men faced the Crusaders' seven divisions (about 3,500 men), but his courage failed, and the Byzantine army returned to the city without a fight.
First, the Greeks were traitors and murderers since they had killed their rightful lord, Alexios IV.
Also in 1195, the Byzantine Emperor Isaac II Angelos was deposed in favor of his brother by a palace coup.
He was succeeded by his infant son Demetrius of Montferrat, who ruled until he reached adulthood but was eventually defeated by Theodore I Ducas, the despot of Epirus and a relative of Murtzuphlus.
However he declined the appointment and sought church sanctuary.
However, there were dissenters.
Genoa was uninterested, but in March 1201 negotiations were opened with Venice, which agreed to transport 33,500 crusaders, a very ambitious number.
As they laid siege to the Tower, the Byzantines counterattacked with some initial success.
His attempts to secure the support of semi-autonomous border commanders undermined central authority.
One subsequent crusade, the Sixth, succeeded in restoring Jerusalem to Christian rule for 15 years.
In the late 14th and early 15th centuries, "crusades" on a limited scale were organised by the Kingdoms of Hungary, Poland, Wallachia, and Serbia.
The Fourth Crusade is considered to be one of the final acts in the Great Schism between the Eastern Orthodox Church and Roman Catholic Church, and a key turning point in the decline of the Byzantine Empire and Christianity in the Near East.
The crusader states had been reduced to three cities along the sea coast: Tyre, Tripoli, and Antioch.
Egypt was now the dominant Muslim power in the eastern Mediterranean but also a major trading partner of Venice.
His actions in wastefully distributing military weapons and supplies as gifts to his supporters had undermined the empire's defenses.
These were not the traditional expeditions aimed at the recovery of Jerusalem but rather defensive campaigns intended to prevent further expansion to the west by the Ottoman Empire."
In 1202, Pope Innocent III, despite wanting to secure papal authority over Byzantium, forbade the crusaders of Western Christendom from committing any atrocious acts against their Christian neighbours.
Out of fear that this would dissolve the army, the leaders of the crusade decided not to inform their followers of this.
After bickering between laymen and the papal legate led to the collapse of the Fifth Crusade, later crusades were directed by individual monarchs, mostly against Egypt.
Alexios IV realised that his promises were hard to keep.
Dandolo, who joined the crusade during a public ceremony in the church of San Marco di Venezia, proposed that the crusaders pay their debts by intimidating many of the local ports and towns down the Adriatic, culminating in an attack on the port of Zara in Dalmatia.
Impressive remains of crusader castles and Gothic churches can still be seen in Greece.
The Venetians also founded the Duchy of the Archipelago in the Aegean Sea.
"The spirit of reconciliation is stronger than hatred," he said during a liturgy attended by Roman Catholic Archbishop Philippe Barbarin of Lyon, France.
The crusaders rallied, and the Byzantines retreated to the Tower, but the crusaders were able to follow the soldiers through the Gate and took the Tower.
A strong northern wind aided the Venetian ships in coming close to the walls, and after a short battle approximately seventy crusaders managed to enter the city.
In addition, 300 siege engines were brought along on board the fleet.
The Anglo-Saxon "axe bearers" had been amongst the most effective of the city's defenders, but they now attempted to negotiate higher wages from their Byzantine employers, before dispersing or surrendering.
Several of the major Greek and Latin protagonists in the event died or were killed in the years following the fall of the city.
He neglected his crucial responsibilities for defense and diplomacy.
With the events of 1204, the schism between the Churches in the East and West was not just complete but also solidified.
Boniface went on to found the Kingdom of Thessalonica, a vassal state of the new Latin Empire.
The ''Chronicle of Morea'' appeared in both French and Greek (and later Italian and Aragonese) versions.
The concept of God testing the determination of the crusaders through temporary setbacks was a familiar means for the clergy to explain failure in the course of a campaign.
The Latin Empire was soon faced with a number of enemies.
The Venetians received 150,000 silver marks that was their due, while the crusaders received 50,000 silver marks.
In fear of his life, the co-emperor asked the crusaders to renew their contract for another six months, to end by April 1204.
The Byzantines hurled large projectiles onto the enemy siege engines, shattering many of them.
However, in January 1204, he was deposed by a popular uprising in Constantinople.
Regarding the Crusaders as having been blackmailed by the Venetians, in February 1203 he rescinded the excommunications against all non-Venetians in the expedition.
The controversy that has surrounded the Fourth Crusade has led to diverging opinions in academia on whether its objective was indeed the capture of Constantinople.
Meanwhile, Byzantine refugees founded their own successor states, the most notable of these being the Empire of Nicaea under Theodore Laskaris (a relative of Alexios III), the Empire of Trebizond, and the Despotate of Epirus.
The majority of the crusading army that set out from Venice in early October 1202 originated from areas within France.
Besides the individual Byzantine Greek states in Epirus and Nicaea, there were also the Seljuk Sultanate and the Bulgarian Empire.
An attempt was made to find a further replacement emperor from amongst the Byzantine nobility, but the situation had now become too chaotic for either of the two candidates who came forward to find sufficient support.
Only five of the wall's towers were actually engaged and none of these could be secured; by mid-afternoon it was evident that the attack had failed.
The Western crusaders were no longer able to receive their promised payments, and when Alexios was murdered on 8 February 1204, the crusaders and Venetians decided on the outright conquest of Constantinople.
He died in Nicaea in 1211.
This tempting offer, for an enterprise that was short on funds, reached the leaders of the Crusade on 1 January 1203 as they wintered at Zara.
The Doge threatened to keep them interned unless full payment was made so a further 14,000 marks was collected, and that only by reducing the crusaders to extreme poverty.
The Imperial officials quickly deposed their runaway emperor and restored Isaac II, robbing the crusaders of the pretext for attack.
In January 1203, en route to Jerusalem, the majority of the crusader leadership entered into an agreement with the Byzantine prince Alexios Angelos to divert to Constantinople and restore his deposed father as emperor.
Legend has it that Pope Urban III literally died of the shock, but the timing of his death makes that impossible.
Smaller contingents continued to Acre.
The main objective of the crusaders was to place Alexios IV on the Byzantine throne so that they could receive the rich payments he had promised them.
This was disastrous to the Venetians, who had halted their commerce for a great length of time to prepare this expedition.
It is a fact that a crime was committed here in the city 800 years ago."
Anxious to shore up his position, Alexios bankrupted the treasury.
The crusaders and Venetians, incensed at the murder of their supposed patron, demanded that Mourtzouphlos honour the contract that Alexios IV had promised.
The Fourth Crusade was one of the last of the major crusades to be launched by the Papacy, though it quickly fell out of Papal control.
The emperor's chief admiral (his wife's brother-in-law), Michael Stryphnos, reportedly sold the fleet's equipment down to the very nails to enrich himself.
Despite their oaths and the threat of excommunication, the crusaders ruthlessly and systematically violated the city's churches and monasteries, destroying, defiling, or stealing all they could lay hands on; nothing was spared.
In 1195 Henry VI, son and heir of Barbarossa, sought to efface this humiliation by declaring a new crusade, and in the summer of 1197 a large number of German knights and nobles, headed by two archbishops, nine bishops, and five dukes, sailed for Palestine.
During the Ottoman siege of Constantinople in 1453, up to 2,000 Venetian and Genoese volunteers formed part of the approximately 9,000 defenders of the city.
There they captured Sidon and Beirut, but at the news of Henry's death in Messina along the way, many of the nobles and clerics returned to Europe.
Ayyubid Sultan Saladin had conquered most of the Frankish, Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, including the ancient city itself, in 1187.
Forcing the populace to destroy their icons at the behest of an army of foreign schismatics did not endear Alexios IV to the citizens of Constantinople.
The Greek states fought for supremacy against both the Latins and each other.
The crusaders could only initially pay 35,000 silver marks.
As a result, it was both a rival and a tempting target for the aggressive new states of the west, notably the Republic of Venice.
Pope Innocent III succeeded to the papacy in January 1198, and the preaching of a new crusade became the prime goal of his pontificate, expounded in his bull ''Post miserabile''.
Conon of Bethune delivered this ultimatum to the Lombard envoy sent by the Emperor Alexios III Angelos, who was the pretender's uncle and had seized the throne from the pretender's father Isaac II.
The citizens of Zara made reference to the fact that they were fellow Catholics by hanging banners marked with crosses from their windows and the walls of the city, but nevertheless the city fell on 24 November 1202 after a brief siege.
These events gave the Venetians a hostile attitude towards Byzantium, but it remains unclear if Constantinople was always intended to be the target, an issue that remains under fierce debate today.
This has been regarded as an apology to the Greek Orthodox Church for the terrible slaughter perpetrated by the warriors of the Fourth Crusade.
The Venetians had performed their part of the agreement: there awaited 50 war galleys and 450 transports enough for three times the assembled army.
The traditional position, which holds that this was the case, was challenged by Donald E. Queller and Thomas F. Madden in their book, ''The Fourth Crusade'' (1977).
Deserted by much of their leadership, the rank and file crusaders panicked before an Egyptian army and fled to their ships in Tyre.
Nevertheless, the Pope accepted the new situation.
The Greek population, reacting to the Latin conquest, believed that the Byzantine civilization that revolved around the Orthodox faith would be more secure under Ottoman Islamic rule.
For both political and financial reasons, the permanent garrison of Constantinople had been limited to a relatively small force, made up of elite guard and other specialist units.
Almost  alone amongst major medieval urban centers, it had retained the civic structures, public baths, forums, monuments, and aqueducts of classical Rome in working form.
They won a cavalry skirmish in which they were outnumbered, defeating 500 Byzantines with just 80 Frankish knights.
Subsequent Venetian attempts to recover control of Zara had been repulsed, and by 1202 the city was economically independent, under the protection of the King.
There was extensive pillaging, and the Venetians and other crusaders came to blows over the division of the spoils.
The city had been dominated economically by Venice throughout the 12th century but had rebelled in 1181 and allied itself with King Emeric of Hungary and Croatia.
The Kingdom of Thessalonica was restored to Byzantine rule in 1224.
This second fire left 15,000 people homeless.
Eight hundred years later, Pope John Paul II twice expressed sorrow for the events of the Fourth Crusade.
"The spirit of reconciliation of the resurrection... incites us toward reconciliation of our churches."
There, Alexios IV offered to pay the entire debt owed to the Venetians, give 200,000 silver marks to the crusaders, 10,000 Byzantine professional troops for the Crusade, the maintenance of 500 knights in the Holy Land, the service of the Byzantine navy to transport the Crusader Army to Egypt, and the placement of the Eastern Orthodox Church under the authority of the Pope, if they would sail to Byzantium and topple the reigning emperor Alexios III Angelos, brother of Isaac II.
It included men from Blois, Champagne, Amiens, Saint-Pol, the Île-de-France, and Burgundy.
As an epilogue to the event, Pope Innocent III, the man who had unintentionally launched the ill-fated expedition, spoke against the crusaders thus:
During the ensuing half century the unstable Latin Empire siphoned off much of Europe's crusading energy.
The Crusader knights charged straight out of the horse transports, and the Byzantine army fled south.
Accordingly, many chose to sail from other ports, particularly Flanders, Marseilles, and Genoa.
The Varangians shifted to meet the new threat, and the Venetians retreated under the screen of fire.
A serious hindrance to the crusaders was bad weather conditions.
The Third Crusade (1189–92) reclaimed an extensive amount of territory for the Kingdom of Jerusalem, including the key towns of Acre and Jaffa, but had failed to retake Jerusalem.
In January 1204, the blinded and incapacitated Isaac II died, probably of natural causes.
Speros Vryonis in ''Byzantium and Europe'' gives a vivid account of the sack:
On 11 July, the Crusaders took positions opposite the Palace of Blachernae on the northwest corner of the city.
The legacy of the Fourth Crusade was the deep sense of betrayal felt by the Greek Christians.
The city was sacred to Christians, Muslims and Jews, and returning it to Christian hands had been a primary purpose of the First Crusade.
The fact that they were Latin Christians fills Catholics with deep regret."
The crusaders insisted that they would only recognize the authority of Isaac II if his son was raised to co-emperor, and on 1 August the latter was crowned as Alexios Angelos IV, co-emperor.
This agreement required a full year of preparation on the part of the Venetians to build numerous ships and train the sailors who would man them, all the while curtailing the city's commercial activities.
At that point the young emperor ordered the destruction and melting of valuable Byzantine and Roman icons in order to extract their gold and silver, but even then he could only raise 100,000 silver marks.
In any event, Innocent shortly reconsidered his decision.
King Emeric was Catholic and had himself taken the cross in 1195 or 1196 (though this was mostly for political reasons; he had made no actual preparations to actually take part to a crusade).
In 1205 or 1206, the Bulgarian Emperor Kaloyan mutilated him and left him to die, while others suggest he was kept captive in the famous Baldwin's Tower in the Bulgarian capital Veliko Turnovo, where he died under unknown circumstances.
About 200 ships, horse transports, and galleys delivered the crusading army across the narrow strait, where Alexios III had lined up the Byzantine army in battle formation along the shore, north of the suburb of Galata.
There was no binding agreement among the crusaders that all should sail from Venice.
Constantinople had been in existence for 874 years at the time of the Fourth Crusade and was the largest and most sophisticated city in Christendom.
One of the leaders of the Third Crusade, Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa, openly plotted with the Serbs, Bulgars, Byzantine traitors, and even the Muslim Seljuks against the Eastern Empire and at one point sought Papal support for a crusade against the Orthodox Byzantines.
They had to convince the men that the events of 9 April were not God's judgment on a sinful enterprise: the campaign, they argued, was righteous and with proper belief it would succeed.
Boniface of Montferrat, meanwhile, had left the fleet before it sailed from Venice, to visit his cousin Philip of Swabia.
Doukas then was crowned as Emperor Alexios V. He immediately moved to have the city fortifications strengthened and summoned additional forces to the city.
Dandolo and the Venetians considered what to do with the crusade.
The attempt failed, however, as the vast majority of Greek civilians and a growing part of their clergy refused to recognize and accept the short-lived near-union of the Churches of East and West signed at the Council of Florence and Ferrara by the Ecumenical patriarch Joseph II of Constantinople.
Not long after, Alexius III was captured by Boniface and sent to exile in Southern Italy.
On 12 April 1204, the weather conditions finally favoured the crusaders.
Order was achieved, and the leaders of the expedition agreed to winter in Zara, while considering their next move.
When the Fourth Crusade arrived at Constantinople on 23 June 1203, the city had a population of approximately 500,000 people, a garrison of 15,000 men (including 5,000 Varangians), and a fleet of 20 galleys.
It was said that the total amount looted from Constantinople was about 900,000 silver marks.
Although the Greeks retook Constantinople after 57 years of Latin rule, the Byzantine Empire had been crippled by the Fourth Crusade.
Although Innocent III had again demanded that they not attack, the papal letter was suppressed by the clergy, and the crusaders prepared for their own attack, while the Venetians attacked from the sea.
In 2001, he wrote to Christodoulos, Archbishop of Athens, "It is tragic that the assailants, who set out to secure free access for Christians to the Holy Land, turned against their brothers in the faith.
The reasons for his visit are a matter of debate; he may have realized the Venetians' plans and left to avoid excommunication, or he may have wanted to meet with the Byzantine prince Alexios IV Angelos, Philip's brother-in-law and the son of the recently deposed Byzantine emperor Isaac II Angelos.
Some were able to knock holes in the walls, large enough for only a few knights at a time to crawl through; the Venetians were also successful at scaling the walls from the sea, though there was extremely bloody fighting with the Varangians.
For their part, the educated and wealthy Byzantines maintained a strong sense of cultural, organizational, and social superiority over the Latins.
Many of the civilians of the city were slaughtered, raped and looted.
Boniface was not elected as the new emperor, although the citizens seemed to consider him as such; the Venetians thought he had too many connections with the former empire because of his brother, Renier of Montferrat, who had been married to Maria Komnene, empress in the 1170s and 1180s.
The fire destroyed about  of the city and left some 20,000 people homeless.
Nevertheless, the Latin Empire always rested on shaky foundations.
On 8 April Alexios V's army put up a strong resistance, which did much to discourage the crusaders.
A further 100,000 silver marks were divided evenly up between the crusaders and Venetians.
It was too small to pay its fee, but disbanding the force gathered would harm Venetian prestige and cause significant financial and trading loss.
The Crusaders followed and attacked the Tower of Galata, which held the northern end of the massive chain that blocked access to the Golden Horn.
The betrayal and blinding of Murtzuphlus by Alexius III led to his capture by the Latins and his execution in 1205.
Furthermore, at the Fourth Council of the Lateran the Pope welcomed and recognised to it western (Catholic) prelates from Sees established in the conquered lands thus recognising their legitimacy over formerly Orthodox areas.
Ascending as Alexios III Angelos, the new emperor had his brother blinded (a traditional punishment for treason, considered more humane than execution) and exiled.
The magnificent Library of Constantinople was destroyed.
Alexios IV had recently fled to Philip in 1201 but it is unknown whether or not Boniface knew he was at Philip's court.
Their first attempts were repulsed, but on 17 July, with four divisions attacking the land walls while the Venetian fleet attacked the sea walls from the Golden Horn, the Venetians took a section of the wall of about 25 towers, while the Varangian guard held off the Crusaders on the land wall.
The Golden Horn now lay open to the Crusaders, and the Venetian fleet entered.
Alexios III had managed to flee with 1,000&nbsp;pounds of gold and some priceless jewels, leaving the imperial treasury short on funds.
On this occasion, the suddenness of the danger posed by the Fourth Crusade put the defenders at a serious disadvantage.
Alexios IV then led 6,000 men from the Crusader army against his rival Alexios III in Adrianople.
In April 2004, in a speech on the 800th anniversary of the city's capture, Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I formally accepted the apology.
The Latin clergy discussed the situation amongst themselves and settled upon the message they wished to spread through the demoralised army.
Hearing of their decision, the Pope hedged and issued an order against any more attacks on Christians unless they were actively hindering the Crusader cause, but he did not condemn the scheme outright.
Count Boniface agreed and Alexios IV returned with the Marquess to rejoin the fleet at Corfu after it had sailed from Zara.
Earlier crusades focused on Palestine had involved the slow movement of large and disorganised land hosts across a generally hostile Anatolia.
The crusading army was expected to consist of 4,500 knights (as well as 4,500 horses), 9,000 squires, and 20,000 foot-soldiers.
Reduced to Constantinople, north-western Anatolia, and a portion of the southern Balkans, the empire fell to the Ottoman Turks who captured the city in 1453.
First the crusaders attacked and were repulsed from the cities of Chalcedon and Chrysopolis, suburbs of the great city.
The Byzantine Senate elected a young noble Nicolas Canabus as emperor, in what was to be one of the last known acts of this ancient institution.
Constantinople was re-captured by the Nicaean Greeks under Michael VIII Palaeologus in 1261, and commerce with Venice was re-established.
Barbarossa died on crusade, and his army quickly disintegrated, leaving the English and French, who had come by sea, to fight Saladin.
The remaining fleet of 60 war galleys, 100 horse transports, and 50 large transports (the entire fleet was manned by 10,000 Venetian oarsmen and marines) sailed in late April 1203.
An attack on Egypt would clearly be a maritime enterprise, requiring the creation of a fleet.
The Crusaders sailed alongside Constantinople with 10 galleys to display the would-be Alexios IV, but from the walls of the city citizens taunted the puzzled crusaders, who had been led to believe that they would rise up to welcome the young pretender Alexios as a liberator.
Several other regions of Europe sent substantial contingents as well, such as Flanders and Montferrat.
Thibaut was elected leader, but he died in 1201 and was replaced by an Italian count, Boniface of Montferrat.
Saladin led a Muslim dynasty, and his incorporation of Jerusalem into his domains shocked and dismayed the Catholic countries of Western Europe.
A nobleman Alexios Doukas (nicknamed Mourtzouphlos) became the leader of the anti-crusader faction within the Byzantine leadership.
The experiences of the first two crusades had thrown into stark relief the vast cultural differences between the two Christian civilizations.
While attempting to defend themselves with a wall of fire, however, they ended up burning down even more of the city.
The crusaders captured the Blachernae section of the city in the northwest and used it as a base to attack the rest of the city.
When Innocent III heard of the conduct of his pilgrims he was filled with shame and rage, and he strongly rebuked them.
