In August, two more people were arrested in connection with the investigation.
It continues to take place legally in several other countries including: Australia, Canada, France, Ireland, Italy, and the United States.
They also argue that wildlife management goals of the hunt can be met more effectively by other methods such as ''lamping'' (dazzling a fox with a bright light, then shooting by a competent shooter using an appropriate weapon and load).
The nature of fox hunting, including the killing of the quarry animal, the pursuit's strong associations with tradition and social class, and its practice for sport have made it a source of great controversy within the United Kingdom.
The professional staff wear their hat ribbons down, while amateur staff and members of the field wear their ribbons up.
These dogs are trained to pursue the fox based on its scent.
Hunt sabotage is unlawful in a majority of the United States, and some tactics used in it (such as trespass and criminal damage) are offences there and in other countries.
They see the social aspects of hunting as reflecting the demographics of the area; the Home Counties packs, for example, are very different from those in North Wales and Cumbria, where the hunts are very much the activity of farmers and the working class.
A prominent feature of hunts operating during the formal hunt season (usually November to March in the northern hemisphere) is hunt members wearing 'colours'.
Draft and Thoroughbred crosses are commonly used as hunters, although purebred Thoroughbreds and horses of many different breeds are also used.
Also around this time, numbers of European red foxes were introduced into the Eastern seaboard of North America for hunting.
Both of these practices were widely abandoned during the nineteenth century, although isolated cases may still have occurred to the modern day.
Scotland, which has its own Parliament, restricted fox hunting in 2002, more than two years before the ban in England and Wales.
Fox hunting with hounds has been happening in Europe since at least the 16th century, and strong traditions have built up around the activity, as have related businesses, rural activities, and hierarchies.
Fox hunting with hounds results in around 650 foxes being killed annually in Victoria, compared with over 90,000 shot over a similar period in response to a State government bounty.
The gray fox (''Urocyon cinereoargenteus''), a distant relative of the European red fox, is also hunted in North America.
The hunt is often the setting for many social rituals, but the hunting itself begins when hounds are "cast" or put into rough or brushy areas called "coverts", where foxes often lay up during daylight hours.
This sometimes means one can then wear scarlet if male, or the hunt collar if female (colour varies from hunt to hunt) and buttons with the hunt crest on them.
In the United States and Canada, pursuing quarry for the purpose of killing is strictly forbidden by the Masters of Foxhounds Association.
The traditional red coats are often misleadingly called "pinks".
The scent of the gray fox is not as strong as that of the red, therefore more time is needed for the hounds to take the scent.
However, drag hunting is disliked by some advocates of quarry hunting because the trail is pre-determined, thereby eliminating the uncertainty present in the live quarry hunt and because they tend to be faster.
During the British Raj, British sportsmen in India would hunt jackals on horseback with hounds as a substitute for the fox hunting of their native England.
The use of scenthounds to track prey dates back to Assyrian, Babylonian, and ancient Egyptian times, and was known as venery.
There is also one pack of beagles in Virginia that hunt fox.
Philosopher Roger Scruton has said, "To criminalise this activity would be to introduce legislation as illiberal as the laws which once deprived Jews and Catholics of political rights, or the laws which outlawed homosexuality".
For this reason, the hunt saboteur ''tactics manual'' presents detailed information on legal issues affecting this activity, especially the Criminal Justice Act.
These help them stand out from the rest of the field.
This number does not include the non-registered (also known as "farmer" or "outlaw") packs.
Unlike foxes, golden jackals were documented to be ferociously protective of their pack mates, and could seriously injure hounds.
Boots are generally English dress boots (no laces).
Fox hunting has inspired artists in several fields to create works which involve the sport.
Research from wildlife hospitals, however, indicates that it is not uncommon for foxes with minor shot wounds to survive.&nbsp; Hunt supporters further say that it is a matter of humanity to kill foxes rather than allow them to suffer malnourishment and mange.
In December 1999, the then Home Secretary, Jack Straw MP, announced the establishment of a Government inquiry (the ''Burns Inquiry'') into hunting with dogs, to be chaired by the retired senior civil servant Lord Burns.
The hounds pursue the trail of the fox and the riders follow, by the most direct route possible.
In much of the world, hunting in general is understood to relate to any game animals or weapons (e.g., deer hunting with bow and arrow); in Britain and Ireland, "hunting" without qualification implies fox hunting (or other forms of hunting with hounds—beagling, drag hunting, hunting the clean boot, mink hunting,  or stag hunting), as described here.
They are unique in that they are the only hunting beagle pack in the U.S. to be followed on horseback.
In its submission to the Burns Inquiry, the League Against Cruel Sports presented evidence of over 1,000 cases of trespass by hunts.
A dead fox was later found in a rubbish bin.
Hunting with Agassaei hounds was popular in Celtic Britain, even before the Romans arrived, introducing the Castorian and Fulpine hound breeds which they used to hunt.
Many experts, such as the Hawk Board, deny that any bird of prey can reasonably be used in the British countryside to kill a fox which has been flushed by (and is being chased by) a pack of hounds.
Generally all hunting whips are brown, except those of Hunt Servants, whose whips are white.
This is not practiced in the United States, as once the fox has gone to ground and is accounted for by the hounds, it is left alone.
In 2001 there was a 1-year nationwide ban on fox-hunting because of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease.
In the state of Victoria there are thirteen hunts, with more than 1000 members between them.
The sport is controversial, particularly in the UK, where its traditional form was banned in Scotland in 2002, and in England and Wales in November 2004 (law enforced from February 2005), although certain modified forms of hunting foxes with hounds are still within the law, and shooting foxes as vermin also remains lawful.
Fox hunting developed further in the eighteenth century when Hugo Meynell developed breeds of hound and horse to address the new geography of rural England.
From the Opening Meet they will switch to formal hunting attire where entitled members will wear scarlet and the rest black or navy.
The coyote is faster than a fox, running at  and also wider ranging, with a territory of up to , so a much larger hunt territory is required to chase it.
Others, as we note below, resent the hunt trespassing on their land, especially when they have been told they are not welcome.
This was considered in the Burns Inquiry (paras 6.60–11), whose tentative conclusion was that lamping using rifles fitted with telescopic sights, if carried out properly and in appropriate circumstances, had fewer adverse welfare implications than hunting.
The highest honour is to be awarded the hunt button by the Hunt Master.
By the end of the seventeenth century, deer hunting was in decline.
The other main countries in which organised fox hunting with hounds is practiced are Ireland (which has 41 registered packs), Australia, France, Canada and Italy.
Oscar Wilde, in his 1893 play ''A Woman of No Importance'', once famously referred to "the English country gentleman galloping after a fox" as "the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable."
American red foxes tend to be larger than European forms, but according to foxhunter's accounts, they have less cunning, vigour and endurance in the chase than European foxes.
Anti-hunting activists who choose to take action in opposing fox hunting can do so through lawful means, such as campaigning for fox hunting legislation and monitoring hunts for cruelty.
Many animal welfare groups, campaigners and activists believe that fox hunting is unfair and cruel to animals.
For example, for some hunts, those under eighteen (or sixteen in some cases) will wear ratcatcher all season.
The fox is sometimes referred to as vermin but it is not categorized as such by The UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA).
Some use unlawful means.
Hunters must be well-mannered, have the athletic ability to clear large obstacles such as wide ditches, tall fences, and rock walls, and have the stamina to keep up with the hounds.
In America, fox hunting is also called "fox chasing", as it is the practice of many hunts not to actually kill the fox (the red fox is not regarded as a significant pest).
However, in the United Kingdom, trespass is a largely civil matter when performed accidentally.
In the autumn of each year (August–October in the UK and Ireland), hunts take the young hounds out ''cub hunting'', ''autumn hunting'' or ''cubbing''.
American fox hunters undertake stewardship of the land, and endeavour to maintain fox populations and habitats as much as possible.
Horses on hunts can range from specially bred and trained field hunters to casual hunt attendees riding a wide variety of horse and pony types.
For this reason, there are large numbers of people who support fox hunting and this can be for a variety of reasons.
Hunts in the southern United States sometimes pursue the bobcat (''Lynx rufus'').
Norman hunting traditions were brought to Britain when William the Conqueror arrived, along with the Gascon and Talbot hounds.
The two main types of foxhound are the English Foxhound and the American Foxhound.
Since the Hunting Act in England and Wales, only Masters and Hunt Servants tend to wear red coats or the hunt livery whilst out hunting.
Various theories about the derivation of this term have been given, ranging from the colour of a weathered scarlet coat to the name of a purportedly famous tailor.
They worry about the welfare of the pets and animals and the difficulty of moving around the roads where they live on hunt days.
Some hunts may go without catching a fox for several seasons, despite chasing two or more foxes in a single day's hunting.
According to article 2 of the organisation's code:
These have a horn handle at the top and a long leather lash (2-3 yards) ending in a piece of coloured cord.
In the United States, George Washington and Thomas Jefferson both kept packs of fox hounds before and after the American Revolutionary War.
The Masters of Foxhounds Association has laid down detailed rules to govern the behaviour of Masters of Foxhounds and their packs of hounds."
Drag hunting, an equestrian sport which involves dragging an object over the ground to lay a scent for the hounds to follow, can also be popular, either instead of, or in addition to, live quarry hunting.
They argue that while more "working class" blood sports such as cock fighting and badger baiting were long ago outlawed, fox hunting persists, although this argument can be countered with the fact that hare coursing, a more "working class" sport was outlawed simultaneously to fox hunting with hounds in the UK.
In Australia, the term also refers to the hunting of foxes with firearms, similar to deer hunting or spotlighting.
Dependent on terrain, and to accommodate different levels of ability, hunts generally have alternative routes that do not involve jumping.
Roads, railway lines, and canals all split hunting countries, but at the same time they made hunting accessible to more people.
Death is instantaneous.
For the men they are black with brown leather tops (called tan tops), and for the ladies, black with a patent black leather top of similar proportion to the men.
It is inevitable, however, that hounds will at times catch their game.
Unlike the red fox which, during the chase, will run far ahead from the pack, the gray fox will speed toward heavy brush, thus making it more difficult to pursue.
Proponents of fox hunting view it as an important part of rural culture, and useful for reasons of conservation and pest control,  while opponents argue that it is cruel and unnecessary.
A small omnivorous predator, the fox lives in underground burrows called earths, and is predominantly active around twilight (making it a crepuscular animal).
Since this may involve very athletic skill on the part of horse and rider alike, fox hunting is the origin of traditional equestrian sports including steeplechase and point to point racing.
Since the ban in the UK, there has been no evidence of significant job losses, and hunts have continued to operate along limited lines, either trail hunting, or claiming to use exemptions in the legislation.
The activity sometimes (and in some areas) takes place in the UK and Ireland as the practice of "holding up", which consists of hunt supporters surrounding a covert, with riders and foot followers to drive back foxes attempting to escape, and then "drawing" the covert with the puppies and some more experienced hounds, allowing them to find and catch foxes within the surrounded wood.
The field may be divided into two groups, with one group, the ''First Field,'' that takes a more direct but demanding route that involves jumps over obstacles while another group, the ''Second Field'' (also called ''Hilltoppers'' or ''Gaters''), takes longer but less challenging routes that utilise gates or other types of access on the flat.
The passing of the Hunting Act was also notable in that it was implemented through the use of the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 after the House of Lords refused to pass the legislation, despite the Commons passing it by a majority of 356 to 166.
The red fox can run at up to .
Since the introduction of legislation to restrict hunting with hounds, there has been a level of confusion over the legal status of hunt monitors or saboteurs when trespassing, as if they disrupt the hunt whilst it is not committing an illegal act (as all the hunts claim to be hunting within the law) then they commit an offence, however if the hunt was conducting an illegal act then the criminal offence of trespass may not have been committed.
: "There are those who have a moral objection to hunting and who are fundamentally opposed to the idea of people gaining pleasure from what they regard as the causing of unnecessary suffering.
Anti-hunting campaigners also criticised UK hunts of which the Burns Inquiry estimated that foxhound packs put down around 3,000 hounds, and the hare hunts killed around 900 hounds per year, in each case after the hounds' working life had come to an end.
It is argued by some hunt supporters that no law should curtail the right of a person to do as they wish, so long as it does not harm others.
Some farmers fear the loss of their smaller livestock, while others consider them an ally in controlling rabbits, voles, and other rodents, which eat crops.
In some countries, ladies generally wear coloured collars on their black or navy coats.
With the onset of the Industrial Revolution, people began to move out of the country and into towns and cities to find work.
Anti-hunting campaigners cite the widespread existence of artificial earths and the historic practice by hunts of introducing foxes, as indicating that hunts do not believe foxes to be pests.
Mounted hunt followers typically wear traditional hunting attire.
After the ban on fox hunting, hunts follow artificially laid trails, or use exemptions laid out in the Act, although the League Against Cruel Sports has alleged that breaches of law may be taking place by some hunts.
Once the season proper starts (usually from early November in the northern hemisphere, or May in the southern hemisphere), the idea is to drive the fox from the covert and pursue the scent that it leaves for long distances over open countryside.
In 2013, the Masters of Foxhounds Association of North America listed 163 registered packs in the U.S. and Canada.
In the case of Scottish hill packs or the gun packs of Wales and upland areas of England, the fox is flushed to guns.
The inquiry was to examine the practical aspects of different types of hunting with dogs and its impact, how any ban might be implemented and the consequences of any such ban.
If the pack manages to pick up the scent of a fox, they will track it for as long as they are able.
The fox is also variously known as a ''Tod'' (old English word for fox), ''Reynard'' (the name of an anthropomorphic character in European literature from the twelfth century), or ''Charlie'' (named for the Whig politician Charles James Fox).
There is one pack of foxhounds in Portugal, and one in India.
Even before the time of Wilde, much of the criticism of fox hunting has been couched in terms of social class.
Therefore, unlike other methods of controlling the fox population, it is argued that hunting with dogs resembles natural selection.
Instead, control of foxes relies heavily on shooting, poisoning and fencing.
The Inclosure Acts brought fences to separate formerly open land into many smaller fields, deer forests were being cut down, and arable land was increasing.
Another goal of cubbing is to teach the young foxhounds to restrict their hunting to foxes.
This is a very old ceremony in which the master or huntsman would smear the blood of the fox or coyote onto the cheeks or forehead of a newly initiated hunt follower, often a young child.
Opponents of fox hunting claim that the activity is not necessary for fox control, arguing that the fox is not a pest species and that hunting does not and cannot make a real difference to fox populations.
There are times when a fox that is injured or sick is caught by the pursuing hounds, but hunts say that the occurrence of an actual kill of this is exceptionally rare.
In the UK, where the fox goes to ground, terriers may be entered into the earth to locate the fox so that it can be dug down to and killed, and this is carried out as a form of pest control.
Those members not entitled to wear colours, dress in a black hunt coat and unadorned black buttons for both men and ladies, generally with pale breeches.
John Leech had a series of "Mr. Briggs" cartoons in ''Punch'' during the 1850s, which illustrated class issues.
In Australia, the European red fox was introduced solely for the purpose of fox hunting in 1855.
Fox hunting with hounds is mainly practiced in the east of Australia.
Social rituals are important to hunts, although many have fallen into disuse.
It was found this ban on hunting had no measurable impact on fox numbers in randomly selected areas.
Gentleman subscribers tend to wear black coats, with or without hunt buttons.
Bloodhounds are also used to hunt a human runner in the sport of ''Hunting the Clean Boot''.
Additionally, the number of buttons is significant.
There is scientific evidence that fox hunting has no effect on fox populations, at least in Britain, thereby calling into question the idea it is a successful method of culling.
:"The sport of fox hunting as it is practised in North America places emphasis on the chase and not the kill.
Jackals were not hunted often in this manner, as they were slower than foxes and could scarcely outrun greyhounds after 200 yards.
Hunt supporters previously claimed that, in the event of a ban, hunts would not be able to convert and that many hounds would have to be put down.
Trespass can occur as the hounds cannot recognise human-created boundaries they are not allowed to cross, and may therefore follow their quarry wherever it goes unless successfully called off.
The individuals arrested were suspended from Hunt membership.
Another differentiation in dress between the amateur and professional staff is found in the ribbons at the back of the hunt cap.
Many foxes learn to evade the hounds by running up or down streams, running along the tops of fences, and other tactics to throw the hounds off the scent.
In English foxhunting, the horses are often a cross of half or a quarter Irish Draught and the remainder English thoroughbred.
Some opponents of hunting criticise the fact that the animal suffering in fox hunting takes place for sport, citing either that this makes such suffering unnecessary and therefore cruel, or else that killing or causing suffering for sport is immoral.
Since the UK hunting ban, hunts are using a mixture of an odoriferous substance with an oil in order to improve the persistence of the scent trail, and then to lay the scent about 20&nbsp;minutes in advance of the hunt.
The hunt continues until either the fox evades the hounds, ''goes to ground'' (that is takes refuge in an underground burrow or den) or is overtaken and usually killed by the hounds.
Amongst its findings, the Burns Inquiry committee analysed opposition to hunting in the UK and reported that:
It is possible to use a sight hound such as a Greyhound or lurcher to pursue foxes, though this practice is not common in organised hunting,  and these dogs are more often used for coursing animals such as hares.
It has been estimated that in the UK, approximately 50% of foxes killed by a hunt during the calendar year will be accounted for by cubs killed during autumn hunting.
Hunt saboteurs trespass on private land to monitor or disrupt the hunt, as this is where the hunting activity takes place.
The committee believed that lamping was not possible without vehicular access, and hence said that the welfare of foxes in upland areas could be affected adversely by a ban on hunting with hounds, unless dogs could be used to flush foxes from cover (as is permitted in the Hunting Act 2004).
The ''red fox'' (''Vulpes vulpes'') is the normal prey animal of a fox hunt in the U.S. and Europe.
In the U.S., some cubs are chased and allowed to escape to teach them better skills of evasion so that they may be tracked (preferably without being killed) again another day.
In the UK, supporters of fox hunting regard it as a distinctive part of British culture generally, the basis of traditional crafts and a key part of social life in rural areas, an activity and spectacle enjoyed not only by the riders but also by others such as the ''unmounted pack'' which may follow along on foot, bicycle or 4x4.
The Federation of Welsh Packs lists 56 member hunts, while the Central Committee of Fell Packs lists 6 member hunts (which hunt on foot in the Lake District and the surrounding region).
The Master wears a scarlet coat with four brass buttons while the huntsman and other professional staff wear five.
In 2001, the RSPCA took high court action to prevent pro-hunt activists joining in large numbers to change the society's policy in opposing hunting.
David Cameron stated on 3 March 2015 that he hopes to repeal the ban in the near future and a free vote in the House of Commons will be held on the issue in the 2015–2020 parliament.
They further argue that, while hunting with hounds may cause suffering, controlling fox numbers by other means is even more cruel.
In contrast, liberal philosopher, John Stuart Mill wrote, "The reasons for legal intervention in favour of children apply not less strongly to the case of those unfortunate slaves and victims of the most brutal parts of mankind—the lower animals."
The UK's most senior court, the House of Lords has decided that a ban on hunting, in the form of the Hunting Act 2004, does not contravene the European Convention on Human Rights, as did the European Court of Human Rights.
Scenting can be affected by temperature, humidity, and other factors.
Coyotes have larger canine teeth and are generally more practised in hostile encounters.
In June 2016, three people associated with the South Herefordshire Hunt (UK) were arrested on suspicion of causing suffering to animals in response to claims that live fox cubs were used to train hounds to hunt and kill.
The first use of packs specifically trained to hunt foxes was in the late 1600s, with the oldest fox hunt being, probably, the Bilsdale in Yorkshire.
In the United Kingdom, since the introduction of the hunting ban, a number of hunts have employed falconers to bring birds of prey to the hunt, due to the exemption in the Hunting Act for falconry.
Some hunt monitors also choose to trespass whilst they observe the hunts in progress.
Examples of notable works which involve characters' becoming involved with a hunt or being hunted are listed below.
This attire usually consists of the traditional red coats worn by huntsmen, masters, former masters, whippers-in (regardless of sex), other hunt staff members and male members who have been invited by masters to wear colours and hunt buttons as a mark of appreciation for their involvement in the organization and running of the hunt.
Animal rights campaigners also object to fox hunting, on the grounds that animals should enjoy some basic rights (such as the right to freedom from exploitation and the right to life).
Other members of the mounted field follow strict rules of clothing etiquette.
Coyotes can be challenging opponents for the dogs in physical confrontations, despite the size advantage of a large dog.
Similarly, they say that the animal rarely endures hours of torment and pursuit by hounds, and research by Oxford University shows that the fox is normally killed after an average of 17&nbsp;minutes of chase.
Other methods include the use of snares, trapping and poisoning, all of which also cause considerable distress to the animals concerned, and may affect other species.
Foxes are not pursued once they have "gone to ground" (hide in a hole).
Main anti-hunting campaign organisations include the RSPCA and the League Against Cruel Sports.
Foxhound packs in the Cumbrian fells and other upland areas are followed by supporters on foot rather than on horseback.
An amendment to the 2004 Act which would have allowed licensed traditional hunting under stricter conditions, advocated by the then Prime Minister Tony Blair and some members of the government's independent inquiry on fox hunting (including its chairman Lord Burns), was voted down.
In countries such as India, and in other areas formerly under British influence, such as Iraq, the golden jackal (''Canis aureus'') is often the quarry.
The construction of the law means that hunt saboteurs' behaviour may result in charges of criminal aggravated trespass, rather than the less severe offence of civil trespass.
Nonetheless, in the UK, the criminal offence of 'aggravated trespass' was introduced in 1994 specifically to address the problems caused to fox hunts and other field sports by hunt saboteurs.
Another practice of some hunts was to cut off the tail ('brush'), the feet ('pads') and the head ('mask') as trophies, with the carcass then thrown to the hounds.
The Court of Appeal, in considering the British Hunting Act determined that the legislative aim of the Hunting Act was "a composite one of preventing or reducing unnecessary suffering to wild mammals, overlaid by a moral viewpoint that causing suffering to animals for sport is unethical."
Some hunts also further restrict the wear of formal attire to weekends and holidays and wear ratcatcher (tweed jacket and tan breeches), at all other times.
According to the Masters of Foxhounds Association of America, Englishman Robert Brooke was the first man to import hunting hounds to America, bringing his pack of foxhounds to Maryland in 1650 along with his horses.
Native animal populations have been very badly affected, with the extinction of at least 10 species attributed to the spread of foxes.
The first organised hunt for the benefit of a group (rather than a single patron) was started by Thomas, sixth Lord Fairfax in 1747.
However, coyotes tend to be less challenging intellectually, as they offer a straight line hunt instead of the convoluted fox line.
The colour of breeches vary from hunt to hunt and are generally of one colour, though two or three colours throughout the year may be permitted.
They may be drafted to other packs, including minkhound packs.
The Banwen Miners Hunt has been used as an example, founded in a small Welsh mining village, although its membership now is by no means limited to miners, with a ''cosmopolitan'' make up.
In many areas of the eastern United States, the coyote, a natural predator of the red and grey fox, is becoming more prevalent and threatens fox populations in a hunt's given territory.
They compare the number of foxes killed in the hunt to the many more killed on the roads.
A pack of hounds will account for their quarry by running it to ground, treeing it, or bringing it to bay in some fashion.
Polls in the UK have shown that the UK public equally divided as to whether or not hunt objectors hold their views based primarily on class grounds.
Depending on the skill of the shooter, the type of firearm used, the availability of good shooting positions and luck, shooting foxes can cause either an instant kill, or lengthy periods of agony for wounded animals which can die of the trauma within hours, or of secondary infection over a period of days or weeks.
Baily's Hunting Directory Lists 163 foxhound or draghound packs in the USA and 11 in Canada In some arid parts of the Western United States, where foxes in general are more difficult to locate, coyotes are hunted and, in some cases, bobcats.
Supporters of fox hunting claim that the number of foxes killed has increased since the Hunting Act came into force, both by the hunts (through lawful methods) and landowners, and that hunts have reported an increase in membership and that around 320,000 people (their highest recorded number) turned up to meets on Boxing Day 2006.
Adult foxes tend to range around an area of between  square kilometres () in good terrain, although in poor terrain, their range can be as much as .
It is an adept climber of trees, making it harder to hunt with hounds.
Many Greek- and Roman- influenced countries have long traditions of hunting with hounds.
Outside of campaigning, some activists choose to engage in direct intervention such as the sabotage of the hunt.
The hunts claim to provide and maintain a good habitat for foxes and other game, and, in the U.S., have fostered conservation legislation and put land into conservation easements.
