The final victory in the Hundred Years' War marked an important stage in the evolution of French architecture.
It was only in 1981 that the government allowed free broadcasting in the territory, ending state monopoly on radio.
Another theory is that it is derived from the Proto-Germanic word ''frankon'', which translates as ''javelin'' or ''lance'' as the throwing axe of the Franks was known as a francisca.
Nevertheless, the situation improved in the first half of the 4th century, which was a period of revival and prosperity for Roman Gaul.
The monarchy reached its peak during the 17th century and the reign of Louis XIV.
Certain groups, such as Scientology, Children of God, the Unification Church, or the Order of the Solar Temple, are considered cults ("''sectes''" in French), and therefore do not have the same status as recognised religions in France.
However, in France, baroque architecture found a greater success in the secular domain than in a religious one.
File:Quiche.jpg|250px|''Quiche''
Like in most industrialised nations, the print media have been affected by a severe crisis in the past decade.
Some consider however that hate speech laws in France are too broad or severe and damage freedom of speech.
The ''Roman de Renart'', written in 1175 by Perrout de Saint Cloude, tells the story of the mediaeval character Reynard ('the Fox') and is another example of early French writing.
Other foreign artists also settled and worked in or near Paris, such as Vincent van Gogh, Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani and Wassily Kandinsky.
Jules Hardouin Mansart, who designed the extensions to Versailles, was one of the most influential French architect of the baroque era; he is famous for his dome at Les Invalides.
France has long been a global centre of art, science, and philosophy.
The European part of France is called Metropolitan France and it is located in one of the occidental ends of Europe.
*In the Atlantic Ocean: Saint Pierre and Miquelon and, in the Antilles: Guadeloupe, Martinique, Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy.
In this context, renewable energies are having difficulty taking off.
France has hosted events such as the 1938 and 1998 FIFA World Cups, and the 2007 Rugby World Cup.
the Provost Service (''Prévôté''), acting as the Military Police branch of the Gendarmerie.
A PNR sets goals and guidelines for managed human habitation, sustainable economic development, and protection of the natural environment based on each park's unique landscape and heritage.
As a continuation of the wars sparked by the European monarchies against the French Republic, changing sets of European Coalitions declared wars on Napoleon's Empire.
It is also Western Europe's leading recipient of asylum seekers, with an estimated 50,000 applications in 2005 (a 15% decrease from 2004).
Other eminent French scientists of the 19th century have their names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.
France has laws against racism and antisemitism.
Ravel's piano compositions, such as ''Jeux d'eau'', ''Miroirs'', ''Le tombeau de Couperin'' and ''Gaspard de la nuit'', demand considerable virtuosity.
The coastlines offer contrasting landscapes: mountain ranges of benefits (the French Riviera, for example), plateaus ending on cliffs (the Alabaster Coast), wetlands and forest areas of Sologne or wide sandy plains (the Languedoc plain).
In the late 20th and early 21st centuries France has been at the forefront of the development of a supranational European Union, notably by signing the Maastricht Treaty (which created the European Union) in 1992, establishing the Eurozone in 1999, and signing the Lisbon Treaty in 2007.
These three state-owned museums welcome close to 17&nbsp;million people a year.
Between 27 and 30% of soldiers conscripted from 1912–1915 were killed.
France is famous for its 24 Hours of Le Mans sports car endurance race.
Rail connections exist to all other neighbouring countries in Europe, except Andorra.
However, since 1904, France has maintained an "Entente cordiale" with the United Kingdom, and there has been a strengthening of links between the countries, especially militarily.
Since 1900, France has hosted the Olympics on 4 further occasions: the 1924 Summer Olympics, again in Paris and three Winter Games (1924 in Chamonix, 1968 in Grenoble and 1992 in Albertville).
France was one of the founding members of NATO (1949).
The country was set to impose a carbon tax in 2009 at 17 euros per tonne of carbon emitted, which would have raised 4&nbsp;billion euros of revenue annually.
According to the World Trade Organization (WTO), in 2009 France was the world's sixth largest exporter and the fourth largest importer of manufactured goods.
Molière, who is deemed to be one of the greatest masters of comedy of the Western literature, wrote dozens of plays, including ''Le Misanthrope'', ''L'Avare'', ''Le Malade imaginaire'', and ''Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme''.
, French carbon dioxide emissions per capita were lower than that of China's.
Due to its shape, it is often referred to in French as '''' ("The Hexagon").
), Lyon (2,237,676), Marseille (1,734,277), Toulouse (1,291,517), Bordeaux (1,178,335), Lille (1,175,828), Nice (1,004,826), Nantes (908,815), Strasbourg (773,447) and Rennes (700,675).
France has produced some of the greatest players in the world, including three time FIFA World Player of the Year Zinedine Zidane, three time Ballon d'Or recipient Michel Platini, record holder for most goals scored at a World Cup Just Fontaine, first football player to receive the Légion d'honneur Raymond Kopa, and the all-time leading goalscorer for the French national team Thierry Henry.
While in 1965, 81% of the French declared themselves to be Catholics, in 2009 this proportion was 64%.
Other national museums hosting paintings include the Grand Palais (1.3&nbsp;million visitors in 2008), but there are also many museums owned by cities, the most visited being the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris (0.8&nbsp;million entries in 2008), which hosts contemporary works.
In the end, the Cathars were exterminated and the autonomous County of Toulouse was annexed into the kingdom of France.
Humans were then confronted by a harsh and variable climate, marked by several glacial eras.
Estimates of the number of Muslims in France vary widely.
Rugby union is popular, particularly in Paris and the southwest of France.
At the end of the Antiquity period, ancient Gaul was divided into several Germanic kingdoms and a remaining Gallo-Roman territory, known as the Kingdom of Syagrius.
A face transplant was first done on 27 November 2005 by Dr Bernard Devauchelle.
Jean Fouquet, the most famous medieval French painter, is said to have been the first to travel to Italy and experience the Early Renaissance at first hand.
Julius Caesar conquered the remainder of Gaul and overcame a revolt carried out by the Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix in 52 BC.
Nord-Pas-de-Calais Picardie
After the back and forth of Catholic royal and secular republican governments during the 19th century, France established ''laïcité'' by passage of the 1905 law on the Separation of the Churches and the State.
These have been mostly male foreign workers from European Catholic countries who generally returned home when not employed.
*In South America: French Guiana.
This period was also a golden age for operas.
There are various theories as to the origin of the name Frank.
Fearing that the king would suppress the newly created National Assembly, insurgents stormed the Bastille on 14 July 1789, a date which would become France's National Day.
France remains a great power in the world, being a founding member of the United Nations, where it serves as one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, and a founding and leading member state of the European Union (EU).
As some have complained that they have suffered from discrimination thus, and after criticism by human rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, these laws remain controversial, although they are supported by most of the population.
The Senate's legislative powers are limited; in the event of disagreement between the two chambers, the National Assembly has the final say.
Among the 47,000 religious buildings in France, 94% are Roman Catholic.
In France, education is compulsory from six to sixteen years old, and the public school is secular and free.
Overseas collectivities and territories form part of the French Republic, but do not form part of the European Union or its fiscal area (with the exception of St. Bartelemy, which seceded from Guadeloupe in 2007).
(Note: There are significant differences between the metropolitan population figures just cited and those in the following table, which only include the core population).
In some cases clergy and churches were attacked, with iconoclasm stripping the churches of statues and ornament.
File:Arc-en-ciel comestible.jpg|250px |Macaron
The architecture associated to this era is named Second Empire in English, the term being taken from the Second French Empire.
Grand Est (''temporarily Alsace-Champagne-Ardenne-Lorraine'')
French explorers, such as Bougainville and Lapérouse, took part in the voyages of scientific exploration through maritime expeditions around the globe.
Senators are chosen by an electoral college for 6-year terms (originally 9-year terms), and one half of the seats are submitted to election every 3 years starting in September 2008.
France obtained many overseas possessions in the Americas, Africa and Asia.
The Algerian War was concluded with the Évian Accords in 1962 that led to Algerian independence.
The Assembly has the power to dismiss the government, and thus the majority in the Assembly determines the choice of government.
In the latter role, Charles de Gaulle managed to keep the country together while taking steps to end the war.
If training and remuneration of teachers, and the choice of programmes, are the state spring, the management of primary and secondary schools is the responsibility of local authorities.
France has an important aerospace industry led by the European consortium Airbus, and has its own national spaceport, the ''Centre Spatial Guyanais''.
For example, after the Battle of Hastings in 1066, William the Conqueror added "King of England" to his titles, becoming both the vassal to (as Duke of Normandy) and the equal of (as king of England) the king of France, creating recurring tensions.
France was one of the first countries to create an environment ministry, in 1971.
The nation succeeded in convincing all EU members to refuse to include culture and audiovisuals in the list of liberalised sectors of the WTO in 1993.
The government has a strong influence in shaping the agenda of Parliament.
Popular sports played in France include football, judo, tennis and rugby union.
The Paris stock exchange () is an old institution, created by Louis XV in 1724.
It is also a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.
The French watershed of the first four matches over 62% of the metropolitan territory.
The Academy of Sciences was founded by Louis XIV to encourage and protect the spirit of French scientific research.
France is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), but under President de Gaulle, it excluded itself from the joint military command to protest the special relationship between the United States and Britain and to preserve the independence of French foreign and security policies.
In the context of the Cold War, de Gaulle pursued a policy of "national independence" towards the Western and Eastern blocs.
The successive political regimes have always promoted artistic creation, and the creation of the Ministry of Culture in 1959 helped preserve the cultural heritage of the country and make it available to the public.
However, since the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, the State tries to prevent its policy-making from being influenced by religion and became suspicious in recent decades towards new religious tendencies of the French society: the Parliament has listed many religious movements as dangerous cults since 1995, and has banned wearing conspicuous religious symbols in schools since 2004.
As a result, the Armorican peninsula was renamed Brittany, Celtic culture was revived and independent petty kingdoms arose in this region.
The three main French brewing regions are Alsace (60% of national production), the Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Lorraine.
French law is divided into two principal areas: private law and public law.
The most popular tourist sites include: (according to a 2003 ranking visitors per year): Eiffel Tower (6.2&nbsp;million), Louvre Museum (5.7&nbsp;million), Palace of Versailles (2.8&nbsp;million), Musée d'Orsay (2.1&nbsp;million), Arc de Triomphe (1.2&nbsp;million), Centre Pompidou (1.2&nbsp;million), Mont Saint-Michel (1&nbsp;million), Château de Chambord (711,000), Sainte-Chapelle (683,000), Château du Haut-Kœnigsbourg (549,000), Puy de Dôme (500,000), Musée Picasso (441,000), Carcassonne (362,000).
France is mainly divided into 18 administrative regions: 13 regions in metropolitan France (including the territorial collectivity of Corsica), and five located overseas.
Facing increasing pressure from European monarchies, internal guerrilla wars and counterrevolutions (such as the War in the Vendée or the Chouannerie), the young Republic fell into the Reign of Terror.
The French Armed Forces (''Forces armées françaises'') are the military and paramilitary forces of France, under the president as supreme commander.
Metropolitan France includes various islands: Corsica and coastal islands.
The financial crisis that followed France's involvement in the American Revolutionary War was one of many contributing factors to the French Revolution.
Air France is the national carrier airline, although numerous private airline companies provide domestic and international travel services.
The Declaration affirms "the natural and imprescriptible rights of man" to "liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression".
Accordingly, the crown passed to Philip of Valois, a cousin of Charles, rather than through the female line to Charles' nephew, Edward, who would soon become Edward III of England.
Occitanie (''temporarily Languedoc-Roussillon Midi-Pyrénées'')
Rugby league in France is a sport that is most popular in the south, in cities such as Perpignan and Toulouse.
In 312, the emperor Constantin I converted to Christianity.
The latter, in particular, held numerous properties throughout France and by the 13th century were the principal bankers for the French crown, until Philip IV annihilated the order in 1307.
During the 18th century, French philosophers produced one of the most important works of the Age of Enlightenment.
From the 250s to the 280s AD, Roman Gaul suffered a serious crisis with its fortified borders being attacked on several occasions by barbarians.
The Franks embraced the Christian Gallo-Roman culture and ancient Gaul was eventually renamed ''Francia'' ("Land of the Franks").
Small and picturesque French villages are promoted through the association ''Les Plus Beaux Villages de France'' (litt.
Hand transplantation was developed on 23 September 1998 in Lyon by a team assembled from different countries around the world including Jean-Michel Dubernard who, shortly thereafter, performed the first successful double hand transplant.
In addition to mandating the use of French in the territory of the Republic, the French government tries to promote French in the European Union and globally through institutions such as La Francophonie.
Gypsies inspired the French novel Hunchback of Notre Dame.
There are nine national parks and 46 natural parks in France, with the government planning to convert 20% of its Exclusive Economic Zone into a Marine Protected Area by 2020.
French artists developed the rococo style in the 18th century, as a more intimate imitation of old baroque style, the works of the court-endorsed artists Antoine Watteau, François Boucher and Jean-Honoré Fragonard being the most representative in the country.
France has a long and varied musical history.
His descendantsthe Capetians, the House of Valois, and the House of Bourbonprogressively unified the country through wars and dynastic inheritance into the Kingdom of France, which was fully declared in 1190 by Philip II Augustus.
Nouvelle-Aquitaine (''temporarily Aquitaine-Limousin-Poitou-Charentes'')
The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots).
The 43,180 buildings protected as historical monuments include mainly residences (many castles, or ''châteaux'' in French) and religious buildings (cathedrals, basilicas, churches, etc.
About a million Frenchmen died during the Napoleonic Wars.
The new car market is dominated by domestic brands such as Renault (27% of cars sold in France in 2003), Peugeot (20.1%) and Citroën (13.5%).
It is estimated that between 300 million and 500 million people worldwide can speak French, either as a mother tongue or a second language.
In the early 20th century, French spiritualist thinkers such as Maine de Biran, Henri Bergson and Louis Lavelle influenced Anglo-Saxon thought, including the Americans Charles Sanders Peirce and William James, and the Englishman Alfred North Whitehead.
The river system in France is mainly organised around four major rivers: the Loire, the Seine, the Garonne and the Rhône to which can be added the Meuse and Rhine.
France's attitude towards freedom of religion is complex.
According to the regions, traditional recipes are different, the North of the country prefers to use butter as the preferred fat for cooking, whereas olive oil is more commonly used in the South.
19th-century French thought was targeted at responding to the social malaise following the French Revolution.
Victor Hugo is sometimes seen as "the greatest French writer of all times" for excelling in all literary genres.
However, the widest circulations are reached by regional daily ''Ouest France'' with more than 750,000 copies sold, and the 50 other regional papers have also high sales.
Clovis made Paris his capital and established the Merovingian dynasty, but his kingdom would not survive his death.
The first is offered to college and leads to the national certificate ().
The Fête de la Musique, imitated by many foreign cities, was first launched by the French government in 1982.
Some of the finest collections are in Lyon, Lille, Rouen, Dijon, Rennes and Grenoble.
France has long had neither blasphemy laws nor sodomy laws (the latter being abolished in 1791).
In ''The Spirit of the Laws'', Baron de Montesquieu theorised the principle of separation of powers, which has been implemented in all liberal democracies since it was first applied in the United States.
Euronext Paris, the French branch of the NYSE Euronext group is Europe's 2nd largest stock exchange market, behind the London Stock Exchange.
Torture and illegal executions were perpetrated by both sides and the debate over whether or not to keep control of Algeria, then home to over one million European settlers, wracked the country and nearly led to a coup and civil war.
Approximately 77% of health expenditures are covered by government funded agencies.
This rebellion was driven by the great feudal lords and sovereign courts as a reaction to the rise of royal power in France.
It counts 1,200 museums welcoming more than 50&nbsp;million people annually.
After the Revolution, the Republicans favoured Neoclassicism although neoclassicism was introduced in France prior to the revolution with such building as the Parisian Pantheon or the Capitole de Toulouse.
There are ten major ports in France, the largest of which is in Marseille, which also is the largest bordering the Mediterranean Sea.
Nearly all the other colonies became independent in the 1960s with minimal controversy and typically retained close economic and military connections with France.
At this time there was a strong Gothic resurgence across Europe and in France; the associated architect was Eugène Viollet-le-Duc.
Western Europe is now serviced by a network of TGV lines.
The Enlightenment philosophy, in which reason is advocated as the primary source for legitimacy and authority, undermined the power of and support for the monarchy and helped pave the way for the French Revolution.
Much of the Enlightenment occurred in French intellectual circles, and major scientific breakthroughs and inventions, such as the discovery of oxygen (1778) and the first hot air balloon carrying passengers (1783), were achieved by French scientists.
Freedom of speech and press were declared, and arbitrary arrests outlawed.
The government retains considerable influence over key segments of infrastructure sectors, with majority ownership of railway, electricity, aircraft, nuclear power and telecommunications.
It is third in income from tourism due to shorter duration of visits.
France emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages, with its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337 to 1453) strengthening state-building and political centralisation.
Basic principles of the rule of law were laid in the Napoleonic Code (which was, in turn, largely based on the royal law codified under Louis XIV).
In 1966, the designer Yves Saint Laurent broke with established Haute Couture norms by launching a prêt-à-porter ("ready to wear") line and expanding French fashion into mass manufacturing.
A common and traditional symbol of the French people is the Gallic rooster.
Although it is one of the most industrialised countries in the world, France is ranked only 17th by carbon dioxide emissions, behind less populous nations such as Canada or Australia.
Metropolitan France was divided into a German occupation zone in the north and Vichy France, a newly established authoritarian regime collaborating with Germany, in the south, while Free France, the government-in-exile led by Charles de Gaulle, was set up in London.
Moreover, this decision was confirmed in a voting in the UNESCO in 2005, and the principle of "cultural exception" won an overwhelming victory: 198 countries voted for it, only 2 countries, the U.S and Israel, voted against it.
During the 1970s France faced economic crisis and allowed new immigrants (mostly from the Maghreb) to permanently settle in France with their families and to acquire French citizenship.
The Paris region is enveloped with the most dense network of roads and highways that connect it with virtually all parts of the country.
Each year the ''Côte d'Azur'' hosts 50% of the world's superyacht fleet.
Over 70% of new cars sold in 2004 had diesel engines, far more than contained petrol or LPG engines.
In 843, under the Treaty of Verdun, the empire was divided between Louis' three sons, with East Francia going to Louis the German, Middle Francia to Lothair I, and West Francia to Charles the Bald.
France does not recognise religious law as a motivation for the enactment of prohibitions.
This label is intended to protect and promote remarkable gardens and parks.
In 2005 the national service Télévision Numérique Terrestre introduced digital television all over the territory, allowing the creation of other channels.
France has a significant Gypsy (Gitan) population, numbering around 400,000.
France retains strong political and economic influence in its former African colonies (Françafrique) and has supplied economic aid and troops for peace-keeping missions in Ivory Coast and Chad.
To be applicable, every law must be officially published in the ''Journal officiel de la République française''.
This represents 0.36% of its GDP, in this regard rating France as twelfth largest donor on the list.
France had colonial possessions, in various forms, since the beginning of the 17th century, but in the 19th and 20th centuries, its global overseas colonial empire extended greatly and became the second largest in the world behind the British Empire.
The regions, departments and communes are all known as territorial collectivities, meaning they possess local assemblies as well as an executive.
As a result of large investments in nuclear technology, most electricity produced by France is generated by 59 nuclear power plants (75% in 2012).
France possesses the Millau Viaduct, the world's tallest bridge, and has built many important bridges such as the Pont de Normandie.
In the 1960s, France sought to exclude the British from the European unification process, seeking to build its own standing in continental Europe.
After a short-lived governmental scheme, Napoleon Bonaparte seized control of the Republic in 1799 becoming First Consul and later Emperor of the French Empire (1804–1814/1815).
French explorers, such as Jacques Cartier or Samuel de Champlain, claimed lands in the Americas for France, paving the way for the expansion of the First French colonial empire.
They consist of the French Army (''Armée de Terre''), French Navy (''Marine Nationale'', formerly called ''Armée de Mer''), the French Air Force (''Armée de l'Air''), the French Strategic Nuclear Force (''Force Nucléaire Stratégique'', nicknamed ''Force de Frappe'' or "Strike Force")  and the Military Police called National Gendarmerie (''Gendarmerie nationale''), which also fulfils civil police duties in the rural areas of France.
Overseas collectivity (''collectivité d'outre-mer'' or COM)
The two composers invented new musical forms and new sounds.
''Les Contemplations'' and ''La Légende des siècles'' are considered as "poetic masterpieces", Hugo's verse having been compared to that of Shakespeare, Dante and Homer.
It is one of the earliest academies of sciences.
The GPRF laid the groundwork for a new constitutional order that resulted in the Fourth Republic, which saw spectacular economic growth (''les Trente Glorieuses'').
Stemming from a strong domestic league, the French rugby team has won 16 Six Nations Championships, including 8 grand slams; and has reached the semi-final of the Rugby World Cup 6 times and the final 3 times.
The French Crusaders also imported the French language into the Levant, making French the base of the ''lingua franca'' ("Frankish language") of the Crusader states.
For this reason, French cinema is sometimes intertwined with the cinema of foreign nations.
It was the time of the French Renaissance and several artists from Italy were invited to the French court; many residential palaces were built in the Loire Valley.
The earliest French literature dates from the Middle Ages, when what is now known as modern France did not have a single, uniform language.
These territories have varying statuses in the territorial administration of France and are located:
In addition to it wine tradition, France is also a major producer of beer.
In 2003, it produced 22% of the European Union's electricity, primarily from nuclear power.
It has been suggested that the meaning of "free" was adopted because, after the conquest of Gaul, only Franks were free of taxation.
A small part of Northern France was occupied, but France and its allies emerged victorious against the Central Powers at a tremendous human and material cost.
The Wars of Religion were ended by Henry IV's Edict of Nantes, which granted some freedom of religion to the Huguenots.
France became the most populous country in Europe and had tremendous influence over European politics, economy, and culture.
In ''The Social Contract'', Jean-Jacques Rousseau openly criticised the European divine right monarchies and strongly affirmed the principle of the sovereignty of the people.
Algeria and the colonies in Indochina became independent in the 1950s after long, bloody wars.
Although the revolt was a political failure (as the Gaullist party emerged even stronger than before) it announced a split between the French people and de Gaulle who resigned shortly after.
Overseas collectivity (''collectivité d'outre-mer'' or COM).
French martial arts include Savate and Fencing.
