His contemporary, Agathias, who based his own writings upon the tropes laid down by Procopius, says:
During Rome's hegemony, to be educated was to know Latin — as an administrative language it was indispensable.
After the invasion of Chlodio, the Roman armies at the Rhine border became a Frankish "franchise" and Franks were known to levy Roman-like troops that were supported by a Roman-like armour and weapons industry.
Numerous small Frankish kingdoms existed during the 5th century around Cologne, Tournai, Le Mans, Cambrai and elsewhere.
When the presence of US soldiers during the Vietnam War placed Thai people in contact with African Americans, they (and people of African ancestry in general) came to be called '''' ("Black Farang", ).
Some decades later, the Salian Franks controlled the River Scheldt and were disrupting transport links to Britain in the English Channel.
In the final half of the 7th century and first half of the 8th in Merovingian Gaul, the chief military actors became the lay and ecclesiastical magnates with their bands of armed followers called retainers.
The Old Frankish phase; that is to say, Old High German and Old Dutch, ran from approximately the late 5th to approximately the 11th centuries.
Remaining pockets of resistance were overcome region by region, primarily due to the work of an expanding network of monasteries.
Modern historians often refer to Christians following the Latin rites in the eastern Mediterranean as ''Franks'' or ''Latins'', regardless of their country of origin, whereas they use the words ''Rhomaios'' and ''Rûmi'' ("Roman") for Orthodox Christians.
Many daily activities centred around the multiple deities, chiefest of which may have been the Quinotaur, a water-god from whom the Merovingians were reputed to have derived their ancestry.
The Frankish realm was reunited in 613 by Chlothar II, the son of Chilperic, who granted his nobles the Edict of Paris in an effort to reduce corruption and reassert his authority.
By the 6th century, when these laws first appeared in written form, two basic legal subdivisions existed: Salian Franks were subject to Salic law and Ripuarian Franks to Ripuarian law.
This lasted at least till the days of the scholar Procopius (c. AD 500 – c. AD 565), more than a century after the demise of the Western Roman Empire, who wrote describing the former Rhine army as still in operation with legions of the style of their forefathers during Roman times.
The military equipment of this people the Franks is very simple&nbsp;...
A phonetic change known as the High German consonant shift occurred along a north–south zone (now termed the Benrath Line) that created Low German to the north and High German to the south, with the Line running from Benrath (part of Düsseldorf) and Aachen to eastern Germany near Frankfurt an der Oder in the area of Berlin and Dessa.
There they founded a city called Sicambria.
Their writers are by far the major sources of medieval European history outside the Gallo-Roman world.
The major primary sources on the early Franks include the '''', Ammianus Marcellinus, Claudian, Zosimus, Sidonius Apollinaris and Gregory of Tours.
They have their chests bare and backs naked to the loins, they cover their thighs with either leather or linen.
However, all the forms of the levy gradually disappeared in the course of the 7th century after the reign of Dagobert I.
In the Middle Ages, the term ''Frank'' was used in the east as a synonym for ''western European'', as the Franks were then rulers of most of Western Europe.
On an intermediate level, the kings began calling up territorial levies from the regions of Austrasia (which did not have major cities of Roman origin).
Both groups remained politically distinct until Clovis, a Salian and a member of the Merovingian dynasty, unified Francia.
* '''' or ''Fah-lan-ki'' () and ''Fulang'' in Chinese
The Franks incorporated some of Friesland and Saxony into the Netherlands, who learned Dutch in their own way.
Monarchs prided themselves in their ability to communicate via Latin, especially to emissaries and rulers of foreign nations.
Carolingian illuminated manuscripts and ivory plaques, which have survived in reasonable numbers, approached those of Constantinople in quality.
Only in the lands beyond the Rhine did the Merovingians seek to extend political control over their neighbours.
A Frankish king, Childeric I, fought with Aegidius in 463: historians have assumed that Childeric and his son Clovis I were both commanders of the Roman military in the Province of  and were subordinate to the magister militum.
Germanic peoples, including those tribes in the Rhine delta that later became the Franks, are known to have served in the Roman army since the days of Julius Caesar.
The main theory concerning the generation of Old French is that the Franks imposed much of their vocabulary (see list of French words of Germanic origin) and other mainly phonetic features on Gallo-Roman.
This has been reconstructed from Germanic reflex languages, chance personal and place names in documents, words from languages such as Latin and inscriptions in a native script called the Elder Futhark.
The few Merovingian illuminated manuscripts that have survived, such as the Gelasian Sacramentary, contain a great deal of zoomorphic representations.
* '''', '''' in Persian, ''Faranji'' in Tajik.
Jan Tent and Paul Geraghty) have suggested that the Samoan and generic Polynesian term for Europeans, ''Palagi'' (pronounced Puh-LANG-ee) or ''Papalagi'', might also be cognate, possibly a loan term gathered by early contact between Pacific islanders and Malays.
The mythology of the Franks was probably a form of Germanic polytheism.
Nowadays, the German and Dutch names for France are '''' and '''', respectively, both meaning "Realm of the Franks".
He promoted them to the status of '''' within the Empire.
Frankish troops guarded the Roman frontier from Britain to the Middle East.
They do not serve on horseback except in very rare cases.
The Carolingian reformation of monasticism and church-state relations was the culmination of the Frankish Church.
The name '''' was originally socio-political.
Some historians have gone to the length of relating their oath-making to the later development of feudalism.
About the year 260 one group of Franks penetrated as far as Tarragona in present-day Spain, where they plagued the region for about a decade before they were subdued and expelled by the Romans.
There is a likely connection with the bees to the traditional Frankish weapon, the angon (meaning "sting"), from its distinctive spearhead.
So little has survived, however, that the best quality of work from this period may not be represented.
Jewelery (such as brooches), weapons (including swords with decorative hilts) and clothing (such as capes and sandals) have been found in a number of grave sites.
The king had an elite bodyguard called the ''truste''.
As a result of this incident, 700 Franks were killed and 300 were sold into slavery.
The chronicle describes Priam as a Frankish king whose people migrated to Macedonia after the fall of Troy.
The Merovingians were capable of raising naval forces: the naval campaign waged against the Danes by Theuderic I in 515 involved ocean-worthy ships and rivercraft were used on the Loire, Rhône and Rhine.
Francia was then divided into eastern and western Frankish kingdoms, with an intermediate zone, Lotharingia.
The '''Franks''' ( or '''') are historically first known as a group of Germanic tribes that inhabited the land between the Lower and Middle Rhine in the 3rd century AD, and second as the people of Gaul who merged with the Gallo-Roman populations during succeeding centuries, passing on their name to modern-day France and becoming part of the heritage of the modern French people.
Some Franks, like the 4th century usurper Silvanus, converted early to Christianity.
The kingdom was acknowledged by the Romans after 357 AD.
Interpretations by modern scholars differ greatly, but it is likely that Frankish paganism shared most of the characteristics of other varieties of Germanic paganism.
When the Franks first appeared as such in the 3rd century, they spoke the same language, Proto-Germanic.
Local urban levies could be reasonably well-armed and even mounted, but the more general levies were composed of '''' and '''', who were mostly farmers by trade and carried ineffective weapons, such as farming implements.
A few decades later, the Menapian Carausius created a Batavian–British rump state on Roman soil that was supported by Frankish soldiers and raiders.
Such words sometimes also connote things, plants or creatures introduced by Europeans/Franks.
Eumenius addressed the Franks in the matter of the execution of Frankish prisoners in the circus at Trier by Constantine I in 306 and certain other measures: '''' ("Where now is that ferocity of yours?
The period of Crusader rule in Greek lands is known to this day as the ''Frangokratia'' ("rule of the Franks").
For more formal communications of any kind, the Franks used the lingua franca, Medieval Latin.
A much rarer occurrence was the general levy, which applied to the entire kingdom and included peasants ('''' and '''').
Though many of the Frankish aristocracy quickly followed Clovis in converting to Christianity, the conversion of all his subjects was only achieved after considerable effort and, in some regions, a period of over two centuries.
Many Franks were high officers in the Roman administration, for which positions a Roman literary education was a prerequisite.
The increasingly wealthy Merovingian elite endowed many monasteries, including that of the Irish missionary Columbanus.
There is also another theory that suggests that Frank comes from the Latin word '''' meaning ("throwing axe").
Clovis' conversion had a profound effect on the course of European history, for at the time the Franks were the only major Christianised Germanic tribe without a predominantly Arian aristocracy and this led to a naturally amicable relationship between the Catholic Church and the increasingly powerful Franks.
As with other Germanic peoples, the laws of the Franks were memorised by "rachimburgs", who were analogous to the lawspeakers of Scandinavia.
The angons are spears which are neither very short nor very long.
In Macedonia, the Franks then divided.
After conquering the Kingdom of Soissons and expelling the Visigoths from southern Gaul at the Battle of Vouillé, he established Frankish hegemony over most of Gaul, excluding Burgundy, Provence and Brittany, which were eventually absorbed by his successors.
The author of the ''Chronicle of Fredegar'' claimed that the Franks came originally from Troy and quoted the works of Vergil and Hieronymous, but the Franks are not mentioned in those works, except in a general way by Hieronymous.
The Franks in the east kept their Germanic language and became part of the Germans, Dutch, Flemings and Luxembourgers.
Clovis later turned against the Roman commanders, defeated Syagrius in 486 or 487 and then had the Frankish king Chararic imprisoned and executed.
A sizeable portion of the Frankish aristocracy quickly followed Clovis in converting to Christianity (the Frankish church of the Merovingians).
After the Battle of Tertry in 687, each mayor of the palace, who had formerly been the king's chief household official, effectively held power until in 751, with the approval of the Pope and the nobility, Pepin the Short deposed the last Merovingian king Childeric III and had himself crowned.
It was highly ritualistic.
* '''' in Malayalam
Most of the gods were "worldly", possessing form and having connections with specific objects, in contrast to the God of Christianity.
Following the collapse of Rome in the West, the Frankish tribes were united under the Merovingians, who succeeded in conquering most of Gaul in the 6th century, which greatly increased their power.
The unification achieved by the Merovingians ensured the continuation of what has become known as the Carolingian Renaissance.
To the Romans, Celts, and Suebi, the Franks must have seemed alike: they looked the same and spoke the same language, so that '''' became the name by which the people were known.
Following the precedents of Edward Gibbon and Jacob Grimm, the name of the Franks has been linked with the word ''frank'' in English.
The commanders of the local levies were always different from the commanders of the urban garrisons.
It did not survive as such.
Internecine feuding occurred during the reigns of the brothers Sigebert I and Chilperic I, which was largely fuelled by the rivalry of their queens, Brunhilda and Fredegunda, and which continued during the reigns of their sons and their grandsons.
In the late 6th century, during the wars instigated by Fredegund and Brunhilda, the Merovingian monarchs introduced a new element into their militaries: the local levy.
Radulf of Thuringia called up the levy for a war against Sigebert III in 640.
In 496, Clovis I, who had married a Burgundian Catholic named Clotilda in 493, was baptised by Saint Remi after a decisive victory over the Alemanni at the Battle of Tolbiac.
The language of the Franks assimilated to Gallo-Roman: the extent to which Gallo-Roman was influenced by Frankish and what Frankish features were adopted have long been questions of scholarly debate.
It includes Old High and Old Low Franconian dialects.
Although a ruler's aims depended upon the political alliances of his family, the leading families of Francia shared the same basic beliefs and ideas of government, which had both Roman and Germanic roots.
On a number of Greek islands, Catholics are still referred to as  ('''') or "Franks", for instance on Syros, where they are called  ('''').
Often the former were commanded by the counts of the districts.
General levies could also be made within the still-pagan trans-Rhenish stem duchies on the orders of a monarch.
The Franks are considered to be the descendants of the original Rhinelanders (''Germani Cisrhenani'') who spoke a single language.
This empire would gradually evolve into the state of France and the Holy Roman Empire.
The later period is called Carolingian art, or, especially in architecture, pre-Romanesque.
The Saxons, Alemanni and Thuringii all had the institution of the levy and the Frankish monarchs could depend upon their levies until the mid-7th century, when the stem dukes began to sever their ties to the monarchy.
The ''Chronicle of St. Denis'' relates that, following Clovis' conversion, a number of pagans who were unhappy with this turn of events rallied around Ragnachar, who had played an important role in Clovis' initial rise to power.
Along the Rhine itself were a number of cities constituting the interface between Roman and Germanic civilisation.
It is traditionally assumed that Frank comes from the Germanic word for "javelin" (such as in Old English '''' or Old Norse '''').
By the 490s, he had conquered all the Frankish kingdoms to the west of the River Maas except for the Ripuarian Franks and was in a position to make the city of Paris his capital.
Modern French began as the language of the province of Neustria in Northern France, which was created by the Franks after the Roman administration departed from northern Gaul.
Now the iron head of this weapon was thick and exceedingly sharp on both sides, while the wooden handle was very short.
Fighting on foot is both habitual and a national custom and they are proficient in this.
The Salian Franks lived on Roman-held soil between the Rhine, Scheldt, Meuse, and Somme rivers in what is now Northern France, Belgium and the southern Netherlands.
Fredegar stated that Theudemer, named king of the Franks by Gregory, was descended from Priam, Friga and Francio.
A number of small baptistries can be seen in Southern France: as these fell out of fashion, they were not updated and have subsequently survived as they were.
In their civil wars, the Merovingian kings concentrated on the holding of fortified places and the use of siege engines.
Merovingian society had a militarised nature.
Charles the Bald was given West Francia, which would later become France, Louis the German received the eastern lands, which would later become Germany and Lothair I was given Middle Francia, which consisted of Lotharingia, Provence and Northern Italy.
According to Michel Rouche, "Frankish judges devoted as much care to a case involving the theft of a dog as Roman judges did to cases involving the fiscal responsibility of '''', or municipal councilors".
Frankish soldiers such as Magnentius, Silvanus and Arbitio held command positions in the Roman army during the mid 4th century.
They can be used, if necessary, for throwing like a javelin, and also in hand to hand combat.
They have neither bows nor slings, no missile weapons except the double edged axe and the angon which they use most often.
The Romans diverted the Rhine into the Yssel through a canal, which emptied into an inland lagoon.
Perhaps the Byzantine writers considered the Frankish horse to be insignificant relative to the Greek cavalry, which is probably accurate.
Gallo-Romans south of the River Loire and clergy remained subject to traditional Roman law.
The Franks under the Merovingians melded Germanic custom with Romanised organisation and several important tactical innovations.
Low Frankish, or Dietsch, is not identical to Dutch, which is subdivided into dialects.
Germanic law was overwhelmingly concerned with the protection of individuals and less concerned with protecting the interests of the state.
According to the ancient writers, the Franks emerged at the first half of the 3rd century from a number of earlier, smaller Germanic groups: the Sicambri, Chamavi, Bructeri, Chatti, Chattuarii, Ampsivarii, Tencteri and the Ubii, who inhabited the Rhine valley from the Yssel (which flows from the Rhine) between , (later the Zuiderzee now the IJsselmeer) and Mainz.
The '''' was probably based on the '''', a map of twenty years' labour commissioned by Augustus and then kept by the Roman's treasury department for the assessment of taxes.
Immediately beneath the Frankish king in the military hierarchy were the '''', his sworn followers, who were generally 'old soldiers' in service away from court.
They do not know the use of the coat of mail or greaves and the majority leave the head uncovered, only a few wear the helmet.
These changes reached beyond the Franks; the coastal Germanics living as far north as the Baltic Sea spoke Low German, while High German prevailed up to the borders of the Slavic states to the south and east.
Old Frankish was very nearly an entirely oral means of communication, as far as can be judged from the surviving writings.
At this time the Franks, hearing that both the Goths and Romans had suffered severely by the war&nbsp;... forgetting for the moment their oaths and treaties&nbsp;... (for this nation in matters of trust is the most treacherous in the world), they straightway gathered to the number of one hundred thousand under the leadership of Theudebert I and marched into Italy: they had a small body of cavalry about their leader, and these were the only ones armed with spears, while all the rest were foot soldiers having neither bows nor spears, but each man carried a sword and shield and one axe.
The Frankish state consolidated its hold over the majority of western Europe by the end of the 8th century, developing into the Carolingian Empire.
Some few writers consider the Old period to extend earlier to the Proto-Germanics, but this usage is inconsistent with the naming conventions of Frankish.
Frankish incursions over the Rhine became so frequent that the Romans began to settle the Franks on their borders in order to control them.
The phases of the complete languages have analogous counterparts among the Frankish dialects as well.
In wars waged against external foes, the objective was typically the acquisition of booty or the enforcement of tribute.
Latin was the written language of Gaul before and during the Frankish period (e.g.
Its author described how 12,000 Trojans, led by Priam and Antenor, sailed from Troy to the River Don in Russia and—with a total disregard of geography—to Pannonia, which is on the River Danube, settling near the Sea of Azov.
The peoples east of the Rhine&nbsp;– Franks, Saxons and even Wends&nbsp;– who were sometimes called upon to serve, wore rudimentary armour and carried weapons such as spears and axes.
Where is that ever untrustworthy fickleness?"). ''''
In contemporary Israel, the Yiddish word  ('''') has, by a curious etymological development, come to refer to Mizrahi Jews and carries a strong pejorative connotation.
Beyond Mainz is Suevia, the country of the Suebi, and beyond that is Alamannia, the country of the Alamanni.
While the above quotations have been used as a statement of the military practices of the Frankish nation in the 6th century and have even been extrapolated to the entire period preceding Charles Martel's reforms (early mid-8th century), post-Second World War historiography has emphasised the inherited Roman characteristics of the Frankish military from the date of the beginning of the conquest of Gaul.
These were moved to the nearby region of Toxandria.
The earliest churches seem to have been timber-built, with larger examples being of a basilica type.
The Holy Roman Empire continued as predominantly German, while the western Franks populated the predominantly Gallo-Roman nation of France and the mixed duchies such as Eastern Flanders (Brabant) and modern day Wallonia.
Although Roman forces managed to pacifiy them, they failed to expel the Franks, who continued to be feared as pirates at least until 358, when, according to the Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus, Julian the Apostate allowed the Franks to settle as '''' in Toxandria.
The meetings were a show of strength on behalf of the monarch and a way for him to retain loyalty among his troops.
Under the so-called '''', the levies disappeared by mid-century in Austrasia and later in Burgundy and Neustria.
Some linguists (among them Drs.
The Franks, being situated on and within the border of Roman Gaul and across the channel from Roman Britain, were the most educated, literate and literarily prolific of all the Germanics of the Old High German and Old Dutch language phases.
* ''Phirangee'' in some other Indian languages
Middle Francia was not united, and by the next generation it had disintegrated into smaller lordships, which West Francia and East Francia fought for control over.
The influence of the Arnulfing clan of Austrasia ensured that the centre of political gravity in the kingdom gradually shifted eastwards to the Rhineland.
Old High German contains a dialect, Old High Franconian (Old East Franconian).
Only in Aquitaine, which was fast becoming independent of the central Frankish monarchy, did complex military institutions persist into the 8th century.
The conversion of all under Frankish rule required a considerable amount of time and effort.
Following the military successes of his son and successor Dagobert I, royal authority rapidly declined under a series of kings, traditionally known as ''les rois fainéants''.
Cavalry formed a large segment of an army, but troops readily dismounted to fight on foot.
Latin served in place of translation; with it all educated and administrative Europe spoke the same language.
The other aspects of the Merovingian military, mostly Roman in origin or innovations of powerful kings, disappeared from the scene by the 8th century.
Three distinct subkingdoms emerged: Austrasia, Neustria and Burgundy, each of which developed independently and sought to exert influence over the others.
The Church sometimes had an uneasy relationship with the Merovingian kings, whose claim to rule depended on a mystique of royal descent and who tended to revert to the polygamy of their pagan ancestors.
The Chinese called the Portuguese '''' 佛郎機 ("Franks") in the 1520s at the Battle of Tunmen and Battle of Xicaowan.
By the end of the 5th century, the Salian Franks had largely moved to a territory (what is now the Netherlands south of the Rhine, Belgium, and northern France), where they formed a kingdom that eventually gave rise to the Merovingian dynasty.
The language originally had been a form of Gallo-Roman spoken chiefly by the , but as the Franks gradually settled there it evolved into Old French.
From the narrative of Ammianus Marcellinus it is evident that both Frankish and Alamannic tribal armies were organised along Roman lines.
Many other important buildings existed, such as the monasteries of Centula or St Gall, or the old Cologne Cathedral, since rebuilt.
Eumenius mentions Constantius as having "killed, expelled, captured and kidnapped" the Franks who had settled there and others who had crossed the Rhine, using the term '''' for the first time.
Germanics who settled south of the Rhine without Roman authority were punished.
Other Franks, from Mainz to Duisburg, raided across the Rhine and at some point acquired the name Ripuarians, or "river people".
Information about the imperial divisions of Gaul probably derives from it.
A formulary written by Marculf about 700 AD described a continuation of national identities within a mixed population when it stated that "all the peoples who dwell in the official's province, Franks, Romans, Burgundians and those of other nations, live&nbsp;... according to their law and their custom."
Examples of derived words include:
They agree that the Franks were primarily infantrymen, threw axes and carried a sword and shield.
Some Franks raided Roman territory, while other Frankish tribes joined the Roman troops of Gaul.
The sons of Louis the Pious fought a civil war after Louis' death, which ended when the Frankish lands were divided between them.
It is a 13th-century copy of a 4th or 5th century document that reflects information from the 3rd century.
In fact, some modern historians have hypothesised that the Franks possessed so numerous a body of horses that they could use them to plough fields and thus were agriculturally technologically advanced over their neighbours.
The 5th, 6th and 7th centuries saw two major waves of hermitism in the Frankish world, which led to legislation requiring that all monks and hermits follow the Rule of St Benedict.
A decade later the Romans killed Priam and drove away Marcomer and Sunno, the sons of Priam and Antenor, and the other Franks.
At the end of the Proto-Germanic period, the language must have been divided into dialects, including Frankish, or Franconian, as well as the predecessors of Frisian and Saxon.
The Frankish military establishment incorporated many of the pre-existing Roman institutions in Gaul, especially during and after the conquests of Clovis I in the late 5th and early 6th centuries.
* '''' ("blonde"), '''' ("temperament/al") in Bahasa Indonesia
All high-ranking men had ''pueri''.
The local levy applied only to a city and its environs.
Throughout Gaul, the descendants of Roman soldiers continued to wear their uniforms and perform their ceremonial duties.
The kingdom of Tournai eventually came to dominate its neighbours, probably because of its association with Aegidius, the '''' of northern Gaul.
The term ''Frangistan'' ("Land of the Franks") was used by Muslims to refer to Christian Europe and was commonly used over several centuries in Iran and the Ottoman Empire.
Claudius Ptolemy's two maps of Germany portrayed '''' on the left bank of the Rhine, which was populated by Germanics, including those who had occupied the region before the Romans, and '''' on the other side of the river, which acted as the Roman frontier.
Jordanes, in ''Getica'' mentions the Riparii as auxiliaries of Flavius Aetius during the Battle of Châlons in 451: ''''  The '''' may not have been the Ripuarian Franks, as they do not appear for certain under that name until their final subjugation by Clovis I.
Though the text remains unclear as to the precise pretext, Clovis had Ragnachar executed.
Tensions between the Empire and the Franks existed because of this artificial division: the Franks saw no reason why they should be kept from settling on either side of the river and eventually they convinced the Emperors to allow this to happen.
The objects produced by the main centres of the Carolingian Renaissance, which represent a transformation from that of the earlier period, have survived in far greater quantity.
By the 5th century, phonetic developments of Futhark indicate that West Germanic — which included the Frankish dialect—was briefly distinct from East Germanic, but not from North Germanic.
Within a few centuries it had eclipsed the names of the original tribes, though the older names have survived in some place-names, such as Hesse, which originates from the Chatti tribe.
These dialects persisted through the evolution of German and Dutch.
The tactic of subterfuge was employed endlessly.
During the Mongol Empire in the 13-14th centuries, the Mongols used the term "Franks" to designate Europeans.
