Instead, he focused on musical interpretation with a combination of anecdote, metaphor and wit.
It is on a paste-over in Liszt's hand.
Although Liszt and Müller-Hartung were on friendly terms, Liszt took no active part in that foundation.
Olga Janina had joined the circle around Liszt in 1869 in Rome.
In winter, when he was in Budapest, some students of his Weimar circle joined him there.
His piano works are often marked by their difficulty.
Although there was a period in which many considered Liszt's works "flashy" or superficial, it is now held that many of Liszt's compositions such as ''Nuages gris'', ''Les jeux d'eaux à la villa d'Este'', etc., which contain parallel fifths, the whole-tone scale, parallel diminished and augmented triads, and unresolved dissonances, anticipated and influenced twentieth-century music like that of Debussy, Ravel and Béla Bartók.
He was also forming a friendship with a third composer who influenced him, Frédéric Chopin; under his influence Liszt's poetic and romantic side began to develop.
Their composition proved daunting, requiring a continual process of creative experimentation that included many stages of composition, rehearsal and revision to reach a version where different parts of the musical form seemed balanced.
In letters to friends, Liszt afterwards announced that he would retreat to a solitary living.
According to his autobiography ''Meine Welt'', he had found it imposing when Arthur Friedheim was thundering Liszt's ''Lucrezia-Fantasy''.
After the first performance the Offertory was added, and two years later the Gradual.
There were also private donations to hospitals, schools and charitable organizations such as the Leipzig Musicians Pension Fund.
While all of those literary works were published under Liszt's name, it is not quite clear which parts of them he had written himself.
While it is commonly claimed that Liszt wrote that motif ten years before Wagner started work on his masterpiece, it has turned out that this is not true: the original version of "Ich möchte hingehn" was composed in 1844 or 1845.
In winter 1835–36, during Liszt's stay in Geneva, about half a dozen further essays followed.
He spent the winter with the princess at her estate in Woronince.
In the beginning of 1837, Liszt published a review of some piano works of Sigismond Thalberg.
Liszt's intent, according to Hugh MacDonald in the ''New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (1980)'', was for these single-movement works "to display the traditional logic of symphonic thought."
The following year, there were no students seeking lessons for matriculation in Hungarian music.
His repertoire at this time consisted primarily of pieces in the style of the brilliant Viennese school, such as concertos by Hummel and works by his former teacher Czerny, and his concerts often included a chance for the boy to display his prowess in improvisation.
Liszt fell down the stairs of a hotel in Weimar on July 2, 1881.
Liszt's inclusion in the Diabelli project—he was described in it as "an 11 year old boy, born in Hungary"—was almost certainly at the instigation of Czerny, his teacher and also a participant.
Since the early 1860s there were attempts of some of Liszt's Hungarian contemporaries to have him settled with a position in Hungary.
Franz Liszt composed about six dozen original songs with piano accompaniment.
More examples can be found in the third volume of Liszt's ''Années de Pélerinage''.
Unfortunately, this treatise has been lost.
Liszt was the only child composer in the anthology.
In a note he added the remark that he had taken the connotation "student" in its widest sense.
Until his death in 1886 there would have been several hundred people who in some sense may have been regarded as his students.
His last stay was from January 30 to March 12, 1886.
But it would be possible to take means like harmony, modulation, rhythm, instrumentation and others to let a musical motif endure a fate.
In March 1875 Liszt was nominated as President.
Most of the concerts at this time were shared with other artists, and as a result Liszt also often accompanied singers, participated in chamber music, or performed works with an orchestra in addition to his own solo part.
After she had played a single piece, without Liszt's saying a word about it, she was nominated as Liszt's student by her husband.
Astonishingly, the names of Aladár Juhász and Károly Aggházy are missing in Nohl's catalogue, although both had been among Liszt's favourite students at the Hungarian Academy.
Lenz, from St. Petersburg, had met Liszt already at the end of 1828.
It developed into an important form of program music in the second half of the 19th century.
It might have been meant as allusion to Emil Sauer, who had in Moscow studied with Nikolai Rubinstein.
Some, such as Sigismond Thalberg and Alexander Dreyschock, focused on specific aspects of technique (e.g.
Some of them joined the lessons which he gave in summer in Weimar.
It appears that both her husband and the Tsar of Russia had managed to quash permission for the marriage at the Vatican.
Among his pupils was Valerie Boissier, whose mother Caroline kept a careful diary of the lessons.
Liszt also wrote essays about Berlioz and the symphony ''Harold in Italy'', Robert and Clara Schumann, John Field's nocturnes, songs of Robert Franz, a planned Goethe foundation at Weimar, and other subjects.
The following year he fell in love with one of his pupils, Caroline de Saint-Cricq, the daughter of Charles X's minister of commerce, Pierre de Saint-Cricq.
In 1886 there was still no class for sacral music, but there were classes for solo and chorus singing, piano, violin, cello, organ and composition.
On July&nbsp;31, 1865, he received the four minor orders of porter, lector, exorcist, and acolyte.
3 "Organ Symphony" to Liszt; it had premiered in London only a few weeks before the death of its dedicatee.
Liszt's transcriptions of Schubert songs, his fantasies on operatic melodies, and his piano arrangements of symphonies by Berlioz and Beethoven are other well-known examples of piano transcriptions.
There are few, if any, good sources that give an impression of how Liszt really sounded from the 1820s.
That logic, embodied in sonata form as musical development, was traditionally the unfolding of latent possibilities in given themes in rhythm, melody and harmony, either in part or in their entirety, as they were allowed to combine, separate and contrast with one another.
From 1845 he was also honorary member of the lodge "Modestia cum Libertate" at Zurich and 1870 of the lodge in Pest (Budapest-Hungary).
Hans von Bülow admitted that Liszt's transcription of his ''Dante Sonett'' "Tanto gentile" was much more refined than the original he himself had composed.
On April 19, 1851, he was ordained as a priest.
Urhan also wrote music that was anti-classical and highly subjective, with titles such as ''Elle et moi, La Salvation angélique'' and ''Les Regrets'', and may have whetted the young Liszt's taste for musical romanticism.
Most important for an understanding of his development is the article series "De la situation des artistes" ("On the situation of artists") which was published in the Parisian ''Gazette musicale'' in 1835.
In his presence, she performed his piano concertos in E-flat and A Major as well as further examples of his works.
The relative obscurity of the vast majority of his works may be explained by the immense number of pieces he composed, and the level of technical difficulty which was present in much of his composition.
Liszt's piano works are usually divided into two categories.
Honours were showered on him and he met with adulation wherever he went.
The term was coined by the publisher Frederick Beale, who suggested it for Liszt's concert at the Hanover Square Rooms in London on June 9, 1840, even though Liszt had given concerts all by himself already by March 1839.
In spring 1844 the couple finally separated.
He had introduced himself by playing Thalberg's Fantasy Op.&nbsp;6 on melodies from Meyerbeer's opera "Robert le diable".
Agnes Street-Klindworth had in 1853 arrived in Weimar, where she received lessons in piano playing from Liszt and lessons in composition from Peter Cornelius.
Besides Liszt's master students there was a crowd of those who could at best reach only moderate abilities.
Also characteristic are the "Via crucis" of 1878, as well as ''Unstern!
Liszt's public debut in Vienna on December 1, 1822, at a concert at the "Landständischer Saal", was a great success.
No earlier than 40 years later the Academy was renamed to "Franz Liszt Akademie".
The Academy was officially opened on November 14, 1875 under Liszt's colleagues Ferenc Erkel, the director, Kornél Ábrányi and Robert Volkmann and Liszt himself came in March 1876 to give some lessons and a charity concert.
Liszt's own point of view regarding programme music can for the time of his youth be taken from the preface of the ''Album d'un voyageur'' (1837).
The review provoked a huge scandal.
She persuaded him to concentrate on composition, which meant giving up his career as a travelling virtuoso.
During the Weimar years it was the Princess Wittgenstein who helped him.
He found it at the monastery ''Madonna del Rosario'', just outside Rome, where on June 20, 1863, he took up quarters in a small, Spartan apartment.
During winter 1835–36 they were Liszt's colleagues at the Conservatoire at Geneva.
Several of Liszt's master students, however, were disappointed with him.
Under the influence of both, Liszt's creative output exploded.
Sipos had become Liszt's student in 1858 in Weimar, after Liszt had heard him playing at a concert and invited him.
Thus, a strong expression is often followed by a sense of fatigue and dejection, a kind of coldness, because this is the way nature works.
Liszt wrote transcriptions for piano of a wide variety of music.
In 1833, Liszt began his relationship with the Countess Marie d'Agoult.
He was merely an amateur with a repertoire of pieces such as Chopin's Nocturne Op.
In Nohl's catalogue he is not even mentioned.
40 and Liszt's ''Sonnambula-Fantasy''.
"As an artist, you do not rake in a million marks without performing some sacrifice on the altar of Art," Liszt told his biographer Lina Ramann.
He preferred to play either on a Bösendorfer or C. Bechstein piano, since they were the only instruments capable of withstanding his tremendously powerful playing.
His performance commenced with Handel's Fugue in E minor, which was played by Liszt with an avoidance of everything approaching to meretricious ornament, and indeed scarcely any additions, except a multitude of ingeniously contrived and appropriate harmonies, casting a glow of colour over the beauties of the composition, and infusing into it a spirit which from no other hand it ever before received.
In such cases, Liszt's lessons changed nothing.
He had many discussions with the Abbé de Lamennais, who acted as his spiritual father, and also with Chrétien Urhan, a German-born violinist who introduced him to the Saint-Simonists.
During this time he also helped raise the profile of the exiled Wagner by conducting the overtures of his operas in concert, Liszt and Wagner would have a profound friendship that lasted until Wagner's death in Venice in 1883.
After this ordination he was often called ''Abbé'' Liszt.
He was promoted to the second degree and elected master as member of the lodge "Zur Einigkeit", in Berlin.
Since a piece of music could also evoke a mood, a mysterious resemblance with the landscape could be imagined.
He also wrote articles championing Berlioz and Wagner.
Liszt taught at the newly founded Geneva Conservatory, wrote a manual of piano technique (later lost) and contributed essays for the Paris ''Revue et gazette musicale''.
Since in the second half of 1858 Liszt was preparing his songs for publication, and he just at that time received the first act of Wagner's ''Tristan'', it is most likely that the version on the paste-over was a quotation from Wagner.
Liszt was one of the most noted teachers of the 19th century.
In 1833 he made transcriptions of several works by Berlioz, including the ''Symphonie fantastique''.
One of them that was slated to be published under the pseudonym "Emm Prym" was about Liszt's own works.
2 in B minor for piano, composed in 1853.
Also missing are the names of Agnes Street-Klindworth and Olga Janina.
Pieces like the "2nd Mephisto-Waltz" are unconventional because of their numerous repetitions of short motives.
Schlesinger, however, following the advice of Berlioz, did not publish it.
On some occasions, Liszt took part in Rome's musical life.
This anthology, commissioned by Anton Diabelli, includes 50 variations on his waltz by 50 different composers (Part II), Part I being taken up by Beethoven's 33 variations on the same theme, which are now separately better known simply as his ''Diabelli Variations'', Op.&nbsp;120.
In any case, a programme should be added to a piece of music only if it was necessarily needed for an adequate understanding of that piece.
In July 1854 Liszt stated in his essay about Berlioz and ''Harold in Italy'' that not all music was programme music.
The largest and best-known portion of Liszt's music is his original piano work.
Cohen, who from George Sand received the nickname "Puzzi", developed into a very successful pianist.
During the Weimar years, Liszt wrote a series of essays about operas, leading from Gluck to Wagner.
Also Hans von Bülow, since the 1860s, had more and more drifted towards a direction which was not only different from Liszt's, but opposite to it.
Frequently played works include Weber's ''Konzertstück'', Beethoven's Emperor Concerto and Choral Fantasy, and Liszt's reworking of the ''Hexameron'' for piano and orchestra.
In summer 1842 he was in Paris again where he received further lessons from Liszt.
In 1861 Sipos returned to Budapest, where in 1875 he founded a music school.
:Without any reserve I completely subscribe to the rule of which you so kindly want to remind me, that those musical works which are in a general sense following a programme must take effect on imagination and emotion, independent of any programme.
The countess returned to Paris with the children, while Liszt gave six concerts in Vienna, then toured Hungary.
He composed practically nothing in these years.
Liszt was viewed by his contemporaries as the greatest virtuoso of his time (although Liszt stated that Charles-Valentin Alkan "had the finest technique of any pianist" known to him).
Until the end of his life, however, it was Liszt's point of view that it was he who was responsible for the contents of those literary works.
Liszt also did not like to hear his own Polonaise No.
Examples for the first category are works such as the piece Harmonies poétiques et religieuses of May 1833 and the Piano Sonata in B minor (1853).
(Latin: Missa coronationalis)
The series had been projected for three volumes, consisting of six songs each, but only two volumes appeared.
It has been debated to what extent he realized his promise, however.
Because of this, he kept uncertain hours and also took up smoking and drinking—all habits he would continue throughout his life.
Alexander Winterberger
As consequence, almost none of them paid any charge at the Academy.
He wrote the ''Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung'', urging Kullak's sons to create an endowment for needy musicians, as Liszt himself frequently did.
August Göllerich published a voluminous catalogue of them.
the "three-hand effect" and octaves, respectively).
As he told Lina Ramann, "I carry a deep sadness of the heart which must now and then break out in sound."
In fact, the Academy was still the winner, since Liszt gave much money from his taking part in charity concerts.
While showing extremely creative amendments to sonata form, Liszt used compositional devices such as cyclic form, motifs and thematic transformation to lend these works added coherence.
One of the most detailed descriptions of his playing from this time comes from the winter of 1831/1832, during which he was earning a living primarily as a teacher in Paris.
On the one hand, there are "original works", and on the other hand "transcriptions", "paraphrases" or "fantasies" on works by other composers.
"Années" contains some pieces which are loose transcriptions of Liszt's own earlier compositions; the first "year" recreates his early pieces of "Album d'un voyageur", while the second book includes a resetting of his own song transcriptions once separately published as "Tre sonetti di Petrarca" ("Three sonnets of Petrarch").
In spite of the conditions under which Liszt had been appointed as "Königlicher Rat", he neither directed the orchestra of the National Theatre, nor did he permanently settle in Hungary.
'', ''Nuages gris'', and the two works entitled ''La lugubre gondola'' of the 1880s.
After attending an April 20, 1832, charity concert, for the victims of a Parisian cholera epidemic, organised by Niccolò Paganini, Liszt became determined to become as great a virtuoso on the piano as Paganini was on the violin.
Every year it was Liszt alone who could decide which one of the students should receive the money.
In 1881 a new edition of Liszt's book about the Romanis and their music in Hungary appeared.
The following year, Liszt took up a long-standing invitation of Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna of Russia to settle at Weimar, where he had been appointed ''Kapellmeister Extraordinaire'' in 1842, remaining there until 1861.
Regarding Liszt's playing a Beethoven Sonata, however, he wrote, Liszt had at least given a good performance as actor.
A year later he became novice of a Carmelite convent.
At a later stage, Liszt experimented with "forbidden" things such as parallel 5ths in the "Csárdás macabre" and atonality in the ''Bagatelle sans tonalité'' ("Bagatelle without Tonality").
Liszt died in Bayreuth, Germany, on July 31, 1886, at the age of 74, officially as a result of pneumonia, which he may have contracted during the Bayreuth Festival hosted by his daughter Cosima.
His chief motive in doing so, especially with the ''Symphonie'', was to help the poverty-stricken Berlioz, whose symphony remained unknown and unpublished.
Examples of students from this period are Johann Nepumuk Dunkl and Wilhelm von Lenz.
The 1860s were a period of great sadness in Liszt's private life.
Liszt bore the expense of publishing the transcription himself and played it many times to help popularise the original score.
On December 13, 1859, he lost his 20-year-old son Daniel, and on September 11, 1862, his 26-year-old daughter Blandine also died.
Wagner held strong value towards Liszt and his musicality, once rhetorically stating "Do you know a musician who is more musical than Liszt?
He gave lessons to a number of pianists, including the great virtuoso Hans von Bülow, who married Liszt's daughter Cosima in 1857 (years later, she would marry Richard Wagner).
In 1886 a similar catalogue would have been much longer, including names such as Eugen d'Albert, Walter Bache, Carl Lachmund, Moriz Rosenthal, Emil Sauer, Alexander Siloti, Conrad Ansorge, William Dayas, August Göllerich, Bernhard Stavenhagen, August Stradal, José Vianna da Motta and István Thomán.
Women fought over his silk handkerchiefs and velvet gloves, which they ripped to shreds as souvenirs.
The first 12 symphonic poems were composed in the decade 1848–58 (though some use material conceived earlier); one other, ''Von der Wiege bis zum Grabe'' (''From the Cradle to the Grave''), followed in 1882.
Other pieces such as the "Marche funèbre, En mémoire de Maximilian I, Empereur du Mexique" ("Funeral march, In memory of Maximilian I, Emperor of Mexico") composed in 1867 are, however, without stylistic parallel in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Nicolaus Neilissoff
Also noted were the extravagant liberties he could take with the text of a score at this time.
During a couple of months in summers 1884 and 1885 he studied with Liszt at Weimar.
Liszt did not respect this, however, and in the end the Minister resigned.
According to this, Hungarian music was identical with the music played by the Hungarian Romanis.
According to a letter to Monsieur de Mancy on December 23, 1829, his schedule was so full of lessons that each day, from half-past eight in the morning till 10 at night, he had scarcely breathing time.
To another who blurred the rhythm in Liszt's ''Gnomenreigen'' (usually done by playing the piece too fast in the composer's presence): "There you go, mixing salad again."
On June 24, 1872, the composer and conductor Karl Müller-Hartung founded an "Orchesterschule" ("Orchestra School") at Weimar.
In most cases the manuscripts have disappeared so that it is difficult to determine which of Liszt's literary works were actually works of his own.
Paris in the 1830s had become the nexus for pianistic activities, with dozens of pianists dedicated to perfection at the keyboard.
Sophie Menter-Popper
When he found out about the Great Fire of Hamburg, which raged for three days during May 1842 and destroyed much of the city, he gave concerts in aid of the thousands of homeless there.
Two years later he was asked to do the same in Budapest at the Hungarian Music Academy.
Berlioz's music made a strong impression on Liszt, especially later when he was writing for orchestra.
Liszt had also claimed in this work that Semitic people, among them the Romanis, had no genuine creativity.
This set of three suites ranges from the virtuosity of the Suisse Orage (Storm) to the subtle and imaginative visualisations of artworks by Michelangelo and Raphael in the second set.
An early example is the melodrama "Der traurige Mönch" ("The sad monk") after a poem by Nikolaus Lenau, composed in the beginning of October 1860.
Liszt also worked until at least 1885 on a treatise for modern harmony.
There were some pieces which Liszt famously refused to hear at his masterclasses.
Liszt offered his students little technical advice, expecting them to "wash their dirty linen at home," as he phrased it.
As special case, Liszt also made piano arrangements of his own instrumental and vocal works.
On January 13, 1886, while Claude Debussy was staying at the Villa Medici in Rome, Liszt met him there with Paul Vidal and Victor Herbert.
On May 9, 1839, Liszt's and the countess's only son, Daniel, was born, but that autumn relations between them became strained.
To this end, he combined elements of overture and symphony with descriptive elements, approaching symphonic first movements in form and scale.
Ilonka Ravasz was since winter 1875–76 one of Liszt's most gifted students at the newly founded Royal Academy for Music at Budapest.
In this sense the music would not paint the landscape, but it would match the landscape in a third category, the mood.
The following catalogue by Ludwig Nohl, headed with "Die Hauptschüler Liszts" ("Liszt's main students"), was approved in September 1881 and, with regard to the order of the names, corrected, by Liszt.
In addition to essays, Liszt wrote a biography of his fellow composer Frédéric Chopin, ''Life of Chopin'', as well as a book about the Romanis (Gypsies) and their music in Hungary.
The last-mentioned eventually contributed to Liszt's death.
Since the Academy needed the money, there was a ministerial order of February 13, 1884, according to which all those who took part in Liszt's lessons had to pay an annual charge of 30 Gulden.
This part of his career commenced after his father's death in August 1827.
She eventually wished to marry Liszt, but since she had been previously married and her husband, Russian military officer Prince Nikolaus zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Ludwigsburg (1812–1864), was still alive, she had to convince the Roman Catholic authorities that her marriage to him had been invalid.
", and in 1856 stating "I feel thoroughly contemptible as a musician, whereas you, as I have now convinced myself, are the greatest musician of all times."
Liszt also wanted to avoid creating carbon copies of himself; rather, he believed in preserving artistic individuality.
According to Liszt's impression, she had rare and admirable musical talents.
Until then, due to World War I, Liszt's Europe and also his Hungary had died.
By retiring from the concert platform at 35, while still at the height of his powers, Liszt succeeded in keeping the legend of his playing untarnished.
Liszt told Friedheim that the time was not yet ripe to publish the manuscript, titled ''Sketches for a Harmony of the Future''.
Most of all, he wants truth in musical sentiment, and so he makes a psychological study of his emotions to convey them as they are.
In spring 1844, in Dresden, Liszt met the young Hans von Bülow, his later son-in-law.
Liszt was invited back to Weimar in 1869 to give master classes in piano playing.
He was buried on August 3, 1886, in the municipal cemetery of Bayreuth in accordance with his wishes.
He also inherited from Berlioz the diabolic quality of many of his works.
