As the 1852 presidential election approached, the Democrats were divided by the slavery issue, though most of the "Barnburners" who had left the party with Van Buren to form the Free Soil Party had returned.
When word reached New Hampshire of the result, Pierce found it difficult to believe, and his wife fainted.
After briefly reading law with former New Hampshire Governor Levi Woodbury, a family friend, in Portsmouth, he spent a semester at Northampton Law School in Northampton, Massachusetts, followed by a period of study in 1826 and 1827 under Judge Edmund Parker in Amherst, New Hampshire.
Despite laws requiring funds to be held in the Treasury, large deposits remained in private banks under the Whig administrations.
The Whigs chose General Zachary Taylor, a Louisianan, whose views on most political issues were unknown.
Pierce's administration aroused sectional apprehensions when three U.S. diplomats in Europe drafted a proposal to the president to purchase Cuba from Spain for $120&nbsp;million (USD), and justify the "wresting" of it from Spain if the offer were refused.
Wanting to die at home, he returned to his plantation in Alabama on April 17 and died the next day.
New Hampshire had been a marginal state politically, but from 1832 through the mid-1850s became the most reliably Democratic state in the North, boosting Pierce's political career.
No such conspiracy existed, but a Pierce supporter, Guy S. Hopkins, sent to the ''Tribune'' a letter purporting to be from a member of the Knights of the Golden Circle, indicating that "President P." was part of a plot against the Union.
Jane had remained in Concord with her young son Frank and her newborn Benjamin for the latter part of Pierce's Senate term, and this separation had taken a toll on the family.
Pierce campaigned vigorously throughout his home state for Van Buren's re-election in the 1840 presidential election.
It also passed a tariff reduction bill he had long sought.
On March 3, 1847, Pierce was promoted to brigadier general, and took command of a brigade of reinforcements for General Scott's army, with Ransom succeeding to command of the regiment.
His Cabinet members implemented an early system of civil service examinations which was a forerunner to the Pendleton Act passed three decades later.
The British, according to Buchanan, were impressed by the message and were rethinking their policy.
Douglas and his allies planned to organize the territory and let local settlers decide whether to allow slavery.
Pierce began his presidency in mourning.
Pierce supported a resolution by Calhoun against this proposal, which Pierce considered a dangerous stepping stone to nationwide emancipation.
Jane wondered if the train accident was divine punishment for her husband's pursuit and acceptance of high office.
As a legislator, he was a passionate advocate for volunteer militias.
Pierce strongly supported the compromise, giving a well-received speech in December 1850 pledging himself to "The Union!
Pierce was a Young America expansionist who signed the Gadsden Purchase of land from Mexico and led a failed attempt to acquire Cuba from Spain.
Jane remained in New Hampshire as Pierce departed for his inauguration, which she did not attend.
The result was a political firestorm that did great damage to Pierce's presidency.
The passage of the act resulted in so much violence between groups that the territory became known as Bleeding Kansas.
Pierce's drinking worsened his health in his last years, and he grew increasingly spiritual.
Pierce grew angry, expressing sadness over Lincoln's death but denying any need for a public gesture.
He had recently become engaged and bought his first house in Hillsborough.
Gadsden negotiated a treaty with Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna in December 1853, purchasing a large swath of land to America's southwest.
Polk's most prominent cause was the annexation of Texas, an issue which caused a dramatic split between Pierce and his former ally Hale, now a U.S. Representative.
On the first ballot, he received only 122 votes, many of them from the South, to Buchanan's 135, with Douglas and Cass receiving the rest.
Pierce was hard-working and his administration largely untainted by graft, yet the legacy from those four turbulent years contributed to the tragedy of secession and civil war.
He took an interest in military pensions, seeing abundant fraud within the system, and was named chairman of the Senate Committee on Military Pensions in the Twenty-sixth Congress (1839–1841).
In Hillsborough, his law partner was Albert Baker, who had studied law under Pierce and was the brother of Mary Baker Eddy.
In June 1842 Pierce was named chairman of the State Democratic Committee.
As a militia officer himself, he had experience mustering and drilling bodies of troops.
Pierce was interred next to his wife and two of his sons in the Minot enclosure at Concord's Old North Cemetery.
The incumbent carried New Hampshire but lost the national vote to William Henry Harrison, the military hero, whose Whigs took a majority of seats in the Twenty-seventh Congress.
One topic of particular importance to Pierce was the military.
The fiasco would compromise the election for the Democrats, who lost several races.
New Hampshire Democrats felt that no one should hold one of the state's Senate seats for longer than one six-year term.
Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, at Pierce's request, led surveys with the Corps of Topographical Engineers of possible transcontinental railroad routes throughout the country.
The large Mexican Cession of land had divided the United States politically, with many in the North insisting that slavery not be allowed there (and offering the Wilmot Proviso to ensure it), while others wanted slavery barred north of the Missouri Compromise line of 36°30′ N. Both proposals were anathema to Southerners, and the controversy divided the Democrats.
He considered the depression a result of the banking system's rapid growth, amidst "the extravagance of overtrading and the wilderness of speculation".
While the administration negotiated with Britain over the Canada–US border, U.S. interests were also threatened in Central America, where the Clayton–Bulwer Treaty of 1850 had failed to keep Great Britain from expanding its influence.
His father fed him dinner and drove him part of the distance back to school before kicking him out of the carriage and ordering him to walk the rest of the way in a thunderstorm.
He never fully understood the nature or depth of Free Soil sentiment in the North.
His private law practice in his home state was a success; he was appointed U.S. Attorney for his state in 1845.
He was admitted to the bar in late 1827 and began to practice in Hillsborough.
Under the Pierce administration, Commodore Matthew C. Perry visited Japan (a venture originally planned under Fillmore) in an effort to expand trade to the East.
He was given a hero's welcome in his home state and issued his resignation from the Army, which was approved on March 20, 1848.
Also, he was frustrated at being a member of the legislative minority and wished to devote his time to his family and law practice.
He was asked by Justice Campbell to travel to Alabama and address that state's secession convention.
Pierce voted the party line on most issues.
He would often represent poor people for little or no compensation.
As the Battle of Churubusco approached, Pierce was ordered by Scott to the rear.
Buchanan had urged Pierce to consult Vice President-elect King in selecting the Cabinet, but Pierce did not do so—Pierce and King never communicated once they had been selected as candidates in June 1852.
Passage of the act coincided with the seizure of escaped slave Anthony Burns in Boston.
His military exploits elevated his popularity in New Hampshire, but his injuries and subsequent troubles in battle led to accusations of cowardice which would long follow him.
He was attacked by the New Hampshire anti-slavery ''Herald of Freedom'' as a "doughface", which had the dual meaning of "craven-spirited man" and "northerner with southern sympathies".
Part of his failure was in allowing a divided Congress to take the initiative, most disastrously with the Kansas–Nebraska Act.
He remained in the militia until 1847, and attained the rank of colonel before becoming a brigadier general in the Army during the Mexican–American War.
Pierce favored expansion and a substantial reorganization of the military.
The office of vice president remained vacant for the remainder of Pierce's term, as the Constitution then had no provision for filling the vacancy, making the Senate President pro tempore, initially David Atchison of Missouri, next in line to the presidency.
Pierce remained involved in the state Democratic Party, which was split by several issues.
Douglas and Davis convinced him to support the bill regardless.
This would repeal the Missouri Compromise of 1820, as most of it was north of the 36°30′ N line the Missouri Compromise deemed "free".
Ransom and Alonzo Jackman, Norwich faculty members and militia officers, to increase recruiting efforts and improve training and readiness.
He dispatched federal troops to break up a meeting of the Topeka government.
The move to Concord had given him more opportunities for cases, and allowed Jane a more robust community life.
Pierce, meanwhile, had begun a demanding but lucrative law partnership with Asa Fowler during congressional recesses.
Pierce's term began in March 1833, but he would not be sworn in until Congress met in December, and his attention was elsewhere.
A. Roys, sent a letter to Lincoln's Secretary of State, William H. Seward, accusing the former president of meeting with disloyal people, and saying he had heard there was a plot to overthrow the government and establish Pierce as president.
As Douglas struggled to attract southern support, Pierce backed Cushing and then Breckinridge as potential alternatives, but his priority was a united Democratic Party.
At the age of 27, he was a star of the New Hampshire Democratic Party.
Organizing the largely unsettled Nebraska Territory, which stretched from Missouri to the Rocky Mountains, and from Texas north to what is now the Canada–US border, was a crucial part of Douglas's plans for western expansion.
Northerners had been suspicious of the Gadsden Purchase, moves towards Cuba annexation, and the influence of slaveholding Cabinet members such as Davis, and saw the Nebraska bill as part of a pattern of southern aggression.
Pierce was skeptical of the bill, knowing it would result in bitter opposition from the North.
Nevertheless, Buchanan was not successful in getting the British to renounce their Central American possessions.
Hale refused to withdraw, and as a majority vote was needed for election in New Hampshire, the party split led to deadlock and a vacant House seat.
As president, Pierce simultaneously attempted to enforce neutral standards for civil service while also satisfying the diverse elements of the Democratic Party with patronage, an effort which largely failed and turned many in his party against him.
Buchanan altered course from the Pierce administration, replacing all of his appointees.
Douglas, only 43 years of age, believed that he could be nominated in 1860 if he let the older Buchanan win this time, and received assurances from Buchanan's managers that this would be the case.
He was able to negotiate a reciprocal trade treaty with Canada, to begin the opening of Japan to western trade, to add land to the Southwest, and to sign legislation for the creation of an overseas empire the Guano Islands Act.
Democratic strength in New Hampshire was also bolstered by Jackson's landslide re-election that year.
Pierce entered the Senate at a time of economic crisis, as the Panic of 1837 had begun.
The resignation in May 1836 of Senator Isaac Hill, who had been elected governor of New Hampshire, left a brief interim opening to be filled by the state legislature.
Pierce was the fifth of eight children born to Benjamin and his second wife, Anna Kendrick (his first wife Elizabeth Andrews died in childbirth, leaving a daughter).
During this time, he used his influence to improve the treatment of Davis, now a prisoner at Fortress Monroe in Virginia.
Pierce publicly opposed President Lincoln's order suspending the writ of ''habeas corpus'', arguing that even in a time of war, the country should not abandon its protection of civil liberties.
He installed John W. Geary as territorial governor, who drew the ire of pro-slavery legislators.
After Pierce died, he mostly passed from the American consciousness, except as one of a series of presidents whose disastrous tenures led to civil war.
He was honest and tenacious of his views but, as he made up his mind with difficulty and often reversed himself before making a final decision, he gave a general impression of instability.
Pierce, whose support had been slowly declining as the ballots passed, directed his supporters to break for Douglas, withdrawing his name in a last-ditch effort to defeat Buchanan.
Pierce served as a Norwich University trustee from 1841 to 1859, and received the honorary degree of LL.D.
Hopkins confessed authorship of the letter and admitted the hoax, but despite this, Seward wrote to Pierce demanding to know if the charges were true.
As abolitionism grew more vocal in the mid-1830s, Congress was inundated with petitions from anti-slavery groups seeking legislative action to restrict slavery in the United States.
It was widely expected that the 1852 Democratic National Convention would result in deadlock, with no major candidate able to win the necessary two-thirds majority.
To Pierce, who saw slavery as a question of property rather than morality, the Union was sacred; because of this, he saw the actions of abolitionists, and the more moderate Free Soilers, as divisive and as a threat to the constitutionally-guaranteed rights of southerners.
Pierce opposed the use of the federal government to prop up private industry and did not endorse the final version of the treaty, which was ratified nonetheless.
Negotiations were nearly derailed by William Walker's unauthorized expedition into Mexico, and so a clause was included charging the U.S. with combating future such attempts.
The surprise victory of dark horse Democratic candidate James K. Polk in the 1844 presidential election was welcome news to Pierce, who had befriended the former Speaker of the House while both served in Congress.
The horse then tripped into a crevice and fell, pinning Pierce underneath and leaving him with a debilitating knee injury.
Pierce's administration was further damaged when several of his diplomats issued the Ostend Manifesto, calling for the annexation of Cuba, a document which was roundly criticized.
Scott was harmed by the lack of enthusiasm of anti-slavery northern Whigs for the candidate and platform; ''New-York Tribune'' editor Horace Greeley summed up the attitude of many when he said of the Whig platform, "we defy it, execrate it, spit upon it".
On the 49th ballot, Pierce received all but six of the votes, and thus gained the Democratic nomination for president.
Pierce fully expected to be renominated by the Democrats.
He wanted a transcontinental railroad with a link from Chicago to California, through the vast western territory.
Several institutions and places have been named after Pierce, mostly in New Hampshire.
Davis also deployed the Army Corps of Engineers to supervise construction projects in the District of Columbia, including the expansion of the United States Capitol and building of the Washington Monument.
Pierce later cited this moment as "the turning-point in my life".
He continued to wrangle with Senator Hale, who was stridently anti-slavery and had opposed the war, stances that Pierce regarded as needless agitation.
The Democrats lost almost every state outside the South.
In Rome, he visited Nathaniel Hawthorne; the two men spent much time together and the author found the retired president as buoyant as ever.
Pierce took part in the Mexican–American War as a brigadier general in the Army.
Partisans found themselves unable to secure positions for their friends, which put the Democratic Party on edge and fueled bitterness between factions.
The political turmoil that followed the passage saw the short-term influence of the nativist and anti-Catholic American Party, often called the Know Nothings, and the founding of the Republican Party.
In December 1836, Pierce was elected to the full term, to commence in March 1837, becoming at age 32 one of the youngest member in Senate history to that point.
In his Cabinet appointments, Pierce sought to unite a party that was squabbling over the fruits of victory.
The Interior Department was reformed by Secretary Robert McClelland, who systematized its operations, expanded the use of paper records, and pursued fraud.
With Hill's term as senator due to expire in March 1837, the legislature also had to fill the six-year term to follow.
Two places in New Hampshire have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places specifically because of their association with Pierce.
The Franklin Pierce House in Concord, where Pierce died, was destroyed by fire in 1981, but is nevertheless listed on the register.
Most of the party had not originally supported him for the nomination, and some had allied with the Free Soil party to gain victory in local elections.
By 1831 the Democrats held a legislative majority, and Pierce was elected Speaker of the House.
After two more deadlocked ballots, Douglas's managers withdrew his name, leaving Buchanan as the clear winner.
"American foreign and commercial policy beginning in the 1890s, which eventually supplanted European colonialism by the middle of the twentieth century, owed much to the paternalism of Jacksonian Democracy cultivated in the international arena by the Presidency of Franklin Pierce."
Thus, he had little likelihood of re-election.
After leaving the White House, the Pierces remained in Washington for more than two months, staying with former Secretary of State Marcy.
Pierce also offered the seat to Benjamin, and when the Louisianan persisted in his refusal, nominated instead John Archibald Campbell, an advocate of states' rights; this would be Pierce's only Supreme Court appointment.
Geary was able to restore order in Kansas, though the electoral damage had already been done—Republicans used "Bleeding Kansas" and "Bleeding Sumner" (the brutal caning of Charles Sumner by South Carolina Representative Preston Brooks in the Senate chamber) as election slogans.
In Pierce's junior year, John P. Hale, a later political ally and then rival of Pierce's, also enrolled at Bowdoin.
'''Franklin Pierce''' (November 23, 1804October 8, 1869) was the 14th President of the United States (1853–57).
With the proposal stalled in the Senate, Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas led an effort to split it into separate bills so that each legislator could vote against the parts his state opposed without endangering the overall package.
The state's political culture grew less tolerant of banks and corporations in the wake of the Panic of 1837, and Hill was voted out of office.
Pierce's opponents caricatured him as a coward and alcoholic ("the hero of many a well-fought bottle"), who was an anti-Catholic.
The three-week journey inland was perilous, and the men fought off several attacks before joining with Scott's army in early August, in time for the Battle of Contreras.
Jane disliked Hillsborough as well, and in 1838, the Pierces relocated to the state capital, Concord, New Hampshire.
He had a brief relationship with an unknown woman in mid-1865.
He was also frustrated with the "religious bigotry" of abolitionists, who cast their political opponents as sinners.
Still interested in politics, he expressed support for Andrew Johnson's Reconstruction policy and supported the president's acquittal in his impeachment trial; he later expressed optimism for Johnson's successor, Ulysses S. Grant.
from Norwich in 1853.
In late 1832, the Democratic Party convention nominated Pierce for one of New Hampshire's five seats in the U.S. House of Representatives.
In reality his chances of winning the nomination were slim, let alone re-election.
Northerners rallied in support of Burns, but Pierce was determined to follow the Fugitive Slave Act to the letter, and dispatched federal troops to enforce the return to his Virginia owner despite furious crowds.
After Pierce gave a speech indicating that most signatories were women and children, without the vote, Calhoun apologized.
This was tantamount to election for the young Democrat, as the National Republicans had faded as a political force, while the Whigs had not yet begun to attract a large following.
Some Democrats tried again to put Pierce's name up for consideration as the 1864 presidential election unfolded, but he kept his distance; Lincoln easily won a second term.
The administration was widely disliked in the North for its position on the Kansas–Nebraska Act, and Democratic leaders were aware of Pierce's electoral vulnerability.
Pierce's father, who sought to ensure that his sons were educated, placed Pierce in a school at Hillsborough Center in childhood and sent him to the town school at Hancock at the age of 12.
This passed the House in 1836.
Perry wanted to encroach on Asia by force, but Pierce and Dobbin pushed him to remain diplomatic.
Much of his $72,000 estate (equal to $ today) went to his brother Henry's family, and to Hawthorne's children and Pierce's landlady.
David Potter concludes that the Ostend Manifesto and the Kansas–Nebraska Act were "the two great calamities of the Franklin Pierce administration&nbsp;...
To broaden his potential base of southern support as the convention approached, he wrote letters reiterating his support for the Compromise of 1850, including the controversial Fugitive Slave Act.
The young Speaker used his platform to oppose the expansion of banking, protect the state militia, and offer support to the national Democrats and Jackson's re-election effort.
In the months between Lincoln's election, and his inauguration on March 4, 1861, Pierce looked on as several southern states began plans to secede.
The incident made it look like he had fainted, causing one soldier to call for someone else to take command, "General Pierce is a damned coward."
Although he criticized those who sought to limit or end slavery, he rarely rebuked southern politicians who took extreme position or opposed northern interests.
His condition deteriorated, and Congress passed a special law, allowing him to be sworn in before the American consul in Havana on March 24.
Pierce spent the first few weeks of his term sorting through hundreds of lower-level federal positions to be filled.
Marcy received international praise for his 73-page letter defending Austrian refugee Martin Koszta, who had been captured abroad in mid-1853 by the Austrian government despite his intention to become a U.S. citizen.
In the final days of the Pierce administration, Congress passed bills to increase the pay of army officers and to build new naval vessels, also expanding the number of seamen enlisted.
He insisted that northern abolitionists stand down to avoid a southern secession, writing that the bloodshed of a civil war would "not be along Mason and Dixon's line merely", but "within our own borders in our own streets".
His inability to cope with the difficult problems that arose early in his administration caused him to lose the respect of great numbers, especially in the North, and his few successes failed to restore public confidence.
His support for the Kansas–Nebraska Act and his determination to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act helped polarize the sections.
Before long, northern newspapers accused Pierce of filling his government with pro-slavery secessionists, while southern newspapers accused him of abolitionism.
She was somewhat gaunt, and constantly ill from tuberculosis and psychological ailments.
Perry signed a modest trade treaty with the Japanese shogunate which was successfully ratified.
British consuls in the United States sought to enlist Americans for the Crimean War in 1854, in violation of neutrality laws, and Pierce eventually expelled minister Crampton and three consuls.
"I consider slavery a social and political evil," Pierce said, "and most sincerely wish that it had no existence upon the face of the earth."
Active military service was a long-held dream for Pierce, who had admired his father's and brothers' service in his youth, particularly his older brother Benjamin's, as well as that of John McNeil Jr., husband of Pierce's older half-sister Elizabeth.
President Grant, who later defended Pierce's service in the Mexican War, declared a day of national mourning.
Historian Kenneth Nivison, writing in 2010, takes a more favorable view of Pierce's foreign policy, stating that his expansionism prefaced those of later presidents William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt, who served at a time when America had the military might to make her desires stick.
Meanwhile, the Whigs were growing in congressional strength, which would leave Pierce's party with only a small majority by the end of the decade.
Gadsden was also charged with re-negotiating the provisions of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo which required the U.S. to prevent Native American raids into Mexico from New Mexico Territory.
The students rebelled and went on strike, an event Pierce was suspected of leading.
When balloting began on June 5 at the convention in Cincinnati, Ohio, Pierce expected a plurality, if not the required two-thirds majority.
By the start of 1853, King was severely ill with tuberculosis, and went to Cuba to recuperate.
Pierce's correspondence with Davis, all pre-war, revealing his deep friendship with Davis and predicting that civil war would result in insurrection in the North, was sent to the press.
Ulysses S. Grant, who had the opportunity to observe Pierce firsthand during the war, countered the allegations of cowardice in his memoirs, written several years after Pierce's death: "Whatever General Pierce's qualifications may have been for the Presidency, he was a gentleman and a man of courage.
"Who, I ask, has clothed the President with power to dictate to any one of us when we must or when we may speak, or be silent upon any subject, and especially in relation to the conduct of any public servant?
New Hampshire Democrats felt that, as the state in which their party had most consistently gained Democratic majorities, they should supply the presidential candidate.
Pierce remained in command of his brigade during the three-month occupation of the city, while frustrated with the stalling of peace negotiations, and tried to distance himself from the constant conflict between Scott and the other generals.
At the 1848 Democratic National Convention, the majority nominated former Michigan senator Lewis Cass for president, while a minority broke off to become the Free Soil Party, backing former president Van Buren.
Those from slave states had never been content with western limits on slavery, and felt it should be able to expand into territories procured with blood and treasure that had come, in part, from the South.
He alluded to his own personal tragedy, telling the crowd, "You have summoned me in my weakness, you must sustain me by your strength."
Benjamin was by then a prominent Democratic-Republican state legislator, farmer, and tavern-keeper.
He issued a circular recommending that U.S. diplomats wear "the simple dress of an American citizen" instead of the elaborate diplomatic uniforms worn in the courts of Europe, and that they only hire American citizens to work in consulates.
The political firestorm led to Pierce cutting off ties with his longtime friend, and with his law partner Fowler, who was a Hale supporter.
Later, Republican newspapers printed the Hopkins letter in spite of his admission that it was a hoax, and Pierce decided that he needed to clear his name publicly.
They both suffered severe depression afterward, which likely affected Pierce's performance as president.
The territory would be split into a northern part, Nebraska, and a southern part, Kansas, and the expectation was that Kansas would allow slavery and Nebraska would not.
Anti-immigrant fervor brought the Know-Nothings their highest numbers to that point, and some northerners were elected under the auspices of the new Republican Party.
In the state elections held in March 1828, the Adams faction withdrew their support of Benjamin Pierce, voting him out of office, but Franklin Pierce won his first election: Hillsborough town moderator, a position to which he would be elected for six consecutive years.
He spent much of that battle in the sick tent, plagued with acute diarrhea.
She abhorred politics and especially disliked Washington, D.C., creating a tension that would continue throughout Pierce's political ascent.
It was the custom at the time for candidates to not appear to seek the office, and he did no personal campaigning.
Congress reduced the Gadsden Purchase to the region now comprising southern Arizona and part of southern New Mexico; the price was cut from $15&nbsp;million to $10&nbsp;million.
The failure of Pierce, as president, to secure sectional conciliation helped bring an end to the dominance of the Democratic Party that had started with Jackson, and led to a period of over seventy years when the Republicans mostly controlled national politics.
