The management professor Peter Drucker credits Kafka with developing the first civilian hard hat while employed at the Worker's Accident Insurance Institute, but this is not supported by any document from his employer.
While he needed women and sex in his life, he had low self-confidence, felt sex was dirty, and was shy—especially about his body.
He may have suffered from an eating disorder.
According to Brod, Kafka was "tortured" by sexual desire and Kafka's biographer Reiner Stach states that his life was full of "incessant womanising" and that he was filled with a fear of "sexual failure".
This interest also served as a starting point for his growing exploration of Judaism.
Brod said that the 20th century will one day be known as the "century of Kafka".
Kafka considered committing suicide at least once, in late 1912.
On a summer trip to Weimar, Brod initiated a meeting between Kafka and Kurt Wolff; Wolff published '''' in the  at the end of 1912 (with the year given as 1913).
His father, Hermann Kafka (1852–1931), was the fourth child of Jakob Kafka, a '''' or ritual slaughterer in Osek, a Czech village with a large Jewish population located near Strakonice in southern Bohemia.
Kafka prepared a final collection of four stories for print, '''' ''(A Hunger Artist)'', which appeared in 1924 after his death, in ''''.
Breaking Bad Season 3 episode written by Peter Gould & George Mastras.
The following are examples of works across a range of literary, musical, and dramatic genres which demonstrate the extent of cultural influence:
One such instance is found in the first sentence of "The Metamorphosis".
In his early years as a writer, he was influenced by von Kleist, whose work he described in a letter to Bauer as frightening, and whom he considered closer than his own family.
A court battle began in 2008 between the sisters and the National Library of Israel, which claimed these works became the property of the nation of Israel when Brod emigrated to British Palestine in 1939.
According to Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, the themes of alienation and persecution, although present in Kafka's work, have been over-emphasised by critics.
It uses many details of experiences of his relatives who had emigrated to America and is the only work for which Kafka considered an optimistic ending.
The hopelessness and absurdity common to his works are seen as emblematic of existentialism.
He was deeply fascinated by the Jews of Eastern Europe, who he thought possessed an intensity of spiritual life that was absent from Jews in the West.
Kafka was born into a middle-class, German-speaking Jewish family in Prague, the capital of the Kingdom of Bohemia, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Pasley was the editor for '''', published in 1982, and '''', published in 1990.
In Kafka's work a character is punished although a crime has not been committed.
Before the date of the intended marriage, he took up with yet another woman.
Numerous films and television works have been described as Kafkaesque, and the style is particularly prominent in dystopian science fiction.
He took many papers, which remain unpublished, with him in suitcases to Palestine when he fled there in 1939.
Such constructions are difficult to duplicate in English, so it is up to the translator to provide the reader with the same (or at least equivalent) effect found in the original text.
Towards the end of his life Kafka sent a postcard to his friend Hugo Bergman in Tel Aviv, announcing his intention to emigrate to Palestine.
Esther Hoffe sold the original manuscript of '''' for US$2&nbsp;million in 1988 to the German Literary Archive Museum of Modern Literature in Marbach am Neckar.
and in Zürau Aphorism number 50:
In his essay ''Sadness in Palestine?!
Kafka had no intention of labeling Gregor, the protagonist of the story, as any specific thing, but instead wanted to convey Gregor's disgust at his transformation.
From the notes in these books, Kafka extracted 109 numbered pieces of text on ''Zettel'', single pieces of paper in no given order.
A 1941 edition, including a homage by Thomas Mann, spurred a surge in Kafka's popularity in the United States the late 1940s.
His diary is full of references to Yiddish writers.
Franz at age 31 moved into Valli's former apartment, quiet by contrast, and lived by himself for the first time.
His family were middle-class Ashkenazi Jews.
Brod compared Kafka to Heinrich von Kleist, noting that both writers had the ability to describe a situation realistically with precise details.
Prior to World War&nbsp;I, Kafka attended several meetings of the Klub Mladých, a Czech anarchist, anti-militarist, and anti-clerical organization.
in their literary yearbook for the art poetry ''Arkadia''.
''In the Penal Colony''
A fragment of the story "Die Aeroplane in Brescia" ("The Aeroplanes at Brescia"), written on a trip to Italy with Brod, appeared in the daily ''Bohemia'' on 28 September 1909.
The double meaning of ''Verkehr'' is given added weight by Kafka's confession to Brod that when he wrote that final line, he was thinking of "a violent ejaculation".
Some of Kafka's books are influenced by the expressionist movement, though the majority of his literary output was associated with the experimental modernist genre.
by BBC Radio 3 produced as part of their ''Play of the Week'' programme.
Films from other genres which have been similarly described include ''The Tenant'' (1976) and ''Barton Fink'' (1991).
Michiko Kakutani notes in a review for ''The New York Times'' that Kafka's letters have the "earmarks of his fiction: the same nervous attention to minute particulars; the same paranoid awareness of shifting balances of power; the same atmosphere of emotional suffocation—combined, surprisingly enough, with moments of boyish ardor and delight."
Kafka considered Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Flaubert, Nikolai Gogol, Franz Grillparzer, and Heinrich von Kleist to be his "true blood brothers".
These are hidden from the individual but control the lives of the people, who are innocent victims of systems beyond their control.
He felt comfortable there and later described this time as perhaps the best time in his life, probably because he had no responsibilities.
He trained as a lawyer, and after completing his legal education he was employed with an insurance company, forcing him to relegate writing to his spare time.
Kafka was born near the Old Town Square in Prague, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Most interpretations identify aspects of law and legality as important in his work, in which the legal system is often oppressive.
Kafka's stories were initially published in literary periodicals.
The reports were received well by his superiors.
Kafka read drafts of his works to his friends, typically concentrating on his humorous prose.
"Franz became a socialist, I became a Zionist in 1898.
Franz's two brothers, Georg and Heinrich, died in infancy before Franz was seven; his three sisters were Gabriele ("Ellie") (1889–1944), Valerie ("Valli") (1890–1942) and Ottilie ("Ottla") (1892–1943).
Brod felt that two of Kafka's most distinguishing traits were "absolute truthfulness" ('''') and "precise conscientiousness" ('''').
Kafka was unknown during his own lifetime, but he did not consider fame important.
Examples include instances in which bureaucracies overpower people, often in a surreal, nightmarish milieu which evokes feelings of senselessness, disorientation, and helplessness.
On 15 July 1908, he resigned.
The protagonist is the '''' (land surveyor) named K., who struggles for unknown reasons to gain access to the mysterious authorities of a castle who govern the village.
The synthesis of Zionism and socialism did not yet exist".
This was published as ''The Castle'' by Secker & Warburg in England and Alfred A. Knopf in the United States.
''Kafka on the Shore''
After seeing a Yiddish theater troupe perform in October 1911, for the next six months Kafka "immersed himself in Yiddish language and in Yiddish literature".
He complains about his boss and that he's not worthy to meet the owner, whom everyone fears.
Kafka, hoping to escape the influence of his family to concentrate on his writing, moved briefly to Berlin and lived with Diamant.
Hartmut M. Rastalsky noted in his thesis: "Like dreams, his texts combine precise "realistic" detail with absurdity, careful observation and reasoning on the part of the protagonists with inexplicable obliviousness and carelessness."
On 27 March 1910, several stories that later became part of the book '''' were published in the Easter edition of ''Bohemia''.
Kafka considered moving to Palestine with Felice Bauer, and later with Dora Diamant.
He wrote the story "" ("Description of a Struggle") in 1904; he showed it to Brod in 1905 who advised him to continue writing and convinced him to submit it to ''Hyperion''.
The law in Kafka's works, rather than being representative of any particular legal or political entity, is usually interpreted to represent a collection of anonymous, incomprehensible forces.
German's more flexible word order and syntactical differences provide for multiple ways in which the same German writing can be translated into English.
Kafka was rapidly promoted and his duties included processing and investigating compensation claims, writing reports, and handling appeals from businessmen who thought their firms had been placed in too high a risk category, which cost them more in insurance premiums.
However, with common usage, the term has become so ubiquitous that Kafka scholars note it's often misused.
Gabriel García Márquez noted the reading of Kafka's "The Metamorphosis" showed him "that it was possible to write in a different way".
Bergmann claims that Kafka wore a red carnation to school to show his support for socialism.
Years later, Brod coined the term '''' ("The Close Prague Circle") to describe the group of writers, which included Kafka, Felix Weltsch and him.
During the communist era, the legacy of Kafka's work for Eastern bloc socialism was hotly debated.
Published in 1961 by Schocken Books, ''Parables and Paradoxes'' presented in a bilingual edition by Nahum N. Glatzer selected writings, drawn from notebooks, diaries, letters, short fictional works and the novel ''Der Process''.
They were later published as '''' (The Zürau Aphorisms or Reflections on Sin, Hope, Suffering, and the True Way).
Canetti titled his book on Kafka's letters to Felice ''Kafka's Other Trial'', in recognition of the relationship between the letters and the novel.
Hawes suggests that Kafka, though very aware of his own Jewishness, did not incorporate it into his work, which, according to Hawes, lacks Jewish characters, scenes or themes.
A ''Financial Times'' literary critic credits Kafka with influencing José Saramago, and Al Silverman, a writer and editor, states that J. D. Salinger loved to read Kafka's works.
The television series ''The Prisoner'' and ''The Twilight Zone'' are also frequently described as Kafkaesque.
Kafka wrote in an aloof manner full of legal and scientific terms.
Brod found it difficult to arrange Kafka's notebooks in chronological order.
Admitted to the '''' of Prague in 1901, Kafka began studying chemistry, but switched to law after two weeks.
Kafkaesque elements often appear in existential works, but the term has transcended the literary realm to apply to real-life occurrences and situations that are incomprehensibly complex, bizarre, or illogical.
Characters in a Kafkaesque setting often lack a clear course of action to escape a labyrinthine situation.
HAZE Netlabel released musical compilation ''Sound Interpretations&nbsp;— Dedication To Franz Kafka''.
Later editions, notably those of 1954 (''Dearest Father.
Kafka was editing "A Hunger Artist" on his deathbed, a story whose composition he had begun before his throat closed to the point that he could not take any nourishment.
Kundera believes that Kafka's inspirations for his characteristic situations came both from growing up in a patriarchal family and living in a totalitarian state.
The story was first published in Leipzig in 1912 and dedicated "to Miss Felice Bauer", and in subsequent editions "for F."
Kafka's earliest published works were eight stories which appeared in 1908 in the first issue of the literary journal ''Hyperion'' under the title '''' (''Contemplation'').
Royal Ballet production of ''The Metamorphosis'' with Edward Watson
During a vacation in July 1923 to Graal-Müritz on the Baltic Sea, Kafka met Dora Diamant, a 25-year-old kindergarten teacher from an orthodox Jewish family.
Known as "Definitive Editions", they include translations of ''The Trial, Definitive'', ''The Castle, Definitive'', and other writings.
San Diego State University (SDSU) operates the ''Kafka Project'', which began in 1998 as the official international search for Kafka's last writings.
The sentence can be translated as: "At that moment an unending stream of traffic crossed over the bridge".
In 1912, Kafka wrote  "Die Verwandlung" ("The Metamorphosis", or "The Transformation"), published in 1915 in Leipzig.
Another example is Kafka's use of the German noun '''' in the final sentence of "Das Urteil".
Jesse Pinkman, at a group therapy meeting, describes his new workplace as a dreary, "totally corporate" laundromat mired in bureaucracy.
Kafka's father also expected him to help out at and take over the family fancy goods store.
''Franz Kafka's It's a Wonderful Life''
In an early 21st-century publication that uses Kafka's office writings as its point of departure, Pothik Ghosh states that with Kafka, law "has no meaning outside its fact of being a pure force of domination and determination".
In one diary entry, Kafka made reference to the influential anarchist philosopher Peter Kropotkin: "Don't forget Kropotkin!"
He explored  details, the inconspicuous, in depth and with such love and precision that things surfaced that were unforeseen, seemingly strange, but  absolutely true ('''').
Google had a sepia-toned doodle of a roach in a hat opening a door, honoring Kafka's 130th birthday
They argue Kafka's work is more deliberate and subversive—and more joyful—than may first appear.
The story "Ein Hungerkünstler" ("A Hunger Artist"), published in the periodical '''' in 1924, describes a victimized protagonist who experiences a decline in the appreciation of his strange craft of starving himself for extended periods.
He stands for the 'guiltless guilt' that imbues the Jew in the modern world, although there is no evidence that he himself is a Jew".
Kafka never enjoyed attending the synagogue and went with his father only on four high holidays a year.
The Franz Kafka Prize is an annual literary award of the Franz Kafka Society and the City of Prague established in 2001.
by Nobel Prize winner Isaac Bashevis Singer, about a Yiddish actor called Jacques Kohn who said he knew Franz Kafka; in this story, according to Jacques Kohn, Kafka believed in the Golem, a legendary creature from Jewish folklore
Instead, he is noted more for his visions and perspective.
A ruling by a Tel Aviv family court in 2010 held that the papers must be released and a few were, including a previously unknown story, but the legal battle continued.
The text for '''' was later purchased through auction and is stored at the German Literary Archives in Marbach am Neckar, Germany.
They point out that reading his work while focusing on the futility of his characters' struggles reveals Kafka's play of humour; he is not necessarily commenting on his own problems, but rather pointing out how people tend to invent problems.
Although this field did not excite him, it offered a range of career possibilities which pleased his father.
Kafka's story "Die Verwandlung" ("The Metamorphosis") was first printed in the October 1915 issue of '''', a monthly edition of expressionist literature, edited by René Schickele.
The Hoffes claim the papers are their personal property, while the National Library argues they are "cultural assets belonging to the Jewish people".
The truth lies in some very elusive place between these two simplistic poles".
German was the language of instruction, but Kafka also spoke and wrote in Czech.
Kafka showed a positive attitude at first, dedicating much of his free time to the business, but he later resented the encroachment of this work on his writing time.
In 1918 the Worker's Accident Insurance Institute put Kafka on a pension due to his illness, for which there was no cure at the time, and he spent most of the rest of his life in sanatoriums.
Hermann brought the Kafka family to Prague.
He kept diaries and '''' (octavo).
The cause of death seemed to be starvation: the condition of Kafka's throat made eating too painful for him, and since parenteral nutrition had not yet been developed, there was no way to feed him.
In 1961, Malcolm Pasley acquired most of Kafka's original handwritten work for the Oxford Bodleian Library.
Harry Steinhauer, a professor of German and Jewish literature, says that Kafka "has made a more powerful impact on literate society than any other writer of the twentieth century".
Brod's sets are usually called the "Definitive Editions".
In the opinion of literary critic Harold Bloom, although Kafka was uneasy with his Jewish heritage, he was the quintessential Jewish writer.
According to Brod, he was a passionate reciter, who was able to phrase his speaking as if it were music.
Kafka was never married.
The museum calls its display of original photos and documents ''Město K. Franz Kafka a Praha'' (City K. Kafka and Prague) and aims to immerse the visitor into the world in which Kafka lived and about which he wrote.
The story begins with a travelling salesman waking to find himself transformed into a '''', a monstrous vermin, '''' being a general term for unwanted and unclean animals.
In addition, he had close relationships with several women during his life.
During that period, he also found interest and entertainment in the performances of Yiddish theatre.
In late 1911, Elli's husband Karl Hermann and Kafka became partners in the first asbestos factory in Prague, known as Prager Asbestwerke Hermann & Co., having used dowry money from Hermann Kafka.
Although the two rented a flat and set a wedding date, the marriage never took place.
Sandbank argues that despite Kafka's pervasiveness, his enigmatic style has yet to be emulated.
His letters to her were later published as ''''.
Franz Kafka was played by David Tennant
Kafka usually got off work at 2 p.m., so that he had time to spend on his literary work, to which he was committed.
Critics regard the work as one of the seminal works of fiction of the 20th century.
His first eight were printed in 1908 in the first issue of the bi-monthly ''Hyperion''.
Shimon Sandbank, a professor, literary critic, and writer, identifies Kafka as having influenced Jorge Luis Borges, Albert Camus, Eugène Ionesco, J. M. Coetzee and Jean-Paul Sartre.
Only Eva was still alive as of 2012.
Another story collection, '''' (''A Country Doctor''), was published by Kurt Wolff in 1919, dedicated to Kafka's father.
According to biographers Stach and James Hawes, around 1920 Kafka was engaged a third time, to Julie Wohryzek, a poor and uneducated hotel chambermaid.
His style, it is claimed, not only in "Die Verwandlung" ("The Metamorphosis"), but in various other writings, appears to show low to medium-level schizoid traits, which explain much of his work.
An example is the first sentence of Kafka's "The Metamorphosis", which is crucial to the setting and understanding of the entire story:
Critics who support this absurdist interpretation cite instances where Kafka describes himself in conflict with an absurd universe, such as the following entry from his diary:
stars Jeremy Irons as the eponymous author; written by Lem Dobbs and directed by Steven Soderbergh, the movie mixes his life and fiction providing a semi-biographical presentation of Kafka's life and works; Kafka investigates the disappearance of one of his colleagues, taking Kafka through many of the writer's own works, most notably ''The Castle'' and ''The Trial''
by Spanish composer Francisco Coll on a text by Meredith Oakes, built from texts and fragments by Franz Kafka; Commissioned by Aldeburgh Music, Opera North and Royal Opera Covent Garden
Shortly after this, Kafka wrote the story "" ("The Judgment") in only one night and worked in a productive period on '''' (''The Man Who Disappeared'') and "Die Verwandlung" ("The Metamorphosis").
When Brod died in 1968, he left Kafka's unpublished papers, which are believed to number in the thousands, to his secretary Esther Hoffe.
film adaptation of ''Amerika'' directed by Straub-Huillet
More accurately then, according to author Ben Marcus, paraphrased in "What it Means to be Kafkaesque" by Joe Fassler in ''The Atlantic'', "Kafka’s quintessential qualities are affecting use of language, a setting that straddles fantasy and reality, and a sense of striving even in the face of bleakness—hopelessly and full of hope."
A week after the meeting at Brod's home, Kafka wrote in his diary:
The boy, whose name is not known, was born in 1914 or 1915 and died in Munich in 1921.
At the end of his first year of studies, Kafka met Max Brod, a fellow law student who became a close friend for life.
Besides these, he took an interest in Czech literature and was also very fond of the works of Goethe.
Kafka left his work, both published and unpublished, to his friend and literary executor Max Brod with explicit instructions that it should be destroyed on Kafka's death; Kafka wrote: "Dearest Max, my last request: Everything I leave behind me... in the way of diaries, manuscripts, letters (my own and others'), sketches, and so on, is to be burned unread".
It recognizes the merits of literature as "humanistic character and contribution to cultural, national, language and religious tolerance, its existential, timeless character, its generally human validity, and its ability to hand over a testimony about our times".
These were confiscated by the Gestapo in 1933, but scholars continue to search for them.
''Klassenverhältnisse''
They all died during the Holocaust of World War II.
His correspondence during that period indicates that he was unhappy with a working time schedule—from 08:00 until 18:00—making it extremely difficult to concentrate on writing, which was assuming increasing importance to him.
Neil Christian Pages, a professor of German Studies and Comparative Literature at Binghamton University who specialises in Kafka's works, says Kafka's influence transcends literature and literary scholarship; it impacts visual arts, music, and popular culture.
His Jewish education ended with his Bar Mitzvah celebration at the age of 13.
He became famous soon after his death.
In November 1913 the family moved into a bigger apartment, although Ellie and Valli had married and moved out of the first apartment.
His body was brought back to Prague where he was buried on 11 June 1924, in the New Jewish Cemetery in Prague-Žižkov.
Kafka feared that people would find him mentally and physically repulsive.
He completed his Matura exams in 1901.
Brod finished many of Kafka's incomplete works for publication.
The inspiration for the novel was the time spent in the audience of Yiddish theatre the previous year, bringing him to a new awareness of his heritage, which led to the thought that an innate appreciation for one's heritage lives deep within each person.
William Burroughs claims that such work is centred on the concepts of struggle, pain, solitude, and the need for relationships.
It is sometimes used colloquially to mean "bug"&nbsp;—a very general term, unlike the scientific "insect".
'', Dan Miron explores Kafka's connection to Zionism: "It seems that those who claim that there was such a connection and that Zionism played a central role in his life and literary work, and those who deny the connection altogether or dismiss its importance, are both wrong.
Kafka did not complete the novel, although he finished the final chapter.
partly inspired by "The Metamorphosis", where a white bigot wakes up as a black man
Although Kafka received compliments for his Czech, he never considered himself fluent in Czech, though he spoke German with a Czech accent.
However, those who met him found him to possess a quiet and cool demeanor, obvious intelligence, and a dry sense of humour; they also found him boyishly handsome, although of austere appearance.
Other stories were published in various publications, including Martin Buber's ''Der Jude'', the paper '''', and the periodicals '''', ''Genius'', and ''Prager Presse''.
Livia Rothkirchen calls Kafka the "symbolic figure of his era".
The book appeared in the ''''.
His anguish can be seen in this diary entry from 21 June 1913:
Kafka's last lover, Dora Diamant (later, Dymant-Lask), also ignored his wishes, secretly keeping 20notebooks and 35letters.
The earliest English translations of Kafka's works were by Edwin and Willa Muir, who in 1930 translated the first German edition of ''''.
One problem was that Kafka often began writing in different parts of the book; sometimes in the middle, sometimes working backwards from the end.
Kafka's laryngeal tuberculosis worsened and in March 1924 he returned from Berlin to Prague, where members of his family, principally his sister Ottla, took care of him.
This is due to the construction of subordinate clauses in German which require that the verb be positioned at the end of the sentence.
I have hardly anything in common with myself and should stand very quietly in a corner, content that I can breathe".
His last story, "Josefine, die Sängerin oder Das Volk der Mäuse" ("Josephine the Singer, or the Mouse Folk"), also deals with the relationship between an artist and his audience.
Writing was important to Kafka; he considered it a "form of prayer".
