The long-distance station is located outside the actual airport ground but has a connecting bridge for pedestrians to Terminal 1, concourse B. Frankfurt Airport regional station (''Frankfurt Flughafen Regionalbahnhof'') is for local S-Bahn trains (lines S8, S9) and regional trains.
The European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) is an institution of the European Union and part of the European System of Financial Supervisors that was created in response to the financial crisis.
In the same year Italian manufacturer Fiat opened its new German headquarters.
As a part of early Franconia, the inhabitants were the early Franks, thus the city's name reveals its legacy as "the ford of the Franks on the Main".
* Skyliners Frankfurt, ''Basketball''
Frankfurt is one of Germany's leading tourist destinations.
* '''King Kamehameha Club''' — named after the first king of Hawaii and a fictional Club in Magnum, P.I., was a disco club at Hanauer Landstraße, known for live music.
The Lufthansa Aviation Center (LAC) is the main operation base of Lufthansa at Frankfurt Airport.
The airport has four runways and serves 265 non-stop destinations.
Car parks are located throughout the city and especially in the city centre.
The 1990s featured a second wave.
Frankfurt was one of the most important cities in the Holy Roman Empire.
Central Frankfurt has been a ''Großstadt'' (a city with at least 100,000 residents by definition) since 1875.
They are the main stations to change from east-to-west-bound S-Bahn trains to north-to-south-bound U-Bahn trains.
Restaurants, bars and pubs concentrate in Sachsenhausen, Nordend, Bornheim and Bockenheim.
These can be spotted with their blue color scheme.
Clubs concentrate in and around the city centre and in the Ostend district, mainly close to Hanauer Landstraße.
Deutsche Bank ranks among the 30 largest banks in the world and the ten largest banks in Europe.
English 'ford) where the river was shallow enough to be crossed on foot.
Its successor service is the public broadcaster Hessischer Rundfunk (Hessian Broadcast Service).
The other important newspaper, the ''Frankfurter Rundschau'', was first published in 1945 and has a daily circulation of over 181,000.
Other radio broadcasters include Main FM and Radio X.
The Römer area was later rebuilt and is popular with visitors and for events such as Christmas markets.
All Rhine-Main S-Bahn lines, two U-Bahn lines (U4, U5), several tram and bus lines stop there.
On 1 February 2012 European Commission blocked the proposed merger of Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext.
The Archaeological Garden contains small parts of the oldest recovered buildings: an ancient Roman settlement and the Frankfurt Royal Palace (''Kaiserpfalz Frankfurt'') from the 6th century.
"Römer" is the German word for "Roman" and the name of a complex of nine houses that form Frankfurt city hall (''Rathaus'').
The geographical centre is in Bockenheim district  near Frankfurt West station.
However, because local authorities did not agree the administrative territory is still much smaller than its actual urban area.
* '''Westend Gate''',  — Germany's tallest building (1976–1978), Main tenant is Marriott Frankfurt Hotel.
In 1948, the allies founded the Bank deutscher Länder, the forerunner of Deutsche Bundesbank.
The Saalhof is the oldest conserved building in the Altstadt district and dates to the 12th century.
In addition to its infrastructure and economy, its diversity supports a vibrant cultural scene.
It is located in the city centre at the Börsenplatz.
When leaving the city the S-Bahn travels above ground.
The suffix 'am Main' has been used regularly since the 14th century.
* '''Saint Catherine's Church'''
The regional station is located within Terminal 1, concourse B.
* '''Velvet Club''' (Innenstadt)
The Römer was partially destroyed in World War II and later rebuilt.
* '''KfW Bankengruppe''' —Government-owned development bank formed in 1948 as part of the Marshall Plan.
According to Arabist and Genizah scholar S.D.
Frankfurter Kreuz, the Autobahn interchange close to the airport, is the most heavily used interchange in the EU, used by 320,000 cars daily.
* '''DekaBank''' — DekaBank is the central asset manager of the ''Sparkassen'' in Germany.
In the Napoleonic Wars, Frankfurt was occupied or bombarded several times by French troops.
Seckbach, Niederrad and Oberrad followed on 1 July 1900.
On 1 April 1928 the City of Höchst became part of Frankfurt, as well as its city districts Sindlingen, Unterliederbach and Zeilsheim.
The ''Kaisersaal'' ("Emperor's Hall") is located on the upper floor and is where the newly crowned emperors held their banquets.
Frankfurt has many high-rise buildings in the city centre, forming the Frankfurt skyline.
With total assets of €442 billion (2010), it is Germany's third-largest bank.
The Bundesautobahn 648 (A648) is a very short motorway in the western part which primarily serves as a fast connection between the A 66 and the Frankfurt Trade Fair.
Depending upon whether total passengers or flights are used for calculations, it ranks third or second busiest in Europe alongside London Heathrow Airport and Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport.
Frankfurt lost its independence after the Austro-Prussian War in 1866 when Prussia annexed several smaller states, among them the Free City of Frankfurt.
After the war, at the end of the year 1945, the number had dropped to 358,000.
The DZ Bank Group defines itself primarily as a service provider for the local Volksbanken and Raiffeisenbanken and their 30 million clients.
Passenger traffic at Hahn Airport in 2010 was 3.5 million.
As such, it is state-owned and defined as a service provider for the local German public banks (''Sparkassen'').
Frankfurt managed to remain neutral during the Thirty Years' War, but suffered from the bubonic plague that refugees brought to the city.
The ''Frankfurter Messe'' (Frankfurt Trade Fair) was first mentioned in 1150.
ICE Trains to London via the Channel Tunnel were planned for 2013.
The city can be accessed from around the world via Frankfurt Airport (''Flughafen Frankfurt am Main'') located  southwest of the city centre.
Many city districts are incorporated suburbs (''Vororte''), or were previously independent cities, such as Höchst.
After World War II, when it was blown up by the Wehrmacht, it was quickly rebuilt in 1946.
Frankfurt Airport is one of the busiest airports in the world and is also the single largest place of work in Germany with over 500 companies which employ 71,500 people (2010).
Helaba is one of nine ''Landesbanken'' and is the fifth-largest in Germany.
* '''Sinkkasten Arts Club''' (Innenstadt)
Other tall buildings from this decade are Westendstrasse 1 (208.0 metres), Main Tower (200.0 metres) and Trianon (186.0 metres).
In 1924, Ludwig Landmann became the first Jewish mayor of the city, and led a significant expansion during the following years.
Nine S-Bahn lines (S1 to S9) connect Frankfurt with the densely populated Rhine Main Region.
Frankfurt is host to the classic cycle race Eschborn-Frankfurt City Loop (known as ''Rund um den Henninger-Turm'' from 1961 to 2008).
The S-Bahn lines S8 and S9 (direction ''Offenbach Ost'' or ''Hanau Hbf'') departing at the regional station take 10–15 minutes from the airport to Frankfurt Central Station and onwards to the city centre (Hauptwache station), the IC and ICE trains departing at the long-distance station take 10 minutes to Frankfurt Central Station.
'''Lufthansa Cargo''' is based in Frankfurt and operates its largest cargo center (LCC) at Frankfurt Airport.
* '''Cooky's''' (Innenstadt)
Many of the largest international management consultancies are represented, including Arthur D. Little, McKinsey & Company, Boston Consulting Group, Booz & Company, Oliver Wyman, Bearing Point, Capgemini, Bain & Company and Roland Berger Strategy Consultants.
With over 922 jobs per 1,000 inhabitants, Frankfurt has the highest concentration of jobs in Germany.
The former Altstadt (old town) quarter between the Römer and the Frankfurt Cathedral was to be redeveloped as the Dom-Römer Quarter through 2016, including reconstructions of historical buildings that were destroyed during World War II.
Frankfurt is a traffic hub for the German motorway (''Autobahn'') system.
A number of bus lines complete the Frankfurt public transport system.
The other well known and obvious nickname is Bankfurt.
After the war, Frankfurt regained its wealth.
Frankfurt schools rank among the best equipped schools nationwide for availability of PCs and other media facilities.
* '''Deutsche Bank —''' Germany's largest commercial bank.
Frankfurt Central Station is one of the largest rail stations in Europe and the busiest junction operated by Deutsche Bahn, the German national railway company, with 342 trains a day to domestic and European destinations.
According to an annual citizen survey (2010), arranged by the city council, 66 percent inhabitants are satisfied or highly satisfied with the city, while only 6 percent said that they are dissatisfied.
It opened in 1976 and attracts mostly people with a left-wing political attitude.
However, during the Nazi era, its synagogues were destroyed.
The French claimed that Articles 42 to 44 of the peace treaty of Versailles concerning the demilitarisation of the Rhineland had been broken.
Information about the U- and S-Bahn can be found on the website of the RMV.
In 1810, Dalberg adopted the title of a Grand Duke of Frankfurt.
Some areas, especially around the shopping streets Zeil, Goethestraße and Freßgass, are pedestrian-only streets.
Located in Frankfurt are the German headquarters of Jones Lang LaSalle and BNP Paribas Real Estate.
With 20,000 employees in 2003, Opel was one of the five largest employers in Hesse.
* '''Landesbank Hessen-Thüringen''' — Landesbank Hessen-Thüringen, or short '''Helaba''', is the central federal bank (''Landesbank'') for the federal states of Hesse and Thuringia.
'''Frankfurt am Main''' () is the largest city in the German state of Hesse (Hessia) and the fifth-largest city in Germany, with a 2015 population of 731,095 within its administrative boundaries.
One of the main venues of the early Trance music sound was the Omen nightclub (closed 1998).
Bergen-Enkheim was the last suburb to become part of Frankfurt on 1 January 1977.
It is a stop for most of ICE high speed lines, making it Germany's most important  ICE station.
Book trade fairs began in 1478.
Due to troop reductions the AFN's location has been closed with AFN now broadcasting from Mannheim.
Many international banks have a registered or a representative office, e.g., Credit Suisse, UBS, Bank of America, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, JPMorgan Chase & Co., Bank of China, Banco do Brasil, Itaú Unibanco Société Générale, BNP Paribas, SEB, Royal Bank of Scotland and Barclays.
The Ahmadiyya Noor Mosque, constructed in 1959, is the city's largest mosque and the third largest in Germany.
It was used as an exhibition hall by Dutch clothiers when trade fairs were held during the 14th and 15th century.
Eurodance and Trance music originated in Frankfurt.
* Rot-Weiss Frankfurt, ''Football''
Passenger traffic at Frankfurt Airport in 2012 was 57.5 million.
Wertheim House is the only timbered house in the Altstadt district that survived the heavy bombings of World War II undamaged.
The BaFin is an independent federal institution and acts as Germany's financial regulatory authority.
The garden is located between the Römerberg and St. Bartholomew's.
He hoped thereby to perpetuate the name of his lineage.
'''Largest groups of foreign residents'''
Over 7,000 inhabitants were affiliated with the Jewish community, amounting to approximately 1% of the population.
However, this statistic is often criticized because it ignores major factors: It is calculated based on the administrative 680,000-inhabitant figure while the urban area has 2.5 M inhabitants and on weekdays adds another million people (not counting the 53 million passengers passing through the airport each year).
Frankfurt was voted the 7th in the  Mercer Quality of Living Survey by the Mercer Quality of Living Survey (2012), seventh in the Mercer Quality of Living Survey (2010) and 18th at the Economist's World's Most Liveable Cities Survey (2011).
It is part of Steigenberger Hotels group and is considered the city's most prestigious.
* '''U60311''' — Techno club in the city centre.
* FSV Frankfurt, ''Football'' (men)
The trade fair premises are located in the western part between Bockenheim, the Westend and the Gallus district.
The city honours the importance of the ECB by officially using the slogan "The City of the Euro" since 1998.
In 1585, Frankfurt traders established a system of exchange rates for the various currencies that were circulating to prevent cheating and extortion.
In 1240, Emperor Friedrich II granted an imperial privilege to its visitors, meaning they would be protected by the empire.
The Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences was created out of several older organisations in 1971, and offers over 38 study areas, in the arts, sciences, engineering and law.
Fraport is the owner and operator of Frankfurt Airport.
Compared to the 1993's survey the number of satisfied inhabitants has grown about 22 percent while the number of dissatisfied inhabitants was reduced by 8 percent.
There are plans underway to construct a building on top of the garden but anyhow it is decided that the garden will stay open to the public.
There are plans to expand the airport with a third passenger terminal to increase the capacity up to 88 million in 2020.
The urban area had an estimated population of 2.3 million in 2010 and is therefore the 13th largest urban area in the European Union.
The city constructed a parliament building that was never used for its intended purpose (it housed the radio studios of Hessischer Rundfunk).
Until the late 1970s, it was a ruin, nicknamed "Germany's Most Beautiful Ruin".
Messe Frankfurt GmbH, the owner and operator company, organized 87 exhibitions in 2010, 51 thereof in foreign countries.
Frankfurt hosts the following sports teams or clubs:
The business centre of Eschborn is located right at Frankfurt's city limits in the west and attracts businesses with significantly lower corporate taxes compared to Frankfurt.
Besides the tourist attractions in central Frankfurt many internationally famous sites are within 80&nbsp;km (50&nbsp;mi) of the city, such as:
Some of the early and most influential Eurodance, Trance and Techno acts, e.g., La Bouche, Jam and Spoon, Magic Affair, Culture Beat, Snap!, Dance 2 Trance, Oliver Lieb and Hardfloor, and record labels such as Harthouse and Eye Q, were based in the city in the early 1990s.
During the 1970s the state government of Hesse wanted to include the entire urban area into its administrative boundaries.
In 2010, 63 national and 152 international banks had a registered office, including the headquarters of the major German banks, as well as 41 offices of international banks.
On 1 August 1972 Hesse's smaller suburbs of Harheim, Kalbach, Nieder-Erlenbach, and Nieder-Eschbach became districts while other neighbouring suburbs chose to join the Main-Taunus-Kreis, the Landkreis Offenbach, the Kreis Groß-Gerau, the Hochtaunuskreis, the Main-Kinzig-Kreis or the Wetteraukreis.
* '''Frankfurter Büro Center''',  — Main tenant is Clifford Chance (Germany).
Frankfurt Airport is one of the world's busiest international airports by passenger traffic and the main hub for Germany's flag carrier Lufthansa.
Dalberg abdicated in favour of Eugène de Beauharnais, which of course was only a symbolic action, as the latter effectively never ruled after the ruin of the French armies and Frankfurt's takeover by the allies.
The German headquarters of Thomas Cook Group are based in Oberursel (Taunus).
Today the Bundesbank is an integral part of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) which is formed by all 27 European Union member states.
The local ''Journal Frankfurt'' is the best-known magazine for events, parties, and "insider tips".
The Grand Duchy remained a short episode lasting from 1810 to 1813, when the military tide turned in favour of the Anglo-Prussian lead allies that overturned the Napoleonic order.
The new building complex was to accommodate up to 2,300 ECB personnel.
FFC Frankfurt, ''Football'' (women)
Since 1998 the ECB Headquarters are located in the Eurotower at Willy-Brandt-Platz and in two other nearby high-rises.
* '''Skyper''',  — Main tenant is DekaBank.
From August 1945 to October 2004, the American Forces Network (AFN) had broadcast from Frankfurt.
The European Central Bank (''Europäische Zentralbank'') is one of the world's most important central banks.
Frankfurt had stayed neutral in the war, but its free press bothered the Prussians and they used the opportunity to occupy the city by force: Bismarck had been an ambassador to the German Confederation there and constantly quarrelled with the local press.
Trading takes place exclusively via the Xetra trading system, with redundant floor brokers taking on the role of market-makers on the new platform.
The 14 skyscrapers are:
The name is derived from the ''Franconofurd'' of the Germanic tribe of the Franks; ''Furt'' (cf.
: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States (2015)
For this reason Frankfurt's property market often operates differently than the rest of the country where the prices are generally flatter.
It is located at the "Funkhaus am Dornbusch" in the Dornbusch district and is one of the most important radio and television broadcasters in Hesse, with additional studios in Kassel, Darmstadt and Fulda.
On work days and Saturdays one million people commute from all over the Rhein-Main-Area.
A landmark building of the trade fair (and of the whole city) is the Messeturm (the name translates as ''Fair Trade Tower''), which was the tallest building in Europe from 1991 to 1997.
Other major German banks include Frankfurter Volksbank, the second-largest ''Volksbank'' in Germany, Frankfurter Sparkasse and old-established private banks such as Bankhaus Metzler, Hauck & Aufhäuser and Delbrück Bethmann Maffei.
* '''Travolta''' (Innenstadt)
* Frankfurt Galaxy (1991–2007), ''American Football''
The third-busiest railway station is Hauptwache station (181,000).
Today, it functions as a famous concert hall, while operas are performed at the "new" Frankfurt Opera.
"The merger between Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext would have led to a near-monopoly in European financial derivatives worldwide", European competition commissioner, Joaquín Almunia, said.
The headquarters of DekaBank are located at the Trianon skyscraper at Mainzer Landstraße.
Frankfurt is home to the German headquarters of Nestlé, the world's largest food company, located in Niederrad.
The southern part of the city contains the Frankfurt City Forest, Germany's largest city forest.
The U-Bahn has nine lines (U1 to U9) serving Frankfurt and the larger suburbs of Bad Homburg and Oberursel in the north.
* Frankfurt Pirates, ''American Football''
The Saalhof was partly destroyed in World War II and later rebuilt.
Deutsche Bahn makes bicycles available for hire through their Call a Bike service.
Its task, unique in Germany, is to collect, permanently archive, comprehensively document and record bibliographically all German and German-language publications from 1913 on, foreign publications about Germany, translations of German works and the works of German-speaking emigrants published abroad between 1933 and 1945, and to make them available to the public.
His coronation was deliberately held on Bastille Day, 14 July, the anniversary of the storming of the Bastille.
Bloomberg TV and RTL Television have regional studios.
In 2012, Peter Feldmann (SPD) succeeded Roth as Lord Mayor.
The fair became particularly important when similar fairs in French Beaucaire lost attraction around 1380.
Alongside the university is the banking academy Frankfurt School of Finance & Management, formerly known as the '''' (Institution of Higher Learning for Banking Economics), with its campus in the Ostend (Eastend) neighbourhood.
Frankfurt is culturally and ethnically diverse, with around half of the population, and a majority of young people, having an immigrant background and a quarter of the population being foreign nationals.
Frankfurt is one of the few European cities with a significant number of skyscrapers, (buildings at least  tall).
With 414,576 residents in 1910, it was the ninth largest city in Germany and the number of inhabitants grew to 553,464 before World War II.
Two important daily newspapers are published.
songs combined Rap and Soul vocals adding rhythm by using computer technology and mixing electronic sounds, bass and drums.
Frankfurt was severely bombed in World War II (1939–1945).
It provides access to the trade fair (S3, S4, S5, S6), the airport (S8, S9), the stadium (S7, S8, S9) and nearby cities such as Wiesbaden, Mainz, Darmstadt, Rüsselsheim, Hanau, Offenbach am Main, Oberursel, Bad Homburg, Kronberg, Friedberg and smaller towns that are on the way.
Lufthansa employs 35,000 people in Frankfurt.
Cycle rickshaws (velotaxis), a type of tricycle designed to carry passengers in addition to the driver, are also available.
Frankfurt is the centre of the densely populated Frankfurt Rhine-Main Metropolitan Region with a population of 5.5 million.
KfW provides loans for approved purposes at lower rates than commercial banks, especially to medium-sized businesses.
Its three main halls were constructed in a neorenaissance-style, while the later enlargement with two outer halls in 1924 was constructed in neoclassic-style.
Frankfurt is home to the German office of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), which is part of the World Bank Group.
Deutsche Börse also owns the European futures exchange Eurex and clearing company Clearstream.
Many sections are served by two lines, combining to run at 5-minute intervals during rush-hour.
Frankfurt is home to many cultural and educational institutions, including the Goethe University and Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences, many museums (e.g., Städel, Senckenberg Natural Museum, Liebieghaus, Goethe House) and two major botanical gardens:  the Palmengarten and the Botanical Garden of Goethe University.
Two DAX companies are located in Bad Homburg vor der Höhe, Fresenius SE & Co. KGaA and Fresenius Medical Care.
Despite the name it is not used for exhibition but serves as an office tower.
''Frankonovurd'' (in Old High German) or ''Vadum Francorum'' (in Latin) were the first names mentioned in written records from 794.
This marked the only civic foundation of a university in Germany; today it is one of Germany's largest.
* '''Silbergold''' (Innenstadt)
The city is at the centre of the larger Frankfurt Rhine-Main Metropolitan Region which has a population of 5,500,000 and is Germany's second-largest metropolitan region.
The airport also serves as a hub for Condor and as the main hub for German flag carrier Lufthansa.
