One of the members of the team was the Director of Scientific Research, David Randall Pye, who walked out of the demonstration utterly convinced of the importance of the project.
Whyte was impressed by the 28-year-old Whittle and his design when they met on 11 September 1935:
Testing and production ramp-up was immediately accelerated.
Falk & Partners specified they would only invest in Whittle's engine if they had independent verification that it was feasible.
By this time he was a Group Captain, having been promoted from Wing Commander in July 1943.
In 1941, de Havilland started a jet fighter project, the Spider Crab&nbsp;— later called Vampire&nbsp;— along with their own engine to power it; Frank Halford's Goblin (Halford H.1).
(Whittle Unit) engine ran successfully on 12 April 1937.
He showed that such designs up to this point had been flying "stalled", and that by giving the compressor blades an aerofoil-shaped cross-section their efficiency could be dramatically improved.
On 9 October the W.U.
On 27 January 1936, the principals signed the "Four Party Agreement", creating "Power Jets Ltd" which was incorporated in March 1936.
Such a speciality was naturally suited to the aero-thermodynamics of jet engines in which the optimisation of airflow in compressor, combustion chambers, turbine and jet pipe, is fundamental.
During a demonstration of the E.28/39 to Winston Churchill in April 1943, Whittle proposed to Stafford Cripps, Minister of Aircraft Production, that all jet development be nationalised.
A flying test-bed enables testing to be done in flight without the aircraft depending on an untried engine for its own propulsion and safety.
Without Air Ministry support, he and two retired RAF servicemen formed Power Jets Ltd to build his engine with assistance from the firm of British Thomson-Houston.
The UK designs also had better materials such as the Nimonic alloys for turbine blades.
However, the advantages of axial-flow compressors with their higher pressure ratios compared to simpler centrifugal designs led to a transition to axial compressors in the late 1940s, epitomised by the Rolls-Royce Avon series, Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire, Bristol Olympus, and others.
Whittle's jet engines were developed some years earlier than those of Germany's Hans von Ohain who was the designer of the first ''operational'' jet engine.
In 1941 Rover set up a new laboratory for Whittle's team along with a production line at their unused Barnoldswick factory, but by late 1941 it was obvious that the arrangement between Power Jets and Rover was not working.
Encouraged by his Commanding Officer, in late 1929 Whittle sent his concept to the Air Ministry to see if it would be of any interest to them.
In early 1942 Whittle contracted Rolls-Royce for six engines, known as the WR.1, identical to the existing W.1.
In February work started on a third design, the W.1A, which was the size of the W.1 but used the W.2's mechanical layout.
Normally a well is drilled by attaching rigid sections of pipe together and powering the cutting head by spinning the pipe from the surface, but Whittle's design removed the need for a strong mechanical connection between the drill and the head frame, allowing for much lighter piping to be used.
It competes though with moyno motors and increasingly with rotary steerable systems and is again out of favour.
Over this period he became irritable and developed an "explosive" temper.
The definitive W.1 of 850&nbsp;lbf (3.8&nbsp;kN) thrust ran on  12 April 1941, and on 15 May the W.1-powered E.28/39 took off from Cranwell at 7:40&nbsp;pm, flying for 17&nbsp;minutes and reaching a maximum speed of around 340&nbsp;mph (545&nbsp;km/h).
Whittle, Williams and Tinling retained a 49% share of the company in exchange for Falk and Partners putting in £2,000 with the option of a further £18,000 within 18 months.
Then, in 1931, he was posted to the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment at Felixstowe as an armament officer and test pilot of seaplanes, where he continued to publicize his idea.
On 8 July Falk gave the company an emergency loan of £250, and on the 15th they agreed to find £4,000 to £14,000 in additional funding.
On 27 August 1928 Pilot Officer Whittle joined No.
This posting came as a surprise for he had never previously flown a seaplane, but he nevertheless increased his reputation as a pilot by flying some 20 different types of floatplanes, flying boats, and amphibians.
His smoking increased to three packs a day and he suffered from various stress-related ailments such as frequent severe headaches, indigestion, insomnia, anxiety, eczema and heart palpitations, while his weight dropped to nine&nbsp;stone (126&nbsp;lb / 57&nbsp;kg).
The prototype Meteor airframe was already complete and took to the air on 12 June 1943.
While writing his thesis there he formulated the fundamental concepts that led to the creation of the turbojet engine, taking out a patent on his design in 1930.
Rolls-Royce closed Rover's secret parallel plant at Clitheroe soon after; however, they continued the development of the W.2B/26 that had begun there.
In 1948, Whittle retired from the RAF and received a knighthood.
His continuing reputation for low flying and aerobatics provoked a public complaint that almost led to his being court-martialled.
However he was allowed to continue at Cambridge for a year doing post-graduate work which gave him time to work on the turbojet.
Combustion problems ceased to be an obstacle to development of the engine although intensive development was started on all features of the new combustion chambers.
(Russia needed the technology because it lacked high strength drill pipe.)
Turbine drilling is best used for drilling hard rocks at high bit RPM's with diamond impregnated bits, and can be used with an angled drive shaft for directional drilling and horizontal drilling.
at high power for 20&nbsp;minutes without any difficulty.
By 1964 he had deserted his previously socialist beliefs, going so far as to launch a fierce attack on the Labour candidate in Smetwick.
Despite limited funding, a prototype was created, which first ran in 1937.
The part-time post enabled him to write a textbook entitled ''Gas turbine aero-thermodynamics: with special reference to aircraft propulsion'', published in 1981.
He was cremated in America and his ashes were flown to England where they were placed in a memorial in a church in Cranwell.
), which was issued in November 1935.
2 School of Technical Training to join No 1 Squadron of Cranwell Aircraft Apprentices.
Success of the design was now evident; the first example of what was a purely experimental and entirely new engine design was already outperforming one of the best piston engines in the world, an engine that had five years of development and production behind it, and decades of engineering.
He lasted only two days: just five feet tall and with a small chest measurement, he failed the medical.
Barnoldswick was too small for full-scale production and turned back into a pure research facility under Hooker's direction, while a new factory was set up in Newcastle-under-Lyme.
From the end of March, Whittle spent six months in hospital recovering from nervous exhaustion, and resigned from Power Jets (R and D) Ltd in January 1946.
Since Whittle had already offered to surrender his shares he would receive nothing at all, while Williams and Tinling each received almost £46,800 for their stock, and investors of cash or services had a threefold return on their original investment.
He obtained an aggregate of 98% in all subjects in his exams, completing the course in 18&nbsp;months instead of the more normal two&nbsp;years.
Undeterred, he applied again under an assumed name and presented himself as a candidate at the No 2 School of Technical Training RAF Cranwell.
There is little doubt that Whittle's efforts would have been at the same level or even more advanced had the Air Ministry taken a greater interest in the design.
The problems between Rover and Power Jets became a "public secret" and late in 1942 Spencer Wilks of Rover met with Hives and Hooker at the "Swan and Royal" pub, in Clitheroe, near the Barnoldswick factory.
This time he passed the physical and, in September that year, 364365 Boy Whittle, F started his three-year training as an aircraft mechanic in No.
Hives agreed to supply key parts to help the project.
The RAF returned his comment to Whittle, referring to the design as being "impracticable".
With the W.2 design proceeding smoothly, Whittle was sent to Boston, Massachusetts in mid-1942 to help the General Electric jet programme.
Since the RAF was not interested in the concept they did not declare it secret, meaning that Whittle was able to retain the rights to the idea, which would have otherwise been their property.
Whittle had already studied the problem of turning the massive W.U.
ran once again, this time equipped with Lubbock or "Shell" atomizing-burner combustion chambers.
However, it was a year before the funds were made available, greatly delaying development.
Despite lengthy delays in their own programme, the Luftwaffe beat the British efforts into the air by nine months.
As part of his socialist ideals, he proposed that Power Jets be nationalised; in part because he saw that private companies would profit from the technology freely given during the war.
Although Me 262s were introduced late in the war they shot down 542 or more allied planes and in one allied bombing raid downed 32 of the 36 Boeing B-17 Flying Fortresses.
With the new contract work started in earnest on the "Whittle Supercharger Type W.1".
Whittle died of lung cancer on 9 August 1996, at his home in Columbia, Maryland.
This was encouraged by the Air Ministry, who gave Whittle's design the name "B.23", and Rover's became the "B.26".
honoris causa, at the Norwegian Institute of Technology, later part of Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
The Ministry agreed to buy the W.U.
He then put himself through a vigorous training programme and special diet devised by a physical training instructor at Halton to build up his physique, only to fail again six months later, when he was told that he could not be given a second chance, despite having added three inches to his height and chest.
Within a year he was posted to Central Flying School, Wittering, for a flying instructor's course.
At first he was turned down by the RAF but, determined to join the Royal Air Force, he overcame his physical limitations and was accepted and sent to No.
Rover's W.2B/26, as the Rolls-Royce Derwent, opened the new line and soon replaced the Welland, allowing the production lines at Barnoldswick to shut down in late 1944.
Instead he described what is today referred to as a motorjet; a motor using a conventional piston engine to provide compressed air to a combustion chamber whose exhaust was used directly for thrust – essentially an afterburner attached to a propeller engine.
In 1967, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Science) by the University of Bath.
With that the jet engine was finally on its way to becoming a reality.
Armstrong Siddeley also developed a more complex axial-flow design with an engineer called Heppner, the ASX but reversed Vickers' thinking and later modified it into a turboprop instead, the Python.
To reduce the weight of the driveshaft as much as possible, the W.2Y used a large diameter, thin-walled, shaft almost as large as the turbine disc, "necked down" at either end where it connected to the turbine and compressor.
The report was once again passed on to Griffith for comment, but was not received back until March 1937 by which point Whittle's design was well along.
GE, the primary supplier of turbochargers in the U.S., was well suited to starting jet production quickly.
Whittle believed that he had triggered this decision, but Cripps had already been considering how best to maintain a successful jet programme and act responsibly regarding the state's substantial financial investment, while at the same time wanting to establish a research centre that could utilise Power Jets' talents, and had come to the conclusion that national interests demanded the setting up of a Government-owned establishment.
Over 200 German pilots were killed during training.
Whittle showed his engine concept around the base, where it attracted the attention of Flying Officer Pat Johnson, formerly a patent examiner.
Nevertheless, the team pressed ahead, and the W.U.
The remaining exhaust thrust would power the aircraft.
This set in motion a chain of events that almost led to the engines being produced much sooner than actually occurred.
His performance in the course was so exceptional that in 1934 he was permitted to take a two-year engineering course as a member of Peterhouse, the oldest college of Cambridge University, graduating in 1936 with a First in the Mechanical Sciences Tripos.
Whittle was born in a terraced house in Newcombe Road, Earlsdon, Coventry, England on 1 June 1907, the eldest son of Moses Whittle and Sara Alice Garlick.
Shortly afterwards, in May, he received mail from Rolf Dudley-Williams, who had been with him at Cranwell in the 1920s and Felixstowe in 1930.
After the second incident an enraged Flight Lieutenant Harold W. Raeburn said furiously, "Why don't you take all my bloody aeroplanes, make a heap of them in the middle of the aerodrome and set fire to them – it's quicker!"
A lack of cobalt for high-temperature steel alloys meant the German designs were always at risk of overheating and damaging their turbines.
He gave the Royal Institution Christmas Lectures in 1954 on ''The Story of Petroleum''.
They also placed a second engine contract, this time for a larger design that developed into the otherwise similar W.2.
Work progressed quickly, and by the end of the year 1936 the prototype detail design was finalised and parts for it were well on their way to being completed, all within the original £2,000 budget.
After two years attending Milverton School, Whittle won a scholarship to a secondary school which in due course became Leamington College for Boys, but when his father's business faltered there was not enough money to keep him there.
This time Whittle was able to run the W.U.
1 School of Technical Training was unable to accommodate all the aircraft apprentices at that time.
This design reduced the length of the engine, and the length of the drive shaft connecting the compressor and turbine, thus reducing weight.
His research concentrated on the boundary layer before his professorship became part-time from 1978 to 1979.
Whittle also turned his attention to the axial-flow (straight-through) engine type as championed by Griffith, designing the L.R.1.
Nevertheless, Falk arranged another loan of £3,000, and work continued.
The next month work on an improved W.2B started under the new name, "W2/500".
This proved to be a mixed blessing – the company was now subject to the Official Secrets Act, which made it extremely difficult to gather more private equity.
After pointing out an error in one of Whittle's calculations, he went on to comment that the centrifugal design would be too large for aircraft use and that using the jet directly for power would be rather inefficient.
The official handover took place on 1 January 1943, although the W.2B contract had already been signed over in December.
Whittle developed a rebellious and adventurous streak, together with an early interest in aviation.
Falk & Partners, where discusions took place with Lancelot Law Whyte and occasionally Sir Maurice Bonham-Carter.
He was made a Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the Royal Aeronautical Society, and in 1991 he and von Ohain were awarded the Charles Stark Draper Prize for their work on turbojet engines.
Later that month after further negotiations the Ministry made another offer of £135,500 for Power Jets, which was reluctantly accepted after the Ministry refused arbitration on the matter.
In 1976, his marriage to Dorothy was dissolved and he married American Hazel S Hall ("Tommie").
Being an ex-apprentice amongst a majority of ex-public schoolboys, life as an officer cadet was not easy for him, but he nevertheless excelled in the courses and went solo in 1927 after only 13.5 hours instruction, quickly progressing to the Bristol Fighter and gaining a reputation for daredevil low flying and aerobatics.
The quality of these attracted the eye of the Apprentice Wing commanding officer, who noted that Whittle was also a mathematical genius.
Instead of using a piston engine to provide the compressed air for the burner, a turbine could be used to extract some power from the exhaust and drive a similar compressor to those used for superchargers.
On 5 April 1944, the Ministry sent Whittle an award of only £10,000 for his shares.
However, his flight logbook also showed numerous red ink warnings about showboating and overconfidence, and because of dangerous flying in an Armstrong Whitworth Siskin he was disqualified from the end of term flying contest.
Within days the aircraft was reaching 370&nbsp;mph (600&nbsp;km/h) at 25,000&nbsp;feet (7,600&nbsp;m), exceeding the performance of the contemporary Spitfires.
In December 1942 Rover had tested the W.2B for a total of 37&nbsp;hours, but within the next month Rolls-Royce tested it for 390&nbsp;hours.
Production versions of the engine started rolling off the line in October, first known as the W.2B/23, then the RB.23 (for "Rolls-Barnoldswick") and eventually became known as the Rolls-Royce Welland.
Nearly every engine company in Britain then started their own crash efforts to catch up with Power Jets.
Whittle's designs were more basic, with centrifugal compressors rather than the more complicated axial designs.
The installation was done by Vickers at Weybridge.
Hooker was in charge of the supercharger division at Rolls-Royce Derby and was a specialist in the mathematics of "fluid flow".
When Rolls-Royce became involved, Ray Dorey, the manager of the company's Flight Centre at Hucknall airfield on the north side of Nottingham, had a Whittle engine installed in the rear of a Vickers Wellington bomber.
A patent was submitted by Maxime Guillaume in 1921 for a similar invention; however, this was technically unfeasible at the time.
Bramson introduced Whittle and his two associates to the investment bank O.T.
On 1 December Cripps advised Power Jets' directors that the Treasury would not pay more than £100,000 for the company.
Bramson was initially skeptical but after studying Whittle's ideas became an enthusiastic supporter.
In July the company was merged with the gas turbine division of the RAE to form the National Gas Turbine Establishment (NGTE) at Farnborough, and 16 Power Jets engineers, following Whittle's example, also resigned.
By arrangement with the Ministry of Aircraft Production they traded the jet factory at Barnoldswick for Rolls-Royce's tank engine factory in Nottingham, sealing the deal with a handshake.
In 2002, Whittle was ranked number 42 in the BBC poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.
Given this astonishing display of official indifference, Falk and Partners gave notice that they could not provide funding beyond £5,000.
With little knowledge of the topic they turned to the only other person who had written on the subject and passed the paper on to Griffith.
Whittle was promoted to Squadron Leader in December.
He quickly developed practical engineering skills while helping in his father's workshop, and being an enthusiastic reader spent much of his spare time in the Leamington reference library, reading about astronomy, engineering, turbines, and the theory of flight.
Williams arranged a meeting with Whittle, himself, and another by-then-retired RAF serviceman, James Collingwood Tinling.
Other developments included the use of fans to provide greater mass-flow, either at the front of the engine as in a modern turbofan or at the rear, which is much less common but somewhat simpler.
This was the first flying test-bed used to test a jet engine.
Earlier, in January 1940, Whittle had met Dr Stanley Hooker of Rolls-Royce, who in turn introduced Whittle to Rolls-Royce board member and manager of their Derby factory, Ernest Hives (later Lord Hives).
A combination of the W.2B design and a simple airframe from Bell Aircraft flew in autumn of 1942 as the Bell XP-59A Airacomet, six months before the flight of the British Meteor.
Official interest was forthcoming following this success, with contracts being placed to develop further engines, but the continuing stress seriously affected Whittle's health, eventually resulting in a nervous breakdown in 1940.
Nevertheless, the Me 262 could fly far faster than allied planes and had very effective firepower.
In January 1944 Whittle was awarded the CBE in the New Year Honours.
The first W.1A was completed soon after, and on 2 March 1942 the second E.28/39 reached 430&nbsp;mph (690&nbsp;km/h) at 15,000&nbsp;feet (4,600&nbsp;m) on this engine.
In a conversation with Whittle after the war, Von Ohain stated that "''If you had been given the money you would have been six years ahead of us.
He joined BOAC as a technical advisor on aircraft gas turbines and travelled extensively over the next few years, viewing jet engine developments in the United States, Canada, Africa, Asia and the Middle East.
Earlier, in January, when the company formed, Henry Tizard, the rector of Imperial College London and chairman of the Aeronautical Research Committee (ARC), had prompted the Air Ministry's Director of Scientific Research to ask for a write-up of the design.
The final terms were agreed on 28 March, and Power Jets officially became Power Jets (Research and Development) Ltd, with Roxbee Cox as Chairman, Constant of RAE Head of Engineering Division, and Whittle as Chief Technical Advisor.
Whittle was an atheist.
Early UK jet engines would run for 150&nbsp;hours between overhauls and had better power-to-weight ratio and specific fuel consumption compared to the German designs.
He had already increased the power of the Merlin piston engine by improving its supercharger.
Work on all of the designs continued over the winter of 1941–42.
In 1966 Rolls-Royce purchased Bristol Siddeley, but the financial pressures and eventual bankruptcy because of cost overruns of the RB211 project led to the slow wind-down and eventual disappearance of Whittle's "turbo-drill".
He was taught the theory of aircraft engines and gained practical experience in the engineering workshops.
and then loan it back to them, injecting cash, and placed an order for a flyable version of the engine.
Because of the dangerous nature of the work being carried out, development was largely moved from Rugby to BTH's lightly used Ladywood foundry at nearby Lutterworth in Leicestershire in 1938, where there was a successful run of the W.U.
He emigrated to the U.S. and the following year accepted the position of NAVAIR Research Professor at the United States Naval Academy (Annapolis, Maryland).
In Coventry, on 24 May 1930, Whittle married his fiancée, Dorothy Mary Lee, with whom he later had two sons, David and Ian.
In January 1930, Whittle was promoted to Flying Officer.
Work continued, however, and in September the first W2/500 ran for the first time, generating its full design thrust of 1,750&nbsp;lbf (7.8&nbsp;kN) the same day.
It was favourable and Falk then agreed to finance Whittle.
They financed an independent engineering review from Bramson (The historic "Bramson Report"
Earlier, in July 1926, A.
The stress of the continual on-again-off-again development and problems with the engine took a serious toll on Whittle.
In June, Whittle received a promotion to Wing Commander.
He joined BOAC as a technical advisor before working as an engineering specialist with Shell, followed by a position with Bristol Aero Engines.
Every officer with a permanent commission was expected to take a specialist course, and as a result Whittle attended the Officers’ Engineering Course at RAF Henlow, Bedfordshire in 1932.
Pat Johnson remained convinced of the validity of the idea, and had Whittle patent the idea in January 1930.
The latter, having several stages of rotating blades, each stage increasing the pressure, were potentially more efficient but were much more difficult to develop.
Griffith appears to have been convinced that Whittle's "simple" design could never achieve the sort of efficiencies needed for a practical engine.
From an early age, Whittle demonstrated an aptitude for engineering and an interest in flying.
Johnson, in turn, took the concept to the commanding officer of the base.
He destroyed two aircraft in accidents during rehearsals but remained unscathed on both occasions.
BTH had decided to put in £2,500 of their own in January, and in March 1938 the Air Ministry funds finally arrived.
Of the few apprentices accepted into the Royal Air Force College, Whittle graduated in 1928 at the age of 21 and was commissioned as a Pilot Officer in July.
Whittle left Shell in 1957 to work for Bristol Aero Engines who picked up the project in 1961, setting up "Bristol Siddeley Whittle Tools" to further develop the concept.
111 Squadron, Hornchurch, flying Siskin IIIs.
Rolls-Royce had already copied the W.1 to produce the low-rated WR.1 but later stopped work on this project after taking over Rover's efforts.
Whittle's developments at Power Jets continued, the W.2/700 later being fitted with an afterburner ("reheat" in British terminology), as well as experimental water injection to cool the engine and allow higher power settings without melting the turbine.
Pondering the problem he thought: "Why not substitute a turbine for the piston engine?"
In August 1996, Whittle died of lung cancer at his home in Columbia, Maryland.
In Germany, Hans von Ohain had started work on a prototype in 1935, and had by this point passed the prototype stage and was building the world's first flyable Jet aircraft, the Heinkel HeS 3.
In 1960 he was awarded an honorary degree, doctor techn.
into a flyable design, with what he described as very optimisitic targets, to power a little aeroplane weighing 2,000 lb with a static thrust of 1,389 lb.
These delays and the lack of funding slowed the project.
Unwilling to wait, Whittle cobbled together an engine from spare parts, creating the W.1X ("X" standing for "experimental") which ran for the first time on 14 December 1940.
For Whittle, this was the chance of a lifetime, not only to enter the commissioned ranks but also because the training included flying lessons on the Avro 504.
Whittle continued working on the motorjet principle after his thesis work but eventually abandoned it when further calculations showed it would weigh as much as a conventional engine of the same thrust.
Johnson arranged a meeting with British Thomson-Houston (BTH), whose chief turbine engineer seemed to agree with the basic idea.
After emigrating to the U.S. in 1976 he accepted the position of NAVAIR Research Professor at the United States Naval Academy from 1977–1979.
Meanwhile, work continued with the W.U., which eventually went through nine rebuilds in an attempt to solve the combustion problems that had dominated the testing.
It featured a reverse-flow design;  air from the compressor was fed rearwards into the combustion chambers, then back towards the front of the engine, then finally reversing again into the turbine.
A. Griffith had published a paper on compressors and turbines, which he had been studying at the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE).
Falk was represented on the board of Power Jets by Whyte as Chairman and Bonham-Carter as a director (with Bramson acting as alternate).
In January 1940, the Ministry placed a contract with the Gloster Aircraft Company for a simple aircraft specifically to flight-test the W.1, the Gloster E.28/39.
As Whittle was still a full-time RAF officer and currently at Cambridge, he was given the title "Honorary Chief Engineer and Technical Consultant".
Initially upset because he believed von Ohain's engine had been developed after seeing Whittle's patent, he eventually became convinced that von Ohain's work was, in fact, independent.
However, the contract was eventually taken up by Rover only.
