During the Algerian War (1954–62), Madrid became the base of the ''Organisation de l'armée secrète'' (OAS) right-wing French Army group which sought to preserve French Algeria.
Victory was proclaimed on April 1, 1939, when the last of the Republican forces surrendered.
On February 23 Franco was sent to the Canary Islands to serve as the islands' military commander, an appointment perceived by him as a ''destierro'' (banishment).
After Franco's death, and according to his own wishes, he was buried at Valle de los Caídos, a colossal memorial built by the forced labour of political prisoners in order to honour the Francoist casualties in the Spanish Civil War.
Franco's family agreed to disconnect the life-support machines.
Augusto Pinochet is known to have admired Franco.
Even in the 1970s a woman fleeing from an abusive husband could be arrested and imprisoned for "abandoning the home" (''abandono del hogar'').
Promoted to colonel, Franco led the first wave of troops ashore at Al Hoceima in 1925.
Five days later (April 24) the raised-arm Fascist salute of the Falange was made the official salute of the Nationalist regime.
The death on December 20, 1973, of prime minister Luis Carrero Blanco in a spectacular bombing by ETA eventually gave an edge to the liberalizing faction.
Yet, after the Fall of France in June 1940, Spain did adopt a pro-Axis non-belligerency stance (for example, he allowed German and Italian ships and U-boats to use Spanish naval facilities) before returning to a more neutral position in the autumn of 1943 when the tide of the war had turned decisively against the Axis Powers.
Most government buildings and streets that were named after him during his long rule reverted to their original names.
Contributing to the disagreement was an ongoing dispute over German mining rights in Spain.
Officially, he died on November 20, 1975, at the age of 82—just two weeks before his 83rd birthday—the same date as the death of José Antonio Primo de Rivera, the founder of the Falange.
Franco's direction of the German and Italian forces was limited, particularly in the direction of the Condor Legion, but he was by default their supreme commander, and they rarely made decisions on their own.
The PCE (the Spanish Communist Party) attempted a mutiny in Madrid with the aim of re-establishing Negrín's leadership, but José Miaja retained control.
Many of the old guard in charge of the economy were replaced by "technocrata", despite some initial opposition from Franco.
Until the 1970s a woman could not have a bank account without a co-sign by her father or husband.
* The ''Victor'', another emblem used by Franco.
Thus, inequalities in schooling, health care or transport facilities among regions were patent: classically affluent regions like Madrid, Catalonia, or the Basque Country fared much better than Extremadura, Galicia or Andalusia.
Despite the Non-Intervention Agreement of August 1936, the war was marked by foreign intervention on behalf of both sides, leading to international repercussions.
These exhibited all the main points of fascistic doctrine.
The physicians of the battle later concluded that his intestines were spared because he inhaled the moment he was shot.
From 1917 to 1920, he served in Spain.
Through representatives, he started to negotiate with the United Kingdom, Germany, and Italy for more military support, and above all for more aircraft.
In 1947 Franco proclaimed Spain a monarchy, but did not designate a monarch.
Thereafter only Madrid (see History of Madrid) and a few other areas remained under control of the government forces.
Azaña found Franco's farewell speech to the cadets insulting.
In Spain and abroad, the legacy of Franco remains controversial.
On March 28, 1939, with the help of pro-Franco forces inside the city (the "fifth column" General Mola had mentioned in propaganda broadcasts in 1936), Madrid fell to the Nationalists.
After the proclamation by Marshal Philippe Pétain of the Vichy France regime, the refugees became political prisoners, and the French police attempted to round up those who had been liberated from the camp.
The remaining nomads of Spain (Gitanos and Mercheros like El Lute) were especially affected.
As a conservative and a monarchist, he opposed the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of a republic in 1931.
In opposition to this government, a revolutionary communist/anarchist movement broke out on October 5, 1934.
Spain was then admitted to the UN in 1955.
Franco had won the hearts of many and was then able to win the Civil War; Churchill said that if he was a Spaniard living in Spain he would have supported Franco.
According to the right-wing opposition, the real enemies of the Republic were not on the Right but on the Left; Spain was in imminent danger of falling under a "Communist dictatorship", and therefore by fighting the democratically elected Popular Front, they were merely doing their duty in defense of law and order and of the freedom and the fundamental rights of the Spanish people.
The Oxford Dictionary uses Franco's regime as an example of fascism.
In 1969 Franco designated Prince Juan Carlos de Borbón, who had been educated by him in Spain, with the new title of Prince of Spain, as his heir-apparent.
Franco abolished the centuries-old fiscal privileges and autonomy (the ''fueros'') in two of the three Basque provinces: Guipuzcoa and Biscay, but kept them for Álava which had sided with the nationalists in the civil war.
This situation ended in part when, in the light of Cold War tensions and of Spain's strategic location, the United States entered into a trade and military alliance with Franco.
In 1913, Franco transferred into the newly formed regulares: Moroccan colonial troops with Spanish officers, who acted as shock troops.
Franco quickly gained a reputation as a good officer.
New elections held in October 1933 resulted in a centre-right majority.
For reasons of prestige it was decided to continue assisting Franco until the end of the war, and Italian and German troops paraded on the day of the final victory in Madrid.
Although Franco made occasional negative references to Jews, he had Jewish friends in Morocco and even publicly stopped an outbreak of discrimination against Jews in Morocco.
The accumulated wealth of Franco's family (including much real estate inherited from Franco, such as the ''Pazo de Meirás'', the ''Canto del Pico'' in Torrelodones and the Cornide Palace in A Coruña), and its murky provenance, have also become matters of public discussion.
Estimates of the family's wealth have ranged from 350&nbsp;million to 600&nbsp;million euros, well above what could possibly be accumulated from investing his official income.
At the time of her death in 1988, Carmen Polo was receiving more than 12.5&nbsp;million pesetas (four million more than Felipe González, then head of the government).
(An oft-cited remark attributed to Hitler is that the German leader said that he would rather have some of his own teeth extracted than to have to personally deal further with Franco.)
* Coat of arms of Franco as Head of State.
On February 5, 1932, he was given a command in A Coruña.
A week later the rebels, who soon called themselves the ''Nationalists'', controlled a third of Spain; however most naval units remained under control of the Republican loyalist forces, which left Franco isolated.
The resolution was at the initiative of Leo Brincat and of the historian Luis María de Puig, and was the first international official condemnation of the repression enacted by Franco's regime.
It was said that officers would receive either ''la caja o la faja'' (a coffin or a general's sash).
Spain lost thousands of doctors, nurses, teachers, lawyers, judges, professors, businessmen, artists, etc.
Despite the official end of the war, guerrilla resistance to Franco (known as "the ''maquis''") was widespread in many mountainous regions, and continued well into the 1950s.
As a side result of Azaña's military reform, in January 1933, Franco was relegated from the first to the 24th in the list of brigadiers; the same year, on February 17, he was given the military command of the Balearic Islands: a post above his rank, but Franco was still angered that he was purposely stuck in the positions he didn't want to be, and this was quite common for the Conservative Officers to be moved or demoted.
The resolution also urged public access to be given to historians (professional and amateurs) to the various archives of the Francoist regime, including those of the private ''Fundación Francisco Franco'' which, as well as other Francoist archives, remain as of 2006 inaccessible to the public.
The few consistent points in Franco's long rule were above all authoritarianism, nationalism, Catholicism, anti-Freemasonry, and anti-Communism.
Like most Civil Wars, Spain's ravaged the Spanish economy.
The nationalist side was supported by Fascist Italy, which sent the ''Corpo Truppe Volontarie'', and later by Nazi Germany, which assisted with the Condor Legion.
All these planes had the Nationalist Spanish insignia painted on them, but were flown by Italian and German nationals.
Navarre remained a separate region from the Basque Country and Franco also decided to preserve its centuries-old fiscal privileges and autonomy, the so-called Fueros of Navarre.
Already proclaimed ''Generalísimo'' of the Nationalists and ''Jefe del Estado'' (Head of State) in October 1936, he thereafter assumed the official title of "''Su Excelencia el Jefe de Estado''" ("His Excellency the Head of State").
The Spanish Army of Morocco itself was split into two columns, one commanded by General Juan Yagüe and the other commanded by Colonel José Varela.
Franco was reluctant to enact any form of administrative and legislative decentralisation and kept a fully centralised government with a similar administrative structure to that established by the House of Bourbon and General Miguel Primo de Rivera y Orbaneja.
This made him the youngest major in the Spanish army.
On the other hand, the Catholic Church was upheld as the established church of the Spanish State, and it regained many of the traditional privileges it had lost under the Republic.
Most country towns and rural areas were patrolled by pairs of ''Guardia Civil'', a military police for civilians, which functioned as Franco's chief means of social control.
By the 1950s, the nature of his regime changed from being openly totalitarian and using severe repression to a more authoritarian system with limited pluralism.
Many of those who had to stay lost their jobs or lost their rank.
From the mid-1950s there was modest acceleration in economic activity after some minor reforms and a relaxation of controls.
The Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) went into exile, and in 1959 the ETA armed group was created to wage a low-intensity war against Franco.
He returned to Castilian as the only official language of the State and education.
Additionally, Mussolini ordered a voluntary army, the ''Corpo Truppe Volontarie'' (CTV) of some 12,000 Italians of fully motorised units to Seville and Hitler added to them a professional squadron from the Luftwaffe (2JG/88) with about 24 planes.
Franco and López Ochoa (who, prior to the campaign in Asturias, had been seen as a left-leaning officer) emerged as officers prepared to use 'troops against Spanish civilians as if they were a foreign enemy'.
Franco abolished the official statute and recognition of the Basque, Galician, and Catalan languages that the Second Spanish Republic had granted for the first time in the history of Spain.
The main drawback of this kind of management is that government attention and initiatives were irregular, and often depended more on the goodwill of regional Government representatives than on regional needs.
In 1952 a syndicate from Dallas, Texas, including Jack Crichton, Everette Lee DeGolyer, and Clint Murchison sought drilling rights to petroleum in Spain.
In 1907, he entered the Infantry Academy in Toledo, graduating in 1910 as a lieutenant.
The Spanish intelligentsia and atheists were also targeted for liquidation, as well as military and government figures who had remained loyal to the Madrid government during the civil war.
Plainclothes secret police worked inside Spanish universities.
In 1923, by now a lieutenant colonel, he was made commander of the Legion.
On September 21 it was decided that Franco was to be commander-in-chief (this unified command was opposed only by Cabanellas), and, after some discussion, with no more than a lukewarm agreement from Queipo de Llano and from Mola, also head of government.
But the closing of the Academy in June by War Minister Manuel Azaña provoked his first clash with the Spanish Republic.
The legal usage of languages other than Castilian was forbidden.
Among other things, they point to the political heterogeneity on both sides (''See Spanish Civil War: other factions'') and criticise a monolithic interpretation which overlooks the local nuances of Spanish history.
Larger cities and capitals were mostly under the Policia Armada, or the ''grises'' ("greys", due to the colour of their uniforms) as they were called.
Franco expelled the original leading members of both the Carlists (Manuel Fal Condé) and the Falangists (Manuel Hedilla) to secure his political future.
The situation reached a point of no return and, as presented to Franco by Mola, the coup was unavoidable and he had to choose a side.
On October 30, 1975, he fell into a coma and was put on life support.
After a 36-year rule, Franco died in 1975.
He decided to join the rebels and was given the task of commanding the Army of Africa.
He promoted the use of Castilian Spanish and suppressed other languages such as Catalan, Galician, and Basque.
Spain ended up helping more Jews than any other neutral nation during World War II.
Concurrent with the absence of social reforms, and the economic power shift, a tide of mass emigration commenced to other European countries, and to a lesser extent, to South America.
One year later he fell ill once again from more health problems including a long battle with Parkinson's disease.
The assassination of the right-wing opposition leader José Calvo Sotelo by government police troops, possibly in retaliation for the murder of José Castillo, precipitated the uprising.
A ''Ley de la memoria histórica de España'' (Law on the Historical Memory of Spain) was approved on July 28, 2006, by the Council of Ministers, but it took until October 31, 2007, for the Congress of Deputies to approve an amended version as "The Bill to recognise and extend rights and to establish measures in favour of those who suffered persecution or violence during the Civil War and the Dictatorship" (in common parlance still known as Law of Historical Memory).
After a referendum, a new constitution was adopted, which transformed Spain into a parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy.
Franco soon recovered, and on September 2 he resumed his duties as Head of State.
On August 11 Mérida was taken, and on August 15 Badajoz, thus joining both nationalist-controlled areas.
At the same time Franco appropriated many of the privileges of a king.
The ''Gudaris'' (Basques) and the pilots easily found local backers and jobs, and were allowed to quit the camp, but the farmers and ordinary people, who could not find relations in France, were encouraged by the Third Republic, in agreement with the Francoist government, to return to Spain.
The United Kingdom and France strictly adhered to the arms embargo, provoking dissensions within the French Popular Front coalition led by Léon Blum, but the Republican side was nonetheless supported by the Soviet Union and volunteers fighting in the International Brigades (see for example Ken Loach's ''Land and Freedom'').
Under Franco, Spain became a one-party state with a merger of the monarchist party and the fascist party that helped him during the war, the FET y de las JONS, while all other political parties were outlawed.
Bullfighting and flamenco were promoted as national traditions while those traditions not considered "Spanish" were suppressed.
(An obelisk commemorating this historic meeting was erected at the site in a clearing at Las Raíces.)
The insurgency in Asturias (see Asturian miners' strike of 1934) sharpened the antagonism between Left and Right.
The country got rid of populations it would not have been able to keep in employment, and the emigrants supplied the country with much needed monetary remittances.
His method was the summary execution of some 200 senior officers loyal to the Republic (one of them his own cousin).
Mola had been somewhat discredited as the main planner of the attempted coup that had now degenerated into a civil war, and was strongly identified with the Carlist monarchists and not at all with the Falange, a party with Fascist leanings and connections ("phalanx", a far-right Spanish political party founded by José Antonio Primo de Rivera), nor did he have good relations with Germany; Queipo de Llano and Cabanellas had both previously rebelled against the dictatorship of Miguel Primo de Rivera and were therefore discredited in some nationalist circles; and Falangist leader José Antonio Primo de Rivera was in prison in Alicante (he would be executed a few months later) and the desire to keep a place open for him prevented any other Falangist leader from emerging as a possible head of state.
His parents married in 1890.
For 40 years, Spaniards, and particularly children at school were told that Divine Providence had sent him to save Spain from chaos and poverty.
Franco's funeral was attended by Prince Rainier III of Monaco, the Chilean leader General Augusto Pinochet, who revered Franco and modelled his leadership style in Chile on the way Franco led Spain, Bolivia's dictator General Hugo Banzer, Jordan's King Hussein and US Vice President Nelson Rockefeller.
The 17,000 refugees housed in Gurs were divided into four categories (Brigadists, pilots, ''Gudaris'' and ordinary 'Spaniards').
Intending to overthrow the republic, Franco and other generals staged a failed coup precipitating the Spanish Civil War.
The operation was handled by Delta Drilling Company.
Women could not become judges, or testify in a trial.
The government and its supporters, the Popular Front, had launched a campaign against the Opposition whom they accused of plotting against the Republic.
Through this law, homosexuality, pedophilia and prostitution were made criminal offenses in 1954 , although its application was seldom consistent.
Though the colonial units sent to the north by the government at Franco's recommendation  consisted of the Spanish Foreign Legion and the Moroccan Regulares Indigenas, the right wing press portrayed the Asturian rebels as lackeys of a foreign Jewish-Bolshevik conspiracy.
State-owned firms like the car manufacturer SEAT, truck builder Pegaso and oil refiner INH, massively expanded production.
On October 1, 1936, in Burgos, Franco was publicly proclaimed as ''Generalísimo'' of the National army and ''Jefe del Estado'' (Head of State).
American military facilities in Spain built during this era included Naval Station Rota, Morón Air Base, and Torrejón Air Base.
Franco initially pursued a policy of autarky, cutting off almost all international trade.
Nevertheless, the Italian troops, despite not being always effective, were present in most of the large operations in large numbers, while the German aircraft helped the Nationalist air force dominate the skies for most of the war.
Franco's previous aloofness from politics meant that he had few active enemies in any of the factions that needed to be placated, and also he had cooperated in recent months with both Germany and Italy.
The end of the war led to hundreds of thousands of exiles, mostly to France (but also Mexico, Chile, Cuba, the USA and so on.).
Two wide coalitions formed: the Popular Front on the left, ranging from Republican Union Party to Communists, and the Frente Nacional on the right, ranging from the centre radicals to the conservative Carlists.
After the war, the Spanish government tried to destroy all evidence of its cooperation with the Axis.
During the Cold War, Franco appeared as one of the world's foremost anticommunist figures; consequently his regime was assisted by the West, and it was asked to join the United Nations and came under NATO's protection.
He wore the uniform of a Captain General (a rank traditionally reserved for the King) and resided in the El Pardo Palace.
Many Spaniards, particularly those who suffered under Franco's rule, have sought to remove official recognition of his regime.
The length of his rule, the suppression of opposition, and the effective propaganda sustained through the years have made a detached evaluation almost impossible.
The Chilean poet Pablo Neruda, who had been named by the Chilean President Pedro Aguirre Cerda special consul for immigration in Paris, was given responsibility for what he called "the noblest mission I have ever undertaken": shipping more than 2,000 Spanish refugees, who had been housed by the French in squalid camps, to Chile on an old cargo ship, the ''Winnipeg''.
The designated leader of the uprising, General José Sanjurjo, died on July 20, 1936, in a plane crash.
He described Spain as part of the Axis in official documents, while offering various kinds of support to Italy and Germany.
The border would not be fully reopened until 1985.
They could not become university professors.
Troops of the Spanish Army of Africa carried this out, with General Eduardo López Ochoa as commander in the field.
Franco dissolved the autonomy granted by the Second Spanish Republic to these two regions and to Galicia.
However, in 2010 documents were discovered showing that on May 13, 1941, Franco ordered his provincial governors to compile a list of Jews while he sided and made an alliance with the Axis powers.
Their affairs and economic lives had to be managed by their fathers and husbands.
After various postponements, July 18 was fixed as the date of the uprising.
International firms established factories in Spain where salaries were low, company taxes very low, strikes forbidden and workers' health or state protections almost unheard of.
Franco's brother-in-law Ramón Serrano Súñer, who was his main political advisor, was able to turn the various parties under Franco against each other to absorb a series of political confrontations against Franco himself.
Recently the Association for the Recovery of Historical Memory (ARHM) initiated a systematic search for mass graves of people executed during Franco's regime, which has been supported since the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party's (PSOE) victory during the 2004 elections by José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero's government.
On April 19, 1937, Franco managed to fuse the ideologically incompatible national-syndicalist Falange ("Phalanx", a fascist Spanish political party founded by José Antonio Primo de Rivera) and the Carlist monarchist parties into one party under his rule, dubbed ''Falange Española Tradicionalista y de las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista'' (FET y de las JONS), which became the only legal party in 1939.
He requested help from Benito Mussolini, who responded with an unconditional offer of arms and planes; in Germany Wilhelm Canaris, the head of the ''Abwehr'' military intelligence, persuaded Hitler to support the Nationalists.
In the 1960s and 1970s these restrictions were somewhat relaxed, but it was not until after Franco's death that a more egalitarian view of the sexes was adopted.
After the ruling centre-right coalition collapsed amid the Straperlo corruption scandal, new elections were scheduled.
For unofficial use, citizens continued to speak these languages.
This made him the youngest general in Spain, and perhaps the youngest general of Europe.
The Basque Country and Catalonia were among the regions that offered the strongest resistance to Franco in the Civil War.
Growing political bitterness surfaced again.
From there they were transferred to the Miranda de Ebro camp for "purification" according to the Law of Political Responsibilities.
He was, doubtlessly, helped to this primacy by the fact that, in late July, Hitler had decided that all of Germany's aid to the nationalists would go to Franco.
On February 16, 1936, the left won by a narrow margin.
At the time Hitler did not want to risk damaging his relations with the new Vichy French government.
Spain attempted to retain control of its colonial empire throughout Franco's rule.
Outwardly Franco maintained an ambiguous attitude almost until July.
The great majority did so and were turned over to the Francoist authorities in Irún.
Accordingly, he left the throne vacant, proclaiming himself as a ''de facto'' regent for life.
However, he was also referred to in state and official documents as "''Caudillo de España''" ("the Leader of Spain"), and sometimes called "''el Caudillo de la Última Cruzada y de la Hispanidad''" ("the Leader of the Last Crusade and of the Hispanic heritage") and "''el Caudillo de la Guerra de Liberación contra el Comunismo y sus Cómplices''" ("the Leader of the War of Liberation Against Communism and Its Accomplices").
This interpretation has not found acceptance among most historians, who consider the Spanish Civil War and Second World War to be two distinct conflicts.
Despite his own monarchist sympathies, Franco did not feel it was time to have a king to rule the country yet, let alone single out any specific candidate for the role.
Franco was aware that his air force would not be able to protect Spanish cities from attacks by the British Royal Air Force, and the British Royal Navy would be able to blockade Spain to prevent imports of crucial materials such as oil.
Franco served as a role model for several anti-communist dictators in South America.
Spanish efforts to occupy their new African protectorate provoked the protracted Rif War (from 1909 to 1927) with native Moroccans.
Civil marriages which had taken place in Republican Spain were declared null and void unless they had been confirmed by the Catholic Church.
Emigration helped the regime in two ways.
Despite the creation of the list, there is no evidence of any Jew seeking refuge from Germany being sent back to Germany.
Franco was a subscriber to the journal of Acción Española, a monarchist organisation, and a firm believer in the Jewish-Masonic-Bolshevik conspiracy or ''contubernio'' (filthy cohabitation)—'one of Franco's favourite words'; a conspiracy in which Jews, Freemasons, Communists, and other leftists alike allegedly sought the destruction of Christian Europe, with Spain the principal target.
They were opposed by the Soviet Union and communist, socialists and anarchists within Spain.
Franco had received important support from Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini during the Spanish Civil War.
While the loyalist forces presented the war as a struggle to defend the Republic against Fascism, Franco depicted himself as the defender of "Catholic Spain" against "atheist Communism."
In 1939 the fascist style heavily predominated, with ritualistic invocations of "Franco, Franco, Franco."
This gesture was largely done to appease the monarchists in the ''Movimiento Nacional'' (Carlists and Alfonsists).
However the historian Ricardo de la Cierva claimed that he had been told, around 6&nbsp;pm on November 19, that Franco had already died.
On the same day, Franco placed his sword upon the altar of a church and in a vow, promised that he would never again take up his sword unless Spain itself was threatened with invasion.
Furthermore, Spanish diplomats extended their diplomatic protection over Jews in Hungary, Czechoslovakia and the Balkans.
In early August, the situation in western Andalusia was stable enough to allow him to organise a column (some 15,000 men at its height), under the command of then Lieutenant-Colonel Juan Yagüe, which would march through Extremadura towards Madrid.
Some regions, like Extremadura or La Mancha did not have a university.
(The letters between the two were found and she was questioned by journalists.)
The next day, Valencia, which had held out under the guns of the Nationalists for close to two years, also surrendered.
Recent attempts to give the national anthem new lyrics have failed due to lack of consensus.
The 1940 shooting of the president of the Catalan government, Lluís Companys, was one of the most notable cases of this early suppression of opponents and dissenters.
In March 2006, the Permanent Commission of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe unanimously adopted a resolution "firmly" condemning the "multiple and serious violations" of human rights committed in Spain under the Francoist regime from 1939 to 1975.
As with his decision to relieve the garrison at Toledo, this approach has been subject of some debate; some of his decisions, such as in June 1938 when he preferred to head for Valencia instead of Catalonia, remain particularly controversial from a military viewpoint.
Franco's Spanish nationalism promoted a unitary national identity by repressing Spain's cultural diversity.
Among other things, the law is supposed to enforce an official recognition of the crimes committed against civilians during the Francoist rule and organise under state supervision the search for mass graves.
Volunteer Spanish troops (the ''División Azul'', or "Blue Division") fought on the Eastern Front under German command from 1941 to 1944.
A privately owned DH 89 De Havilland Dragon Rapide, flown by two British pilots, Cecil Bebb and Hugh Pollard, was chartered in England on July 11 to take Franco to Africa.
Franco's recognition eventually caught up with him and he was promoted to brigadier general on February 3, 1926.
The Franco era corresponded with the popularisation of the compulsory national educational system and the development of modern mass media, both controlled by the State and in the Castilian language, and heavily reduced the number of speakers of Basque, Catalan and Galician, as happened during the second half of the 20th century with other European minority languages which were not officially protected, such as Scottish Gaelic or French Breton.
Franco supplied Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler with a list of 6,000 Jews in Spain, for the Nazis' Final Solution.
The Legion and supporting units relieved the Spanish enclave of Melilla after a three-day forced march led by Franco.
This uprising was rapidly quelled in most of the country, but gained a stronghold in Asturias, with the support of the miners' unions.
