Critic Alistair Cooke observed that Capra was "starting to make movies about themes instead of people."
During his career as a director, he retained an early ambition to teach science, and after his career declined in the 1950s, he made educational TV films related to science subjects.
Capra pleaded with Cohn to allow the film to go into distribution and remembers the intensity of their decision making:
Within four days after the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, Capra quit his successful directing career in Hollywood and received a commission as a major in the United States Army.
Capra had become "disconnected from an American culture that had changed" during the previous decade.
He welcomed the transition to sound, recalling, "I wasn't at home in silent films."
He was rejected due to his age.
At the event ceremony, director John Ford announced that Capra had also received an honorary Order of British Empire (OBE) on the recommendation of Winston Churchill.
He briefly held the record for winning the most Best Director Oscars when he won for the third time in 1938, until this record was matched by John Ford in 1941, and then later surpassed by Ford in 1952.
The movie was considered a failure.
He worked through college at the California Institute of Technology, playing banjo at nightclubs and taking odd jobs, which included working at the campus laundry facility, waiting tables, and cleaning engines at a local power plant.
After World War II, Capra's career declined as his later films such as ''It's a Wonderful Life'' (1946), which was flopped when it was first released, were critically derided as being "simplistic" or "overly idealistic".
As Capra's films often carry a message about basic goodness in human nature, and show the value of unselfishness and hard work, his wholesome, feel-good themes have led some cynics to term his style "Capra-corn."
When his career ended, Capra regarded these films as his most important works.
Capra directed his first "real" sound picture, ''The Younger Generation'', in 1929.
Winston Churchill ordered that ''all'' of them be shown to the British public in theaters.
He studied chemical engineering and graduated in the spring of 1918.
Capra recalls some personal reasons for enlisting:
Capra wrote of this period and recalled the confidence that Cohn placed in Capra's vision and directing:
Friedman finds that while Capra's ideas were popular with depression-era and prewar audiences, they became less relevant to a prospering post-war America.
Film historian and author William S. Pechter described Capra's style as one "of almost classical purity."
Capra's personal papers and some film related materials are contained in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives, which allows scholars and media experts full access.
To support himself, he took odd jobs on farms, as a movie extra, playing poker, and selling local oil well stocks.
Capra directed two films at Paramount Pictures starring Bing Crosby, ''Riding High'' (1950) and ''Here Comes the Groom'' (1951).
Capra was born '''Francesco Rosario Capra''' in Bisacquino, Sicily, a village near Palermo.
Capra's father worked as a fruit picker and young Capra sold newspapers after school for 10 years, until he graduated from high school.
He is selected by a news reporter to represent the "common man", used to capture the imagination of ordinary Americans.
After a year without work, seeing how his siblings had steady jobs, he felt he was a failure, which led to bouts of depression and abdominal pains, later discovered to have been an undiagnosed burst appendix.
His father died during the war in an accident (1916).
Capra was four times president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and three times president of the Directors Guild of America, which he helped found.
That is a most wonderful thing."
He took a position with another minor San Francisco studio, and subsequently received an offer to work with producer Harry Cohn at his new studio in Los Angeles.
Under his presidency, he worked to give directors more artistic control of their films.
In his much later years, he spent time writing short stories and songs, along with playing his guitar.
Capra recalled that he "hated being a peasant, being a scrounging new kid trapped in the Sicilian ghetto of Los Angeles ... All I had was cockiness – and let me tell you that gets you a long way."
Capra expanded on his visions in his 1971 autobiography, ''The Name Above the Title'':
These educational science documentaries were popular favorites for school science classrooms.
Many studio heads agreed nor did they want negative feelings about Hollywood to be instilled in political leaders.
He died in La Quinta, California, of a heart attack in his sleep in 1991 at the age of 94.
George Sidney, President of the Directors Guild, stated that "This is the first time in the history of Hollywood, that the city of Los Angeles has officially recognized a creative talent."
He was nominated six times for Best Director and seven times for Outstanding Production/Best Picture.
After the first complete film was viewed by General Marshall along with U.S. Army staff, Marshall approached Capra: "Colonel Capra, how did you do it?
His films soon established Capra as a "bankable" director known throughout the industry, and Cohn raised Capra's initial salary of $1,000 per film to $25,000 per year.
In his autobiography written in 1971, Capra expressed his feelings about the shifting film industry:
For Capra, the journey, which took 13 days, remained in his mind for the rest of his life as one of his worst experiences:
To a France, soon to be invaded and occupied by Nazi forces, the film most expressed the "perseverance of democracy and the American way."
He was the youngest of seven children of Salvatore Capra, a fruit grower, and the former Rosaria "Serah" Nicolosi.
During his book sales effortsand nearly brokeCapra read a newspaper article about a new movie studio opening in San Francisco.
He started using his films to convey messages to the public.
According to some historians, the film was made to convey a "deliberate reaffirmation of American values", although ones which seemed uncertain with respect to the future.
Although ''It's a Wonderful Life'' and ''State of the Union'' were successful soon after the war ended, Capra's themes were becoming out of step with changes in the film industry and the public mood.
His influence can be traced in the works of many directors, including Robert Altman, Ron Howard, Masaki Kobayashi, Akira Kurosawa, John Lasseter, David Lynch, John Milius, Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, Oliver Stone and François Truffaut
One colonel explained the importance of these future films to Capra:
Film critic John Raeburn discusses an early Capra film, ''American Madness'' (1932), as an example of how he had  mastered the movie medium and expressed a unique style:
''Prelude to War'' won the 1942 Academy Award for Documentary Feature.
Hollywood columnist Louella Parsons called it a "smash patriotic hit" and most critics agreed, seeing that audiences left the theaters with "an enthusiasm for democracy" and "in a glow of patriotism."
A conservative Republican, Capra railed against Franklin Delano Roosevelt during his tenure as governor of New York State, and opposed his presidency during the years of the Depression.
Pechter describes its effect:
In his research before filming, he was able to stand close to President Franklin D. Roosevelt during a press conference after the recent acts of war by Germany in Europe.
During his first year with Columbia, Capra directed nine films, some of which were successful.
Capra recalls his fears:
Politicians were concerned about the potential negative impact the film might have on the morale of the United States' allies, as World War II had begun.
Joseph P. Kennedy, U.S. ambassador to the UK, wrote to Columbia head Harry Cohn, "Please do not play this picture in Europe."
Capra remembers the ship's arrival in New York Harbor, where he saw "a statue of a great lady, taller than a church steeple, holding a torch above the land we were about to enter".
All footage came from military and government sources, whereas during earlier years, many newsreels secretly used footage from enemy sources.
Capra stood against government intervention during the national economic crisis.
However, the only picture completed by the studio was ''It's a Wonderful Life'' (1946).
Capra became one of America's most influential directors during the 1930s, winning three Oscars as Best Director.
Capra would eventually direct 20 films for Cohn's studio, including all of his classics.
Physically, Capra was short, stocky, and vigorous, and enjoyed outdoor activities such as hunting, fishing, and mountain climbing.
The name "Capra", notes Capra's biographer Joseph McBride, represents his family's closeness to the land, and means "goat".
In the army, Capra contracted Spanish flu and was medically discharged to return home to live with his mother.
Smith Goes to Washington'', and ''It's a Wonderful Life'').
"Average America" is visualized  as "...a tree lined street, undistinguished frame houses surrounded by modest areas of grass, a few automobiles.
During his first meeting with General Marshall, Capra was told his mission:
When the French public were asked to select which film they wanted to see most, having been told by the Vichy government that soon no more American films would be allowed in France, the overwhelming majority chose it over all others.
Biographer Joseph McBride argues that Capra's disillusionment was more related to the negative effect that the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) had on the film industry in general.
In 1941 Capra directed ''Meet John Doe'' (1941), considered by some to be Capra's most controversial movie.
According to some experts, Capra used great, unobtrusive craftsmanship when directing, and felt it was bad directing to distract the audience with fancy technical gimmicks.
After splitting with Langdon, Capra directed a picture for First National, ''For the Love of Mike'', (1927).
Capra had a difficult time communicating this, however, as he noted in his diary:
He collected fine and rare books during the 1930s/40s.
According to Barson, "Capra became ensconced as Harry Cohn's most trusted director."
He was noted for going on the set with no more than the master scenes written.
Nonetheless, McBride insists that ''The Younger Generation'' abounds with parallels to Capra's own life."
According to Capra, it was he who invented Langdon's character, the innocent fool living in a "naughty world."
The film has been called "picaresque", and was one of the earliest "road movies" which inspired variations on its theme by other filmmakers.
His final theatrical film was with Glenn Ford and Bette Davis, named ''Pocketful of Miracles'' (1961), a remake of his 1933 film ''Lady for a Day''.
The chief cinematographer who worked with Capra on a number of films, was likewise unaware.
Instead of working after graduating, as his parents wanted, he enrolled in college.
A State Department friend of Capra asked him and explained why his trip would be important:
The Academy Film Archive preserved "The Matinee Idol" and "Two Down and One to Go!"
McBride notes the "devastatingly painful climactic scene", where the young social-climbing son, embarrassed when his wealthy new friends first meet his parents, passes his mother and father off as house servants.
Many in Hollywood considered sound a threat to the industry and hoped it would pass quickly; McBride notes that "Capra was not one of them."
Capra blames his early retirement from films on the rising power of stars, which forced him to continually compromise his artistic vision.
Animated charts were created by Walt Disney and his animators.
The family settled in Los Angeles's East Side (today Chinatown) which Capra described in his autobiography as an Italian "ghetto".
The ''Why We Fight'' series is widely considered a masterpiece of war information documentaries, and won an Academy Award.
Film historian Richard Griffith speaks of Capra's "...reliance on sentimental conversation and the ultimate benevolence of ordinary America to resolve all deep conflicts."
In many of Capra's films, the wise-cracking and sharp dialogue was often written by Riskin, and he and Capra went on to become Hollywood's "most admired writer-director team."
This added goal was inspired after meeting with a Christian Scientist friend who told him to view his talents in a different way:
Ford suggested publicly to Capra:
On May 5, 1936, Capra hosted the 8th Academy Awards ceremony.
The HUAC interrogations in the early 1950s ended many Hollywood careers.
Like the others, Columbia was unable to compete with larger studios which often had their own production facilities, distribution and theaters.
Capra returned to Harry Cohn's studio, now named Columbia Pictures, which was then producing short films and two-reel comedies used as "fillers", which played between main features.
Although Capra's stature as a director had declined in the 1950s, his films underwent a revival in the 1960s:
His 'Distinguished Library' was sold at auction in New York in 1949, realizing over $68,000.
Although the project had an excellent pedigree with stars Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, the film was not a success, and Capra's eyebrow-raising statement, "I think ''State of the Union'' was my most perfect film in handling people and ideas" has few adherents today.
A number of Hollywood composers wrote the background music, including Alfred Newman and Russian-born composer Dimitri Tiomkin.
Although ''It's a Wonderful Life'' is his best-known film, Friedman notes that it was ''Mr.
It would become Capra's last important film and, although he directed five more films over the next 14 years, his successful years were now behind him.
He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1920, taking the name '''Frank Russell Capra'''.
Columbia was one of many start-up studios on "Poverty Row" in Los Angeles.
When Langdon eventually left Sennett to make longer, feature-length movies with First National Studios, he took Capra along as his personal writer and director.
His grandson, Frank Capra III, is a Hollywood director and worked as an assistant director in the 1995 film ''The American President'', which referred to Capra in the film's dialogue.
During World War II, Capra served in the U.S. Army Signal Corps and produced propaganda films, such as the ''Why We Fight'' series.
By 1952, at the age of 55, Capra effectively retired from Hollywood filmmaking and spent his later years working with Caltech, his alma mater, to produce educational films on science topics.
Capra's personality when directing gave him a reputation for "fierce independence" when dealing with studio bosses.
Cohn rehired Capra in 1928 to help his studio produce new, full-length feature films, to compete with the major studios.
When the filming was completed, the studio sent preview copies to Washington.
French film historian John Raeburn, editor of ''Cahiers du cinéma'', notes that Capra's films were unknown in France, but there too his films underwent a fresh discovery by the public.
Because of Capra's engineering education, he adapted more easily to the new sound technology than most directors.
Their studio became the first independent company of directors since United Artists in 1919 whose goal was to make films without interference by studio bosses.
Capra himself was not called to testify, although he was a prime target of the committee due to his past associations with many Hollywood blacklisted screenwriters.
In 1903, when he was five, Capra emigrated to the United States with his family, who traveled in the steerage section of the boat, which was the cheapest way to gain passage.
In the mid-1960s he worked on pre-production for an adaptation of Martin Caidin's novel ''Marooned,'' but budgetary constraints caused him to eventually shelve it.
It was a rags-to-riches romantic comedy about a Jewish family's upward mobility in New York City, with their son later trying to deny his Jewish roots in order to keep his rich gentile girlfriend.
He notes that the English word "capricious" derives from it, "evoking the animal's skittish temperament", adding that "the name neatly expresses two aspects of Frank Capra's personality: emotionalism and obstinacy."
Written by Robert Riskin, it is one of the first of the "screwball comedies", and with its release in the Great Depression, critics considered it an escapist story and a variation of the "American Dream".
The film established the names of Capra, Columbia Pictures, and stars Clark Gable and Claudette Colbert in the movie industry.
For Capra, there would be pain and loss, but no enduring sense of tragedy would be allowed to intrude on his fabulist world."
Marshall chose to bypass the usual documentary film-making department, Signal Corps, because he felt they were not capable of producing "sensitive and objective troop information films."
Capra was assigned to work directly under Chief of Staff George C. Marshall, the most senior officer in command of the Army, who later created the Marshall Plan and was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize.
For certain purposes it assumed that all ''real ''Americans live in towns like this, and so great is the power of myth, even the born city-dweller is likely to believe vaguely that he too lives on this shady street, or comes from it, or is going to."
During his acceptance speech for the AFI award, Capra stressed his most important values:
A totalitarian system –  and they would become nothing but publicity men for the party in power."
Capra's family was Roman Catholic.
Among his leading films were ''It Happened One Night'' (1934), which won the Academy Award for Best Picture, as well as ''You Can't Take It With You'', and ''Mr.
In 1986, Capra received the National Medal of Arts.
Being 44 years of age, he was not asked to enlist, but, notes Friedman, "Capra had an intense desire to prove his patriotism to his adopted land."
Capra's basic themes of championing the common man, as well as his use of spontaneous, fast-paced dialogue and goofy, memorable lead and supporting characters, made him one of the most popular and respected filmmakers of the 20th century.
The films made Langdon a recognized comedian in the caliber of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton.
From 1952 to 1956, Capra produced four science-related television specials in color for The Bell Laboratory Science Series: ''Our Mr. Sun'' (1956), ''Hemo the Magnificent'' (1957), ''The Strange Case of the Cosmic Rays'' (1957), and ''Meteora: The Unchained Goddess'' (1958).
The film was followed by ''Broadway Bill'' (1934), a screwball comedy about horse racing.
Capra later became a gag writer for Hal Roach's ''Our Gang'' series and then writer for slapstick comedy director, Mack Sennett, where he wrote scripts for comedian Harry Langdon.
For ''State of the Union'' (1948), Capra changed studios, working for the only time for MGM Pictures.
That scene, notes McBride, "echoes the shame Capra admitted feeling toward his own family as he rose in social status."
In January 1952, Capra was requested by the U.S.
When he returned to Washington to give his report, Secretary of State Dean Acheson gave Capra his commendation for "virtually single-handedly forestalling a possible Communist take-over of Indian films."
They are today often broadcast on television and used as a teaching aid.
The performances his actors gave were invariable portrayals of  personalities developed into recognizable images of popular culture, "their acting has the bold simplicity of an icon..."
In his early twenties, Capra had to undergo a circumcision due to recurring bouts of STIs (the first of which happened after an anonymous encounter with a woman at a party in San Francisco), which caused severe damage to his sex life, an affliction that lasted until his twilight years.
He was interred at Coachella Valley Public Cemetery in Coachella, California.
Capra later wrote that his college education had "changed his whole viewpoint on life from the viewpoint of an alley rat to the viewpoint of a cultured person".
It was during this time that the 24-year-old Capra directed a 32-minute documentary film entitled ''La Visita Dell'Incrociatore Italiano LIBYA a San Francisco''.
In addition to his three directing wins, Capra received directing nominations for three other films (''Lady for a Day'', ''Mr.
The American Film Institute named it one of the best films ever made, putting it at the top of the list of AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers, a list of what AFI considers to be the most inspirational American movies of all time.
During his years at Columbia, Capra worked often with screenwriter Robert Riskin (husband of Fay Wray), and cameraman Joseph Walker.
Director/actor John Cassavetes contemplating Capra’s contribution to the art of film quipped: "Maybe there really wasn't an America, it was only Frank Capra."
Few of the studio heads or crew were aware of Capra's engineering background until he began directing ''The Younger Generation'' in 1929.
After two weeks in India, Capra discovered that Bowles' fears were warranted, as many film sessions were used by Russian and Chinese representatives to give long political speeches.
Capra, with the help of a cameraman, made the film in two days and cast it with amateurs.
Smith Goes to Washington'' (1939) which most represented the "Capra myth."
Glazer describes how "John's accidental transformation from drifter to national figure parallels Capra's own early drifting experience and subsequent involvement in movie making ... ''Meet John Doe'', then, was an attempt to work out his own fears and questions."
Most studios were unwilling to invest in the new sound technology, assuming it was a passing fad.
As a colonel, he received the Legion of Merit in 1943 and the Distinguished Service Medal in 1945.
Soon after graduating college, Capra was commissioned in the US Army as a second lieutenant, having already worked on the campus ROTC.
His son Frank Capra Jr., one of the four children born to Capra and his second wife, Lucille Capra, was the president of EUE Screen Gems Studios in Wilmington, North Carolina, until his death on December 19, 2007.
Ambassador to India to represent the U.S. film industry at the International Film Festival to be held in India.
Capra began to embody messages in subsequent films, many of which conveyed "fantasies of goodwill."
Capra directed a film for MGM during this period, but soon realized he "had much more freedom under Harry Cohn's benevolent dictatorship", where Cohn also put Capra's "name above the title" of his films, a first for the movie industry.
In 1985, at age 88, Capra suffered one of a series of strokes.
Capra's final film, ''Rendezvous in Space'' (1964), was an industrial film made for the Martin Marietta Company and shown at the 1964 New York World's Fair.
Capra explains his new thinking:
In the Army, he taught mathematics to artillerymen at Fort Point, San Francisco.
He left part of his  ranch in Fallbrook, California, to Caltech as a retreat center.
NYU professor Leonard Quart writes:"There would be no enduring conflicts – harmony, no matter how contrived and specious, would ultimately triumph in the last frame...In true Hollywood fashion, no Capra film would ever suggest that social change was a complex, painful act.
Film author Richard Glazer speculates that the film may have been autobiographical, "reflecting Capra's own uncertainties."
The film also appeared in another AFI Top 100 list: it placed at 11th on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list of the top American films.
Capra's only prior exposure to films was in 1915 while attending Manual Arts High School.
Los Angeles Mayor Sam Yorty, by vote of the city council, declared May 12, 1962 as "Frank Capra Day."
The film, however, became Capra's most controversial.
During this time, he worked as a property man, film cutter, title writer, and assistant director.
He served as President of the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences, worked alongside the Screenwriters Guild, and was head of the Directors Guild of America.
After completion of the first few documentaries, government officials and U.S. Army staff found them to be powerful messages and excellent presentations of why it was necessary for the U.S. to fight in the war.
It was eight years before he directed another theatrical film, ''A Hole in the Head'' (1959) with Frank Sinatra and Edward G. Robinson, his first feature film in color.
In 1938, Capra won his third Director Oscar in five years for ''You Can't Take It with You'', which also won Best Picture.
The film's hero, played by Gary Cooper, is a former baseball player now bumming around, lacking goals.
An annual ''It's a Wonderful Life'' celebration that Capra attended in 1981, during which he said, "This is one of the proudest moments of my life," was recounted in ''The New Yorker''.
Outside of directing, Capra was active in the film industry, engaging in various political and social issues.
It was later nominated for 11 Academy Awards, only winning one (for Best Original Story) partly because of the number of major pictures that were nominated that year was 10, including ''The Wizard of Oz'' and ''Gone with the Wind''.
Capra phoned them saying he had moved from Hollywood, and falsely implied that he had experience in the budding film industry.
It was a box office disappointment, but was nonetheless nominated for five Academy Awards.
Capra’s films were his love letters to an idealized America –  a cinematic landscape of his own invention.
Capra remained employable in Hollywood during and after the HUAC hearings, but chose nonetheless to demonstrate his loyalty by attempting to re-enlist in the Army at the outbreak of the Korean War, in 1950.
Ambassador Bowles also conveyed gratitude to Capra for "one helluva job."
They were translated into French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Chinese for use by other countries.
The significance of the film's message was established further in France, shortly after World War II began.
Capra added that in his opinion, "practically all the Hollywood film-making of today is stooping to cheap salacious pornography in a crazy bastardization of a great art to compete for the 'patronage' of deviates and masturbators."
