Bismarck met Favre on 18 September at the Château de Ferrières and demanded a frontier immune to a French war of revenge, which included Strasbourg, Alsace and most the Moselle department in Lorraine of which Metz was the capital.
The sheer number of soldiers available made encirclement ''en masse'' and destruction of French formations relatively easy.
Anglo-German straining of tensions was somewhat mitigated by several prominent relationships between the two powers, such as the Crown Prince's marriage with the daughter of Queen Victoria.
This plan was discarded in favour of a defensive plan by Generals Charles Frossard and Bartélemy Lebrun, which called for the Army of the Rhine to remain in a defensive posture near the German border and repel any Prussian offensive.
Despite access to the armaments factories of Lille, the Army of the North suffered from severe supply difficulties, which depressed morale.
When the war began, the French government ordered a blockade of the North German coasts, which the small North German navy (''Norddeutsche Bundesmarine'') with only five ironclads could do little to oppose.
Outside Europe, the French corvette ''Dupleix'' blockaded the German corvette  in Nagasaki and the Battle of Havana took place between the Prussian gunboat  and the French aviso ''Bouvet'' off Havana, Cuba, in November 1870.
The Prussian army was unique in Europe for having the only such organisation in existence, whose purpose in peacetime was to prepare the overall war strategy, and in wartime to direct operational movement and organise logistics and communications.
The Prussian Army, under the terms of the armistice, held a brief victory parade in Paris on 17 February; the city was silent and draped with black and the Germans quickly withdrew.
The French, meanwhile, suffered from an education and promotion system that stifled intellectual development.
The aging General von Steinmetz made an overzealous, unplanned move, leading the 1st Army south from his position on the Moselle.
French determination to regain Alsace-Lorraine and fear of another Franco-German war, along with British apprehension about the balance of power, became factors in the causes of World War I.
Many Germans also viewed the French as the traditional destabilizer of Europe, and sought to weaken France to prevent further breaches of the peace.
The first was a reorganization of the army that integrated the regular army and the ''Landwehr'' reserves.
Under Marshal Adolphe Niel, urgent reforms were made.
The French were routed and the III Corps captured Vionville, blocking any further escape attempts to the west.
Instead of continuing to defend the heights, by the close of battle after dusk he retreated to the south.
The German Official History recorded  and French casualties of
Bismarck's demand for the return of Alsace caused a dramatic shift in that sentiment in Italy, which was best exemplified by the reaction of Garibaldi soon after the revolution in Paris, who told the ''Movimento'' of Genoa on 7 September 1870 that "Yesterday I said to you: war to the death to Bonaparte.
The French troops who did not surrender retreated westward, leaving behind  and wounded and another  and all of their remaining ammunition.
The survivors were amnestied by a bill introduced by Gambetta in 1880 and allowed to return.
The French expected the invasion to divert German troops and to encourage Denmark to join in the war, with its 50,000-strong army and the Royal Danish Navy.
With MacMahon wounded on the previous day, General Auguste Ducrot took command of the French troops in the field.
Garibaldi went to France and assumed command of the Army of the Vosges, with which he operated around Dijon till the end of the war.
Albrecht von Roon, the Prussian Minister of War from 1859 to 1873, put into effect a series of reforms of the Prussian military system in the 1860s.
In this he was backed by other senior military figures such as the Crown Prince and Moltke.
By the time engine repairs had been completed, the French fleet had already departed.
The French had lost the opportunity to win a decisive victory.
The officers of the General Staff were hand-picked from the Prussian ''Kriegsakademie'' (War Academy).
Marguerite was killed leading the very first charge and the two additional charges led to nothing but heavy losses.
The rifle had a range of only  and lacked the rubber breech seal that permitted aimed shots.
This organization of forces was due to a lack of supplies, forcing each division to seek out basic provisions along with the representatives of the army supply arm that was supposed to aid them.
As the autumn storms of the North Sea forced the return of more of the French ships, the blockade of the north German ports diminished and in September 1870 the French navy abandoned the blockade for the winter.
Today I say to you: rescue the French Republic by every means."
He told General Abel Douay, commander of the 2nd Division, on 1 August that ''"The information I have received makes me suppose that the enemy has no considerable forces very near his advance posts, and has no desire to take the offensive"''.
Reservists that were supposed to be at the ready in case of war, were working in the Newfoundland fisheries or in Scotland.
The Germans expected to negotiate an end to the war but immediately ordered an advance on Paris; by 15 September Moltke issued the orders for an investment of Paris and on 20 September the encirclement was complete.
Second French Empire
However, following the "Seven Weeks War" between Prussia and Austria four years earlier, it had been calculated that the French Army could field only 288,000 men to face the Prussian Army when potentially 1,000,000 would be required.
The Battle of Gravelotte, or Gravelotte–St.
More recent histories, based on studies of the number buried in Paris cemeteries and in mass graves after the fall of the Commune, put the number killed at between 6,000 and 10,000.
The '''Franco-Prussian War''' or '''Franco-German War''' (, ), often referred to in France as the '''War of 1870''' (19 July  1871), was a conflict between the Second French Empire of Napoleon III and the German states of the North German Confederation led by the Kingdom of Prussia.
The Crown Prince of Prussia's 3rd army had, on the quick reaction of his Chief of Staff General von Blumenthal, drawn reinforcements which brought its strength up to 140,000 troops.
The French losses were 7,855 killed and wounded along with 4,420 prisoners of war (half of them were wounded) for a total of 12,275.
Douay was killed in the late morning when a caisson of the divisional mitrailleuse battery exploded near him; the encirclement of the town by the Prussians threatened the French avenue of retreat.
Several sources claim that in his carriage on the way back to Paris, Favre broke into tears, and collapsed into his daughter's arms as the guns around Paris fell silent at midnight.
The Prussians reported their losses at 2,320 killed, 5,980 wounded and 700 captured or missing.
Douay held a very strong position initially, thanks to the accurate long-range fire of the Chassepots but his force was too thinly stretched to hold it.
The army had achieved several small victories at towns such as Ham, La Hallue, and Amiens and was protected by the belt of fortresses in northern France, allowing Faidherbe's men to launch quick attacks against isolated Prussian units, then retreat behind the fortresses.
Bismarck agreed to end the siege and allow food convoys to immediately enter Paris (including trains carrying millions of German army rations), on condition that the Government of National Defence surrender several key fortresses outside Paris to the Prussians.
Without the forts, the French Army would no longer be able to defend Paris.
The Prussian tactics were adopted by European armies by 1914, exemplified in the French 75, an artillery piece optimised to provide direct fire support to advancing infantry.
Faced with the blockade, the new French government called for the establishment of several large armies in the French provinces.
Bismarck wanted an early peace but had difficulty in finding a legitimate French authority with which to negotiate.
The Ems telegram had exactly the effect on French public opinion that Bismarck had intended.
However, the Prussian artillery was superior with the all-steel Krupp breech-loading gun.
A delegation of Parisian diplomats arrived in Tours by train on 5 February to negotiate with Gambetta, and the following day Gambetta stepped down and surrendered control of the provincial armies to the Government of National Defence, which promptly ordered a cease-fire across France.
Reconnaissance by Frossard's forces had identified only the Prussian 16th Infantry Division guarding the border town of Saarbrücken, right before the entire Army of the Rhine.
On 10 October, hostilities began between German and French republican forces near Orléans.
Only part of the 470-ship French Navy put to sea on 24 July.
The immediate cause of the war resided in the candidacy of Leopold of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, a Prussian prince, to the throne of Spain.
The French Navy lacked the heavy guns to engage the coastal defences and the topography of the Prussian coast made a seaborne invasion of northern Germany impossible.
Two days later, he told MacMahon that he had not found ''"a single enemy post&nbsp;... it looks to me as if the menace of the Bavarians is simply bluff"''.
A series of swift Prussian and German victories in eastern France, culminating in the Siege of Metz and the Battle of Sedan, saw Napoleon III captured and the army of the Second Empire decisively defeated.
The German 3rd army did not pursue the French but remained in Alsace and moved slowly south, attacking and destroying the French garrisons in the vicinity.
Two Prussian corps had attacked the French advance guard, thinking that it was the rearguard of the retreat of the French Army of the Meuse.
Some historians argue that the Prussian chancellor Otto von Bismarck deliberately provoked a French attack in order to draw the southern German states—Baden, Württemberg, Bavaria and Hesse-Darmstadt—into an alliance with the North German Confederation dominated by Prussia, while others contend that Bismarck did not plan anything and merely exploited the circumstances as they unfolded.
It was an overwhelming victory for the Prussians, for they not only captured an entire French army, but the leader of France as well.
The army also possessed a precursor to the machine-gun: the mitrailleuse, which could unleash significant, concentrated firepower but nevertheless lacked range and was comparatively immobile, and thus prone to being easily overrun.
In addition, the Prussian artillery batteries had 30% more guns than their French counterparts.
A pre-war plan laid out by the late Marshal Niel called for a strong French offensive from Thionville towards Trier and into the Prussian Rhineland.
Napoleon's new prime minister, Emile Ollivier, declared that France had done all that it could humanly and honorably do to prevent the war, and that he accepted the responsibility "with a light heart."
Moltke embraced new technology, particularly the railroad and telegraph, to coordinate and accelerate mobilisation of large forces.
The French breech-loading rifle, the Chassepot, had a far longer range than the German needle gun;  compared to .
Service was compulsory for all of men of military age, and thus Prussia and its North and South German allies could mobilise and field some 1,000,000 soldiers in time of war.
It was fought about  west of Metz, where on the previous day, having intercepted the French army's retreat to the west at the Battle of Mars-La-Tour, the Prussians were now closing in to complete the destruction of the French forces.
The fighting within the town had become extremely intense, becoming a door to door battle of survival.
Seriously flawed communications between Frossard and those in reserve under Bazaine slowed down so much that by the time the reserves received orders to move out to Spicheren, German soldiers from the 1st and 2nd armies had charged up the heights.
Following the Army of the Loire's defeats, Gambetta turned to General Faidherbe's Army of the North.
These developments prompted calls from the German public for a bombardment of the city.
Each Prussian Corps was based within a ''Kreis'' (literally "circle") around the chief city in an area.
It was discovered that Prussia had recently built defences around the big North German ports, including coastal artillery batteries with Krupp heavy artillery, which with a range of , had double the range of French naval guns.
With Paris starving, and Gambetta's provincial armies reeling from one disaster after another, French foreign minister Favre went to Versailles on 24 January to discuss peace terms with Bismarck.
To relieve pressure from the expected German attack into Alsace-Lorraine, Napoleon III and the French high command planned a seaborne invasion of northern Germany as soon as war began.
Napoleon III was under immense domestic pressure to launch an offensive before the full might of Moltke's forces was mobilized and deployed.
This new power destabilized the European balance of power established by the Congress of Vienna in 1815 after the Napoleonic Wars.
The French lost over 17,000 men, killed or wounded, with 21,000 captured.
At 17:15, the Prussian 4th Guards Infantry Brigade joined the advance followed at 17:45 by the Prussian 1st Guards Infantry Brigade.
Twenty-six courts were established to try more than  who had been arrested, which took until 1875 and imposed  sentences, of which  inflicted.
The mitrailleuse was mounted on an artillery gun carriage and grouped in batteries in a similar fashion to cannon.
As the bulk of the remaining French armies were digging-in near Paris, the German leaders decided to put pressure upon the enemy by attacking Paris.
In a breakdown of the casualties, Frossard's II Corps of the Army of the Rhine suffered 621 casualties while inflicting 4,300 casualties on the Prussian First Army under Steinmetz before the Pointe du Jour.
The creation of a unified German Empire greatly disturbed the balance of power that had been created with the Congress of Vienna after the end of the Napoleonic Wars.
By 12:00, General Manstein opened up the battle before the village of Amanvillers with artillery from the 25th Infantry Division.
Saarbrücken also proved to be a major obstacle in terms of logistics.
A Government of National Defence declared the Third Republic in Paris on 4 September and continued the war for another five months; the German forces fought and defeated new French armies in northern France.
By afternoon, the Germans had suffered  or wounded and the French had lost a similar number of casualties and another  taken prisoner, a loss of about 50%.
Furious, he refused to surrender and launched an immediate attack on German forces at Orleans which, predictably, failed.
However, planning for the next encounter was more based upon the reality of unfolding events rather than emotion or pride, as Intendant General Wolff told him and his staff that supply beyond the Saar would be impossible.
The only campaign plan prepared between 1866 and 1870 was a defensive one.
The rest of the navy retired to ports along the English Channel and remained in port for the rest of the war.
The army was still equipped with the Dreyse needle gun of Battle of Königgrätz fame, which was by this time showing the age of its 25-year-old design.
One French army was now immobilised and besieged in the city of Metz, and no other forces stood on French ground to prevent a German invasion.
This was particularly manifested in the desire for another war with Germany in order to reclaim Alsace and Lorraine.
The German coalition mobilised its troops much more quickly than the French and rapidly invaded northeastern France.
The Prussian Army was composed not of regulars but conscripts.
At 20:00, the arrival of the Prussian 4th Infantry Division of the II Corps and with the Prussian right flank on Mance Ravine, the line stabilised.
The French were unaware of German numerical superiority at the beginning of the battle as the German 2nd Army did not attack all at once.
By September 15, German troops reached the outskirts of the fortified city.
The second was the provision for the conscription of every male Prussian of military age in the event of mobilization.
A grand total of 20,163 German troops were killed, wounded or missing in action during the August 18 battle.
However, there was no previously arranged plan of campaign in place.
It also led to the development of right-wing ideologies emphasising "the ideal of the guarded, self-referential nation schooled in the imperative of war", an ideology epitomised by figures such as General Georges Ernest Boulanger in the 1880s.
The French Marines and naval infantry intended for the invasion of northern Germany were dispatched to reinforce the French Army of Châlons and fell into captivity at Sedan along with Napoleon III.
Following the Siege of Paris, the capital fell on 28 January 1871 and then a revolutionary uprising called the Paris Commune seized power in the capital and held it for two months, until it was bloodily suppressed by the regular French army at the end of May 1871.
The national government and regular army forces retreated to Versailles and a revolutionary government was proclaimed in Paris.
Facing annihilation, the last intact French army crossed the border and was disarmed and interned by the neutral Swiss near Pontarlier (1 February).
Other countries quickly discerned the advantages given to the Germans by their military system, and adopted many of their innovations, particularly the General Staff, universal conscription and highly detailed mobilization systems.
After the German victory at Sedan, most of the French standing army was either besieged in Metz or prisoner of the Germans, who hoped for an armistice and an end to the war.
The republic then renewed the declaration of war, called for recruits in all parts of the country and pledged to drive the German troops out of France by a .
At 18:15 the Prussian 2nd Guards Infantry Brigade, the last of the 1st Guards Infantry Division, was committed to the attack on St. Privat while Steinmetz committed the last of the reserves of the First Army across the Mance Ravine.
Prussian forces commenced the Siege of Paris on 19 September 1870.
He moved straight toward the town of Spicheren, cutting off Prince Frederick Charles from his forward cavalry units in the process.
What made a bad situation much worse was the conduct of General Auguste-Alexandre Ducrot, commander of the 1st Division.
The Chassepot rifle proved its worth against the Dreyse rifle, with French riflemen regularly outdistancing their Prussian counterparts in the skirmishing around Saarbrücken.
The Prussian General Staff had drawn up minutely detailed mobilization plans using the railway system, which in turn had been partly laid out in response to recommendations of a Railway Section within the General Staff.
Reservists rarely lived more than a day's travel from their regiment's depot.
Forced labour for life was imposed on   were transported to "a fortified place" and  were transported.
After the surrender of Metz, more than 100,000 well-trained and experienced German troops joined the German 'Southern Army'.
On 18 March 1871, when the regular army tried to remove cannons from an artillery park on Montmartre, National Guard units resisted and killed two army generals.
Among these were two major reforms that substantially increased the military power of Germany.
Napoleon III, then the emperor of France, demanded compensations in Belgium and on the left bank of the Rhine to secure France's strategic position, which the Prussian chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, flatly refused.
Most European armies ignored the evidence of the Russo-Japanese War of  which suggested that infantry armed with new smokeless-powder rifles could engage gun crews effectively.
At 15:00, the massed guns of the VII and VIII Corps opened fire to support the attack.
The final attack by the Prussian troops also cost  The German cavalry then failed to pursue the French and lost touch with them.
On 18 August, the battle began when at 08:00 Moltke ordered the First and Second Armies to advance against the French positions.
Bringing in the German 'Southern Army', General von Manteuffel then drove Bourbaki's army into the mountains near the Swiss border.
This did not materialize as the South German states had come to Prussia's aid and were mobilizing their armies against France.
German tactics emphasised encirclement battles like Cannae and using artillery offensively whenever possible.
On 1 September 1870, the battle opened with the Army of Châlons, with 202 infantry battalions, 80 cavalry squadrons and 564 guns, attacking the surrounding Prussian Third and Meuse Armies totaling 222 infantry battalions, 186 cavalry squadrons and 774 guns.
He left the Prussian First and Second Armies besieging Metz, except three corps detached to form the Army of the Meuse under the Crown Prince of Saxony.
By the time he realized what kind of a force he was opposing, it was too late.
Gramont, the French foreign minister, declared that he felt "he had just received a slap".
Next day a grossly outnumbered Prussian force of 30,000 men of III Corps (of the 2nd Army) under General Konstantin von Alvensleben, found the French Army near Vionville, east of Mars-la-Tour.
The Prussian batteries could thus destroy French artillery with impunity, before being moved forward to directly support infantry attacks.
The causes of the Franco-Prussian War are deeply rooted in the events surrounding the unification of Germany.
Favre was unaware that the real aim of Bismarck in making such extortionate demands was to establish a durable peace on the new western frontier of Germany, preferably by a peace with a friendly government, on terms acceptable to French public opinion.
The Hohenzollern prince's candidacy was withdrawn under French diplomatic pressure, but Otto von Bismarck goaded the French into declaring war by altering a telegram sent by William I.
On 8 May 1870, shortly before the war, French voters had overwhelmingly supported Napoleon III's program in a national plebiscite, with 7,358,000 votes yes against 1,582,000 votes no, an increase of support of two million votes since the legislative elections in 1869.
General Le Bœuf, flushed with anger, was intent upon going on the offensive over the Saar and countering their loss.
The defeat of the French at Sedan had decided the war in Prussia's favour.
To the resulting lack of intelligence at the top can be ascribed all the inexcusable defects of French military policy."
With the Prussians exhausted from the fighting, the French were now able to mount a counter-attack.
By 18:30, a considerable portion of the VII and VIII Corps disengaged from the fighting and withdrew towards the Prussian positions at Rezonville.
According to the military historian Dallas Irvine, the system "was almost completely effective in excluding the army's brain power from the staff and high command.
Ignoring Moltke's plan again, both German armies attacked Frossard's French 2nd Corps, fortified between Spicheren and Forbach.
President Trochu resigned on 25 January and was replaced by Favre, who signed the surrender two days later at Versailles, with the armistice coming into effect at midnight.
Worse still, once the small number of soldiers who had been trained how to use the new weapon became casualties, there were no replacements who knew how to operate the mitrailleuse.
On the French side, the units holding St. Privat lost more than half their number in the village.
Within a few weeks, five new armies totalling more than 500,000 troops were recruited.
The bold use of artillery by the Prussians, to silence French guns at long range and then to directly support infantry attacks at close range, proved to be superior to the defensive doctrine employed by French gunners.
While the French army under General MacMahon engaged the German 3rd Army at the Battle of Wörth, the German 1st Army under Steinmetz finished their advance west from Saarbrücken.
This was partly due to the peacetime organisations of the armies.
The quick German victory over the French stunned neutral observers, many of whom had expected a French victory and most of whom had expected a long war.
Although Britain remained the dominant world power overall, British involvement in European affairs during the late 19th century was limited, owing to its focus on colonial empire-building, allowing Germany to exercise great influence over the European mainland.
Dispatched from Paris as the republican government emissary, Léon Gambetta flew over the German lines in a balloon inflated with coal gas from the city's gasworks and organized the recruitment of the Armée de la Loire.
Some historians argue that Napoleon III also sought war, particularly as a result of the diplomatic failure, in 1866, to obtain any concessions following the Austro-Prussian War, and he believed he would win a conflict with Prussia.
The strategic advantages possessed by the Germans were not appreciated outside Germany until after hostilities had ceased.
When the war had begun, European public opinion heavily favoured the Germans; many Italians attempted to sign up as volunteers at the Prussian embassy in Florence and a Prussian diplomat visited Giuseppe Garibaldi in Caprera.
The German conquest of France and the unification of Germany upset the European balance of power that had existed since the Congress of Vienna in 1815, and Otto von Bismarck maintained great authority in international affairs for two decades.
Prussia then turned its attention towards the south of Germany, where it sought to incorporate the southern German kingdoms, Bavaria, Württemberg, Baden and Hesse-Darmstadt, into a unified Prussia-dominated Germany.
The French Army of the Rhine, commanded by Marshal François-Achille Bazaine, numbering about 183 infantry battalions, 104 cavalry squadrons, backed by 520 heavy cannons, totaling 112,800 officers and men, dug in along high ground with their southern left flank at the town of Rozerieulles, and their northern right flank at St. Privat.
+ Population and soldiers mobilized at the start of the war
On 19 July 1870 a declaration of war was sent to the Prussian government.
Moltke had indeed massed three armies in the area—the Prussian First Army with 50,000 men, commanded by General Karl von Steinmetz opposite Saarlouis, the Prussian Second Army with 134,000 men commanded by Prince Friedrich Karl opposite the line Forbach-Spicheren, and the Prussian Third Army with 120,000 men commanded by Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm, poised to cross the border at Wissembourg.
The southern German states immediately sided with Prussia.
Because the reserves had not arrived, Frossard erroneously believed that he was in grave danger of being outflanked as German soldiers under General von Glume were spotted in Forbach.
An exodus occurred from Paris as some 200,000 people, predominantly middle-class, went to the countryside.
Accordingly, on 31 July the Army marched forward toward the Saar River to seize Saarbrücken.
But by 11:00, Prussian artillery took a toll on the French while more Prussian troops arrived on the battlefield.
On September 19, the Germans surrounded it and erected a blockade, as already established at Metz.
The Prussian army was controlled by the General Staff, under Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke.
Armed French civilians were to create a guerilla force—the so-called ''Francs-tireurs''—for the purpose of attacking German supply lines.
The Treaty of Frankfurt of 10 May 1871 gave Germany most of Alsace and some parts of Lorraine, which became the Imperial territory of Alsace-Lorraine (''Reichsland Elsaß-Lothringen'').
The mobilisation of reservists was chaotic and resulted in large numbers of stragglers, while the ''Garde Mobile'' were generally untrained and often mutinous.
The deficiencies of the needle gun were more than compensated for by the famous Krupp 6-pounder (3&nbsp;kg) steel breech-loading cannons being issued to Prussian artillery batteries.
The combined German forces, under Field Marshal Count Helmuth von Moltke, were the Prussian First and Second Armies of the North German Confederation numbering about 210 infantry battalions, 133 cavalry squadrons, and 732 heavy cannons totaling 188,332 officers and men.
The events of the Franco-Prussian War had great influence on military thinking over the next forty years.
But the French had spent the night and early morning digging trenches and rifle pits while placing their artillery and their mitrailleuses in concealed positions.
By 22:00, firing largely died down across the battlefield for the night.
They were quite startled in the morning when they had found out that their efforts were not in vain—Frossard had abandoned his position on the heights.
During the war, the Paris National Guard, particularly in the working-class neighbourhoods of Paris, had become highly politicised and units elected officers; many refused to wear uniforms or obey commands from the national government.
Privat (18 August), was the largest battle during the Franco-Prussian War.
While the French hailed the invasion as the first step towards the Rhineland and later Berlin, General Le Bœuf and Napoleon III were receiving alarming reports from foreign news sources of Prussian and Bavarian armies massing to the southeast in addition to the forces to the north and northeast.
All of the Prussian Guard attacks were pinned down by lethal French gunfire from the rifle pits and trenches.
Germany had established itself as a major power in continental Europe, boasting the most powerful and professional army in the world.
With this army and the Prussian Third Army, Moltke marched northward and caught up with the French at Beaumont on 30 August.
Moltke had originally planned to keep Bazaine's army on the Saar River until he could attack it with the 2nd Army in front and the 1st Army on its left flank, while the 3rd Army closed towards the rear.
At Tours, Gambetta received word from Paris on 30 January that the Government had surrendered.
Rail sidings and marshalling yards became choked with loaded wagons, with nobody responsible for unloading them or directing them to the destination.
