His compositions include ''mélodies'', solo piano works, chamber music, choral pieces, operas, ballets, and orchestral concert music.
The composer Lennox Berkeley wrote of him, "All through his life, he was content to use conventional harmony, but his use of it was so individual, so immediately recognizable as his own, that it gave his music freshness and validity."
Another performer with whom the composer came to be closely associated was the harpsichordist Wanda Landowska.
Boulez did not take a reciprocal view, remarking in 2010, "There are always people who will take an easy intellectual path.
Henri Hell suggests that Koechlin's influence occasionally inhibited Poulenc's natural simple style, and that Auric offered useful guidance to help him appear in his true colours.
He decided that the theme would be a modern version of the classical French ''fête galante''.
In the US and Britain, with their strong choral traditions, his religious music was frequently performed, but performances in France were much rarer, so that the public and the critics were often unaware of his serious compositions.
The biographer Richard D&nbsp;E&nbsp;Burton comments that, in the late 1920s, Poulenc might have seemed to be in an enviable position: professionally successful and independently well-off, having inherited a substantial fortune from his father.
Two unrelated events in 1936 combined to inspire a reawakening of religious faith and a new depth of seriousness in Poulenc's music.
The Concerto for piano and orchestra (1949) initially caused some disappointment: many felt that it was not an advance on Poulenc's pre-war music, a view he came to share.
The sonatas in this group are for violin and piano (1942–43) and for cello and piano (1948).
Integral sets of the chamber music have been recorded by the Nash Ensemble (Hyperion), and a variety of young French musicians (Naxos).
The critic Claude Rostand later described Poulenc as "half monk and half naughty boy".
Among the lighter pieces, one of the composer's most popular songs is a setting of Jean Anouilh's "Les Chemins de l'Amour" (1940) as a Parisian waltz; by contrast his "monologue" "La Dame de Monte Carlo", (1961) a depiction of an elderly woman addicted to gambling, shows the composer's painful understanding of the horrors of depression.
Poulenc's favoured Intermezzo was the last of three.
Sams describes the opera as "high-spirited topsy-turveydom" concealing "a deeper and sadder theme&nbsp;– the need to repopulate and rediscover a France ravaged by war".
Poulenc had no time for musical theories; in one of his many radio interviews he called for "a truce to composing by theory, doctrine, rule!"
The ''Aubade'', "Concerto choréographique" for piano and 18 instruments (1930) achieves an almost orchestral effect, despite its modest number of players.
He told Satie of this unhappy encounter; Satie replied with a dismissive epithet for Ravel who, he said, talked "a load of rubbish".
The same age as Poulenc, Auric was musically an early developer; by the time they met, Auric's music had already been performed at important Parisian concert venues.
In Sams's view, all three of Poulenc's operas display a depth of feeling far distant from "the cynical stylist of the 1920s": ''Les mamelles de Tirésias'' (1947), despite the riotous plot, is full of nostalgia and a sense of loss.
The first four sonatas come from the early group, all written before Poulenc was twenty-two.
Jenny was from a Parisian family with broad artistic interests.
Poulenc found it "such a moving and noble work", ideal for his libretto, and he began composition in August 1953.
May they spare me a few days in Purgatory, if I narrowly avoid going to hell."
The first of the ''Deux poèmes de Louis Aragon'' (1943), titled simply "C", is described by Johnson as "a masterpiece known the world over; it is the most unusual, and perhaps the most moving, song about the ravages of war ever composed."
In the last years of the 1930s, Poulenc's compositions continued to vary between serious and light-hearted works.
As the decade progressed, Poulenc produced a range of compositions, from songs to chamber music and another ballet, ''Aubade''.
Having achieved fame by his early twenties, he was in his forties before attempting his first opera.
They are early examples of Poulenc's many and varied influences, with echoes of rococo ''divertissements'' alongside unconventional harmonies, some influenced by jazz.
Poulenc later said of Viñes:
As Poulenc was writing the last pages of his opera in October 1955, Roubert died, at the age of forty-seven.
In 2005, EMI issued a DVD, "Francis Poulenc & Friends", featuring filmed performances of Poulenc's music, played by the composer, with Duval, Jean-Pierre Rampal, Jacques Février and Georges Prêtre.
The sonata did not create a deep public impression, but the song cycle made the composer's name known in France, and the ''Trois mouvements perpétuels'' rapidly became an international success.
Auric, who had just enjoyed a similar triumph with a Diaghilev ballet, ''Les Fâcheux'', was also repudiated by Satie for becoming a friend of Laloy.
I like very much my two collections of Improvisations, an Intermezzo in A flat, and certain Nocturnes.
At the École Normale in Paris they gave the premiere of Poulenc's ''Cinq poèmes de Paul Éluard''.
In the early months of the war, he had composed little new music, instead re-orchestrating ''Les biches'' and reworking his 1932 Sextet for Piano and Winds.
Those disagreeing with Poulenc attempted to paint him as a relic of the pre-war era, frivolous and unprogressive.
Poulenc's principal works for large orchestra comprise two ballets, a ''Sinfonietta'' and four keyboard concertos.
His view that Berg had taken serialism as far as it could go and that Schoenberg's music was now "desert, stone soup, ersatz music, or poetic vitamins" earned him the enmity of composers such as Pierre Boulez.
Listening to his music you think&nbsp;– it's Poulenc."
Poulenc, who composed 90&nbsp;songs for his collaborator, considered him one of the "three great meetings" of his professional career, the other two being Éluard and Landowska.
In the two avowedly serious operas, ''Dialogues des Carmélites'' (1957) and ''La Voix humaine'' (1959), in which Poulenc depicts deep human suffering, Sams sees a reflection of the composer's own struggles with depression.
Poulenc's music is essentially diatonic.
Poulenc defended Stravinsky and expressed incredulity that "in 1945 we are speaking as if the aesthetic of twelve tones is the only possible salvation for contemporary music".
In the printed score of ''Dialogues des Carmélites'' he acknowledged his debt to Mussorgsky, Monteverdi, Debussy and Verdi.
Between July and October 1918 he served at the Franco-German front, after which he was given a series of auxiliary posts, ending as a typist at the Ministry of Aviation.
It greatly appealed to Poulenc, who made his first setting of Cocteau's words in 1919 and his last in 1961.
Neither of the French composers was influenced by their Austrian colleagues' revolutionary twelve tone system, but they admired the three as its leading proponents.
From the early 1920s Poulenc was well received abroad, particularly in Britain, both as a performer and a composer.
He later explained:
They vary from swift and balletic to tender lyricism, old-fashioned march, ''perpetuum mobile'', waltz and a poignant musical portrait of the singer Édith Piaf.
The chamber works of Poulenc's middle period were written in the 1930s and 1940s.
His literary style, "paradoxical and lapidary" in Henri Hell's phrase, was anti-romantic, concise and irreverent.
Four of Poulenc's early works were premiered at the Salle Huyghens in Montparnasse, where between 1917 and 1920 the cellist Félix Delgrange presented concerts of music by young composers.
''Sept répons des ténèbres'', which Poulenc did not live to hear performed, uses a large orchestra, but, in Nichols's view, it displays a new concentration of thought.
Their 1920 piano suite ''L'Album des Six'' consists of six separate and unrelated pieces.
While working on the opera Poulenc composed little else; exceptions were two ''mélodies'', and a short orchestral movement, "Bucolique" in a collective work, ''Variations sur le nom de Marguerite Long'' (1954), to which his old friends from ''Les Six'' Auric and Milhaud also contributed.
In 1958 Poulenc embarked on a collaboration with his old friend Cocteau, in an operatic version of the latter's 1930 monodrama ''La Voix humaine''.
With the Gloria and the Stabat Mater, I think I have three good religious works.
With Bernac, he made his first tour of Britain in 1938.
Commentators including Hell, Schmidt and Poulenc himself have regarded it, and to some extent the cello sonata, as less effective than those for wind.
Poulenc was a painstaking craftsman, though a myth grew up&nbsp;– ''"la légende de facilité"''&nbsp;– that his music came easily to him; he commented, "The myth is excusable, since I do everything to conceal my efforts."
I remember him playing me the records of Boulez's ''Le marteau sans maître'' with which he was already familiar when that work was much less well-known than it is today."
All four are characterised by their brevity&nbsp;– less than ten minutes each&nbsp;– their mischievousness and their wit, which Nichols describes as acid.
The final three sonatas are for woodwind and piano: for flute (1956–57), clarinet (1962), and oboe (1962).
Keck considers Poulenc's harmonic language "as beautiful, interesting and personal as his melodic writing&nbsp;... clear, simple harmonies moving in obviously defined tonal areas with chromaticism that is rarely more than passing".
At around this time Poulenc began his last romantic relationship, with Louis Gautier, a former soldier; they remained partners to the end of Poulenc's life.
There was a fashion for African arts in Paris at the time, and Poulenc was delighted to run across some published verses purportedly Liberian, but full of Parisian boulevard slang.
In January 1945, commissioned by the French government, Poulenc and Bernac flew from Paris to London, where they received an enthusiastic welcome.
Apart from a single early work for unaccompanied choir ("Chanson à boire", 1922), Poulenc began writing choral music in 1936.
I am now twenty years older".
They have, according to ''Grove'', become fixtures in their repertoires because of "their technical expertise and of their profound beauty".
He set to music verses by poets prominent in the French resistance, including Aragon and Éluard.
The ''Sinfonietta'' (1947) is a reversion to Poulenc's pre-war frivolity.
On 30 January 1963, at his flat opposite the Jardin du Luxembourg, Poulenc suffered a fatal heart attack.
In 1953 Poulenc was offered a commission by La Scala and the Milanese publisher Casa Ricordi for a ballet.
When Poulenc was age sixteen his mother died; his father died two years later.
His wealthy family intended a business career for Poulenc and they did not allow him to enrol  at a music college.
The work was produced in February 1959 at the Opéra-Comique, under Cocteau's direction, with Duval as the tragic deserted woman speaking to her former lover by telephone.
Complete sets of Poulenc's solo piano music have been recorded by Gabriel Tacchino, who had been Poulenc's only piano student (released on the EMI label), Pascal Rogé (Decca), Paul Crossley (CBS), Eric Parkin (Chandos) and Olivier Cazal (Naxos).
Numbers one and two were composed in August 1934; the A flat followed in March 1943.
At around the same time the writer Jessica Duchen described Poulenc as "a fizzing, bubbling mass of Gallic energy who can move you to both laughter and tears within seconds.
In terms of musical technique the operas show how far Poulenc had come from his naïve and insecure beginnings.
Music critics generally continued to define Poulenc by his light-hearted works, and it was not until the 1950s that his serious side was widely recognised.
Viñes encouraged his pupil to compose, and later premiered three of Poulenc's early pieces.
Throughout the decade, Poulenc was popular with British audiences; he established a fruitful relationship with the BBC in London, which broadcast many of his works.
From January 1918 to January 1921 Poulenc was a conscript in the French army in the last months of the First World War and the immediate post-war period.
With Bernac and Duval he recorded many of his own songs, and those of other composers including Chabrier, Debussy, Gounod and Ravel.
Shortly after the war, Poulenc had a brief affair with a woman, Fréderique ("Freddy") Lebedeff, with whom he had a daughter, Marie-Ange, in 1946.
The ''Elégie'' for horn and piano (1957) was composed in memory of the horn player Dennis Brain.
The following year Poulenc received a commission from Serge Diaghilev for a full-length ballet score.
He called her the nightingale who made him cry (''"Mon rossignol à larmes"'').
He used one of the poems in two sections of the rhapsody.
The London Philharmonic Orchestra gave a reception in the composer's honour; he and Benjamin Britten were the soloists in a performance of Poulenc's Double Piano Concerto at the Royal Albert Hall; with Bernac he gave recitals of French ''mélodies'' and piano works at the Wigmore Hall and the National Gallery, and recorded for the BBC.
He took piano lessons from the age of five; when he was eight he first heard the music of Debussy and was fascinated by the originality of the sound.
His "Epitaphe", to a poem by Malherbe, was written in memory of Linossier, and is described by the pianist Graham Johnson as "a profound song in every sense".
At this stage in his career Poulenc was conscious of his lack of academic musical training; the critic and biographer Jeremy Sams writes that it was the composer's good luck that the public mood was turning against late-romantic lushness in favour of the "freshness and insouciant charm" of his works, technically unsophisticated though they were.
The best known is the Sextet for Piano and Wind (1932), in Poulenc's light-hearted vein, consisting of two lively outer movements and a central ''divertimento''; this was one of several chamber works that the composer became dissatisfied with and revised extensively some years after their first performance (in this case in 1939–40).
In a centenary tribute in ''The Times'' Gerald Larner commented that Poulenc's prediction was wrong, and that in 1999 the composer was widely celebrated for both sides of his musical character: "both the fervent Catholic and the naughty boy, for both the Gloria and Les Biches, both Les Dialogues des Carmélites and Les Mamelles de Tirésias."
His affair with Chanlaire petered out in 1931, though they remained lifelong friends.
The music critic of ''The Times'' later wrote that the work "is among the very finest choral works of our time and in itself removes Poulenc from the category of ''petit maître'' to which ignorance has generally been content to relegate him."
Ravel's modesty about his own music particularly appealed to Poulenc, who sought throughout his life to follow Ravel's example.
These were music for ''Babar the Elephant'', the Cello Sonata, the ballet ''Les Animaux modèles'' and the song cycle ''Banalités''.
This ''jeu d'esprit'' was the first of many examples of what Anglophone critics came to call "leg-Poulenc".
Honegger wrote, "The influences that have worked on him, Chabrier, Satie, Stravinsky, are now completely assimilated.
In the post-war period Poulenc crossed swords with composers of the younger generation who rejected Stravinsky's recent work and insisted that only the precepts of the Second Viennese School were valid.
On her death he wrote, "All my youth departs with her, all that part of my life that belonged only to her.
Like the Mass, it is unaccompanied, and to succeed in performance it requires singers of the highest quality.
He came to feel, "I dressed too young for my age&nbsp;... it is a new version of ''Les biches'' but young girls ''biches'' that are forty-eight years old&nbsp;– that's horrible!"
The composer wrote to a friend, "Lucien was delivered from his martyrdom ten days ago and the final copy of ''Les Carmélites'' was completed (take note) at the very moment my dear breathed his last."
Nichols comments in ''Grove'' that ''Les mamelles de Tirésias'', deploys "lyrical solos, patter duets, chorales, falsetto lines for tenor and bass babies and&nbsp;... succeeds in being both funny and beautiful".
Poulenc called him "my true brother in spirit".
Whether or not Poulenc originally conceived them as an integral set, he give the eighth the title "To serve as Coda for the Cycle" (''Pour servir de Coda au Cycle'').
The two sides to Poulenc's musical nature caused misunderstanding during his life and have continued to do so.
In Johnson's words, "for twenty-five years Bernac was Poulenc's counsellor and conscience", and the composer relied on him for advice not only on song-writing, but on his operas and choral music.
The work is a setting of Apollinaire's play of the same name, staged in 1917.
Biographer Henri Hell said that Viñes's influence on his pupil was profound, with regard to both his piano technique and the style of Poulenc's keyboard works.
The two young composers shared  similar musical outlooks and enthusiasms, and for the rest of Poulenc's life, Auric was his most trusted friend and guide.
'''Francis Jean Marcel Poulenc''' (; 7 January 189930 January 1963) was a French composer and pianist.
In 1948 Poulenc made his first visit to the US, in a two-month concert tour with Bernac.
He was dismayed by Ravel's judgments, which exalted composers whom Poulenc thought little of above those he greatly admired.
It was not progress."
Cocteau, though similar in age to ''Les Six'', was something of a father-figure to the group.
The exigencies of music-making in wartime taught Poulenc much about writing for whatever instruments were available; then, and later, some of his works were for unusual combinations of players.
In that year he produced three works for choir: ''Sept chansons'' (settings of verses by Éluard and others), ''Petites voix'' (for children's voices), and his religious work ''Litanies à la vierge noire'', for female or children's voices and organ.
Bernac was overwhelmed by the public's response; when he and Poulenc stepped out on the Wigmore Hall stage, "the audience rose and my emotion was such that instead of beginning to sing, I began to weep."
In 1932 his music was among the first to be broadcast on television, in a transmission by the BBC in which Reginald Kell and Gilbert Vinter played his Sonata for Clarinet and Bassoon.
A 1984 discography of Poulenc's music lists recordings by more than 1,300 conductors, soloists and ensembles, including the conductors Leonard Bernstein, Charles Dutoit, Milhaud, Eugene Ormandy, Prêtre, André Previn and Leopold Stokowski.
He was a founder-member of the Front National (pour musique) which the Nazi authorities viewed with suspicion for its association with banned musicians such as Milhaud and Paul Hindemith.
Poulenc's new celebrity after the success of the ballet was the unexpected cause of his estrangement from Satie: among the new friends Poulenc made was Louis Laloy, a writer whom Satie regarded with implacable enmity.
They continued to perform together for more than twenty years, in Paris and internationally, until Bernac's retirement in 1959.
Ravel was amused by the piece and commented on Poulenc's ability to invent his own folklore.
At about this time Poulenc began a relationship with Raymond Destouches, a chauffeur; as with Chanlaire earlier, what began as a passionate affair changed into a deep and lasting friendship.
In 1936 Poulenc began giving frequent recitals with Bernac.
The piece has been re-evaluated in more recent years, and in 1996 the writer Claire Delamarche rated it as the composer's finest concertante work.
It draws on a variety of stylistic sources: the first movement ends in a manner reminiscent of Balinese gamelan, and the slow movement begins in a Mozartian style, which Poulenc gradually fills out with his own characteristic personal touches.
In Henri Hell's view, this is because the main feature of Poulenc's musical art is his melodic gift.
The works of Poulenc's last twelve months included ''Sept répons pour les ténèbres'' for voices and orchestra, the Clarinet Sonata and the Oboe Sonata.
Satie was suspicious of music colleges, but Ravel advised Poulenc to take composition lessons; Milhaud suggested the composer and teacher Charles Koechlin.
The first two of the four concertos are in Poulenc's light-hearted vein.
In the words of Roger Nichols in the ''Grove'' dictionary, "For Poulenc the most important element of all was melody and he found his way to a vast treasury of undiscovered tunes within an area that had, according to the most up-to-date musical maps, been surveyed, worked and exhausted."
Poulenc made his début as a composer in 1917 with his ''Rapsodie nègre'', a ten-minute, five-movement piece for baritone and chamber group; it was dedicated to Satie and premiered at one of a series of concerts of new music run by the singer Jane Bathori.
His performing partnerships with baritone Pierre Bernac (who also advised him in vocal writing) and  soprano Denise Duval were especially  celebrated, touring Europe and America with each artist and making many sound recordings.
Stravinsky was impressed enough to use his influence to secure Poulenc a contract with a publisher, a kindness that Poulenc never forgot.
In all three operas Poulenc drew on earlier composers, while blending their influence into music unmistakably his own.
I condemn ''Napoli'' and the ''Soirées de Nazelles'' without reprieve."
Poulenc was soon studying music composition under the tutelage of composer Erik Satie, and under his influence Francis joined a group of young gifted composers collectively known as ''Les Six''.
If one part is erased you get only a pale photocopy of what he really is."
After one of their concerts, the critic Henri Collet published an article titled, "The Five Russians, the Six Frenchmen and Satie".
Poulenc composed songs throughout his career, and his output in the genre is extensive.
During the composition of the opera, Poulenc suffered two blows: the Bernanos estate made unforeseen difficulties about allowing him the rights to set the text, and simultaneously Roubert became gravely ill. Intense worry pushed Poulenc into a nervous breakdown, and in November 1954 he was in a clinic at L'Haÿ-les-Roses, outside Paris, heavily sedated.
It contains one of Poulenc's rare excursions into dodecaphony, with the brief employment of a twelve-note tone row.
The vast majority of the piano works are, in the view of the writer Keith W Daniel, "what might be called 'miniatures'".
For most of the war, Poulenc was in Paris, giving recitals with Bernac, concentrating on French songs.
Poulenc was born in the 8th arrondissement of Paris, the younger child and only son of Émile Poulenc and his wife, Jenny Poulenc, ''née'' Royer.
From the outset of his career he favoured verses by Guillaume Apollinaire, and from the mid-1930s the writer whose work he set most often was Paul Éluard.
He made numerous recordings, mainly for the French division of EMI.
Three days later, on 21 June, came the Paris premiere of ''Dialogues des Carmélites'' at the Opéra.
The Mass in G major (1937) for unaccompanied choir is described by Gouverné as having something of a baroque style, with "vitality and joyful clamour on which his faith is writ large".
He spent the summer of that year with family and friends at Brive-la-Gaillarde in south-central France.
In 1922 Poulenc and Milhaud travelled to Vienna to meet Alban Berg, Anton Webern and Arnold Schönberg.
In ''Les Animaux modèles'', premiered at the Opéra in 1942, he included the tune, repeated several times, of the anti-German song "Vous n'aurez pas l'Alsace et la Lorraine".
Hell considers that the finest of Poulenc's music for piano is in the accompaniments to the songs, a view shared by Poulenc himself.
His uncompromising adherence to melody, both in his lighter and serious works, has similarly caused some to regard him as unprogressive.
His first serious affair was with the painter Richard Chanlaire, to whom he sent a copy of the ''Concert champêtre'' score inscribed, "You have changed my life, you are the sunshine of my thirty years, a reason for living and working".
By the time of the last of the operas, ''La Voix humaine'', Poulenc felt able to give the soprano stretches of music with no orchestral accompaniment at all, though when the orchestra plays, Poulenc calls for the music to be "bathed in sensuality".
The Organ Concerto (1938) is in a much more serious vein.
At his father's insistence, Poulenc followed a conventional school career, studying at the Lycée Condorcet in Paris rather than at a music conservatory.
In addition to being a composer of some renown, Poulenc was an accomplished pianist.
Other composers whose works influenced his development were Schubert and Stravinsky: the former's ''Winterreise'' and the latter's ''The Rite of Spring'' made a deep impression on him.
In May Poulenc's 60th birthday was marked, a few months late, by his last concert with Bernac before the latter's retirement from public performance.
He considered the story of St Margaret of Cortona but found a dance version of her life impracticable.
Poulenc worked with him intermittently from 1921 to 1925.
Poulenc said that he was not inventive in his harmonic language.
Among the singers, in addition to Bernac and Duval, the list includes Régine Crespin, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Nicolai Gedda, Peter Pears, Yvonne Printemps and Gérard Souzay.
The commentator George Keck writes, "His melodies are simple, pleasing, easily remembered, and most often emotionally expressive."
As she was not only well aware of his homosexuality but was also romantically attached elsewhere, she refused him, and their relationship became strained.
In compliance with his wishes, none of his music was performed; Marcel Dupré played works by Bach on the grand organ of the church.
The opera was first given in January 1957 at La Scala in Italian translation.
They are for two clarinets (1918), piano duo (1918), clarinet and bassoon (1922) and horn, trumpet and trombone (1922).
He suffered the first of many periods of depression, which affected his ability to compose, and he was devastated in January 1930, when Linossier died suddenly at the age of 32.
Clements finds in the Éluard settings a profundity "worlds away from the brittle, facetious surfaces of Poulenc's early orchestral and instrumental music".
Poulenc grew up in a musical household; his mother was a capable pianist, with a wide repertoire ranging from classical to less elevated works that gave him a lifelong taste for what he called "adorable bad music".
He was among the first composers to recognise the importance of the gramophone, and from 1928 onwards, Poulenc recorded quite extensively.
Both sonatas are predominantly grave in character; that for violin is dedicated to the memory of Federico García Lorca.
He bought a large country house, Le Grande Coteau, at Noizay, Indre-et-Loire,  south-west of Paris, where he retreated to compose in peaceful surroundings.
The commentators Marina and Victor Ledin describe the work as "the embodiment of the word 'charming'.
To the critic Ralph Thibodeau, the work may be considered as Poulenc's own requiem and is "the most avant-garde of his sacred compositions, the most emotionally demanding, and the most interesting musically, comparable only with his ''magnum opus sacrum'', the opera, ''Dialogues des Carmélites''."
If you take away either part, the serious or the non-serious, you destroy him.
He later set many of their poems to music.
Poulenc described Satie's influence on him as "immediate and wide, on both the spiritual and musical planes".
In his elder years and for decades posthumously, particularly in his native country, Poulenc's reputation was that of a humorous lightweight composer, and perhaps for this reason his religious works were largely ignored.
Francis  was part of a pious Roman Catholic family from Espalion in the département of Aveyron.
Among them were Auric, Durey, Honegger, Darius Milhaud and Germaine Tailleferre, who, with Poulenc, became known collectively as ''"Les Six"''.
According to Milhaud:
In 1917 Poulenc got to know Ravel well enough to have serious discussions with him about music.
In 1937 he composed his first major liturgical work, the Mass in G Major for soprano and mixed choir ''a cappella'', which has become the most frequently performed of all his sacred works.
The world premiere of ''Dialogues des Carmélites'' (in Italian, as ''Dialoghi delle Carmelitane'') was recorded and has been released on CD.
