I used to stand there so amazed I'd almost forget to take my own solos".
Later, Sinatra helped Rich form his own band with a $25,000 loan and provided financial help to Rich during times of the drummer's serious illness.
On January 26, 1940, he made his first public appearance with the band at the Coronado Theatre in Rockford, Illinois, opening the show with "Stardust".
After releasing ''Sinatra at the Sands'', recorded at the Sands Hotel and Casino in Vegas with frequent collaborator Count Basie in early 1966, the following year he recorded one of his most famous collaborations with Tom Jobim, the album ''Francis Albert Sinatra & Antonio Carlos Jobim''.
was named Album of the Year by ''Billboard'', and he was also named "Favorite Male Vocalist" by ''Billboard'', ''Down Beat'', and ''Metronome'' that year.
Sinatra came to consider Riddle "the greatest arranger in the world", and Riddle, who considered Sinatra "a perfectionist", offered equal praise of the singer, observing, "It's not only that his intuitions as to tempi, phrasing, and even configuration are amazingly right, but his taste is so impeccable&nbsp;... there is still no one who can approach him."
He performed several charity concerts with Count Basie at the Royal Festival Hall in London.
In 1966 Sinatra released ''That's Life'', with both the single of "That's Life" and album becoming Top Ten hits in the US on ''Billboard'''s pop charts.
Sinatra's illiterate father was a bantamweight boxer who fought under the name Marty O'Brien.
He quoted reporter James Bacon in saying that Sinatra was the "swinging image on which the town is built", adding that no other entertainer quite "embodied the glamour" associated with Las Vegas as him.
The Cahn-Styne partnership lasted from 1942 until 1954, when Van Heusen succeeded him as Sinatra's main composer.
In financial difficulty following his divorce and career decline, Sinatra was forced to borrow $200,000 from Columbia to pay his back taxes after MCA refused to front the money.
In the late 1970s, John Denver appeared as a guest in the ''Sinatra and Friends'' ABC-TV Special, singing "September Song" as a duet.
The concert was recorded on a motion picture scoring soundstage with the use of multiple synchronized recording machines that employed an optical signal onto 35&nbsp;mm film designed for movie soundtracks.
Using his Las Vegas shows as a home base, he toured both within the United States and internationally until a short time before his death in 1998.
By the end of 1948, Sinatra had slipped to fourth on ''Down Beat'''s annual poll of most popular singers (behind Billy Eckstine, Frankie Laine, and Bing Crosby).
He next portrayed comedian Joe E. Lewis in ''The Joker Is Wild''; the song "All the Way" won the Academy Award for Best Original Song.
According to Jo Carroll Silvers, in his younger years Sinatra had "ardent liberal" sympathies, and was "so concerned about poor people that he was always quoting Henry Wallace".
Barbara Sinatra claims that Dolly was abusive to him as a child, and "knocked him around a lot".
Sinatra became one of Las Vegas's pioneer entertainers,  and a prominent figure on the Vegas scene throughout the 1950s and 1960s onwards, a period described by Rojek as the "high-water mark" of Sinatra's "hedonism and self absorption".
Sinatra had invested a lot of his own money in upgrading the facilities at his home in anticipation of the President's visit, fitting it with a heliport, which he later reportedly smashed up with a sledgehammer upon being rejected.
His close friends, Jilly Rizzo and Jimmy Van Heusen, are buried nearby.
In 1957, Sinatra released ''Close to You'', ''A Swingin' Affair!''
It was followed by 1968's collaboration with Duke Ellington.
A 1998 episode of the BBC documentary series ''Arena'', ''The Voice of the Century'', focused on Sinatra.
Sinatra's first album for Capitol, ''Songs for Young Lovers'', was released on January 4, 1954, and included "A Foggy Day", "I Get a Kick Out of You", "My Funny Valentine", "Violets for Your Furs" and "They Can't Take That Away from Me", songs which became staples of his later concerts.
The Frank Sinatra Student Center at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem was dedicated in his name in 1978.
In 1938, Sinatra found employment as a singing waiter at a roadhouse called "The Rustic Cabin" in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, for which he was paid $15 a week.
Though he did much towards racial causes, it did not stop the occasional racist jibe from him and the other Rat Pack members toward Davis at concerts.
By 1958 Sinatra was one of the ten biggest box office draws in the United States, appearing with Dean Martin and Shirley MacLaine in Vincente Minnelli's ''Some Came Running'' and ''Kings Go Forth'' with Tony Curtis and Natalie Wood.
Barbara Sinatra wrote that "A big part of Frank's thrill was the sense of danger that he exuded, an underlying, ever-present tension only those closest to him knew could be defused with humor".
In December he recorded "Sweet Lorraine" with the Metronome All-Stars, featuring talented jazz musicians such as Coleman Hawkins, Harry Carney and Charlie Shavers, with Nat King Cole on piano, in what Charles L. Granata describes as "one of the highlights of Sinatra's Columbia epoch".
He was awarded the Hollzer Memorial Award by the Los Angeles Jewish Community in 1949.
He was just a skinny kid with big ears.
Sinatra had intended to play Detective Harry Callahan in ''Dirty Harry'' (1971), but had to turn the role down due to developing Dupuytren's contracture in his hand.
After roles in ''Guys and Dolls'', and ''The Tender Trap'', Sinatra was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for his role as hospital orderly in Stanley Kramer's début picture, ''Not as a Stranger''.
His popularity was later matched only by Elvis Presley, The Beatles, and Michael Jackson.
Sinatra's first live album, ''Sinatra at the Sands'', was recorded during January and February 1966 at the Sands Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas.
He teamed up with Kelly for a third time in ''On the Town'', playing a sailor on leave in New York City.
Dorsey recalled: "You could almost feel the excitement coming up out of the crowds when the kid stood up to sing.
To improve his speech, he began taking elocution lessons for a dollar each from vocal coach John Quinlan, who was one of the first people to notice his impressive vocal range.
Sinatra also released the album ''The World We Knew'', which features a chart-topping duet of "Somethin' Stupid" with daughter Nancy.
He points everything he does from a sexual standpoint".
When Martin dropped out of the tour early on, a rift developed between them and the two never spoke again.
In March, he recorded and released the single "Three Coins in the Fountain", a "powerful ballad" that reached #4.
In August he held several consecutive concerts at Lake Tahoe together with the newly-risen singer John Denver, who became a frequent collaborator.
and, in an effort to assert his new direction, temporarily parted with Riddle, May and Jenkins, working with other arrangers such as Neil Hefti, Don Costa, and Quincy Jones.
I never heard such a commotion&nbsp;... All this for a fellow I never heard of."
Once he found ones that he liked, he actively sought to work with them as often as he could, and made friends with many of them.
When Sinatra was featured as a priest in ''The Miracle of the Bells'', due to press negativity surrounding his alleged Mafia connections at the time, it was announced to the public that Sinatra would donate his $100,000 in wages from the film to the church.
During production, Sinatra got drunk with Robert Mitchum and Broderick Crawford and trashed Kramer's dressing room.
When Sinatra's mother was a child, her pretty face earned her the nickname "Dolly".
Sinatra grew discontented at Capitol, and fell into a feud with Alan Livingston, which lasted over six months.
Vincent Canby, writing for the magazine ''Variety'', found the portrayal of Sinatra's character to be "a wide-awake pro creating a straight, quietly humorous character of some sensitivity."
Throughout his life, Sinatra had mood swings and bouts of mild to severe depression, admitting to an interviewer in the 1950s that "I have an over-acute capacity for sadness as well as elation".
He donated a lot of his earnings to charity.
"Mam'selle", composed by Edmund Goulding with lyrics by Mack Gordon for the film ''The Razor's Edge'' (1946), was released a single.
Also right after Sinatra's death, the lights on the Las Vegas Strip were dimmed in his honor, and the casinos stopped spinning for a minute.
Also in 1981, Sinatra was embroiled in controversy when he worked a ten-day engagement for $2&nbsp;million in Sun City, in the internationally unrecognized Bophuthatswana, breaking a cultural boycott against apartheid-era South Africa.
On November 2, 1970, Sinatra recorded the last songs for Reprise Records before his self-imposed retirement, announced the following June at a concert in Hollywood to raise money for the Motion Picture and TV Relief Fund.
During the Labor Day weekend held in 1976, Sinatra was responsible for reuniting old friends and comedy partners Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis for the first time in nearly twenty years, when they performed at the "Jerry Lewis MDA Telethon".
He began what Barbara Sinatra describes as a "massive comeback tour of the United States, Europe, the Far East and Australia".
In November 1945 Sinatra was invited by the mayor of Gary, Indiana, to try to settle a strike by white students of Froebel High School against the "Pro-Negro" policies of the new principal.
Frank Sinatra, Jr., who was present during the recording, noted the "huge orchestra", which Nancy Sinatra stated "opened a whole new era" in pop music, with orchestras getting bigger, embracing a "lush string sound".
The couple had eloped on Valentine's Day 1913, and married in a civil ceremony in Jersey City, New Jersey.
According to Granata it was the first concept album of his to make a "single persuasive statement", with an extended program and "melancholy mood".
On March 13, 1953, Sinatra met with Capitol Records vice president Alan Livingston and signed a seven-year recording contract.
Sinatra's publicist, George Evans, encouraged interviews and photographs with fans, and was the man responsible for depicting Sinatra as a vulnerable, shy, Italian–American with a rough childhood who made good.
Sinatra denied Mafia involvement, declaring that "any report that I fraternized with goons or racketeers is a vicious lie".
His timing was impeccable, allowing him, according to Charles L. Granata, to "toy with the rhythm of a melody, bringing tremendous excitement to his reading of a lyric".
Of all the U.S. Presidents he associated with during his career, he was closest to John F. Kennedy.
As disc jockey Jonathan Schwartz said, "Never before had there been an opportunity for a popular singer to express emotions at an extended length".
In his spare time, Sinatra enjoyed listening to classical music, and would attend concerts when he could.
The album ''September of My Years'' was released September 1965, and went on to win the Grammy Award for best album of the year.
During his tours in the early 1990s, his memory failed him at times during concerts, and he happened to faint onstage in Richmond, Virginia, in March 1994.
In 1958 Sinatra released the album ''Come Fly with Me'' with Billy May.
After winning an Academy Award for ''From Here to Eternity'', he starred in ''The Man with the Golden Arm'' (1955), and received critical acclaim for his performance in ''The Manchurian Candidate'' (1962).
I will never forget what you have done for me today".
Cuts from this LP, such as "Angel Eyes" and "One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)", would remain staples of the "saloon song" segments of Sinatra's concerts.
The phenomenon became officially known as "Sinatramania" after his "legendary opening" at the Paramount Theatre in New York on December 30, 1942.
Sinatra spent much time at his parents' tavern in Hoboken,  working on his homework and occasionally singing a song on top of the player piano for spare change.
According to Nancy Sinatra, Jack Benny later said, "I thought the goddamned building was going to cave in.
A legal battle ensued, eventually settled in August 1943.
The couple formally announced their separation on October 29, 1953, through MGM.
At the Sands in 1955, Sinatra went against policy by inviting Nat King Cole into the dining room, and in 1961, after an incident where an African-American couple entered the lobby of the hotel and were blocked by the security guard, Sinatra and Sammy Davis, Jr. forced the hotel management to begin hiring black waiters and busboys.
Sinatra performed for four weeks at the theatre, his act following the Benny Goodman orchestra, after which his contract was renewed for another four weeks by Bob Weitman due to his popularity.
The United States Congress passed a resolution introduced by Representative Mary Bono Mack on May 20, 2008, designating May 13 as Frank Sinatra Day to honor his contributions to American culture.
Dorsey eventually relented, and on January 19, 1942, Sinatra recorded "Night and Day, "The Night We Called It a Day", "The Song is You" and "Lamplighter's Serenade" at a Bluebird recording session, with Axel Stordahl as arranger and conductor.
In 1943 he had a cameo role along with Duke Ellington and Count Basie in Charles Barton's ''Reveille with Beverly'', making a brief appearance singing "Night and Day".
The Rat Pack concert was broadcast live via satellite to numerous movie theaters across America.
In the words of author John Lahr, "as many as sixteen songs could be held by the twelve-inch L.P., and this allowed Sinatra to use song in a novelistic way, turning each track in a kind of chapter, which built and counterpointed moods to illuminate a larger theme".
The FBI documented that Sinatra was losing esteem with the Mafia as he grew closer to President Kennedy, whose brother Bobby was leading a crackdown on organized crime.
For Santopietro, Sinatra was the "greatest male pop singer in the history of America", who amassed "unprecedented power onscreen and off", and "seemed to exemplify the common man, an ethnic twentieth-century American male who reached the 'top of the heap', yet never forgot his roots".
At the end of the program Sinatra graced the stage for the last time to sing the final notes of the "Theme from New York, New York" with an ensemble.
She also states that Sinatra and Hank Sanicola were financial partners with Mickey Cohen in the gossip magazine ''Hollywood Night Life''.
In 1945, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cast Sinatra opposite Gene Kelly and Kathryn Grayson in the Technicolor musical ''Anchors Aweigh'', in which he played a sailor on leave in Hollywood for four days.
Sinatra copied Dorsey's mannerisms and traits, becoming a demanding perfectionist like him, even adopting his hobby of toy trains.
In another instance, after a heated argument with manager Bobby Burns, rather than apologize, Sinatra bought him a brand new Cadillac.
In an effort to maintain his commercial viability in the 1960s, Sinatra recorded Elvis Presley's hit "Love Me Tender", and later recorded works by Paul Simon such as "Mrs. Robinson", the Beatles ("Something", "Yesterday"), and Joni Mitchell ("Both Sides, Now").
For Santopietro, Sinatra was the personification of America in the 1950s: "cocky, eye on the main chance, optimistic, and full of the sense of possibility".
Sinatra had long been desperate to find a film role which would bring him back into the spotlight, and Columbia Pictures boss Harry Cohn had been inundated by appeals from people across Hollywood to give Sinatra a chance to star as "Maggio" in the film.
He became known as "Swoonatra" or "The Voice", and his fans "Sinatratics".
Sinatra's last major film role was opposite Faye Dunaway in Brian G. Hutton's ''The First Deadly Sin'' (1980).
Sinatra was present at the Mafia Havana Conference in 1946, and when the press learned of Sinatra being in Havana with Lucky Luciano, one newspaper published the headline, "Shame, Sinatra".
In 1984, Sinatra worked with Quincy Jones for the first time in nearly two decades on the album, ''L.A.
Sinatra forged a highly successful career as a film actor.
He initially developed problems with his vocal cords during the comeback due to a prolonged period without singing.
Santopietro writes that through the 1950s, well into the 1960s, "every Sinatra LP was a masterpiece of one sort of another, whether uptempo, torch song, or swingin' affairs.
In 1962, Sinatra was snubbed by Kennedy during his visit to Palm Springs when he decided to stay with the Republican Bing Crosby, due to FBI concerns about Sinatra's alleged connections to organized crime.
In March 1939, saxophone player Frank Mane, who knew Sinatra from Jersey City radio station WAAT where both performed on live broadcasts, arranged for him to audition and record "Our Love", his first solo studio recording.
Voice coach John Quinlan was impressed by Sinatra's vocal range, remarking, "He has far more voice that people think he has.
Sinatra's relationship with Columbia Records was also disintegrating, with A&R executive Mitch Miller claiming he "couldn't give away" the singer's records.
Santopietro argues that Sinatra created his own world, which he was able to dominate—his career was centred around power, perfecting the ability to capture an audience.
In 1980 he scored a Top 40 hit with "(Theme From) New York, New York".
His personal favorite was Ralph Vaughan Williams.
Lahr comments that the new Sinatra was "not the gentle boy balladeer of the forties.
Sinatra restored his gaming license in February 1981, following support from Ronald Reagan.
Granata considers the album to have been "impeachable" sic, "one of the very best of the Sinatra-Riddle ballad albums", in which Sinatra displayed an impressive vocal range, particularly in "Ol' Man River", in which he darkened the hue.
In 1977, Sinatra starred as a detective in ''Contract on Cherry Street'', cited as his "one starring role in a dramatic television film".
Sinatra played a major role in the desegregation of Nevada hotels and casinos in the 1950s and 1960s.
Sinatra became the stereotype of the "tough working-class Italian American", something which he embraced.
Sinatra was noted for his impeccable sense of style.
He appeared as a special guest in the sisters' ABC ''Eight-to-the-Bar Ranch'' series, while the trio in turn guested on his ''Songs by Sinatra'' series on CBS.
Sinatra's maternal uncle, Domenico, gave him a ukulele for his 15th birthday, and he began performing at family gatherings.
He also released ''No One Cares'' in the same year, a collection of "brooding, lonely" torch songs, which critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine thought was "nearly as good as its predecessor ''Where Are You?
The album was released in February 1961, the same month that Reprise Records released Ben Webster's ''The Warm Moods'', Sammy Davis, Jr.'s ''The Wham of Sam'', Mavis River's ''Mavis'' and Joe E. Lewis's ''It is Now Post Time''.
He gave a series of concerts in Israel in 1962, and donated his entire $50,000 fee for appearing in a cameo role in ''Cast a Giant Shadow'' (1966) to the Youth Center in Jerusalem.
He always dressed immaculately, both in his professional and private life.
Although still a registered Democrat, Sinatra endorsed Republican Ronald Reagan for a second term as Governor of California in 1970.
Other buildings named for Sinatra include the Frank Sinatra School of the Arts in Astoria, Queens, the Frank Sinatra International Student Center at Israel's Hebrew University in Jerusalem dedicated in 1978, and the Frank Sinatra Hall at the USC School of Cinematic Arts in Los Angeles, California, dedicated in 2002.
From his youth, Sinatra displayed sympathy for African Americans and worked both publicly and privately all his life to help them win equal rights.
Sinatra met President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944, and subsequently heavily campaigned for the Democrats in the 1944 presidential election.
and in the following year he was pushed out of the top spots in polls for the first time since 1943.
As his success and popularity grew, Sinatra pushed Dorsey to allow him to record some solo songs.
Fred Zinnemann's ''From Here to Eternity'' deals with the tribulations of three soldiers, played by Burt Lancaster, Montgomery Clift, and Sinatra, stationed on Hawaii in the months leading up to the attack on Pearl Harbor.
He is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, having sold more than 150 million records worldwide.
Sinatra left Capitol in 1960 to start his own record label, Reprise Records, and released a string of successful albums.
On September 21, 1983, Sinatra filed a $2 million court case against Kitty Kelley, suing her in punitive damages, before her unofficial biography, ''His Way'', was even published.
A biographical film directed by Martin Scorsese has long been in production.
Sinatra arranged Reagan's Presidential gala, as he had done for Kennedy 20 years previously.
Dolly found Sinatra work as a delivery boy at the ''Jersey Observer'' newspaper, where his godfather Frank Garrick worked, and after that, Sinatra was a riveter at the Tietjen and Lang shipyard.
His deep blue eyes earned him the popular nickname "Ol' Blue Eyes".
I'm not going to mess with him, are you?"
In 1978, Sinatra filed a $1 million lawsuit against a land developer for using his name in the "Frank Sinatra Drive Center" in West Los Angeles.
By the end of 1943 he was more popular in a ''Down Beat'' poll than Bing Crosby, Perry Como, Bob Eberly and Dick Haymes.
While Sinatra never formally learned how to read music, he had a fine, natural understanding of it, and he worked very hard from a young age to improve his abilities in all aspects of music.
During his Columbia years Sinatra would use a RCA 44 microphone, which Granata describes as "the 'old-fashioned' microphone which is closely associated with Sinatra's crooner image of the 1940s", though when performing on talk shows later he would use a bullet-shaped RCA 77.
Shot in January 1987, the episode aired on CBS on February 25.
He believed that as he was the best, he had to give his best to the audience, and would wear expensive custom-tailored tuxedos on stage as a sign of respect and to look important.
According to his son, Frank Sinatra, Jr., King sat weeping in the audience at one of his father's concerts in 1963 as Sinatra sang "Ol' Man River", a song from the musical ''Show Boat'' that is sung by an African-American stevedore.
During a party at Caesars in 1979, he was awarded the Grammy Trustees Award, while celebrating 40 years in show business and his 64th birthday.
The roadhouse was connected to the WNEW radio station in New York City, and he began performing with a group live during the ''Dance Parade'' show.
Sinatra received three honorary degrees during his lifetime.
Evans once noted that whenever Sinatra suffered from a bad throat and loss of voice it was always due to emotional tension which "absolutely destroyed him".
His fourth chart appearance was "I'll Never Smile Again", topping the charts for twelve weeks beginning in mid-July.
Sinatra was buried in a blue business suit with mementos from family members including cherry-flavored Life Savers, Tootsie Rolls, a bottle of Jack Daniel's, a pack of Camel cigarettes and a Zippo lighter, stuffed toys, and a dog biscuit, as well as a roll of dimes, of which he always carried next to his parents in section B-8 of Desert Memorial Park in Cathedral City, California.
He swam daily in the Pacific Ocean, finding it to be therapeutic and giving him much-needed solitude.
Items of memorabilia from Sinatra's life and career are displayed at USC's Frank Sinatra Hall and Wynn Resort's Sinatra restaurant.
He asked Dorsey to be godfather to his daughter Nancy in June 1940.
A childhood operation on his mastoid bone left major scarring on his neck, and during adolescence he suffered from cystic acne that scarred his face and neck.
1 on the Billboard chart.
Recording sessions would typically last three hours, though Sinatra would always prepare for it by spending at least an hour by the piano beforehand to vocalize, followed by a short rehearsal with the orchestra to ensure the balance of sound.
In 1990, Sinatra was awarded the second "Ella Award" by the Los Angeles-based Society of Singers, and performed for a final time with Ella Fitzgerald at the award ceremony.
According to Granata, the recording of "Indian Summer" on the album was a favorite of Riddle's, noting the "contemplative mood which is heightened by a Johnny Hodges alto sax solo that will bring a tear to your eye".
Kelley claims that Tina Sinatra blamed her for her father's colon surgery in 1986.
Look at Me Now", "Dolores", "Everything Happens to Me" and "This Love of Mine" in 1941; "Just as Though You Were There", "Take Me" and "There Are Such Things" in 1942; and "It Started All Over Again", "In the Blue of Evening" and "It's Always You" in 1943.
The TV special was highlighted by a dramatic reading of "Send in the Clowns" and a song-and-dance sequence with former co-star Gene Kelly.
He began to console himself in songs with a "brooding melancholy", such as "I'm a Fool to Want You", "Don't Worry 'Bout Me", "My One and Only Love" and There Will Never Be Another You", which Riddle believed was the direct influence of Ava Gardner.
The album was a substitute for another Jones project, an album of duets with Lena Horne, which had to be abandoned.
Riddle noted that Sinatra took "particular delight" in singing "The Lady is a Tramp", commenting that he "always sang that song with a certain amount of salaciousness", making "cue tricks" with the lyrics.
Sinatra was lastly married to Barbara Marx from 1976 until his death.
His career was reborn in 1953 with the success of ''From Here to Eternity'' and his subsequent Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
As a singer, early on he was primarily influenced by Bing Crosby, but later believed that Tony Bennett was "the best singer in the business".
&nbsp;– his first album in stereo, with Gordon Jenkins.
Starting in September 1949, the BBD&O advertising agency produced a radio series starring Sinatra for Lucky Strike called ''Light Up Time''&nbsp;– some 176 15-minute shows which featured Frank and Dorothy Kirsten singing&nbsp;– which lasted through to May 1950.
On May 29 he recorded seven songs in a single session, more than double the usual yield of a recording session, and an eighth was planned, "Lush Life", but Sinatra found it too technically demanding.
He went on to describe that "this is the first educational degree I have ever held in my hand.
Born in Hoboken, New Jersey, to Italian immigrants, he began his musical career in the swing era with Harry James and Tommy Dorsey.
ABC agreed to allow Sinatra's Hobart Productions to keep 60% of the residuals,and bought stock in Sinatra's film production unit, Kent Productions, guaranteeing him $7 million.
The album and its sequel, ''Duets II'', released the following year, would see Sinatra remake his classic recordings with popular contemporary performers, who added their vocals to a pre-recorded tape.
In 1982, he signed a $16 million three-year deal with the Golden Nugget of Las Vegas.
When he changed his political affiliations in 1970, Sinatra became less outspoken on racial issues.
Sinatra's second album with Riddle, ''Swing Easy!
Composer Gus Levene commented that Sinatra's strength was that when it came to lyrics, telling a story musically, Sinatra displayed a "genius" ability and feeling, which with the "rare combination of voice and showmanship" made him the "original singer" which others who followed most tried to emulate.
On September 11 and 12, 1961, Sinatra recorded his final songs for Capitol.
In 1953 Sinatra starred in the NBC radio program ''Rocky Fortune'', portraying Rocco Fortunato (a.k.a.
Early on he frequently worked with the popular Andrews Sisters on radio, and they would appear as guests on each other's shows, as well as on many USO shows broadcast to troops via the Armed Forces Radio Service (AFRS).
Sinatra's third album, ''Christmas Songs by Sinatra'', was originally released in 1948 as a 78&nbsp;rpm album set, and a 10" LP record was released two years later.
'', sometimes seen as one of his best albums, which was released in March 1956.
Due to the success of the group, Bowes kept asking for them to return, disguised under different names, varying from "The Seacaucus Cockamamies" to "The Bayonne Bacalas".
A star-studded birthday tribute, ''Sinatra: 80 Years My Way'', was held at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles, featuring performers such as Ray Charles, Little Richard, Natalie Cole and Salt-N-Pepa singing his songs.
In the late 1960s, Sinatra became known for playing detectives, including Tony Rome in ''Tony Rome'' (1967) and its sequel ''Lady In Cement'' (1968).
''Nice 'n' Easy'', a collection of ballads, topped the  ''Billboard'' chart in October 1960 and remained in the charts for 86 weeks,  winning critical plaudits.
It won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year, as well as Best Vocal Performance, Male and Best Arrangement for Billy May.
Sinatra quickly became the group's lead singer, and, much to the jealousy of his fellow group members, garnered most of the attention from girls.
It was the first studio album of Sinatra's to feature his touring pianist at the time, Vinnie Falcone, and was based on an idea by Sonny Burke.
In the 1950s, Sinatra's career was facilitated by developments in technology.
He put on a performance at the White House for the Italian Prime Minister, and performed at the Radio City Music Hall with Luciano Pavarotti and George Shearing.
William Ruhlmann of AllMusic noted that Sinatra "took the material very seriously, singing the love lyrics with utter seriousness", and that his "singing and the classically influenced settings gave the songs unusual depth of meaning".
He signed with Capitol Records and released several critically lauded albums, including ''In the Wee Small Hours'' (1955), ''Songs for Swingin' Lovers!''
