The battle became known as the Battle of Chotusitz.
After one particular defeat on the battlefield Frederick bluntly wrote: "Fortune has it in for me; she is a woman, and I am not that way inclined."
Frederick invited German immigrants to the province also hoping they would displace the Poles.
He modernized the Prussian bureaucracy and civil service and pursued religious policies throughout his realm that ranged from tolerance to segregation.
He prepared the ground for the partition of Poland-Lithuania in 1752 at the latest, hoping to gain territorial bridge between Pomerania, Brandenburg and East Prussian provinces.
The success in integrating the Jews into those areas of society that Frederick encouraged them in can be seen by the role played by Gerson von Bleichröder in financing Bismarck's efforts to reunite Germany.
Keith was intelligent, but without education.
In her biography of the king, Margaret Goldsmith says rumors of the liaison spread in the court and the "intimacy" between the two boys provoked the condemnation of even his elder and favorite sister, Wilhelmine, who was his protector in all things.
They were caught at the border and King Frederick William I nearly executed his son for desertion.
Frederick's relationship with Hans Hermann von Katte was also believed by King Frederick William to be romantic, a suspicion which enraged him.
''Heiteres und Ernstes um den großen König'' – director: Phil Jutzi
Jews on the Polish border were therefore encouraged to perform all the trade they could and received all the protection and support from the king as any other Prussian citizen.
Frederick was an influential military theorist whose analysis emerged from his extensive personal battlefield experience and covered issues of strategy, tactics, mobility and logistics.
Frederick and his brother Prince Henry marched the Prussian army into Bohemia to confront Joseph's army, but the two forces ultimately descended into a stalemate, largely living off the land rather than actively attacking each other.
Frederick supported arts and philosophers he favored, as well as allowing complete freedom of the press and literature.
The gilded stucco decorations of the ceilings were created by Johann Michael Merck (1714–1784) and Carl Joseph Sartori (1709–1770).
Voltaire's angry attack on Maupertuis, the President of Frederick's academy, in the form of ''Le Diatribe du Docteur Akakia'' provoked Frederick to burn the pamphlet publicly and put Voltaire under house arrest, after which Voltaire left Prussia.
It should however be noted that interest in foreign cultures was by no means an exception in Germany at that time.
He defied his authoritarian father, Frederick William I, and sought to run away with his best friend Hans Hermann von Katte.
He made it possible for men not of noble stock to become judges and senior bureaucrats.
Moreover, Saxony and Russia, both of which had been Austria's allies in the Seven Years' War, were now allied with Prussia.
In spite of his lack of taste for German, Frederick did sponsor the "Königliche Deutsche Gesellschaft" whose aim was to promote and develop the German language.
Despite his dazzling success as a military commander, Frederick was no fan of protracted warfare, and once wrote, "Our wars should be short and quickly fought… A long war destroys … our army’s discipline; depopulates the country, and exhausts our resources."
Frederick himself tried further propaganda justifying the Partition, portraying the acquired provinces as underdeveloped and improved by Prussian rule.
While the ensuing Treaty of Hubertusburg simply returned the European borders to what they had been before the Seven Years' War, Frederick's ability to retain Silesia during the Silesian Wars made him and Prussia popular throughout the German-speaking territories.
In spite of his father's desire that his education be entirely religious and pragmatic, the young Frederick, with the help of his tutor Jacques Duhan, procured for himself a three thousand volume secret library of poetry, Greek and Roman classics, and French philosophy to supplement his official lessons.
On 11 September 1744, the Prussians began a three-day artillery bombardment of Prague, in which Prague fell a few days later.
In 1763 when Gotzkowsky went broke during a financial crisis, which started in Amsterdam, Frederick took over his porcelain factory, known as KPM, but refused to buy more of his paintings.
In lieu of his military predilections, Frederick administered his Kingdom justly and ranks among the most "enlightened" monarchs of his era; this, notwithstanding the fact that in many ways, "Frederick the Great represented the embodiment of the art of war".
However, Prussia's Polish territory was also the best-developed economically.
'''Frederick II''' (; 24 January 171217 August 1786) was King of Prussia from 1740 until 1786, the longest reign of any Hohenzollern King.
Frederick was a patron of music as well as a gifted musician who played the transverse flute.
As a result, Keith was dismissed from his service to the King and sent away to a regiment by the Dutch border, while Frederick was sent to Wusterhausen in order to "repent of his sin".
In late March 1741, Frederick set out on his campaign again, but was forced to fall back by a sudden surprise attack by the Austrians.
Well, we had not much to say in favour of the constitution of the Reich; we admitted that it consisted entirely of lawful misuses, but it rose therefore the higher over the present French constitution which is operating in a maze of unlawful misuses, whose government displays its energies in the wrong places and therefore has to face the challenge that a thorough change in the state of affairs is widely prophesied.
Frederick formed the Bayard Order to discuss warfare with his friends; Heinrich August de la Motte Fouqué was made the grand master of the gatherings.
* 1920: ''Die Tänzerin Barbarina'' – director: Carl Boese
Frederick hoped these two great victories would force Austria into a peace agreement, but Maria Theresa was determined not to make peace until she had recovered Silesia, and so the war continued.
Frederick was restored to the Prussian Army as Colonel of the Regiment von der Goltz, stationed near Nauen and Neuruppin.
Late in his life Frederick also involved Prussia in the low-scale War of the Bavarian Succession in 1778, in which he stifled Austrian attempts to exchange the Austrian Netherlands for Bavaria.
Frederick disliked the German language, and literature, explaining that German authors "pile parenthesis upon parenthesis, and often you find only at the end of an entire page the verb on which depends the meaning of the whole sentence".
The first real battle Frederick faced in Silesia was the Battle of Mollwitz on 10 April 1741.
However the Academy was in a crisis for two decades at mid-century, due to scandals and internal rivalries such as the debates between Newtonianism and Leibnizian views, and the personality conflict between Voltaire and Maupertuis.
In Rheinsberg, Frederick assembled a small number of musicians, actors and other artists.
He protected his industries with high tariffs and minimal restrictions on domestic trade.
Frederick and Napoleon are perhaps the most admiringly quoted military leaders in Clausewitz' ''On War''.
He considered himself "the first servant of the state."
Frederick remained an admired historical figure through the German Empire's defeat in the First World War, and the Nazis glorified him as a great German leader pre-figuring Hitler, but his reputation became far less favorable in 1945 in both East and West Germany after the fall of the Nazi regime, largely due to his status as a favorite icon of the Nazis.
He modernized the Prussian bureaucracy and civil service and promoted religious tolerance throughout his realm.
Prince Frederick was twenty-eight years of age when his father Frederick William I died and he acceded to the throne of Prussia.
He loved dogs and his horse and wanted to be buried with his greyhounds.
Finally, Catherine II of Russia threatened to enter the war on Frederick's side if peace was not negotiated, and Joseph reluctantly dropped his claim to Bavaria.
Frederick the Great commissioned Johann Ernst Gotzkowsky to promote the trade and—to take on the competition with France—put a silk factory where soon 1,500 people found employment.
In the ensuing Russo-Turkish War (1768–74), Frederick supported Catherine with a subsidy of 300,000 rubles with reluctance as he did not want Russia to become even stronger through the acquisitions of Ottoman territory.
King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, is named after the King of Prussia Inn, itself named in honor of Frederick.
He opposed attempts of political reform in Poland, and his troops bombarded customs ports on the Vistula, thwarting Polish efforts to create a modern fiscal system.
The king forced Frederick to watch the decapitation of his confidant Katte at Küstrin on 6 November, leaving the crown prince to faint right before the fatal blow was struck.
To encourage immigration, he repeatedly emphasized that nationality and religion were of no concern to him.
Frederick William, weakened by gout brought about by the campaign and seeking to reconcile with his heir, granted Frederick Schloss Rheinsberg in Rheinsberg, north of Neuruppin.
Historian Dennis Showalter argues, "The King was also more consistently willing than any of his contemporaries to seek decision through offensive operations."
The Protestant dissidents were still free to practice their religion, although their schools were shut down.
Frederick made French the official language and speculative philosophy the most important topic of study.
I have drained the marshes and established a police force where none existed.
Nationalist historian Heinrich von Treitschke presented Frederick as the greatest German in centuries.
The king briefly threatened the crown prince with the death penalty, then considered forcing Frederick to renounce the succession in favour of his brother, Augustus William, although either option would have been difficult to justify to the Imperial Diet of the Holy Roman Empire.
These provinces cannot be compared with any European country--the only parallel would be Canada."
Frederick's long-term goal was to remove all Polish people from his territories, both peasants and nobility, by expelling the nobles through an oppressive tax system and through "other measures" and by eradicating the Polish national character of the rural population by mixing them with Germans invited in their thousands by promises of free land; by such means, Frederick boasted he would "gradually...get rid of all Poles".
It depicts the life of Frederick the Great.
The works of Niccolò Machiavelli, such as ''The Prince'', were considered a guideline for the behavior of a king in Frederick's age.
In the 1750s Voltaire began writing his ''Mémoires.''
This policy allowed Prussia's population to recover very quickly from the considerable losses it suffered during Frederick's three wars.
Moreover, it was under his reign that Berlin became an important center of German enlightenment.
He was an influential military theorist whose analysis emerged from his extensive personal battlefield experience and covered issues of strategy, tactics, mobility and logistics.
Once Frederick secured the throne in 1740, he prevented Elisabeth from visiting his court in Potsdam, granting her instead Schönhausen Palace and apartments at the Berliner Stadtschloss.
Although Frederick wrote to his sister that, "There can be neither love nor friendship between us," and he considered suicide, he went along with the wedding on 12 June 1733.
As soon as you get away from the frontier, the Jews become a disadvantage, they form cliques, they deal in contraband and get up to all manner of rascally tricks which are detrimental to Christian burghers and merchants.
As early as 1731 Frederick had suggested that the country would be well-served by annexing Polish Prussia in order to join the separated territories of the Kingdom of Prussia.
Dorpalen says "The book was indeed a very courageous indictment of Hitler's irrationalism and recklessness, his ideological fanaticism and insatiable lust for power."
Foresight ranked among the most important attributes when fighting an enemy, according to the Prussian monarch, as the discriminating commander must see everything before it takes place, so "nothing will be new to him."
Frederick exploited this conflict as means to keep Poland weak and divided.
Much of the structure of the more modern German General Staff owed its existence and extensive structure to Frederick, along with the accompanying power of autonomy given to commanders in the field.
On 4 June 1745, Frederick trapped a joint force of Saxons and Austrians that had crossed the mountains to invade Silesia.
Frederick also aspired to be a Platonic philosopher king like the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius.
Also, Frederick the great was dismissive of the radical philosophy of later French thinkers such as Rousseau, and grew to believe that the French cultural golden age was drawing to a close.
Historian Leopold von Ranke was unstinting in his praise of Frederick's "heroic life, inspired by great ideas, filled with feats of arms ... immortalized by the raising of the Prussian state to the rank of a power."
Frederick undertook the conquest of Polish territory under the pretext of an enlightened and civilizing mission, particularly given his negative perceptions about Poland and the traditions of its ruling elite, all of which merely provided a convenient path for the "sanguine ameliorism" of the Enlightenment and heightened assurance in the "distinctive merits of the 'Prussian way'".
Once again, Frederick's stunning victories on the battlefield caused his enemies to seek peace terms.
However, in person Frederick found Voltaire difficult to live with, and was often annoyed by Voltaire's many quarrels with his other friends.
Frederick's ultimate success in the Seven Years' War came at a heavy price.
This story is doubted by Wolfgang Burgdorf, who is of the opinion that "Frederick had a physical disgust of women" and therefore "was unable to sleep with them".
A further intimate friendship was with his first valet Michael Gabriel Fredersdorf who, Frederick confided to his diary, had "a very pretty face": Fredersdorf was provided with an estate, and acted as unofficial prime minister.
"Frederician Rococo" developed under Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff.
After the first partition Frederick engaged in plunder of Polish property, confiscating Polish estates and monasteries to support German colonization, and in 1786 he ordered forced buy-outs of Polish holdings.
This was only the second real battle in which Frederick led troops since becoming king.
Frederick was himself partly responsible for the weakness of the Polish government, having inflated its currency with Polish coin dies obtained during the conquest of Saxony in 1756.
He immediately separated from his wife when Frederick William I died in 1740.
Before his accession, Frederick was told by D'Alembert, "The philosophers and the men of letters in every land have long looked upon you, Sire, as their leader and model."
Despite its excellent performance, the Prussian army was stretched thin from many costly battles.
:Teil 3 – Sanssouci
The crown prince returned to Berlin after finally being released from his tutelage at Küstrin on 26 February 1732.
As neighboring countries began conspiring against him, Frederick was determined to strike first.
Because they were army officers who had tried to flee Prussia for Great Britain, Frederick William leveled an accusation of treason against the pair.
He called it "peopling Prussia" (''Peuplierungspolitik'').
They were allowed to serve in the army and vote in elections, but were barred from public offices and the Polish Parliament the Sejm, and during the 1760s their importance became out of proportion compared to their numbers.
More significantly, Russia's about-face from once an enemy of Prussia to its patron rattled the leadership of Sweden, who, seeing the writing on the wall, hastily made peace with Frederick as well.
Therefore, the Prussian king struck preemptively and quickly occupied Silesia, using as justification an obscure treaty from 1537 between the Hohenzollern and the Piast dynasty of Brieg (Brzeg).
Unusual for his time and aristocratic background, he criticized hunting as cruel, rough and uneducated.
Prussia annexed  and 600,000 inhabitants, the least of the partitioning powers.
His conquest of Silesia gave Prussia's fledgling industries access to raw materials and fertile agricultural lands.
William Hogarth's painting The Toilette features a flautist (who stands next to a painting of Zeus, as an eagle, abducting Ganymede), which may be a satirical depiction of Frederick – thereby publicly outing him as a homosexual as early as 1744.
While using German as a working language in the army and with his administration, Frederick read and wrote his literary works in French and also generally used that language with his closest relatives or friends.
The Prussian king achieved a rapprochement with Emperor Joseph and the Austrian chancellor Kaunitz.
* 1936: ''Fridericus'' – director: Johannes Meyer
Some critics, however, point out his oppressive measures against conquered Polish subjects during the First Partition.
When Joseph tried the scheme again in 1784, Frederick created the ''Fürstenbund'', allowing himself to be seen as a defender of German liberties, in contrast to his earlier role of attacking the imperial Habsburgs.
The new strict tax system and bureaucracy was particularly disliked among Polish population, as was the compulsory military service in the army, which didn't exist previously in Poland.
In actual fact, the Prussians had won the battle at the very moment that Frederick had fled.
Wilhelmine recorded that the two "soon became inseparable.
However, the Prussian Cavalry proved to be a powerful force and ultimately Prussia claimed victory.
Frederick did befriend Ignacy Krasicki, whom he asked to consecrate St. Hedwig's Cathedral in 1773.
Both the wall paneling of the galleries and the diamond shapes of the floor consist of white and yellow marble.
Nevertheless, although Frederick was largely irreligious, he to some extent appeared to adopt this tenet of Calvinism.
Lewitter says: "The conflict over the rights of religious dissenters in Poland had led to civil war and foreign intervention."
According to Citino, "When later generations of Prussian-German staff officers looked back to the age of Frederick, they saw a commander who repeatedly, even joyfully, risked everything on a single day's battle - his army, his kingdom, often his very life."
How closely linked was he to The Enlightenment?
He presided over the construction of canals for bringing crops to market, and introduced new crops, especially the potato and the turnip, to the country.
The situation is summed up in a widely translated and quoted aphorism attributed to Mirabeau who asserted in 1786 that Prussia under Frederick was not a state in possession of an army, but an army in possession of a state (''"La Prusse n’est pas un pays qui a une armée, c’est une armée qui a un pays.
The newly created province of West Prussia connected East Prussia and Farther Pomerania and granted Prussia control of the mouth of the Vistula River.
For this, he was sometimes called ''Der Kartoffelkönig'' (the Potato King).
He had little in common with his bride and resented the political marriage as an example of the Austrian interference which had plagued Prussia since 1701.
They are needed on the Polish border because in these areas Hebrews alone perform trade.
Though he had a good command of this language, his writing style was flawed; he had troubles with its orthography and always had to rely on French proofreaders.
When someone once asked Frederick why he didn't wear spurs when riding his horse, he replied, "Try sticking a fork into your naked stomach, and you will soon see why."
Accordingly, he renewed his alliance with the French and preemptively invaded Bohemia in August 1744.
Historian Robert M. Citino describes Frederick's strategic approach:
Rumors finally reached King Frederick William, a religious bigot who cultivated in his court an ideal of ultramasculine, military life, and who enjoyed bullying his son.
At age 16, Frederick formed an attachment to the king's 13-year-old page, Peter Karl Christoph Keith.
He was the most aggressive field commander of the century, perhaps of all time, and one who constantly pushed the limits of the possible.
His main inspiration were ancient philosophers and poets as well as French authors of the 17th century.
As Frederick made more wasteland arable, Prussia looked for new colonists to settle the land.
In 1739 Frederick met the handsome young Venetian philosopher Francesco Algarotti.
In later years, Frederick would pay his wife formal visits only once a year.
:Teil 4 – Schicksalswende
Frederick wrote that Poland had "the worst government in Europe with the exception of Turkey".
The personal friendship of Frederick and Voltaire came to an unpleasant end after Voltaire's visit to Berlin and Potsdam in 1750–1753, although they reconciled from afar in later years.
With the help of French experts, he organized a system of indirect taxation, which provided the state with more revenue than direct taxation.
Pursuing the Austrians into Bohemia, Frederick caught the enemy on 30 September 1745 and delivered a flanking attack on the Austrian right wing at the Battle of Soor which set the Austrians to flight.
it is not reasonable that the country which produced Copernicus should be allowed to moulder in the barbarism that results from tyranny.
Frederick the Great's most notable and decisive military victories on the battlefield were the Battles of Hohenfriedberg, fought during the War of Austrian Succession in June of 1745; the Battle of Rossbach, where Frederick defeated a combined Franco-Austrian army of 41,000 with a mere 21,000 soldiers (10,000 dead for the Franco-Austrian side with only 550 casualties for Prussia); and the Battle of Leuthen, which was a follow up victory to Rossbach pitting Frederick's 36,000 troops against Charles of Lorraine's Austrian force of 80,000—Frederick's masterful strategy and tactics at Leuthen inflicted 7,000 casualties upon the Austrians and yielded 20,000 prisoners.
German historians often made him the romantic model of a glorified warrior, praising his leadership, administrative efficiency, devotion to duty and success in building up Prussia to a leading role in Europe.
Three days after the fall of Prague, Frederick's troops were again on the march into the heart of central Bohemia.
Frederick had famous buildings constructed in his capital, Berlin, most of which still exist today, such as the Berlin State Opera, the Royal Library (today the State Library Berlin), St. Hedwig's Cathedral, and Prince Henry's Palace (now the site of Humboldt University).
In it, Voltaire explicitly detailed Frederick's homosexuality and the circle surrounding him.
Economic exploitation of Poland, especially by Prussia and Austria, followed the territorial seizures.
When Frederick pursued them into Bohemia and blocked their path to Prague, the Austrians attacked him on 17 May 1742.
The pair slandered the British and Prussian courts in the eyes of the two kings.
Thus it was flexibility that was often paramount to military success.
Peter III was so enamored of Frederick that he not only offered him the full use of a Russian corps for the remainder of the war, he also wrote to Frederick that he would rather have been a general in the Prussian army than Tsar of Russia.
Those hitherto in power have destroyed the schools, thinking that the uneducated people are easily oppressed.
Frederick's place in British historiography was established by Thomas Carlyle's ''History of Frederick the Great'' (8 vol.
His most significant accomplishments during his reign included his military victories, his reorganization of Prussian armies, his patronage of the Arts and the Enlightenment in Prussia, and his final success against great odds in the Seven Years' War.
According to Scott, Frederick was eager to exploit Poland economically as part of his wider aim of increasing Prussia's wealth.
When Frederick ascended the throne as "King in Prussia" in 1740, Prussia consisted of scattered territories, including Cleves, Mark, and Ravensberg in the west of the Holy Roman Empire; Brandenburg, Hither Pomerania, and Farther Pomerania in the east of the Empire; and the Kingdom of Prussia, the former Duchy of Prussia, outside of the Empire bordering the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
* 1921–23: ''Fridericus Rex'' – director: Arzén von Cserépy
He also sent in Jesuits to open schools.
The Habsburg court at Vienna was open to influences from Italy, Spain and France.
His diminished legacy in Germany was due in part to the Nazis' fascination with him, to say nothing of his supposed connection with "Prussian militarism."
Thus, upon the death of Charles VI on 29 October 1740, Frederick disputed the succession of the 23-year-old Maria Theresa to the Habsburg lands, while simultaneously making his own claim on Silesia.
Her father, George Louis of Brunswick-Lüneburg, succeeded to the British throne as King George I in 1714.
In the process of checking Joseph II's attempts to acquire Bavaria, Frederick enlisted two very important players, the Electors of Hanover and Saxony along with several other second rate German princes.
However, he does not seem to have taken much interest in the work of the society.
Dramatically winning the Battle of Chotusitz, Frederick forced the Austrians to seek peace with him in the First Silesian War (1740–1742).
By contrast d' Alembert took a republican rather than monarchical approach and emphasized the international Republic of Letters as the vehicle for scientific advance.
He reformed the judicial system and made it possible for men not of noble stock to become judges and senior bureaucrats, while at the same time his practical yet prejudiced attitude towards Jews was similar to his father's.
According to Karin Friedrich these claims were accepted for a long time in German historiography and sometimes still reflected in modern works.
Unfortunately for the Austrian Emperor Joseph II, the French were unable to provide sufficient manpower and resources to the endeavor since they were already struggling on the North American continent against the British, aiding the American cause for independence in the process.
For their part, the Austrians tried to pressure the French to participate in the War of Bavarian Succession since there were guarantees under consideration related to the Peace of Westphalia, clauses which linked the Bourbon dynasty of France and the Holy Roman Empire.
The fortress at Ohlau fell to Frederick almost immediately and became the winter quarters for Frederick's army.
In the case of Frederick II, it might also have been a reaction to the austerity of the familial ''environnement'' in which he grew up, as his father had a deep aversion for France and was not interested in the cultural development of his state.
Many statesmen, including Baron vom und zum Stein, were also inspired by Frederick's statesmanship.
:In war...he usually saw one path to victory, and that was fixing the enemy army in place, maneuvering near or even around it to give himself a favorable position for the attack, and then smashing it with an overwhelming blow from an unexpected direction.
The palace gardens include a Temple of Friendship (built as a memorial to Wilhelmine), which celebrate the homoerotic attachments of Greek Antiquity, and which is decorated with portraits of Orestes and Pylades, amongst others.
Using improved technology enabled him to create new farmland through a massive drainage program in the country's Oderbruch marsh-land.
The king joined the Freemasons in 1738 and stood close to the French Enlightenment, corresponding with some of its key figures, such as Voltaire.
Frederick ended up the ultimate beneficiary of the French and British struggle across the Atlantic.
In 1732, Queen Sophia Dorothea attempted to arrange a dual marriage of Frederick and his sister Wilhelmine with Amelia and Frederick, the children of her brother, King George II of Great Britain.
), Frederick then pinned the enemy force down and defeated them at the Battle of Hohenfriedberg.
This "Miracle of the House of Brandenburg" led to the collapse of the anti-Prussian coalition; Peter immediately withdrew his armies from Frederick's territories.
* 1928: ''Der alte Fritz – 2.
This was replaced in northern Germany by the ''Reichsthaler'', worth one-fourth of a Conventionsthaler.
However, he also possessed a violent temper (in part due to porphyritic illness) and ruled Brandenburg-Prussia with absolute authority.
Frederick saw as this project as the "taming" and "conquering" of nature, which, in its wild form, he regarded as "useless" and "barbarous" (an attitude that reflected his enlightenment-era, rationalist sensibilities).
He left instructions that he should be buried next to his greyhounds on the vineyard terrace on the side of the ''corps de logis'' of Sanssouci.
This program created roughly  of new farmland, but also eliminated vast swaths of natural habitat, destroyed the region's biodiversity, and displaced numerous native plant and animal communities.
Frederick's subsequent 1757 invasion of Austrian Bohemia, though initially successful, ended in his first defeat at the Battle of Kolin.
The manuscript was stolen and a pirate copy was published in Amsterdam in 1784 as ''The Private Life of the King of Prussia''.
Many other rulers soon followed the steps of Frederick in reforming their own currencies—this resulted in a shortage of ready money thus lowering prices.
Frederick claimed most of the Polish province of Royal Prussia.
Although Maria Theresa had reluctantly agreed to the partition, Frederick commented, "she cries, but she takes".
About a thousand new villages were founded in his reign that attracted 300,000 immigrants from outside Prussia.
