Other works of the period were the fantasy overture ''Over the Hills and Far Away'' (1895–97) and orchestral variations, ''Appalachia'' (1896, rewritten in 1904 for voices and orchestra).
After a brief period of formal musical study in Germany beginning in 1886, he embarked on a full-time career as a composer in Paris and then in nearby Grez-sur-Loing, where he and his wife Jelka lived for the rest of their lives, except during the First World War.
For the rest of his lifetime Delius's more popular pieces were performed in England and abroad, often under the sponsorship of Beecham, who was primarily responsible for the Delius festival in October–November 1929.
Having been influenced by African-American music during his short stay in Florida, he began composing.
The work was given under Busoni in Berlin less than a year later.
Ibsen's denunciations of social conventions further alienated Delius from his commercial background.
Beecham gave discreet financial help, and the composer and musical benefactor H. Balfour Gardiner bought the house at Grez and allowed Delius and Jelka to live there rent-free.
Fenby later wrote a book about his experiences of working with Delius.
Randel notes that in local hotels, the African-American waiters doubled as singers, with daily vocal concerts for patrons and passers-by, giving Delius his introduction to spirituals.
In late 1885 he left a caretaker in charge of Solano Grove and moved to Danville, Virginia.
His choral works of the period, notably ''An Arabesque'' (1911) and ''A Song of the High Hills'' (1911) are among the most radical of Delius's writings in their juxtapositions of unrelated chords.
Over the next eight years, Delius befriended many writers and artists, including August Strindberg, Edvard Munch and Paul Gauguin.
In 1915, ''The Musical Times'' published a profile of him by his admirer, the composer Philip Heseltine (known as "Peter Warlock"), who commented:
Beecham was assisted in the organisation of the festival by Philip Heseltine, who wrote the detailed programme notes for three of the six concerts.
Delius's parents were born in Bielefeld, Westphalia, of Dutch origin; the family had for some generations been settled in German lands near the Rhine.
Jacksonville had a rich, though to a European, unorthodox musical life.
These works became part of the standard English concert repertory, and helped to establish the character of Delius's music in the English concert-goer's mind, although according to Ernest Newman, the concentration on these works to the neglect of his wider output may have done Delius as much harm as good.
Grieg, however, was perhaps the composer who influenced him more than any other.
In ''Paris'' (1899), the orchestration owes a debt to Richard Strauss; its passages of quiet beauty, says Payne, nevertheless lack the deep personal involvement of the later works.
By May 1935, Jelka felt she had enough strength to undertake the crossing to attend a reburial in England.
Although the work was based on the same Nietzsche work as Richard Strauss's ''Also sprach Zarathustra'', Delius distanced himself from the Strauss work, which he considered a complete failure.
The marriage was not conventional: Jelka was, at first, the principal earner; there were no children; and Delius was not a faithful husband.
The Trust is a co-sponsor of the   Royal Philharmonic Society's Composition Prize for young composers.
In 1903 they married, and, apart from a short period when the area was threatened by the advancing German army during the First World War,  Delius lived in Grez for the rest of his life.
"The cream of his orchestral output with and without soli and chorus was included," and the hall was filled.
The Delius Society, formed in 1962 by his more dedicated followers, continues to promote knowledge of the composer's life and works, and sponsors the annual Delius Prize competition for young musicians.
In Payne's view, the ''Sketches'' are the high water mark of Delius's compositional skill, although Fenby awards the accolade to the later ''Eventyr (Once Upon a Time)'' (1917).
His alternative wish, despite his atheism, was to be buried "in some country churchyard in the south of England, where people could place wild flowers".
Beecham's presentation of ''A Mass of Life'' at the Queen's Hall in June 1909 did not inspire Hans Haym, who had come from Elberfeld for the concert, though Beecham says that many professional and amateur musicians thought it "the most impressive and original achievement of its genre written in the last fifty years"  Some reviewers continued to doubt  the popular appeal of Delius's music, while others were more specifically hostile.
In the ''North Country Sketches'' of 1913–14, Delius divides the strings into 12 parts, and harps, horns, clarinets and bassoons evoke a lifeless winter scene.
Delius left Danville and returned to Europe via New York, where he paused briefly to give a few lessons.
Additionally, ship owners encouraged their deckhands to sing as they worked.
Nor was Strauss an admirer of Delius, as he was of Elgar; he told Delius that he did not wish to conduct ''Paris'': "the symphonic development seems to me to be too scant, and it seems moreover to be an imitation of Charpentier".
Once again Beecham, now with the HMV label, led the way, with ''A Village Romeo and Juliet'' in 1948, performed by the new Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus.
He then attended the International College at Isleworth between 1878 and 1880.
The film depicted the years of the Delius–Fenby collaboration; Fenby co-scripted with Russell.
Delius's music has been only intermittently popular, and often subject to critical attacks.
As a pupil he was neither especially quick nor diligent, but the college was conveniently close to London for Delius to attend concerts and opera.
He mixed very little with French musicians, although Florent Schmitt arranged the piano scores of Delius's first two operas, ''Irmelin'' and ''The Magic Fountain'' (Ravel later did the same for his ''verismo'' opera ''Margot la rouge'').
When the symphonic poem ''Paa Vidderne'' was performed at Monte Carlo on 25 February 1894 in a programme of works from British composers, ''The Musical Times'' listed the composers as "...&nbsp;Balfe, Mackenzie, Oakeley, Sullivan&nbsp;... and one Delius, whoever he may be".
Julius Delius assumed that his son would play a part in the family wool business, and for the next three years he tried hard to persuade him to do so.
He was the second of four sons (there were also ten daughters) born to Julius Delius (1822–1901) and his wife Elise Pauline, ''née'' Krönig (1838–1929).
Cardus's verdict, however, is that Delius's chamber and concerto works are largely failures.
They took up temporary residence in the south of England, where Delius continued to compose.
Beecham, who had until then heard not a note of Delius's music, expressed his "wonderment" and became a lifelong devotee of the composer's works.
An advertisement in the local paper announced, "Fritz Delius will begin at once giving instruction in Piano, Violin, Theory and Composition.
Britain; he does not teach in any of the academies, he is not even an honorary professor or doctor of music.
Delius was not on the whole an admirer of Elgar's music, but the two men took to each other, and there followed a warm correspondence until Elgar's death in February 1934.
By the end of the 1930s Beecham had issued versions for Columbia of most of the main orchestral and choral works, together with several songs in which he accompanied the soprano Dora Labbette on the piano.
Most of Delius's premieres of this period were given by Haym and his fellow German conductors.
By 1936 Columbia and HMV had issued recordings of Violin Sonatas 1 and 2, the ''Elegy and Caprice'', and of some of the shorter works.
Hereafter, whole works rather than brief passages would be informed by this idea.
The opening of ''Brigg Fair'' is described by Palmer as "perhaps the most Debussian  moment in Delius".
From 1910, Delius's works began to be heard in America: ''Brigg Fair'' and ''In a Summer Garden'' were performed in 1910–11 by the New York Philharmonic Orchestra under Walter Damrosch.
Later that year, Beecham introduced ''Brigg Fair'' to London audiences, and Fernández Arbós presented ''Lebenstanz''.
''Paris'', the final work of Delius's apprentice years, is described by Foss as "one of the most complete, if not the greatest, of Delius's musical paintings".
''Brigg Fair'' (1907) announced the composer's full stylistic maturity, the first of the pieces for small orchestra that confirm Delius's status as a musical poet, with the influences of Wagner and Grieg almost entirely absent.
In Delius's native Britain, it was 1907 before his music made regular appearances in concert programmes, after Thomas Beecham took it up.
The work was followed in the next few years by ''In a Summer Garden'' (1908), ''Life's Dance'' (1911), ''Summer Night on the River'' (1911) and ''On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring'' (1912).
During this period Delius did not confine himself to purely orchestral works; he produced his final opera, ''Fennimore and Gerda'' (1908–10), like ''A Village Romeo and Juliet'' written in tableau form, but in his mature style.
Full recordings of the operas were not available until after the Second World War.
When Delius wrote to Elgar in 1933 of the "beautiful four-part harmonies" of the black plantation workers, he may have been unconsciously alluding to the spirituals sung by the Fisk group.
Delius's music is often assumed to lack melody and form.
McVeagh rates their greatest joint production as ''The Songs of Farewell'', settings of Whitman poems for chorus and orchestra, which were dedicated to Jelka.
In Germany, the regular presentation of Delius's works ceased at the outbreak of the war, and never resumed.
''Appalachia'' (choral orchestral variations on an old slave song, also inspired by Florida) followed there in 1905.
After 1915, Delius turned his attention to traditional sonata, chamber and concerto forms, which he had largely left alone since his apprentice days.
Delius visited her there, and after a brief return visit to Florida, he moved in with her.
At the conservatoire, Delius made little progress in his piano studies under Carl Reinecke, but Salomon Jadassohn praised his hard work and grasp of counterpoint; Delius also resumed studies under Hans Sitt.
For five years, from 1928, he worked with Delius, taking down his new compositions from dictation, and helping him revise earlier works.
Although Payne argues that ''Appalachia'' shows only a limited advance in technique, Fenby identifies one orchestral passage as the first expression of Delius's idea of "the transitoriness of all mortal things mirrored in nature".
The Norwegian composer, like Delius, found his primary inspiration in nature and in folk-melodies, and was the stimulus for the Norwegian flavour that characterises much of Delius's early music.
According to Palmer, it is arguable that Delius gained his sense of direction as a composer from his French contemporary Claude Debussy.
Delius also offered lessons in French and German.
Delius was much better received in Germany, where a series of successful performances of his works led to what Beecham describes as a Delius vogue there, "second only to that of Richard Strauss".
The entr'acte known as "The Walk to the Paradise Garden" is described by Heseltine as showing "all the tragic beauty of mortality&nbsp;... concentrated and poured forth in music of overwhelming, almost intolerable poignancy".
A young English admirer, Eric Fenby, learning that Delius was trying to compose by dictating to Jelka, volunteered his services as an unpaid amanuensis.
Payne describes the work as "bracing and exultant, with in places an almost Holstian clarity".
Delius paid little attention to the business of growing oranges, and continued to pursue his musical interests.
Together they produced ''Cynara'' (a setting of words by Ernest Dowson), ''A Late Lark'' (a setting of W. E. Henley), ''A Song of Summer'', a third violin sonata, the ''Irmelin'' prelude, and ''Idyll'' (1932), which reused music from Delius's short opera ''Margot la rouge'', composed thirty years earlier.
Debussy, in a review of Delius's ''Two Danish Songs'' for soprano and orchestra given in a concert on 16 March 1901, wrote: "They are very sweet, very pale—music to soothe convalescents in well-to-do neighbourhoods".
''Sea Drift'' (a cantata with words taken from a poem by Walt Whitman) was premiered at Essen in 1906, and ''A Village Romeo and Juliet'' in Berlin in 1907.
"Delius never forgot the singing as he heard it, day or night, carried sweet and clear across the water to his verandah at Solano Grove, whenever a steam-ship passed; it is hard to imagine conditions less conducive to cultivating oranges—or more conducive to composing."
Haym conducted ''Over the Hills and Far Away'', which he gave under its German title ''Über die Berge in die Ferne'' on 13 November 1897, believed to be the first time Delius's music was heard in Germany.
He was not alone, however; Geoffrey Toye in 1929–30 recorded ''Brigg Fair'', ''In a Summer Garden'', ''Summer Night on the River'' and the "Walk to the Paradise Garden".
Heseltine depicted Delius as a composer uncompromisingly focused on his own music.
In 2004, as a stimulus for young musicians to study and perform Delius's music, the Society established an annual Delius Prize competition, with a prize of £1,000 to the winner.
Delius's biographer Diana McVeagh says of these years that Delius "was found to be attractive, warm-hearted, spontaneous, and amorous."
Jelka quickly declared her admiration for the young composer's music, and the couple were drawn closer together by a shared passion for the works of the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and the music of Grieg.
He took treatment at clinics across Europe, but by 1922 he was walking with two sticks, and by 1928 he was paralysed and blind.
The first of these works was ''A Village Romeo and Juliet'', a music drama which departs from the normal operatic structure of acts and scenes and tells its story of tragic love in a series of tableaux.
After Beecham's death in 1961 advisers were appointed to assist the trustees, and in 1979 the administration of the Trust was taken over by the Musicians' Benevolent Fund.
Henry Wood premiered the revised version of Delius's Piano Concerto that year.
The work was well received in Monte Carlo, and brought the composer a congratulatory letter from Princess Alice of Monaco, but this did not lead to demands for further performances of this or other Delius works.
Julius moved to England to further his career as a wool merchant, and became a naturalised British subject in 1850.
Other works produced in this period include a ''Caprice and Elegy'' for cello and orchestra written for the distinguished British cellist Beatrice Harrison, and a short orchestral piece, ''Fantastic Dance'', which Delius dedicated to Fenby.
Delius's Paris years were musically productive.
The orchestral work ''Paris: The Song of a Great City'' was composed in 1899 and dedicated to Haym.
The typical mature Delian orchestral sound is apparent in these works, through the division of the strings into ten or more sections, punctuated by woodwind comments and decorations.
Of the music in this final choral work, Beecham wrote of its "hard, masculine vigour, reminiscent in mood and fibre of some of the great choral passages in ''A Mass of Life''".
Leipzig was a major musical centre, where Nikisch and Mahler were conductors at the Opera House, and Brahms and Tchaikovsky conducted their works at the Gewandhaus.
The ''Florida Suite'' (1887, revised 1889) is "an expertly crafted synthesis of Grieg and Negroid Americana", while Delius's first opera ''Irmelin'' (1890–92) lacks any identifiably Delian passages.
Beecham was temporarily absent from the concert hall and opera house between 1920 and 1923, but Coates gave the first performance of ''A Song of the High Hills'' in 1920, and Henry Wood and Hamilton Harty programmed Delius's music with the Queen's Hall and Hallé Orchestras.
Nevertheless, his standing with some continental musicians was unaffected; Beecham records that Bartók and Kodály were admirers of Delius, and the former grew into the habit of sending his compositions to Delius for comment and tried to interest him in both Hungarian and Romanian popular music.
The ''New York Times'' critic described the work as uneven; richly harmonious, but combining colour and beauty with effects "of an almost crass unskillfulness and ugliness".
Beecham stresses Delius's role as an innovator: "The best of Delius is undoubtedly to be found in those works where he disregarded classical traditions and created his own forms".
Fenby, however, draws attention to Delius's "flights of melodic poetic-prose", while conceding that the composer was contemptuous of public taste, of "giving the public what they wanted" in the form of pretty tunes.
In 1909, Beecham conducted the first complete performance of ''A Mass of Life'', the largest and most ambitious of Delius's concert works, written for four soloists, a double choir, and a large orchestra.
Danville had a thriving musical life, and early works of his were publicly performed there.
During the First World War, Delius and Jelka moved from Grez to avoid the hostilities.
He was baptised as "Fritz Theodore Albert Delius", and used the forename Fritz until he was about 40.
After Delius's death Beecham continued to promote his works; a second festival was held in 1946, and a third (after Beecham's death) at Bradford in 1962, to celebrate the centenary of Delius's birth.
After Jelka's death in 1935 the Delius Trust was established, to supervise this task.
In America, a small memorial to Delius stands in Solano Grove.
The reviews were polite, but ''The Times'', having praised the orchestral aspects of the score, commented, "Mr. Delius seems to have remarkably little sense of dramatic writing for the voice".
This may be a part of the reason why one so seldom hears a really first-rate performance of Delius's work, save under Mr. Beecham".
Although he achieved enough skill as a violinist to set up as a violin teacher in later years, his chief musical joy was to improvise at the piano, and it was a piano piece, a waltz by Chopin, that gave him his first ecstatic encounter with music.
Hubert Foss, the Oxford University Press's musical editor during the 1920s and 1930s, writes that rather than creating his music from the known possibilities of instruments, Delius "thought the sounds first" and then sought the means for producing these particular sounds.
Fenby describes ''A Mass of Life'' as standing outside the general progression of Delius's work, "a vast parenthesis", unlike anything else he wrote, but nevertheless an essential ingredient in his development.
Delius admired the French composer's orchestration, but thought his works lacking in melody—the latter a comment frequently directed against Delius's own music.
The first recordings of Delius's works, in 1927, were conducted by Beecham for the Columbia label: the "Walk to the Paradise Garden" interlude from ''A Village Romeo and Juliet'', and ''On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring'', performed by the orchestra of the Royal Philharmonic Society.
Fenby echoes this: "the people who really count are those who discover new ways of making our lives more beautiful.
Delius later liked to represent his house at Solano Grove as "a shanty", but it was a substantial cottage of four rooms, with plenty of space for Delius to entertain guests.
After 1918 Delius began to suffer the effects of syphilis, contracted during his earlier years in Paris.
Its harmony and modulation are conventional, and the work bears the clear fingerprints of Wagner and Grieg.
Thereafter he pursued a wholly musical career.
The Delius Association of Florida has for many years organised an annual festival at Jacksonville, to mark the composer's birthday.
Delius's first job was as the firm's representative in Stroud in Gloucestershire, where he did moderately well.
In this work Delius begins to achieve the texture of sound that characterised all his later compositions.
In 1899 Hertz gave a Delius concert in St. James's Hall in London, which included ''Over the Hills and Far Away'', a choral piece, ''Mitternachtslied'', and excerpts from the opera ''Koanga''.
Ward sometimes stayed there, as did an old Bradford friend, Charles Douglas, and Delius's brother Ernest.
She was buried in the same grave as Delius.
Hadley cites, in particular, the six-day Delius festival at the Queen's Hall in 1929 under Beecham's general direction, in the presence of the composer in his bath-chair.
Beecham had died in 1961, and Fenby writes that it "seemed to many then that nothing could save Delius's music from extinction", such was the conductor's unique mastery over the music.
Fenby recounts that on his first day in Grez, Jelka played Beecham's ''First Cuckoo'' recording.
Delius had a financial and artistic success with his incidental music for James Elroy Flecker's play ''Hassan'' (1923) with 281 performances at His Majesty's Theatre.
He had wished to be buried in his own garden, but the French authorities forbade it.
He was sent to Florida in the United States in 1884 to manage an orange plantation.
Its general objectives are the furtherance of knowledge of Delius's life and works, and the encouragement of performances and recordings.
He married Elise in 1856.
Back in Europe he enrolled at the conservatoire in Leipzig, Germany.
As a result, his music never became widely known in France.
In May 1934, when Delius was close to death, Fenby played him Toye's ''In a Summer Garden'', the last music, Fenby says, that Delius ever heard.
By 1907, thanks to performances of his works in many German cities, Delius was, as Thomas Beecham said, "floating safely on a wave of prosperity which increased as the year went on".
Also in 1907 Cassirer conducted some concerts in London, at one of which, with Beecham's New Symphony Orchestra, he presented ''Appalachia''.
In February 2012 Delius was one of ten prominent Britons honoured by the Royal Mail in the "Britons of Distinction" stamps set.
Of these pieces Payne highlights two: the Violin Concerto (1916), as an example of how, writing in unfamiliar genres, Delius remained stylistically true to himself; and the Cello Sonata of 1917, which, lacking the familiarity of an orchestral palate, becomes a melodic triumph.
Cardus argues that melody, while not a primary factor, is there abundantly, "floating and weaving itself into the texture of shifting harmony" – a characteristic which Cardus believes is shared only by Debussy.
In 1997 EMI reissued Meredith Davies's 1976 recording of ''Fennimore and Gerda'', which Richard Hickox conducted in German the same year for Chandos.
These began a long series of Delius recordings under Beecham that continued for the rest of the conductor's life.
She chose St Peter's Church, Limpsfield, Surrey as the site for the grave.
Mendl described this sequence as "exquisite nature studies", with a unity and shape lacking in the earlier formal tone poems.
It is an art which will never enjoy an appeal to the many, but one which will always be loved, and dearly loved, by the few."
She was a professional painter, a friend of Auguste Rodin, and a regular exhibitor at the Salon des Indépendants.
There he soon neglected his managerial duties, and in 1886 returned to Europe.
Delius was then sent to represent the firm in France, but he frequently absented himself from business for excursions to the French Riviera.
His father sent him to Sweden, where he again put his artistic interests ahead of commerce, coming under the influence of the Norwegian dramatists Henrik Ibsen and Gunnar Heiberg.
The ''Manchester Guardian'''s music critic, Neville Cardus, met Delius during the festival.
Beecham conducted the full premiere of ''A Mass of Life'' in London in 1909 (he had premiered Part II in Germany in 1908); he staged the opera ''A Village Romeo and Juliet'' at Covent Garden in 1910; and he mounted a six-day Delius festival in London in 1929, as well as making gramophone recordings of many of Delius's works.
Born in the north of England to a prosperous mercantile family, he resisted attempts to recruit him to commerce.
He holds no official position in the musical life of the country i.e.
The first of the major works was the orchestral ''A Song of Summer'', based on sketches that Delius had previously collected under the title of ''A Poem of Life and Love''.
In the spring of 1888, Sitt conducted Delius's ''Florida Suite'' for an audience of three: Grieg, Christian Sinding and the composer.
The Delius household was musical; famous musicians such as Joseph Joachim and Carlo Alfredo Piatti were guests, and played for the family.
In 1962, enthusiasts for Delius's music who had gone to Bradford for the centenary festival formed the Delius Society; Fenby became its first president.
It is generally believed that during this period he contracted the syphilis that caused the collapse of his health in later years.
Jelka was often distressed by his affairs, but her devotion did not waver.
Delius's first successes came in Germany, where Hans Haym and other conductors promoted his music from the late 1890s.
Grieg, like Ward before him, recognised Delius's potential.
As stipulated in Jelka's will, the Trust operated largely under Beecham's direction.
Just before his death, Delius prepared a codicil to his will whereby the royalties on future performances of his music would be used to support an annual concert of works by young composers.
In spite of encouraging reviews, Delius's orchestral music was not heard again in an English concert hall until 1907.
Julius's father, Ernst Friedrich Delius, had served under Blücher in the Napoleonic Wars.
Delius's familiarity with "black" music possibly predates his American adventures; during the 1870s a popular singing group, the Fisk Jubilee Singers from Nashville, Tennessee, toured Britain and Europe, giving several well-received concerts in Bradford.
Public interest in Delius's life was stimulated in the UK in 1968, with the showing of the Ken Russell film ''Song of Summer'' on BBC Television.
Protected from excessive summer heat by river breezes and a canopy of oak trees, the house was an agreeable place to live in.
Delius's full stylistic maturity dates from around 1907, when he began to write the series of works on which his main reputation rests.
Payne salutes each of these as masterpieces, in which the Delian style struggles to emerge in its full ripeness.
The ceremony took place at midnight; the headline in the ''Sunday Dispatch'' was "Sixty People Under Flickering Lamps In A Surrey Churchyard".
"There can be no superficial view of Delius's music: either one feels it in the very depths of one's being, or not at all.
The earliest significant experiences in his artistic development came, Delius later asserted, from the sounds of the plantation songs carried down the river to him at Solano Grove.
To suggestions that Delius's music is an "acquired taste", Fenby answers: "The music of Delius is not an acquired taste.
However, other conductors have continued to advocate Delius, and since the centenary year, the Delius Society has pursued the aim of "developing a greater knowledge of the life and works of Delius".
One of Delius's major wartime works was his ''Requiem'', dedicated "to the memory of all young Artists fallen in the war".
This attitude persisted long after Delius's death, as the ''Requiem'' did not receive another performance in the UK until 1965, and by 1980 had still had only seven performances world-wide.
'''Frederick Theodore Albert Delius''', CH ( 29 January 186210 June 1934) was an English composer.
Beecham, however, records that despite this  "fair show of acclaim", for all the impetus it gave to future performances of Delius's work the event might never have happened; none of the music was heard again in England for many years.
From that point onwards the music of Delius became increasingly familiar to both British and European audiences, as performances of his works proliferated.
In November 1915 Grainger gave the first American performance of the Piano Concerto, again with the New York Philharmonic.
In each of the major works written in the years after ''Paris'', Delius combined orchestral and vocal forces.
Delius died before this provision could be legally effected;  Fenby says that Beecham then persuaded Jelka in her own will to abandon the concerts idea and apply the royalties towards the editing and recording of Delius's main works.
The pair followed the 1930 Test series between England and Australia with great interest, and regaled a bemused Jelka with accounts of their boyhood exploits in the game.
This occasion was an unusual opportunity for an unknown composer at a time when any sort of orchestral concert was a rare event in London.
After being sent in a similar capacity to Chemnitz, he neglected his duties in favour of trips to the major musical centres of Germany, and musical studies with Hans Sitt.
While in Florida, Delius had his first composition published, a polka for piano called ''Zum Carnival''.
In a retrospective comment on the festival ''The Times'' critic wrote of full houses and an apparent enthusiasm for "music which hitherto has enjoyed no exceptional vogue", but wondered whether this new acceptance was based on a solid foundation.
This does not, says Fenby, indicate that the dictation process was calm and leisurely; the mood was usually frenzied and nerve-wracking.
In January 1908  he conducted the British premiere of ''Paris: The Song of a Great City''.
At Leipzig, Delius became a fervent disciple of Wagner, whose technique of continuous music he sought to master.
The other major work, a setting of Walt Whitman poems with the title ''Songs of Farewell'', was an even more alarming prospect to Fenby: "the complexity of thinking in so many strands, often all at once; the problems of orchestral and vocal balance; the wider area of possible misunderstandings&nbsp;..."  combined to leave Delius and his helper exhausted after each session of work—yet both these works were ready for performance in 1932.
