East of the universities is the Skyline Acres/Southwood Park area, consisting of a core of older established suburbs, and newer more affluent areas such as Poets Hill.
South of the "Hill Area", where it plateaus, is a sizeable shopping district consisting of the city's largest mall-the Regent Mall-,two big-box retail complexes-Corbett Centre and Uptown Centre- along with numerous adjacent strip malls and restaurants.
In the 1830s a sawmill was built on the site of Marysville by two local entrepreneurs.
* '''Reading Park''' - a  passive use park incorporating an open meadow, and a 1.1 kilometre walking trail through a beautiful old-growth forest.
The service was cancelled in the VIA Rail cuts of 1981, but it was resumed in 1985.
During King William's War, Villebon built Fort Nashwaak on the north side of the Saint John River, at the mouth of the Nashwaak River.
Downtown also hosts many of the city's cultural attractions, such as The Playhouse, the Fredericton Region Museum (formerly the York-Sunbury Museum), the Beaverbrook Art Gallery and Science East, New Brunswick's science centre.
As well, the city's growing IT sector has been the basis for new research on IT and computer programming development, including the October 2002 opening of the National Research Council of Canada Institute for Information Technology – e-Business facility, located on the University of New Brunswick campus.
CN's former Centreville Subdivision continues beyond the station to Silverwood in the west; this rail line was abandoned west of the Hanwell Road after the Mactaquac Dam opened in 1968 and flooded the right-of-way through to Woodstock.
In 1783, United Empire Loyalists were settled in Ste.
Club sports (non-varsity) include baseball, cheerleading, cricket, fencing, football, golf, rowing, wrestling and men's rugby.
UFred offers MBA and EMBA Programs under Section 3 of the Degree Granting Act of the Province of New Brunswick in Canada.
On the Southside, the Lady Beaverbrook Rink (opened in 1954), the former home of St. Thomas University's hockey programs, and the Aitken University Centre (opened in 1976 and owned by the University of New Brunswick) were joined in 2012 by the brand new Grant • Harvey Centre, named after two more Fredericton-born NHL alumni - Danny Grant and Buster Harvey - which is another two rink complex; one NHL sized and the other Olympic.
The dead were buried in what became the Loyalist cemetery, which is still found on the south bank of the Saint John River.
This is reflected in cuisine offered by local ethnic restaurants (which include Caribbean, Chinese, Greek, Indian, Korean, Italian, Japanese, Lebanese, Mexican, Pakistani and Vietnamese foods).
* '''The Green''' - along the north and south banks of the Saint John River, the green is primarily a walking and biking trail flanked by grassy areas for picnics and sun bathing.
On 18 October, the British troops arrived opposite the fort, landed three cannons, and assembled earthworks on the south bank of the Nashwaak River.
Dohaney, Herb Curtis, Wayne Curtis, David Adams Richards, Robert Hawkes, Shari Andrews, Mark Anthony Jarman, Gerard Beirne and Joe Blades.
, the Grant • Harvey Centre has replaced the Lady Beaverbrook Rink as the home of the St. Thomas Tommies and the Fredericton High School Black Kats.
Its trails and wooded areas are a favourite for hiking, jogging, dog walking, and cross-country skiing for city residents.
Every November Fredericton hosts the Silver Wave Film Festival.
As a provincial capital, its economy is tied to the public sector; however, the city also contains a growing IT and commercial sector.
* '''Officers' Square''' - Officers' Square is adjacent to the former Officers' Quarters, which houses the Fredericton Region Museum.
The Centre closely collaborates with the Forestry Department at the University of New Brunswick which is one of the top Forestry Departments in Canada.
Each year attendance and interest in the festival has risen.
Via Rail's "Atlantic" passenger train ran for many years between Saint John and Montreal, stopping at Fredericton Junction, about 28 kilometers south of Fredericton, and passing through Maine.
Officers' Square is an outdoor public space located at the centre of the city.
Due to the presence of the universities, Fredericton is more cosmopolitan than many cities its size.
The 2008 Federal Election saw the Conservative Party of Canada take the seat with former New Maryland MLA Keith Ashfield taking this seat with 42% of the popular vote.
This expansion of the post-secondary sector also contributed to Fredericton's population growth during the 1960s and 1970s.
Killarney Lake and nearby Mactaquac Provincial Park have small beaches which are popular in the summer.
A recent issue with middle schools in the city has been the location of George Street Middle School and Albert Street Middle School close to the city centre.
The city has the highest percentage of residents with a post-secondary education in the province and one of the highest per capita incomes.
Because of the its relationship with the Toronto Film Festival, the Silver Wave Festival offers Frederictonians the opportunity to see films that would otherwise be overlooked in their smaller market.
Fredericton has 5 permanent rink facilities which have a combined seven ice surfaces.
"Boss" Gibson named the company town that grew up around the mill Marysville in honour of his wife.
One of the communities amalgamated into Fredericton in 1973, Marysville, has a unique and distinctive history of its own.
Fredericton's parks and public spaces include:
The  building, which serves as the home for the Leo Hayes High School Lions, opened in 2008.
Fredericton is home to three public high schools, two operating in the English language and one in the French language.
The Tommies men's volleyball team has won four ACAA titles, including 2012, while the men's and women's basketball teams were both 2012 CCAA Bronze Medalists.
Along Waterloo Row, the Green becomes Morrell Park which features two football/soccer fields and a baseball field.
Reading Park Trail, ( ) is a 1.1&nbsp;km forested trail going through Reading Park in Skyline Acres on the City's south side.
Protected by trees, and constructed in a loop, Reading Park Trail is very popular with city residents for walking their dogs.
Their townsite was on the south side of the river, approximately a mile upriver from Fort Nashwaak.
University of Fredericton (UFred) and Yorkville University are currently operational.
Fredericton is also home to several commercial art galleries.
Fredericton has also been home to some great historical Canadian painters as well, including Goodridge Roberts, and Molly and Bruno Bobak.
The city has been investing actively in IT infrastructure.
The Calithumpians Theatre Company holds daily shows on a permanent stage every weekday throughout the summer.
They were granted land in compensation in British North America by the Crown.
Fredericton is also served by École Sainte-Anne (ESA), which provides French language education for grades 6-12, and ''École des Bâtisseurs'' (opened in 2007) and École Les Éclaireurs (opened in 2015), which provide K-5 education on the north and south side, respectively.
Many notable historical buildings are also located in or near downtown, including grand Victorian-era residences, the New Brunswick Legislative Building, and Christ Church Cathedral.
Streets in downtown follow a grid pattern.
UNB houses a Faculty of Law which is one of two Anglophone common-law schools in Atlantic Canada.
The current mayor is Brad Woodside, who first served from 1986 until 1999 but was re-elected in 2004.
STU offers an excellent program in Human Rights and is the home of the Atlantic Human Rights Research and Development Centre.
These include the Centre for Conflict Studies, which carries out research on military and strategic issues and the Muriel McQueen Fergusson Centre for Family Violence Research, which carries out multi-disciplinary research on family violence issues.
Meritus closed in 2012.
Federally, the city forms most of the riding of Fredericton.
The Greater Fredericton Region has also established an investment attraction program called Invest Greater Fredericton.
The former CP passenger station (York Street Railway Station) is located at the end of the Fredericton Subdivision and, after sitting abandoned for decades, was renovated into a winery and liquor store in 2011.
The city hosts the annual Harvest Jazz & Blues Festival, attracting regional and international jazz, blues, rock, and world artists.
The same attributes that made Fredericton the capital city also made it an ideal spot for a military installation.
Fred-eZone spans much of the city’s downtown and parts of surrounding residential areas, as well as peripheral commercial areas such as Fredericton's Regent Mall.
One of the main urban centres in New Brunswick, the city had a population of 56,224 in the 2011 census.
Also located on the Northside is the Brookside Mall, a retail mall anchored by Sobeys, Alcool NB Liquor and a Lawtons Drugs store as well as government offices.
Anne's Point") in 1732 by Acadians fleeing Nova Scotia after the British took over the territory (1710).
The average January low temperature is -16&nbsp;°C, while the average high in July high is 26&nbsp;°C.
Passenger service started in 1869 and ended in the 1960s.
In the west side, the bedrock underneath the earth is topographically dominant, whereas the other is controlled by Pleistocene and recent deposits leading to the rivers (resulting in the area being shallow and wide).
Southwest of the universities on the crest of the hill near the highway interchange between Route 8 and Route 7 is the Dr. Everett Chalmers Regional Hospital.
The Southside is characterized by a downtown core consisting of provincial government departments, historical buildings, and numerous business establishments, banks, and law firms.
The Square is also a popular venue for outdoor concerts and boasts an outdoor skating rink in the winter.
The Boyce Farmers Market, open on Saturday mornings, is a place where municipal, provincial and federal politicians frequently visit to mingle with their electorate - something which has evolved into a political tradition.
The Maritime College of Forest Technology maintains its English-language campus in the city.
It houses two NHL-sized ice surfaces, as well as meeting facilities, an indoor track and a small YMCA workout centre, while outside in Scotiabank Park North there is a soccer field and beach volleyball courts.
There were numerous attempts to re-open the mill; however, in 1980, it closed its doors permanently.
As well, research and development in agriculture and crop development is carried out at the Agricultural Research Station in Lincoln.
Fredericton also boasts public and private facilities for archery, soccer, track and field, golf, football, fencing, rowing, sailing, swimming, curling, martial arts, bowling, paintball, and lawn bowling.
Fredericton has a strong Rugby history with the Fredericton Loyalists RFC.
In 1883, under the direction of Gibson, construction began of a cotton mill, which was state of the art for its time.
At St. Thomas University, their men's and women's hockey and Cross Country teams compete in the AUS conference of the CIS, while their other sports teams (which include men's and women's soccer, rugby, golf, basketball, and volleyball) play in the Atlantic Collegiate Athletic Association (ACAA) conference of the Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association (CCAA).
Many of the city trails are rail trails that follow old railway lines.
The line proceeds north, crossing the Saint John River on the Fredericton Railway Bridge, to the former railway yard in South Devon where CP Rail's Gibson and Minto subdivisions join.
TNB was founded by prominent Canadian director Walter Learning in 1969, and is the province’s largest professional theatre company.
The UNB Varsity Reds men hockey team has experienced recent success in national competition, winning the Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS) championships in the 2008–2009, 2010–2011, and 2015-2016 seasons.
Fredericton is also served by several taxi companies.
The pattern of streets in the rest of the city varies including straight thoroughfares (such as Smythe Street, Prospect Street and Regent Street), to curved streets and cul-de-sacs in primarily residential areas.
For many years, it was the home of the acclaimed Governor General's Award-winning poet, playwright, and journalist Alden Nowlan.
Leo Hayes' current principal is Brad Sturgeon.
These include Devon, Nashwaaksis, Marysville and Barker's Point.
Fredericton High School is home to several sports teams - including basketball, hockey, soccer, and football - which dominated New Brunswick provincial high school sports championships during much of the 1980s and 1990s.
CN Rail's Nashwaak Subdivision joined the Oromocto Subdivision at Una Junction, immediately north of Beaverbrook Street opposite the University of New Brunswick campus.
The building is named after Fredericton-born Willie O'Ree, the first black player in the National Hockey League.
The highest temperature ever recorded in Fredericton was  on 18 August 1935.
Anne's Point became the provincial capital, winning out over Parrtown (present-day Saint John) due to its central inland location.
This Centre carries out major research endeavours in forestry management and scientific research.
text:Data from Statistics Canada; increases in 1951 and 1981 were the result of boundary changes.
The UNB Varsity Reds and St. Thomas Tommies are rivals in most sports.
The park, which was once the site of Alexander "Boss" Gibson's rail yard, is adjacent to the Bill Thorpe Walking Bridge, which provides easy access to the Southside of the City.
Villebon had been alerted and prepared his defences.
The first European contact was by the French in the late 17th century.
There are also several trails within the city which are used in the winter for cross-country skiing.
The high school is a Public Private Partnership, known as a P3.
The Acadians sustained losses of one killed and two wounded.
There are healthy programs in both baseball and softball at all age levels around the city.
Within weeks of an attack launched from Fort Nashwaak on Pemaquid, Maine (present day Bristol, Maine), the New Englanders struck back.
It holds over 300 children from kindergarten to grade 5.
Closer to the Downtown, across Saint Annes Point Drive from Officers' Square is the Lighthouse which is an ice cream parlour and tourist attraction, as well as hosting a Tourism Fredericton Information Desk.
Willie O'Ree Place - a new multimillion-dollar hockey complex - opened in the same area in 2007.
Marysville can be described as a prime example of a 19th-century mill town.
There are 12 National Historic Sites of Canada in Fredericton.
It is also one of the oldest public high schools in Canada tracing its beginnings to 1785 - having celebrated its bicentennial in 1985.
MCFT is a small post-secondary school training students from across the Maritime provinces.
Odell Park is adjacent to the Fredericton Botanic Garden.
Fredericton is located on the Trans-Canada Highway, which passes along the southern municipal boundary.
In 1994, Canadian Pacific initially announced that it would abandon its railway line through Maine and New Brunswick, thus leading to VIA Rail's decision to cancel the Atlantic train service.
CP Rail's Minto Subdivision enters the city from Barker's Point in the east and follows the Saint John River to South Devon and crossing the Nashwaak River.
Main Street (in Nashwaaksis) which becomes Union Street in Devon, runs along the northern bank of the Saint John River.
Furthermore, the Institute of Biomedical Engineering has completed groundbreaking work on prosthetic limbs to aid war amputees in developing countries.
It includes numerous retail outlets as well as an eclectic array of businesses including IT firms, law firms, and real estate agents.
Many died during the harsh and long first winter in Fredericton.
Following abandonment, both companies sold their right-of-ways to the provincial government which developed the trail network in partnership with the city and volunteer trail organizations.
As well, the Fredericton City Guard holds a parade in the Square several times a day throughout the summer.
South of downtown, the city's elevation rises along a sloping hill (part of the river valley feature of the city).
There are also several retail outlets that sell ethnic products and artifacts.
The 1960s also saw an expansion of the University of New Brunswick - due to increased post-war university enrolment - as well as the construction of the Fredericton campus of Saint Thomas University.
When their men's hockey teams play (UNB has no women's hockey program in the AUS), the matches are called the "Battle of the Hill".
Fredericton and its surroundings are rich in water resources, which, coupled with highly arable soil, make the Fredericton region ideal for agriculture.
The Saint John River and one of its major tributaries, the Nashwaak River, come together in Fredericton.
* '''Killarney Lake Park''' - A lakeside park with a beach and picnic spots as well as an extensive network of nature trails
The Fredericton U18 Twins hosted the Canadian U18 Softball Fast Pitch Championships in 2011 and 2012, while the Senior Twins hosted the National Senior Fast Pitch Championships in 2012.
The mill remains the dominant feature in the Marysville skyline.
In addition, there are four middle schools, fourteen elementary schools and three private schools in the city.
St. Thomas University (STU) is the province's only Catholic university and has been located in Fredericton since 1964, when it moved from its Chatham, New Brunswick campus.
These include the Old Train Bridge that spans 0.6&nbsp;km across the Saint John River, providing a panoramic view of downtown Fredericton.
Many of the local films come from shorts created through the University of New Brunswick and the New Brunswick Filmmaker's Co-operative.
Central to Marysville is Alexander Gibson Memorial School, or AGMS.
The community is distinguished by its 19th-century mill and historic buildings, which include 19th-century company houses and buildings patterned after those of British industrial towns.
The Beaverbrook Art Gallery is New Brunswick's provincial art gallery.
Skiing and snowboarding at nearby Crabbe Mountain are also common winter activities among city residents, as is skating on the outdoor rinks at Officer's and Queen's Squares.
The Northside is also home to the Saint Mary's First Nation Indian reserve, which includes a community centre and a shopping centre.
For two days gunfire was fiercely exchanged, with the advantage going to the better-sited Acadian guns.
The University of Fredericton was founded in 2006, making it the youngest private university in Canada.
Originally called the Tidal Wave Film Festival, it has been running since 2001.
The Fredericton area was first permanently settled and named Pointe-Sainte-Anne (later often anglicized to "Ste.
The name was shortened to Fredericton shortly after the city became the official provincial capital of New Brunswick on 25 April 1785.
However, the mill frequently changed ownership and never showed a profit.
In residential areas of downtown, some neighbourhoods are traffic-calmed and include traffic circles at intersections to slow the speed of cars and discourage thoroughfare traffic.
The purpose is to provide investors and site selectors with one central source for economic information such as real estate, demographics, key industries and more.
Since 2000, the city's universities - Saint Thomas University and the University of New Brunswick - have seen a growing number of students from overseas attending.
All city buses feature bike racks so that cyclists can take advantage of bus services as well.
Its current principal is Jonathan McAloon.
CP Rail's Marysville Spur runs from Barker's Point to Marysville along the east bank of the Nashwaak River.
Leo Hayes High School places priority on both Arts and Athletics, in addition to Academia.
This has led to the construction of new university residences and apartment buildings in the city, and increased rates of rent - making them the highest rental rates in the province.
West of the park and garden is Hanwell Road, Golf Club Road, and Silverwood neighbourhoods consisting largely of suburban residences.
Fredericton's public schools are located in either the Anglophone West School District (formerly known as District 18, and prior to that, District 26) or the District Scolaire Francophone Sud (District 1).
In recent years, increased student enrolment at the city's universities has led to greater demand for rental property.
When New Brunswick became a separate colony from Nova Scotia in 1784, Ste.
Alexander Gibson (popularly referred to as "Boss Gibson") turned this situation around and built a prosperous industrial town.
Furthermore, during the last budget the Federal Government pledged more money towards urban infrastructure - some of this money will go towards upgrading Fredericton's bus transit system.
After Villebon's death in 1700 and a devastating flood, the fort was abandoned.
The American Hockey League was once represented in Fredericton, with the Fredericton Express playing between 1981 and 1988, and the Fredericton Canadiens between 1990 and 1999.
Fredericton is home to the New Brunswick Summer Music Festival, which, each August, features professional chamber music by top local players and nationally renowned performers.
Other institutions include 3D and 2D Animation schools such as the Centre for Arts and Technology and the Gaming and Animation Institute of Fredericton.
There are no professional sports teams in Fredericton, although both universities have extensive athletic programs.
However, three fur traders settled permanently here in 1768.
Alongside Fredericton's more established universities, the city also is home to several online for-profit universities.
In the lower centre of the park is a lodge for events such as wedding receptions and adjacent to Prospect street at the top of the park is the Fredericton Botanic Garden and the Prospect Street Softball Fields.
When spring came, more Loyalists left the new settlement to take up land grants in other areas.
The linguistic breakdown of Fredericton is as follows:
Flooding occurs during the spring of most years on area rivers and affects the city's low-lying neighbourhoods.
Since 1 December 2012, Fredericton is served by Maritime Bus connections to points throughout Eastern Canada.
Built in 1826, UNB's Old Arts Building is the oldest university building still in use in Canada.
Specializations include capabilities in aquaculture, mining, manufacturing, energy and the environment.
The city's "Northside" consists of several boroughs which were at one time separate communities.
Historically, Fredericton has been referred to as the Poets' Corner of Canada, because it was the birthplace of Bliss Carman, Charles G. D. Roberts and Francis Joseph Sherman.
The Men's soccer team under the leadership of Coaches Gary Brown and Robin Hopper defeated Sir Wilfred Laurier 3-1 on a frigid day in November .
In 2009 Albert Street Middle School was replaced by Bliss Carman Middle School, located in the Kimble Road Park area of Skyline Acres.
While a predominantly Anglophone city, the civil service has seen an increase in the city's Francophone population.
Some sections of the trail system are being paved to make it more accessible to non-motorized vehicles such as bicycles and wheelchairs.
The motto of the school is "Somnia Sunt Circuli Veritatis", Latin for "Dreams are the Seedlings of Reality".
Northumberland Street and Odell Avenue have adopted speedbumps to slow fast moving traffic.
There are prominently two distinct areas in the region that are divided around the area of Wilsey Road, in the east end of the city.
Fredericton is also home to several colleges and similar institutions.
The predominance of the universities and government provide Fredericton with a measure of economic stability.
It serves as a venue for outdoor concerts during the summer, featuring a variety of local and national talent.
Fredericton has several large parks, including Odell Park, Reading Park, Queen's Square, Officer's Square, Carleton Park and Wilmot Park.
An important cultural, artistic, and educational centre for the province, Fredericton is home to two universities, the New Brunswick College of Craft and Design, and cultural institutions such as the Beaverbrook Art Gallery, the Fredericton Region Museum, and The Playhouse, a performing arts venue.
These communities are largely suburban neighbourhoods and retail outlets.
Joseph Robineau de Villebon received a land grant and was appointed  governor of Acadia.
Freight service to Fredericton ended in 1996 and all railway tracks have since been abandoned and removed, with the city joining St. John's and Charlottetown as Canada's only provincial capitals without rail service.
Fredericton has a mayor-council and non-partisan form of government, with the mayor and council serving fixed four-year terms (three years until 2004), and elections held in May.
These settlers eventually erected a community downriver at what is today the town of Maugerville (pronounced "majorville").
Also on the Northside is Willie O'Ree Place, known to local residents as the "O'Reena" or the "Willie O'Rink".
The federal government named Fredericton the "Cultural Capital of Canada" for the year 2009.
Fredericton is also home to a private Christian school, Fredericton Christian Academy, which is located on the Northside.
The city's highway system is mostly complete, and traffic jams rarely occur.
