He spoke and wrote on behalf of a variety of reform causes: women's rights, temperance, peace, land reform, free public education, and the abolition of capital punishment.
Douglass thus became the only man to receive an honorary membership posthumously.
After returning to the US, Douglass started publishing his first abolitionist newspaper, the ''The North Star'', from the basement of the Memorial AME Zion Church in Rochester, New York.
The preaching of a white Methodist minister, named Hanson, was the means of causing me to feel that in God I had such a friend.
After this early separation from his mother, young Frederick lived with his maternal grandmother, Betty Bailey.
They enforced this by a combination of violence, late 19th-century laws imposing segregation and a concerted effort to disfranchise African Americans.
The Episcopal Church (USA) remembers Douglass annually on its liturgical calendar for February 20, the anniversary of his death.
Within three years, it had been reprinted nine times, with 11,000 copies circulating in the United States.
At first, they adopted Johnson as their married name, to divert attention.
The plantation was between Hillsboro and Cordova; his birthplace was likely his grandmother's shack east of Tappers Corner, () and west of Tuckahoe Creek.
President Harrison appointed Douglass to be the United States's minister resident and consul-general to the Republic of Haiti and Chargé d'affaires for Santo Domingo in 1889, but Douglass resigned the commission in July 1891.
As Douglass began to read newspapers, pamphlets, political materials, and books of every description, this new realm of thought led him to question and condemn the institution of slavery.
This and Douglass's later abolitionist newspapers were mainly funded by English supporters, who gave Douglass five hundred pounds to use as he chose.
Douglass supported the amendment, which would grant suffrage to black men.
In his first autobiography, Douglass stated: "I have no accurate knowledge of my age, never having seen any authentic record containing it.
His draw was such that some facilities were "crowded to suffocation".
... She would lie down with me, and get me to sleep, but long before I waked she was gone.
Inspired by Garrison, Douglass later said, "no face and form ever impressed me with such sentiments of the hatred of slavery as did those of William Lloyd Garrison."
But, Lysander Spooner published ''The Unconstitutionality of Slavery'' (1846), which explored the United States Constitution as an anti-slavery document.
More than 10 years after the end of the war, Democrats regained political power in every state of the former Confederacy and began to reassert white supremacy.
These were the central concerns of his long reform career.
Douglass also joined several organizations in New Bedford, and regularly attended abolitionist meetings.
Frederick Douglass later wrote of his arrival in New York City:
A stone marker in Falls Park in the Pendleton Historic District commemorates this event.
The ballot box, jury box and the cartridge box.
Douglass described her as a kind and tender-hearted woman, who treated him "as she supposed one human being ought to treat another".
I was not more than thirteen years old, when in my loneliness and destitution I longed for some one to whom I could go, as to a father and protector.
The ''The North Star'''s motto was "Right is of no Sex – Truth is of no Color – God is the Father of us all, and we are all brethren."
Douglass believed that since African-American men were fighting for the Union in the American Civil War, they deserved the right to vote.
After the raid, Douglass fled for a time to Canada, fearing guilt by association as well as arrest as a co-conspirator.
He traveled in Ireland as the Irish Potato Famine was beginning.
During this tour, slavery supporters frequently accosted Douglass.
In 1892, Douglass constructed rental housing for blacks, now known as Douglass Place, in the Fells Point area of Baltimore.
*On June 19, 2013, a statue of Douglass by Maryland artist Steven Weitzman was unveiled in the United States Capitol Visitor Center as part of the National Statuary Hall Collection, the first statue representing the District of Columbia.
The visit also appears to have brought closure to Douglass, although some criticized his effort.
At a lecture in Pendleton, Indiana, an angry mob chased and beat Douglass before a local Quaker family, the Hardys, rescued him.
Douglass assured the American women that at no time had he ever argued against women's right to vote.
Like many abolitionists, Douglass believed that education would be crucial for African Americans to improve their lives.
Calling Lincoln "the white man's president", Douglass criticized Lincoln's tardiness in joining the cause of emancipation, noting that Lincoln initially opposed the expansion of slavery but did not support its elimination.
*On September 15, 2014, under the leadership of Governor Martin O'Malley a portrait of Frederick Douglass was unveiled at his official residence in Annapolis, MD.
Douglass met John Brown, a radical abolitionist, when Brown visited his home two months before leading the raid on the federal armory in Harpers Ferry.
The annual $25,000 prize is administered by the Gilder Lehrman Institute for American History and the Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance, and Abolition at Yale.
*In 2007, the former Troup–Howell bridge, which carried Interstate 490 over the Genesee River in Rochester, was redesigned and renamed the Frederick Douglass&nbsp;– Susan B. Anthony Memorial Bridge.
After Anthony died, Douglass was given to Lucretia Auld, wife of Thomas Auld, who sent him to serve Thomas' brother Hugh Auld in Baltimore.
On September 3, 1838, Douglass successfully escaped by boarding a Philadelphia, Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad train (the line was newly merged) to the great Northern cities.
Douglass spent two years in Ireland and Britain, where he gave many lectures in churches and chapels.
The fireplace mantle features busts of two of his favorite philosophers, David Friedrich Strauss, author of "The Life of Jesus," and Ludwig Feuerbach, author of "The Essence of Christianity."
In 1892, at an Indianapolis conference convened by Bishop Henry McNeal Turner, Douglass spoke out against the separatist movements, urging blacks to stick it out.
When Republican Rutherford B. Hayes was elected President, Douglass accepted an appointment as United States Marshal for the District of Columbia, which helped assure his family's financial security.
Douglass stood and spoke eloquently in favor; he said that he could not accept the right to vote as a black man if women could not also claim that right.
In August 1861, Douglass published an account of the First Battle of Bull Run that noted that there were some blacks already in the Confederate ranks.
He also remarried in 1884, as mentioned above.
The couple settled in New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Strikingly, he expressed the belief that "a discussion of the rights of animals would be regarded with far more complacency…than would be a discussion of the rights of women," and Douglass noted the link between abolitionism and feminism, the overlap between the communities.
Douglass published three versions of his autobiography during his lifetime (and revised the third of these), each time expanding on the previous one.
Also in the wake of the Seneca Falls Convention, Douglass used an editorial spot in his paper, The North Star, to press the case for women's rights in this public venue.
Many supporters tried to encourage Douglass to remain in England but, with his wife still in Massachusetts and three million of his black brethren in bondage in the United States, he returned to America in spring of 1847.
Douglass's change of opinion about the Constitution and his splitting from Garrison around 1847 became one of the abolitionist movement's most notable divisions.
Douglass also continued his speaking engagements and travel, both in the United States and abroad.
President Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation, which took effect on January 1, 1863, declared the freedom of all slaves in Confederate-held territory.
Douglass also said: "Though Mr. Lincoln shared the prejudices of his white fellow-countrymen against the Negro, it is hardly necessary to say that in his heart of hearts he loathed and hated slavery...."
In his autobiography, Douglass related how he learned to read from white children in the neighborhood, and by observing the writings of the men with whom he worked.
Douglass believed that attacking federal property would enrage the American public.
I saw the world in a new light, and my great concern was to have everybody converted.
He was the most photographed American of the 19th Century, self-consciously using photography to advance his political views.
After meeting and staying with Nathan and Mary Johnson, they adopted Douglass as their married name: previously Douglass had been given the second name of Bailey, but he now again felt the need to find a new name and asked Johnson to choose a suitable surname.
He became a licensed preacher in 1839, and this helped him hone his oratorical skills.
His entire journey to freedom took less than 24 hours.
When I go to church, I am met by no upturned nose and scornful lip to tell me, ''We don't allow niggers in here!''
In addition to several Bibles and books about various religions in the library, images of angels and Jesus are displayed, as well as interior and exterior photographs of Washington's Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church.
Susan B. Anthony is the cemetery's other often-visited gravesite.
In his time he was described by abolitionists as a living counter-example to slaveholders' arguments that slaves lacked the intellectual capacity to function as independent American citizens.
The Freedman's Savings Bank went bankrupt in 1874, mere months after Douglass became its president.
She brought with her the necessary basics for them to set up a home.
Douglass's mother died when he was about ten.
In 1846 Douglass met with Thomas Clarkson, one of the last living British abolitionists, who had persuaded Parliament to abolish slavery in Great Britain's colonies.
The 1845 ''Narrative'' was his biggest seller, and probably allowed him to raise the funds to gain his legal freedom the following year, as discussed below.
In a graphic passage, Douglass asked Auld how he would feel if Douglass had come to take away his daughter Amanda as a slave, treating her the way he and members of his family had been treated by Auld.
*In 1921, members of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity (the first African-American intercollegiate fraternity) designated Frederick Douglass as an honorary member.
However, feminist Elizabeth Cady Stanton congratulated the couple.
Stanton opposed the 15th Amendment because it limited expansion of suffrage to black men; she predicted its passage would delay for decades the cause for women's right to vote.
Throughout the Reconstruction era, Douglass continued speaking, and emphasized the importance of work, voting rights and actual exercise of suffrage.
Douglass remarked that in England he was treated not "as a color, but as a man."
He also gave many lectures there, including his last major speech, "The Lesson of the Hour."
Commissioned by Eddie C. Brown, founder of Brown Capital Management, LLC, the painting was presented at a reception by the Governor.
Though this placed him some 20 miles from the free state of Pennsylvania, it was easier to travel through Delaware, another slave state.
During his visits to the United Kingdom, between 1846 and 1848, Douglass asked British Christians never to support American Churches that permitted slavery, and he expressed his happiness to know that a group of ministers in Belfast had refused to admit slaveholders as members of the Church.
Throughout his life, Douglass had linked that individual experience with social reform, and like other Christian abolitionists, he followed practices such as abstaining from tobacco, alcohol and other substances that he believed corrupted body and soul.
Garrison had burned copies of the Constitution to express his opinion.
That year, Douglass spoke at Claflin College, a black college in Orangeburg, South Carolina, and the oldest such institution in the state.
The AME Church and ''North Star'' vigorously opposed the mostly white American Colonization Society and its proposal to send blacks back to Africa.
The exact date of his birth is unknown, and he later chose to celebrate his birthday on February 14.
He made plans with Lincoln to move liberated slaves out of the South.
Lewis Douglass fought at the Battle of Fort Wagner.
In the 21st century, historical plaques were installed on buildings in Cork and Waterford, Ireland, and London to celebrate Douglass's visit: the first is on the Imperial Hotel in Cork and was unveiled on August 31, 2012; the second is on the facade of Waterford City Hall and was unveiled on October 7, 2013.
President Grant sent a Congressionally sponsored commission, accompanied by Douglass, on a mission to the West Indies to investigate if the annexation of Santo Domingo would be good for the United States.
After Anna died in 1882, in 1884 Douglass married again, to Helen Pitts, a white feminist from Honeoye, New York.
The third plaque adorns Nell Gwynn House, South Kensington in London, where Douglass stayed with the British abolitionist George Thompson.
I employ a cab—I am seated beside white people—I reach the hotel—I enter the same door—I am shown into the same parlour—I dine at the same table—and no one is offended...
In 1881, Douglass both published the final edition of his autobiography, ''The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass'', and received another political appointment, as Recorder of Deeds for the District of Columbia.
He jumped aboard the train a short distance east of the previous temporary P.W.& B. train depot in the just-developed industrial, commercial and residential neighborhood, between the modern neighborhoods of Harbor East and Little Italy, at President and Fleet Streets, east of "The Basin" of the Baltimore harbor on the Northwest Branch of the Patapsco River.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton asked the assembly to pass a resolution asking for women's suffrage.
Douglass thought of joining a white Methodist Church but from the beginning he was disappointed when he saw it was segregated.
I gaze around in vain for one who will question my equal humanity, claim me as his slave, or offer me an insult.
Douglass was a firm believer in the equality of all peoples, whether black, female, Native American, or recent immigrant.
I cannot say that I had a very distinct notion of what was required of me, but one thing I did know well: I was wretched and had no means of making myself otherwise.I consulted a good old colored man named Charles Lawson, and in tones of holy affection he told me to pray, and to "cast all my care upon God."
A few days later Douglass spoke at the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society's annual convention in Nantucket.
Douglass and the commission favored annexation, however, Congress remained opposed to annexation.
Northerners at the time found it hard to believe that such a great orator had once been a slave.
Pitts was the daughter of Gideon Pitts, Jr., an abolitionist colleague and friend of Douglass.
In an effort to combat these efforts, Douglass supported the presidential campaign of Ulysses S. Grant in 1868.
Douglass's stump speech for 25 years after the end of the Civil War emphasized work to counter the racism that was then prevalent in unions.
His reception by leaders in England and Ireland added to his stature.
For about six months, their study went relatively unnoticed.
They encouraged Douglass to tour Ireland, as many former slaves had done.
This led Douglass to become an early advocate for school desegregation.
He subscribed to William Lloyd Garrison's weekly journal ''The Liberator''.
When Douglass was about twelve, Hugh Auld's wife Sophia started teaching him the alphabet.
In this sense, Douglass distinguished between the "Christianity of Christ" and the "Christianity of America" and considered religious slaveholders and clergymen who defended slavery as the most brutal, sinful, and cynical of all who represented "wolves in sheep's clothing."
Powerful paramilitary groups included the White League and the Red Shirts, both active during the 1870s in the Deep South.
This painting, by artist Simmie Knox, is the first African American portrait to grace the walls of Government House.
He maintained that "upon these men lies the duty to inspire our ranks with high religious faith and zeal, and to cheer us on in the great mission of the slave's redemption from his chains."
In successive autobiographies, Douglass gave more precise estimates of when he was born, his final estimate being 1817.
At the time, some skeptics questioned whether a black man could have produced such an eloquent piece of literature.
While Freeland remained complacent about their activities, other plantation owners became incensed about their slaves being educated.
Many of those present opposed the idea, including influential Quakers James and Lucretia Mott.
That walking-stick still rests in Douglass's final residence, "Cedar Hill", now preserved as the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.
Earlier Douglass had agreed with Garrison's position that the Constitution was pro-slavery, because of its compromises related to apportionment of Congressional seats, based on partial counting of slave populations with state totals; and protection of the international slave trade through 1807.
The marriage provoked a storm of controversy, since Pitts was both white and nearly 20 years younger than Douglass.
Meanwhile, white insurgents had quickly arisen in the South after the war, organizing first as secret vigilante groups, including the Ku Klux Klan.
Douglass and Stanton both knew that there was not yet enough male support for women's right to vote, but that an amendment giving black men the vote could pass in the late 1860s.
The sixteen-year-old Douglass finally rebelled against the beatings, however, and fought back.
Though a believer, he strongly criticized religious hypocrisy and accused slaveholders of ''wickedness'', lack of morality, and failure to follow the Golden Rule.
Stanton argued that American women and black men should band together to fight for universal suffrage, and opposed any bill that split the issues.
In 1843, Douglass joined other speakers in the American Anti-Slavery Society's "Hundred Conventions" project, a six-month tour at meeting halls throughout the Eastern and Midwestern United States.
Douglass' coffin was transported back to Rochester, New York, where he had lived for 25 years, longer than anywhere else in his life.
Two editions of this artwork, by artist Benjamin Jancewicz, were purchased from Galerie Myrtis by Peter Franchot and his wife Ann both as a gift for the Governor as well as to add to their own collection.
Douglass' friends and mentors feared that the publicity would draw the attention of his ex-owner, Hugh Auld, who might try to get his "property" back.
He never smiled, specifically so as not to play into the racist caricature of a happy slave.
He further asserted, "in speaking of the American church, however, let it be distinctly understood that I mean the great mass of the religious organizations of our land.
(Tuckahoe is not a town; it refers to the area west of the creek in Talbot County.)
In 1837, Douglass met and fell in love with Anna Murray, a free black woman in Baltimore about five years older than he.
In 1833, Thomas Auld took Douglass back from Hugh ("as a means of punishing Hugh," Douglass later wrote).
His eloquence gathered crowds at every location.
First published in 1881 and revised in 1892, three years before his death, it covered events during and after the Civil War.
One biographer argues:
Douglass later wrote a letter to his former slaveholder, in which he denounced him for leaving Douglass's family illiterate:
Then 23 years old, Douglass conquered his nervousness and gave an eloquent speech about his rough life as a slave.
Douglass publicized this view in his newspapers and several speeches.
Notably, in a famous oration given in the Corinthian Hall of Rochester, he sharply criticized the attitude of religious people who kept silent about slavery, and held that religious ministers committed a ''blasphemy'' when they taught it as sanctioned by religion.
Noble men may be found, scattered all over these Northern States,... Henry Ward Beecher, of Brooklyn, Samuel J.
He was given his name by his mother, Harriet Bailey.
After the Civil War, Douglass continued to work for equality for African-Americans and women.
*In 2010, a statue (by Gabriel Koren) and memorial (designed by Algernon Miller) of Douglass were unveiled at Frederick Douglass Circle at the northwest corner of Central Park in New York City.
In 1870, Douglass started his last newspaper, the ''New National Era,'' attempting to hold his country to its commitment to equality.
Hugh Auld disapproved of the tuition, feeling that literacy would encourage slaves to desire freedom; Douglass later referred to this as the "first decidedly antislavery lecture" he had ever heard.
From there, because of the not yet completed rail line at that time, he went by steamboat along the Delaware River further northeast to the "Quaker City" of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, an anti-slavery stronghold, and continued to the safe house of noted abolitionist David Ruggles in New York City.
On the first count, Douglass acknowledged the "decorum" of the participants in the face of disagreement.
Douglass first tried to escape from Freeland, who had hired him out from his owner Colonel Lloyd, but was unsuccessful.
In the 1850s, Douglass observed that New York's facilities and instruction for African-American children were vastly inferior to those for whites.
His eldest son, Charles Douglass, joined the 54th Massachusetts Regiment, but was ill for much of his service.
His funeral was held at the Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church; thousands passed by his coffin to show their respect.
This I sought to do; and though for weeks I was a poor, broken-hearted mourner, traveling through doubts and fears, I finally found my burden lightened, and my heart relieved.
Douglass understood that the struggle for emancipation and equality demanded forceful, persistent, and unyielding agitation.
The post-war (1865) ratification of the 13th Amendment outlawed slavery.
Thomas Auld sent Douglass to work for Edward Covey, a poor farmer who had a reputation as a "slave-breaker."
One year later, Douglass purchased adjoining lots and expanded the property to 15&nbsp;acres (61,000&nbsp;m²).
The book received generally positive reviews and became an immediate bestseller.
During the war, Douglass also helped the Union by serving as a recruiter for the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment.
Sometimes considered a precursor of a non-denominational liberation theology, Douglass was a deeply spiritual man, as his home continues to show.
One example was his hugely popular ''London Reception Speech'', which Douglass delivered in May 1846 at Alexander Fletcher's Finsbury Chapel.
Douglass continued, secretly, to teach himself how to read and write.
The 15th Amendment protected all citizens from being discriminated against in voting because of race.
In 1840, Douglass delivered a speech in Elmira, New York, then a station on the Underground Railroad.
Instead of a democratic government, I am under a monarchical government.
Douglass was mentored by Rev.
Douglass did not favor this, nor the Back-to-Africa movement, which he thought resembled the American Colonization Society he had fought in his youth.
In time, he became interested in literacy; he began reading and copying bible verses, and he eventually converted to Christianity.
Grant believed annexation would help relieve the violent situation in the South allowing African Americans their own state.
Douglass was of mixed race, which likely included Native American on his mother's side, as well as African and European.
Also in 1877, Douglass visited Thomas Auld, who was by then on his deathbed, and the two men reconciled.
This letter, written a week after the convention, reaffirmed the first part of the paper's slogan, "right is of no sex."
Years later, Douglass shared a stage in Harpers Ferry with Andrew Hunter, the prosecutor who secured Brown's conviction and execution.
During this trip Douglass became legally free, as British supporters led by Ellen Richardson of Newcastle upon Tyne raised funds to buy his freedom from his American owner Thomas Auld.
He served as president of the Reconstruction-era Freedman's Savings Bank.
It was also translated into French and Dutch and published in Europe.
When Douglass was hired out to William Freeland, he taught other slaves on the plantation to read the New Testament at a weekly Sunday school.
After Douglass's powerful words, the attendees passed the resolution.
and some consider it the greatest anti-slavery oration ever given.
In later years, Douglass credited ''The Columbian Orator'', an anthology that he discovered at about age twelve, with clarifying and defining his views on freedom and human rights.
Her free status strengthened his belief in the possibility of gaining his own freedom.
He wrote of his earliest times with his mother:
Under his leadership over 5,000 arrests were made.
One Sunday they burst in on the gathering, armed with clubs and stones, to disperse the congregation permanently.
Let no woman be kept from the ballot box because of her sex."
Douglass then moved to Washington, D.C.
In 1881, after the Civil War, Douglass published ''Life and Times of Frederick Douglass'', which he revised in 1892.
Grant's vigor in disrupting the Klan made him unpopular among many whites, but earned Douglass's praise.
Douglass responded to the criticisms by saying that his first marriage had been to someone the color of his mother, and his second to someone the color of his father.
An associate of Douglass wrote of Grant that African Americans "will ever cherish a grateful remembrance of his name, fame and great services."
