In addition to business, the meeting may perform a ceremony to confer a Masonic degree or receive a lecture, which is usually on some aspect of Masonic history or ritual.
The symbolism is mainly, but not exclusively, drawn from the manual tools of stonemasons – the square and compasses, the level and plumb rule, the trowel, among others.
However, the matter was clarified when Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI), as the Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, issued a Declaration on Masonic Associations, which states: "...&nbsp;the Church's negative judgment in regard to Masonic association remains unchanged since their principles have always been considered irreconcilable with the doctrine of the Church and therefore membership in them remains forbidden.
There is no clear mechanism by which these local trade organisations became today's Masonic Lodges, but the earliest rituals and passwords known, from operative lodges around the turn of the 17th–18th centuries, show continuity with the rituals developed in the later 18th century by accepted or speculative Masons, as those members who did not practice the physical craft came to be known.
In 1868 the ''Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of the State of Louisiana'' appeared in the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana, recognised by the Grand Orient de France, but regarded by the older body as an invasion of their jurisdiction.
This has been generally affirmed throughout the whole Eastern Orthodox Church.
The largest single jurisdiction, in terms of membership, is the United Grand Lodge of England (with a membership estimated at around a quarter million).
The preserved records of the ''Reichssicherheitshauptamt'' (the Reich Security Main Office) show the persecution of Freemasons during the Holocaust.
A moral lesson is attached to each of these tools, although the assignment is by no means consistent.
In Pakistan in 1972, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, then Prime Minister of Pakistan, placed a ban on Freemasonry.
Templar and Cryptic Masonry also exist.
Those Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE deny the Church's claims.
Exclusive Jurisdiction is a concept whereby only one Grand Lodge will be recognised in any geographical area.
Since the founding of Freemasonry, many Bishops of the Church of England have been Freemasons, such as Archbishop Geoffrey Fisher.
The term Continental Freemasonry was used in Mackey's 1873 Encyclopedia of Freemasonry to "designate the Lodges on the Continent of Europe which retain many usages which have either been abandoned by, or never were observed in, the Lodges of England, Ireland, and Scotland, as well as the United States of America".
Briefly eclipsed during the French Revolution, French Freemasonry continued to grow in the next century.
Each Grand Lodge sets its own definition of what these landmarks are, and thus what is Regular and what is Irregular (and the definitions do not necessarily agree between Grand Lodges).
Later organisations with a similar aim emerged in the United States, but distinguished the names of the degrees from those of male masonry.
His writings represented his personal opinion only, and furthermore an opinion grounded in the attitudes and understandings of late 19th century Southern Freemasonry of the USA.
The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a system of 33 degrees (including the three Blue Lodge degrees) administered by a local or national Supreme Council.
In general, Continental Freemasonry is sympathetic to Freemasonry amongst women, dating from the 1890s when French lodges assisted the emergent co-masonic movement by promoting enough of their members to the 33rd degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite to allow them, in 1899, to form their own grand council, recognised by the other Continental Grand Councils of that Rite.
In all of these ceremonies, the candidate is entrusted with passwords, signs and grips peculiar to his new rank.
While many different versions of these rituals exist, with at least two different lodge layouts and versions of the Hiram myth, each version is recognisable to any Freemason from any jurisdiction.
* The Grand Lodge has complete control over the first three degrees, and is not subject to another body.
(In 1849, for example, the Grand Lodge of New York split into two rival factions, each claiming to be the legitimate Grand Lodge.
Conspiracy theorists have long associated Freemasonry with the New World Order and the Illuminati, and state that Freemasonry as an organisation is either bent on world domination or already secretly in control of world politics.
When two Grand Lodges are not in amity, inter-visitation is not allowed.
Because each Masonic jurisdiction is independent, each sets its own procedures.
In a few cases, the candidate may be required to be of a specific religion.
At the dawn of the Grand Lodge era, during the 1720s, James Anderson composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasons, the basis for most subsequent constitutions, which specifically excluded women from Freemasonry.
The majority of Freemasonry considers the Liberal (Continental) strand to be Irregular, and thus withhold recognition.
In recent decades, however, reservations about Freemasonry have increased within Anglicanism, perhaps due to the increasing prominence of the evangelical wing of the church.
However, Pike, although undoubtedly learned, was not a spokesman for Freemasonry and was also controversial among Freemasons in general.
In 1799, English Freemasonry almost came to a halt due to Parliamentary proclamation.
The new constitutions read, "Its principles are absolute liberty of conscience and human solidarity", the existence of God and the immortality of the soul being struck out.
It is possible that the immediate objections of the United Grand Lodge of England were at least partly motivated by the political tension between France and Britain at the time.
Another ceremony is the annual installation of the Master and officers of the Lodge.
Freemasonry is both successful and controversial in France; membership is rising, but reporting in the popular media is often negative.
Freedom from secret societies is one of the "frees" upon which the Free Methodist Church was founded.
For the Continental lodges, however, having a different approach to Freemasonry was not a reason for severing masonic ties.
In addition, most Grand Lodges require the candidate to declare a belief in a Supreme Being.
In 1913, the United Grand Lodge of England recognised a new Grand Lodge of Regular Freemasons, a Grand Lodge that follows a similar rite to Anglo-American Freemasonry with a mandatory belief in a deity.
The Grand Masters of both the Moderns and the Antients Grand Lodges called on Prime Minister William Pitt (who was not a Freemason) and explained to him that Freemasonry was a supporter of the law and lawfully constituted authority and was much involved in charitable work.
The Collector for the port of Pennsylvania, John Moore, wrote of attending lodges there in 1715, two years before the formation of the first Grand Lodge in London.
The faithful who enrol in Masonic associations are in a state of grave sin and may not receive Holy Communion."
These are the degrees offered by Craft (or Blue Lodge) Freemasonry.
Today, it is frequently used to refer to only the Liberal jurisdictions typified by the Grand Orient de France.
All Freemasons begin their journey in the "craft" by being progressively ''initiated, passed ''and'' raised'' into the three degrees of Craft, or Blue Lodge Masonry.
The degrees of freemasonry retain the three grades of medieval craft guilds, those of Apprentice, Journeyman or fellow (now called Fellowcraft), and Master Mason.
Masonic lodges existed in Iraq as early as 1917, when the first lodge under the United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE) was opened.
Since the middle of the 19th century, Masonic historians have sought the origins of the movement in a series of similar documents known as the Old Charges, dating from the Regius Poem in about 1425 to the beginning of the 18th century.
* Liberal (also adogmatic or progressive) – Principles of liberty of conscience, and laicity, particularly the separation of the Church and State.
* Only men can be admitted, and no relationship exists with mixed Lodges.
These principles have thus far eluded any universally accepted definition.
While the number is not accurately known, it is estimated that between 80,000 and 200,000 Freemasons were killed under the Nazi regime.
It is reputed to be the oldest Masonic Lodge in the world.
As Freemasonry spread, continental masons began to include their ladies in Lodges of Adoption, which worked three degrees with the same names as the men's but different content.
The status of women in the old guilds and corporations of mediaeval masons remains uncertain.
''Anti-Masonry'' (alternatively called ''Anti-Freemasonry'') has been defined as "opposition to Freemasonry", but there is no homogeneous anti-Masonic movement.
However, by this time the lodge was operating independently and irregularly, as the Grand Orient had revoked its charter and expelled Gelli in 1976.
The ''1917 Code of Canon Law'' explicitly declared that joining Freemasonry entailed automatic excommunication, and banned books favouring Freemasonry.
Other offices vary between jurisdictions.
If the candidate decides to proceed from here, the Lodge ballots on the application before he (or she, depending on the Masonic Jurisdiction) can be accepted.
Some time later, in a separate ceremony, they will be ''passed'' to the degree of Fellowcraft, and finally they will be ''raised'' to the degree of Master Mason.
Masonic charities contribute to many fields from education to disaster relief.
In the past, few members of the Church of England would have seen any incongruity in concurrently adhering to Anglican Christianity and practising Freemasonry.
The policy of requiring a declaration of masonic membership of applicants for judicial office (judges and magistrates) was ended in 2009 by Justice Secretary Jack Straw (who had initiated the requirement in the 1990s).
From France and England, Freemasonry spread to most of Continental Europe during the course of the 18th century.
Many lodges came into existence with no warrant from any Grand Lodge, applying and paying for their authorisation only after they were confident of their own survival.
In other jurisdictions, the grade is not recognised, and no inner ceremony conveys new secrets during the installation of a new Master of the Lodge.
varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
In article 28 of its Covenant, Hamas states that Freemasonry, Rotary, and other similar groups "work in the interest of Zionism and according to its instructions ..."
* The Grand Lodge should be established by an existing regular Grand Lodge, or by at least three regular Lodges.
There are many reasons why one Grand Lodge will withhold or withdraw recognition from another, but the two most common are ''Exclusive Jurisdiction'' and ''Regularity''.
The Grand Lodge of Ireland and the Grand Lodge of Scotland were formed in 1725 and 1736 respectively, although neither persuaded all of the existing lodges in their countries to join for many years.
There is very little consistency in Freemasonry.
There have been many disclosures and exposés dating as far back as the 18th century.
Included in the list of over 70 Grand Lodges and Grand Orients are representatives of all three of the above categories, including mixed and women's organisations.
The former Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Rowan Williams, appeared to harbour some reservations about Masonic ritual, whilst being anxious to avoid causing offence to Freemasons inside and outside the Church of England.
While celebrating their heritage as lodges of black Americans, Prince Hall is open to all men regardless of race or religion.
This lodge was chartered by the Grande Oriente d'Italia in 1877, as a lodge for visiting Masons unable to attend their own lodges.
Candidates for Freemasonry will have met most active members of the Lodge they are joining before they are initiated.
The absolute minimum requirement of any body of Freemasons is that the candidate must be free, and considered to be of good character.
While a parliamentary inquiry found that there has been no evidence of wrongdoing, it was felt that any potential loyalties Masons might have, based on their vows to support fellow Masons, should be transparent to the public.
Most Lodges have some sort of social calendar, allowing Masons and their partners to meet in a less ritualised environment.
The initiations are part allegory and part lecture, and revolve around the construction of the Temple of Solomon, and the artistry and death of his chief architect, Hiram Abiff.
There are now three strands of Freemasonry in France, which extend into the rest of Continental Europe:-
Regular Freemasonry insists that a volume of scripture is open in a working lodge, that every member profess belief in a Deity, that no women are admitted, and that the discussion of religion and politics is banned.
Roberts believed Freemasonry was a "mystery" or "alternate" religion and encouraged his church not to support ministers who were Freemasons.
There is no international, worldwide Grand Lodge that supervises all of Freemasonry; each Grand Lodge is independent, and they do not necessarily recognise each other as being legitimate.
The basic, local organisational unit of Freemasonry is the Lodge.
However, many Lodges could not endorse changes which some Lodges of the GLE made to the ritual (they came to be known as the Moderns), and a few of these formed a rival Grand Lodge on 17 July 1751, which they called the "Antient Grand Lodge of England."
Continental Freemasonry is now the general term for the "liberal" jurisdictions who have removed some, or all, of these restrictions.
* Regular – Standard Anglo-American ritual, mandatory belief in Supreme being.
The degrees are those of ''Entered apprentice, Fellowcraft'' and ''Master Mason''.
Each Masonic Lodge exists and operates according to a set of ancient principles known as the ''Landmarks of Freemasonry''.
The process varies between jurisdictions, but the candidate will typically have been introduced by a friend at a Lodge social function, or at some form of open evening in the Lodge.
In the course of three degrees, new masons will promise to keep the secrets of their degree from lower degrees and outsiders, and to support a fellow Mason in distress (as far as practicality and the law permit).
Often coupled with these events is the obligation placed on every Mason to contribute to charity.
Straw stated that the rule was considered disproportionate, since no impropriety or malpractice had been shown as a result of judges being Freemasons.
The form of Freemasonry most common in Scandinavia (known as the Swedish Rite), for example, accepts only Christians.
In 1938 a forget-me-not badge—made by the same factory as the Masonic badge—was chosen for the annual Nazi Party ''Winterhilfswerk'', the annual charity drive of the National Socialist People's Welfare, the welfare branch of the Nazi party.
During these three rituals, the candidate is progressively taught the meanings of the Lodge symbols, and entrusted with grips, signs and words to signify to other Masons that he has been so initiated.
Masonic concentration camp inmates were graded as political prisoners and wore an inverted red triangle.
After the American Revolution, independent U.S. Grand Lodges formed themselves within each state.
Other lodges in the colony obtained authorisations from the later Antient Grand Lodge of England, the Grand Lodge of Scotland, and the Grand Lodge of Ireland, which was particularly well represented in the travelling lodges of the British Army.
Even in modern democracies, Freemasonry is sometimes viewed with distrust.
The result was the withdrawal of recognition of the Grand Orient of France by the United Grand Lodge of England, a situation that continues today.
Lodge buildings were confiscated by the government.
It states: "A person who joins an association which plots against the Church is to be punished with a just penalty; one who promotes or takes office in such an association is to be punished with an interdict."
In some countries anti-Masonry is often related to antisemitism and anti-Zionism.
Nine lodges under UGLE existed by the 1950s, and a Scottish lodge was formed in 1923.
Annie Besant spread the phenomenon to the English speaking world.
Some thought was briefly given to organising an overarching "Grand Lodge of the United States," with George Washington (who was a member of a Virginian lodge) as the first Grand Master, but the idea was short-lived.
If two Grand Lodges claim jurisdiction over the same area, the other Grand Lodges will have to choose between them, and they may not all decide to recognise the same one.
A dispute during the Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils of 1875 prompted the Grand Orient de France to commission a report by a Protestant pastor which concluded that, as Freemasonry was not a religion, it should not require a religious belief.
The bulk of Masonic ritual consists of degree ceremonies.
The French officially abandoned the experiment in the early 19th century.
The lodges, however, continued to meet, which gave rise, in 1959, to a body of women practising continental Freemasonry.
In 1784, these individuals obtained a Warrant from the Premier Grand Lodge of England (GLE) and formed African Lodge, Number 459.
When the UGLE was formed in 1813, all U.S.-based Lodges were stricken from their rolls&nbsp;– due largely to the War of 1812.
If the differences are significant, one Grand Lodge may declare the other "Irregular" and withdraw or withhold recognition.
The onus is on candidates to ask to join; while candidates may be encouraged to ask, they are never invited.
Candidates for Freemasonry are progressively ''initiated'' into Freemasonry, first in the degree of Entered Apprentice.
In 1983, the Church issued a new code of canon law.
The various state Grand Lodges did not wish to diminish their own authority by agreeing to such a body.
Members of these organisations are known as '''Freemasons''' or '''Masons'''.
In 2003 he felt it necessary to apologise to British Freemasons after he said that their beliefs were incompatible with Christianity and that he had barred the appointment of Freemasons to senior posts in his diocese when he was Bishop of Monmouth.
The fifteenth century also sees the first evidence of ceremonial regalia.
Professor Andrew Prescott of the University of Sheffield writes: "Since at least the time of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, antisemitism has gone hand in hand with anti-masonry, so it is not surprising that allegations that 11 September was a Zionist plot have been accompanied by suggestions that the attacks were inspired by a masonic world order".
Masonic scholar Albert Pike is often quoted (in some cases misquoted) by Protestant anti-Masons as an authority for the position of Masonry on these issues.
Freemasonry in the United States faced political pressure following the 1826 kidnapping of William Morgan by Freemasons and subsequent disappearance.
Some Muslim anti-Masons argue that Freemasonry promotes the interests of the Jews around the world and that one of its aims is to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque in order to rebuild the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem.
Essentially, every Grand Lodge will hold that ''its'' landmarks (its requirements, tenets and rituals) are Regular, and judge other Grand Lodges based on those.
Once the initial inquiry is made, an interview usually follows to determine the candidate's suitability.
The most commonly shared rules for Recognition (based on Regularity) are those given by the United Grand Lodge of England in 1929:
The objections raised by the Roman Catholic Church are based on the allegation that Masonry teaches a naturalistic deistic religion which is in conflict with Church doctrine.
Each Grand Lodge maintains a list of other Grand Lodges that it recognises.
A number of Papal pronouncements have been issued against Freemasonry.
Having failed to achieve acceptance from any masonic governing body, she and Georges Martin started a mixed masonic lodge that actually worked masonic ritual.
The wording of the ritual, the number of officers present, the layout of the meeting room, etc.
In the Nordic countries the Swedish Rite is dominant; a variation of it is also used in parts of Germany.
There is usually an age requirement, varying greatly between Grand Lodges, and (in some jurisdictions) capable of being overridden by a dispensation from the Grand Lodge.
Maria Deraismes was initiated into Freemasonry in 1882, then resigned to allow her lodge to rejoin their Grand Lodge.
Notably, his book carries in the preface a form of disclaimer from his own Grand Lodge.
In modern times, interested people often track down a local Lodge through the Internet.
This position was later reinforced under Saddam Hussein; the death penalty was "prescribed" for those who "promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including freemasonry, or who associate themselves with Zionist organisations."
Exclusive Jurisdiction can be waived when the two over-lapping Grand Lodges are themselves in Amity and agree to share jurisdiction (for example, since the Grand Lodge of Connecticut is in Amity with the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Connecticut, the principle of Exclusive Jurisdiction does not apply, and other Grand Lodges may recognise both).
Reports of the "Morgan Affair", together with opposition to Jacksonian democracy (Andrew Jackson was a prominent Mason) helped fuel an Anti-Masonic movement, culminating in the formation of a short lived Anti-Masonic Party which fielded candidates for the Presidential elections of 1828 and 1832.
* Traditional – Old French ritual with a requirement for a belief in a supreme being.
There is also a Tyler, or outer guard, who is always present outside the door of a working Lodge.
The new Scottish rite body admitted blacks, and the resolution of the Grand Orient the following year that neither colour, race, nor religion could disqualify a man from Masonry prompted the Grand Lodge to withdraw recognition, and it persuaded other American Grand Lodges to do the same.
The denomination with the longest history of objection to Freemasonry is the Roman Catholic Church.
* There is no discussion of politics or religion.
For example, In 1980, the Iraqi legal and penal code was changed by Saddam Hussein's ruling Ba'ath Party, making it a felony to "promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including Freemasonry, or who associate themselves with Zionist organisations".
In 1933, the Orthodox Church of Greece officially declared that being a Freemason constitutes an act of apostasy and thus, until he repents, the person involved with Freemasonry cannot partake of the Eucharist.
the former Communist states in Eastern Europe).
Roberts was a vocal opponent of Freemasonry in the mid 19th century.
The first Grand Lodge, the Grand Lodge of London and Westminster (later called the Grand Lodge of England (GLE)), was founded on 24 June 1717, when four existing London Lodges met for a joint dinner.
While they were not, therefore, recognised as regular, they were part of Freemasonry "in general".
Thus, separated from both UGLE and any concordantly recognised U.S. Grand Lodge, African Lodge re-titled itself as the African Lodge, Number 1&nbsp;– and became a ''de facto'' "Grand Lodge" (this Lodge is not to be confused with the various Grand Lodges on the Continent of Africa).
Freemasonry, as it exists in various forms all over the world, has a membership estimated by the United Grand Lodge of England at around six million worldwide.
The United Grand Lodge of England has no problem with recognising Prince Hall Grand Lodges.
Some will further explore the ritual and symbolism of the craft, others will focus their involvement on the social side of the Lodge, while still others will concentrate on the charitable functions of the lodge.
The York Rite, with a similar range, administers three orders of Masonry, namely the Royal Arch, Cryptic Masonry and Knights Templar.
This named omission of Masonic orders caused both Catholics and Freemasons to believe that the ban on Catholics becoming Freemasons may have been lifted, especially after the perceived liberalisation of Vatican II.
When two Grand Lodges recognise and are in Masonic communication with each other, they are said to be ''in amity'', and the brethren of each may visit each other's Lodges and interact Masonically.
The Lodge meets regularly to conduct the usual formal business of any small organisation (pay bills, organise social and charitable events, elect new members, etc.).
The fraternity is administratively organised into independent Grand Lodges (or sometimes Grand Orients), each of which governs its own Masonic jurisdiction, which consists of subordinate (or ''constituent'') Lodges.
In some jurisdictions the main themes of each degree are illustrated by tracing boards.
At the other end of the spectrum, "Liberal" or Continental Freemasonry, exemplified by the Grand Orient de France, does not require a declaration of belief in any deity, and accepts atheists (a cause of discord with the rest of Freemasonry).
In the UK, Masons working in the justice system, such as judges and police officers, were from 1999 to 2009 required to disclose their membership.
This occurs at both Lodge and Grand Lodge level.
The political opposition that arose after the "Morgan Affair" in 1826 gave rise to the term ''Anti-Masonry'', which is still in use today, both by Masons in referring to their critics and as a self-descriptor by the critics themselves.
The small blue forget-me-not flower was first used by the Grand Lodge ''Zur Sonne'', in 1926, as a Masonic emblem at the annual convention in Bremen, Germany.
In 1894, lodges favouring the compulsory recognition of the Great Architect of the Universe formed the Grande Loge de France.
Not all French lodges agreed with the new wording.
Regular Freemasonry has traditionally not responded to these claims, beyond the often repeated statement that those Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE explicitly adhere to the principle that "Freemasonry is not a religion, nor a substitute for religion.
In most Lodges the oath or obligation is taken on a ''Volume of Sacred Law'', whichever book of divine revelation is appropriate to the religious beliefs of the individual brother (usually the Bible in the Anglo-American tradition).
The UGLE now states that "Freemasonry does not seek to replace a Mason's religion or provide a substitute for it."
As a result, Freemasonry was specifically exempted from the terms of the Act, provided that each private lodge's Secretary placed with the local "Clerk of the Peace" a list of the members of his lodge once a year.
Under Licio Gelli's leadership, in the late 1970s, P2 became involved in the financial scandals that nearly bankrupted the Vatican Bank.
By the 1980s, such discrimination was a thing of the past, and today most U.S. Grand Lodges recognise their Prince Hall counterparts, and the authorities of both traditions are working towards full recognition.
Freemasons are encouraged to join the Holy Royal Arch, which is linked to Mark Masonry in Scotland and Ireland, but separate in England.
However, the position changed following the revolution, and all lodges were forced to close in 1965.
Widespread segregation in 19th- and early 20th-century North America made it difficult for African-Americans to join Lodges outside of Prince Hall jurisdictions&nbsp;– and impossible for inter-jurisdiction recognition between the parallel U.S. Masonic authorities.
The first was Pope Clement XII's ''In eminenti apostolatus,'' 28 April 1738; the most recent was Pope Leo XIII's ''Ab apostolici,'' 15 October 1890.
Freemasonry describes itself as a "'beautiful system of morality, veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols".
His successor, the Duke of Orléans, reconstituted the central body as the Grand Orient de France in 1773.
This coincidence enabled Freemasons to wear the forget-me-not badge as a secret sign of membership.
The Grande Loge de France formed under the Grand Mastership of the Duke of Clermont, who exercised only nominal authority.
Disagreements over ritual led to the formation of exclusively female bodies of Freemasons in England, which spread to other countries.
Accordingly, Masons swear at each degree to keep the contents of that degree secret, and to support and protect their brethren unless they have broken the law.
After World War&nbsp;II, the forget-me-not flower was again used as a Masonic emblem at the first Annual Convention of the United Grand Lodges of Germany in 1948.
Regularity is a concept based on adherence to Masonic Landmarks, the basic membership requirements, tenets and rituals of the craft.
In the wake of the French Revolution, the Unlawful Societies Act 1799 banned any meetings of groups that required their members to take an oath or obligation.
During the ceremony of initiation, the candidate is expected to swear (usually on a volume of sacred text appropriate to his personal religious faith) to fulfil certain obligations as a Mason.
In contrast to Catholic allegations of rationalism and naturalism, Protestant objections are more likely to be based on allegations of mysticism, occultism, and even Satanism.
This creates the distinction between Anglo-American and Continental Freemasonry.
For its part, Freemasonry has never objected to Catholics joining their fraternity.
