Baumeister and colleagues found that provoking disbelief in free will seems to cause various negative effects.
as meaning both concepts are of dubious value.
To be responsible for the way one was at ''S−1'', one must have been responsible for the way one was at ''S−2'', and so on.
The basic argument for theological fatalism in the case of weak theological determinism is as follows;
Some compatibilists even hold that determinism is ''necessary'' for free will, arguing that choice involves preference for one course of action over another, requiring a sense of ''how'' choices will turn out.
* Schopenhauer's proof from ''The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason'' (which referenced the so-called intellectuality of representations, that is, in other words, objects and qualia perceived with senses)
A rejection of theological determinism (or divine foreknowledge) is classified as theological incompatibilism also (see figure, bottom), and is relevant to a more general discussion of free will.
Modern science, on the other hand, is a mixture of deterministic and stochastic theories.
Steven Pinker's view is that fear of determinism in the context of "genetics" and "evolution" is a mistake, that it is "a confusion of ''explanation'' with ''exculpation''".
Predeterminism can be used to mean such pre-established causal determinism, in which case it is categorised as a specific type of determinism.
To determine when subjects felt the intention to move, he asked them to watch the second hand of a clock.
A seminal experiment in this field was conducted by Benjamin Libet in the 1980s, in which he asked each subject to choose a random moment to flick their wrist while he measured the associated activity in their brain; in particular, the build-up of electrical signal called the readiness potential (after German Bereitschaftspotential, which was discovered by Kornhuber & Deecke in 1965).
Causal determinists believe that there is nothing uncaused or self-caused.
Hobbes sometimes attributes such compatibilist freedom to each individual and not to some abstract notion of ''will'', asserting, for example, that "no liberty can be inferred to the will, desire, or inclination, but the liberty of the man; which consisteth in this, that he finds no stop, in doing what he has the will, desire, or inclination to doe."
Destiny implies there is a set course that cannot be deviated from, but does not of itself make any claim with respect to the setting of that course (i.e., it does not necessarily conflict with incompatibilist free will).
For example, an addict may experience a conscious desire to escape addiction, but be unable to do so.
Reductive physicalism is grounded in the idea that everything in the world can actually be reduced analytically to its fundamental physical, or material, basis.
Soft theological determinism claims that humans have free will to choose their actions, holding that God, while knowing their actions before they happen, does not affect the outcome.
In many ways, the Buddhist position is closer to a theory of "conditionality" than a theory of "causality", especially as it is expounded by Nagarjuna in the ''Mūlamadhyamakakārikā''.
"There is a sharp difference between moral judgments and judgments of fact....
The basic reasoning is that, if one excludes God, an infinitely powerful demon, and other such possibilities, then because of chaos and epistemic limits on the precision of our knowledge of the current state of the world, the future is ill-defined for all finite beings.
Among Protestants there is Arminianism, held primarily by Methodist and some Baptist, and formulated by Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius; and there is also Calvinism held by most in the Reformed tradition which was formulated by the French Reformed theologian, John Calvin.
That choice is of his own making, although the ability to choose either has been planted in him by God's will.
Incompatibilism requires a distinction between the mental and the physical, being a commentary on the incompatibility of (determined) physical reality and one's presumably distinct experience of will.
For instance, priming subjects with information about an effect increases the probability that a person falsely believes is the cause.
Another view is that of hard incompatibilists, which state that free will is incompatible with both determinism and indeterminism.
Discussion regarding destiny does not necessitate the existence of supernatural powers.
According to the Buddha, "There is free action, there is retribution, but I see no agent that passes out from one set of momentary elements into another one, except the connection of those elements."
''Centred accounts'' propose that for any given decision between two possibilities, the strength of reason will be considered for each option, yet there is still a probability the weaker candidate will be chosen.
A description of "how conscious experience might affect brains" has been provided in which "the experience of conscious free will is the first-person perspective of the neural correlates of choosing."
Newcomb's paradox and other philosophical problems pose questions about free will and predictable outcomes of choices.
Defining 'free will' often revolves around the meaning of phrases like  "ability to do otherwise" or  "alternative possibilities".
Predestination is often considered a form of hard theological determinism.
* explain the underlying brain structures involved
However, these authors also found that awareness of action was ''anticipatory'' to activity in the muscle underlying the movement; the entire process resulting in action involves more steps than just the ''onset'' of brain activity.
Vivekananda never said things were absolutely determined and placed emphasis on the power of conscious choice to alter one's past karma: "It is the coward and the fool who says this is his fate.
Free will enters as follows: Free-will is an "appetitive power", that is, not a cognitive power of intellect (the term "appetite" from Aquinas's definition "includes all forms of internal inclination".)
The Buddhist notion of karma is primarily focused on the cause and effect of moral actions in this life, while in Hinduism the concept of karma is more often connected with determining one's destiny in future lives.
Similarly, Voltaire, in his ''Dictionnaire philosophique'', claimed that "Liberty then is only and can be only the power to do what one will."
Some views in Jewish philosophy stress that free will is a product of the intrinsic human soul, using the word ''neshama'' (from the Hebrew root ''n.sh.m.''
For example, Ted Honderich holds the view that "determinism is true, compatibilism and incompatibilism are both false" and the real problem lies elsewhere.
One argument asserts that an omniscient creator not only implies destiny but a form of high level predeterminism such as hard theological determinism or predestination – that they have independently fixed all events and outcomes in the universe in advance.
This argument entails that free will itself is absurd, but not that it is incompatible with determinism.
It is suggested that although the two worlds do interact, each retains some measure of autonomy.
* suggest that the cancelling or "veto" of an action may first arise subconsciously as well
In a study conducted by Roy Baumeister, after participants read an article arguing against free will, they were more likely to lie about their performance on a test where they would be rewarded with cash.
If determinism is true, then all of man's choices are caused by events and facts outside his control.
+Galen Strawson's table
This is sometimes likened to being a robot controlled by someone else.
A second common objection to these models is that it is questionable whether such indeterminism could add any value to deliberation over that which is already present in a deterministic world.
The concept of karma in Buddhism is different from the notion of karma in Hinduism.
The philosopher Søren Kierkegaard claimed that divine omnipotence cannot be separated from divine goodness.
It preaches a middle doctrine, named ''pratitya-samutpada'' in Sanskrit, often translated as "inter-dependent arising".
For instance, some hardware random number generators work by amplifying quantum effects into practically usable signals.
Another argument for incompatibilism is that of the "causal chain".
It is closely linked to the concepts of responsibility, praise, guilt, sin, and other judgments which apply only to actions that are freely chosen.
A first common objection to event-causal accounts is that the indeterminism could be destructive and could therefore diminish control by the agent rather than provide it (related to the problem of origination).
This argument has been rejected by compatibilists such as Daniel Dennett on the grounds that, even if humans have something in common with these things, it remains possible and plausible that we are different from such objects in important ways.
According to their suggestion, man has relative freedom, i.e.
A quotation from Swami Vivekananda, a Vedantist, offers a good example of the worry about free will in the Hindu tradition.
Assuming that an indeterministic interpretation of quantum mechanics is correct, one may still object that such indeterminism is for all practical purposes confined to microscopic phenomena.
Since we can have no control over these matters, we also can have no control over the ''consequences'' of them.
Determinism is a broad term with a variety of meanings.
For example, Adam Feltz and Edward Cokely found that people of an extrovert personality type are more likely to dissociate belief in determinism from belief in moral responsibility.
He asked, "would you have everything at the pleasure of a million blind caprices?"
This prediction has been confirmed by three of Pronin and Kugler's experiments.
The "new" problem is how to resolve this conflict.
''Incompatibilism'' may occupy any of the nine positions except (5), (8) or (3), which last corresponds to ''soft determinism''.
This argument has also been challenged by various compatibilist philosophers.
Theological determinism can also be seen as a form of causal determinism, in which the antecedent conditions are the nature and will of God.
The researchers also found that people consider acts more "free" when they involve a person opposing external forces, planning, or making random actions.
This creates a unique problem for free will given that propositions about the future already have a truth value in the present (that is it is already determined as either true or false), and is referred to as the problem of future contingents.
Steiner then argues that inner freedom is achieved when we bridge the gap between our sensory impressions, which reflect the outer appearance of the world, and our thoughts, which give us access to the inner nature of the world.
He states that judgment "concludes and terminates counsel.
freedom in degrees, that can be in- or decreased through deliberate choices that involve both conscious and unconscious (panencephalic) processes.
There are really two notions of freedom: voluntary action and origination.
In response, others point out the complexity of decision making and the importance of nuances in the terminology.
Traditionally, only actions that are freely willed are seen as deserving credit or blame.
Compatibilist models adhere to models of mind in which mental activity (such as deliberation) can be reduced to physical activity without any change in physical outcome.
The term predeterminism suggests not just a determining of all events, but the prior and deliberately conscious determining of all events (therefore done, presumably, by a conscious being).
For instance, courts of law make judgments about whether individuals are acting under their own free will under certain circumstances without bringing in metaphysics.
* Weak theological determinism is either compatible or incompatible with metaphysical libertarian free will depending upon one's philosophical interpretation of omniscience - and as such is interpreted as either a form of hard theological determinism (known as theological fatalism), or as ''soft theological determinism'' (terminology used for clarity only).
Since our present choices and acts, under determinism, are the necessary consequences of the past and the laws of nature, then we have no control over them and, hence, no free will.
If the laws of nature were determinate, then such an entity would be able to use this knowledge to foresee the future, down to the smallest detail.
Instead, the Buddhist philosophical strategy is to examine the metaphysics of causality.
This emphasis upon words has led some philosophers to claim the problem is merely verbal and thus a pseudo-problem.
Alvin Plantinga's "free will defense" is a contemporary expansion of this theme, adding how God, free will, and evil are consistent.
Freeman introduces what he calls "circular causality" to "allow for the contribution of self-organizing dynamics", the "formation of macroscopic population dynamics that shapes the patterns of activity of the contributing individuals", applicable to "interactions between neurons and neural masses ... and between the behaving animal and its environment".
In Buddhism, the idea of karma is much less deterministic.
;Theological determinism: The idea that the future is already determined, either by a creator deity decreeing or knowing its outcome in advance.
This argument is very often accepted as a basis for theological incompatibilism: denying either libertarian free will or divine foreknowledge (omniscience) and therefore theological determinism.
This includes interactionist dualism, which claims that some non-physical mind, will, or soul overrides physical causality.
God, therefore, is the first cause, Who moves causes both natural and voluntary.
William James' views were ambivalent.
It was his position that causality was a mental construct used to explain the repeated association of events, and that one must examine more closely the relation between things ''regularly succeeding'' one another (descriptions of regularity in nature) and things that ''result'' in other things (things that cause or necessitate other things).
# Assume divine foreknowledge or omniscience
Classical compatibilists have addressed the dilemma of free will by arguing that free will holds as long as we are not externally constrained or coerced.
There are also some holding to Molinism which was put forth by Jesuit priest Luis de Molina.
Emily Pronin and Matthew Kugler found that people believe they have more free will than others.
There are various implications for metaphysical libertarian free will as consequent of theological determinism and its philosophical interpretation.
In ''Freedom Evolves'', Daniel Dennett argues that a no-free-will conclusion is based on dubious assumptions about the location of consciousness, as well as questioning the accuracy and interpretation of Libet's results.
Joshua Knobe and Shaun Nichols have proposed that incompatibilism may or may not be intuitive, and that it is dependent to some large degree upon the circumstances; whether or not the crime incites an emotional response – for example if it involves harming another human being.
After making a movement, the volunteer reported the time on the clock when they first felt the conscious intention to move; this became known as Libet's W time.
The exercise of intent in such intentional actions is not that which determines their freedom – intentional actions are rather self-generating.
Suggestions have been made that hard determinism need not maintain strict determinism, where something near to, like that informally known as adequate determinism, is perhaps more relevant.
The bearing of these results upon notions of free will appears complex.
Early scientific thought often portrayed the universe as deterministic – for example in the thought of Democritus or the Cārvākans – and some thinkers claimed that the simple process of gathering sufficient information would allow them to predict future events with perfect accuracy.
Although often used interchangeably, the words "fate" and "destiny" have distinct connotations.
But this is impossible.
It suggests that the indeterminacy of agent volition processes could map to the indeterminacy of certain physical events – and the outcomes of these events could therefore be considered caused by the agent.
Now counsel is terminated, first, by the judgment of reason; secondly, by the acceptation of the appetite that is, the free-will."
In facing choices, he argued that humans are governed by ''intellect'', ''will'', and ''passions''.
He did believe that indeterminism is important as a "doctrine of relief" – it allows for the view that, although the world may be in many respects a bad place, it may, through individuals' actions, become a better one.
The sense of agency thus appears to normally emerge in conjunction with this orderly sequential network activation incorporating premotor association cortices together with primary motor cortex.
Fatalism, then, may be what threatens people's sense of self-efficacy.
In the definition of compatibilism and incompatibilism, the literature often fails to distinguish between physical determinism and higher level forms of determinism (predeterminism, theological determinism, etc.)
Deliberative indeterminism has been referenced by Daniel Dennett and John Martin Fischer.
A different approach to the dilemma is that of incompatibilists, namely, that if the world is deterministic then, our feeling that we are free to choose an action is simply an illusion.
Even with physical indeterminism an event could still be fated externally (see for instance theological determinism).
Combinations and syntheses of determinist theses, such as bio-environmental determinism, are even more common.
It may be conceived as a predetermined future, whether in general or of an individual.
On the one side, we have our intuitions; on the other, the scientific facts.
This is the tendency for people to trust the reliability of their own introspections while distrusting the introspections of other people.
Acknowledging the many influences on our choice, he points to the impact of our becoming aware of just these determinants.
In articulating this crucial proviso, David Hume writes, "this hypothetical liberty is universally allowed to belong to every one who is not a prisoner and in chains."
Some studies have been conducted indicating that people react strongly to the way in which mental determinism is described, when reconciling it with moral responsibility.
Outer freedom is attained by permeating our deeds with ''moral imagination''.
This requirement was universally embraced by both incompatibilists and compatibilists.
In contrast, the incompatibilist positions are concerned with a sort of "metaphysically free will", which compatibilists claim has never been coherently defined.
Baumeister found that most people tend to believe in a sort of "naive compatibilistic free will".
Firstly, it is difficult to establish the reason for any given choice by the agent, which suggests they may be random or determined by ''luck'' (without an underlying basis for the free will decision).
The most common form of causal determinism is nomological determinism (or scientific determinism), the notion that the past and the present dictate the future entirely and necessarily by rigid natural laws, that every occurrence results inevitably from prior events.
Free will here is predominately treated with respect to physical determinism in the strict sense of nomological determinism, although other forms of determinism are also relevant to free will.
The problem of free will has been identified in ancient Greek philosophical literature.
The sense of agency does not emerge in conjunction with the overt appearance of the purposeful act even though the sense of ownership in relationship to the body part is maintained.
Although compatibilism is generally aligned to (or is at least compatible with) physicalism, some compatibilist models describe the natural occurrences of deterministic deliberation in the brain in terms of the first person perspective of the conscious agent performing the deliberation.
Current physical theories cannot resolve the question of whether determinism is true of the world, being very far from a potential Theory of Everything, and open to many different interpretations.
Quantum mechanics poses a serious challenge to this view.
He must be ''causa sui'', in the traditional phrase.
Others have argued that data such as the Bereitschaftspotential undermine epiphenomenalism for the same reason, that such experiments rely on a subject reporting the point in time at which a conscious experience occurs, thus relying on the subject to be able to consciously perform an action.
Corresponding to each of these different meanings, there arises a different problem for free will.
Similarly, the consequences that follow upon a person's choice to follow one way or the other are also determined by God's will, which is active, absolute.
In particular, the supplementary motor complex on the medial surface of the frontal lobe appears to activate prior to primary motor cortex presumably in associated with a preparatory pre-movement process.
Adrian G. Guggisberg and Annaïs Mottaz have also challenged those findings.
According to Dennett, because individuals have the ability to act differently from what anyone expects, free will can exist.
''Deliberative indeterminism'' asserts that the indeterminism is confined to an earlier stage in the decision process.
They insist, rather, that free will means that man must be the "ultimate" or "originating" cause of his actions.
Destiny or fate is a predetermined course of events.
Although one might suppose that mental states and neurological states are different in kind, that does not rule out the possibility that mental states are correlated with neurological states.
Wegner observes that one event is inferred to have caused a second event when two requirements are met:
Agent (substance)-causal accounts have been suggested by both George Berkeley and Thomas Reid.
"Hard determinists", such as d'Holbach, are those incompatibilists who accept determinism and reject free will.
Equally incorrect is the idea that humans have no choice in life or that their lives are pre-determined.
Cartesian dualism implies that the physical world is not deterministic—and in which external mind controls (at least some) physical events, providing an interpretation of incompatibilist free will.
Critics of the theory point out that there is no certainty that conflicts will not arise even at the higher-order levels of desire and preference.
As discussed earlier in this article, compatibilistic free will is illustrated by statements like ''"my choices have causes, and an effect – so I affect my future"'', whereas fatalism is more like ''"my choices have causes, but no effect – I am powerless"''.
The argument, then, is that if man has free will, then man is the ultimate cause of his actions.
This empiricist view was often denied by trying to prove the so-called apriority of causal law (i.e.
Compatibilists thus consider the debate between libertarians and hard determinists over free will vs determinism a false dilemma.
''Pubbekatahetuvada'', the belief that all happiness and suffering arise from previous actions, is considered a wrong view according to Buddhist doctrines.
Having participants read articles that simply "disprove free will" is unlikely to increase their understanding of determinism, or the compatibilistic free will that it still permits.
This is not always the case: many macroscopic phenomena are based on quantum effects.
For the Yoga school, only Ishvara is truly free, and its freedom is also distinct from all feelings, thoughts, actions, or wills, and is thus not at all a freedom of will.
Moreover, he did not accept incompatibilism as formulated below; he did not believe that the indeterminism of human actions was a prerequisite of moral responsibility.
Non-reductive physicalism is therefore often categorised as property dualism rather than monism, yet other types of property dualism do not adhere to the causal reducibility of mental states (see epiphenomenalism).
Further, even if they were micro-level events, they do not seem to have any relevance to how the world is at the macroscopic level.
Determinism, he argued, undermines meliorism – the idea that progress is a real concept leading to improvement in the world.
He also took the view that the truth of determinism was irrelevant.
''” - Romans 8:29-30
And there are still further different conceptions of free will, each with their own concerns, sharing only the common feature of not finding the possibility of determinism a threat to the possibility of free will.
A person's will is identified with their effective first-order desire, that is, the one they act on, and this will is free if it was the desire the person wanted to act upon, that is, the person's second-order desire was effective.
Soft theological determinism is known as theological compatibilism (see figure, top right).
As a result, people infer that their thoughts must have caused the observed behavior.
On that basis "... free will cannot be squeezed into time frames of 150–350 ms; free will is a longer term phenomenon" and free will is a higher level activity that "cannot be captured in a description of neural activity or of muscle activation...." The bearing of timing experiments upon free will is still under discussion.
The second group, "unwilling addicts", have a second-order desire not to take the drug, while the third group, "willing addicts", have a second-order desire to take it.
The clinical definition requires "feeling that one limb is foreign or has a ''will of its own,'' together with observable involuntary motor activity" (emphasis in original).
Similarly, political liberty is a non-metaphysical concept.
In the philosophy of decision theory, a fundamental question is: From the standpoint of statistical outcomes, to what extent do the choices of a conscious being have the ability to influence the future?
Overall brain health, substance dependence, depression, and various personality disorders clearly influence mental activity, and their impact upon volition also is important.
* Assert differences in non-temporal knowledge (space-time independence), an approach taken for example by Boethius, Thomas Aquinas, and C. S. Lewis.
To abandon these notions of freedom would be to abandon moral responsibility.
While he believed in free will on "ethical grounds", he did not believe that there was evidence for it on scientific grounds, nor did his own introspections support it.
On the other hand, theological compatibilism must attempt to find problems with it.
At some point in the chain, there must have been an act of origination of a new causal chain.
Likewise, compatibilists define free will as freedom to act according to one's determined motives without hindrance from other individuals.
A third argument for incompatibilism was formulated by Carl Ginet in the 1960s and has received much attention in the modern literature.
And just as by moving natural causes He does not prevent their acts being natural, so by moving voluntary causes He does not deprive their actions of being voluntary: but rather is He the cause of this very thing in them; for He operates in each thing according to its own nature."
Wegner summarizes some empirical evidence that may suggest that the perception of conscious control is open to modification (or even manipulation).
Ordinary randomness is appealed to as supplying the "elbow room" that libertarians believe necessary.
The view of many researchers is that many human behaviors can be explained in terms of humans' brains, genes, and evolutionary histories.
Predeterminism has therefore been compared to fatalism.
The exact meaning of these verses has been debated by Christian theologians throughout history.
Physical determinism is currently disputed by prominent interpretations of quantum mechanics, and while not necessarily representative of intrinsic indeterminism in nature, fundamental limits of precision in measurement are inherent in the uncertainty principle.
Third, psychologists have studied the beliefs that the majority of ordinary people hold about free will and its role in assigning moral responsibility.
This is because to be responsible in some situation ''S'', one must have been responsible for the way one was at ''S−1''.
Traditional arguments for incompatibilism are based on an "intuition pump": if a person is like other mechanical things that are determined in their behavior such as a wind-up toy, a billiard ball, a puppet, or a robot, then people must not have free will.
Compatibilist free will has also been attributed to our natural sense of agency, where one must believe they are an agent in order to function and develop a theory of mind.
Epistemological pluralism is one view in which the mind-body problem is ''not'' reducible to the concepts of the natural sciences.
Some conceive free will to be the capacity to make choices in which the outcome has not been determined by past events.
However, Wegner has been able to manipulate people's thoughts and behaviors so as to conform to or violate the two requirements for causal inference.
