Freedom of religion in contemporary India is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 25 of the nation's constitution.
The US and India, both constitutionally secular nations, have taken two different views of this.
The committee further stated that "the freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief necessarily entails the freedom to choose a religion or belief, including the right to replace one's current religion or belief with another or to adopt atheistic views."
The Council also decreed that Wycliffe's remains be disinterred and cast out.
They cannot obtain ID cards, birth certificates, death certificates, marriage or divorce certificates, and passports; they also cannot be employed, educated, treated in public hospitals or vote, among other things.
Many scholars push this as far as allowing the apostate till he/she dies.
On the main Asian continent, the Mongols were tolerant of religions.
Therefore, strict separation of church and state has to be kept.
The Maryland Toleration Act was repealed during the Cromwellian Era with the assistance of Protestant assemblymen and a new law barring Catholics from openly practicing their religion was passed.
Most of the early colonies were generally not tolerant of dissident forms of worship, with Maryland being one of the exceptions.
It benefitted also the Jews who had landed on Manhattan Island in 1654, fleeing Portuguese persecution in Brazil.
Smith also points out that laws that prevent religious freedom and seek to preserve the power and belief in a particular religion will, in the long run, only serve to weaken and corrupt that religion, as its leaders and preachers become complacent, disconnected and unpractised in their ability to seek and win over new converts:
While most countries provided for the protection of religious freedom in their constitutions or laws, only a quarter of those countries were found to fully respect these legal rights in practice.
Jews were alternately tolerated and persecuted, the most notable examples of the latter being the expulsion of all Jews from Spain in 1492.
The importance of freedom of worship in India was encapsulated in an inscription of Ashoka:
ISIS re-established the punitive ''jizya'' tax and forbade Christians in Syria from building places of worship, ringing bells, wearing crosses or criticizing Islam, or face beheading.
It took the victory of prince Henry IV of France, who had converted into Protestantism, and his accession to the throne, to impose religious tolerance formalized in the Edict of Nantes in 1598.
It was the inseparable connection between democracy, religious freedom, and the other forms of freedom which became the political and legal basis of the new nation.
MK Dov Lipman expressed the concern that many Knesset workers are unfamiliar with non-Orthodox and American practices and would view "an egalitarian service in the synagogue as an affront."
When around 1210 AD the Islamic Sultanates invaded India from the north-west, gradually the principle of freedom of religion deteriorated in this part of the world.
Some Islamic theologians quote the Qur'an ( and , i.e., Sura Al-Kafirun) to show scriptural support for religious freedom.
This raises the question of whether prohibiting the practice infringes on the beliefs of certain Muslims.
Non-Muslims were allowed to engage in religious practices that was usually forbidden by Islamic law, such as the consumption of alcohol and pork, as well as religious practices which Muslims found repugnant, such as the Zoroastrian practice of incestuous "self-marriage" where a man could marry his mother, sister or daughter.
The French Revolution then abolished state religion and confiscated all Church property, turning intolerance against Catholics.
In 1660, one of the most notable victims of the religious intolerance was English Quaker Mary Dyer, who was hanged in Boston, Massachusetts for repeatedly defying a Puritan law banning Quakers from the colony.
Children 10 and older have to be heard before their parents change their religious upbringing to a different belief.
Freedom of religion in the Indian subcontinent is exemplified by the reign of King Piyadasi (304 BC to 232 BC) (Ashoka).
In its 2011 annual report, the ''United States Commission on International Religious Freedom'' designated fourteen nations as "countries of particular concern".
However, the movement continued to gain ground in his absence and spread to Switzerland.
In particular, Baptists and Presbyterians demanded the disestablishment of state churches - Anglican and Congregationalist - and the protection of religious freedom.
After the fall of the city of Granada, Spain, in 1492, the Muslim population was promised religious freedom by the Treaty of Granada, but that promise was short-lived.
550 BC, and initiated a general policy of permitting religious freedom throughout the empire, documenting this on the Cyrus Cylinder.
For example, Roger Williams found it necessary to found a new colony in Rhode Island to escape persecution in the theocratically dominated colony of Massachusetts.
Those sentiments also found expression in the First Amendment of the national constitution, part of the United States' Bill of Rights: "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof..."
When street mobs of separate quarters clashed in a Hellenistic or Roman city, the issue was generally perceived to be an infringement of community rights.
Hindu festivals like Deepavali and Holi, Muslim festivals like Eid al-Fitr, Eid-Ul-Adha, Muharram, Christian festivals like Christmas and other festivals like Buddha Purnima, Mahavir Jayanti, Gur Purab etc.
During the 18th century, other Jewish communities were established at Newport, Rhode Island, Philadelphia, Charleston, Savannah, and Richmond.
Of the world's 25 most populous countries, Iran, Egypt, Indonesia and Pakistan had the most restrictions, while Brazil, Japan, Italy, South Africa, the UK, and the US had some of the lowest levels, as measured by Pew.
Catholics and later on Jews also had full citizenship and free exercise of their religions.
The privileged position of the Catholic Church in the Czech kingdom was firmly established after the Battle of White Mountain in 1620.
Later he promoted the principles of Buddhism, and the creation of a just, understanding and fair society was held as an important principle for many ancient rulers of this time in the East.
Cyrus the Great established the Achaemenid Empire ca.
Debates have also occurred in various states of India regarding similar laws, particularly those that restrict conversions using force, fraud or allurement.
The Act allowed freedom of worship for all Trinitarian Christians in Maryland, but sentenced to death anyone who denied the divinity of Jesus.
In 1558, the Transylvanian Diet Diet of Torda declared free practice of both Catholicism and Lutheranism.
The statute granted exclusive jurisdiction of Jewish courts over Jewish matters and established a separate tribunal for matters involving Christians and Jews.
Some of those who remained and converted were tried as heretics in the Inquisition for allegedly practicing Judaism in secret.
People could worship as they wished freely and openly, though the formation of 2 nations i.e.
While many countries have accepted some form of religious freedom, this has also often been limited in practice through punitive taxation, repressive social legislation, and political disenfranchisement.
The defiance of Papal authority proved contagious, and in 1533, when Henry VIII of England was excommunicated for his divorce and remarriage to Anne Boleyn, he promptly established a state church with bishops appointed by the crown.
In 2009, nearly 70 percent of the world's population lived in countries classified as having heavy restrictions on freedom of religion.
In 1647, Massachusetts passed a law prohibiting any Jesuit Roman Catholic priests from entering territory under Puritan jurisdiction.
In a classic case of jury nullification, the jury refused to convict William Penn of preaching a Quaker sermon, which was illegal.
Greek-Jewish clashes at Cyrene in 73 AD and 117 AD and in Alexandria in 115 AD provide examples of cosmopolitan cities as scenes of tumult.
Most Roman Catholic kingdoms kept a tight rein on religious expression throughout the Middle Ages.
Social hostilities were classified by the level of communal violence and religion-related terrorism.
One of the famous Hindu sayings about religion is: "Truth is one; sages call it by different names."
Not entirely trusting in his safety, he made his will before he left.
In their book ''Breaking India'', Rajiv Malhotra and Aravindan Neelakandan discussed the "US Church" funding activities in India, such as the popularly advertised campaigns to "save" poor children by feeding, clothing, and educating them, with the book arguing that the funds collected were being used not so much for the purposes indicated to sponsors, but for indoctrination and conversion activities.
His major aim was theological, summed up in the three basic dogmas of Protestantism:
Gradually freedom of religion in Bohemian lands came to an end and Protestants fled or were expelled from the country.
It granted asylum to persecuted religious minorities, such as the Huguenots, the Dissenters, and the Jews who had been expelled from Spain and Portugal.
Compare examples of individual freedom in Italy or the Muslim tradition of dhimmis, literally "protected individuals" professing an officially tolerated non-Muslim religion.
Despite this, minority religions still are persecuted in many parts of the world.
Under Calvinist leadership, the Netherlands became the most tolerant country in Europe.
This decree was not carried out until 1429.
As early as 1380, John Wycliffe in England denied transubstantiation and began his translation of the Bible into English.
Thus, practically making the death penalty just a theoretical statement/exercise.
The constitution, however, also set the groundwork for the institutionalized persecution of Bahá'ís,
In France, from the 1550s, many attempts to reconcile Catholics and Protestants and to establish tolerance failed because the State was too weak to enforce them.
The United States formally considers religious freedom in its foreign relations.
It calls on Muslim nations, the international community, the UN and the international media to resolutely address the serious violations of human rights suffered by apostates.
After the fifteenth century, most Western colonialists rationalized the spread of empire with the belief that they were saving a barbaric and pagan world by spreading Christian civilization.
This was the core for resentment and the persecution of early Christian communities.
A devout Catholic, Emperor Ferdinand II forcibly converted Austrian and Bohemian Protestants.
Religious tolerance is inherent in Indian tradition," the Dalai Lama said.
In Egypt, a 16 December 2006 judgment of the Supreme Administrative Council created a clear demarcation between recognized religions – Islam, Christianity and Judaism – and all other religious beliefs; no other religious affiliation is officially admissible.
Freedom to practise, preach and propagate any religion is a constitutional right in Modern India.
In 2013, Pew classified 30% of countries as having restrictions that tend to target religious minorities, and 61% of countries have social hostilities that tend to target religious minorities.
The word "Mughal" is the Indo-Iranian version of Mongol.
Christianity added new impetus to the expansion of empire.
Among the statements included in the Syllabus are: "It is an error to say that Every man is free to embrace and profess that religion which, guided by the light of reason, he shall consider true" (15); "It is an error to say that In the present day it is no longer expedient that the Catholic religion should be held as the only religion of the State, to the exclusion of all other forms of worship" (77); "It is an error to say that Hence it has been wisely decided by law, in some Catholic countries, that persons coming to reside therein shall enjoy the public exercise of their own peculiar worship" (78).
So long as there are enough different religions and/or religious sects operating freely in a society then they are all compelled to moderate their more controversial and violent teachings, so as to be more appealing to more people and so have an easier time attracting new converts.
John Calvin, who had been active in Geneva was expelled in 1538 in a power struggle, but he was invited back in 1540.
Hinduism is one of the more open-minded religions when it comes to religious freedom.
''The Syllabus was made up of phrases and paraphrases from earlier papal documents, along with index references to them, and presented as a list of "condemned propositions".
* The Bible only is infallible
In Sri Lanka, there have been debates regarding a bill on religious freedom that seeks to protect indigenous religious traditions from certain kinds of missionary activities.
Citizens of other faiths could relocate to a more hospitable environment.
In 1414, Jan Hus, a Bohemian preacher of reformation, was given a safe conduct by the Holy Roman Emperor to attend the Council of Constance.
The establishment of a Jewish community in the Netherlands and New Amsterdam (present-day New York) during the Dutch Republic is an example of religious freedom.
Some Indian scholars have similarly argued that the right to propagate religion is not culturally or religiously neutral.
The law in Germany provides the term of "religious majority" (''Religiöse Mündigkeit'') with a minimum age for minors to follow their own religious beliefs even if their parents don't share those or don't approve.
In 2015, Pew published that social hostilities declined in 2013, but the harassment of Jews increased.
Topping the Pew government restrictions index were Saudi Arabia, Iran, Uzbekistan, China, Egypt, Burma, Maldives, Eritrea, Malaysia and Brunei.
The Pilgrims of New England held radical Protestant disapproval of Christmas.
The Union of Utrecht was an important step in the establishment of the Dutch Republic (from 1581 to 1795).
Joel Spring has written about the Christianization of the Roman Empire:
Dhimmis were allowed to operate their own courts following their own legal systems in cases that did not involve other religious groups, or capital offences or threats to public order.
The government provides the greatest funding to Orthodox Judaism, even though adherents represent a minority of citizens.
The Commonwealth set a precedent by allowing Jews to become ennobled.
Freedom of religion is considered by many people and nations to be a fundamental human right.
In 75 countries governments limit the efforts of religious groups to proselytise and in 178 countries religious groups must register with the government.
Judaism includes multiple streams, such as Orthodox, Reform Judaism, Conservative Judaism, Reconstructionist Judaism, Jewish Renewal and Humanistic Judaism.
Adam Smith, in his book ''The Wealth of Nations'' (using an argument first put forward by his friend and contemporary David Hume), states that in the long run it is in the best interests of society as a whole and the civil magistrate (government) in particular to allow people to freely choose their own religion, as it helps prevent civil unrest and reduces intolerance.
Intolerance of dissident forms of Protestantism also continued, as evidenced by the exodus of the Pilgrims, who sought refuge, first in the Netherlands, and ultimately in America, founding Plymouth Colony in Massachusetts in 1620.
Vishwa Hindu Parishad counters this argument by saying that evangelical Christians are forcefully (or through money) converting rural, illiterate populations and they are only trying to stop this.
Despite the persecution of Jews, they were the most tolerated non-Catholic faith in Europe.
Poland kept religious freedom laws during an era when religious persecution was an everyday occurrence in the rest of Europe.
The Puritans of the Massachusetts Bay Colony were the most active of the New England persecutors of Quakers, and the persecuting spirit was shared by Plymouth Colony and the colonies along the Connecticut river.
In 1993, the UN's human rights committee declared that article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights "protects theistic, non-theistic and atheistic beliefs, as well as the right not to profess any religion or belief."
Though by and large there are hardly any reports of law and order disturbance from mobs with Christian beliefs except perhaps in the north eastern region of India.
Freedom of religion as a legal concept is related to, but not identical with, religious toleration, separation of church and state, or secular state (''laïcité'').
Williams gave the most profound argument: As faith is the free work of the Holy Spirit, it cannot be forced on a person.
Vietnam and China were classified as having high ''government'' restrictions on religion but were in the moderate or low range when it came to ''social'' hostilities.
Some Orthodox Christians, especially those living in democratic countries, support religious freedom for all, as evidenced by the position of the Ecumenical Patriarchate.
Muhammad refused to do so.
Fifteen years later (1649), the Maryland Toleration Act, drafted by Lord Baltimore, provided: "No person or persons...shall from henceforth be any waies troubled, molested or discountenanced for or in respect of his or her religion nor in the free exercise thereof."
The same kind of seesaw back and forth between Protestantism and Catholicism was evident in England when Mary I of England returned that country briefly to the Catholic fold in 1553 and persecuted Protestants.
Thus, this supports the argument against the execution of apostates in Islam.
Pennsylvania was the only colony that retained unlimited religious freedom until the foundation of the United States in 1776.
There are similar laws in Austria and in Switzerland.
In France, although peace was made between Protestants and Catholics at the Treaty of Saint Germain in 1570, persecution continued, most notably in the Massacre of Saint Bartholomew's Day on 24 August 1572, in which thousands of Protestants throughout France were killed.
Huldrych Zwingli preached reform in Zürich from 1520 to 1523.
They suggest that this nexus of players includes not only church groups, government bodies, and related organizations, but also private think tanks and academics.
This culminated in outright war between the Swiss cantons that accepted Protestantism and the Catholics.
Signatories to the convention are barred from "the use of threat of physical force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers" to recant their beliefs or convert.
The statute served as the basis for the legal position of Jews in Poland and led to creation of the Yiddish-speaking autonomous Jewish nation until 1795.
When New Amsterdam surrendered to the English in 1664, freedom of religion was guaranteed in the Articles of Capitulation.
A different kind of critique of the freedom to propagate religion has come from non-Abrahamic traditions such as the African and Indian.
William Penn, the founder of Philadelphia, was involved in a case which had a profound effect upon future American laws and those of England.
Others have been where the established order has felt threatened, as shown in the trial of Socrates in 399 BC or where the ruler has been deified, as in Rome, and refusal to offer token sacrifice was similar to refusing to take an oath of allegiance.
Hindus believe in different ways to preach attainment of God and religion as a philosophy and hence respect all religions as equal.
Bohemia (present-day Czech Republic) enjoyed religious freedom between 1436 and 1520, and became one of the most liberal countries of the Christian world during that period of time.
Freedom of religious worship was established in the Buddhist Maurya Empire of ancient India by Ashoka the Great in the 3rd century BC, which was encapsulated in the Edicts of Ashoka.
The countries in North and South America reportedly had some of the lowest levels of ''government'' and ''social'' restrictions on religion, while The Middle East and North Africa were the regions with the highest.
'', "the human person has a right to religious freedom", which is described as "immunity from coercion in civil society".
It was presented to Charles V in 1530.
He opposed the sale of indulgences, celibacy, pilgrimages, pictures, statues, relics, altars, and organs.
Many Protestant Christian churches, including some Baptists, Churches of Christ, Seventh-day Adventist Church and main line churches have a commitment to religious freedoms.
The fourteen nations designated were Burma, China, Egypt, Eritrea, Iran, Iraq, Nigeria, North Korea, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Vietnam.
In a country with a state religion, freedom of religion is generally considered to mean that the government permits religious practices of other sects besides the state religion, and does not persecute believers in other faiths.
In 1609 Emperor Rudolf II granted Bohemia greater religious liberty with his Letter of Majesty.
Williams, Hooker, Penn, and their friends were firmly convinced that freedom of conscience was the will of God.
The Mughal empire was founded by the Mongol leader Babur in 1526, when he defeated Ibrahim Lodi, the last of the Delhi Sultans at the First Battle of Panipat.
These colonies became sanctuaries for persecuted religious minorities.
Then, he (the Bedouin) left Medina.
However, while almost all scholars agree about the punishment, many disagree on the allowable time to retract the apostasy.
In Antiquity, a syncretic point of view often allowed communities of traders to operate under their own customs.
They sacked the cathedral in Lausanne and destroyed all its art and statuary.
Many scholars and intellectuals believe that India's predominant religion, Hinduism, has long been a most tolerant religion.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also affirms religious freedom.
Anti-Catholic sentiment appeared in New England with the first Pilgrim and Puritan settlers.
Freedom of religion edicts have been found written during Ashoka the Great's reign in the 3rd century BC.
Historically, ''freedom of religion'' has been used to refer to the tolerance of different theological systems of belief, while ''freedom of worship'' has been defined as freedom of individual action.
Canadian law goes further, requiring that private citizens and companies provide reasonable accommodation to those, for example, with strong religious beliefs.
Nigeria, Bangladesh and India were high in ''social'' hostilities but moderate in terms of ''government'' actions.
Children 14 and older have the unrestricted right to enter or exit any religious community.
As he states in the book produced by the Oslo Coalition on Freedom of Religion or Belief, "Imperial religions have necessarily violated individual conscience and the communal expressions of Africans and their communities by subverting African religions."
Ten years later, in 1568, the Diet extended the freedom to all religions, declaring that "It is not allowed to anybody to intimidate anybody with captivity or expelling for his religion".
Imperialists could claim that they were both civilizing the world and spreading the true religion.
Other countries having the same restrictive laws tend to be more liberal when imposing them.
It does not explain why each particular proposition is wrong, but it cites earlier documents to which the reader can refer for the Pope's reasons for saying each proposition is false.
One of King Ashoka's main concerns was to reform governmental institutes and exercise moral principles in his attempt to create a just and humane society.
They suggest that India is the prime target of a huge enterprise—a "network" of organizations, individuals, and churches—that, they argue, seem intensely devoted to the task of creating a separatist identity, history, and even religion for the vulnerable sections of India.
"Not only Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, Sikhism which are the native religions but also Christianity and Islam have flourished here.
Rhode Island (1636), Connecticut (1636), New Jersey, and Pennsylvania (1682)—founded by Protestants Roger Williams, Thomas Hooker, and William Penn, respectively—combined the democratic form of government which had been developed by the Puritans and the Separatist Congregationalists in Massachusetts with religious freedom.
In September 2010, Indian state Kerala's State Election Commissioner announced that "Religious heads cannot issue calls to vote for members of a particular community or to defeat the nonbelievers".
- Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health or morals, or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others."''
Historian Anthony Pagden argues, "just as the ''civitas''; had now become coterminous with Christianity, so to be human—to be, that is, one who was 'civil', and who was able to interpret correctly the law of nature—one had now also to be Christian."
African scholar Makau Mutua criticizes religious evangelism on the ground of cultural annihilation by what he calls "proselytizing universalist faiths" (Chapter 28: Proselytism and Cultural Integrity, page 652):
, referring to the war against Pagans during the Battle of Badr in Medina, indicates that Muslims are only allowed to fight against those who intend to harm them (right of self-defense) and that if their enemies surrender, they must also stop because God does not like those who transgress limits.
Jewish women, including Anat Hoffman, have been arrested at the Western Wall for praying and singing while wearing religious garments the Orthodox feel should be reserved for men.
However others, such as African scholar Makau Mutua, have argued that Christian insistence on the propagation of their faith to native cultures as an element of religious freedom has resulted in a corresponding denial of religious freedom to native traditions and led to their destruction.
Each of these have existed to varying degrees.
The Catholic Church comprising Latin, Syro-Malabar and Syro-Malankara rites used to give clear directions to the faithful on exercising their franchise during elections through pastoral letters issued by bishops or council of bishops.
It is this free competition amongst religious sects for converts that ensures stability and tranquillity in the long run.
The emergence in social hierarchy wasn't depend on the religion of the person thus Transylvania had also Catholic and Protestant monarchs.
In 2015, Kim Davis, a Kentucky county clerk, refused to abide by the Supreme Court decision in ''Obergefell v. Hodges'' legalizing same-sex marriage in the United States.
His forebodings proved accurate, and he was burned at the stake on 6 July 1415.
Most major religious festivals of the main communities are included in the list of national holidays.
However, her half-sister, Elizabeth I of England was to restore the Church of England in 1558, this time permanently, and began to persecute Catholics again.
In addition, , which is believed to be God's final revelation to Muhammad, states that Muslims are to fear God and not those who reject Islam, and  states that one is accountable only for one's own actions.
Conversion to Islam is simple, but Muslims are forbidden to convert  from Islam to another religion.
In November 2014, a group of 60 non-Orthodox rabbinical students were told they would not be allowed to pray in the Knesset synagogue because it is reserved for Orthodox.
Prior to this, Pope Pius IX had written a document called the ''Syllabus of Errors.
Full religious toleration would not be restored in Maryland until the American Revolution, when Maryland's Charles Carroll of Carrollton signed the American Declaration of Independence.
27 October is International Religious Freedom Day, in commemoration of the execution of the Boston martyrs, a group of Quakers executed by the Puritans on Boston Common for their religious beliefs under the legislature of the Massachusetts Bay Colony between 1659–1661.
The Norman Kingdom of Sicily under Roger II was characterized by its multi-ethnic nature and religious tolerance.
This meant that to be human, as opposed to being a natural slave, was to be "civilized" and Christian.
The initial entry of Islam into South Asia came in the first century after the death of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad.
It would remain in force for over 80 years until its revocation in 1685 by Louis XIV of France.
In 1955, Chief Justice of California Roger J. Traynor neatly summarized the American position on how freedom of religion cannot imply freedom from law: "Although freedom of conscience and the freedom to believe are absolute, the freedom to act is not."
For instance, even though polygamy is permitted in Islam, it is prohibited in secular law in many countries.
By the 5th century, Christianity was thought of as co-extensive with the ''Imperium romanum''.
* Every Christian can interpret it
Rather than exterminate the Muslims of Sicily, Roger II's grandson Emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen (1215—1250) allowed them to settle on the mainland and build mosques.
However, it was more than a religious tolerance; it declared the equality of the religions.
In 1535, the Swiss canton of Geneva became Protestant.
The Pew Research Center has performed studies on international religious freedom between 2009 and 2015, compiling global data from 16 governmental and non-governmental organizations–including the United Nations, the United States State Department, and Human Rights Watch–and representing over 99.5 percent of the world's population.
