Most of these activists were punished for their actions.
The Committee first attempted to set the price for only a limited number of grain products but, by September 1793, it expanded the "maximum" to cover all foodstuffs and a long list of other goods.
A new Republican Calendar was established in 1793, with 10-day weeks that made it very difficult for Catholics to remember Sundays and saints' days.
In an attempt to address the financial crisis, the Assembly declared, on 2 November 1789, that the property of the Church was "at the disposal of the nation."
Over the course of a year, such disagreements would lead to a constitutional crisis.
For this structure they substituted the modern, autonomous individual, free to do whatever was not prohibited by law...
His brother, the Comte d'Artois and his queen, Marie Antoinette, urged a stronger stance against the revolution and support for the émigrés, while he was resistant to any course that would see him openly side with foreign powers against the Assembly.
Strong turnout produced 1,201 delegates, including 303 clergy, 291 nobles and 610 members of the Third Estate.
Throughout the 19th Century, the revolution was heavily analysed by economists and political scientists, who saw the class nature of the revolution as a fundamental aspect in understanding human social evolution itself.
What has it been until now in the political order?
Because of the extremely brutal forms that the Republican repression took in many places, certain historians such as Reynald Secher have called the event a "genocide".
Several of these factions broke off to form their own clubs, such as the Club of '89.
They took it upon themselves to protect the Church from what they saw as a heretical change to their faith, enforced by revolutionaries.
The Neapolitan Republic was formed around Naples, but it lasted only five months before the enemy forces of the Coalition recaptured it.
Starting in the early 18th century saw the appearance of the "public sphere" which was "critical" in that both sides were active.
Widespread shortages and famine ensued.
The Committee reacted by sending dragoons into the countryside to arrest farmers and seize crops.
Habermas argued that the dominant cultural model in 17th century France was a "representational" culture, which was based on a one-sided need to "represent" power with one side active and the other passive.
A majority of the representatives of the clergy soon joined them, as did 47 members of the nobility.
Another anti-clerical uprising was made possible by the instalment of the Republican Calendar on 24 October 1793.
The Assembly called for the municipal authorities to "preserve public order".
Fasces are a bundle of birch rods containing an axe.
However, late the next day, the King was recognised and arrested at Varennes and returned to Paris.
Historians until the late 20th century emphasised class conflicts from a largely Marxist perspective as the fundamental driving cause of the Revolution.
Olympe de Gouges wrote a number of plays, short stories, and novels.
After the abdication of Napoleon III in 1871, the monarchists probably had a voting majority, but they were so factionalised they could not agree on who should be king, and instead the French Third Republic was launched with a deep commitment to upholding the ideals of the Revolution.
Increasingly it depended on the Army in foreign and domestic affairs, as well as finance.
In 1793, as war broke out in Europe, the Republican Party led by Thomas Jefferson favoured France and pointed to the 1778 treaty that was still in effect.
Madame Roland (a.k.a.
This encouraged the Jacobins to seize power through a parliamentary ''coup'', backed up by force effected by mobilising public support against the Girondist faction, and by utilising the mob power of the Parisian ''sans-culottes''.
Little was done to improve the finances, and the assignats continued to fall in value until each note was worth less than the paper it was printed on; debtors easily paid off their debts.
Louis cast his lot with General Bouillé, who condemned both the emigration and the Assembly, and promised him refuge and support in his camp at Montmédy.
Necker realised that the country's extremely regressive tax system subjected the lower classes to a heavy burden, while numerous exemptions existed for the nobility and clergy.
As she was led to the scaffold, Madame Roland shouted "O liberty!
On the other hand, the socialist conspiracy of Babeuf was easily quelled.
The press saw its lofty role to be the advancement of civic republicanism based on public service, and downplayed the liberal, individualistic goal of making a profit.
Jean-Sylvain Bailly, president of the Assembly at the time of the Tennis Court Oath, became the city's mayor under a new governmental structure known as the ''commune''.
By December 1790 the Brabant revolution had been crushed and Liège was subdued the following year.
Battles over the role of religion in the public sphere, and closely related issues such as church-controlled schools, that were opened by the Revolution have never seen closure.
Third, the economy was badly hurt by the issuance of ever increasing amounts of paper money (called "assignants"), which caused more and more inflation; the rising prices hurt the urban poor who spent most of their budget on bread.
:From the social point of view, the Revolution consisted in the suppression of what was called the feudal system, in the emancipation of the individual, in greater division of landed property, the abolition of the privileges of noble birth, the establishment of equality, the simplification of life....
At the peak of the terror, the slightest hint of counter-revolutionary thoughts or activities (or, as in the case of Jacques Hébert, revolutionary zeal exceeding that of those in power) could place one under suspicion, and trials did not always proceed according to contemporary standards of due process.
The modern era has unfolded in the shadow of the French Revolution.
The Commune then sent a circular letter to the other cities of France inviting them to follow this example, and many cities launched their own massacres of prisoners and priests in the "September massacres."
Almost all future revolutionary movements looked back to the Revolution as their predecessor.
Furthermore, the universal male suffrage of 1793 was replaced by limited suffrage based on property.
Twenty thousand National Guardsmen under the command of Lafayette responded to keep order, and members of the mob stormed the palace, killing several guards.
In the Soviet Union, "Gracchus" Babeuf was regarded as a hero.
In the 1750s, during the "''querelle des bouffons''" over the question of the quality of Italian vs. French music, the partisans of both sides appealed to the French public "because it alone has the right to decide whether a work will be preserved for posterity or will be used by grocers as wrapping-paper".
Instead it issued more and more paper money (called "assignat") that supposedly were grounded seized lands.
Protestants and Jews gained equal rights.
Some of its central documents, like the Declaration of the Rights of Man, expanded the arena of human rights to include women and slaves, leading to movements for abolitionism and universal suffrage in the next century.
Most lasted only a matter of weeks.
Following these arrests, the Jacobins gained control of the Committee of Public Safety on 10 June, installing the ''revolutionary dictatorship''.
Demands for change were formulated in terms of Enlightenment ideals and contributed to the convocation of the Estates-General in May 1789.
The aristocrat Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès and the abbé Jean-Sifrein Maury led what would become known as the right wing, the opposition to revolution (this party sat on the right-hand side of the Assembly).
Hanson says the terror was not inherent in the ideology of the Revolution, but that circumstances made it necessary.
Resentment towards the Church weakened its power during the opening of the Estates General in May 1789.
Originally largely apolitical, Freemasonry was radicalised in the late 18th century through the introduction of higher grades which emphasised themes of liberty, equality, and fraternity.
Manon or Marie Roland) was another important female activist.
The revolt and its suppression, including both combat casualties and massacres and executions on both sides, are thought to have taken between 117,000 and 250,000 lives (170,000 according to the latest estimates).
The popular party carried the day: France would have a single, unicameral assembly.
The French Revolution differed from other revolutions in being not merely national, for it aimed at benefiting all humanity.
The Estates-General convened in the Grands Salles des Menus-Plaisirs in Versailles on 5 May 1789 and opened with a three-hour speech by Necker.
Even before the Flight to Varennes, the Assembly members had determined to debar themselves from the legislature that would succeed them, the Legislative Assembly.
Jury trials started for criminal cases.
As part of the funeral procession, they carried the bathtub in which Marat had been murdered (by a counter-revolutionary woman) as well as a shirt stained with Marat's blood.
After the collapse of the First Empire in 1815, the French public lost the rights and privileges earned since the Revolution, but they remembered the participatory politics that characterised the period, with one historian commenting: "Thousands of men and even many women gained firsthand experience in the political arena: they talked, read, and listened in new ways; they voted; they joined new organisations; and they marched for their political goals.
The tricolour flag is derived from the cockades used in the 1790s.
At this point the Jacobins controlled the government; they dissolved the Society of Revolutionary Republican Women, and decreed that all women's clubs and associations were illegal.
It stimulated the demand for further reform throughout Ireland, especially in Ulster.
By 1793 the radicals were most active but at the start the royalists flooded the country with their press the "Ami du Roi" (Friends of the King) until they were suppressed.
The "National Party", representing the centre or centre-left of the assembly, included Honoré Mirabeau, Lafayette, and Bailly; while Adrien Duport, Barnave and Alexandre Lameth represented somewhat more extreme views.
The economy continued in bad condition, with the poor especially hurt by the high cost of food.
Second, the effort to overthrow the Roman Catholic Church, sell off its lands, close its monasteries and its charitable operations, and replace it with an unpopular makeshift system caused deep consternation among the pious and the peasants.
The legislators abolished hereditary offices, except for the monarchy itself.
The Girondists lost ground when they seemed too conciliatory.
The Liège Revolution expelled the tyrannical Prince-Bishop and installed a republic.
Reigning opinions are no longer received from the court; it no longer decides on reputations of any sort...The court's judgments are countermanded; one says openly that it understands nothing; it has no ideas on the subject and could have none.".
Feminism emerged in Paris as part of a broad demand for social and political reform.
Belgian men were drafted into the French wars and heavily taxed.
De Corday d'Armont is a prime example of such a woman; engaged in the revolutionary political faction of the Girondins, she assassinated the Jacobin leader, Marat.
It also abolished the highly inefficient system of tax farming, whereby private individuals would collect taxes for a hefty fee.
The Third Estate representation was doubled to 610 men, representing 95% of the population.
This led to a schism between those clergy who swore the required oath and accepted the new arrangement and those who remained loyal to the Pope.
The Directory reacted by purging all the winners in the Coup of 18 Fructidor, banishing 57 leaders to certain death in Guiana and closing 42 newspapers.
Brown stresses the turn towards dictatorship and the failure of liberal democracy under the Directory, blaming it on, "chronic violence, ambivalent forms of justice, and repeated recourse to heavy-handed repression."
Their political and administrative systems were modernised, the metric system introduced, and trade barriers reduced.
Over the course of the 18th century, there emerged what the philosopher Jürgen Habermas called the idea of the "public sphere" in France and elsewhere in Europe.
This was not received well by the King's ministers, and Necker, hoping to bolster his position, argued to be made a minister.
The central theme of this argument was that the Revolution emerged from the rising bourgeoisie, with support from the sans-culottes, who fought to destroy the aristocracy.
Marie Antoinette, the King's younger brother the Comte d'Artois, and other conservative members of the King's privy council urged him to dismiss Necker as financial advisor.
The state sold the lands but typically local authorities did not replace the funding and so most of the nation's charitable and school systems were massively disrupted.
Thus the peasants got their land free, and also no longer paid the tithe to the church.
On 11 July 1789, after Necker published an inaccurate account of the government's debts and made it available to the public, the King fired him, and completely restructured the finance ministry at the same time.
The National Constituent Assembly functioned not only as a legislature, but also as a body to draft a new constitution.
Louis XVI had already been guillotined before the start of the terror; Queen Marie Antoinette, Barnave, Bailly, Brissot and other leading Girondins, Philippe Égalité (despite his vote for the death of the King), Madame Roland and many others were executed by guillotine.
The movement was crushed.
The soldiers responded to a barrage of stones by firing into the crowd, killing between 13 and 50 people.
Napoleon, who became the hero of the Revolution through his popular military campaigns, went on to establish the Consulate and later the First Empire, setting the stage for a wider array of global conflicts in the Napoleonic Wars.
– which further alienated the more conservative nobles, and added to the ranks of the ''émigrés''.
The army suppressed riots and counter-revolutionary activities.
Invented by a physician during the Revolution as a quicker, more efficient and more distinctive form of execution, the guillotine became a part of popular culture and historic memory.
In the spring of 1794, both extremist ''enragés'' such as Hébert and moderate Montagnard ''indulgents'' such as Danton were charged with counter-revolutionary activities, tried and guillotined.
Finally, foreign powers threatened to overthrow the Revolution, which responded with extremism and systematic violence in its own defence.
"La Marseillaise" () became the national anthem of France.
The Concordat of 1801 between Napoleon and the Church ended the de-Christianisation period and established the rules for a relationship between the Catholic Church and the French State that lasted until it was abrogated by the Third Republic via the separation of church and state on 11 December 1905.
External threats closely shaped the course of the Revolution.
It never had a strong base of popular support; when elections were held, most of its candidates were defeated.
Eventually, fearing for his own safety and that of his family, he decided to flee Paris to the Austrian border, having been assured of the loyalty of the border garrisons.
The Church was exempt from paying taxes to the government, while it levied a tithe—a 10% tax on income, often collected in the form of crops—on the general population, only a fraction of which it then redistributed to the poor.
Nearly a third were in trades or industry; 51 were wealthy land owners.
In Paris, various committees, the mayor, the assembly of representatives, and the individual districts each claimed authority independent of the others.
Economically, many peasant women refused to sell their goods for assignats because this form of currency was unstable and was backed by the sale of confiscated Church property.
In Ireland, the effect was to transform what had been an attempt by Protestant settlers to gain some autonomy into a mass movement led by the Society of United Irishmen involving Catholics and Protestants.
Policy became considerably more radical, as "The Law of the Maximum" set food prices and led to executions of offenders.
A perfect example would be the Palace of Versailles which was meant to overwhelm the senses of the visitor and convince one of the greatness of the French state and Louis XIV.
The stalemate was broken in the summer of 1794 with dramatic French victories.
At Nancy, General Bouillé successfully put down one such rebellion, only to be accused of being anti-revolutionary for doing so.
Nearly everyone was Catholic, but the Church was repressed.
The anthem's evocative melody and lyrics have led to its widespread use as a song of revolution and its incorporation into many pieces of classical and popular music.
The former Louis XVI, now simply named ''Citoyen Louis Capet'' (Citizen Louis Capet) was executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793 on the ''Place de la Révolution'', former ''Place Louis XV'', now called the Place de la Concorde.
The Commune sent gangs of National Guardsmen and fereres into the prisons to kill 10 or more victims, mostly nonjuring priests.
Devance explains the decision in terms of the emphasis on masculinity in a wartime situation, Marie Antoinette's bad reputation for feminine interference in state affairs, and traditional male supremacy.
This effectively led to Bonaparte's dictatorship and eventually (in 1804) to his proclamation as ''Empereur'' (emperor) which brought to a close the specifically republican phase of the French Revolution.
The new régime met opposition from Jacobins on the left and royalists on the right (the latter were secretly subsidised by the British government).
In this way the army and in particular Napoleon gained total power.
The Revolution caused a massive shift of power from the Roman Catholic Church to the state.
The causes of the French Revolution are complex and are still debated among historians.
The '''French Revolution''' ( ) was a period of far-reaching social and political upheaval in France that lasted from 1789 until 1799, and was partially carried forward by Napoleon during the later expansion of the French Empire.
Many Parisians presumed Louis' actions to be aimed against the Assembly and began open rebellion when they heard the news the next day.
However, the demand for their nursing services remained strong, and after 1800 the sisters reappeared and resumed their work in hospitals and on rural estates.
It conquered Switzerland and most of Italy, setting up a series of puppet states.
An astute financier but a less astute politician, Necker overplayed his hand by demanding and obtaining a general amnesty, losing much of the people's favour.
Getting unsatisfactory responses from city officials, as many as 7,000 women joined the march to Versailles, bringing with them cannons and a variety of smaller weapons.
She focused on other aspects of the government, but was a feminist by virtue of the fact that she was a woman working to influence the world.
They were tolerated by officials because they had widespread support and were the link between elite male physicians and distrustful peasants who needed help.
Counter-revolutionary women resisted what they saw as the intrusion of the state into their lives.
The Society of Revolutionary Republican Women, a militant group on the far left, demanded a law in 1793 that would compel all women to wear the tricolour cockade to demonstrate their loyalty to the Republic.
This was a signal that the Bourbon monarchy was in a weakened state and subject to the demands of its people.
Napoleon conquered most of Italy in the name of the French Revolution in 1797–99.
The result was escalating inflation.
The French invaded Switzerland and turned it into an ally known as the "Helvetic Republic" (1798–1803).
It nationalised all church lands, as well as lands belonging to royalist enemies who went into exile.
Fuelled by rumours of a reception for the King's bodyguards on 1 October 1789, at which the national cockade had been trampled upon, on 5 October 1789, crowds of women began to assemble at Parisian markets.
In the Old regime there were a small number of heavily censored newspapers that needed a royal licence to operate.
When their cries went unnoticed, the women went on a rampage, "sacking shops, seizing grain and kidnapping officials."
The influence was great in the hundreds of small German states and elsewhere, where it was either inspired by the French example or in reaction against it.
When Robespierre went to the guillotine in July of that year the crowd jeered, "There goes the dirty maximum!"
During the Revolution, most of the orders of nuns were shut down and there was no organised nursing care to replace them.
Meanwhile, the Assembly continued to work on developing a constitution.
They followed up by a campaign which swept the allies to the east bank of the Rhine and left the French, by the beginning of 1795, conquering the Dutch Republic itself.
Harvest taxes were ended, such as the tithe and seigneurial dues, much to the relief of the peasants.
The women demanded equality for men and then moved on to a demand for the end of male domination.
On 7 June Robespierre, who had previously condemned the ''Cult of Reason'', advocated a new state religion and recommended the Convention acknowledge the existence of the "Supreme Being".
The incident cost Lafayette and his National Guard much public support.
In addition, France turned the Netherlands into the Batavian Republic, and Switzerland into the Helvetic Republic.
The French legal system, however, was adopted, with its equal legal rights, and abolition of class distinctions.
Francis Charles Montague concluded in 1911, "In the attempt to govern, the Assembly failed altogether.
Virtually every major player in the Revolution was a Freemason and these themes became the widely recognised slogan of the revolution.
By 1795, after the bad harvest of 1794 and the removal of price controls, inflation had reached a level of 3500%.
They also demanded vigorous price controls to keep bread – the major food of the poor people – from becoming too expensive.
It became the focal point for the development of all modern political ideologies, leading to the spread of liberalism, radicalism, nationalism, socialism, feminism, and secularism, among many others.
Necker, Mounier, Lally-Tollendal and others argued unsuccessfully for a senate, with members appointed by the crown on the nomination of the people.
In the rebellious provinces, the government representatives had unlimited authority and some engaged in extreme repressions and abuses.
After the king's execution in January 1793, these powers, along with Spain and most other European states, joined the war against France.
The King refused, Necker was dismissed, and Charles Alexandre de Calonne was appointed to the Comptrollership.
In addition, wild rumours and paranoia caused widespread unrest and civil disturbances that contributed to the collapse of law and order.
The Revolution represented the most significant and dramatic challenge to political absolutism up to that point in history and spread democratic ideals throughout Europe and ultimately the world.
On 13 July, the assassination of Jean-Paul Marat&nbsp;– a Jacobin leader and journalist known for his bloodthirsty rhetoric&nbsp;– by Charlotte Corday, a Girondin, resulted in further increase of Jacobin political influence.
On 29 September, the Convention extended price limits from grain and bread to other household goods and established the Law of the Maximum, intended to prevent price gouging and supply food to the cities.
The Civil Constitution of the Clergy, passed on 12 July 1790, turned the remaining clergy into employees of the state.
The Assembly provisionally suspended the King.
When the Revolution opened, groups of women acted forcefully, making use of the volatile political climate.
Years of bad harvests leading up to the Revolution also inflamed popular resentment of the privileges enjoyed by the clergy and the aristocracy.
Primogeniture was ended both for nobles and peasants, thereby weakening the family patriarch.
In the elections of 1797 for one-third of the seats the Royalists won the great majority of seats and were poised to take control of the Directory in the next election.
The result hurt the tenants, who paid both higher rents and higher taxes.
Alexis de Tocqueville argued that the Revolution was a manifestation of a more prosperous middle class becoming conscious of its social importance.
Camille Desmoulins asked his followers to wear green cockades on 12 July 1789.
As Olwen Hufton argues, these women began to see themselves as the "defenders of faith".
The Ventôse Decrees (February–March 1794) proposed the confiscation of the goods of exiles and opponents of the Revolution, and their redistribution to the needy.
A French plebiscite ratified the document, with about 1,057,000 votes for the constitution and 49,000 against.
Georges Danton, the leader of the August 1792 uprising against the king, undermined by several political reversals, was removed from the Committee and Robespierre, "the Incorruptible", became its most influential member as it moved to take radical measures against the Revolution's domestic and foreign enemies.
With enemy troops advancing, the Commune looked for potential traitors in Paris.
The typical businessman owned a small store, mill or shop, with family help and a few paid employees; large-scale industry was less common than in other industrialising nations.
Inspired by liberal and radical ideas, the Revolution profoundly altered the course of modern history, triggering the global decline of absolute monarchies while replacing them with republics and liberal democracies.
The new regime was called "The Directory".
Danton fled to England; Desmoulins and Marat went into hiding.
To this end, symbols were borrowed from historic cultures and redefined, while those of the old regime were either destroyed or reattributed acceptable characteristics.
By this time, Necker had earned the enmity of many members of the French court for his overt manipulation of public opinion.
The Army at first was quite successful.
Above all the antagonism helped stimulate and shape German nationalism.
Conservatives across Europe were horrified and monarchies called for war against revolutionary France.
In an attempt to keep control of the process and prevent the Assembly from convening, Louis XVI ordered the closure of the Salle des États where the Assembly met, making an excuse that the carpenters needed to prepare the hall for a royal speech in two days.
Napoleon's Cisalpine Republic was centred on Milan.
The kings had so thoroughly centralised the system that most nobles spent their time at Versailles, and thus played only a small direct role in their home districts.
Many other factors involved resentments and aspirations given focus by the rise of Enlightenment ideals.
They defeated the allied army at the Battle of Fleurus, leading to a full Allied withdrawal from the Austrian Netherlands.
They were also afraid that arriving soldiers – mostly foreign mercenaries – had been summoned to shut down the National Constituent Assembly.
