The Foreign Legion was dissolved on 8 December 1838, when it had dropped to only 500 men.
''Legionnaire 1e Classe''
Current headquarters is in Aubagne, France, just outside Marseille.
After the four-week air campaign, coalition forces launched the ground offensive.
Recruits who do enlist with declared identities may, after one year's service, regularise their situations under their true identities.
The early years in Algeria were hard on the legion because it was often sent to the worst postings and received the worst assignments, and its members were generally uninterested in the new colony of the French.
In this battle, the unit lost 575 killed and missing.
But the ''Légion étrangère'' service color is green (for the now-defunct colonial ''Armée d'Afrique'') instead of red (regular infantry).
Jean-Denis Lepage reports that "The Foreign Legion discreetly recruited from German P.O.W.
** 1st Foreign Engineer Regiment (1er REG) former 6th Foreign Engineer Regiment (6ème REG), based in Laudun, France
The Foreign Legion lost 226 men, of whom only a tenth died in actual fighting.
The standard medium-blue double breasted greatcoat (''capote'') of the French infantry was worn, usually buttoned back to free the legs for marching.
This can be seen at ceremonial parades and public displays attended by the Foreign Legion, particularly while parading in Paris on 14 July (Bastille Day Military Parade).
At the time of the battle of Dien Bien Phu, any legionnaire of that age group was at the worst, in his "Hitler Youth" shorts when the Third Reich collapsed.
Reconstituted on March 1, 1951 the battalion participated in combat operations at Cho Ben, on the Black River and in Annam.
Others, like much of the expeditionary force, died from tropical diseases.
** 1st Foreign Regiment (1er RE), based in Aubagne, France (HQ, selection and administration, other specific missions)
The Ever Victorious Army was the name given to a Chinese imperial army in the late 19th century.
Created to fight "outside mainland France", the Foreign Legion was stationed in Algeria, where it took part in the pacification and development of the colony, notably by drying the marshes in the region of Algiers.
File:Patrol paratroopers foreign legion paris notre dame.jpg|Legionnaires in Paris on Vigipirate, France's counter-terrorism security alert system, in November 2010.
Recruits selected for this course need to show good leadership skills during basic training.
The battalion played an important role in Colonel Jacques Duchesne's offensive in March 1885 that captured the key Chinese positions of La Table and Fort Bamboo and disengaged Keelung.
The high percentage of Germans was contrary to normal policy concerning a single dominant nationality however, and in more recent times Germans have made up a much smaller percentage of the Foreign Legion's composition.
Many of them were professional soldiers, attracted by the regiment's reputation—mostly former British soldiers, or Vietnam veterans from the United States, Australian and New Zealand forces—and these became a key part of the unit.
** Foreign Legion Detachment in Mayotte (DLEM)
Many recruits originate from Eastern Europe and Latin America.
15 weeks basic training.
Contrary to popular belief however, French policy was to exclude former members of the Waffen-SS, and candidates for induction were refused if they exhibited the tell-tale blood type tattoo, or even a scar that might be masking it.
These ranged from the heavy capotes and Adrian helmets of 1940 through to British battledress and American field uniforms from 1943 to 1945.
Some notable operations include: the Chadian–Libyan conflict in 1969–72 (the first time that the Legion was sent in operations after the Algerian War), 1978–79, and 1983–87; Kolwezi in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May 1978; Rwanda in 1990–94; and the Ivory Coast in 2002 to the present.
These francophone recruits were placed in their own unit, 7 Independent Company, Rhodesia Regiment, which was commanded by French-speaking officers and operated entirely in French.
Constantly being deployed in operations, units of the Legion suffered particularly heavy losses in the climatic Battle of Dien Bien Phu, before the fortified valley finally fell on May 7, 1954.
The new force originally comprised about 200 mostly European mercenaries, recruited in the Shanghai area from sailors, deserters and adventurers.
Throughout its four-year existence the Ever Victorious Army was mainly to operate within a thirty-mile radius of Shanghai.
Contrary to popular belief, the adoption of the Foreign Legion's slow marching speed was not due to a need to preserve energy and fluids during long marches under the hot Algerian sun.
Canada allows post-Legion enlistment in its ranks with a completed five-year contract.
The Foreign Legion was initially divided into six "national battalions" (Swiss, Poles, Germans, Italians, Spanish, and Dutch-Belgian).
Regarding recruitment conditions within the Foreign Legion, see the official page (in English) dedicated to the subject: With regard to age limits, recruits can be accepted from ages ranging from 17 ½ (with parental consent) to 40 years old.
camps", but adds that the number of these recruits has been subsequently exaggerated.
Prior to the end of the Algerian War the legion had not been stationed in mainland France except in wartime.
The Foreign Legion participated in the suppression of the Commune, which was crushed with great bloodshed.
One short lived aberration was the wearing of green uniforms in 1856 by Foreign Legion units recruited in Switzerland for service in the Crimean War.
The main activity during the period 1954-62 were part of the tasked operations of the 10th Parachute Division and 25th Parachute Division.
From 1882 until his capture, Samori Ture, ruler of the Wassoulou Empire, fought the French colonial army, defeating them on several occasions, including a notable victory at Woyowayanko (2 April 1882), in the face of French heavy artillery.
The Foreign Legion began the process of reorganizing and redeploying to Algeria.
It was at this time that the Legion acquired its parade song "Non, je ne regrette rien" (''No, I don't regret anything''), a 1960 Edith Piaf song sung by Sous-Officiers and legionnaires as they left their barracks for re-deployment following the Algiers putsch of 1961.
During the eight-year war, the Legion suffered the loss of 12,000 of its own men, almost 4 legionnaires per day for 8 years.
Beyond its reputation as an elite unit often engaged in serious fighting, the recruitment practices of the French Foreign Legion have also led to a somewhat romanticised view of it being a place for disgraced or "wronged" men looking to leave behind their old lives and start new ones.
The bulk of the artillery and some infantry transferred to the Chinese Imperial forces.
In the French Army, since the 18th century, every infantry regiment included a small detachment of pioneers.
The white kepi was stubbornly retained whenever possible.
***Pionniers Groups
In relation to the Legion, other offensives in the mountains in 1959 included operations, Jumelles, Cigales and Ariege in the Aures and last in Kabylie.
It is the Foreign Legion's most precious relic.
Small cavalry and artillery units were raised from legionnaires serving in Mexico.
The Foreign Legion's First Battalion (Lieutenant-Colonel Donnier) sailed to Tonkin in the autumn of 1883, during the period of undeclared hostilities that preceded the Sino–French War (August 1884 to April 1885), and formed part of the attack column that stormed the western gate of Son Tay on 16 December.
The Foreign Legion played a smaller role in World War II in mainland Europe than in World War I, though there was involvement in many exterior theatres of operations, notably sea transport protection through to the Norwegian, Syria-Lebanon, and North African campaigns.
From 1940 until 1963 the Foreign Legion maintained four Saharan Companies (''Compagnies Sahariennes'') as part of the French forces used to patrol and police the desert regions to the south of Morocco and Algeria.
File:Insigne de béret de la Légion étrangère.jpg|Second pattern beret cap badge, worn until 1990
In 2010 the service conditions of the Russian Military have been changed.
Upon being notified that this regiment was to be disbanded and that they were to be reassigned, legionnaires of the 1er REP burned the Chinese pavilion acquired following the Siege of Tuyên Quang in 1884.
German legionnaires were incorporated into the Wehrmacht's 90th Light Infantry Division in North Africa.
The Foreign Legion accepts people enlisting under a nationality that is not their own.
Prior to 1914 units in Indo-China wore white or khaki Colonial Infantry uniforms with Foreign Legion insignia, to overcome supply difficulties.
According to Chris Cocks, an RLI veteran, "the RLI was a mirror of the French Foreign Legion, in that recruiters paid little heed as to a man's past and asked no questions.
In barracks a white bleached kepi cover was often worn together with a short dark blue jacket ("veste") or white blouse plus white trousers.
In 1931, Général Paul-Frédéric Rollet assumed the role of 1st Inspector of the Foreign Legion, a post created at his initiative.
The Legion detachment under Captain Jean Danjou, Sous-Lieutenant Jean Vilain, Sous-Lieutenant Clément Maudet made a stand in the ''Hacienda de la Trinidad'' - a farm near the village of ''Camarón''.
The Foreign Legion was initially stationed only in Algeria, where it took part in the pacification and development of the colony.
General Jean Mordacq intended to rebuild the Foreign Legion as a larger military formation, doing away with the legion's traditional role as a solely infantry formation.
In comparison to the 116-step-per-minute pace of other French units, the Foreign Legion has an 88-step-per-minute marching speed.
'''Passed Selection'''
The adoption of the Foreign Legion as a new "fatherland" does not imply the repudiation by the legionnaire of his original nationality.
The French Army, including the Legion disbanded its regimental sapper platoons in 1870.
During that time, insurrections against the Malagasy Christians of the island, missionaries and foreigners were particularly terrible.
This dress included a white sun helmet of a model that was also worn by Foreign Legion units serving in the outposts of Southern Algeria, though never popular with its wearers.
The Legionnaires' victory at the fortress of Ouilla and police patrols in the region accelerated the submission of the tribes.
The Algerian War of Independence (1954–62) was a highly traumatic conflict for France.
The Legion played a major part in the Rif War of 1920–25.
The actual term "Russian Foreign Legion" is a colloquial expression without any official recognition.
After a few skirmishes, the Queen Ranavalona III promptly surrendered.
** 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment (2ème REI), based in Nîmes, France
Reception, information, and terms of contract.
The latter continued to be worn in the relatively peaceful conditions of Algeria throughout World War I, although increasingly replaced by khaki drill.
The couple of hectares comprising the battlefield today are filled with corn fields centered by a stele which commemorates the sacrifices of those who died there.
However, the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment 2ème REP prevailed in existence.
In 1932, the Foreign Legion consisted of 30,000 men, serving in 6 multi-battalion regiments including the 1st Foreign Infantry Regiment 1er REI – Algeria, Syria and Lebanon; 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment 2ème REI, 3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment 3ème REI, and 4th Foreign Infantry Regiment 4ème REI – Morocco, Lebanon; 5th Foreign Infantry 5ème REI – Indochina; and 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment 1er REC – Lebanon, Tunisia and Morocco.
White linen trousers tucked into short leather leggings were substituted for red serge in hot weather.
Most of the Foreign Legion's commissioned officers are French with approximately 10% being former Legionnaires who have risen through the ranks.
By the mid-1960s the Legion had lost its traditional and spiritual home in Algeria and elite units had been dissolved.
However, it's worth noting that while both the 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) and the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment (2ème REP) were part of the operations of French Parachute Divisions (10ème DP and 25ème DP established in 1956); the Legion 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) and the Legion 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment (2ème REP) are older than the French divisions.
The United States allows post-FFL enlistment in its National Guard, and career soldiers, up to the rank of captain only and to green card holders.
King Behanzin surrendered and was captured by the legionnaires in January 1894.
However the Legion was withdrawn with the other French forces during February–March 1867.
Other items of currently worn dress are the standard issue of the French Army.
Officers and senior noncommissioned officers still wear their kepis in the pre-1939 colours of dark blue and red.
There have been units composed of foreign recruits in China, Israel, the Netherlands, Rhodesia, Russia, and Spain.
Notable operations during this period included the Suez Crisis, the Battle of Algiers and various offensives launched by General Maurice Challe including Operations Oranie and Jumelles.
In January 1885 the Foreign Legion's 4th Battalion (''chef de bataillon'' Vitalis) was deployed to the French bridgehead at Keelung (Jilong) in Formosa (Taiwan), where it took part in the later battles of the Keelung Campaign.
('You, Legionnaires, you are soldiers in order to die, and I'm sending you to where one dies!')
Additionally, any soldier who becomes injured during a battle for France immediately becomes a French citizen under a provision known as "''Français par le sang versé''" ("French by spilled blood").
Neil Tweedie of ''The Daily Telegraph'' said that Germany traditionally provided many recruits, "somewhat ironically given the Legion's bloody role in two world wars."
The captain had a wooden hand, which was later returned to the Legion and is now kept in a case in the Legion Museum at Aubagne, and paraded annually on Camerone Day.
As of 20 September 2010, new recruits may enlist under their real identities or under declared identities.
Legion losses were significant and the 2nd Foreign Regiment lost Colonel Chabrière, its commanding officer.
On 29 September 1898, Samori Ture was captured by the French Commandant Gouraud and exiled to Gabon, marking the end of the Wassoulou Empire.
Subsequently, the Foreign Legion was deployed in a number of conflicts, including the First Carlist War in 1835, the Crimean War in 1854, the Second Italian War of Independence in 1859, the French intervention in Mexico in 1863, the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, the Tonkin Campaign and Sino–French War in 1883, supporting growth of the French colonial empire in Sub-Saharan Africa and pacifying Algeria, the Second Franco-Dahomean War in 1892, the Second Madagascar expedition in 1895, and the Mandingo Wars in 1894.
The Swiss jail or fine their nationals for joining the Legion due to Switzerland's neutrality.
** 2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment (2ème REG), based in St Christol, France
The 1er REP was the former 3 time reconstituted 1st Foreign Parachute Battalion (1er BEP) and the 2ème REP was the former 2nd Foreign Parachute Battalion (2ème BEP); both battalions renamed with their Legionnaires transferred from Indochina on August 1, 1954 to Algeria by November 1, 1954 in a period of 4 months and both tracing their origins to the Parachute Company of the 3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment commanded by Legion Lieutenant Jacques Morin attached to the III/1er R.C.P.
The 38,000 strong French expeditionary force dispatched to Mexico via sea between 1862 and 1863 included two battalions of the Foreign Legion, increased to six battalions by 1866.
Moreover, this 'blanket provision' between member-states cannot exclude others for it would seem inappropriate to single out individual countries, that is, France in relation to the Legion.
Consequently, training is often described as not only physically challenging, but also very stressful psychologically.
On 8 September the final assault was launched on Sevastopol.
They are worn beneath the rank insignia.
***Pionniers Groups
In the 1960s and 1970s, the Legion had a new role as a rapid deployment force to preserve French interests – not only in its former African colonies but in other nations as well; it also returned to its roots of being a unit always ready to be sent to hot-spots all around the world.
Samori began a steady retreat, but the fall of other resistance armies, particularly Babemba Traoré at Sikasso, permitted the colonial army to launch a concentrated assault against his forces.
Shakos were soon replaced by the light cloth kepi, which was far more suitable for North African conditions.
During the Gulf War, DINOPS operated in support of the U.S. Army's 82nd Airborne Division, and provided the EOD services to the division.
Gold fringed epaulettes were worn for full dress and rank was shown by the number of gold rings on both kepi and cuffs.
However subsequent colonial campaigns saw an increasing use of special garments for hot weather wear such as collarless ''keo'' blouses in Tonkin 1884–85, khaki drill jackets in Dahomey (1892) and drab covered topees worn with all-white fatigue dress in Madagascar (1895).
The new Third Republic was desperately short of trained soldiers following Sedan, so the Foreign Legion was ordered to provide a contingent.
The original Mahalniks were mostly World War II veterans from American and British armed forces.
This is a way to strengthen them enough to work as a team.
The 1er BEP received 5 citations and the fourragère of the colors of the Médaille militaire for its service in Indochina.
The pre-1914 blue and red uniforms could still be occasionally seen as garrison dress in Algeria until stocks were used up about 1919.
The Foreign Legion has remained an important part of the French Army and sea transport protected by the French Navy, surviving three Republics, the Second French Empire, two World Wars, the rise and fall of mass conscript armies, the dismantling of the French colonial empire, and the loss of the Foreign Legion's base, Algeria.
Intervention actions in Africa following the Algerian War included the Chadian–Libyan conflict in 1969–72, 1978–79, and 1983–87; Kolwezi in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May 1978; Rwanda in 1990–94; and the Ivory Coast in 2002 to the present.
Reflecting the divisions of the time, part of the Foreign Legion joined the Free French movement while another part served the Vichy government.
During the Algerian War of Independence (1954–62), the Foreign Legion came close to being disbanded after some officers, men, and the highly decorated 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) took part in the Generals' putsch.
Following World War II, many French speaking German former soldiers joined the Foreign Legion to pursue a military career, an option no longer possible in Germany including French German soldiers of Malgré-nous.
Among these losses, 1,918 of the deaths were from a single regiment of the Legion, a fact that testifies to the importance of the Legion's role in the campaign.
Table note: Command insignia in the Foreign Legion use gold lace or braid indicating foot troops in the French Army.
The remainder of French paratrooper units of the French Armed Forces were commanded by Jacques Massu, Buchond, Marcel Bigeard, Paul Aussaresses.
It was the first Chinese army trained in European techniques, tactics, and strategy.
The majority of enlisted men originate from outside France, while the majority of the officer corps consists of Frenchmen.
Today, there is a program, Garin Tzabar, within the Israeli Ministry of Defense that administers the enlistment of non-Israeli citizens in the country's armed forces.
Smaller national groups, such as the ten Englishmen recorded in December 1832, appear to have been placed randomly.
The original intention was that Foreign Legion units should remain in Mexico for up to six years to provide a core for the Imperial Mexican Army.
The 13th Demi-Brigade, formed for service in Norway, found itself in the UK at the time of the French Armistice (June 1940), was deployed to the British 8th Army in North Africa and distinguished itself in the Battle of Bir Hakeim (1942).
On 11 October 1870 two provisional battalions disembarked via sea at Toulon, the first time the Foreign Legion had been deployed in France itself.
Others, with no military experience, were often motivated to join the Rhodesian Army by anti-communism, or a desire for adventure or to escape the past.
It is now called the ''Spanish Legion'' and only recruits Spanish nationals.
It would have been considered problematic if the men from Alsace-Lorraine didn't speak French.
Since 1831, the Legion has suffered the loss of nearly 40,000 men on active service in France, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Madagascar, West Africa, Mexico, Italy, the Crimea, Spain, Indo-China, Norway, Loyada, Syria, Chad, Zaïre, Lebanon, Central Africa, Gabon, Kuwait, Rwanda, Djibouti, Ex-Yugoslavia, Somalia, Republic of Congo, Ivory Coast, Afghanistan, Mali, Sahel and others.
A company led by Captain Jean Danjou, numbering 62 Legionnaires and 3 Legion officers, was escorting a convoy to the besieged city of Puebla when it was attacked and besieged by three thousand Mexican loyalists, organised in two battalions of infantry and cavalry, numbering 2,200 and 800 respectively.
The original kepi cover was khaki and due to constant washing turned white quickly.
In 1939 the white covered kepi won recognition as the official headdress of the Foreign Legion to be worn on most occasions, rather than simply as a means of reflecting heat and protecting the blue and red material underneath.
Incorporation into the Foreign Legion as a trainee.
Nevertheless, the old and the new men of the Foreign Legion fought and died in vicious battles on the Western front, including Belloy-en-Santerre during the Battle of the Somme, where the poet Alan Seeger, after being mortally wounded by machine-gun fire, cheered on the rest of his advancing battalion.
The Legion now had a new role as a rapid intervention force to preserve French interests.
Trousers were red with black stripes or white according to occasion or conditions.
''Legionnaire 2e Classe''
Though not named "Foreign Legion", the Dutch Koninklijk Nederlandsch-Indische Leger (KNIL), or Royal Netherlands-Indian Army (in reference to the Dutch East Indies, now Indonesia), was created in 1830, a year before the French Foreign Legion, and is therefore not an emulation but an entirely original idea and had a similar recruitment policy.
In World War I, the Foreign Legion fought in many critical battles on the Western Front.
Psychological and personality tests, logic tests (no education requirements), medical exam, physical condition tests, motivation and security interviews.
Special uniforms were developed for these units, modeled on those of the French officered Camel Corps (''Méharistes'') having prime responsibility for the Sahara.
The 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment 1er REP, was part of the branch hierarchy and command of the 10th Parachute Division (France) 10ème DP and the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment 2ème REP, was part of the branch hierarchy and command of the 25th Parachute Division (France) 25ème DP.
The war ended after a hundred hours of fighting on the ground, which resulted in very light casualties for the Legion.
Many were dismissed in the summer of 1861, but the remainder became the officers of the Chinese soldiers recruited mainly in and around Sungkiang.
** 4th Foreign Regiment (4èmeRE), based in Castelnaudary (training), France
It succeeded in retaking Orléans, but failed to break the siege.
The Chinese troops were increased to 3,000 by May 1862, all equipped with Western firearms and equipment by the British authorities in Shanghai.
In Israel, Mahal (, an acronym for ''Mitnadvei Ḥutz LaAretz'', which means ''Volunteers from outside the Land of Israel'') is a term designating non-Israelis serving in the Israeli military.
He is also given his own new rifle, which according to the lore of the ''Legion'' must never be left on a battlefield.
Also, because the Foreign Legion must always stay together, it does not break formation into two when approaching the presidential grandstand, as other French military units do, in order to preserve the unity of the legion.
1 to 4 days in a Foreign Legion Recruitment Center (Paris).
Small detachable stripes were buttoned on to the front of the white shirt-like blouse.
Furthermore, a soldier who becomes injured during a battle for France can immediately apply for French citizenship under a provision known as "Français par le sang versé" ("French by spilled blood").
Many former Wehrmacht personnel joined in the wake of WWII as many soldiers returning to civilian life found it hard to find reliable employment.
The Foreign Legion still uses chevrons to indicate seniority (''chevrons d'ancienneté'').
After the Rhodesians' overseas recruiting campaign for English-speakers, started in 1974, proved successful, they began recruiting French-speakers as well, in 1977.
Appointment by either: (i) passing an examination or(ii) promotion after a minimum of 14 years service(without an examination).
President de Gaulle considered disbanding it altogether but after being downsized to 8,000 men and stripped of all heavy weaponry the Legion was relocated to metropolitan France.
Foreign Legion units serving in France during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71 were distinguishable only by minor details of insignia from the bulk of the French infantry.
In 1920, decrees ordained the establishment of regiments of cavalry and artillery.
Each gold chevron, which are only worn by ordinary legionnaires and non-commissioned officers, denotes five years service in the Legion.
The 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment 1er REP was disbanded on April 30, 1961.
The KNIL was finally disbanded on 26 July 1950, seven months after the Netherlands formally recognised Indonesia as a sovereign state, and almost five years after Indonesia declared its independence.
Main operations during the Algerian War included the Battle of Algiers and the Batlle of the Frontiers carried by 60,000 soldiers including French and Foreign Legion Paratroopers.
During the First Indochina War (1946–54), the Foreign Legion saw its numbers swell.
The 1er BEP sailed to Indochina on November 12 and was then engaged in combat operations in Tonkin.
The Foreign Legion was also deployed in Cambodia, Somalia, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
French citizenship may be applied for after three years' service.
There were marked differences between the idealistic volunteers of 1914 and the hardened men of the old Legion, making assimilation difficult.
During the Mexican Campaign, 6,654 French died.
***Pionniers Groups
Nevertheless, the "leather bellies" (the nickname given to the legionnaires by the Russians because of the large cartridge pouches that they wore attached to their waist-belts), performed well.
In the Crimea itself (1854–59) a hooded coat and red or blue waist sashes were adopted for winter dress, while during the Mexican Intervention (1863–65) straw hats or sombreros were sometimes substituted for the kepi.
** 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment (1er REC), based in Camp de Carpiagne (Bouches-du-Rhône), France (armoured troops)
When parades of the Foreign Legion are opened by this unit, it is to commemorate the traditional role of the sappers "opening the way" for the troops.
As the Foreign Legion is composed of soldiers of different nationalities and backgrounds, it needed to develop an intense Esprit de Corps, which is carried out by the development of camaraderie, specific traditions, the high sense of loyalty of its legionnaires, the quality of their training and the pride of being a soldier of an élite unit.
The Foreign Legion faced the possibility of disbandment after the highly decorated 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) was readied to take part in the General's Putsch.
At the time of the Foreign Legion's centennial in 1931, a number of traditional features were reintroduced at the initiative of the then commander Colonel Rollet.
In gratitude, the city of Milan awarded, in 1909, the "commemorative medal of deliverance", which still adorns the regimental flags of the Second Regiment.
The Third Foreign Infantry Regiment adopted white tunics and trousers for walking-out dress during the 1930s and all Foreign Legion officers were required to obtain full dress uniforms in the pre-war colours of black and red from 1932 to 1939.
In 1919, the government of Spain raised the Spanish Foreign Legion and modeled it after the French Foreign Legion.
The experiment was not generally considered a success by the Rhodesian commanders, however, and the company was disbanded in early 1978.
Fall, who was a supporter of the French government, writing in the context of the First Indochina War, questioned the notion that the Foreign Legion was mainly German at that time, calling it:
