Since the beginning of the Third Republic (1871–1940), the state has not categorized people according to their alleged ethnic origins.
Native English-speaking Blacks on the island of Saint-Martin hold French nationality even though they do not speak French as a first language, while their neighbouring French-speaking Haitian immigrants speak French créole yet remain foreigners.
The 1993 reform, which defines the Nationality law, is deemed controversial by some.
He is a citizen, before being a member of a community or of a social class
Many Mexicans of French descent live in cities or states such as Zacatecas, San Luis Potosí, Sinaloa, Monterrey, Puebla, Guadalajara, and the capital, Mexico City, where French surnames such as Chairez/Chaires, Renaux, Pierres, Michel, Betancourt, Alaniz, Blanc, Ney, Jurado (Jure), Colo (Coleau), Dumas, or Moussier can be found.
An unknown number with mixed French and Lao ancestry can be found throughout Laos.
Their ancestors were Celts who came from Central Europe in the 7th century BCE (and even before, according to new research), and dominated native peoples which can't be clearly identified except the Ligures (Alps and Provence), the Iberians at the eastern bottom of the Pyrenees (south of Agde according to Avenius) and Aquitanic people (among them, the Basques) in Aquitaine.
Another Germanic people immigrated massively to Alsace: the Alamans, which explains the Alemannic German spoken there.
By the early 6th century the Franks, led by the Merovingian king Clovis I and his sons, had consolidated their hold on much of modern-day France, the country to which they gave their name.
The Franks were a Germanic tribe that overran Roman Gaul at the end of the Roman Empire.
Small but significant numbers of Frenchmen in the North and Northeast regions have relatives in Germany and Great Britain.
Over the next five centuries the two cultures intermingled, creating a hybridized Gallo-Roman culture.
Among those are television presenters Davina McCall and Louis Theroux.
By 1788 there were 8 villages populated by French colonists.
The discourse of ethno-nationalist groups such as the Front National (FN), however, advances the concept of ''Français de souche'' or "indigenous" French.
The Franks were Germanic pagans who began to settle in northern Gaul as ''laeti'', already during the Roman era.
The Dreyfus Affair and the 16 May 1877 crisis, which almost led to a monarchist ''coup d'état'' by MacMahon, are examples of this anti-republican spirit.
French entrepreneurs went to Maghreb countries looking for cheap labour, thus encouraging work-immigration to France.
Successive waves of immigrants during the 19th and 20th centuries were rapidly assimilated into French culture.
It was the Normans who, two centuries later, would go on to conquer England and Southern Italy.
It is estimated that 20,000 settlers were living in Saigon in 1945, and there were 68,430 European settlers living in Madagascar in 1958.
Thus, while the United States received 195,971 French immigrants between 1820 and 1855, 13,922 Frenchmen, most of them from the Basque Country and Béarn, left for Uruguay between 1833 and 1842.
In the 1860s, during the Second Mexican Empire ruled by Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico—which was part of Napoleon III's scheme to create a Latin empire in the New World (indeed responsible for coining the term of "Amérique latine", "Latin America" in English)-- many French soldiers, merchants, and families set foot upon Mexican soil.
In most of the cases, however, a foreigner is an immigrant, and vice versa.
The 6 June 2000 law on parity attempted to address this question.
Nevertheless, speaking French is distinct from being a French citizen.
Eventually, though, the independent duchy of Normandy was incorporated back into the French kingdom in the Middle Ages.
In Asia, a proportion of people with mixed French and Vietnamese descent can be found in Vietnam.
Some, particularly in the northern and eastern areas, had Germanic admixture (the Belgae); many of these peoples had already spoken Celtic by the time of the Roman conquest, but others seem to have spoken a Celto-Germanic creole.
This conception of the nation as being composed by a "will to live together," supported by the classic lecture of Ernest Renan in 1882, has been opposed by the French far-right, in particular the nationalist ''Front National'' ("National Front" - FN) party which claims that there is such a thing as a "French ethnic group".
Between October 1882 and December 1897, 8,413 Frenchmen settled in Chile, making up 23% of immigrants (second only after Spaniards) from this period.
This system more or less remained the same until the 1993 reform of the Nationality Code, created by the 9 January 1973 law.
It has been noted that the French view of having Gallic origins has evolved over history.
According to the 3 September 1791 Constitution, those who are born in France from a foreign father and have fixed their residency in France, or those who, after being born in foreign country from a French father, have come to France and have sworn their civil oath, become French citizens.
But it is in fact a very small amount of noble blood put into the circulation of a people that is enough to ennoble them, at least as to historical effects; this is how France, a nation so completely fallen into commonness, in practice plays on the world stage the role of a gentleman.
Many British people have French ancestry, and French remains the foreign language most learned by British people.
Paternity, against Napoléon Bonaparte's wish, became the principal criterion of nationality, and therefore broke for the first time with the ancient tradition of ''jus soli'', by breaking any residency condition toward children born abroad from French parents.
During the first half of the 19th century, Uruguay received mostly French immigrants to South America.
The latter meaning is often used in Canada, when discussing matters internal to Canada.
This new policy is symbolized by the expulsion of 101 Malians by charter.
Elsewhere in the Americas, French settlement took place in the 16th to 20th centuries.
These French Canadians arrived to work in the timber mills and textile plants that appeared throughout the region as it industrialized.
* 1975: additional condition: "to be able to express oneself in French"; they may vote at ''prud'hommes elections'' ("industrial tribunal elections") but may not be elected; foreigners may also have administrative or leadership positions in tradeunions but under various conditions
At least half of these immigrants came from Southwestern France, especially from the Basque Country, Béarn (Basses-Pyrénées accounted for more than 20% of immigrants), Bigorre and Rouergue but also from Savoy and the Paris region.
Today, there are an estimated at 300,000 French descendants in Uruguay.
For example, French speakers in Switzerland are not "French citizens".
French migration to the United Kingdom is a phenomenon that has occurred at various points in history.
At the end of the century they were almost 30,000.
By the beginning of the 17th century, some 20% of the total male population of Catalonia was made up of French immigrants.
The first French emigration in Costa Rica was a very small number to Cartago in the mid-nineteenth century.
* 1968: right to become a trade-union delegate
The debate concerning the integration of this view with the principles underlying the European Community remains open.
The 1993 reform was prepared by the Pasqua laws.
With this 1986 law, a child born in France from foreign parents can only acquire French nationality if he or she demonstrates his or her will to do so, at age 16, by proving that he or she has been schooled in France and has a sufficient command of the French language.
During the early nineteenth century, intellectuals began using the identification with Gaul instead as a unifying force to bridge divisions within French society with a common national origin myth.
Encouraging settlement was difficult, and while some immigration did occur, by 1763 New France only had a population of some 65,000.
Modern French society can be considered a melting pot, since it experienced a high rate of inward migration from the middle of the 19th century, and the government, defining France as an inclusive nation with universal values, used to advocate assimilation through which immigrants were expected to adhere to French traditional values and cultural norms.
According to a study by Ancestry.co.uk, 3 million of British people are from French descent.
The French community in Louisiana consists of the Creoles, the descendants of the French settlers who arrived when Louisiana was a French colony, and the Cajuns, the descendants of Acadian refugees from the Great Upheaval.
Since in France, the state preceded the nation, voluntary policies have taken an important place in the creation of this common cultural identity.
Therefore, according to Villalba, "a democratic nation is, by definition, multicultural as it gathers various populations, which differs by their regional origins (Auvergnats, Bretons, Corsicans or Lorrains...), their national origins (immigrant, son or grandson of an immigrant), or religious origins (Catholics, Protestants, Jews, Muslims, Agnostics or Atheists...)."
It commits young people born in France to foreign parents to solicit French nationality between the ages of 16 and 21.
There have also been periods of history when a majority of French people had other first languages (local languages such as Occitan, Catalan, Alsatian, West Flemish, Lorraine Franconian, Gallo, Picard or Ch'timi and Arpitan).
According to him, "integration is therefore the result of a double will: the nation's will to create a common culture for all members of the nation, and the communities' will living in the nation to recognize the legitimacy of this common culture".
French Argentines form the third largest ancestry group in Argentina, after Italian and Spanish Argentines.
According to Emmanuel Todd the relatively high exogamy among French Algerians can be explained by the colonial link between France and Algeria.
Many are descendants of French settlers who intermarried with local Vietnamese people.
Setting aside the quite inferior races whose intermingling with the great races would only poison the human species, I see in the future a homogeneous humanity.”
A large percentage of politicians, businessmen, professionals and entertainers in the country are of French ancestry.
But also what compensations!
This paradoxical tension between the universalist conception of the French nation and the racism inherent in colonization is most obvious in Ernest Renan himself, who went as far as advocating a kind of eugenics.
New Rochelle, New York is named after La Rochelle, France, one of the sources of Huguenot emigration to the Dutch colony; and New Paltz, New York, is one of the few non-urban settlements of Huguenots that did not undergo massive recycling of buildings in the usual redevelopment of such older, larger cities as New York City or New Rochelle.
They may be elected in workers' representation functions (Auroux laws).
However they should not be interpreted as ethnic conflicts (as appeared before in other countries like the USA and the UK) but as social conflicts born out of socioeconomic problems endangering proper integration.
In World War II, a group of over 10,000 Chileans of French descent, the majority have French relatives joined the Free French Forces and fought the Nazi occupation of France .
However, according to Patrick Weil, it was not "ethnically motivated" but "only meant that family links transmitted by the pater familias had become more important than subjecthood".
The citizen thus emancipates himself from the particularisms of identity which characterize himself to attain a more "universal" dimension.
From 1814 to 1955, inhabitants of Barcelonnette and the surrounding Ubaye Valley emigrated to Mexico by the dozens.
("What is a Nation?").
During a large part of the Third Republic (1871–1940), the Army was in its majority anti-republican (and thus counterrevolutionary).
In a 26 June 1856 letter to Arthur de Gobineau, author of ''An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races'' (1853–55) and one of the first theoreticians of "scientific racism", he wrote:
However, the Napoleonic Code would insist on ''jus sanguinis'' ("right of blood").
He went as far as advocating racial segregation there.
While Ernest Renan's arguments were also concerned by the debate about the disputed Alsace-Lorraine region, he said that not only one referendum had to be made in order to ask the opinions of the Alsatian people, but also a "daily referendum" should be made concerning all those citizens wanting to live in the French nation-state.
Henceforth, children born in France from French parents were differentiated from children born in France from foreign parents, creating a hiatus between these two categories.
In Mexico, a sizeable population can trace its ancestry to France.
* 1972: right to sit in works council and to be a delegate of the workers at the condition of "knowing how to read and write French"
The Vikings eventually intermarried with the local people, converting to Christianity in the process.
In the famously popular French comic ''Asterix'', the main characters are patriotic Gauls fight against Roman invaders while in modern days the term ''Gaulois'' is used in French to distinguish the "native" French from French of immigrant origins.
In addition to these Countries, small minorities can be found elsewhere in Asia; the majority of these living as expatriates.
The decrees of 24 October 1870 by Adolphe Crémieux granted automatic and massive French citizenship to all Jewish people of Algeria.
Some of them, coming from French-speaking communes in Lorraine or being French Swiss ''Walsers'' from the Valais canton in Switzerland, maintained for some generations the French language and a specific ethnic identity, later labelled as Banat (French: ''Français du Banat'').
Their language is still spoken as a kind of Dutch (Flemish - Low Frankish) in northern France and Frankish (Central Franconian) in German speaking Lorraine.
As of 2008, the French national institute of statistics INSEE estimated that 5,3 million foreign-born immigrants and 6,5 million direct descendants of immigrants (born in France with at least one immigrant parent) lived in France representing a total of 11.8 million and 19% of the total population in metropolitan France (62,1 million in 2008).
Philosopher Giorgio Agamben has pointed out this fact that the 1915 French law which permitted denaturalization with regard to naturalized citizens of "enemy" origins was one of the first example of such legislation, which Nazi Germany later implemented with the 1935 Nuremberg Laws.
On 30 December 1687 a community of French Huguenots settled in South Africa.
However, the success of such assimilation has recently been called into question.
French Argentines had a considerable influence over the country, particularly on its architectural styles and literary traditions, as well as on the scientific field.
Indeed, the country has long valued its openness, tolerance and the quality of services available.
Therefore, social exclusion may lead to deprivation of citizenship.
In 1805, when the French were forced out of Saint-Domingue (Haiti), 35,000 French settlers were given lands in Cuba.
Even though this mass settlement approached the size of the settlement of the French settlement of Quebec, it has assimilated into the English-speaking mainstream to a much greater extent than other French colonial groups and has left few traces of cultural influence.
Hence, by 1968, Jews of North African origin comprised the majority of the Jewish population of France.
While 90% stayed in Mexico, some returned, and from 1880 to 1930, built grand mansions called ''Maisons Mexicaines'' and left a mark upon the city.
From 1713 to 1787, 30,000 colonists immigrated from France to the Saint-Domingue.
This 1851 law was in part passed because of conscription concerns.
From 1840 to 1940, around 25,000 Frenchmen immigrated to Chile.
If they do not, they are considered "illegal aliens".
The ruthless conquest of Algeria thus led to the integration of the territory as a Département of the French territory.
Descending from diverse peoples of Celtic (Gauls) origin, later mostly mixing with Italic peoples (Romans and Ligurians), and Germanic origin, which is a minority per genetic evidence (Franks, mainly in the Northeast of France), whereas the ethnonym that referred to German-speaking Franks survived to be applied to modern French.
Apart from Québécois, Acadians, Cajuns, and Métis, other populations with some French ancestry outside metropolitan France include the ''Caldoches'' of New Caledonia, Louisiana Creole people of the United States, the so-called ''Zoreilles'' and ''Petits-blancs'' of various Indian Ocean islands, as well as populations of the former French colonial empire in Africa.
This universalist conception of citizenship and of the nation has influenced the French model of colonization.
After Spain, this makes France the second largest European ethnicity in the country.
Since the mid-1980s, the government has let newcomers retain their distinctive cultures and traditions and required from them a mere integration but French citizens have equated their nationality with citizenship however, as French law still does so.
The bulk of French immigrants arrived in Mexico during the 19th and early 20th centuries.
The majority of immigrants were coming from the Basque Country, Béarn and Bigorre.
French citizenship has been defined for a long time by three factors: integration, individual adherence, and the primacy of the soil (''jus soli'').
During the ''Ancien Régime'' (before the 1789 French revolution), ''jus soli'' (or "right of territory") was predominant.
The European treaties have formally permitted movement and European citizens enjoy formal rights to employment in the state sector (though not as trainees in reserved branches, e.g., as magistrates).
This classic French republican non-essentialist conception of nationality is officialized by the French Constitution, according to which "French" is a nationality, and not a specific ethnicity.
Much of the UK's mediaeval aristocracy was descended from Franco-Norman migrants at the time of the Norman Conquest of England, and also during the Angevin Empire of the Plantagenet dynasty.
Approximately 5,000 in Vietnam are of pure French descent, however, this number is disputed.
Due to World War II, a group of exiled French (mostly soldiers and families orphaned) migrated to the country.
Most French people speak the French language as their mother tongue, but certain languages like Norman, Occitan, Auvergnat, Corsican, Euskara, French Flemish and Breton remain spoken in certain regions (see Language policy in France).
Some argue that this privation of nationality and citizenship does not square with their contribution to the national economic efforts, and thus to economic growth.
Most of these originally settled in the Cape Colony, but have since been quickly absorbed into the Afrikaner population.
Large numbers of people of French ancestry outside Europe speak other first languages, particularly English, throughout most of North America (except French Canada), Spanish or Portuguese in southern South America, and Afrikaans in South Africa.
However, despite its occasional nativist usage, the Gaulish identity has also been embraced by French of non-native origins as well: notably, Napoleon III, whose family was ultimately of Corsican and Italian roots, identified France with Gaul and Vercingetorix, and declared that "New France, ancient France, Gaul are one and the same moral person."
Furthermore, some authors who have insisted on the "crisis of the nation-state" allege that nationality and citizenship are becoming separate concepts.
It was estimated that 14,000 Frenchmen were living in Brazil in 1912, 9% of the 149,400 Frenchmen living in Latin America, the second largest community after Argentina (100,000).
No doubt if the noble elements mixed in the blood of a people happened to disappear completely, then there would be a demeaning equality, like that of some Eastern states and in some respects China.
However, women still suffer from under-representation in the political class.
Therefore, modern French nationality law combines four factors: paternality or 'right of blood', birth origin, residency and the will expressed by a foreigner, or a person born in France to foreign parents, to become French.
Many people in these countries still bear French names.
former prime minister Dominique de Villepin who lived the majority of his life abroad).
According to Dominique Schnapper, "The classical conception of the nation is that of an entity which, opposed to the ethnic group, affirms itself as an open community, the will to live together expressing itself by the acceptation of the rules of a unified public domain which transcends all particularisms".
Vercingetorix, the Gaulish chieftain who tried to unite the various Gallic tribes of the land against Roman encroachment but was ultimately vanquished by Julius Caesar, is often revered as a "first national hero".
At the turn of the 20th century, there were 5,000 French families from the Barcelonnette region registered with the French Consulate in Mexico.
The large impact of North African and Arab immigration is the greatest and has brought racial, socio-cultural and religious questions to a country seen as homogenously European, French and Christian for thousands of years.
* Inhabitants of the colonies: the 7 May 1946 law meant that soldiers from the "Empire" (such as the ''tirailleurs'') killed during World War I and World War II were not citizens.
Nevertheless, militaries do not benefit from the whole of public liberties, as the 13 July 1972 law on the general statute of militaries specify.
The United States is home to an estimated 13 to 16 million people of French descent, or 4 to 5 percent of the US population, particularly in Louisiana, New England and parts of the Midwest.
Most French people speak the French language as their mother tongue, but certain languages like Norman, Occitan, Auvergnat, Corsican, Basque, French Flemish, Franconian and Breton remain spoken in certain regions ''(see Language policy in France)''.
In any cases, rights of foreigners in France have improved over the last half-century:
The Brazilian Imperial Family originates from the Portuguese House of Braganza and the last emperor's heir and daughter, Isabella, married Prince Gaston d'Orleans, Comte d'Eu, a member of the House of Orléans, a cadet branch of the Bourbons, the French Royal Family.
The adjective "French" can be used to mean either "French citizen" or "French-speaker", and usage varies depending on the context, with the former being common in France.
Ernest Renan described this republican conception in his famous 11 March 1882 conference at the Sorbonne, ''Qu'est-ce qu'une nation?''
Gaul was militarily conquered in 58-51 BCE by the Roman legions under the command of General Julius Caesar (except the south-east which had already been conquered about one century earlier).
However, this universal ideal, rooted in the 1789 French Revolution ("bringing liberty to the people"), suffered from the racism that impregnated colonialism.
This has led various authors (Philippe Van Parijs, Jean-Marc Ferry, Alain Caillé, André Gorz) to theorize a guaranteed minimum income which would impede exclusion from citizenship.
Between 1848 and 1939, 1 million people with French passports emigrated to other countries.
They can be found in Haiti, Cuba (refugees from the Haitian Revolution) and Uruguay.
Unlike elsewhere in Europe, France experienced relatively low levels of emigration to the Americas, with the exception of the Huguenots, due to a lower birthrate than in the rest of Europe.
* Women: until the Liberation, they were deprived of the right to vote.
* Young people: the July 1974 law, voted at the instigation of president Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, reduced from 21 to 18 the age of majority.
Between 1956 and 1967, about 235,000 North African Jews from Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco also immigrated to France due to the decline of the French empire and following the Six-Day War.
Current president of Chile, Michelle Bachelet is of French origin, as was dictator Augusto Pinochet.
They also may become administrators in public structures such as Social security banks (''caisses de sécurité sociale''), OPAC (which administers HLMs), Ophlm...
With something akin to Latin culture, the French immigrants quickly assimilated into mainstream Chilean society.
Before the French Revolution, it divided social classes, with the peasants identifying with the native Gauls while the aristocracy identified with the Franks.
Large numbers of Huguenots are known to have settled in the United Kingdom (ab 50 000), Ireland, in Protestant areas of Germany (especially the city of Berlin) (ab 40 000), in the Netherlands (ab 50 000), in South Africa and in North America.
The second Pasqua law on "immigration control" makes regularisation of illegal aliens more difficult and, in general, residence conditions for foreigners much harder.
These people number approximately 16,000 in Cambodia, among this number, approximately 3,000 are of pure French descent.
According to the census of 1865, out of 23,220 foreigners established in Chile, 2,483 were French, the third largest European community in the country after Germans and Englishmen.
Thus, in Algeria, the Crémieux decrees at the end of the 19th century gave French citizenship to north African Jews, while Muslims were regulated by the 1881 Indigenous Code.
English and Dutch colonies of pre-Revolutionary America attracted large numbers of French Huguenots fleeing religious persecution in France.
There is increasing dissatisfaction with, and within, growing ethno-cultural enclaves (''communautarisme'').
It was estimated that 10,000 Frenchmen were living in Chile in 1912, 7% of the 149,400 Frenchmen living in Latin America.
There are nearly seven million French speakers out of nine to ten million people of French and partial French ancestry in Canada.
A large number of foreigners have traditionally been permitted to live in France and succeeded in doing so.
Thus, it gave French nationality to the child of a foreigner, if both are born in France, except if the year following his coming of age he reclaims a foreign nationality (thus prohibiting dual nationality).
In the 18th century and early 19th century, a small migration of French emigrated by official invitation of the Habsburgs to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, now the nations of Austria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Serbia and Romania.
The French mind turns little to ethnographic considerations: France has little belief in race, ...
Most of them settled in the country between 1884 and 1925 (8,008 from 1819 to 1883, 25,727 from 1884 to 1925, 6,648 from 1926 to 1940).
In France, the conception of citizenship teeters between universalism and multiculturalism, especially in recent years.
There are currently an estimated 400,000 French people in the United Kingdom, most of them in London.
From 1819 to 1940, 40,383 Frenchmen immigrated to Brazil.
The Canadian province of Quebec (2006 census population of 7,546,131), where more than 95 percent of the people speak French as either their first, second or even third language, is the center of French life on the Western side of the Atlantic; however, French settlement began further east, in Acadia.
Does that mean total decadence?
In New England, the vast majority of French immigration in the 19th and early 20th centuries came not from France, but from over the border in Quebec, the Quebec diaspora.
The 2005 French riots in some troubled and impoverished suburbs (''les quartiers sensibles'') were an example of such tensions.
A small French descent group also subsequently arrived from Latin America (Argentina, Chile and Uruguay) in the 1970s.
According to historian Eric Hobsbawm, "the French language has been essential to the concept of 'France'," although in 1789, 50 percent of the French people did not speak it at all, and only 12 to 13 percent spoke it fairly well; even in oïl language zones, it was not usually used except in cities, and even there not always in the outlying districts.
* 1992: for European Union citizens, right to vote at the European elections, first exercised during the 1994 European elections, and at municipal elections (first exercised during the 2001 municipal elections).
According to its principles, France has devoted itself to the destiny of a ''proposition nation'', a generic territory where people are bounded only by the French language and the assumed willingness to live together, as defined by Ernest Renan's "''plébiscite de tous les jours''" ("daily referendum" on the willingness to live together, in Renan's 1882 essay "Qu'est-ce qu'une nation?
Renan's non-essentialist definition, which forms the basis of the French Republic, is diametrically opposed to the German ethnic conception of a nation, first formulated by Fichte.
In just a few months in 1962, 900,000 pied noir settlers left Algeria in the most massive relocation of population in Europe since the World War II.
In 1863, 1,650 French citizens were registered in Chile.
The first Pasqua law, in 1986, restricts residence conditions in France and facilitates expulsions.
Villalba thus shows that any democratic nation characterize itself by its project of transcending all forms of particular memberships (whether biological - or seen as such, ethnic, historic, economic, social, religious or cultural).
The French came to Chile in the 18th century, arriving at Concepción as merchants, and in the mid-19th century to cultivate vines in the haciendas of the Central Valley, the homebase of world-famous Chilean wine.
France was one of the first countries to implement denaturalization laws.
This ''plébiscite de tous les jours'' might be compared to a social contract or even to the classic definition of consciousness as an act which repeats itself endlessly.
* 1982: those conditions are suppressed, only the function of ''conseiller prud'hommal'' is reserved to those who have acquired French nationality.
Many established textile businesses between Mexico and France.
by its citizenship.
The pace of industrial growth attracted millions of European immigrants over the next century, with especially large numbers arriving from Poland, Belgium, Portugal, Italy, and Spain.
On the other hand, a Frenchman born abroad may be considered an immigrant (e.g.
Emperor Maximilian's consort, Carlota of Mexico, a Belgian princess, was a granddaughter of Louis-Philippe of France.
The Araucanía Region also has an important number of people of French ancestry, as the area hosted settlers arrived by the second half of the 19th century as farmers and shopkeepers.
