Abercrombie was recalled and replaced by Jeffery Amherst, victor at Louisbourg.
An early important political response to the opening of hostilities was the convening of the Albany Congress in June and July, 1754.
France concentrated its forces against Prussia and its allies in the European theatre of the war.
The situation in New France was further exacerbated by a poor harvest in 1757, a difficult winter, and the allegedly corrupt machinations of François Bigot, the intendant of the territory.
Céloron threatened "Old Briton" with severe consequences if he continued to trade with the British.
The colonial governments were used to operating independently of each other and of the government in London, a situation that complicated negotiations with Native tribes.
These attempts were met with increasingly stiff resistance, until troops were called in so that representatives of the Crown could safely perform their duties.
Washington surrendered; he negotiated a withdrawal under arms.
"Seven Years" refers to events in Europe, from the official declaration of war in 1756 to the signing of the peace treaty in 1763.
In conjunction, Shirley was made aware that the French were massing for an attack on Fort Oswego in his absence when he planned to attack Fort Niagara.
Beset by delays of all kinds, the expedition was finally ready to sail from Halifax, Nova Scotia in early August.
France's colonial presence north of the Caribbean was reduced to the islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, confirming Great Britain's position as the dominant colonial power in eastern North America.
With Abercrombie pinned down at Albany, Montcalm slipped away and led the successful attack on Oswego in August.
In January they ambushed British rangers near Ticonderoga.
One of Washington's men reported that the Canadian force was accompanied by Shawnee, Delaware, and Mingo native warriors—just those whom Tanaghrisson was seeking to influence.
In Europe, the North American theater of the Seven Years' War usually is not given a separate name.
To cut vital supplies to Louisbourg, Nova Scotia's Governor Charles Lawrence ordered the deportation of the French-speaking Acadian population from the area.
They set back any British hopes for campaigns on Lake Ontario, and endangered the Oswego garrison, already short on supplies.
Johnson's advance stopped at Fort William Henry, and the French withdrew to Ticonderoga Point, where they began the construction of Fort Carillon (later renamed Fort Ticonderoga after British capture in 1759).
Learning of a French scouting party in the area, Washington, with Tanaghrisson and his party, surprised the Canadians on May 28 in what became known as the Battle of Jumonville Glen.
Monckton's forces, including companies of Rogers' Rangers, forcibly removed thousands of Acadians, chasing down many who resisted, and sometimes committing atrocities.
None succeeded, and the main effort by Braddock proved a disaster; he lost the Battle of the Monongahela on July 9, 1755 and died a few days later.
The new British command was not in place until July.
In the meantime French ships had escaped the British blockade of the French coast, and a fleet outnumbering the British one awaited Loudoun at Louisbourg.
(The French word "Acadien" evolved to "Cadien", then to "Cajun".)
Amherst granted Vaudreuil's request that any French residents who chose to remain in the colony would be given freedom to continue worshiping in their Roman Catholic tradition, continued ownership of their property, and the right to remain undisturbed in their homes.
While many parties to the conflict blamed others (the Indians blamed the French for bringing "bad medicine" as well as denying them prizes at Fort William Henry), the disease was probably spread through the crowded conditions at William Henry after the battle.
Most of the other northern tribes sided with the French, their primary trading partner and supplier of arms.
The expedition was a disaster.
British operations in 1755, 1756 and 1757 in the frontier areas of Pennsylvania and New York all failed, due to a combination of poor management, internal divisions, effective Canadian scouts, French regular forces, and Indian warrior allies.
The historian Fred Anderson suggests that Tanaghrisson was acting to gain the support of the British and regain authority over his own people.
They had been inclined to support the French, with whom they had long trading relationships.
His schemes to supply the colony inflated prices and were believed by Montcalm to line his pockets and those of his associates.
Later he was commissioned as a colonel of the Western New York Militia.
The war pitted the colonies of British America against those of New France, with both sides supported by military units from their parent countries of Great Britain and France, as well as by Native American allies.
He had a road built to the headwaters of LeBoeuf Creek.
In 1758 the Pennsylvania government successfully negotiated the Treaty of Easton, in which a number of tribes in the Ohio Country promised neutrality in exchange for land concessions and other considerations.
The British formed an aggressive plan of operations for 1755.
It began with a dispute over control of the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers, called the Forks of the Ohio, and the site of the French Fort Duquesne  (within present-day Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania).
He intensely disliked the French (whom he accused of killing and eating his father).
Many of the older colonies had land claims that extended arbitrarily far to the west, as the extent of the continent was unknown at the time their provincial charters were granted.
Some were sent to colonize places as diverse as French Guiana and the Falkland Islands; these latter efforts were unsuccessful.
Because of its large frontier, Virginia had several companies of British regulars.
The Iroquois sent runners to the manor of William Johnson in upstate New York.
The change of control in Florida also prompted most of its Spanish Catholic population to leave.
France ceded its territory east of the Mississippi to Great Britain.
These actions contributed to the eventual formal declarations of war in spring 1756.
But, as the territory was also claimed by Pennsylvania, both colonies began pushing for action to improve their respective claims.
Following the treaty, King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 on October 7, 1763, which outlined the division and administration of the newly conquered territory, and to some extent continues to govern relations between the government of modern Canada and the First Nations.
The British resettled many Acadians throughout its North American provinces, but many went to France, and some went to New Orleans, which they had expected to remain French.
The Crown, seeking sources of revenue to pay off the debt, attempted to impose new taxes on its colonies.
The expedition covered about  between June and November 1749.
Leaving a sizable force at Fort William Henry to distract Montcalm, he began organizing for the expedition to Quebec.
Building on Vaudreuil's work harassing the Oswego garrison, Montcalm executed a strategic feint by moving his headquarters to Ticonderoga, as if to presage another attack along Lake George.
Florida's European population was a few hundred, concentrated in St. Augustine and Pensacola.
Nova Scotia, which had been captured from France in 1713, still had a significant French-speaking population.
Pitt's plan called for three major offensive actions involving large numbers of regular troops, supported by the provincial militias, aimed at capturing the heartlands of New France.
The Forbes Expedition was a British campaign in September–October 1758, with 6,000 troops led by General John Forbes to drive the French out of the contested Ohio Country.
French Canadians call it '''La guerre de la Conquête''' (the War of the Conquest) or (rarely) the '''Fourth Intercolonial War'''.
One of Tanaghrisson's men told Contrecoeur that Jumonville had been killed by British musket fire.
Most went to Cuba, including the entire governmental records from St. Augustine, although some Christianized Yamasee were resettled to the coast of Mexico.
American historians generally use the traditional name or sometimes the Seven Years' War.
For many native populations, the elimination of French power in North America meant the disappearance of a strong ally and counterweight to British expansion, leading to their ultimate dispossession.
He spoke their languages and had become a respected honorary member of the Iroquois Confederacy in the area.
Traders married daughters of chiefs, creating high-ranking unions.
At the Chautauqua Portage (near present-day Barcelona, New York), the expedition moved inland to the Allegheny River, which it followed to the site of present-day Pittsburgh.
Although the Spanish takeover of the Louisiana territory (which was not completed until 1769) had modest repercussions, the British takeover of Spanish Florida resulted in the westward migration of tribes that did not want to do business with the British, and a rise in tensions between the Choctaw and the Creek, historic enemies whose divisions the British at times exploited.
He purchased their construction tools to continue building what became Fort Duquesne.
The British Superintendent for Indian Affairs in the New York region and beyond, Johnson was known to the Iroquois as ''Warraghiggey'', meaning "He who does great things."
The British were supported in the war by the Iroquois Six Nations, and also by the Cherokee – until differences sparked the Anglo-Cherokee War in 1758.
In September 1760, and before any hostilities erupted, Governor Vaudreuil negotiated from Montreal a capitulation with General Amherst.
The policies he introduced in those lands disturbed large numbers of Indians, and contributed to the outbreak in 1763 of the conflict known as Pontiac's Rebellion.
This traditional name continues as the standard in the United States, but it obscures the fact that Indians fought on both sides of the conflict, and that this was part of the Seven Years' War, a much larger conflict between France and Great Britain.
A massive outbreak of smallpox among western tribes led many of them to stay away from trading in 1758.
The Acadians, both those captured in arms and those who had sworn the loyalty oath to His Britannic Majesty, were expelled.
French Canadians also use the term "War of Conquest" (''Guerre de la Conquête''), since it is the war in which Canada was conquered by the British and became part of the British Empire.
Traveling to Fort Le Boeuf, he threatened the French with military action, which Marin contemptuously dismissed.
In 1746, Johnson was made a colonel of the Iroquois.
Céloron continued south until his expedition reached the confluence of the Ohio and the Miami rivers, which lay just south of the village of Pickawillany, the home of the Miami chief known as "Old Briton".
He was then ordered by William Pitt, the Secretary of State responsible for the colonies, to attack Louisbourg first.
In the spring of 1753, Paul Marin de la Malgue was given command of a 2,000-man force of Troupes de la Marine and Indians.
French fur traders and trappers traveled throughout the St. Lawrence and Mississippi watersheds, did business with local tribes, and often married Indian women.
By the late 17th century, the Iroquois had pushed many tribes out of the Ohio Valley, and kept it as hunting ground by right of conquest.
The deportation of Acadians beginning in 1755 resulted in land made available to migrants from Europe and the colonies further south.
The entire international conflict is known as the ''Seven Years' War''.
Fewer lived in New Orleans, Biloxi, Mississippi, Mobile, Alabama and small settlements in the Illinois Country, hugging the east side of the Mississippi River and its tributaries.
The British, for their part, were happy to take New France, as defence of their North American colonies would no longer be an issue and also because they already had ample places from which to obtain sugar.
Bogged down by disagreements and disputes with others, including William Johnson and New York's Governor Sir Charles Hardy, Shirley's plan had little support.
They met at Albany, New York with Governor Clinton and officials from some of the other American colonies.
Scouts had reported the weakness of the British supply chain, so he ordered an attack against the forts Shirley had erected at the Oneida Carry.
Marin constructed a second fort at Fort Le Boeuf (present-day Waterford, Pennsylvania), designed to guard the headwaters of LeBoeuf Creek.
Orders for the deportation were given by William Shirley, Commander-in-Chief, North America, without direction from Great Britain.
Frontiers from between Nova Scotia and Acadia in the north, to the Ohio Country in the south, were claimed by both sides.
Native Americans were likewise driven off their land to make way for settlers from New England.
Colonel Monckton, in the sole British success that year, captured Fort Beauséjour in June 1755, cutting the French fortress at Louisbourg off from land-based reinforcements.
When war broke out, the French used their trading connections to recruit fighters from tribes in western portions of the Great Lakes region (an area not directly subject to the conflict between the French and British), including the Huron, Mississauga, Ojibwa, Winnebago, and Potawatomi.
The French population numbered about 75,000 and was heavily concentrated along the St. Lawrence River valley, with some also in Acadia (present-day New Brunswick and parts of Nova Scotia, including Île Royale (present-day Cape Breton Island)).
Approximately 1,000 British soldiers were killed or injured.
Since Tanaghrisson had promised support to the British, Washington continued toward Fort Duquesne and met with the Mingo leader.
Over dinner, Washington presented Saint-Pierre with the letter from Dinwiddie demanding an immediate French withdrawal from the Ohio Country.
The issues of conflicting territorial claims between British and French colonies in North America were turned over to a commission to resolve, but it reached no decision.
Braddock (with George Washington as one of his aides) led about 1,500 army troops and provincial militia on an expedition in June 1755 to take Fort Duquesne.
The invasion failed both militarily and politically, as Pitt again planned significant campaigns against New France, and sent funds to Britain's ally on the mainland, Prussia, and the French Navy failed in the 1759 naval battles at Lagos and Quiberon Bay.
To counter the French military presence in Ohio, in October 1753 Dinwiddie ordered the 21-year-old Major George Washington (whose brother was another Ohio Company investor) of the Virginia Regiment to warn the French to leave Virginia territory.
The outcome was one of the most significant developments in a century of Anglo-French conflict.
They succeeded in capturing territory in surrounding colonies and ultimately  the city of Quebec (1759).
At the start of the war, no French regular army troops were stationed in North America, and few British troops.
Conflicts between the colonies, accomplished through raiding parties that included Indian allies, had taken place for decades, leading to a brisk trade in European colonial captives from either side.
The notable exception was the French seizure of St. John's, Newfoundland.
While en route, Washington learned of Trent's retreat.
The conflict is known by multiple names.
After Washington had returned to Williamsburg, Dinwiddie ordered him to lead a larger force to assist Trent in his work.
Included in its provisions was the reservation of lands west of the Appalachian Mountains to its Indian population, a demarcation that was at best a temporary impediment to a rising tide of westward-bound settlers.
When these forces arrived at the fort on April 16, Contrecœur generously allowed Trent's small company to withdraw.
Vaudreuil and Montcalm were minimally resupplied in 1758, as the British blockade of the French coastline limited French shipping.
Further south the Southeast interior was dominated by Siouan-speaking Catawba, Muskogee-speaking Creek and Choctaw, and the Iroquoian-speaking Cherokee tribes.
Loudoun, a capable administrator but a cautious field commander, planned one major operation for 1757: an attack on New France's capital, Quebec.
This series of attacks on frontier forts and settlements required the continued deployment of British troops, and was not resolved until 1766.
The disputes also extended into the Atlantic Ocean, where both powers wanted access to the rich fisheries of the Grand Banks off Newfoundland.
When accommodations were made in the Quebec Act in 1774 to address this and other issues, religious concerns were raised in the largely Protestant Thirteen Colonies over the advance of "popery"; the Act maintained French Civil law, including the seigneurial system, a medieval code soon to be removed from France within a generation by the French Revolution.
Word of the British military plans leaked to France well before Braddock's departure for North America.
"Old Briton" ignored the warning.
In his extensively detailed report, Céloron wrote, "All I can say is that the Natives of these localities are very badly disposed towards the French, and are entirely devoted to the English.
When he arrived in Albany, Abercrombie refused to take any significant actions until Loudoun approved them.
Their territories often encompassed land claimed by multiple colonies.
British settlers outnumbered the French 20 to 1 with a population of about 1.5 million ranged along the eastern coast of the continent, from Nova Scotia and Newfoundland in the north, to Georgia in the south.
It went up the St. Lawrence, continued along the northern shore of Lake Ontario, crossed the portage at Niagara, and followed the southern shore of Lake Erie.
These acts ultimately led to the start of the American Revolutionary War.
In the aftermath, Montcalm and the Indians under his command disagreed about the disposition of prisoners' personal effects.
On March 17, 1752, the Governor-General of New France, Marquis de la Jonquière, died and was temporarily replaced by Charles le Moyne de Longueuil.
Mohawk Chief Hendrick, Speaker of their tribal council, insisted that the British abide by their obligations and block French expansion.
Leaving Fort Le Boeuf early on December 16, Washington and his party arrived in Williamsburg on January 16, 1754.
The continuing British activity in the Ohio territories prompted Longueuil to dispatch another expedition to the area under the command of Charles Michel de Langlade, an officer in the Troupes de la Marine.
Britain also claimed Rupert's Land, where the Hudson's Bay Company traded for furs with local tribes.
His objective was to punish the Miami people of Pickawillany for not following Céloron's orders to cease trading with the British.
In the March Battle of Fort Bull, French forces destroyed the fort and large quantities of supplies, including 45,000 pounds of gunpowder.
In February they launched a daring raid against the position across the frozen Lake George, destroying storehouses and buildings outside the main fortification.
Though the British later lost the Battle of Sainte-Foy west of Quebec (1760), the French ceded Canada in accordance with the Treaty of Paris (1763).
There Céloron buried lead plates engraved with the French claim to the Ohio Country.
Washington left with a small party, picking up along the way Jacob Van Braam as an interpreter; Christopher Gist, a company surveyor working in the area; and a few Mingo led by Tanaghrisson.
In British America, wars were often named after the sitting British monarch, such as King William's War or Queen Anne's War.
To the north, the Mi'kmaq and the Abenaki were engaged in Father Le Loutre's War and still held sway in parts of Nova Scotia, Acadia, and the eastern portions of the province of Canada, as well as much of present-day Maine.
When the withdrawal began, some of Montcalm's Indian allies, angered at the lost opportunity for loot, attacked the British column, killing and capturing several hundred men, women, children, and slaves.
In addition to renewing the efforts to capture Niagara, Crown Point and Duquesne, he proposed attacks on Fort Frontenac on the north shore of Lake Ontario and an expedition through the wilderness of the Maine district and down the Chaudière River to attack the city of Quebec.
Disappointed, Céloron returned to Montreal in November 1749.
As he moved south, he drove off or captured British traders, alarming both the British and the Iroquois.
Fighting took place primarily along the frontiers between New France and the British colonies, from Virginia in the south to Newfoundland in the north.
In a second British action, Admiral Edward Boscawen fired on the French ship ''Alcide'' on June 8, 1755, capturing her and two troop ships.
His permanent replacement, the Marquis Duquesne, did not arrive in New France until 1752 to take over the post.
They viewed the economic value of the Caribbean islands' sugar cane to be greater and easier to defend than the furs from the continent.
These dates do not correspond with the fighting on mainland North America, where the fighting between the two colonial powers was largely concluded in six years, from the Battle of Jumonville Glen in 1754 to the capture of Montreal in 1760.
In 1755, the British captured  Fort Beauséjour on the border separating Nova Scotia from Acadia; soon afterwards they ordered the expulsion of the Acadians (1755-1764).
The grant required that it settle 100 families in the territory, and construct a fort for their protection.
In 1749 the British government gave land to the Ohio Company of Virginia for the purpose of developing trade and settlements in the Ohio Country.
Abercrombie saved something from the disaster when he sent John Bradstreet on an expedition that successfully destroyed Fort Frontenac, including caches of supplies destined for New France's western forts and furs destined for Europe.
In early August, Montcalm and 7,000 troops besieged the fort, which capitulated with an agreement to withdraw under parole.
French irregular forces (Canadian scouts and Indians) harassed Fort William Henry throughout the first half of 1757.
Supplies for use in the projected attack on Niagara were cached at Fort Bull.
The British failures in North America, combined with other failures in the European theater, led to the fall from power of Newcastle and his principal military advisor, the Duke of Cumberland.
After the disastrous 1757 British campaigns (resulting in a failed expedition against Louisbourg and the Siege of Fort William Henry, which was followed by Indian torture and massacres of British victims), the British government fell.
It was attacked by French soldiers and Indian warriors ambushing them from up in trees and behind logs.
During that time in Europe, on May 18, 1756, England formally declared war on France, which expanded the war into Europe, which was later to be known as the Seven Years' War.
William Pitt came to power and significantly increased British military resources in the colonies at a time when France was unwilling to risk large convoys to aid the limited forces it had in New France.
New France was defended by about 3,000 troupes de la marine, companies of colonial regulars (some of whom had significant woodland combat experience).
More than any other factor, the cutting off of supplies to Louisbourg led to its demise.
The Creek and Cherokee were subject to diplomatic efforts by both the French and British to gain either their support or neutrality in the conflict.
Tanaghrisson, a chief of the Mingo, who were remnants of Iroquois and other tribes who had been driven west by colonial expansion.
He had primarily been concerned about the extended supply line to the forts on the Ohio, and had sent Baron Dieskau to lead the defenses at Frontenac against Shirley's expected attack.
Newcastle replaced him in January 1756 with Lord Loudoun, with Major General James Abercrombie as his second in command.
Most British colonies mustered local militia companies, generally ill trained and available only for short periods, to deal with native threats, but did not have any standing forces.
In between the French and the British, large areas were dominated by native tribes.
In response, King Louis XV dispatched six regiments to New France under the command of Baron Dieskau in 1755.
Céloron's expedition force consisted of about 200 Troupes de la marine and 30 Indians.
He first constructed Fort Presque Isle (near present-day Erie, Pennsylvania) on Lake Erie's south shore.
Others migrated to places like Saint-Domingue, and fled to New Orleans after the Haitian Revolution.
Even before his return to Montreal, reports on the situation in the Ohio Country were making their way to London and Paris, each side proposing that action be taken.
At a meeting in Albany in December 1755, he laid out his plans for 1756.
Braddock called for a retreat.
The third invasion was stopped with the improbable French victory in the Battle of Carillon, in which 3,600 Frenchmen famously and decisively defeated Abercrombie's force of 18,000 regulars, militia and Native American allies outside the fort the French called Carillon and the British called Ticonderoga.
Newcastle and Pitt joined in an uneasy coalition in which Pitt dominated the military planning.
Saint-Pierre said, "As to the Summons you send me to retire, I do not think myself obliged to obey it."
After several months of negotiations, the government of the Duke of Newcastle decided to send an army expedition the following year to dislodge the French.
Many troops from North America were reassigned to participate in further British actions in the West Indies, including the capture of Spanish Havana when Spain belatedly entered the conflict on the side of France, and a British expedition against French Martinique in 1762, led by (the now) Major General Robert Monckton.
While their population centers were along the coast, the settlements were growing into the interior.
He completed the 1752 Treaty of Logstown in which the local Indians, through their "Half-King" Tanacharison and an Iroquois representative, agreed to terms that included permission to build a "strong house" at the mouth of the Monongahela River (the site of present-day Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania).
France chose to cede the former, but was able to negotiate the retention of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, two small islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, along with fishing rights in the area.
This led to ongoing alarms along the western frontiers, with streams of refugees returning east to get away from the action.
The aftermath of the siege may have contributed to the transmission of smallpox into remote Indian populations; as some Indians were reported to have traveled from beyond the Mississippi to participate in the campaign and returned afterward having been exposed to European carriers.
When Clinton did not respond to his satisfaction, Chief Hendrick said that the "Covenant Chain", a long-standing friendly relationship between the Iroquois Confederacy and the British Crown, was broken.
When Céloron's expedition arrived at Logstown, the Native Americans in the area informed Céloron that they owned the Ohio Country and that they would trade with the British regardless of the French.
The great French fortress at Louisbourg in Nova Scotia was captured after a siege.
In 1755, six colonial governors in North America met with General Edward Braddock, the newly arrived British Army commander, and planned a four-way attack on the French.
The '''French and Indian War''' (1754–1763) comprised the North American theater of the worldwide Seven Years' War of 1756-1763.
The British, intending to blockade French ports, sent out their fleet in February 1755, but the French fleet had already sailed.
When Johnson was seen as the larger threat, Vaudreuil sent Dieskau to Fort St. Frédéric to meet that threat.
In Canada, both French-speaking and English-speaking Canadians refer to both the European and North American conflicts as the Seven Years' War (''Guerre de Sept Ans'').
Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre, who succeeded Marin as commander of the French forces after the latter died on October 29, invited Washington to dine with him.
By this time, in eastern North America Spain claimed only the province of Florida; it controlled Cuba and other territories in the West Indies that became military objectives in the Seven Years' War.
Whenever he encountered British merchants or fur-traders, Céloron informed them of the French claims on the territory and told them to leave.
In 1750 Christopher Gist, acting on behalf of both Virginia and the company, explored the Ohio territory and opened negotiations with the Indian tribes at Logstown.
