On 17 June, during a stop for repairs after the kayaks had been attacked by a walrus, Nansen thought he heard sounds of a dog barking, and of voices.
Nansen's first task on his return was to write his account of the voyage.
''Fram'' left Christiania on 24 June 1893, cheered on by thousands of well-wishers.
We all have a Land of Beyond to seek in our life—what more can we ask?
A strong enough ship might therefore enter the frozen Siberian sea, and drift to the Greenland coast via the pole.
He invented the "Nansen sledge" with broad, ski-like runners, the "Nansen cooker" to improve the heat efficiency of the standard spirit stoves then in use, and the layer principle in polar clothing, whereby the traditionally heavy, awkward garments were replaced by layers of lightweight material.
Nansen followed the line of the pack northwards to a position recorded as 78°49′N, 132°53′E, before ordering engines stopped and the rudder raised.
He began his studies at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania (renamed Oslo in 1925) early in 1881.
The world was quickly informed by telegram of Nansen's safe return, but as yet there was no news of ''Fram''.
The foundation of the League at this time was providential as far as Nansen was concerned, giving him a new outlet for his restless energy.
Although Nansen refused to meet his own countryman and fellow-explorer Carsten Borchgrevink (whom he considered a fraud), he gave advice to Robert Falcon Scott on polar equipment and transport, prior to the 1901–04 Discovery Expedition.
Supplies would be manhauled on specially designed lightweight sledges.
Store Frøen's rural surroundings shaped the nature of Nansen's childhood.
The rest of the party, according to Nansen, "hailed the change of plan with acclamation".
Nansen, although not by inclination a politician, had spoken out on the issue on several occasions in defence of Norway's interests.
The long winter months were devoted mainly to skiing, which Nansen began to practice at the age of two, on improvised skis.
From thousands of applicants, Nansen selected a party of twelve.
Following continued turmoil between the centre-right parties, there was even an independent petition in 1926 gaining some momentum that proposed for Nansen to head a centre-right national unity government on a balanced budget program, an idea he did not reject.
He was given a non-religious state funeral before cremation, after which his ashes were laid under a tree at Polhøgda.
He supported a settlement of the post-war reparations issue, and championed Germany's membership of the League, which was granted in September 1926 after intensive preparatory work by Nansen.
He and his wife, the British princess Maud, were crowned in the Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim on 22 June 1906.
He confided in his diary: "I have become more and more convinced we ought to turn before time."
Within the League's Assembly, Nansen spoke out on many issues besides those related to refugees.
Taking the weekly mail steamer south, Nansen and Johansen reached Hammerfest on 18 August, where they learned that ''Fram'' had been sighted.
Nansen's sporting prowess continued to develop; at 18 he broke the world one-mile (1.6&nbsp;km) skating record, and in the following year won the national cross-country skiing championship, a feat he would repeat on 11 subsequent occasions.
Towards the end of April they observed the tracks of an Arctic fox, the first trace they had seen of a living creature other than their dogs since leaving ''Fram''.
The secret of success was to work ''with'' this current.
The idea of an expedition across the Greenland icecap grew in Nansen's mind throughout his Bergen years.
'', which had been crushed and sunk in June 1881 on the opposite side of the Arctic Ocean, off the Siberian coast.
His main assistant in this endeavour was Vidkun Quisling, the future Nazi collaborator and head of a Norwegian puppet government during the Second World War.
She had not passed over the pole, nor exceeded Nansen's northern mark.
During the 20 years following his return from the Arctic, Nansen devoted most of his energies to scientific work.
There were fears in Norway that should the Marxist-oriented Labour Party gain power it would introduce a revolutionary programme.
She had emerged from the ice north and west of Spitsbergen, as Nansen had predicted, and was now on her way to Tromsø.
Nevertheless, he continued to publish occasional papers.
Kayaks were built, to be carried on the sledges until needed for the crossing of open water.
In February 1930, aged 68, he took a short break in the mountains with two old friends, who noted that Nansen was slower than usual and appeared to tire easily.
The Nansen family originated in Denmark.
The first weeks in the ice were frustrating, as the drift moved unpredictably, sometimes north, sometimes south; by 19 November ''Fram's'' latitude was south of that at which she had entered the ice.
With an overall length of  and a beam of , the length-to-beam ratio of just over three gave the ship its stubby appearance, justified by Archer thus: "A ship that is built with exclusive regard to its suitability for Nansen's object must differ essentially from any known vessel."
Mohn surmised that the location of the artefacts indicated the existence of an ocean current, flowing from east to west all the way across the polar sea, possibly over the pole itself.
As the war progressed, the loss of Norway's overseas trade led to acute shortages of food in the country, which became critical in April 1917 when the United States entered the war and placed extra restrictions on international trade.
At school, Nansen worked adequately without showing any particular aptitude.
Eva was three years older than Nansen, and despite the evidence of this first meeting, was an accomplished skier.
Nansen was popular in England, and got on well with King Edward, though he found court functions and diplomatic duties disagreeable; "frivolous and boring" was his description.
After muted Christmas and New Year celebrations, in slowly improving weather they began to prepare to leave their refuge, but it was 19 May 1896 before they were able to resume their journey.
There was in various transatlantic countries such an abundance of maize, that the farmers had to burn it as fuel in their railway engines.
By 1901 Nansen's family had expanded considerably.
However, after an impassioned speech Nansen secured the support of the Norwegian parliament, which voted him a grant.
He worked on behalf of refugees until his sudden death in 1930, after which the League established the Nansen International Office for Refugees to ensure that his work continued.
As the ship's northerly progress continued at a rate rarely above a mile (1.6&nbsp;km) a day, Nansen began privately to consider a new plan—a dog sledge journey towards the pole.
The Nansen Office faced great difficulties, in part arising from the large numbers of refugees from the European dictatorships during the 1930s.
After visiting the region, Nansen presented the Assembly with a modest plan for the irrigation of 36,000 hectares (360&nbsp;km2 or 139 square miles) on which 15,000 refugees could be settled.
In later life he settled in Copenhagen, becoming the city's ''borgmester'' in 1654.
Through such experiences Nansen developed a marked degree of self-reliance.
They would then cross to Spitzbergen where they would find a ship to take them home.
Among the many tributes paid to him subsequently was that of Lord Robert Cecil, a fellow League of Nations delegate, who spoke of the range of Nansen's work, done with no regard for his own interests or health: "Every good cause had his support.
After reaching the pole, Nansen and Johansen would make for the nearest known land, the recently discovered and sketchily mapped Franz Josef Land.
It would then drift west with the current towards the pole and beyond it, eventually reaching the sea between Greenland and Spitsbergen.
He was a fearless peacemaker, a friend of justice, an advocate always for the weak and suffering."
The boys thought I had broken my neck, but as soon as they saw there was life in me ... a shout of mocking laughter went up."
On 8 December he set out for home, but before he reached Polhøgda he learned, from a telegram, that Eva had died.
Studies took second place to sports, or to expeditions into the forests where he would live "like Robinson Crusoe" for weeks at a time.
In a tense situation the Swedish government agreed to Norway's request that the dissolution should be put to a referendum of the Norwegian people.
The balance of funding was met by private donations and from a national appeal.
Towards the end of August, as the weather grew colder and travel became increasingly difficult, Nansen decided to camp for the winter.
He also wrote a book, ''Norway and the Union with Sweden'', specifically to promote Norway's case abroad.
Sir Allen Young, a veteran of the searches for Sir John Franklin's lost expedition, and Sir Joseph Hooker, who had sailed south with James Clark Ross in 1839–43, were equally dismissive.
The weather was generally bad; on one occasion all progress was halted for three days by violent storms and continuous rain.
The union between Norway and Sweden, imposed by the Great Powers in 1814, had been under considerable strain through the 1890s, the chief issue in question being Norway's rights to its own consular service.
The book was an instant success, and secured Nansen's long-term financial future.
They were greeted by Hans Mohn, the originator of the polar drift theory, who was in the town by chance.
After a week of travel a sextant observation indicated that they were averaging nine nautical miles a day, (17&nbsp;km; 10&nbsp;mi), putting them ahead of schedule.
This was published in 1911 as ''Nord i Tåkeheimen'' ("In Northern Mists").
"Never in my life", he said, "have I been brought into touch with so formidable an amount of suffering."
By 29 July they were  south of the point where they had left the ship.
At the same time the ships in Europe were idle, for there were no cargoes.
After a slow journey around the coast, the final port of call was Vardø, in the far north-east of Norway.
He was invited by a group of Australians to lead an expedition to Antarctica, but declined, believing that Norway's interests would be better served by a North Pole conquest.
However, at Michelsen's request he went to Berlin and then to London where, in a letter to ''The Times'', he presented Norway's legal case for a separate consular service to the English-speaking world.
Nansen was appointed president of the Norwegian Union of Defence, but had few official duties, and continued with his professional work as far as circumstances permitted.
The impoverished Greek state was unable to take them in, and so Nansen devised a scheme for a population exchange whereby half a million Turks in Greece were returned to Turkey, with full financial compensation, while further loans facilitated the absorption of the refugee Greeks into their homeland.
Nansen was able to report to the Assembly in November 1920 that around 200,000 men had been returned to their homes.
He and his party therefore spent the next seven months in Greenland, hunting, fishing and studying the life of the local inhabitants.
After 1896 his main scientific interest switched to oceanography; in the course of his research he made many scientific cruises, mainly in the North Atlantic, and contributed to the development of modern oceanographic equipment.
Nansen himself was an atheist.
Nansen calculated that, at this rate, it might take the ship five years to reach the pole.
By 26 September they had battled their way down to the edge of a fjord that ran westward towards Godthaab.
The two were equally astonished by their encounter; after some awkward hesitation Jackson asked: "You are Nansen, aren't you?
Of these, 300,000 were in Russia which, gripped by revolution and civil war, had little interest in their fate.
Biographer Roland Huntford has asserted that Nansen and Kathleen Scott enjoyed a brief love affair.
To overcome this, Nansen devised a document that became known as the "Nansen passport", a form of identity for stateless persons that was in time recognised by more than 50 governments, and which allowed refugees to cross borders legally.
All had experience of outdoor life in extreme conditions, and were experienced skiers.
In 1926 Nansen was elected Rector of the University of St Andrews in Scotland, the first foreigner to hold this largely honorary position.
They had reached 86°34N on 24 April 1900, in an attempt to reach the North Pole from Franz Josef Land.
They all vanish ... it is merely a question of time."
On 17 July, with the coast still  away, Nansen decided to launch the small boats; they were within sight of the Sermilik Fjord, which Nansen believed would offer a route up on to the icecap.
The day after leaving this camp Nansen recorded: "At last the marvel has come to pass—land, land, and after we had almost given up our belief in it!"
Life was disrupted when, in the summer of 1877, Adelaide Nansen died suddenly.
However, he was able to pursue his geographical and scientific interests through contacts with the Royal Geographical Society and other learned bodies.
Nansen was enthusiastic, and made arrangements through a recent acquaintance, Captain Axel Krefting, commander of the sealer ''Viking''.
Using the toughest oak timbers available, and an intricate system of crossbeams and braces throughout its length, Archer built a vessel of extraordinary strength.
On 23 May the Storting passed the Consulate Act establishing a separate consular service.
His first words were to inform Nansen that he had been awarded his doctorate, a matter that "could not have been more remote from my thoughts at that moment".
This office received the Nobel Peace Prize for 1938.
A major problem impeding Nansen's work on behalf of refugees was that most of them lacked documentary proof of identity or nationality.
In 1910, aboard the Norwegian naval vessel ''Fridtjof'', he carried out researches in the northern Atlantic, and in 1912 he took his own yacht, ''Veslemøy'', to Bear Island and Spitsbergen.
In 1897 he accepted a professorship in zoology at the Royal Frederick University, which gave him a base from which he could tackle the major task of editing the reports of the scientific results of the ''Fram'' expedition.
The party then took a steamer up the Yenisei River to Krasnoyarsk, and travelled on the Trans-Siberian Railway to Vladivostok before turning for home.
Nansen was honoured by many nations, and his name is commemorated in numerous geographical features, particularly in the polar regions.
Nansen's chosen area of study was the then relatively unexplored field of neuroanatomy, specifically the central nervous system of lower marine creatures.
In 2004 the Royal Norwegian Navy launched the first of a series of five ''Fridtjof Nansen''-class frigates.
Without delay Nansen and Johansen sailed for Tromsø, where they were reunited with their comrades.
From then on the downward slope made travelling easier, although the terrain was difficult and the weather remained hostile.
They remained on the floe for a month.
Nansen became an expert marksman, and on one day proudly recorded that his team had shot 200 seal.
Rooted deep in the nature of every one of us is the spirit of adventure, the call of the wild—vibrating under all our actions, making life deeper and higher and nobler.
They then lashed their two kayaks together, raised a sail and made for the land.
In accordance with custom he was required to defend his work before appointed examiners acting as "devil's advocates".
On 3 June 1888 Nansen's party was picked up from the north-western Icelandic port of Ísafjörður by the sealer ''Jason''.
In between his various duties and responsibilities, Nansen had continued to take skiing holidays when he could.
The lead ship of the group is HNoMS ''Fridtjof Nansen''; two others are named after Roald Amundsen and Otto Sverdrup.
A fifth and final child, son Asmund, was born at Polhøgda in 1903.
In November Nansen announced his plan: when the ship passed latitude 83° he and Hjalmar Johansen would leave the ship with the dogs and make for the pole while ''Fram'', under Sverdrup, continued its drift until it emerged from the ice in the North Atlantic.
The crew were received by King Oscar, and Nansen, reunited with family, remained at the palace for several days as a special guest.
Competition for places on the voyage was such that reserve Army lieutenant and dog-driving expert Hjalmar Johansen signed on as ship's stoker, the only position available.
Later he was to express himself bitterly on the matter:
However, these plans remained on the drawing board.
He believed that the Assembly gave the smaller countries such as Norway a "unique opportunity for speaking in the councils of the world."
Nansen died of a heart attack, at home, on 13 May 1930.
In any event he was forestalled in this ambition by Amundsen, who flew over the pole in Umberto Nobile's airship ''Norge'' in May 1926.
From 1925 onwards he spent much time trying to help Armenian refugees, victims of Armenian Genocide at the hands of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War and further ill-treatment thereafter.
A daughter, Liv, had been born just before ''Fram'' set out; a son, Kåre was born in 1897 followed by a daughter, Irmelin, in 1900 and a second son Odd in 1901.
Nansen's main task in the following weeks was writing his account of the expedition, but he found time late in June to visit London, where he met the Prince of Wales (the future King Edward VII), and addressed a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society (RGS).
Otto Sverdrup from the Greenland expedition was appointed captain of ''Fram'' and second-in-command of the expedition.
Nordenskiöld had advised Nansen that Sami people, from Finland in the far north of Norway, were expert snow travellers, so Nansen recruited a pair, Samuel Balto and Ole Nielsen Ravna.
On 17 July the ship broke free from the ice, and early in August was back in Norwegian waters.
Despite Nansen's pleas on behalf of the starving, Russia's revolutionary government was feared and distrusted internationally, and the League was reluctant to come to its peoples' aid.
In 1900 Nansen became director of the Christiania-based International Laboratory for North Sea Research, and helped found the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea.
The party would have no line of retreat to a safe base; the only way to go would be forward, a situation that fitted Nansen's philosophy completely.
That year he renewed an acquaintance with Kathleen Scott, wife of Robert Falcon Scott whose Terra Nova Expedition had sailed for Antarctica in 1910.
Our part is to find the trail that leads to it.
Baldur and Adelaide settled at Store Frøen, an estate at Aker, a few kilometres north of Norway's capital city, Christiania (since renamed Oslo).
On 9 September ''Fram'' was escorted into Christiania's harbour and welcomed by the largest crowds the city had ever seen.
The book was translated in many languages including Norwegian, English, French, German, Russian and Armenian.
In his lifetime and thereafter, Nansen received honours and recognition from many countries.
Abruzzi had consulted him, as had the Belgian Adrien de Gerlache, each of whom took expeditions to the Antarctic.
At one point Nansen seriously considered leading a South Pole expedition himself, and asked Colin Archer to design two ships.
Its rounded hull was designed so that it would slip upwards out of the grip of packing ice.
The crew disembarked, fearing that the vessel would be crushed, but ''Fram'' proved herself equal to the danger.
Nansen chose Colin Archer, Norway's leading shipbuilder and naval architect, to design and build a suitable ship for the planned expedition.
Tributes arrived from all over the world; typical was that from the British mountaineer Edward Whymper, who wrote that Nansen had made "almost as great an advance as has been accomplished by all other voyages in the nineteenth century put together".
News of the crossing had preceded its arrival, and Nansen and his companions were feted as heroes.
After suffering a paralytic stroke in 1821 Hans Leierdahl Nansen died, leaving a four-year-old son, Baldur Fridtjof Nansen, the explorer's father.
Despite some controversy over the principle of a population exchange, the plan was implemented successfully over a period of several years.
Soon they began to see bear tracks, and by the end of May seals, gulls and whales were in evidence.
A central street in Sofia Bulgaria is named after Fridtiof Nansen, and a memorial plate is mounted on a nearby building.
Professor Robert Collett of the university's zoology department proposed that Nansen take a sea voyage, to study Arctic zoology at first hand.
However, uneven surfaces made skiing more difficult, and their speeds slowed.
They also realised that they were marching against a southerly drift, and that distances travelled did not necessarily equate to northerly progression.
Nansen accepted the position of curator of the Royal Frederick University's zoology collection, a post which carried a salary but involved no duties; the university was satisfied by the association with the explorer's name.
In the weeks before sealing started, Nansen was able to concentrate on scientific studies.
Progress was impeded by fog and ice conditions in the mainly uncharted seas.
Nansen wrote the book, ''Armenia and the Near East'' in 1923 which describes his sympathies to the plight of the Armenians in the wake of losing its independence to the Soviet Union.
Nansen donated the prize money to international relief efforts.
On 15 April 1889 the Danish ship ''Hvidbjørnen'' finally entered the harbour, and Nansen and his comrades prepared to depart.
Among the initiatives he introduced was the "Nansen passport" for stateless persons, a certificate recognised by more than 50 countries.
A week later the Greenland coast was sighted, but progress was hindered by thick pack ice.
He left before knowing the outcome of this process.
Baldur was a lawyer without ambitions for public life, who became Reporter to the Supreme Court of Norway.
'''Fridtjof Nansen''' (  ; 10 October 1861 – 13 May 1930) was a Norwegian explorer, scientist, diplomat, humanitarian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate.
Nansen published a report from the trip in ''Through Siberia''.
Nansen largely avoided involvement in domestic Norwegian politics, but in 1924 he was persuaded by the long-retired former Prime Minister Christian Michelsen to take part in a new anti-communist political grouping, the Fatherland League.
In 1922 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of the First World War and related conflicts.
She was also a celebrated classical singer who had been coached in Berlin by Désirée Artôt, one-time paramour of Tchaikovsky.
In the summer of 1913 Nansen travelled to the Kara Sea, by the invitation of Jonas Lied, as part of a delegation investigating a possible trade route between Western Europe and the Siberian interior.
Now remains only one path, the way forward, perhaps through difficulties and hardships, but forward for our country, to a free Norway".
Preparations were interrupted early in January when violent tremors shook the ship.
Without knowing the correct time, it was impossible for them to calculate their longitude and thus navigate their way accurately to Franz Josef Land.
This he did remarkably quickly, producing 300,000 words of Norwegian text by November 1896; the English translation, titled ''Farthest North'', was ready in January 1897.
This new designation reflected the general character of Nansen's more recent scientific interests.
In the short summers the main activities were swimming and fishing, while in the autumn the chief pastime was hunting for game in the forests.
In July, ''Viking'' became trapped in the ice close to an unexplored section of the Greenland coast; Nansen longed to go ashore, but this was impossible.
On 1 September 1921, prompted by the British delegate Philip Noel-Baker, he accepted the post of the League's High Commissioner for Refugees.
Through the spring and early summer ''Viking'' roamed between Greenland and Spitsbergen in search of seal herds.
The homeward voyage to Christiania was a series of triumphant receptions at every port.
When Amundsen made his controversial change of plan and set out for the South Pole, Nansen stood by him.
His main task was to work with representatives of the major European powers on an Integrity Treaty which would guarantee Norway's position.
He was to spend the next six years of his life there—apart from a six-month sabbatical tour of Europe—working and studying with leading figures such as Gerhard Armauer Hansen, the discoverer of the leprosy bacillus, and Daniel Cornelius Danielssen, the museum's director who had turned it from a backwater collection into a centre of scientific research and education.
In anticipation of this, Michelsen's government had been considering the suitability of various princes as candidates for the Norwegian throne.
Just before the party's departure, Nansen attended a formal examination at the university, which had agreed to receive his doctoral thesis.
Ten days later, as ''Fram'' approached the area in which ''Jeannette'' had been crushed, heavy pack ice was sighted at around latitude 78°N.
All this, while thirty million people in the Volga region—not far away and easily reached by our ships—were allowed to starve and die.
", and received the reply "Yes, I am Nansen."
On his return to Oslo he was laid up for several months, with influenza and later phlebitis, and was visited on his sickbed by H.M.K., Haakon VII of Norway.
By starting from the east—assuming that a landing could be made there—Nansen's would be a one-way journey towards a populated area.
A party setting out from the inhabited west coast would, he reasoned, have to make a return trip, as no ship could be certain of reaching the dangerous east coast and picking them up.
The family home, which Nansen had built in 1891 from the profits of his Greenland expedition book, was now too small.
His son, Hans Leierdahl Nansen (1764–1821), was a magistrate first in the Trondheim district, later in Jæren.
After his visit to Armenia, Nansen wrote two additional books called "Gjennem Armenia" ("Across Armenia"), published in 1927 and "Gjennem Kaukasus til Volga" ("Through Caucasus to Volga").
