Readers of ''TV Guide'' voted the cast of ''Friends'' their Best Comedy cast of all time, ranking at 29% of the votes, beating ''Seinfeld'', which registered 18%.
They liked the ones that stayed true to the series, citing the finale of ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show'' as the gold standard.
The Complete Series
(They had originally thought that there were two boys and one girl, but decided to keep the name Chandler, despite the baby turning out a girl.)
Reviews of the series finale were mixed.
The creators felt that using six equal characters, rather than emphasizing one or two, would allow for "myriad storylines and give the show legs."
Rachel gets fired from her job and accepts a new offer in Paris, but Ross, realizing he loves her, chases after her.
There are two ''Friends'' themed cafes in Pakistan as well.
The relationship ends because of their maturity differences.
At the same time, Warren Littlefield, the then-president of NBC Entertainment, was seeking a comedy involving young people living together and sharing expenses.
NBC liked the pilot script and ordered the series under another title, ''Six of One'', mainly due to the similar title it shared with the ABC sitcom ''These Friends of Mine''.
In September 1995, WEA Records released the first album of music from ''Friends'', the ''Friends Original TV Soundtrack'', containing music featured in previous and future episodes.
In the series finale, Erica gives birth to twins, to the surprise of Monica and Chandler&nbsp;— a boy, Jack (after Monica's father), and a girl, Erica (named after the birth mother).
The box set contained extended episodes, an episode guide, and original special features.
Kudrow and Cox told the Associated Press in January 2010 that they had never been approached by Crane and Kauffman to make a film version of the series.
Filming took place at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California.
The casting director shortlisted 1,000 actors who had applied for each role down to 75.
When Kauffman, Crane and Bright pitched ''Insomnia Cafe'', Littlefield was impressed that they knew who their characters were.
The majority of the storyline ideas came from the writers, although the actors added ideas.
", and a quiz video game for PlayStation 2 and PC entitled ''Friends: The One with All the Trivia''.
Phoebe becomes a surrogate mother for her brother and his wife Alice (Debra Jo Rupp).
Although Crane and Kauffman did not want LeBlanc for the role at the time, they were told by the network to cast him.
Central Perk was rebuilt as part of a museum exhibit at Warner Bros. Studios, and was shown on ''The Ellen DeGeneres Show'' in October 2008.
Those who received a callback read again in front of Crane, Kauffman and Bright.
For the remastered episodes, Warner Bros. restored previously cropped images on the left and right sides of the screen, using the original 35 mm film source, to use the entire 16:9 widescreen frame.
LeBlanc also gave the character heart, which the writers did not realize Joey had.
Monica and Chandler move in together, causing Rachel to move in with Phoebe.
Series creator David Crane wanted all six actors to be equally prominent, and the series was lauded as being "the first true 'ensemble' show."
The series ends with all the friends plus Monica and Chandler's new babies leaving the apartment, heading to Central Perk for a final cup of coffee.
The Complete Tenth Season
In fall 2001, Warner Bros.
Following the September 11 attacks, ratings increased 17% over the previous season.
In 2013, ''Friends'' ranked no.
The second season begins with Rachel waiting at the gate for Ross to declare her love for him.
Rachel realizes she loves him, too, and cancels her flight to Paris, agreeing to stay with him.
In the season finale, they end their relationship when they realize that unlike Monica, Richard does not want children.
According to a pop-culture expert at the University at Buffalo, ''Friends'' is "one of those rare shows that marked a change in American culture."
However, many obstacles stand in his way, such as the fact that he is expecting a baby with his lesbian ex-wife, Carol.
Auditions for the lead roles took place in New York and Los Angeles.
However, she discovers that he is dating Julie (Lauren Tom), someone he knew from graduate school.
Monica and Chandler prepare to move to the suburbs, and Joey becomes upset with the changes in his life.
100 on TV Guide's 100 Greatest Episodes of All-Time.
Monica and Rachel are forced to switch apartments with Joey and Chandler after losing a bet during a quiz game, but manage to switch back by bribing them with Knicks season tickets and a one-minute kiss (off-screen) between the girls.
Ross and Rachel try to get an annulment because he doesn't want to have three divorces.
She said there would never be a ''Friends'' movie as the characters had all grown up: "''Friends'' was about that time in your life when your friends are your family and once you have a family, there's no need anymore."
The first season introduces the six main characters: Rachel, Monica, Phoebe, Joey, Chandler, and Ross.
Sarah Rodman of the ''Boston Herald'' praised Aniston and Schwimmer for their acting, but felt that their characters' reunion was "a bit too neat, even if it was what most of the show's legions of fans wanted."
It is now often ranked among the all-time best TV shows.
The opening title sequence was filmed in a fountain at the Warner Bros. Ranch at 4:00&nbsp;am, while it was particularly cold for a Burbank morning.
Joey gets cast in a part in a fictional version of the soap opera ''Days of Our Lives'', but his character is killed off after conflicts with the show's writers, claiming that he writes many of his own lines.
Kauffman and Crane were not interested in the spin-off, although Bright agreed to executive produce the series with Scott Silveri and Shana Goldberg-Meehan.
More changes occurred to the series' storylines during the casting process.
Crane, Kauffman, and Bright had difficulty writing the finale, and spent several days thinking about the final scene without being able to write a word.
Phoebe and Rachel's apartment catches fire, and Rachel moves in with Joey, while Phoebe moves in with Chandler and Monica.
The director of publicity for Warner Bros., Jayne Trotman, said there was "no truth in the story", and Perry's spokeswoman added that "nothing is happening in this regard, so the rumor is false."
Rachel begins working at Bloomingdale's, an upscale department store chain, and Ross becomes jealous of her colleague, Mark.
At the end of the season, Chandler accidentally reveals that Ross loves Rachel, who realizes that she feels the same way.
Season nine begins with Ross and Rachel living together as roommates with their daughter Emma.
We had Pat the Cop."
'''''Friends''''' is an American television sitcom, created by David Crane and Marta Kauffman, which originally aired on NBC from September 22, 1994, to May 6, 2004, lasting ten seasons.
After year-long expectations that the ninth season would be the series' last, NBC signed a deal in late December 2002 to bring the series back for a final tenth season.
Crane and Kauffman presented the idea to their production partner Kevin Bright, who had served as executive producer on their HBO series ''Dream On''.
Robert Bianco of ''USA Today'' was complimentary of Schwimmer, calling him "terrific."
It was later confirmed on January 16, 2014, that the poster was made by a fan, who later apologized for misleading fans of the show.
It wrapped up the story while reminding us why we liked the show and will miss it."
The images of youth and the roles they portray are better defined and represent a lifestyle that centres around creating and sustaining relationships between friends running their own lives and seeking help from each other.
28 on TV Guide's 60 Best TV Series of All Time.
Joey lands a role on a cable television series called ''Mac and C.H.E.E.S.E.
The series also influenced the English language, according to a study by the University of Toronto that found that the characters used the emphasized word "''so''" to modify adjectives more often than any other intensifier.
For the first season, each episode is updated with color correction and sound enhancement.
It portrays a new way of living life and developing relationships which are not normally seen in conventional society.
All ten seasons have been released on DVD individually and as a box set.
Phoebe gives birth to triplets in the show's 100th episode.
While saying his vows, Ross uses the wrong name at the altar (Rachel's), to the shock of his bride and the guests.
The networks and studios are looking for young people coming in out of college."
Carter found that by "generating new hot storylines and high-decibel laughs", the series made its way "back into the hearts of its fans."
Roger Catlin of the ''Hartford Courant'' felt that newcomers to the series would be "surprised at how laughless the affair could be, and how nearly every strained gag depends on the sheer stupidity of its characters."
On September 4, 2011, ''Friends'' officially ended on E4 after the channel re-ran the series since 2004.
Joey's television series ''Mac and C.H.E.E.S.E'' is cancelled, but he is offered his job back on ''Days of Our Lives''.
With an ensemble cast starring Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matt LeBlanc, Matthew Perry and David Schwimmer, the show revolves around six friends living in Manhattan.
When it was confirmed that ''Friends'' would return for a ninth season, the news was mainly about the amount of money—$7&nbsp;million per episode—that it took to bring the series back for another season.
ET except for the first year.
''USA Today''s Robert Bianco described the finale as entertaining and satisfying, and praised it for deftly mixing emotion and humor while highlighting each of the stars.
They found the concept to be interesting, as they believed "everybody knows that feeling", and because it was also how they felt about their own lives at the time.
On September 28, 2009, a box set was released in the UK celebrating the series' 15th anniversary.
The main cast enjoyed the finale and were confident that the fans would react similarly:
Rumors of a film reemerged after the release of the ''Sex and the City'' film in 2008, which proved to be a success at the box office.
The pilot was watched by 18.60&nbsp;million American viewers, but ratings continually decreased throughout the series' two seasons, averaging 10.20&nbsp;million viewers in the first season and 7.10&nbsp;million in the second.
Although the producers always wanted to find the right stories to take advantage of being on location, ''Friends'' was never shot in New York.
The scenes were shot in a studio with three audiences each made up of 500 people.
He kneels to pick it up and turns to Rachel, still on his knees and still holding the ring.
The Complete Seventh Season
The retrospective episode was watched by fewer than 36&nbsp;million viewers, and the finale was the second most watched television broadcast of the year, only behind the Super Bowl.
Noel Holston of ''Newsday'', who had dismissed the pilot as a "so-so ''Seinfeld'' wannabe" in 1994, repudiated his earlier review after rewatching the episode, and felt like writing an apology to the writers.
November 21, 2012 (JB Hi-Fi exclusive)August 21, 2013
The series won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series in 2002, receiving nominations in 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, and 2003.
Beginning with the series' eighth season, the actors decided to submit themselves in the lead actor balloting, rather than in the supporting actor fields.
However, Littlefield found difficulty in bringing the concept to life, and found the scripts developed by NBC to be terrible.
The fifth season finale, set in Las Vegas, was filmed at Warner Bros. Studios, although Bright met people who thought it was filmed on location.
The series finale on May 6, 2004, was watched by around 52.5 million American viewers, making it the fifth most watched series finale in television history, and the most watched television episode of the 2000s decade.
", became a popular part of Western English slang, often used as a pick-up line or when greeting friends.
In 1999, a second soundtrack album entitled ''Friends Again'' was released.
Once it became apparent that the series was a favored project at NBC, Littlefield reported that he was getting calls from every agent in town, wanting their client to be a part of the series.
Kathy and Chandler later kiss, which causes drama between Chandler and Joey.
Season three takes on a significantly greater serialized format.
One in Lahore known as "Friends Cafe" and the other in Peshawar called "Central Perk".
The actors were given the salary of the least-paid cast member, meaning Aniston and Schwimmer had their salaries reduced.
A one-hour retrospective of clips from previous episodes was shown before to the airing of the episode.
''Friends'' is parodied in the twelfth season ''Murder, She Wrote'' episode "Murder Among Friends."
Rachel gives birth to baby Emma in the season finale.
Following the series finale, rumors began to emerge of a ''Friends'' film, although all were proven untrue.
Each summer (June, July, and August in the US), the producers would outline the storylines for the subsequent season.
In December 2013, following rumors suggesting that Aniston and Cox were discussing plans for a 2014 reunion, a poster titled 'The One After The 10 Year Break' went viral on the internet, claiming to be an advertisement for a reunion show.
At the beginning of the second season, production moved to the larger Stage 24, which was renamed "The Friends Stage" after the series finale.
In the U.S., 52.5&nbsp;million viewers watched the finale on May 6, 2004, making it the most watched entertainment telecast since the ''Seinfeld'' finale in 1998.
Joey develops romantic feelings for Rachel, but she does not reciprocate them.
The poster was met with excitement at first, and then anger after a tweet by Lisa Kudrow implied that the rumor was untrue.
Each 22-minute episode took six hours to film—twice the length of most sitcom tapings—mainly due to the several retakes and rewrites of the script.
November 15, 2005November 14, 2006 (re-issue)April 16, 2013 (re-issue 2013)
Ross, who has had a crush on Rachel since the two of them were in high school, constantly attempts to tell her how he feels about her.
In 2014, the series was ranked by ''Mundo Estranho'' the Best TV Series of All Time.
The series was a huge success throughout its run, and was a staple of NBC's Thursday night line-up, dubbed by the network as Must See TV.
21 on ''TV Guide'''s 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time and no.
Nick at Nite paid $500,000 per episode to air the episodes after 6&nbsp;p.m.
The six characters each have many dates and serious relationships, such as Monica with Richard Burke and Ross with Emily Waltham.
After several script rewrites and changes, including a title change to ''Six of One'' and ''Friends Like Us'', the series was finally named ''Friends''.
As the series progressed, reviews became more positive, and ''Friends'' became one of the most popular sitcoms of its time.
Season five features Monica and Chandler trying to keep their new relationship a secret from their friends.
In 1997, the episode "The One with the Prom Video" was ranked no.
In 2006, Iranian businessman Mojtaba Asadian started a Central Perk franchise, registering the name in 32 countries.
Bright blamed the collaboration between NBC executives, the studio and other producers for quickly ruining the series:
The storyline was incorporated into the season; however, when the actors feared that the storyline would make their characters unlikable, the storyline was wrapped up, until it again resurfaced in the season's finale.
For the ninth season, the writers were unsure about the amount of storyline to give to Rachel's baby, as they wanted the show neither to revolve around a baby nor pretend there to be none.
However the rest of the group loves her regardless.
Although the producers thought of ''Friends'' as "only a TV show", numerous psychologists investigated the cultural impact of ''Friends'' during the series' run.
The creators did not want Ross and Rachel to get back together so soon, and while looking for a romantic impediment, a writer suggested Joey's romantic interest in Rachel.
In Canada, the series was broadcast on Global.
Joey and his girlfriend Charlie (Aisha Tyler) break up, and she begins a relationship with Ross.
"It may have been impossible for any one episode to live up to the hype and expectations built up around the ''Friends'' finale, but this hour probably came as close as fans could have reasonably hoped.
Phoebe begins dating Mike Hannigan (Paul Rudd), and chooses to be with him over her ex-boyfriend David (Hank Azaria).
Phoebe begins a relationship with a police officer, Gary (Michael Rapaport), after finding his badge and using it as her own.
Expressed opinions varied between a signaling of the end of the sitcom genre, a small decline in the large history of the genre, and a general reduction of scripted television in favor of reality shows.
Friends has also developed an alternative family lifestyle by representing young people that live unconventional domestic lives.
Comedy Central took over the rights to air the program from October 2011.
Filming for the series began during the summer (June, July, and August in the US) of 1994 in front of a live audience, who were given a summary of the series to familiarize themselves with the six main characters; a hired comedian entertained the studio audience between takes.
The camera's last view is of all of the character's keys to the apartment on the counter table, finishing with a shot of the apartment door.
When the series was criticized for incorrectly depicting New York, with the financially struggling group of friends being able to afford huge apartments, Bright noted that the set had to be big enough for the cameras, lighting, and "for the audience to be able to see what's going on"; the apartments also needed to provide a place for the actors to execute the funny scripts.
NBC heavily promoted the series finale, which was preceded by weeks of media hype.
Domestic Cable announced that it had sold additional cable rights to ''Friends'' to Nick at Nite which began airing in the fall of 2011 (unlike the TBS and broadcast syndication airings, Nick at Nite broadcasts of the series, which began airing as part of a seven-night launch marathon on September 5, 2011, replace the end credit tag scenes with marginalized credits featuring promotions for the series and other Nick at Nite programs).
The show ranked no.
Crane argued that it was not a series for one generation, and wanted to produce a series that everyone would enjoy watching.
Jennifer Aniston revisited the set for the first time since the series finale in 2004.
Nonetheless, they divorce several episodes later.
During production of the pilot, NBC requested that the script be changed to feature one dominant storyline and several minor ones, but the writers refused, wanting to keep three storylines of equal weight.
The first season was shot on Stage 5 at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California.
Kauffman and Crane would not have signed on for an eleventh season, even if all the cast members had wanted to continue.
Phoebe and Mike get married mid-season outside the Central Perk coffee house.
Other merchandise include a ''Friends'' version of the DVD game "Scene It?
Critics commended the series as having consistently sharp writing and chemistry between the main actors.
The coffee houses also contain paintings of the various characters from the series, and televisions playing ''Friends'' episodes.
October 2, 2006November 12, 2007 (re-issue)September 28, 2009 (15th Anniversary Edition)
The seventh season mainly follows the various antics by Monica and Chandler, who begin to plan their wedding and run into financial problems which are quickly fixed by Chandler’s secret funds.
They presented the idea to Bright, and together they pitched a seven-page treatment of the show to NBC.
Warner Bros. was expected to make $200&nbsp;million in license fees and advertising from the deal.
The finale dialogue used in this series is by Chandler, making a joke for the last time.
The cast members also became best friends off-screen, and guest star Tom Selleck reported sometimes feeling left out.
In the meantime, Chandler has a hard time dealing with their breakup because it reminds him of his parents' divorce.
The writers found that they had to adjust the characters they had written to suit the actors, and the discovery process of the characters occurred throughout the first season.
In the weeks after NBC's pick up of ''Friends'', Crane, Kauffman and Bright reviewed sent-in scripts that writers had originally prepared for other series, mainly unproduced ''Seinfeld'' episodes.
Kauffman acknowledged that Joey's character became "this whole new being", and that "it wasn't until we did the first Thanksgiving episode that we realized how much fun Monica's neuroses are."
In the fourth season premiere, Ross and Rachel briefly reconcile after Ross pretends to read a long letter that Rachel wrote for him, but continues to insist that the two were on a break so they break up again.
Rachel arrives at Central Perk after running away from her wedding to her fiancé Barry and moves into an apartment with her friend Monica from high school.
A wide range of ''Friends'' merchandise has been produced by various companies.
David Crane and Marta Kauffman began developing three new television pilots that would premiere in 1994 after their sitcom ''Family Album'' was cancelled by CBS in 1993.
The similarities between the two consist of both sitcoms taking place in Manhattan, a group of white adults who are funny and have similar character traits.
In the Republic of Ireland each season of the show made its European debut on RTÉ2.
Meanwhile, in the post-delivery room, Joey looks for some tissue for an upset Rachel, picks up Ross's jacket, and the ring falls to the floor.
The authors of ''Friends Like Us: The Unofficial Guide to Friends'' thought that the cast was "trying just a little too hard", in particular Perry and Schwimmer.
The most critical parts of the finale were shot without an audience, and with a minimum number of crew members.
Following the finales of ''Friends'' and ''Frasier'', media critics speculated about the fate of the sitcom genre.
Joey dates Kathy (Paget Brewster), a girl that Chandler has a crush on.
The Complete Third Season
The idea of a romantic interest between Ross and Rachel emerged during the period when Kauffman and Crane wrote the pilot script.
To support herself, Rachel becomes a waitress at Central Perk, a Manhattan coffeehouse where the group often hangs out; when not there, the six are usually at Monica and Rachel's nearby West Village apartment, or Joey and Chandler's across the hall.
The Complete Fifth Season
Bright felt that filming outside the studio made episodes less funny, even when shooting on the lot outside, and that the live audience was an integral part of the series.
The original executive producers were Kevin S. Bright, Marta Kauffman, and David Crane.
''Friends'' received acclaim throughout its run, becoming one of the most popular television shows of all time.
Rachel and Emma move in with Joey in the middle of the season, and Rachel develops romantic feelings for him, while the rest of the "friends" try hard to get Ross and Rachel back together.
''Friends'' has aired in Australia on the Seven Network (season 1 only), Nine Network (season 2–10), Network Ten (2007–09, repeats), on GEM (a sub-channel of the Nine Network), and on pay TV channel TV Hits formerly aired on Arena, 111 Hits.
Although NBC was unable to bring in enough advertising revenue from commercials to cover the costs, the series was integral to the Thursday night schedule, which brought high ratings and profits to the other television series.
Local NBC affiliates organized viewing parties around the U.S., including an event at Universal CityWalk featuring a special broadcast of the finale on an outdoor Astrovision screen.
1 spot with its eighth season.
Monica and Chandler try to conceive a baby of their own but find out that they are unable to, due to health restrictions.
Jennifer Aniston, Matthew Perry and Lisa Kudrow were cast based on their auditions.
The Complete Fourth Season
Netflix added all ten seasons of ''Friends'' in high definition to their streaming service in the United States on January 1, 2015.
The cast members received different salaries in the second season, beginning from the $20,000 range to $40,000 per episode.
The audience is able to identify with the program through the troubles seen on weekly episodes.
James Michael Tyler, who plays the Central Perk manager in the series, Gunther, attended the grand opening of the Dubai cafe, where he worked as a waiter.
