They "flash" this when attacked, adopting a pose that exposes the vivid colouring on their bellies.
The tiny yellow-striped pygmy eleuth (''Eleutherodactylus limbatus'') lays eggs singly, burying them in moist soil.
At the end of the tadpole stage, a frog undergoes metamorphosis in which its body makes a sudden transition into the adult form.
The tiny male ''Colostethus subpunctatus'' stands guard over his egg cluster, laid under a stone or log.
The subsequent need to transport hatched tadpoles to a water body required an even more intense form of parental care.
Their lower jaws usually have three rows of keradonts surrounded by a horny beak, but the number of rows can vary and the exact arrangements of mouth parts provide a means for species identification.
Both male and female pouched frogs (''Assa darlingtoni'') guard their eggs, which are laid on the ground.
Female frogs prefer males that produce sounds of greater intensity and lower frequency, attributes that stand out in a crowd.
The earliest known amphibians that were more closely related to frogs than to salamanders are ''Triadobatrachus massinoti'', from the early Triassic period of Madagascar (about 250 million years ago), and ''Czatkobatrachus polonicus'', from the Early Triassic of Poland (about the same age as ''Triadobatrachus'').
Some frogs in the tropical rainforest are specially adapted for gliding from tree to tree or parachuting to the forest floor.
In some species there are satellite males who have no territory and do not call.
A cladogram showing the relationships of the different families of frogs in the clade Anura can be seen in the table above.
After this it is able to leave the water as a miniature, air-breathing frog.
Certain frogs change colour between night and day, as light and moisture stimulate the pigment cells and cause them to expand or contract.
In some extremely capable jumpers, such as the Cuban tree frog (''Osteopilus septentrionalis'') and the northern leopard frog (''Rana pipiens''), the peak power exerted during a jump can exceed that which the muscle is theoretically capable of producing.
In some species such as the bullfrog, the size of the tympanum indicates the sex of the frog; males have tympani that are larger than their eyes while in females, the eyes and tympani are much the same size.
lessonae'') and the marsh frog (''P.
After six or seven weeks, they are ready for metamorphosis.
Other renderings of frog calls into speech include "brekekekex koax koax", the call of the marsh frog (''Pelophylax ridibundus'') in ''The Frogs'', an Ancient Greek comic drama by Aristophanes.
It can alter its direction of travel and navigate distances of up to  between trees.
Adult frogs generally have a carnivorous diet consisting of small invertebrates, but omnivorous species exist and a few feed on fruit.
By measuring the toad's uptake of oxygen it was found that hopping was an inefficient use of resources during sustained locomotion but was a useful strategy during short bursts of high-intensity activity.
It usually splits down the middle of the back and across the belly, and the frog pulls its arms and legs free.
It breeds in temporary pools that form after rains.
This has been suggested as an adaptation to their lifestyles; because the transformation into frogs happens very fast, the tail is made of soft tissue only, as bone and cartilage take a much longer time to be broken down and absorbed.
This metamorphosis typically lasts only 24 hours, and is initiated by production of the hormone thyroxine.
Frogs have ten pairs of cranial nerves which pass information from the outside directly to the brain, and ten pairs of spinal nerves which pass information from the extremities to the brain through the spinal cord.
When the eggs hatch, he transports the tadpoles on his back to a temporary pool, where he partially immerses himself in the water and one or more tadpoles drop off.
The surface of the toe pads is formed from a closely packed layer of flat-topped, hexagonal epidermal cells separated by grooves into which glands secrete mucus.
They have a tympanum on each side of their heads which is involved in hearing and, in some species, is covered by skin.
has triangular pupils and the tomato frog (''Dyscophus spp.'')
Males have vocal cords and make a range of croaks, particularly in the breeding season, and in some species they also have vocal sacs to amplify the sound.
The lower jaw transforms into the big mandible of the carnivorous adult, and the long, spiral gut of the herbivorous tadpole is replaced by the typical short gut of a predator.
The red-legged running frog (''Kassina maculata'') has short, slim hind limbs unsuited to jumping.
Because of this fossorial existence, it was first described in 2003, being new to the scientific community at that time, although previously known to local people.
Their tails are stiffened by a notochord, but does not contain any bony or cartilaginous elements except for a few vertebrae at the base which forms the urostyle during metamorphosis.
The tiny northern cricket frog (''Acris crepitans'') can "skitter" across the surface of a pond with a series of short rapid jumps.
In many species the male is smaller and slimmer than the female.
Being cold-blooded, they make efficient use of the food they eat with little energy being used for metabolic processes, while the rest is transformed into biomass.
One of these, the green burrowing frog (''Scaphiophryne marmorata''), has a flattened head with a short snout and well-developed metatarsal tubercles on its hind feet to help with excavation.
Madagascan burrowing frogs are less fossorial and mostly bury themselves in leaf litter.
The origins and evolutionary relationships between the three main groups of amphibians are hotly debated.
This species can also climb trees and shrubs, and does so at night to catch insects.
At the breeding site, the male mounts the female and grips her tightly round the body.
These toe pads, moistened by the mucus, provide the grip on any wet or dry surface, including glass.
They are first stretched while the frog is still in the crouched position, then they are contracted before being stretched again to launch the frog into the air.
The European common toad (''Bufo bufo'') adopts a characteristic stance when attacked, inflating its body and standing with its hindquarters raised and its head lowered.
Frogs have three eyelid membranes: one is transparent to protect the eyes underwater, and two vary from translucent to opaque.
The coastal tailed frog (''Ascaphus truei'') lives in mountain streams in North America and does not vocalize.
The tadpoles rely on the yolks of the eggs for nourishment.
Some glands on the hands and chest of males are specialized to produce sticky secretions to aid in amplexus.
A distress call, emitted by some frogs when they are in danger, is produced with the mouth open resulting in a higher-pitched call.
Poisonous frogs tend to advertise their toxicity with bright colours, an adaptive strategy known as aposematism.
In 1852, H. F. Stannius used a frog's heart in a procedure called a Stannius ligature to demonstrate the ventricle and atria beat independently of each other and at different rates.
In 1935, 3000 toads were liberated in the sugar cane fields of Queensland, Australia, in an attempt to control cane beetles such as ''Dermolepida albohirtum'', the larvae of which damage and kill the canes.
This arrangement enables detection of the territorial and breeding calls of their conspecifics.
However, in modern frogs, almost all muscles have been modified to contribute to the action of jumping, with only a few small muscles remaining to bring the limb back to the starting position and maintain posture.
It then proceeds to the small intestine (duodenum and ileum) where most digestion occurs.
These contain bufotenin (5-MeO-DMT), a psychoactive compound that has been used in modern times as a recreational drug.
Other chemicals isolated from the skins of frogs may offer resistance to HIV infection.
The excretory system is similar to that of mammals and there are two kidneys that remove nitrogenous products from the blood.
Among prolonged breeders, males usually arrive at the breeding site first and remain there for some time whereas females tend to arrive later and depart soon after they have spawned.
Many frogs return to the bodies of water in which they developed as larvae.
Similar glands in tree frogs produce a glue-like substance on the adhesive discs of the feet.
The burrowing frogs of Australia have a rather different lifestyle.
Tadpoles mostly have large tail fins which provide thrust when the tail is moved from side to side.
They have highly specialized rasping mouth parts suitable for herbivorous, omnivorous or planktivorous diets.
The teeth are mainly used to grip the prey and keep it in place till swallowed, a process assisted by retracting the eyes into the head.
Some frogs obtain poisons from the ants and other arthropods they eat.
The combination of the two alkaloid toxins batrachotoxin and homobatrachotoxin is so powerful, one frog contains enough poison to kill an estimated 22,000 mice.
They are impaled on pointed sticks and may be heated over a fire to maximise the quantity of poison that can be transferred to the dart.
The bullfrog (''Rana catesbeiana'') crouches down with eyes closed and head tipped forward when threatened.
They bred freely, competed with native frog species, ate bees and other harmless native invertebrates, had few predators in their adopted habitats, and poisoned pets, carnivorous birds, and mammals.
The tunnel is filled with soil and the toad hibernates in a small chamber at the end.
This is likely to be an underestimate because it excludes 1,427 species for which evidence was insufficient to assess their status.
The frog has a highly developed nervous system that consists of a brain, spinal cord and nerves.
More than one third of species are considered to be threatened with extinction and over one hundred and twenty are believed to have become extinct since the 1980s.
With the digits splayed, the limbs outstretched, and these flaps spread, it can glide considerable distances, but is unable to undertake powered flight.
Some species have bony plates embedded in their skin, a trait that appears to have evolved independently several times.
Some members of the subfamily Phyllomedusinae have opposable toes on their feet.
In some cases, the full leg still grows, but in others it does not, although the frog may still live out its normal lifespan with only three limbs.
The strategy employed by juvenile American toads (''Bufo americanus'') on being approached by a snake is to crouch down and remain immobile.
The reticulated leaf frog (''Phyllomedusa ayeaye'') has a single opposed digit on each fore foot and two opposed digits on its hind feet.
This same technique was later used to create Dolly the sheep, and their experiment was the first time a successful nuclear transplantation had been accomplished in higher animals.
No teeth are in the lower jaw and frogs usually swallow their food whole.
In 1952, Robert Briggs and Thomas J.
In cool damp conditions, the colour will be darker than on a hot dry day.
Frogs have served as experimental animals throughout the history of science.
It has many glands, particularly on the head and back, which often exude distasteful and toxic substances.
Frogs are widely distributed, ranging from the tropics to subarctic regions, but the greatest concentration of species diversity is in tropical rainforests.
In these species, fertilization is internal and females give birth to fully developed juvenile frogs, except ''L.
Some frogs have no tongue and just stuff food into their mouths with their hands.
The muscular system has been similarly modified.
Emerging infectious diseases, including chytridiomycosis  and ranavirus, are also devastating populations.
Sometimes the two roles are reversed and a calling male gives up its territory and becomes a satellite.
Two other species, the Kokoe poison dart frog (''Phyllobates aurotaenia'') and the black-legged dart frog (''Phyllobates bicolor'') are also used for this purpose.
It can be shot out and retracted at great speed.
Salientia (Latin ''salere'' (''salio''), "to jump") is the name of the total group that includes modern frogs in the order Anura as well as their close fossil relatives, the "proto-frogs" or "stem-frogs".
Some frogs protect their offspring inside their own bodies.
The common features possessed by these proto-frogs include 14 presacral vertebrae (modern frogs have eight or 9), a long and forward-sloping ilium in the pelvis, the presence of a frontoparietal bone, and a lower jaw without teeth.
Among these species are the gastric-brooding frogs of Australia and the golden toad of Costa Rica.
Toads have a more sinister reputation.
This often results in annual migrations involving thousands of individuals.
Almost all frog species are carnivorous as adults, preying on invertebrates, including arthropods, worms, snails, and slugs.
In general, the length of the egg stage depends on the species and the environmental conditions.
There is no penis, and sperm is ejected from the cloaca directly onto the eggs as the female lays them.
Initial results in many of these countries were positive, but it later became apparent that the toads upset the ecological balance in their new environments.
Frogs range in size from the recently discovered  ''Paedophryne amauensis'' of Papua New Guinea to the  goliath frog (''Conraua goliath'') of Cameroon.
They tend to be portrayed as benign, ugly, and clumsy, but with hidden talents.
It normally makes no use of its rudimentary lungs but will sometimes raise and lower its body rhythmically while on the lake bed to increase the flow of water around it.
When the frog applies pressure, the cells adhere to irregularities on the surface and the grip is maintained through surface tension.
Typical of them is Wallace's flying frog (''Rhacophorus nigropalmatus'') from Malaysia and Borneo.
The grey foam-nest tree frog (''Chiromantis xerampelina'') is even able to turn white to minimize the chance of overheating.
When the floor of the mouth is compressed, air is forced into the lungs.
The larvae that emerge from the eggs, known as tadpoles (or occasionally polliwogs), typically have oval bodies and long, vertically flattened tails.
The African bullfrog (''Pyxicephalus''), which preys on relatively large animals such as mice and other frogs, has cone shaped bony projections called odontoid processes at the front of the lower jaw which function like teeth.
During extreme conditions, some frogs enter a state of torpor and remain inactive for months.
Frogs feature prominently in folklore, fairy tales, and popular culture.
The webbing between the toes of the hind feet increases the area of the foot and helps propel the frog powerfully through the water.
Frogs live on all the continents except Antarctica, but they are not present on certain islands, especially those far away from continental land masses.
Some frogs, such as the poison dart frogs, are especially toxic.
Tadpoles are highly vulnerable to being eaten by fish, newts, predatory diving beetles, and birds, such as kingfishers.
They advertise their presence by calling, often alternating their croaks with neighbouring frogs.
Frog mutations and genetic defects have increased since the 1990s.
The tibia, fibula, and tarsals have been fused into a single, strong bone, as have the radius and ulna in the fore limbs (which must absorb the impact on landing).
Once this happened, the desiccating terrestrial environment demands that one or both parents keep them moist to ensure their survival.
As it digs, the toad wriggles its hips from side to side to sink into the loose soil.
They proposed that the date of lissamphibian diversification should be placed in the Permian, rather less than 300 million years ago, a date in better agreement with the palaeontological data.
Females of many frog species, such as the common tree frog (''Polypedates leucomystax''), reply to the male calls, which acts to reinforce reproductive activity in a breeding colony.
The dish is also common in French-speaking parts of Louisiana, particularly the Cajun areas of Southern Louisiana as well as New Orleans, United States.
Features such as warts and skin folds are usually on ground-dwelling frogs, for whom smooth skin would not provide such effective camouflage.
A different call is emitted by a male frog or unreceptive female when mounted by another male.
''Allobates zaparo'' is not poisonous, but mimics the appearance of two different toxic species with which it shares a common range in an effort to deceive predators.
The eyes assist in the swallowing of food as they can be retracted through holes in the skull and help push food down the throat.
At this time, the tail is being lost and locomotion by means of limbs is only just becoming established.
Because predation of eggs and larvae is high in large water bodies, some frog species started to lay their eggs on land.
'''Frogs''' are a diverse and largely carnivorous group of short-bodied, tailless amphibians composing the order '''Anura''' (Ancient Greek ''an-,'' without + ''oura'', tail).
Here they are immersed in a frothy, viscous liquid that contains some nourishment to supplement what they obtain from the yolks of the eggs.
She ceases to feed and stops secreting stomach acid.
The granular poison frog (''Oophaga granulifera'') looks after its tadpoles in a similar way.
The native people of South America extract poison from these frogs to apply to their weapons for hunting, although few species are toxic enough to be used for this purpose.
from Australia, now probably extinct, swallows her fertilized eggs, which then develop inside her stomach.
Because the cochlea is short, frogs use electrical tuning to extend their range of audible frequencies and help discriminate different sounds.
While these smaller rearing sites are free from competition, they also lack sufficient nutrients to support a tadpole without parental assistance.
When not submerged, a frog breathes by a process known as buccal pumping.
Frogs that live in or visit water have adaptations that improve their swimming abilities.
In certain other species, the skin at the top of the head is compacted and the connective tissue of the dermis is co-ossified with the bones of the skull (exostosis).
The relative size of the cerebrum in frogs is much smaller than it is in humans.
It has a shallow burrow in the summer from which it emerges at night to forage.
Members of the West African genus ''Nimbaphrynoides'' are unique among frogs in that they are viviparous; ''Limnonectes larvaepartus'', ''Eleutherodactylus jasperi'' and members of the Tanzanian genus ''Nectophrynoides'' are the only frogs known to be ovoviviparous.
This position is called amplexus and may be held for several days.
They may be the only part of an otherwise submerged frog to protrude from the water.
The hind limbs of ancestral frogs presumably contained pairs of muscles which would act in opposition (one muscle to flex the knee, a different muscle to extend it), as is seen in most other limbed animals.
The tip of the projectile is rubbed over the back of the frog and the dart is launched from a blowgun.
Frogs are generally recognized as exceptional jumpers and, relative to their size, the best jumpers of all vertebrates.
This enables the force to be transferred from the legs to the body during a leap.
After three to six weeks, he travels to a pond and the eggs hatch into tadpoles.
Sometimes during the tadpole stage, one of the developing rear legs is eaten by a predator such as a dragonfly nymph.
The irises of the southern toad (''Anaxyrus terrestris'') are patterned so as to blend in with the surrounding camouflaged skin.
In certain species, such as the Northern red-legged frog (''Rana aurora'') and the wood frog (''Rana sylvatica''), symbiotic unicellular green algae are present in the gelatinous material.
has fully webbed toes, whereas those of White's tree frog (''Litoria caerulea''), an arboreal species, are only a quarter or half webbed.
King cloned a frog by somatic cell nuclear transfer.
Like the latter, ''Prosalirus'' did not have greatly enlarged legs, but had the typical three-pronged pelvic structure of modern frogs.
The cane toad (''Bufo marinus'') has been known to survive 24 years in captivity, and the American bullfrog (''Rana catesbeiana'') 14 years.
The eyes of most frogs are located on either side of the head near the top and project outwards as hemispherical bulges.
The former detects high frequencies and the latter low frequencies.
They were associated with the devil; in John Milton's ''Paradise Lost'', Satan was depicted as a toad pouring poison into Eve's ear.
Some frogs use bluff or deception.
Frog species that changed from the use of larger to smaller phytotelmata have evolved a strategy of providing their offspring with nutritive but unfertilized eggs.
An apparently lifeless, frozen frog can resume respiration and the heart beat can restart when conditions warm up.
Its lungs are similar to those of humans, but the chest muscles are not involved in respiration, and no ribs or diaphragm exist to help move air in and out.
In the Pipidae, with the exception of ''Hymenochirus'', the tadpoles have paired anterior barbels, which make them resemble small catfish.
The Great Plains narrow-mouthed toad (''Gastrophryne olivacea'') has been described as having a gait that is "a combination of running and short hops that are usually only an inch or two in length".
Frog populations have declined dramatically since the 1950s.
The Pacific tree frog (''Pseudacris regilla'') produces the onomatopoeic "ribbit" often heard in films.
Although toads are avoided by many predators, the common garter snake (''Thamnophis sirtalis'') regularly feeds on them.
The number of malformations among frogs is on the rise and an emerging fungal disease, chytridiomycosis, has spread around the world.
This posture is also used to prevent water loss and involves the frog squatting close to the substrate with its hands and feet tucked under its chin and body.
Larger, stronger males tend to have deeper calls and maintain higher quality territories.
The skin of the frog is glandular, with secretions ranging from distasteful to toxic.
Frogs' skins vary in colour from well-camouflaged dappled brown, grey and green to vivid patterns of bright red or yellow and black to advertise toxicity and warn off predators.
Some frog species are adapted to a cold environment.
Frogs are used in cloning research and other branches of embryology.
This is because a hormone, human chorionic gonadotropin, is present in substantial quantities in the urine of women during pregnancy.
However, others have suggested that ''Gerobatrachus hottoni'' was only a dissorophoid temnospondyl unrelated to extant amphibians.
The tail fin and tip is fragile and will easily tear, which is seen as an adaptation to escape from predators which tries to grasp them by the tail.
They are typically red, orange, or yellow, often with contrasting black markings on their bodies.
Captive frogs and toads have been recorded as living for up to 40 years, an age achieved by a European common toad (''Bufo bufo'').
Explosive breeders tend to call in unison creating a chorus that can be heard from far away.
Egg and tadpole development is very fast in comparison to those of most other frogs, so breeding can be completed before the pond dries up.
There are blood vessels near the surface of the skin and when a frog is underwater, oxygen diffuses directly into the blood.
True toads completely lack teeth, but most frogs have them, specifically pedicellate teeth in which the crown is separated from the root by fibrous tissue.
When they are on land, much water is lost by evaporation from the skin.
Some frog calls are so loud that they can be heard up to a mile away.
Frogs typically lay their eggs in water.
larvaepartus'', which give birth to tadpoles.
The alkaloid epibatidine, a painkiller 200 times more potent than morphine is made by some species of poison dart frogs, although it can also cause death by lung paralysis.
Typically, amplexus takes place in the water, the female releases her eggs and the male covers them with sperm; fertilization is external.
In the former, adopted by the majority of species, adult frogs  at certain times of year assemble at a pond, lake or stream to breed.
Some species of frog have adaptations that allow them to survive in oxygen deficient water.
