Twelve hydrogen fueling stations had been built in 11 cities in Japan by 2012.
Solid acid fuel cells (SAFCs) are characterized by the use of a solid acid material as the electrolyte.
Another disadvantage of SOFC systems is slow start-up time, making SOFCs less useful for mobile applications.
The world's first fuel-cell boat HYDRA used an AFC system with 6.5&nbsp;kW net output.
These fuel cells are at an early stage of development.
Professor Jeremy P. Meyers estimated in 2008 that cost reductions over a production ramp-up period will take about 20 years after fuel-cell cars are introduced before they will be able to compete commercially with current market technologies, including gasoline internal combustion engines.
Suzuki Motor Corp. and IE have announced a joint venture to accelerate the commercialization of zero-emission vehicles.
In 2015, ''Clean Technica'' listed some of the disadvantages of hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.
In 1955, W. Thomas Grubb, a chemist working for the General Electric Company (GE), further modified the original fuel cell design by using a sulphonated polystyrene ion-exchange membrane as the electrolyte.
Disadvantages of co-generation systems include slow ramping up and down rates, high cost and short lifetime.
In 1959, a team led by Harry Ihrig built a 15&nbsp;kW fuel cell tractor for Allis-Chalmers, which was demonstrated across the U.S. at state fairs.
Grove later sketched his design, in 1842, in the same journal.
The first fuel cells were invented in 1838.
The University of Minnesota owns the patent rights to this type of system
Fuel cells are very useful as power sources in remote locations, such as spacecraft, remote weather stations, large parks, communications centers, rural locations including research stations, and in certain military applications.
To deliver the desired amount of energy, the fuel cells can be combined in series to yield higher voltage, and in parallel to allow a higher current to be supplied.
As with SOFCs, MCFC disadvantages include slow start-up times because of their high operating temperature.
While these efficiencies are not approached in most real world applications, high-temperature fuel cells (solid oxide fuel cells or molten carbonate fuel cells) can theoretically be combined with gas turbines to allow stationary fuel cells to come closer to the theoretical limit.
SOFCs are capable of internally reforming light hydrocarbons such as methane (natural gas), propane and butane.
*Daimler AG, with 36 experimental buses powered by Ballard Power Systems fuel cells, completed a successful three-year trial in eleven cities, in January 2007.
The Japanese ENE FARM project will pass 100,000 FC mCHP systems in 2014, 34.213 PEMFC and 2.224 SOFC were installed in the period 2012-2014, 30,000 units on LNG and 6,000 on LPG.
There the Stuart Island Energy Initiative has built a complete, closed-loop system: Solar panels power an electrolyzer, which makes hydrogen.
The gold wire around the cell ensures the collection of electric current.
Joseph Romm, the author of ''The Hype About Hydrogen'' (2005), devoted two articles in 2014 to updating his critique of the use of fuel cells in cars.
While a much cheaper lead–acid battery might return about 90%, the electrolyzer/fuel cell system can store indefinite quantities of hydrogen, and is therefore better suited for long-term storage.
His letter discussed current generated from hydrogen and oxygen dissolved in water.
This was called a "solid polymer electrolyte fuel cell" (SPEFC) in the early 1970s, before the proton exchange mechanism was well-understood.
The oxygen ions then travel through the electrolyte to react with hydrogen gas at the anode.
power for remote locations including gas/oil wellsites, communication towers, security, weather stations), and in the military sector.
The theoretical maximum efficiency of any type of power generation system is never reached in practice, and it does not consider other steps in power generation, such as production, transportation and storage of fuel and conversion of the electricity into mechanical power.
Norway plans to build a network of hydrogen station between the major cities, starting in 2017.
In the 1960s, Pratt and Whitney licensed Bacon's U.S. patents for use in the U.S. space program to supply electricity and drinking water (hydrogen and oxygen being readily available from the spacecraft tanks).
The first proof-of-concept SAFCs were developed in 2000 using cesium hydrogen sulfate (CsHSO4).
The fuel cell was a stack design that allowed the fuel cell to be integrated with the plane's aerodynamic surfaces.
However, when the fuel cell's waste heat is used to heat a building in a cogeneration system this efficiency can increase to 85%.
:''Anode Reaction'': CO32− + H2 → H2O + CO2 + 2e−
At low temperatures, solid acids have an ordered molecular structure like most salts.
SFC Energy is a German manufacturer of direct methanol fuel cells for a variety of portable power systems.
Later in 1959, Bacon and his colleagues demonstrated a practical five-kilowatt unit capable of powering a welding machine.
* Mass transport loss (depletion of reactants at catalyst sites under high loads, causing rapid loss of voltage).
There are many types of fuel cells, but they all consist of an anode, a cathode, and an electrolyte that allows positively charged hydrogen ions (or protons) to move between the two sides of the fuel cell.
The electrolyte is a substance specifically designed so ions can pass through it, but the electrons cannot.
The date was chosen in recognition of the atomic weight of hydrogen (1.008).
This was the first commercial use of a fuel cell.
Fuel cell buses have been deployed around the world including in Whistler, Canada; San Francisco, United States; Hamburg, Germany; Shanghai, China; London, England; and São Paulo, Brazil.
The cell runs continuously until the reactant's supply is exhausted.
The most common fuel is hydrogen.
The net result of the two reactions is that fuel is consumed, water or carbon dioxide is created, and an electric current is created, which can be used to power electrical devices, normally referred to as the load.
In addition to this pure hydrogen type, there are hydrocarbon fuels for fuel cells, including diesel, methanol (''see:'' direct-methanol fuel cells and indirect methanol fuel cells) and chemical hydrides.
Condensation of water produced by a PEMFC on the air channel wall.
As temperature decreases, so does the ionic conductivity of YSZ.
In January 2016 a Raptor E1 drone made a successful test flight using a fuel cell that was lighter than the lithium-ion battery it replaced.
The space between the two electrodes is filled with a concentrated solution of KOH or NaOH which serves as an electrolyte.
Phosphoric acid, the electrolyte used in PAFCs, is a non-conductive liquid acid which forces electrons to travel from anode to cathode through an external electrical circuit.
The U.S. Department of Energy's Fuel Cell Technology Program claims that, as of 2011, fuel cells achieved 53–59% efficiency at one-quarter power and 42–53% vehicle efficiency at full power, and a durability of over  with less than 10% degradation.
In 2008 Honda released a demonstration fuel cell electric vehicle (the Honda FCX Clarity) with fuel stack claiming a 60% tank-to-wheel efficiency.
In 2013 the Department of Energy launched H2USA focused on advancing the hydrogen infrastructure.
Hyundai introduced the limited production Hyundai ix35 FCEV.
The materials used for different parts of the fuel cells differ by type.
Most hydrogen, however, is produced by steam methane reforming, and so most hydrogen production emits carbon dioxide.
Such a design is called a ''fuel cell stack''.
The comparable NEDC value for a Diesel vehicle is 22%.
They make the most sense for operation disconnected from the grid, or when fuel can be provided continuously.
In combined heat and power (CHP) systems, the heat produced by the fuel cell is captured and put to use, increasing the efficiency of the system to up to 85–90%.
Assuming production at scale, fuel cells could save 20–40% on energy costs when used in cogeneration systems.
Fuel cells are also in use to provide auxiliary power in aircraft, replacing fossil fuel generators that were previously used to start the engines and power on board electrical needs.
The ceramic can run as hot as 800 degrees Celsius.
There were 140,000 fuel cell stacks shipped globally in 2010, up from 11,000 shipments in 2007, and from 2011 to 2012 worldwide fuel cell shipments had an annual growth rate of 85%.
The analysis concluded that, by 2030, PEM stationary market will reach $1 billion, while the vehicle market, including forklifts, will reach a total of $2 billion.
At the cathode, hydrogen ions, electrons, and oxygen react to form water.
This heat can be used to produce steam for air conditioning systems or any other thermal energy consuming system.
Challenges exist in SOFC systems due to their high operating temperatures.
In 2013 military organisations are evaluating fuel cells to significantly reduce the battery weight carried by soldiers.
At the anode a catalyst oxidizes the fuel, usually hydrogen, turning the fuel into a positively charged ion and a negatively charged electron.
Solid-oxide fuel cells produce heat from the recombination of the oxygen and hydrogen.
# the necessary hardware such as current collectors and gaskets.
The fuel was contained in approximately 100 solid  pellets composed of a proprietary chemical within an unpressurized cartridge.
A typical capacity range of home fuel cell is 1–3&nbsp;kWel / 4–8&nbsp;kWth.
Fuel cell fleets are operated by various companies, including Sysco Foods, FedEx Freight, GENCO (at Wegmans, Coca-Cola, Kimberly Clark, and Whole Foods), and H-E-B Grocers.
MCFCs also have relatively high efficiencies.
For the fuel cell to operate, the fuel must be converted into pure hydrogen gas.
The ship is silent, giving it an advantage in the detection of other submarines.
"The large amount of energy required to isolate hydrogen from natural compounds (water, natural gas, biomass), package the light gas by compression or liquefaction, transfer the energy carrier to the user, plus the energy lost when it is converted to useful electricity with fuel cells, leaves around 25% for practical use."
He used a combination of sheet iron, copper and porcelain plates, and a solution of sulphate of copper and dilute acid.
Most buses are produced by UTC Power, Toyota, Ballard, Hydrogenics, and Proton Motor.
Fuel Cells also produce 97% less nitrogen oxide emissions than conventional coal-fired power plants.
Despite these disadvantages, a high operating temperature provides an advantage by removing the need for a precious metal catalyst like platinum, thereby reducing cost.
It is also important to take losses due to fuel production, transportation, and storage into account.
The reaction at the anode produces electricity and water as by-products.
As of July 2015, there were 12 public hydrogen fueling stations in the US, 10 of which were in California.
A '''fuel cell''' is a device that converts the chemical energy from a fuel into electricity through a chemical reaction of positively charged hydrogen ions with oxygen or another oxidizing agent.
Greentech Media's analyst reached similar conclusions in 2014.
(Notice that the synonyms "polymer electrolyte membrane" and "proton exchange mechanism" result in the same acronym.)
Another ''Clean Technica'' writer concluded, "while hydrogen may have a part to play in the world of energy storage (especially seasonal storage), it looks like a dead end when it comes to mainstream vehicles."
In 2003, the world's first propeller-driven airplane to be powered entirely by a fuel cell was flown.
The reforming process creates  emissions.
Since fuel cell electrolyzer systems do not store fuel in themselves, but rather rely on external storage units, they can be successfully applied in large-scale energy storage, rural areas being one example.
When the heat is captured, total efficiency can reach 80–90% at the unit, but does not consider production and distribution losses.
Fuel cells can produce electricity continuously for as long as these inputs are supplied.
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) use a solid material, most commonly a ceramic material called yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ), as the electrolyte.
There were over 85 hydrogen refueling stations in the U.S. in 2010.
These cells commonly work in temperatures of 150 to 200 degrees Celsius.
There, oxygen from the air and carbon dioxide recycled from the anode react with the electrons to form carbonate ions that replenish the electrolyte, completing the circuit.
When hydrogen is used, the CO2 is released when methane from natural gas is combined with steam, in a process called steam methane reforming, to produce the hydrogen.
A typical fuel cell produces a voltage from 0.6 V to 0.7 V at full rated load.
Thus the overall reaction involves the combination of hydrogen gas and oxygen gas to form water.
The program, called "''Ônibus Brasileiro a Hidrogênio''" (Brazilian Hydrogen Autobus), includes three additional buses.
SOFCs are unique since in those, negatively charged oxygen ions travel from the cathode (positive side of the fuel cell) to the anode (negative side of the fuel cell) instead of positively charged hydrogen ions travelling from the anode to the cathode, as is the case in all other types of fuel cells.
Researchers are addressing this problem by exploring corrosion-resistant materials for components as well as fuel cell designs that may increase cell life without decreasing performance.
The high operating temperature is largely due to the physical properties of the YSZ electrolyte.
GE went on to develop this technology with NASA and McDonnell Aircraft, leading to its use during Project Gemini.
Canada and Sweden also had planned hydrogen highways.
Platinum and/or similar type of noble metals are usually used as the catalyst for PEMFC.
This heat can be captured and used to heat water in a micro combined heat and power (m-CHP) application.
The cell consists of two porous carbon electrodes impregnated with a suitable catalyst such as Pt, Ag, CoO, etc.
The cell was from Arcola Energy.
MCFCs hold several advantages over other fuel cell technologies, including their resistance to impurities.
The first references to hydrogen fuel cells appeared in 1838.
, there were a total of approximately 100 fuel cell buses deployed around the world.
One such challenge is the potential for carbon dust to build up on the anode, which slows down the internal reforming process.
According to their website, Ceres Power, a UK SOFC fuel cell manufacturer, has developed a method of reducing the operating temperature of their SOFC system to 500–600 degrees Celsius.
Fuel cell vehicles running on compressed hydrogen may have a power-plant-to-wheel efficiency of 22% if the hydrogen is stored as high-pressure gas, and 17% if it is stored as liquid hydrogen.
Voltage decreases as current increases, due to several factors:
They are also used to power fuel cell vehicles, including forklifts, automobiles, buses, boats, motorcycles and submarines.
Research to address this "carbon coking" issue at the University of Pennsylvania has shown that the use of copper-based cermet (heat-resistant materials made of ceramic and metal) can reduce coking and the loss of performance.
Japan has a hydrogen highway, as part of the Japan hydrogen fuel cell project.
*A fleet of Thor buses with UTC Power fuel cells was deployed in California, operated by SunLine Transit Agency.
H2 gas and O2 gas are bubbled into the electrolyte through the porous carbon electrodes.
However, since hydrogen is necessary for the reactions listed above, the fuel selected must contain hydrogen atoms.
In a letter to the same publication written in December 1838 but published in June 1839, German physicist Christian Friedrich Schönbein discussed the first crude fuel cell that he had invented.
As of June 2011 demonstration FCEVs had driven more than , with more than 27,000 refuelings.
Fuel cells are used for primary and backup power for commercial, industrial and residential buildings and in remote or inaccessible areas.
The fuel cell demonstrator airplane, as it was called, used a proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell/lithium-ion battery hybrid system to power an electric motor, which was coupled to a conventional propeller.
Another method would use iron and sulphur instead of platinum.
This became known as the "Grubb-Niedrach fuel cell".
The system consists of nine PEM fuel cells, providing between 30&nbsp;kW and 50&nbsp;kW each.
This increases the corrosion or oxidation of components exposed to phosphoric acid.
SOFC systems can run on fuels other than pure hydrogen gas.
However, this calculation allows the comparison of different types of power generation.
The Department of Energy claims that coal, itself, might even be a fuel option in the future, assuming the system can be made resistant to impurities such as sulfur and particulates that result from converting coal into hydrogen.
They require high operating temperatures (800–1000&nbsp;°C) and can be run on a variety of fuels including natural gas.
This would lower the cost of a fuel cell (as the platinum in a regular fuel cell costs around , and the same amount of iron costs only around ).
In a Well-to-Wheels simulation analysis that "did not address the economics and market constraints", General Motors and its partners estimated that per mile traveled, a fuel cell electric vehicle running on compressed gaseous hydrogen produced from natural gas could use about 40% less energy and emit 45% less greenhouse gasses than an internal combustion vehicle.
In the case of fuel cells, useful output energy is measured in electrical energy produced by the system.
The hydrogen in the gas reacts with carbonate ions from the electrolyte to produce water, carbon dioxide, electrons and small amounts of other chemicals.
The lower operating temperature allows them to use stainless steel instead of ceramic as the cell substrate, which reduces cost and start-up time of the system.
The main challenge of MCFC technology is the cells' short life span.
Carbon dioxide may also be a by-product depending on the fuel, but the carbon emissions from an SOFC system are less than those from a fossil fuel combustion plant.
In a fuel-cell vehicle the tank-to-wheel efficiency is greater than 45% at low loads and shows average values of about 36% when a driving cycle like the NEDC (New European Driving Cycle) is used as test procedure.
The energy efficiency of a fuel cell is generally between 40–60%, or up to 85% efficient in cogeneration if waste heat is captured for use.
The motorcycle holds enough fuel to run for four hours, and to travel  in an urban area, at a top speed of .
Most companies in Europe and the US do not use petroleum-powered forklifts, as these vehicles work indoors where emissions must be controlled and instead use electric forklifts.
Once reaching the cathode, the ions are reunited with the electrons and the two react with a third chemical, usually oxygen, to create water or carbon dioxide.
Co-generation systems can reach 85% efficiency (40–60% electric + remainder as thermal).
In 2004 Honda developed a fuel-cell motorcycle that utilized the Honda FC Stack.
Also their need to have a hot water storage tank to smooth out the thermal heat production was a serious disadvantage in the domestic market place where space in domestic properties is at a great premium.
For instance, if you drive a full sized SUV and pull a boat up into the mountains, you can do that with this technology and you can't with current battery-only vehicles, which are more geared toward city driving."
The waste heat from fuel cells can be diverted during the summer directly into the ground providing further cooling while the waste heat during winter can be pumped directly into the building.
RVs, cabins, marine), the industrial sector (i.e.
The flight lasted 10 minutes at an altitude of , although the fuel cell reportedly had enough fuel to fly for two hours.
As the main difference among fuel cell types is the electrolyte, fuel cells are classified by the type of electrolyte they use and by the difference in startup time ranging from 1 second for proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEM fuel cells, or PEMFC) to 10 minutes for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC).
As the result CHP systems have the potential to save primary energy as they can make use of waste heat which is generally rejected by thermal energy conversion systems.
In addition to electricity, fuel cells produce water, heat and, depending on the fuel source, very small amounts of nitrogen dioxide and other emissions.
The anode catalyst is usually made up of very fine platinum powder.
In these cells phosphoric acid is used as a non-conductive electrolyte to pass positive hydrogen ions from the anode to the cathode.
This is higher than some other systems for energy generation.
The fuel cell he made used similar materials to today's phosphoric-acid fuel cell.
The membrane electrode assembly (MEA) is referred as the heart of the PEMFC and is usually made of a proton exchange membrane sandwiched between two catalyst-coated carbon papers.
In 2014, Toyota introduced its first fuel cell vehicle in Japan, the Mirai, at a price of less than , although former European Parliament President Pat Cox estimates that Toyota will initially lose about $100,000 on each Mirai sold.
The pellets are physically robust and operate at temperatures as warm as .
A gas turbine would capture heat from the fuel cell and turn it into mechanical energy to increase the fuel cell's operational efficiency.
A key disadvantage of these cells is the use of an acidic electrolyte.
Fuel cells cannot store energy like a battery, except as hydrogen, but in some applications, such as stand-alone power plants based on discontinuous sources such as solar or wind power, they are combined with electrolyzers and storage systems to form an energy storage system.
They are made up of three adjacent segments: the anode, the electrolyte, and the cathode.
They are not prone to "carbon coking", which refers to carbon build-up on the anode that results in reduced performance by slowing down the internal fuel reforming process.
CHP units are being developed today for the European home market.
* The fuel that is used.
For applications that require frequent and relatively rapid start-ups ... where zero emissions are a requirement, as in enclosed spaces such as warehouses, and where hydrogen is considered an acceptable reactant, a PEM fuel cell is becoming an increasingly attractive choice if exchanging batteries is inconvenient".
* The electrolyte substance.
The company says that their MCFC products range from 300&nbsp;kW to 2.8&nbsp;MW systems that achieve 47% electrical efficiency and can utilize CHP technology to obtain higher overall efficiencies.
Some experts believe that hydrogen fuel cell cars will never become economically competitive with other technologies or that it will take decades for them to become profitable.
Stationary fuel cells are used for commercial, industrial and residential primary and backup power generation.
Like SOFCs, MCFCs are capable of converting fossil fuel to a hydrogen-rich gas in the anode, eliminating the need to produce hydrogen externally.
Phosphoric-acid fuel cells (PAFC) comprise the largest segment of existing CHP products worldwide and can provide combined efficiencies close to 90%.
The overall efficiency (electricity to hydrogen and back to electricity) of such plants (known as ''round-trip efficiency''), using pure hydrogen and pure oxygen can be "from 35 up to 50 percent", depending on gas density and other conditions.
Amsterdam recently introduced its first fuel cell-powered boat that ferries people around the city's canals.
Input energy is the energy stored in the fuel.
FuelCell Energy, a Connecticut-based fuel cell manufacturer, develops and sells MCFC fuel cells.
The electrons travel through an external circuit creating electricity and return to the cathode.
The ions travel through the electrolyte to the cathode.
One such pilot program is operating on Stuart Island in Washington State.
The hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell or alkaline fuel cell was designed and first demonstrated publicly by Francis Thomas Bacon in 1959.
"It would take several miracles to overcome all of those problems simultaneously in the coming decades."
Fuel cell-powered forklifts can be used in refrigerated warehouses, as their performance is not degraded by lower temperatures.
The 14 stations in Germany were planned to be expanded to 50 by 2015 through its public private partnership Now GMBH.
So did ''Car Throttle''.
* The cathode catalyst turns the ions into the waste chemicals like water or carbon dioxide.
The U212A is a non-nuclear submarine developed by German naval shipyard Howaldtswerke Deutsche Werft.
A fuel cell system running on hydrogen can be compact and lightweight, and have no major moving parts.
Because fuel cells have no moving parts and do not involve combustion, in ideal conditions they can achieve up to 99.9999% reliability.
