From about 1600 to 1914 there were two professions in Europe now almost totally forgotten.
In a number of jurisdictions, special laws cover funeral processions – such as requiring most other vehicles to give right-of-way to a funeral procession.
In Victorian times, mutes would wear somber clothing including black cloaks, top hats with trailing hatbands, and gloves.
In most cases, this process is followed faithfully in Greece until today.
In some religious denominations, for example, Roman Catholic, Anglican and the Churches of Christ, eulogies from loved ones are somewhat discouraged during this service.
Civil funerals are an alternative to religious or humanist ceremonies in the UK.
This was done by some groups of Native Americans in protohistoric times.
Reading may take as long as needed to complete the paath.
The majority of Italians are Roman Catholic and follow Catholic funeral traditions.
The practice continues in Africa and the Middle East.
The British Humanist Association organises a network of humanist funeral celebrants or officiants across England and Wales, and a similar network is organised by the Humanist Society of Scotland.
Markers such as gravestones, monuments, etc.
After the sudden deaths of important public officials, public memorial services have been held by communities, including those without any specific connection to the deceased.
Aside from the religious aspect, a Japanese funeral usually includes a wake, the cremation of the deceased, and inclusion within the family grave.
Religious thought among the Japanese people is generally a blend of Shintō and Buddhist beliefs.
The coffin will be held at the funeral home until the day of the funeral.
Taking into consideration the written sources, however, the dinner could also be served in the houses.
First there is the Wake where family and friends sit with the deceased until the burial.
There were niches cut out of the walls, in which the urns were placed; these, from their resemblance to the niche of a pigeon-house, were called columbaria.
Once the final ceremony has been completed, the march proceeds to a gathering place, and the solemn music is replaced by loud, upbeat, raucous music and dancing, where onlookers join in to celebrate the life of the deceased.
Cremation is popular among non-religious and Protestants in Poland.
Chinese custom dictates that nothing given during the funeral should be taken home, except for the red thread, which is tied to the front doorknob of the mourner's house to ward off bad luck.
The public display of grief by wailing or crying out loud at the funeral (called Antam Sanskar  in the Sikh culture) is discouraged and should be kept to a minimum.
The surviving relations bore masks bearing the images of the family's deceased ancestors.
Burial, rather than a destructive process such as cremation, was the traditional practice amongst Christians, because of the belief in the resurrection of the body.
In Poland Cremation is less popular because the Catholic Church in Poland doesn't allow it.
According to the film, the Chinese use professional mourners to help expedite the entry of a deceased loved one's soul into heaven by giving the impression that he or she was a good and loving person, well-loved by many.
* Enshrouding the dead body in a white cotton or linen cloth.
The viewing typically takes place at a funeral home, which is equipped with gathering rooms where the viewing can be conducted, although the viewing may also take place at a church.
The pallbearers often sit in a special reserved section during the memorial service.
Burial rites should normally take place as soon as possible and include:
The ashes of the cremated corpse are commonly stored in columbaria.
Follow-up services are then performed by a Buddhist priest on specific anniversaries after death.
There is no single Masonic funeral service.
Exposure to scavenger birds (with preservation of some, but not all bones) is also practiced by some high-altitude Tibetan Buddhists, where practical considerations such as the lack of firewood and a shallow active layer seem to have led to the practice known as ''jhator'' or "giving alms to the birds".
The use of these phrases has been on the rise for the past century.
In Chinese culture, red is strictly forbidden as it is a traditionally symbolic color of happiness.
These funerals involve honour guards from police forces and/or fire services from across the country and sometimes from overseas.
The ancient Greek funeral since the Homeric era included the ''próthesis'' (πρόθεσις), the ''ekphorá'' (ἐκφορά), the burial and the ''perídeipnon'' (περίδειπνον).
In the twentyfirst century humanist funerals were held for well-known people including Claire Rayner, Keith Floyd, Linda Smith, and Ronnie Barker.
The service may be held in any of the usual places or a Lodge room with committal at graveside, or the complete service can be performed at any of the aforementioned places without a separate committal.
They may choose to be buried in an all natural bio-degradable green burial shroud, sometimes a simple coffin made of cardboard or other easily biodegradable material.
The Roman Catholic Church forbade it for many years, but since 1963 the church has allowed it, as long as it is not done to express disbelief in bodily resurrection.
There is an order of precedence when approaching the casket at this stage that usually starts with the immediate family (siblings, parents, spouse, children); followed by other mourners, after which the immediate family may file past again, so they are the last to view their loved one before the coffin is closed.
These services if taking place in a funeral home consists of prayers, blessings and eulogies from the family.
Burial was not always permanent.
Celebration of those who still have survived death, "the butcher", ensues.
Some diseases, such as Ebola can be spread by funerary customs including touching the dead.
Sometimes, the burial service will immediately follow the funeral, in which case a funeral procession travels from the site of the memorial service to the burial site.
This part takes place in the house where the deceased had lived.
In modern practice, specific rites concerning an individual's passage through life are generally ascribed to one of these two faiths.
It also reminds the living of their own mortality.
The ashes are later collected and disposed of by immersing them in the Punjab (five famous rivers in India).
Greek funerals are an exception as the coffin is open during the whole procedure unless the state of the body does not allow it.
The funeral services may be divided into two parts.
After the funeral, families get together for a post-funeral get-together (stypa).
In such cases, the eulogy is only done by a member of the clergy.
Most Japanese funerals are conducted with Buddhist rites.
"Burial at sea" in past generations has meant the deliberate disposal of a corpse into the ocean, wrapped and tied with weights to make sure it sinks.
Obituaries sometimes contain a request that attendees do not send flowers (e.g.
The body may or may not be embalmed, depending upon such factors as the amount of time since the death has occurred, religious practices, or requirements of the place of burial.
By the middle of the century, they had grown to 14.5%, with over 54% of those noting a charitable contribution as the preferred method of expressing sympathy.
visitation, funeral, and the burial service.
In many religious traditions, pallbearers, usually males who are relatives or friends of the decedent, will carry the casket from the chapel (of a funeral home or church) to the hearse, and from the hearse to the site of the burial service.
A Masonic funeral is held at the request of a departed Mason or family member.
A Mason wears a white leather apron, called a "lambskin," on becoming a Mason, and he may continue to wear it even in death.
Hence these words frequently occur in ancient inscriptions, V.F.
Many medical schools rely on the donation of cadavers for the teaching of anatomy.
"In lieu of flowers").
In recent years however, alternative methods of disposal have become more popular, including scattering of the ashes, burial in outer space, and conversion of the cremated remains into a diamond that can be set in jewelry.
The pyre is then set ablaze, while the mourner's mourn.
The ceremony depends on the traditions of the ethnicity the deceased belonged to.
Wakes in rural areas are usually held in the home, while in urban settings the dead is typically displayed in a funeral home.
In the present-day structures, the bones are collected in a central pit where, assisted by lime, they, too, eventually decompose.
Less well-to-do Romans could join benevolent funerary societies (''collegia funeraticia'') that undertook these rites on their behalf.
The mute is depicted in art quite frequently but in literature is probably best known from Dickens's ''Oliver Twist''.
The eldest son, or a male mourner, or a priest then bathes before leading the cremation ceremonial function.
He would make a delightful mute, my love".
A memorial service, often called a funeral, is often officiated by clergy from the decedent's, or bereaved's, church or religion.
One issue of concern as the 21st century began was with the use of secular music at Christian funerals, a custom generally forbidden by the Roman Catholic Church.
Christian burials typically occur on consecrated ground.
They consist of five elements: air, water, fire, earth and space.
The first five and final verses of "Anand Sahib," the "Song of Bliss," are recited or sung.
A more recent trend is to create a DVD with pictures and video of the deceased, accompanied by music, and play this DVD continuously during the visitation.
The coffin is then moved from the Church to the local Cemetery, often with a procession of locals walking behind the hearse.
First is the church service (siunaustilaisuus) in a cemetery chapel or local church, than the burial.
The funeral service itself is almost invariably closed casket.
Afterwards, the Akan hold a sombre funeral procession and burial with intense displays of sorrow.
The procession in the ancient times, according to the law, should have passed silently through the streets of the city.
Derivative words are also ''kēdemón'' (κηδεμών, "guardian") and ''kēdemonía'' (κηδεμονία, "guardianship").
Other funerals in Ghana are held with the deceased put in elaborate "fantasy coffins" colored and shaped after a certain object, such as a fish, crab, boat, and even airplanes.
It is also possible to donate organs and tissue after death, for treating the sick, or for research.
In the United States, any type of noise other than quiet whispering or mourning is considered disrespectful.
Another custom, a kind of memorial, frequently takes place seven years after the person's death.
During the funeral and at the burial service, the casket may be covered with a large arrangement of flowers, called a casket spray.
The most commonly prescribed aspects of this gathering are that the attendees sign a book kept by the deceased's survivors to record who attended.
The decedent may, in most U.S. jurisdictions, provide instructions as to the funeral by means of a last will and testament.
The jewelry may be taken off and given to the family of the deceased or remain in the casket after burial.
The deceased is often transported in a procession (also called a funeral cortège), with the hearse, funeral service vehicles, and private automobiles traveling in a procession to the church or other location where the services will be held.
This tradition is giving way to eulogies read by family members or friends.
The Kane Kwei Carpentry Workshop in Teshie, named after Seth Kane Kwei who invented this new style of coffin, has become an international reference for this form of art.
Most if not all present-day Filipinos, like their ancestors, believe in some form of an afterlife and give considerable attention to honouring the dead.
In more recent times, however, this has often been forbidden by hygiene laws.
* Positioning the deceased so that when the face or body is turned to the right side it faces Mecca (Makkah Al-Mukarramah).
In these religions the coffin is traditionally closed at the end of the wake and is not re-opened for the funeral service.
The Romans prohibited cremation or inhumation within the sacred boundary of the city ''(pomerium)'', for both religious and civil reasons, so that the priests might not be contaminated by touching a dead body, and that houses would not be endangered by funeral fires.
The final rites of a burial, in case of untimely death of a child, is rooted in Rig Veda's section 10.18, where the hymns mourn the death of the child, praying to deity Mrityu to "neither harm our girls nor our boys", and pleads the earth to cover, protect the deceased child as a soft wool.
Today the body is placed in the casket, that is always open in Greek funerals.
Pharaohs stored their embalmed corpses in pyramids.
This requires the will to become available in time; aspects of the disposition of the remains of US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt ran contrary to a number of his stated wishes, which were found in a safe that was not opened until after the funeral.
Additionally, funerals often have religious aspects which are intended to help the soul of the deceased reach the afterlife, resurrection or reincarnation.
The ''open-casket service'' (which is common in North America) allows mourners to have a final opportunity to view the deceased and say good-bye.
The body will often be adorned with common jewelry, such as watches, necklaces, brooches, etc.
Funeral rites are as old as human culture itself, pre-dating modern ''Homo sapiens'' and dated to at least 300,000 years ago.
Its main purpose is to return the body to soil quickly while minimizing pollution and resource consumption.
Funeral customs tend to be characterized by five "anchors": significant symbols, gathered community, ritual action, cultural heritage, and transition of the dead body (corpse).
In addition, a family may choose to display photographs taken of the deceased person during his/her life (often, formal portraits with other family members and candid pictures to show "happy times"), prized possessions and other items representing his/her hobbies and/or accomplishments.
It has been a common practice in navies and seafaring nations; in the Church of England, special forms of funeral service were added to the Book of Common Prayer to cover it.
Cannibalism has earlier been practiced post-mortem in parts of Papua New Guinea.
In such cases, mourners wearing dark colors at times may also wear a white or off-white armband or white robe.
Custom requires that everything goes into the ground; however this is not true for Jewish services.
'''Funerals in Islam''' (called Janazah in Arabic) follow fairly specific rites, though they are subject to regional interpretation and variation in custom.
Celebrations of life focus on a life that was lived, including the person’s best qualities, interests, achievements and impact, rather than mourning a death.
In Judaism, funerals follow fairly specific rites, though they are subject to variation in custom.
''Próthesis'' is the deposition of the body of the deceased on the funereal bed and the threnody of his relatives.
The Roman orator Cicero describes the habit of planting flowers around the tomb as an effort to guarantee the repose of the deceased and the purification of the ground, a custom that is maintained until today.
The US Conference of Catholic Bishops said "The Church earnestly recommends that the pious custom of burying the bodies of the deceased be observed; nevertheless, the Church does not prohibit cremation unless it was chosen for reasons contrary to Christian doctrine" (canon 1176.3).
The earth hinted that the body would decay and become one with the earth, while the salt represented the soul, which does not decay.
Customs vary widely both between cultures and between religious groups and denominations within cultures.
During this period of time, it is customary for the males in the family to personally greet all who come to show respect.
Funerals of the socially prominent usually were undertaken by professional undertakers called ''libitinarii''.
Common secular motivations for funerals include mourning the deceased, celebrating their life, and offering support and sympathy to the bereaved.
This day, in some communities, also marks a day when the poor and needy are offered food in memory of the dead.
After the cremation, in some regions, the immediate male relatives of the deceased shave their head and invite all friends and relatives, on the tenth or twelfth day, to eat a simple meal together in remembrance of the deceased.
Some medical conditions, such as amputations or various surgeries can make the cadaver unsuitable for these purposes; in other cases the bodies of people who had certain medical conditions are useful for research into those conditions.
The Eastern Orthodox Church and Islam also forbid cremation.
The custom of burying the dead in the floor of dwelling-houses has been to some degree prevalent on the Gold Coast of Africa.
The main purpose of a funeral mute was to stand around at funerals with a sad, pathetic face.
The church specifies that cremated remains are either buried or entombed; they do not allow cremated remains to be scattered or kept at home.
Among Hindus, the dead body is usually cremated within a day of death.
However, the extent to which decisions regarding the disposition of a decedent's remains (including funeral arrangements) can be controlled by the decedent while still alive vary from one jurisdiction to another.
However, this step is foreign to Judaism; Jewish funerals are held soon after death (preferably within a day or two, unless more time is needed for relatives to come), and the corpse is never displayed.
In most East Asian, South Asian and many Southeast Asian cultures, the wearing of white is symbolic of death.
These people are mentioned in ancient Greek plays, and were commonly employed throughout Europe until the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Today, well over 87% of them have such a note – but those statistics vary demographically.
These services often take place at a funeral home; however, they can be held in a home, school, workplace, church or other location of some significance.
The deceased is usually transported from the funeral home to a church in a hearse, a specialized vehicle designed to carry casketed remains.
The first five verses of Sikhism's morning prayer, "Japji Sahib," are read aloud to begin the Sidharan paath.
Funeral homes are generally not used for funeral services, which are almost exclusively held in a church, cemetery, or crematorium chapel.
According to archaeological findings–traces of ash, bones of animals, shards of crockery, dishes and basins–the dinner during the classical era was also organized at the burial spot.
After the ceremony, the mourners return to the house of the deceased for the ''perídeipnon'', the dinner after the burial.
For example, letting relatives see the face of the dead before bodybags are closed and taking photographs, if desired, can greatly reduce the risk of infection without impacting too heavily on the customs of burial.
In Finland, religious funerals (hautajaiset) are quite ascetic.
Contemporary Western influence however has meant that dark-colored or black attire is now often also acceptable for mourners to wear (particularly for those outside the family).
Some people choose to make their funeral arrangements in advance so that at the time of their death, their wishes are known to their family.
This was seen as deleterious to society and conditions for grieving were set.
Funerals and follow-up memorial services fall under the purview of Buddhist ritual, and 90% Japanese funerals are conducted in a Buddhist manner.
These funerals and especially the memorials may be extremely expensive for the family in question.
The socially prominent sometimes had the privilege of having their corpses stored in church crypts.
A symbolic protector of the deceased, the mute would usually stand near the door of the home or church.
If the deceased served in a branch of the armed forces, the casket may be covered with a national flag; however, in the US, nothing should cover the national flag according to Title 4, United States Code, Chapter 1, Paragraph 8i.
The rite of passage is said to be performed in harmony with the sacred premise that the microcosm of all living beings is a reflection of a macrocosm of the universe.
A funeral may take place at either a funeral home, church, or crematorium or cemetery chapel.
The relatives of the deceased, for an unspecified length of time that depends on them, are in mourning, during which women wear black clothes and men a black armband.
Some denominations of Protestantism allow cremation; the more conservative denominations generally do not.
At the ''visitation'' (also called a "viewing", "wake" or "calling hours"), in Christian or secular Western custom, the body of the deceased person (or decedent) is placed on display in the casket (also called a coffin, however almost all body containers are caskets).
In the United States, there are states which allow one to make these decisions for oneself if desired, for example by appointing an agent to carry out one's wishes; in other states, the law allows the decedent's next-of-kin to make the final decisions about the funeral without taking the wishes of the decedent into account.
Some of the customs include the presiding officer wearing a hat while doing his part in the service, the Lodge members placing sprigs of evergreen on the casket, and a small white leather apron may being placed in or on the casket.
Nine days after the disposal of the body, by burial or cremation, a feast was given (''cena novendialis'') and a libation poured over the grave or the ashes.
The viewing may end with a prayer service; in a Roman Catholic funeral, this may include a rosary.
The professional mourner, generally a woman, would shriek and wail (often while clawing her face and tearing at her clothing), to encourage others to weep.
Aspects of this tradition have been practiced in other locations by long-time devotees of jazz.
Rarer forms of disposal of the dead include exposure to the elements and to scavenger animals.
An extreme example might have "a fully stocked open bar, catered food, and even favors."
Langar, a meal, is served to guests.
Many ritually bestow a new name on the deceased; funerary names typically use obsolete or archaic kanji and words, to avoid the likelihood of the name being used in ordinary speech or writing.
Hymns are sung from Sri Guru Granth Sahib Ji.
On the day of the cremation, the body is washed and dressed and then taken to the Gurdwara or home where hymns (Shabads) from Sri Guru Granth Sahib Ji, the Sikh Scriptures are recited by the congregation.
Men are shrouded with a ''kittel'' and then (outside the Land of Israel) with a ''tallit'' (shawl), while women are shrouded in a plain white cloth.
This practice was also carried out in Ireland, as well as in parts of England, particularly in Leicestershire, although in England the salt was intended to prevent air from distending the corpse.
Frequently, a relative or close friend will be asked to give a eulogy, which details happy memories and accomplishments rather than criticism.
The tombs of the rich usually were constructed of marble, the ground enclosed with walls, and planted around with trees.
Burial rituals should normally take place as soon as possible and include:
In the past, it was common practice to place the casket in the decedent’s home or that of a relative for viewing.
The word ''funeral'' comes from the Latin ''funus'', which had a variety of meanings, including the corpse and the funerary rites themselves.
Cremation of the body is forbidden in Orthodox Judaism, but allowed in Reform Judaism.
This type of ceremony  is not open to the public, but only to those invited.
The Ashanti and Akan ethnic groups in Ghana typically wear red and black during funerals.
The cremation of the dead that appears around the 11th century BC constitutes a new practice of burial and is probably an influence from the East.
In Spain, a burial or cremation may occur very quickly following the death of a loved one.
The body, brought by a hearse from the mortuary, may be taken to a church or Cemetery chapel,Then there is a funeral mass or service at Cemetery chapel, Following the mass or Service the casket is carried in Procession (usually by foot) on hearse to the Grave.
The local priest or minister says the prayers and blessed the deceased in their house.
* Burial of the dead body in a grave.
Sometimes family members or friends of the dead will say something.
The funeral usually includes a ritual through which the corpse of the deceased is given up.
Some families opt to bury their dead in the countryside homes instead of urban cemeteries, thus spending more money on transporting the dead.
They may also all have their headlights on, to identify which vehicles are part of the cortege, although the practice also has roots in ancient Roman customs.
The body is washed, wrapped in white cloth for a man or a widow, red for a married woman, the two toes tied together with a string, a ''Tilak'' (red mark) placed on the forehead.
* Burial of the dead body in a grave.
Until the Christian era, when interment becomes again the only burial practice, both cremation and interment had been practiced depending on the area.
