Adaptations such as these are complemented by hydrolytic enzymes secreted into the environment to digest large organic molecules—such as polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids—into smaller molecules that may then be absorbed as nutrients.
The system may assist the pathogen in surviving DNA damage arising from the host plant’s oxidative defensive response to infection.
Before the introduction of molecular methods for phylogenetic analysis, taxonomists considered fungi to be members of the plant kingdom because of similarities in lifestyle: both fungi and plants are mainly immobile, and have similarities in general morphology and growth habitat.
It is known to play a role in intraspecific hybridization and is likely required for hybridization between species, which has been associated with major events in fungal evolution.
neoformans'' usually infects the lungs, where it is phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages.
The latter genus includes the destroying angel ''(A.&nbsp;virosa)'' and the death cap ''(A.&nbsp;phalloides)'', the most common cause of deadly mushroom poisoning.
* In common with some plant and animal species, more than 70 fungal species display bioluminescence.
Other fungi can attack eyes, nails, hair, and especially skin, the so-called dermatophytic and keratinophilic fungi, and cause local infections such as ringworm and athlete's foot.
Members of the Basidiomycota, commonly known as the club fungi or basidiomycetes, produce meiospores called basidiospores on club-like stalks called basidia.
Plants have evolved efficient defense systems against pathogenic microbes such as ''U.
This in turn is derived from the Greek word ''sphongos'' (σφογγος "sponge"), which refers to the macroscopic structures and morphology of mushrooms and molds; the root is also used in other languages, such as the German ''Schwamm'' ("sponge") and ''Schimmel'' ("mold").
It recognizes seven phyla, two of which—the Ascomycota and the Basidiomycota—are contained within a branch representing subkingdom Dikarya.
More recent studies (2009) estimate the arrival of fungal organisms at about 760–1060&nbsp;Ma on the basis of comparisons of the rate of evolution in closely related groups.
There are many more mushroom species that are harvested from the wild for personal consumption or commercial sale.
A basidiocarp is formed in which club-like structures known as basidia generate haploid basidiospores after karyogamy and meiosis.
Along with bacteria, fungi are the major decomposers in most terrestrial (and some aquatic) ecosystems, and therefore play a critical role in biogeochemical cycles and in many food webs.
''Ustilago maydis'' is a pathogenic plant fungus that causes smut disease in maize and teosinte.
The most commonly known basidiocarps are mushrooms, but they may also take other forms (see Morphology section).
The fungi are now considered a separate kingdom, distinct from both plants and animals, from which they appear to have diverged around one billion years ago.
A specialized anatomical structure, called a clamp connection, is formed at each hyphal septum.
Members of the group that have been isolated lack the chitinous cell wall that is characteristic of fungi.
Asci are embedded in an ascocarp, or fruiting body.
Phylogenetic studies published in the last decade have helped reshape the classification within Kingdom Fungi, which is divided into one subkingdom, seven phyla, and ten subphyla.
Fungi include symbionts of plants, animals, or other fungi and also parasites.
This ejection ensures exit of the spores from the reproductive structures as well as traveling through the air over long distances., a group of fungi with lively colors and putrid odor that attract insects to disperse their spores.
Certain fungi, in particular "white rot" fungi, can degrade insecticides, herbicides, pentachlorophenol, creosote, coal tars, and heavy fuels and turn them into carbon dioxide, water, and basic elements.
The apothecium—a specialized structure important in sexual reproduction in the ascomycetes—is a cup-shaped fruit body that holds the hymenium, a layer of tissue containing the spore-bearing cells.
Other notable mycotoxins include the aflatoxins, which are insidious liver toxins and highly carcinogenic metabolites produced by certain ''Aspergillus'' species often growing in or on grains and nuts consumed by humans, ochratoxins, patulin, and trichothecenes (e.g., T-2 mycotoxin) and fumonisins, which have significant impact on human food supplies or animal livestock.
They can exert large penetrative mechanical forces; for example, the plant pathogen ''Magnaporthe grisea'' forms a structure called an appressorium that evolved to puncture plant tissues.
Phylogenetic analysis has demonstrated that the Microsporidia, unicellular parasites of animals and protists, are fairly recent and highly derived endobiotic fungi (living within the tissue of another species).
Certain types of cheeses require inoculation of milk curds with fungal species that impart a unique flavor and texture to the cheese.
The false morel (''Gyromitra esculenta'') is occasionally considered a delicacy when cooked, yet can be highly toxic when eaten raw.
Fungi have evolved a high degree of metabolic versatility that allows them to use a diverse range of organic substrates for growth, including simple compounds such as nitrate, ammonia, acetate, or ethanol.
In nature, antibiotics of fungal or bacterial origin appear to play a dual role: at high concentrations they act as chemical defense against competition with other microorganisms in species-rich environments, such as the rhizosphere, and at low concentrations as quorum-sensing molecules for intra- or interspecies signaling.
Fossilized hyphae and spores recovered from the Ordovician of Wisconsin (460&nbsp;Ma) resemble modern-day Glomerales, and existed at a time when the land flora likely consisted of only non-vascular bryophyte-like plants.
On the basis of observations of the ratio of the number of fungal species to the number of plant species in selected environments, the fungal kingdom has been estimated to contain about 1.5 million species.
Species may also be distinguished by their biochemical and physiological characteristics, such as their ability to metabolize certain biochemicals, or their reaction to chemical tests.
During cell division, formation of the hook ensures proper distribution of the newly divided nuclei into the apical and basal hyphal compartments.
Fungi are also used as biological pesticides to control weeds, plant diseases and insect pests.
Fungi perform an essential role in the decomposition of organic matter and have fundamental roles in nutrient cycling and exchange in the environment.
It differs in many aspects from sexual reproduction in animals or plants.
As decomposers, they play an essential role in nutrient cycling, especially as saprotrophs and symbionts, degrading organic matter to inorganic molecules, which can then re-enter anabolic metabolic pathways in plants or other organisms.
The evolutionary adaptation from an aquatic to a terrestrial lifestyle necessitated a diversification of ecological strategies for obtaining nutrients, including parasitism, saprobism, and the development of mutualistic relationships such as mycorrhiza and lichenization.
Mycology is a relatively new science that became systematic after the development of the microscope in the 16th century.
The blastocladiomycetes are saprotrophs, feeding on decomposing organic matter, and they are parasites of all eukaryotic groups.
Many Asian fungi are commercially grown and have increased in popularity in the West.
The accompanying cladogram depicts the major fungal taxa and their relationship to opisthokont and unikont organisms, based on the work of Philippe Silar and "The Mycota: A Comprehensive Treatise on Fungi as Experimental Systems for Basic and Applied Research".
For example, the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis was formulated by scientists using the bread mold ''Neurospora crassa'' to test their biochemical theories.
The combination of apical growth and branching/forking leads to the development of a mycelium, an interconnected network of hyphae.
This process might bear similarity to CO2 fixation via visible light, but instead uses ionizing radiation as a source of energy.
The Eccrinales and Amoebidiales are opisthokont protists, previously thought to be zygomycete fungi.
Although commonly included in botany curricula and textbooks, fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants and are placed with the animals in the monophyletic group of opisthokonts.
All known Glomeromycota species reproduce asexually.
The discipline of biology devoted to the study of fungi is known as mycology (from the Greek μύκης, mukēs, meaning "fungus").
Other antibiotics produced by fungi include: ciclosporin, commonly used as an immunosuppressant during transplant surgery; and fusidic acid, used to help control infection from methicillin-resistant ''Staphylococcus aureus'' bacteria.
In sexually reproducing fungi, compatible individuals may combine by fusing their hyphae together into an interconnected network; this process, anastomosis, is required for the initiation of the sexual cycle.
These sporangiospores allow the fungus to rapidly disperse and germinate into new genetically identical haploid fungal mycelia.
Compatible haploid hyphae fuse to produce a dikaryotic mycelium.
The human use of fungi for food preparation or preservation and other purposes is extensive and has a long history.
The lengths of the branches are not proportional to evolutionary distances.
Most fungi lack an efficient system for the long-distance transport of water and nutrients, such as the xylem and phloem in many plants.
The shiitake mushroom is a source of lentinan, a clinical drug approved for use in cancer treatments in several countries, including Japan.
The fungi part of the relationship are composed mostly of various species of ascomycetes and a few basidiomycetes.
Entomopathogenic fungi can be used as biopesticides, as they actively kill insects.
Notable medicinal mushrooms with a well-documented history of use include ''Agaricus subrufescens'', ''Ganoderma lucidum'', and ''Ophiocordyceps sinensis''.
Some of the oldest written records contain references to the destruction of crops that were probably caused by pathogenic fungi.
Fungal spores are also a cause of allergies, and fungi from different taxonomic groups can evoke allergic reactions.
At least one species of stingless bee has a relationship with a fungus in the genus ''Monascus'', where the larvae consume and depend on fungus transferred from old to new nests.
Serious pathogens of many cultivated plants causing extensive damage and losses to agriculture and forestry include the rice blast fungus ''Magnaporthe oryzae'', tree pathogens such as ''Ophiostoma ulmi'' and ''Ophiostoma novo-ulmi'' causing Dutch elm disease, and ''Cryphonectria parasitica'' responsible for chestnut blight, and plant pathogens in the genera ''Fusarium'', ''Ustilago'', ''Alternaria'', and ''Cochliobolus''.
The majority of ''C.
Many species have developed specialized hyphal structures for nutrient uptake from living hosts; examples include haustoria in plant-parasitic species of most fungal phyla, and arbuscules of several mycorrhizal fungi, which penetrate into the host cells to consume nutrients.
For example, certain species may be used to eliminate or suppress the growth of harmful plant pathogens, such as insects, mites, weeds, nematodes, and other fungi that cause diseases of important crop plants.
The taxonomy of the Fungi is in a state of constant flux, especially due to recent research based on DNA comparisons.
The growth of fungi as hyphae on or in solid substrates or as single cells in aquatic environments is adapted for the efficient extraction of nutrients, because these growth forms have high surface area to volume ratios.
Many of the plant and fungal enzymes that make these compounds differ from each other in sequence and other characteristics, which indicates separate origins and evolution of these enzymes in the fungi and plants.
Karyogamy in the asci is followed immediately by meiosis and the production of ascospores.
Asexual reproduction occurs via vegetative spores (conidia) or through mycelial fragmentation.
this process requires a gene called ''DMC1'', which is a conserved homologue of genes ''recA'' in bacteria and ''RAD51'' in eukaryotes, that mediates homologous chromosome pairing during meiosis and repair of DNA double-strand breaks.
Although fungi are opisthokonts—a grouping of evolutionarily related organisms broadly characterized by a single posterior flagellum—all phyla except for the chytrids have lost their posterior flagella.
Unlike those of plants and oomycetes, fungal cell walls do not contain cellulose.
The pressure generated by the appressorium, directed against the plant epidermis, can exceed .
They are able to grow on inhospitable surfaces, including bare soil, rocks, tree bark, wood, shells, barnacles and leaves.
Fungi produce several secondary metabolites that are similar or identical in structure to those made by plants.
* The fungal cell wall is composed of glucans and chitin; while glucans are also found in plants and chitin in the exoskeleton of arthropods, fungi are the only organisms that combine these two structural molecules in their cell wall.
Similar to animals, fungi are heterotrophs; they acquire their food by absorbing dissolved molecules, typically by secreting digestive enzymes into their environment.
As with the structurally similar hook in the ascomycetes, the clamp connection in the basidiomycetes is required for controlled transfer of nuclei during cell division, to maintain the dikaryotic stage with two genetically different nuclei in each hyphal compartment.
Quorn, a meat substitute, is made from ''Fusarium venenatum''.
This fungal group is distinct from the structurally similar myxomycetes (slime molds) and oomycetes (water molds).
Widespread use of antibiotics for the treatment of bacterial diseases, such as tuberculosis, syphilis, leprosy, and others began in the early 20th century and continues to date.
These alkaloids protect grass plants from herbivory, but several endophyte alkaloids can poison grazing animals, such as cattle and sheep.
However, the relative proportion of fungal spores relative to spores formed by algal species is difficult to assess, the spike did not appear worldwide, and in many places it did not fall on the Permian–Triassic boundary.
Other drugs produced by fungi include griseofulvin isolated from ''Penicillium griseofulvum'', used to treat fungal infections, and statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors), used to inhibit cholesterol synthesis.
Fungal reproduction is complex, reflecting the differences in lifestyles and genetic makeup within this diverse kingdom of organisms.
Furthermore, persons with immuno-deficiencies are particularly susceptible to disease by genera such as ''Aspergillus'', ''Candida'', ''Cryptoccocus'', ''Histoplasma'', and ''Pneumocystis''.
These include aspergillosis, candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, mycetomas, and paracoccidioidomycosis.
Around 100,000 species of fungi have been formally described by taxonomists, but the global biodiversity of the fungus kingdom is not fully understood.
A characteristic that places fungi in a different kingdom from plants, bacteria and some protists, is  chitin in their cell walls.
After dispersal, the ascospores may germinate and form a new haploid mycelium.
Baker's yeast or ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'', a unicellular fungus, is used to make bread and other wheat-based products, such as pizza dough and dumplings.
Micheli not only observed spores but also showed that, under the proper conditions, they could be induced into growing into the same species of fungi from which they originated.
Some individual fungal colonies can reach extraordinary dimensions and ages as in the case of a clonal colony of ''Armillaria solidipes'', which extends over an area of more than 900&nbsp;ha (3.5 square miles), with an estimated age of nearly 9,000&nbsp;years.
Other important basidiomycetes include the maize pathogen ''Ustilago maydis'', human commensal species of the genus ''Malassezia'', and the opportunistic human pathogen, ''Cryptococcus neoformans''.
The 2007 classification of Kingdom Fungi is the result of a large-scale collaborative research effort involving dozens of mycologists and other scientists working on fungal taxonomy.
The fungal partners may also mediate plant-to-plant transfer of carbohydrates and other nutrients.
Termites on the African savannah are also known to cultivate fungi, and yeasts of the genera ''Candida'' and ''Lachancea'' inhabit the gut of a wide range of insects, including neuropterans, beetles, and cockroaches; it is not known whether these fungi benefit their hosts.
Most fungi grow as hyphae, which are cylindrical, thread-like structures 2–10&nbsp;µm in diameter and up to several centimeters in length.
Historically, fly agaric was used by different peoples in Europe and Asia and its present usage for religious or shamanic purposes is reported from some ethnic groups such as the Koryak people of north-eastern Siberia.
Classification based on morphological characteristics, such as the size and shape of spores or fruiting structures, has traditionally dominated fungal taxonomy.
It is estimated that a third of all fungi reproduce using more than one method of propagation; for example, reproduction may occur in two well-differentiated stages within the life cycle of a species, the teleomorph and the anamorph.
Edible mushrooms are well-known examples of fungi.
Molecular phylogenies, inferred from rRNA sequences in ribosomes, suggest that the Chytrids are a basal group divergent from the other fungal phyla, consisting of four major clades with suggestive evidence for paraphyly or possibly polyphyly.
Medically relevant genera include ''Mucor'', ''Rhizomucor'', and ''Rhizopus''.
They reproduce by both sexual and asexual means, and like basal plant groups (such as ferns and mosses) produce spores.
As eukaryotes, fungi possess a biosynthetic pathway for producing terpenes that uses mevalonic acid and pyrophosphate as chemical building blocks.
Although fungal spores were first observed by Giambattista della Porta in 1588, the seminal work in the development of mycology is considered to be the publication of Pier Antonio Micheli's 1729 work ''Nova plantarum genera''.
Fungi are used extensively to produce industrial chemicals like citric, gluconic, lactic, and malic acids, and industrial enzymes, such as lipases used in biological detergents, cellulases used in making cellulosic ethanol and stonewashed jeans, and amylases, invertases, proteases and xylanases.
Other notable early contributors to mycology in the 17th–19th and early 20th centuries include Miles Joseph Berkeley, August Carl Joseph Corda, Anton de Bary, the brothers Louis René and Charles Tulasne, Arthur H. R. Buller, Curtis G. Lloyd, and Pier Andrea Saccardo.
Sexual reproduction with meiosis exists in all fungal phyla except Glomeromycota.
They have long been used as a direct source of food, in the form of mushrooms and truffles; as a leavening agent for bread; and in the fermentation of various food products, such as wine, beer, and soy sauce.
Lichens occur in every ecosystem on all continents, play a key role in soil formation and the initiation of biological succession, and are the dominating life forms in extreme environments, including polar, alpine, and semiarid desert regions.
Both asexual and sexual spores or sporangiospores are often actively dispersed by forcible ejection from their reproductive structures.
''Ellobiopsis'', now in Alveolata, was considered a chytrid.
However, little is known of the true biodiversity of Kingdom Fungi, which has been estimated at 1.5 million to 5 million species, with about 5% of these having been formally classified.
Other forms of fungal growth include intercalary extension (longitudinal expansion of hyphal compartments that are below the apex) as in the case of some endophytic fungi, or growth by volume expansion during the development of mushroom stipes and other large organs.
In the past, mycology was regarded as a branch of botany, although it is now known fungi are genetically more closely related to animals than to plants.
Endophytic fungi of grasses of the genus ''Neotyphodium'', such as ''N.
Many species produce bioactive compounds called mycotoxins, such as alkaloids and polyketides, that are toxic to animals including humans.
Some well-known examples of fungi formerly in the Zygomycota include black bread mold (''Rhizopus stolonifer''), and ''Pilobolus'' species, capable of ejecting spores several meters through the air.
Particularly important are the antibiotics, including the penicillins, a structurally related group of β-lactam antibiotics that are synthesized from small peptides.
Most grow in terrestrial environments, though several species live partly or solely in aquatic habitats, such as the chytrid fungus ''Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis'', a parasite that has been responsible for a worldwide decline in amphibian populations.
Many Actinomycetales (Actinobacteria), a group with many filamentous bacteria, were also long believed to be fungi.
Fly agaric mushrooms (''Amanita muscaria'') also cause occasional non-fatal poisonings, mostly as a result of ingestion for its hallucinogenic properties.
Slime molds lack a cell wall during the assimilative phase (except labyrinthulids, which have a wall of scales), and ingest nutrients by ingestion (phagocytosis, except labyrinthulids) rather than absorption (osmotrophy, as fungi, labyrinthulids, oomycetes and hyphochytrids).
Mushroom farming and mushroom gathering are large industries in many countries.
These fungi form meiotic spores called ascospores, which are enclosed in a special sac-like structure called an ascus.
Mycelia grown on solid agar media in laboratory petri dishes are usually referred to as colonies.
Other groups now in Opisthokonta (e.g., ''Corallochytrium'', Ichthyosporea) were also at given time classified as fungi.
coenophialum'', produce alkaloids that are toxic to a range of invertebrate and vertebrate herbivores.
Some can survive the intense UV and cosmic radiation encountered during space travel.
maydis'' can respond to the oxidative burst with an oxidative stress response, regulated by the gene ''YAP1''.
Growth is their means of mobility, except for spores (a few of which are flagellated), which may travel through the air or water.
Fungi have been shown to biomineralize uranium oxides, suggesting they may have application in the bioremediation of radioactively polluted sites.
The mechanical pressure exerted by the appressorium is generated from physiological processes that increase intracellular turgor by producing osmolytes such as glycerol.
Efforts among researchers are now underway to establish and encourage usage of a unified and more consistent nomenclature.
It is presumed that the fungi colonized the land during the Cambrian (542–488.3&nbsp;Ma), long before land plants.
Mycelial fragmentation occurs when a fungal mycelium separates into pieces, and each component grows into a separate mycelium.
Examples that have been used as biological insecticides are ''Beauveria bassiana'', ''Metarhizium'' spp, ''Hirsutella'' spp, ''Paecilomyces'' (''Isaria'') spp, and ''Lecanicillium lecanii''.
Several groups of ants cultivate fungi in the order Agaricales as their primary food source, while ambrosia beetles cultivate various species of fungi in the bark of trees that they infest.
Many ascomycete species have only been observed undergoing asexual reproduction (called anamorphic species), but analysis of molecular data has often been able to identify their closest teleomorphs in the Ascomycota.
Prominent and important genera of filamentous ascomycetes include ''Aspergillus'', ''Penicillium'', ''Fusarium'', and ''Claviceps''.
Plants and some other organisms have an additional terpene biosynthesis pathway in their chloroplasts, a structure fungi and animals do not have.
Modern penicillins are semisynthetic compounds, obtained initially from fermentation cultures, but then structurally altered for specific desirable properties.
Two amber-preserved specimens provide evidence that the earliest known mushroom-forming fungi (the extinct species ''Archaeomarasmius leggetti'') appeared during the late Cretaceous, 90&nbsp;Ma.
These structures aid reproduction by efficiently dispersing spores or spore-containing propagules.
* With plants: Fungi have a cell wall and vacuoles.
In ascomycetes, dikaryotic hyphae of the hymenium (the spore-bearing tissue layer) form a characteristic ''hook'' at the hyphal septum.
Fungi that were placed in the Zygomycota are now being reassigned to the Glomeromycota, or the subphyla incertae sedis Mucoromycotina, Kickxellomycotina, the Zoopagomycotina and the Entomophthoromycotina.
The filamentous fungus ''Paecilomyces lilacinus'' uses a similar structure to penetrate the eggs of nematodes.
Lichen-like fossils have been found in the Doushantuo Formation in southern China dating back to 635–551&nbsp;Ma.
Examples of statins found in fungi include mevastatin from ''Penicillium citrinum'' and lovastatin from ''Aspergillus terreus'' and the oyster mushroom.
The use of fungi by humans dates back to prehistory; Ötzi the Iceman, a well-preserved mummy of a 5,300-year-old Neolithic man found frozen in the Austrian Alps, carried two species of polypore mushrooms that may have been used as tinder (''Fomes fomentarius''), or for medicinal purposes (''Piptoporus betulinus'').
Differences also exist between fungal groups and can be used to discriminate species by morphological differences in sexual structures and reproductive strategies.
As it is difficult to accurately identify a safe mushroom without proper training and knowledge, it is often advised to assume that a wild mushroom is poisonous and not to consume it.
These current phylogenetic analyses often overturn classifications based on older and sometimes less discriminative methods based on morphological features and biological species concepts obtained from experimental matings.
The Chytridiomycota are commonly known as chytrids.
Particularly infamous are the lethal amatoxins in some ''Amanita'' mushrooms, and ergot alkaloids, which have a long history of causing serious epidemics of ergotism (St Anthony's Fire) in people consuming rye or related cereals contaminated with sclerotia of the ergot fungus, ''Claviceps purpurea''.
More recently, methods have been developed for genetic engineering of fungi, enabling metabolic engineering of fungal species.
Some time after the Permian–Triassic extinction event (251.4&nbsp;Ma), a fungal spike (originally thought to be an extraordinary abundance of fungal spores in sediments) formed, suggesting that fungi were the dominant life form at this time, representing nearly 100% of the available fossil record for this period.
Mycotoxins are secondary metabolites (or natural products), and research has established the existence of biochemical pathways solely for the purpose of producing mycotoxins and other natural products in fungi.
Filaments of mating "type a" ordinarily have haploid nuclei, but they can become diploid (perhaps by endoduplication or by stimulated nuclear fusion) to form blastospores.
The biological species concept discriminates species based on their ability to mate.
Because of the capacity of this group to produce an enormous range of natural products with antimicrobial or other biological activities, many species have long been used or are being developed for industrial production of antibiotics, vitamins, and anti-cancer and cholesterol-lowering drugs.
In mycology, species have historically been distinguished by a variety of methods and concepts.
Milk mushrooms, morels, chanterelles, truffles, black trumpets, and ''porcini'' mushrooms (''Boletus edulis'') (also known as king boletes) demand a high price on the market.
Yeast species of the genus ''Saccharomyces'' are also used to produce alcoholic beverages through fermentation.
Unlike true fungi, the cell walls of oomycetes contain cellulose and lack chitin.
Web sites such as Index Fungorum and ITIS list current names of fungal species (with cross-references to older synonyms).
Many mushroom species are poisonous to humans, with toxicities ranging from slight digestive problems or allergic reactions as well as hallucinations to severe organ failures and death.
Hyphae are specifically adapted for growth on solid surfaces, and to invade substrates and tissues.
Extending the use of the binomial system of nomenclature introduced by Carl Linnaeus in his ''Species plantarum'' (1753), the Dutch Christian Hendrik Persoon (1761–1836) established the first classification of mushrooms with such skill so as to be considered a founder of modern mycology.
Most common mushrooms belong to this group, as well as rust and smut fungi, which are major pathogens of grains.
Ever since the pioneering 18th and 19th century taxonomical works of Carl Linnaeus, Christian Hendrik Persoon, and Elias Magnus Fries, fungi have been classified according to their morphology (e.g., characteristics such as spore color or microscopic features) or physiology.
In Europe and Japan, polysaccharide-K (brand name Krestin), a chemical derived from ''Trametes versicolor'', is an approved adjuvant for cancer therapy.
Another mechanism involves meiosis.
Although often inconspicuous, fungi occur in every environment on Earth and play very important roles in most ecosystems.
Recent (2009) studies suggest that the ancestral ecological state of the Ascomycota was saprobism, and that independent lichenization events have occurred multiple times.
For much of the Paleozoic Era (542–251&nbsp;Ma), the fungi appear to have been aquatic and consisted of organisms similar to the extant chytrids in having flagellum-bearing spores.
These colonies can exhibit growth shapes and colors (due to spores or pigmentation) that can be used as diagnostic features in the identification of species or groups.
Losses of crops due to fungal diseases (e.g., rice blast disease) or food spoilage can have a large impact on human food supplies and local economies.
* Some species grow as unicellular yeasts that reproduce by budding or binary fission.
To overcome this limitation, some fungi, such as ''Armillaria'', form rhizomorphs, which resemble and perform functions similar to the roots of plants.
Environmental conditions trigger genetically determined developmental states that lead to the creation of specialized structures for sexual or asexual reproduction.
They may become noticeable when fruiting, either as mushrooms or as molds.
Several of these fungi are domesticated species that were bred or selected according to their capacity to ferment food without producing harmful mycotoxins (see below), which are produced by very closely related ''Aspergilli''.
Both fungi and oomycetes grow as filamentous hyphal cells.
This organism spends part of its life cycle as a motile zoospore, enabling it to propel itself through water and enter its amphibian host.
''Tricholoma equestre'' was considered edible until it was implicated in serious poisonings causing rhabdomyolysis.
They have a characteristic range of soluble carbohydrates and storage compounds, including sugar alcohols (e.g., mannitol), disaccharides, (e.g., trehalose), and polysaccharides (e.g., glycogen, which is also found in animals).
Rare in the fossil record are the Homobasidiomycetes (a taxon roughly equivalent to the mushroom-producing species of the Agaricomycetes).
Because the products of meiosis are retained within the sac-like ascus, ascomycetes have been used for elucidating principles of genetics and heredity (e.g., ''Neurospora crassa'').
