The failure of ''Epoch'', the magazine he had founded with Mikhail after the suppression of ''Vremya'', worsened his financial situation, although the continued help of his relatives and friends averted bankruptcy.
One of Dostoyevsky's friends, Milyukov, advised him to hire a secretary.
His father, Mikhail, was expected to join the clergy but instead ran away from home and broke with the family permanently.
But he spoke about Christ ecstatically."
A crater on Mercury was named after him in 1979, and a minor planet discovered in 1981 by Lyudmila Karachkina was named 3453 Dostoevsky.
In April 1876, in response to a question about a suicide in ''Diary of a Writer'', he remarked that he was a "philosophical deist"—this was a quote from ''The Adolescent'', though he did not say that it was.
He speaks with the tone of a prophet.
According to critic Alexander Burry, some of the most effective adaptions are Sergei Prokofiev's opera ''The Gambler'', Leoš Janáček's opera ''From the House of the Dead'', Akira Kurosawa's film ''The Idiot'' and Andrzej Wajda's film ''The Possessed''.
Pyotr gathers conspirators such as the philosophising Shigalyov, the suicidal Kirillov and the former military man Virginsky.
In his semi-autobiographical  ''Notes from the House of the Dead'' the protagonist has a friendship with a Jew, Isaiah Fomitch Bumstein, who is portrayed in a positive manner: 'We were great friends: his good-humour was inexhaustible'.
An Eagle Award-winning TV series directed by Vladimir Khotinenko about Dostoyevsky's life was screened in 2011.
Although he emphasises that he does not intend to publish his notes for the public, the narrator appeals repeatedly to an ill-described audience, whose questions he tries to address.
Polyphony is a literary concept, analogous with musical polyphony, developed by M. M. Bakhtin on the basis of his analyses of Dostoyevsky's works.
He was respected by most of the other prisoners, and despised by some because of his xenophobic statements.
Dostoyevsky and Apollonia (Polina) Suslova had a short but intimate affair, which peaked in the winter of 1862–63.
In 1864 his wife Maria and brother Mikhail died, and Dostoyevsky became the lone parent of his stepson Pasha and the sole supporter of his brother's family.
Branches of the family included Russian Orthodox Christians, Roman Catholics and Eastern Catholics.
He met his second love, Polina Suslova, in Paris and lost nearly all his money gambling in Wiesbaden and Baden-Baden.
Their relationship is not verified; Anna Dostoyevskaya spoke of a good affair, but Korvin-Krukovskaya's sister, the mathematician Sofia Kovalevskaya, thought that Korvin-Krukovskaya had rejected him.
The family later moved to the apartment where Dostoyevsky had written his first works.
Like Christ, Myshkin is a teacher, confessor and mysterious outsider.
The execution was stayed when a cart delivered a letter from the Tsar commuting the sentence.
Before his arrest for participating in the Petrashevsky Circle in 1849, Dostoyevsky remarked, "As far as I am concerned, nothing was ever more ridiculous than the idea of a republican government in Russia."
Most contemporary critics and scholars agree that Dostoyevsky is attacking Roman Catholicism and socialist atheism, both represented by the Inquisitor.
He found Protestantism self-contradictory and claimed that it would ultimately lose power and spirituality.
Others found fault with chaotic and disorganised plots, and others, like Turgenev, objected to "excessive psychologising" and too-detailed naturalism.
Dostoyevsky distinguished three "enormous world ideas" prevalent in his time: Roman Catholicism, Protestantism and Russian Orthodoxy.
The book includes numerous essays and a few short stories about society, religion, politics and ethics.
Had the serfs been found guilty and sent to Siberia, Khotiaintsev would have been in a position to buy the vacated land.
Dostoyevsky expressed religious, psychological and philosophical ideas in his writings.
Her flowing and easy translations helped popularise Dostoyevsky's novels in anglophone countries, and Bakthin's ''Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics'' (1929) provided further understanding of his style.
His books have been translated into more than 170 languages.
In his incomplete article "Socialism and Christianity", Dostoyevsky claimed that civilisation ("the second stage in human history") had become degraded, and that it was moving towards liberalism and losing its faith in God.
In the summer of 1876, Dostoyevsky began experiencing shortness of breath again.
Dostoyevsky is regarded as one of the greatest and most influential novelists of the Golden Age of Russian literature.
;Crime and Punishment
Instead of answering him, Christ gives him a kiss, and the Inquisitor subsequently releases him, telling him not to return.
Dostoyevsky received more letters from readers than ever before, and people of all ages and occupations visited him.
Modern cultural movements such as the surrealists, the existentialists and the Beats cite Dostoyevsky as an influence, and he is cited as the forerunner of Russian symbolism, existentialism, expressionism and psychoanalysis.
Numerous memorials were inaugurated in cities and regions such as Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Novosibirsk, Omsk, Semipalatinsk, Kusnetsk, Darovoye, Staraya Russa, Lyublino, Tallinn, Dresden, Baden-Baden and Wiesbaden.
With assistance from Anna's brother, the family bought a dacha in Staraya Russa.
Dostoyevsky completed his first novel, ''Poor Folk'', in May 1845.
She doesn't deserve this love&nbsp;..." In 1858 Dostoyevsky had a romance with comic actress Aleksandra Ivanovna Schubert.
He considers his own decline natural and necessary.
He advocated social change instead, for example removal of the feudal system and a weakening of the divisions between the peasantry and the affluent classes.
Dostoyevsky did not refuse permission, but he advised against it, as he believed that "each art corresponds to a series of poetic thoughts, so that one idea cannot be expressed in another non-corresponding form".
He schemes to consolidate their loyalty to him and each other by murdering Ivan Shatov, a fellow conspirator.
He began writing in his 20s, and his first novel, ''Poor Folk'', was published in 1846 when he was 25.
On 3 February 1880 Dostoyevsky was elected vice-president of the Slavic Benevolent Society, and he was invited to speak at the unveiling of the Pushkin memorial in Moscow.
Konstantin Pobedonostsev, future Imperial High Commissioner of the Most Holy Synod, influenced Dostoyevsky's political progression to conservatism.
In 1849, the first parts of ''Netochka Nezvanova'', a novel Dostoyevsky had been planning since 1846, were published in ''Annals of the Fatherland'', but his banishment ended the project.
He began to travel around western Europe and developed a gambling addiction, which led to financial hardship.
Antonelli, the government agent who had reported the group, wrote in his statement that at least one of the papers criticised Russian politics and religion.
While returning to St Petersburg to finalise his ''Diary'', he visited Darovoye, where he had spent much of his childhood.
Otherwise, it received a mixed reception from critics, with most of the negative responses coming from nihilists.
In Semipalatinsk, Dostoyevsky revived his faith by looking frequently at the stars.
To pay the school fees, his father borrowed money and extended his private medical practice.
Classified as "one of the most dangerous convicts", Dostoyevsky had his hands and feet shackled until his release.
In 1956 an olive-green postage stamp dedicated to Dostoyevsky was released in the Soviet Union, with a print run of 1,000 copies.
His aggression turns inward on to himself and he tries to humiliate himself further.
The only known facts about his situation are that he has quit the service, lives in a basement flat on the outskirts of Saint Petersburg and finances his livelihood from a modest inheritance.
Fyodor Dostoyevsky, born on , was the second child of Dr. Mikhail Dostoyevsky and Maria Dostoyevskaya (née Nechayeva).
Dostoyevsky revived his friendships with Maykov and Strakhov and made new acquaintances, including church politician Terty Filipov and the brothers Vsevolod and Vladimir Solovyov.
In Tobolsk, the members received food and clothes from the Decembrist women, as well as several copies of the New Testament with a ten-ruble banknote inside each copy.
The story of ''Demons'' is based largely on the murder of Ivan Ivanov by "People's Vengeance" members in 1869.
Dostoyevsky returned to Saint Petersburg in mid-September and promised his editor, Fyodor Stellovsky, that he would complete ''The Gambler'', a short novel focused on gambling addiction, by November, although he had not yet begun writing it.
In 1856 Dostoyevsky sent a letter through Wrangel to General Eduard Totleben, apologising for his activity in several utopian circles.
On 15 February 1867 Dostoyevsky married Snitkina in Trinity Cathedral, Saint Petersburg.
It was influenced by the Book of Revelation.
He later described her in a letter to Nadezhda Suslova as a "great egoist.
Dostoyevsky was introduced to literature at an early age.
The main plot is the death of their father Fyodor, while other parts are philosophical and religious arguments by Father Zosima to Alyosha.
''Notes from the House of the Dead'' was released in ''Russky Mir'' (Russian World) in September 1860.
Two pilgrimages and two works by Dmitri Rostovsky, an archbishop who influenced Ukrainian and Russian literature by composing groundbreaking religious plays, strengthened his beliefs.
Dostoyevsky's work was delayed when Anna's sister Maria Svatkovskaya died on 1 May 1872, either from typhus or malaria, and Anna developed an abscess on her throat.
When he was four his mother used the Bible to teach him to read and write.
As a result, he obtained the right to publish books and to marry, although he remained under police surveillance for the rest of his life.
As his friend Konstantin Trutovsky once said, "There was no student in the entire institution with less of a military bearing than F. M. Dostoyevsky.
Dostoevsky was an Orthodox Christian.
Anna gave birth to their second daughter, Lyubov, on 26 September 1869 in Dresden.
Around July, he reached Ems and consulted a physician, who diagnosed him with acute catarrh.
Dostoyevsky disliked the academy, primarily because of his lack of interest in science, mathematics and military engineering and his preference for drawing and architecture.
Dostoyevsky's parents subsequently had six more children: Varvara (1822–92), Andrei (1825–97), Lyubov (born and died 1829), Vera (1829–96), Nikolai (1831–83) and Aleksandra (1835–89).
They mostly lived apart.
On 8 June he delivered his speech, giving an impressive performance that had a significant emotional impact on his audience.
He visited Mikhail in Reval, and frequently attended concerts, operas, plays and ballets.
After graduating, he worked as an engineer and briefly enjoyed a lavish lifestyle, translating books to earn extra money.
Mikhail was refused admission on health grounds and was sent to the Academy in Reval, Estonia.
Elements of gothic fiction, romanticism, and satire are observable in some of his books.
She wrote that he "became very attracted to me".
On 25 January 1881, while searching for members of the terrorist organisation Narodnaya Volya ("The People's Will") who would soon assassinate Tsar Alexander II, the Tsar's secret police executed a search warrant in the apartment of one of Dostoyevsky's neighbours.
Dostoyevsky was occasionally sent to the military hospital, where he read newspapers and Dickens novels.
"The Insulted and the Injured" was published in the new ''Vremya'' (Time) magazine, which had been created with the help of funds from his brother's cigarette factory.
Even so, he and his fellow "conspirators" were arrested on 23 April 1849 at the request of Count A. Orlov and Emperor Nicolas&nbsp;I, who feared a revolution like the Decembrist revolt of 1825 in Russia and the Revolutions of 1848 in Europe.
Although theologian George Florovsky described Dostoyevsky as a "philosophical problem", because it is unknown whether Dostoyevsky believed in what he wrote, many philosophical ideas are found in books such as ''A Writer's Diary'' and ''The Brothers Karamazov''.
The protagonist and first-person narrator is an unnamed 40-year-old civil servant known as The Underground Man.
In the summer of 1873, Anna returned to Staraya Russa with the children, while Dostoyevsky stayed in St Petersburg to continue with his ''Diary''.
He was raised in the family home in the grounds of the Mariinsky Hospital for the Poor, which was in a lower class district on the edges of Moscow.
In 1871, Dostoyevsky and Anna travelled by train to Berlin.
''The House of the Dead'', based on his experience in prison, was published in 1861 in the journal Vremya – it was the first published novel about Russian prisons.
His philosophy, particularly in ''Demons'', was deemed capitalist and anti-Communist.
Konstantin Staniukovich praised the speech in his essay "The Pushkin Anniversary and Dostoyevsky's Speech" in ''The Business'', writing that "the language of Dostoyevsky's Pushkin Speech really looks like a sermon.
Many literary critics rate him as one of the greatest psychologists in world literature.
Two months later, he wrote in his ''Diaries'' that his heroine George Sand "died a ''déiste'', firmly believing in God and in the immortality of the soul," although deists at that time had a range of beliefs about the immortality of the soul.
In an 1881 edition of his ''Diaries'', Dostoyevsky  stated that the Tsar and the people should form a unity: "For the people, the tsar is not an external power, not the power of some conqueror&nbsp;... but a power of all the people, an all-unifying power the people themselves desired."
According to one reporter, more than 100,000 mourners were present, while others describe attendance between 40,000 and 50,000.
Maria then moved with Dostoyevsky to Barnaul.
He considered this crisis to be the consequence of the collision between communal and individual interests, brought about by a decline in religious and moral principles.
;The Brothers Karamazov
Their first child, Sonya, was conceived in Baden-Baden, and was born there on 5 March 1868.
His tombstone is inscribed with lines from the New Testament:
An incident involving a family servant, or serf, in the estate in Darovoye, is described in "The Peasant Marey": when the young Dostoyevsky imagines hearing a wolf in the forest, Marey, who is working nearby, comforts him.
Born in Moscow in 1821, Dostoyevsky was introduced to literature at an early age through fairy tales and legends, and through books by Russian and foreign authors.
The couple moved from Geneva to Vevey and then to Milan, before continuing to Florence.
In contrast to those around him, he puts no value on money and power.
For a time, he had to beg for money, but he eventually became one of the most widely read and highly regarded Russian writers.
Franz Kafka called Dostoyevsky his "blood-relative" and was heavily influenced by his works, particularly ''The Brothers Karamazov'' and ''Crime and Punishment'', both of which profoundly influenced ''The Trial''.
It was his explosive power which shattered the Victorian novel with its simpering maidens and ordered commonplaces; books which were without imagination or violence."
His oeuvre consists of 11 novels, three novellas, 17 short novels and numerous other works.
The most famous chapter is "The Grand Inquisitor", a parable told by Ivan to Alyosha about Christ's Second Coming in Seville, Spain, in which Christ is imprisoned by a ninety-year-old Catholic Grand Inquisitor.
The story focuses on poor people who struggle with their lack of self-esteem.
Dostoyevsky had his first known affair with Avdotya Yakovlevna, whom he met in the Panayev circle in the early 1840s.
He attended Sunday services from an early age and took part in annual pilgrimages to the St. Sergius Trinity Monastery.
Her shorthand helped Dostoyevsky to complete ''The Gambler'' on 30 October, after 26 days' work.
Albert Einstein put him above the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, calling him a "great religious writer" who explores "the mystery of spiritual existence".
Suslova's dalliance with a Spaniard in late spring and Dostoyevsky's gambling addiction and age ended their relationship.
The Underground Man was very influential on philosophers.
An unscrupulous merchant finds the inexperienced girl and hires her as his housewife and guarantor.
As his health began to decline, he consulted several doctors in St Petersburg and was advised to take a cure outside Russia.
Bakhtin argued that Dostoyevsky's use of multiple voices was a major advancement in the development of the novel as a genre.
After the 1917 Russian Revolution, passages of Dostoyevsky books were sometimes shortened, and only two books were censored: ''Demons'' and ''Diary of a Writer''.
His 1864 novella ''Notes from Underground'' is considered to be one of the first works of existentialist literature.
After his father's death, Dostoyevsky continued his studies, passed his exams and obtained the rank of engineer cadet, entitling him to live away from the academy.
During the Russo-Turkish War, Dostoyevsky asserted that war might be necessary if salvation were to be granted.
He admitted later that he was uncertain about their relationship.
Although they only accepted cash payments and the bookshop was in their own apartment, the business was successful, and they sold around 3,000 copies of ''Demons''.
In the mid-1840s he wrote his first novel, ''Poor Folk'', which gained him entry into St. Petersburg's literary circles.
From there he was assigned to a Moscow hospital, where he served as military doctor, and in 1818, he was appointed a senior physician.
He maintained that political parties ultimately led to social discord.
This book may have prompted his later interest in Christian socialism.
Dostoyevsky used the circle's library on Saturdays and Sundays and occasionally participated in their discussions on freedom from censorship and the abolition of serfdom.
Although Dostoyevsky had a delicate physical constitution, his parents described him as hot-headed, stubborn and cheeky.
He tells of meeting old school friends, who are in secure positions and treat him with condescension.
Nabokov complains that the novels are peopled by "neurotics and lunatics" and states that Dostoyevsky's characters do not develop: "We get them all complete at the beginning of the tale and so they remain."
He wanted the Muslim Ottoman Empire eliminated and the Christian Byzantine Empire restored, and he hoped for the liberation of Balkan Slavs and their unification with the Russian Empire.
The collection sold more than twice as many copies as his previous books.
He was interred in the Tikhvin Cemetery at the Alexander Nevsky Convent, near his favourite poets, Karamsin and Zhukovsky.
Although she divorced Dostoyevsky's friend Stepan Yanovsky, she would not live with him.
Their family life was unhappy and she found it difficult to cope with his seizures.
The case was discussed for four months by an investigative commission headed by the Tsar, with Adjutant General Ivan Nabokov, senator Count Pavel Gagarin, Count Vasili Dolgorukov, General Yakov Rostovtsev and General Leonty Dubelt, head of the secret police.
During the trip, he burnt several manuscripts, including those of ''The Idiot'', because he was concerned about potential problems with customs.
He frequently used autobiographical or semi-autobiographical details.
In 1859 he was released from military service because of deteriorating health and was granted permission to return to Russia, first to Tver, where he met his brother for the first time in ten years, and then to St Petersburg.
Back in Russia in July 1871, the family was again in financial trouble and had to sell their remaining possessions.
which are now considered to be unreliable.
Despite the circumstances, Dostoyevsky consoled the other prisoners, such as the Petrashevist Ivan Yastrzhembsky, who was surprised by Dostoyevsky's kindness and eventually abandoned his decision to commit suicide.
Maria married Dostoyevsky in Semipalatinsk on 7 February 1857, even though she had initially refused his marriage proposal, stating that they were not meant for each other and that his poor financial situation precluded marriage.
On 14 April 1867, they began a delayed honeymoon in Germany with the money gained from the sale.
The baby died of pneumonia three months later, and Anna recalled how Dostoyevsky "wept and sobbed like a woman in despair".
He declined an invitation to an international congress on copyright in Paris after his son Alyosha had a severe epileptic seizure and died on 16 May.
A Dostoevsky Museum was opened on 12 November 1971 in the apartment where he wrote his first and final novels.
Dostoyevsky's first completed literary work, a translation of Honoré de Balzac's novel ''Eugénie Grandet'', was published in June and July 1843 in the 6th and 7th volume of the journal ''Repertoire and Pantheon'', followed by several other translations.
Nikolay Nekrasov suggested that he publish ''A Writer's Diary'' in ''Notes of the Fatherland''; he would receive 250 rubles for each printer's sheet&nbsp;– 100 more than the text's publication in ''The Russian Messenger'' would have earned.
At nearly 800 pages, ''The Brothers Karamazov'' is Dostoyevsky's largest work.
Dostoyevsky entered the academy in January 1838, but only with the help of family members.
His major works include ''Crime and Punishment'' (1866), ''The Idiot'' (1869), ''Demons'' (1872) and ''The Brothers Karamazov'' (1880).
He claimed that Jews might exert a negative influence, but he advised the Tsar to allow them to occupy influential positions such as university professorships.
In 1809, the 20-year-old Mikhail Dostoyevsky enrolled in Moscow's Imperial Medical-Surgical Academy.
In 1846, on the recommendation of the poet Aleksey Pleshcheyev, he joined the Petrashevsky Circle, founded by Mikhail Petrashevsky, who had proposed social reforms in Russia.
Around November 1854, he met Baron , an admirer of his books, who had attended the aborted execution.
This visit further increased Dosteyevsky's circle of acquaintances.
Dostoyevsky's character and interests made him an outsider among his 120 classmates: he showed bravery and a strong sense of justice, protected newcomers, aligned himself with teachers, criticised corruption among officers and helped poor farmers.
In the following years, Dostoyevsky worked as a journalist, publishing and editing several magazines of his own and later ''A Writer's Diary'', a collection of his writings.
The novel takes place in a provincial Russian setting, primarily on the estates of Stepan Verkhovensky and Varvara Stavrogina.
After the birth of his first two sons, Mikhail and Fyodor, he was promoted to collegiate assessor, a position which raised his legal status to that of the nobility and enabled him to acquire a small estate in Darovoye, a town about 150&nbsp;km (100 miles) from Moscow, where the family usually spent the summers.
Several critics, such as Nikolay Dobrolyubov, Ivan Bunin and Vladimir Nabokov, viewed his writing as excessively psychological and philosophical rather than artistic.
James Joyce praised Dostoyevsky's prose: "...&nbsp;he is the man more than any other who has created modern prose, and intensified it to its present-day pitch.
The novel's protagonist, the 26-year-old Prince Myshkin, returns to Russia after several years at a Swiss sanatorium.
Dostoyevsky added a short commentary saying that although the storyline and characters are fictional, such things were inevitable in contemporary society.
He moved clumsily and jerkily; his uniform hung awkwardly on him; and his knapsack, shako and rifle all looked like some sort of fetter he had been forced to wear for a time and which lay heavily on him."
During a visit to Belikhov, Dostoyevsky met the family of Alexander Ivanovich Isaev and Maria Dmitrievna Isaeva and fell in love with the latter.
Pyotr escapes, but the remainder of his aspiring revolutionary crew is arrested.
Dostoyevsky did not love her either, but they were probably good friends.
Among his most cherished childhood memories were the prayers he used to recite in front of guests and a reading from the Book of Job that impressed him while "still almost a child."
He returned to Saint Petersburg in late July.
These characters were compared to those of Hoffmann, an author whom Dostoyevsky admired.
Their son Fyodor was born on 16 July, and they moved to an apartment near the Institute of Technology soon after.
The family arrived in Saint Petersburg on 8 July, marking the end of a honeymoon (originally planned for three months) that had lasted over four years.
The famous Malayalam novel ''Oru Sankeerthanam Pole'' by Perumbadavam Sreedharan deals with the life of Dostoyevsky and his love affair with Anna.
When he returned to Russia, Tsar Alexander II ordered Dostoyevsky to visit his palace to present the ''Diary'' to him, and he asked him to educate his sons, Sergey and Paul.
Myshkin is the personification of a "relatively beautiful man", namely Christ.
''Poor Folk'' is an epistolary novel that describes the relationship between the small, elderly official Makar Devushkin and the young seamstress Varvara Dobroselova, remote relatives who write letters to each other.
Dostoyevsky proposed that they establish a new periodical, which would be called ''A Writer's Diary'' and would include a collection of essays, but funds were lacking, and the ''Diary'' was published in Vladimir Meshchersky's ''The Citizen'', beginning on 1 January, in return for a salary of 3,000 rubles per year.
According to an officer at the military academy, Dostoyevsky was profoundly religious, followed Orthodox practice, and regularly read the Gospels and Heinrich Zschokke's ''Die Stunden der Andacht'' ("Hours of Devotion"), which "preached a sentimental version of Christianity entirely free from dogmatic content and with a strong emphasis on giving Christian love a social application."
Although his father's approach to education has been described as strict and harsh, Dostoyevsky himself reports that his imagination was brought alive by nightly readings by his parents.
Shortly thereafter, he wrote his second novel, ''The Double'', which appeared in the journal ''Notes of the Fatherland'' on 30 January 1846, before being published in February.
In the 1860s, he discovered ''Pochvennichestvo'', a movement similar to Slavophilism in that it rejected Europe's culture and contemporary philosophical movements, such as nihilism and materialism.
He was a frequent guest in several salons in Saint Petersburg and met many famous people, including Princess Sophia Tolstaya, Yakov Polonsky, Sergei Witte, Alexey Suvorin, Anton Rubinstein and Ilya Repin.
Dostoyevsky could at times, in his fiction, diaries and articles, be viciously antisemitic and yet, on other occasions, write appreciatively of Jews or defend their rights.
Some of his childhood experiences found their way into his writings.
