From 1982 to 1993, Gaborone was divided into two constituencies, Gaborone North and Gaborone South.
There is a Hindu temple in Gaborone, nicknamed ''Hindu Hall'', Swami Narayan Temple, Sai Centre as well as a gurudwara and several mosques.
International passengers total 244,073 passengers while domestic air passenger movement comes up to 333,390 passengers.
The Botswana Stock Exchange, National Museum and Art Gallery, and the main campus of the University of Botswana also lie near the Mall.
In 2008, Sir Seretse Khama International Airport handled 15,844 aircraft movements, second only to Maun Airport (ICAO code: FMBN IATA code: MUB) Air traffic in Gaborone has decreased since 2006.
The Gaborone Dam is located south of Gaborone along the Gaborone-Lobatse road, and provides water for both Gaborone and Lobatse.
The average dew point peaks around January and February at  and hits the lowest levels in July at .
Today, the Gaborone Broadcasting Company and Botswana TV provide television programming for Gaborone.
These settlements were named Naledi.
The city was planned under Garden city principles with numerous pedestrian walkways and open spaces.
There are many different species of animals found in the park such as common warthogs, steenbok, kudu, zebras, giraffes, common eland, ostriches, hippos and rhinos.
The National Assembly of Botswana, the Ntlo ya Dikgosi, the National Archives, the Department of Taxes and Attorney General's Chambers Building, and the Ministry of Health.
The Maitisong Festival was started in 1987 and is held every year for seven days on either the last week of March or the first week of April.
Also during the same period, the chloride concentration was 6.44&nbsp;mg/l, the fluoride concentration was 0.54&nbsp;mg/l, the potassium concentration was 6.72&nbsp;mg/l, and the sodium concentration was 10.76&nbsp;mg/l.
HIV/AIDS education is somewhat limited in Gaborone.
Evidence shows that there have been inhabitants along the Notwane River for centuries.
Phakalane, an affluent suburb, lies about 25&nbsp;km north of the city limits.
''Kombis'' (small vans) and taxis ply the routes within the city while buses serve surrounding villages and other towns in Botswana.
Gaborone is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world.
The majority of vehicle accident casualties involved pedestrians, and most traffic accidents occur between 16:00 and 18:00.
To the west of the Mall is the Government Enclave.
During the winter, days are still warm, and the nights are cold.
Near the entrance of the parliament building, there is a statue of Sir Seretse Khama, Botswana's first president as well as a memorial dedicated to the three hundred Batswana who were killed from 1939 to 1945.
The city is the government capital as well as the economic capital; the city is headquarters to numerous companies and the Botswana Stock Exchange.
Suburbs in Gaborone include Broadhurst, Gaborone West, The Village, Naledi, and New Canada.
Most of the marriages in Botswana are registered in Gaborone; about 15% of all marriages in Botswana were registered in Gaborone in 2007.
When Botswana gained its independence, Lobatse was the first choice as the nation's capital.
There is also an exhibit on the San, the earliest inhabitants of southern Africa.
Gaborone is one of the fastest growing cities in Africa.
In 2001, the average household size was 3.11 people.
Outside the museum, there are various forms of transportation such as wagons, sledges, and ''bakkies'' (pickup trucks).
The book series  The No.
It is composed of 35 councillors representing the wards of Gaborone.
The northern end of the reservoir is planned to become an entertainment venue called ''The Waterfront''.
The latter term literally means "the star", but could also mean "under the open sky" or "a community that stands out from all others".
It is also starting to be marketed as a recreational area.
City Scapes contains parks, playgrounds, and boating facilities.
The city was chosen because of its proximity to a fresh water source, its proximity to the railway to Pretoria, its central location among the central tribes, and its lack of association with those surrounding tribes.
There are 21 diplomatic missions in Gaborone.
Locals often refer to the city as ''Gabs''.
Construction started in May 2001 on a Venkateswara temple in Block 8, Gaborone for a local community of Telugu people by the Botswana Hindu Charities Trust and was complete in September 2007.
However, the demand for housing increased yet again; moreover, the residents who relocated to New Naledi disliked the houses.
The Main Mall, a car-free shopping and commercial area, runs in an east-west direction with the Government Enclave and National Assembly on the west end and the Gaborone City Town Council complex on the east.
The Cancer Association of Botswana is a voluntary non-governmental organization established as a trust in 1998.
Orapa House, located at the intersection of Khama Crescent and Nelson Mandela Drive, has a unique style of architecture that allows the perfect amount of indirect sunlight to shine through the windows in order to accurately sort diamonds.
Gaborone North had seven, Gaborone West had seven.
Gaborone International Airport terminal was rebuilt into a modern terminal in 2010.
Buildings in early Gaborone include Assembly buildings, government offices, a power station, a hospital, schools, a radio station, a telephone exchange, police stations, a post office, and more than 1,000 houses.
The city's central business district (CBD) is still under construction so when one says ''downtown'', they actually mean the ''Main Mall'' and ''Government Enclave'' areas where tall buildings are usually found.
On 30 September 1966, Bechuanaland became the eleventh British dependency in Africa to become independent.
The museum opened in 1968.
The Steinmetz Gaborone Marathon, the second marathon in Botswana, was held for the first time on 18 April 2010.
There are 113,603 males and 118,023 females in the city.
The line stops at the following cities in and near Botswana: Ramatlabama on the South African border, Lobatse, Gaborone, Palapye, Serule, Francistown, Ramokgwebana, and Plumtree, Zimbabwe.
The line became a cargo-only line on 1 April 2009 but passenger services resumed in early 2016.
The route started at the Phakalane Golf Estate in Phakalane, north of the city, and went through Gaborone, passing the National Assembly Building.
Including the district of Gaborone West, Gaborone had 9,415 vehicle accidents with 74 human fatalities in 2008.
Almost half of Botswana citizens live within  of Gaborone.
Exhibits include ''Artists in Botswana'', ''Children's Art Competition'' and ''Thapong International''.
There are on average fifty-one days per year with temperatures below .
The academy would provide training for middle managers for the countries in the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Former mayor Veronica Lesole has stated that Gaborone's development problems were caused by the original city planners.
Botswana Railways runs a line that goes from Cape Town to Harare via Bulawayo.
Today, Gaborone is growing very rapidly.
Gaborone is the political centre of Botswana.
Somarelang Tikologo (Environment Watch Botswana) is a member-based environmental NGO housed inside an ecological park at the heart of Gaborone.
The Townships Act mandates the structure of local governments in Botswana.
The population between 45–49 years of age are most likely to have AIDS with 35.4% of the residents in that age group testing positive.
Gaberones, derived from Gaborone's Village, was named after Chief Gaborone of the BaTlokwa, whose home village, now called Tlokweng, was across the river from the Government Camp, the name of the colonial government headquarters.
The Mokolodi Nature Reserve is a  reserve that was created in 1994.
In 2008, the city of Gaborone consumed  of water, and the water consumption per capita was  per person per year, the lowest rate since 1999.
The city has also seen 679 pedestrian casualties in 2008; 24 pedestrians were killed.
Because the city had no tribal affiliation and was close to fresh water, the city was planned to be the capital in the mid-1960s when the Bechuanaland Protectorate became an independent nation.
The city was then called "Gaberones" by the early European settlers.
The dam is the second biggest in Botswana, able to hold .
There are on average seventy-four days per year with temperatures above .
The dam is popular with birdwatchers, windsurfers, and anglers.
The Botswana national football team play in the National Stadium, but have never qualified for the FIFA World Cup, even though they recently qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations, held in Gabon in January 2012.
Highways in and around Gaborone include the Trans-Kalahari Highway, A1 Highway, and the Cairo-Cape Town Highway.
There is a yacht club, called  Gaborone Yacht Club, also on the northern side of the lake.
In 2010, the council had problems with waste management: Frenic, the waste management company hired by the city, sued the Gaborone City Council for unpaid compensation.
The city is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world, and this has created problems with housing and illegal settlements.
Gaborone also has the highest number of vehicle registration renewals at 73,206 in 2008.
Gaborone has been affected by three floods based on records going back to 1995, one in 2000, one in 2001 that caused an estimated 5,000,000 Botswana pula worth of damage, and one in 2006.
The city centre was planned to be functionalist, with major buildings designed and built in the style of Modern architecture.
In 1965, the capital of the Bechuanaland Protectorate moved from Mafeking to Gaberones.
English, iKalanga, and the native language of the Kgalagadi, are also spoken.
with different crafts people of Gaborone have managed to sustain their lives, be it in sports, and or performing arts.
AIDS is a very serious problem in Gaborone.
The southern end houses the Kalahari Fishing Club and a new public facility called City Scapes.
There is on average one day per year with temperatures below .
There are on average forty days of thunderstorms per year, most of them happening during the summer months, and four days of fog, usually happening during the winter months.
Other universities include the Limkokwing University Of Creative Technology, which also has a campus in Gaborone; the Botswana Accountancy College, which caters for both accounting and IT students, Gaborone Technical College, Boitekanelo College, Botho University which offers courses ranging from computing, accounting and finance, business, engineering and health information management courses; and Botswana University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (located about  from the city centre) are also located at Gaborone.
The old Gaberones became a suburb of the new Gaborone, and is now known as "the Village".
There is a higher prevalence of HIV among women; 20.5% of women have tested positive compared to 13.6% of men.
Kgale Hill is located a few hundred metres from the city.
US$1.7M, €1.4M, or £1.1M as of June 2010), and over the construction company, North Korean Mansudae Overseas Projects, putting the wrong inscription date.
Usually, the summers with little rainfall are warmer than summers with regular rainfall.
The nickname, "GC", comes from the name "Government Camp".
For local government elections, the four constituencies were divided into wards.
In more recent history, Kgosi Gaborone left the Magaliesberg to settle in the area around 1880, and called the settlement ''Moshaweng''.
Most of them are commuter towns for Gaborone.
The National Museum and Art Gallery is located just northwest of the Mall along Independence Road.
The population, based on the 2011 census, is 231,626.
In 1890, Cecil John Rhodes picked Gaberones to house a colonial fort.
The fort was where Rhodes planned the Jameson Raid.
At the eastern end of the Mall, one can find the Civic Centre along with the Pula Arch that commemorates Botswana's independence.
263 accidents involved animals.
93.7% of the households in Gaborone have a cell phone.
An International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) was established on 24 July 2000 in Gaborone.
The mother church for the diocese is the Christ the King Cathedral.
However, Gaborone has the most air passenger traffic, accounting for 51.6% of all passenger movement in Botswana.
Before 2000, residents of Gaborone received television programming from BOP TV in Mahikeng via a repeating transmitter on the summit of Kgale Hill.
However, Naledi still grew, and the demand for housing was greater than ever.
The previous bishop was Boniface Tshosa Setlalekgosi.
The museum opened a  botanical gardencalled the National Botanical Garden on 2 November 2007.
In 1964, Gaborone only had 3,855 citizens; seven years later, the city had almost eighteen thousand residents.
1 Ladies' Detective Agency, written by Scottish author Alexander McCall Smith, is set in Gaborone.
The city changed its name from Gaberones to Gaborone in 1969.
Today, the city council derives most of its revenue from property rates.
It is located  south of Gaborone.
Seventeen of the sixty private schools in Botswana are located in Gaborone.
Gaborone's CBD is home to the new Square Mall, The Tower, the new SADC headquarters, the Industrial Court, a court specifically for settling trade disputes, and the Three Dikgosi Monument, a landmark featuring the statues of Khama III, Sebele I, and Bathoen I, three dikgosi, or chiefs, who traveled to Great Britain to establish the Bechuanaland Protectorate separate from Southern Rhodesia (present-day Zimbabwe) or the Cape Colony (present-day South Africa).
The councillors elect the mayor in a first-past-the-post system and place each other in the committees yearly.
It is the headquarters of Air Botswana, the national airline of Botswana.
The nights are cool.
The park helps with wildlife projects in Botswana that include: the reintroduction of the white rhino and the relocation of “problem” cheetahs.
The railway station in Gaborone is located south of the Parliament House in the city's centre.
The total has increased from 12,690 new vehicle registrations in 2007.
Other buildings under construction in the CBD include the Holiday Inn Gaborone, retail space, and office space.
Most of the rainfall in Gaborone falls during the summer months, between October and April.
There are on average 196 days per year with temperatures above .
Several international companies have invested in the city: Hyundai, IBM, Daewoo, Volvo, Owens-Corning, and Siemens.
Public transport in the city is generally reliable, when compared with major African cities.
Most of the city was built within three years.
This has led to many squatter settlements on undeveloped land.
In the mid-1980s, South Africa attacked Botswana and conducted raids on Gaborone and other border towns.
of water was bought for domestic use, and  of water was bought by the commercial and industrial sectors.
The problem was solved in 1975 when Sir Seretse Khama, the president of Botswana, rezoned Naledi from an industrial zone to a low-income housing area.
The city council has been criticised by the Botswana Association of Local Authorities for its closed elections and minimal authority.
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) has its headquarters in Gaborone; the organization was formed in 1980 to increase economic cooperation among its members and reduce dependence on South Africa.
Luanda, Nairobi and various domestic destinations.
17,773 Gaborone citizens, 17.1% of the total population of Gaborone, have tested positive for HIV.
The marathon, which was cancelled in 2011, has been held annually starting from 2012.
The monument was inaugurated on 29 September 2005.
The concentration of calcium in the reservoir was 14.87milligrams per litre from April 2001 to August 2006.
While the statues represent famous historical figures, there has been some controversy over the cost of the construction, P12,000,000 (approx.
The summers are usually hot.
These include Westwood International School, Maru-a-Pula School, Legae Academy, Northside Primary School, Thornhill Primary School and Hillcrest International School.
This area contains the governmental buildings such as the National Assembly of Botswana and Ntlo ya Dikgosi buildings.
The government sector bought the most water, .
There are five major roads in Gaborone that go to Lobatse, Kanye, Molepolole, Francistown via Mochudi, and Tlokweng.
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Gaborone, which is under the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Pretoria, is located in the city.
78.7% of the households in Gaborone have a working television.
The population growth rate of Gaborone is 3.4%, the highest in the country.
The average wind speed in a given year is .
Most of the year, Gaborone is very sunny.
The Raid on Gaborone resulted in twelve deaths.
The Gaborone Game Reserve is a  park east of the city on Limpopo Drive.
In January 1993, two new constituencies were created: Gaborone West and Gaborone Central.
Much of the growth is based on net in migration from the rest of Botswana.
However, there is no swimming due to the presence of crocodiles and parasitic bilharzias.
If there is normal rainfall, the hottest temperatures are usually in October, right before the rain starts.
It is an administrative district in its own right, but is the capital of the surrounding South-East District.
The first mayor of Gaborone was Reverend Derek Jones.
The park was officially opened by the Botswana Minister of Environment, Wildlife and Tourism, Onkokame kitso Mokaila on 27 February 2009.
It is windier from September to November at , and it is calmer from May to August at  .
Gaborone comes between Chennai, India and Quito, Ecuador.
This is a low number compared to the rest of Botswana.
Solar radiation levels range from 14.6 MJ/m2 in June to 26.2 MJ/m2 in December.
The books follow Precious Ramotswe, the first female private detective in Botswana, and the mysteries that she solves.
Gaborone has many primary and secondary schools, both public and private.
The Ministry of Local Government, Land and Housing has a major influence in terms of personnel hiring and training, budgeting, and development planning.
Gaborone is controlled by the Gaborone City Council, the wealthiest council in Botswana.
Orapa House, owned by Debswana, is where the diamonds mined from Debswana are sorted and valued.
He advocates for a stronger city council with the power to determine budgets and hire and fire clerks and officers.
The park is a destination for  birdwatching.
The introduction of the ministry of youth sports and culture has immensely contributed to the growth of arts and culture, with few elements of culture used to create a living for the youth, the ministry buys the locally designed ornaments and artifacts.
14.5% of Gaborone residents between 10–64 who have heard of HIV/AIDS believe that HIV can be spread through witchcraft, and 31.3% of the residents believe HIV can be spread through mosquito bites.
It holds many things from traditional crafts to works of art by local artists.
The city commission-style council is run by the city clerk and the deputy city clerk.
The city has also dealt with conflicts spilling into the country from Zimbabwe and South Africa during the 1980s.
During the city's construction, the chairman of Gaberones Township Authority, Geoffrey Cornish, likened the layout of the city to a “brandy glass” with the government offices in the base of the glass and businesses in the “mall”, a strip of land extending from the base.
The Gaborone Universal College of Law, opened in 2006, has its main campus in Gaborone.
The growth of Gaborone, especially suburban growth, has caused much of the farmland surrounding the city to be absorbed into the city.
The city is served by the Sir Seretse Khama International Airport.
Its headquarters is at Diktlhakore Way, Extension 12, Gaborone.
The council has 2,515 employees.
Birds in the marshy section of the park include snake eagles, boubou, gallinule, kingfishers, and hornbills.
Another monument pays tribute to the Botswana Defence Force soldiers who died in the Rhodesian Bush War.
The National Archives building is also found here.
However, Lobatse was deemed too limited, and instead, a new capital city would be created next to Gaberones.
After the 1994 General Elections, riots started in Gaborone because of high unemployment and other issues.
The headquarters of important financial institutions such as the Bank of Botswana, Bank Gaborone, BancABC, and the Botswana Stock Exchange are centrally located, as well as the headquarters for Air Botswana, Consumer Watchdog, Botswana Telecommunications Corporation, and Debswana, the joint diamond mining venture between De Beers and the Botswana government.
Many languages are spoken there, Setswana (Tswana) being the main language.
The festival holds outdoor concerts, plays, and films in various venues around the city.
Gaborone Central had six, and Gaborone South had five.
Because the city was built so quickly, there was a massive influx of labourers who had built illegal settlements on the new city's southern industrial development zone.
The word "Gaborone" literally means "it does not fit badly" or "it is not unbecoming".
These include SSKB Stadium, Mochudi Stadium, and Botswana National Stadium.
