The main gods held in high regard were the Tuatha Dé Danann; the superhuman beings said to have ruled Ireland before the coming of the Milesians; known in later times as the ''aes sídhe''.
It is also worth noting that eponymous characters were created in medieval Irish pseudo-histories: Scota, described as an Egyptian princess, and her husband Goídel Glas.
The Romans began to use the term ''Scoti'' to describe the Gaels in the Latin language from the 4th century onwards.
According to the scholar John T. Koch in his ''Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia'', the word in the form of ''Guoidel'' was borrowed from a Primitive Welsh form that became an Old Welsh term, roughly meaning "forest people", "wild men" or later "warriors".
The ''Finte na hÉireann'' (Clans of Ireland) was founded in 1989 to gather together clan associations; individual clan associations operate throughout the world and produce journals for their septs.
Informally, archetypal forenames such as ''Tadhg'' or ''Domhnall'' are sometimes used for Gaels.
Another group were the Ithians, descended from Íth (an uncle of Milesius) who were located in South Leinster (associated with the Brigantes) but they later became extinct.
First entering Europe proper 7,000 years ago, the Indo-Europeans developed bronze weapons and domesticated the horse, giving them the upper-hand in their conquest of the Old Europe and the proliferation of their lineages.
Some, particularly champions of Christianity, hold the 6th to the 9th centuries to be a Golden Age for the Gaels.
Although the Gaelic League itself aimed to be apolitical, this ideal was attractive to militant republicans such as the Irish Republican Brotherhood, who formulated and led the Irish Revolution at the turn of the 20th century; a key leader, Pádraig Pearse, imagined an Ireland "Not merely Free but Gaelic as well - Not merely Gaelic but Free as well."
), who are associated with R-M222 and the Dál gCais (i.e.
Ériu is mentioned as a goddess in the ''Lebor Gabála Érenn'' as a daughter of Ernmas of the ''Tuatha Dé Danann''.
The Gaelic revival also occurred in the 19th century, with organisations such as ''Conradh na Gaeilge'' and ''An Comunn Gàidhealach'' attempting to restore the prestige of Gaelic culture and to restore the hegemony of their language.
Scottish Gaelic did not undergo as extensive of a politicalisation at this juncture, as nationalists there tended to focus on the Lowland mythos of William Wallace rather than the ''Gàidhealtachd''.
In the context of the times, the Gaels were raiding the west coast of Britain for hostages, and they took part in the Great Conspiracy; it is thus conjectured that the term means "raider, pirate".
This era was also marked by a Gaelic presence in Great Britain; in what is today Wales, the Déisi founded Dyfed and the Uí Liatháin founded Brycheiniog.
Haplogroup R originated 26,800 years ago in Central Asia during the Last Ice Age.
claimed to be of the Uí Néill.
It also depends on the self-reported response of the individual and so is a rough guide rather than an exact science.
Based on the accounts of Tacitus, some modern historians associate him with an “Irish prince” said to have been entertained by Agricola, Governor of Britain and speculate at Roman sponsorship.
It is further divided into major kindreds, such as the Eóganacht Chaisil, Glendamnach, Áine, Locha Léin and Raithlind.
The Érainn included peoples such as the Corcu Loígde and Dál Riata.
In the ''Gaeltacht'' itself, the language has continued to be in crisis under the pressure of globalism, but there are institutions such as ''Údarás na Gaeltachta'' and a Minister for the Gaeltacht, as well as media outlets such as ''TG4'' and ''RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta'' to support it.
The Dublin Norse; some of them, such as Uí Ímair king Ragnall ua Ímair now partly Gaelicised as the Norse-Gaels; were a serious regional power, with territories across Northumbria and York.
After the R-L51 subclade founded the Unetice culture, a derivative R-L21 moved West arriving in Britain ''c.''
Further to the north, the Érainn's Dál Riata colonised Argyll (eventually founding Alba) and there was a significant Gaelic influence in Northumbria and the MacAngus clan arose to the Pictish kingship by the 8th century.
The ultimate origin of this word is thought to be from the Old Irish Ériu, which is from Old Celtic ''*Iveriu'', likely associated with the Proto-Indo-European term ''*pi-wer-'' meaning "fertile".
Similar to the Desert Fathers, Gaelic monastics were known for their asceticism.
Until 1973, school children had to pass Modern Irish to achieve a Leaving Cert and studying the subject remains obligatory.
The Normans arrived in Leinster initially due to Diarmait Mac Murchada's alliance with the Normans of Wales; following this, the King of England, with the backing of the Papacy, established the Lordship of Ireland in 1171 to stifle this rival force.
The spread of the English language has had the most significant impact historically on the number of speakers and a majority of people of Gaelic ancestry do not speak their forefather's language today.
There are about 2,000 Scottish Gaelic speakers in Canada (Canadian Gaelic dialect), although many are elderly and concentrated in Nova Scotia and Cape Breton Island.
There are also ''Gaelscoileanna'' where children are taught exclusively through the medium of Irish.
- MacNeill, Buchanan, Munro, etc.)
At first the Christian Church had difficulties infiltrating Gaelic life; Ireland had never been part of the Roman Empire and was a de-centralised tribal society, making patron-based mass conversion problematic.
These kindreds themselves contain septs that have passed down as Irish Gaelic surnames, for example the Eóganacht Chaisil includes O'Callaghan, MacCarthy, O'Sullivan and others.
Donnchad Donn raided Munster and took Cellachán Caisil of the Eóganachta hostage.
- O'Brien, McMahon, Kennedy, etc.)
The language was rolled back to the Gaelic strongholds of the north west of Scotland, the west of Ireland and Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia.
In the south, the influence of the Eóganachta based at Cashel grew further, to the detriment of Érainn clans such as the Corcu Loígde and Clann Conla.
The abbot and the monk eventually took over certain cultural roles of the ''aos dána'' (not least the roles of ''druí'' and ''seanchaí'') as the oral culture of the Gaels was transmitted to script by the arrival of literacy.
Some of them were associated with specific social functions, seasonal events and personal archetypal qualities.
The name ultimately derives from the Old Irish word ''Goídel'', spelled officially today as ''Gaedheal'', ''Gael'' (Irish and Manx) and ''Gàidheal'' (Scottish Gaelic).
This realm was variously held to be located on a set of islands or underground.
Many underwent a linguistic "Anglicisation" and some eventually merged with Anglo populations.
At the same time, the Uí Néill branches were involved in an internal power struggle to see if the northern or southern branch would be the hegemonic Gaelic force.
Ancient Roman writers, such as Caesar, Pliny and Tacitus, derived from "''Ivernia''" the name Hibernia.
2100 BCE and Ireland ''c.''
Gaelic Christian missionaries were also active across the Frankish Empire.
As part of this, the Catholic Church actively participated in the Norman conquest of Gaelic Ireland, with the issuing of ''Laudabiliter'' (claiming to gift the King of England the title "Lord of Ireland") and in Scotland strongly encouraged the program of king David who Normanised that country.
The Érainn; claiming descent from a Milesian eponymous ancestor named Ailill Érann; were the hegemonic power in Ireland prior to the rise of the descendents of Conn of the Hundred Battles and Mug Nuadat.
By the 6th century, the division of Ireland into two spheres of influence; Leath Cuinn and Leath Moga; was largely a reality.
Using the Munster-based Eóganachta as an example, members of this ''clann'' claim patrilineal descent from Éogan Mór.
This group has been associated with the Érainn of Irish tradition by T. F. O'Rahilly and others.
However, in most areas, the Gaels were gradually anglicized and the Gaelic languages supplanted by English.
This balance began to unravel during the 12th century with the polemics of Bernard of Clairvaux, who attacked various Gaelic customs (including polygamy and hereditary clergy) as "pagan".
His grandson, Conn Cétchathach, is the ancestor of the Connachta who would dominate the Irish Middle Ages.
This has seen the growth of Gaelic medium education.
The Catholic Church of the time, fresh from its split with the Orthodox Church, was becoming more centralised and uniform throughout Europe with the Gregorian Reform and military reliance on Germanic peoples at the fringes of Latin Christendom, particularly the warlike Normans.
He is described as a Scythian prince (the grandson of Fénius Farsaid), who is credited within creating the Gaelic languages.
), Laigin and Ulaid (including Dál nAraidi).
The earliest recorded cases of this were Rathlin and Iona in 795; these hit and run attacks would continue for some time until they began to settle in the 840s at Dublin (setting up a large slave market), Limerick, Waterford and elsewhere.
Due to the geopolitical rivalry between Protestant Britain and Catholic France or Spain, the Catholic religion and its mostly Gaelic followers in Ireland were persecuted for a long time.
Each was associated with a Gaelic tribe.
The 19th century was the turning point as The Great Hunger in Ireland and across the Irish Sea, the Highland Clearances, had the effect of causing mass emigration (leading to Anglicisation, but also a large Irish diaspora in particular).
Core destinations for "exiles" have been North America (what is today the United States and Canada) and Oceania (Australia and New Zealand).
It gradually penetrated through remnants of Roman Britain and is especially associated with the activities of Patrick; a Briton who had been a slave in Ireland.
This brought to end the independence of the last few Gaelic Irish kingdoms.
Thus Christianity in Ireland during this early time retained elements of Gaelic culture.
Clan associations built up over time and ''Na Fineachan Gàidhealach'' (The Highland Clans) was founded in 2013.
As the Roman Empire began to collapse, the Gaels; along with the Anglo-Saxons; were one of the peoples able to take advantage in Great Britain from the 4th century onwards.
There are also media outlets such as ''BBC Alba'' and ''BBC Radio nan Gàidheal''.
At this early point of the Milesian-era, the non-Gaelic Fir Domnann held Leinster and the Fir Ol nEchmacht held what was later known as Connacht (possibly remnants of the Fir Bolg).
claimed descent from Síl Conairi, for instance.
Similar Highland Gaelic groups existed, such as ''An Comunn Gàidhealach''.
Among the gods were male and female deities such as The Dagda, Lugh, Nuada, The Morrígan, Aengus, Brigid and Áine, as well as many others.
In traditional Gaelic society, a patrilineal kinship group is referred to as a ''clann''; this signifies a tribal grouping descended from a common ancestor, much larger than a personal family, which may also consist of various kindreds and septs.
The remainder of the Middle Ages would be defined by the conflict between Gael and Norman.
The Gaels believed that certain heroic persons could gain access to this spiritual realm, as recounted in the various ''echtra'' (adventure) and ''immram'' (voyage) tales.
For the Irish Gaels, the old clan system did not survive the incorporation of the Gaelic realms into the Kingdom of Ireland and the subsequent Flight of the Earls.
It was found that the overwhelming majority belonged to haplogroup R1b in their Y-chromosome DNA (as with much of Western Europe).
Unlike other religions, there is no overall "holy book" systematically setting out exact rules to follow, but various works, such as the ''Lebor Gabála Érenn'', ''Dindsenchas'', ''Táin Bó Cúailnge'' and ''Acallam na Senórach'', represent the metaphysical orientation of ''Gaelachas''.
The Isle of Man (, 'Mannin's Isle', from the pre-Christian deity known as Manannán mac Lír) also came under massive Gaelic influence in its history.
Even within orders such as the Franciscans, ethnic tensions between Norman and Gael continued throughout the later Middle Ages, as well as competition for ecclesiastic posts.
Other ethnonyms historically associated with the Gaels include ''Irish'' and ''Scots'', but the scope of those nationalities is today more complex.
The question of ethnic identity is slightly more complex, but included below are those who identify with Irish or Scottish ethnicity.
Lowland Germanics in Scotland spoke a language called ''Inglis'', which they started to call ''Scottis'' (Scots) in the 16th century, while they in turn began to refer to Scottish Gaelic as "Erse".
During the Victorian-era, symbolic tartans, crests and badges were retroactively applied to clans.
Gaelic language and culture originated in Ireland, extending to Dál Riata in southwest Scotland.
Learned in Greek and Latin during an age of cultural collapse, the Gaelic scholars were able to gain a presence at the court of the Carolingian Frankish Empire; perhaps the best known example is Johannes Scotus Eriugena.
This is due to the influence which the Gaels had across Western Europe as part of their Christian missionary activities.
The last native speaker of Manx died in the 1970s, though use of the Manx language never fully ceased.
There is now a resurgent language movement and Manx is once again taught in all schools as a second language and in some as a first language.
The Gaels underwent Christianisation during the 5th century and that religion, ''de facto'', remains the predominant one to this day, although irreligion is fast rising.
During the 19th century, a number of ''Gaeilgeoir'' (Irish language enthusiast) organisations were founded to promote a broad cultural and linguistic revival.
The religion of Christianity reached Ireland during the 5th century, most famously through a Romano-British slave Patrick, but also through Gaels such as Declán, Finnian and the Twelve Apostles of Ireland.
The ancient Greeks; in particular Ptolemy in his 2nd century ''Geographia'', possibly based on earlier sources; located a group known as the Iverni (Greek: '''') in the south-west of Ireland.
The Irish Gaels can be grouped into the following major historical clans; Connachta (including Uí Néill, Clan Colla, Uí Maine, etc.
In countries where Gaels live, census records documenting population statistics have taken place.
As well as this there has been a mass "internal migration" within the British Isles from the 19th century, with Gaelic Irish peasantry and Highlanders migrating to the English-speaking industrial cities of London, Dublin, Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, Cardiff, Leeds, Edinburgh and others.
Some arrivals in the High Middle Ages (i.e.
Ogham stones are found throughout Ireland and neighbouring parts of Britain.
The development of in-depth studies of DNA sequences known as STRs and SNPs, have allowed geneticists to associate subclades with specific Gaelic kindred groupings (and their surnames), vindicating significant elements of Gaelic genealogy, as found in works such as the ''Leabhar na nGenealach''.
With the coming of the Viking Age and their slave markets, Gaels were also dispersed in this way across the realms under Viking-control; as a legacy, in genetic studies, Icelanders exhibit high levels of Gaelic-derived mDNA.
The Kingdom of Ireland, which had its power in the Pale of Dublin was implemented and the high aristocracy was encouraged to apply for a surrender and regrant.
With regards to Gaelic genetic genealogy studies, these developments in subclades have aided people in finding their original clan group in the case of a non-paternity event, with Family Tree DNA having the largest such database at present.
The origins of a literary anti-Gaelic sentiment was born in this time, forwarded by the likes of Gerald of Wales, as part of a propaganda campaign (with a Gregorian "reform" gloss) to justify taking Gaelic lands.
Although the ''sídhe'' were held to intervene in worldly affairs sometimes, particularly battles and issues of sovereignty, the gods were held to reside in the Otherworld, also known as ''Mag Mell'' (Plain of Joy) or ''Tír na nÓg'' (Land of the Young).
The Norsemen also took the Hebrides and the Isle of Man from the Dál Riata clans and established the Kingdom of the Isles.
Some physical locations of importance in Ireland related to these stories include the Brú na Bóinne, Hill of Tara and Hill of Uisneach.
The Dál Riata (i.e.
The Irish Church became closer to Continental models with the Synod of Ráth Breasail and the arrival of the Cistercians; as well as this there was more economic trade and interlocking with Normanised Britain and France.
In the Highlands, the various Gaelic-originated clans tended to claim descent from one of the Irish groups, particularly those from Ulster.
The Gaels are depicted as wandering from place to place for hundreds of years; they spend time in Egypt, Crete, Scythia, the Caspian Sea and Getulia, before arriving in Iberia.
The two groups agree to divide Ireland between them: the Gaels take the world above, while the Tuath Dé take the world below (i.e.
In the Scottish Highlands too, the Gaels remained mostly Catholic, but many of them would later convert to Presbyterianism in the 19th century.
As far back as the Statutes of Kilkenny in 1366 there had been efforts to dissuade use of Gaelic for political reasons.
The late 8th century heralded external involvement in Gaelic affairs as the Norsemen from Scandinavia; known as the Vikings; began to raid and pillage settlements looking for booty.
The Romans called these Gaels "Scoti".
Examples can be taken from the Uí Néill (i.e.
The Highland clans held out until the 18th century Jacobite risings.
The word ''Gaelic'' is first recorded in print in the English language in the 1770s, replacing the earlier word ''Gathelik'' which is attested as far back as 1596.
The most important was Tara, where the High King (also known as the King of Tara) was inaugurated on the ''Lia Fáil'' (Stone of Destiny), which stands to this day.
Despite policies such as mandatory Irish language education, the living first-language communities have continued to become smaller however.
Throughout the centuries, Gaels and Gaelic-speakers have been known by a number of names.
Other terms, such as Milesian, are not as frequently used.
The destabilisation inadvertently led to the rise of the Dál gCais and Brian Bóruma.
The Gaels are then said to have sailed to Ireland via Galicia in the form of the Milesians, sons of Míl Espáine.
While the general worldview of the Gaelic tradition has been recovered, a major issue to wrestle with for academic scholars is that Gaelic culture was oral prior to the coming of Christianity and monks were the first to record their beliefs in a palatable manner as "mythology".
This term shared a root with the Old Irish ''fíad'' "deer", and was partially cognate with ''Féni'', from the Proto-Indo-European *''weidh-n-jo-''.
According to the ''Annals of the Four Masters'', the early branches of the Milesian Gaels were the Heremonians, the Heberians and the Irians, descended from the three brothers Érimón, Éber Finn and Ír respectively.
Initially, the Hermonians dominated the High Kingship of Ireland from their stronghold of Mide, the Heberians were given Munster and the Irians were given Ulster.
The Gaelic languages have been undergoing an existential crisis since at least the 19th century, when they went from majority languages of Ireland and the Scottish Highlands, to an endangered language today.
This was also a critical period for the Ulaid (earlier known as the Irians) as their kinsman Rudraige Mór took over the High Kingship in the 3rd century BCE; his offspring would be the subject of the Ulster Cycle of heroic tradition, including the epic ''Táin Bó Cúailnge''.
Many of the participants in the Irish Revolution of 1912-1923 were inspired by these ideals and so when a sovereign state was formed (the Irish Free State), the ideal of Gaelic culture was now more popular.
The '''Gaels''' (; ; ), also known as '''Goidels''', are an ethnolinguistic group indigenous to northwestern Europe.
), Dál gCais, Eóganachta, Érainn (including Dál Riata, Dál Fiatach, etc.
The two comparatively "major" Gaelic nations in the modern era are Ireland (which in the 2002 census had 185,838 people who spoke Irish "daily" and 1,570,894 who were "able" to speak it) and Scotland (58,552 "Gaelic speakers" and 92,400 with "some Gaelic language ability" in the 2001 census).
After a spell where the Norsemen were driven from Dublin by Leinsterman Cerball mac Muirecáin, they returned in the reign of Niall Glúndub, initiating a second Viking period.
Along with her sisters Banba and Fódla, she is said to have made a deal with the Milesians to name the island after her.
Examples can be taken from Johannes Scotus Eriugena and other figures from Hiberno-Latin culture and the ''Schottenkloster'' founded by Irish Gaels in Germanic lands.
After regaining power, the Heremonians, in the form of Fíachu Finnolach were overthrown in a 1st-century AD provincial coup.
Ériu, a goddess of the land, promises the Gaels that Ireland shall be theirs so long as they give tribute to her.
The Gaels fight a battle of sorcery with the Tuatha Dé Danann, the gods, who inhabited Ireland at the time.
Although the Dál Riata settled in Argyll in the 6th century, the term "Scots" did not just apply to them, but to Gaels in general.
As a result of the Gaelic revival, there has been renewed interest in Irish genealogy; the Irish Government recognised Gaelic Chiefs of the Name since the 1940s.
In their own national epic contained within medieval works such as the ''Lebor Gabála Érenn'', the Gaels trace the origin of their people to an eponymous ancestor named Goídel Glas.
who are associated with R-L226.
The Statutes of Iona in 1609 and the early workings of the SSPCK in the Highlands are also notable examples.
Many Irish kingdoms remained outside of Norman control and Gallowglass warriors were brought in from the Highlands to fight for various kings.
The 6th-9th centuries are generally held to be the height of Gaelic Christianity with numerous saints, scholars and works of devotional art.
Primitive Irish does appear in a specialised written form, using a unique script known as Ogham.
Estimates of the emergence of proto-Gaelic in Ireland vary widely from the introduction of agriculture circa 7000–6000 BC to around the first few centuries BC.
His son, Túathal Techtmar was exiled to Roman Britain before returning to claim Tara.
At the turn of the 21st century, the principles of human genetics and genetic genealogy were applied to the study of populations of Gaelic origin.
The Gaels of northern Britain referred to themselves as ''Albannaich'' in their own tongue and their realm as the Kingdom of Alba (founded as a successor state to Pictland and Dál Riata).
- O'Neill, O'Donnell, Gallagher, etc.
The Gaels emerged into the clear historical record during the classical-era, with ogham inscriptions and quite detailed references in Greco-Roman ethnography (most notably by Ptolemy).
Aside from their activities abroad, insular art flourished domestically, with artifacts such as the Book of Kells and Tara Brooch surviving.
Some of the most celebrated figures of this time were Columba, Aidan, Columbanus and others.
At this time, Irish Gaelic was widely spoken along the Western seaboard (and a few other enclaves) and the Gaelic League began defining it as the "''Gaeltacht''", idealised as the core of true Irish-Ireland, rather than the Anglo-dominated Dublin.
Since that time Gaelic language rose and, in the past three centuries, greatly diminished, in most of Ireland and Scotland.
As the old Gaelic aristocracy were displaced or assimilated, the language lost its patronage and became primarily a peasant language, rather than one of education and the arts.
The proto-Eóganachta Uí Liatháin and the Déisi Muman of Dyfed both established colonies in today's Wales.
The last native Manx Gaelic speaker died in 1974, although there are ongoing attempts at revival.
During the 16th century, with the emergence of Protestantism and Tridentine Catholicism, a distinct Christian sectarianism made its way into Gaelic life, with societal effects carrying on down to this day.
- MacGregor, MacDuff, MacLaren, etc.)
Thus the name Hibernian also comes from this root (although the Romans tended to call the Gaels "''Scoti''").
This includes the struggle between Conchobar mac Nessa and Fergus mac Róich.
Through military might, Brian went about constructing a Gaelic Imperium under his High Kingship, even gaining the submission of Máel Sechnaill mac Domnaill.
In early modern Irish, the words ''Gaelic'' and ''Gael'' were spelled respectively ''Gaoidhealg'' and ''Gaoidheal''.
In the Middle Ages, it became dominant throughout Scotland and the Isle of Man also.
Aside from their gains in Ulster (excluding the Érainn's Ulaid), the Uí Néill's southern branch had also pushed down into Mide and Brega.
Their close relatives the Érainn (both groups descend from Óengus Tuirmech Temrach) and the Ulaid would later lose out to them in Ulster, as the descendants of the Three Collas in Airgíalla and Niall Noígíallach in Ailech extended their hegemony.
It is here that their king, Breogán, is said to have founded Galicia.
The modern descendants of the Gaels have spread throughout much of Great Britain and as far as the Americas and Oceania.
They are associated with the Gaelic languages; a branch of the Celtic languages comprising Irish, Manx and Scottish Gaelic.
The traditional, or "pagan", worldview lived by the pre-Christian Gaels of Ireland is typically described as animistic, polytheistic, ancestor venerating and focused on the hero cult of archetypal Gaelic warriors such as Cú Chulainn and Fionn mac Cumhaill.
As part of their self-justification; taking over power from the Norse-Gael MacLeod in the Hebrides; the MacDonalds claimed to be from Clan Colla.
The policies of the Lowland Scots Parliament were similar with the Statutes of Iona taking place in 1609 before the Union of the Crowns.
They agree, and their bard Amergin recites an incantation known as the ''Song of Amergin''.
''Gael'', defined as a "member of the Gaelic race", is first attested in print in 1810.
It is recorded as a personal name in the Book of Llandaff.
The following includes the number of speakers of a Gaelic language (either ''Gaeilge'', also known as Irish, ''Gàidhlig'', known as Scottish Gaelic, or ''Gaelg'', known as Manx).
The most consistent of these have been ''Gael'', ''Irish'' and ''Scot'', which continue to be used today, although the latter two have developed more ambiguous meanings (due to the early modern concept of the nation state and later romantic ideas, which encompasses non-Gaels).
They were involved in a series of battles against the Vikings; Tara, Glenmama and Clontarf; the latter of which saw Brian's death in 1014, glorified in the ''Cogad Gáedel re Gallaib''.
The Tudor state used the Anglican Church to bolster their power and enticed native elites into the project, without making much initial effort to convert the Irish Gaelic masses, meanwhile, the mass of Gaeldom (as well as the "Old English") became staunchly Catholic.
2000 BCE, becoming the Gaelic people.
This term was further popularised in academia by John Rhys; the first Professor of Celtic at Oxford University; due to his work ''Celtic Britain'' (1882).
During the Iron Age there was heightened activity at a number of important royal ceremonial sites, including Tara, Dún Ailinne, Rathcroghan and Emain Macha.
Communities where the languages are still spoken natively are restricted largely to the west coast of each country and especially the Hebrides in Scotland.
Advances in DNA studies have revealed some clues about the origin of the Gaels (who are associated with paternal R-L21).
Clonmacnoise, Glendalough, Clonard, Durrow and Inis Cathaigh are some of the more prominent Ireland-based monasteries founded during this time.
A common name, passed down to the modern day, is Irish; this existed in the English language during the 13th century in the form of ''Irisce'', which derived from the stem of Old English ''Iras'' "inhabitant of Ireland", from Old Norse ''irar''.
It should be taken into account that not all will have Gaelic descent, especially in the case of Scotland, due to the nature of the Lowlands.
Little can be said with certainty, as the language now known as Old Irish—ancestral to modern Irish, Scots Gaelic and Manx—first began to be properly recorded with the Christianisation of Ireland in the 4th century, after the introduction of the Roman script.
Since the fall of Gaelic polities, the Gaels have made their way across parts of the world, mainly under the auspices of the British Empire, but to a lesser extent under the Spanish Empire.
To the north, the Dál Riata are held to have established a territory in Argyll and the Hebrides.
''Conradh na Gaeilge'' was set up in 1893 and had its origins in Charles Owen O'Conor's Gaelic Union, itself a derivative of the Society for the Preservation of the Irish Language.
The script frequently encodes a name or description of the owner and surrounding region, and it is possible that the inscribed stones may have represented territorial claims.
