The youngest of the three brothers was Francesco whose life was spent entirely in Bergamo, except for a brief visit to Paris during his brother's decline.
He sought a final opinion from the three doctors practicing at the clinic, and on 30 August, they provided a lengthy report outlining step-by-step the complete physical condition of their declining patient, concluding that the rigours of travel—the jolting of the carriage, for example—could bring on new symptoms or complications impossible to treat on such a journey.
As musicologists Roger Parker and William Ashbrook have stated, "negotiations with Charles Duponchel, the director of the Opéra, took on a positive note for the first time" and "the road to Paris lay open for him", the first Italian to obtain a commission to write a real grand opera.
Arriving in Vienna in the Spring of 1842 with a letter of recommendation from Rossini, Donizetti became involved in rehearsals for ''Linda di Chamounix'' which was given its premiere in May and which was a huge success.
Giuseppe agreed and sent Andrea back to Paris, which he reached on 23 April.
Before arriving in Milan by August 1840, he visited Switzerland and then his hometown of Bergamo, eventually reaching Milan where he was to prepare an Italian version of ''La fille du régiment''.
Performances were staged "up and down the Italian peninsula" between 1830 and 1834 and then throughout Europe's capitals well into the 1840s, with  revivals being presented up to about 1881.
''Nabucco'' followed, the first production of a Verdi opera in Vienna.
Gilardoni shared with the composer a very good sense of what would work on stage.
Then came a rapid series of operas from Naples including ''Francesca di Foix'' (May 1831); ''La romanziera e l'uomo nero'' (June 1831); and ''Fausta'' (January 1832).
The performance also included a waltz which Donizetti played and for which he received credit in the libretto.
A contract with the San Carlo remained unresolved.
On 12 May the first new opera, ''La zingara'', was given at the Nuovo "with hot enthusiasm", as scholar Herbert Weinstock states.
Performed in April 1840, it was his first grand opera in the French tradition and was quite successful.
When it did appear, it was not very successful.
While not especially successful as a choirboy during the first three trial months of 1807 (there being some concern about a ''diffetto di gola'' (throat defect)), Mayr was soon reporting that Gaetano "surpasses all the others in musical progress" and he was able to persuade the authorities that the young boy's talents were worthy of keeping him in the school.
By late  March Donizetti had been offered a contract not only to compose new operas, but also to be responsible for preparing performances of new productions by other composers whose work had been given elsewhere.
The piece was performed on 13 September 1811 and included the composer character stating the following:
Like Rossini, who had occupied this position before him, Donizetti was free to compose for other opera houses.
:No opera composed expressly for the ''Théâtre-Italien'' has had a more clamorous success.
While preparations were underway, other ideas came to Donizetti and, discovering Cammarano's libretto for Giuseppe Lillo's unsuccessful 1839 ''Il Conte di Chalais'', he turned it into the first two acts of ''Maria di Rohan'' within twenty-four hours.
This ''dramma tragico'' appeared at a time when several factors were moving Donizetti's reputation as a composer of opera to greater heights: Gioachino Rossini had recently retired and Vincenzo Bellini had died shortly before the premiere of ''Lucia'' leaving Donizetti as "the sole reigning genius of Italian opera".
In October 1838, Donizetti moved to Paris vowing never to have dealings with the San Carlo again after the King of Naples banned the production of ''Poliuto'' on the grounds that such a sacred subject was inappropriate for the stage.
The season also included ''Don Pasquale'' in addition to ''The Barber of Seville''.
After the successful staging of ''Lucrezia Borgia'' in 1833, his reputation was  further consolidated, and Donizetti followed the paths of both Rossini and Bellini by visiting Paris, where his ''Marin Faliero'' was given at the Théâtre-Italien in March 1835.
His family was very poor and had no tradition of music, his father Andrea being the caretaker of the town pawnshop.
Their report concluded with the advice that he leave for Italy without delay.
It was during the months which Donizetti spent in Rome for the production of ''Zoraida'' that he met the Vasselli family, with Antonio initially becoming a good friend.
Two new operas were presented in Milan: ''Le convenienze ed inconvenienze teatrali'' (April 1831) and ''Ugo, conte di Parigi'' (March 1832).
The second new work, which appeared six weeks later on 29 June, was a one-act farsa—''La lettera anonima''.
Another opera with Scribe as librettist was in the works: it was to be ''Dom Sébastien, roi de Portugal'' planned for November 1843 in Paris.
It was followed by the third in the "Three Donizetti Queens" series, ''Roberto Devereux'', which features the relationship between Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex.
In addition, he provided the young musician with letters of recommendation to both the publisher Giovanni Ricordi as well as to the Marchese Francesco Sampieri in Bologna (who would find him suitable lodging) and where, at the Liceo Musicale, he was given the opportunity to study musical structure under the renowned Padre Stanislao Mattei.
She gave birth to three children, none of whom survived and, within a year of his parents' deaths—on 30 July 1837—she also died from what is believed to be cholera or measles, but Ashbrook speculates that it was connected to what he describes as a "severe syphilitic infection."
Ashbrook's comments—which reinforce those of ''Giornali'' critic who reviewed the work on 1 July—recognize an important aspect of Donizetti's burgeoning musical style: he shows that "his concern with the dramatic essence of opera rather than the mechanical working out of musical formulas was, even at this early stage, was already present and active."
Various aggressive treatment was tried; it was described as having "its successes, however fleeting".
However, it suffered by comparison to Bellini's ''I puritani'' which appeared at the same time.
his 1816 "initial exercises in operatic style", the opera ''Il pigmalione'', as well as his composition of portions of ''Olympiade'' and ''L'ira d'Achille'' in 1817, as  two being no more than "suggesting the work of a student".
London was the first European capital to see the work; it was given at the King's Theatre on 8 July 1831.
During this time and prior to leaving for Vienna, he was persuaded to conduct the premiere of Rossini's ''Stabat Mater'' in Bologna in March 1842.
Writing about the Naples premiere, the correspondent of the ''Gazzetta privilegiata di Milano'' stated: "The situations that the libretto offers are truly ingenious and do honour to the poet, Gilardoni.
Returning north via Rome, Donizetti signed a contract for performances of ''Zoraida'' for the Teatro Argentina which included the requirement that the libretto to be revised by Ferretti, given Donizetti's low opinion of the work of the original Neapolitan librettist, Andrea Leone Tottola: he referred to it as "a great barking".
Having entered into a contract with Léon Pillet of the Opéra for a new work for the coming year, he found nothing to be suitable and immediately wrote to Pillet proposing that another composer take his place.
Then, in 1811, Mayr once again intervened.
Donizetti returned from Paris to oversee the staging of ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' on 26 September 1835.
Gaetano (then 9) was accepted.
It was their fourth collaboration, and became a success not only in Naples but also in Rome over the 1830/31 season.
For Donizetti, the result was a further commission and, using another of Merelli's librettos, this became the one-act, ''Una follia'' which was presented a month later.
Four or five numbers repeated, callings-out of the singers, callings-out of the Maestro—in sum, one of those ovations.....which in Paris are reserved for the truly great.
This took place on 23 June and, while there, he was able to take rides in his carriage and appeared to be much more aware of his surroundings.
Encouraged by Mayr to return to Bergamo in 1817, he began his "quartet years" as well as composing piano pieces and, most likely, being a performing member of quartets where he would have also heard music of other composers.
In addition to the revision, he committed to write another new opera for the Rome's Teatro Valle which would also be set to a libretto written by Ferretti.
With his commissions, the years from 1830 to 1835 saw a huge outpouring of work; ''L'elisir d'amore'', a comedy produced in 1832, came soon after ''Anna Bolena'''s success and it is deemed to be one of the masterpieces of 19th-century ''opera buffa''.
Then the police sent in their own doctor (who opposed the move), posted gendarmes outside the apartment, and forbade the daily carriage rides.
Following behind in another coach was Dr. Ricord.
However, on 6 September he was on his way back to Genoa from where he would leave for a three-month planned stay in Paris to be followed by time in Vienna once again.
However, with no other work forthcoming, the composer once again returned to Bergamo, where a cast of singers made up from the Venice production the month before, presented ''Enrico di Borgogna'' in his home town on 26 December.
As Ashbrook states, this "was nothing less than Mayr's argument that Donizetti be allowed to continue his musical studies".
The Italian season in Vienna, which included Bellini's ''Norma'', a revival of ''Linda di Chamounix'' and of ''Don Pasquale'', was also to the first production there of Verdi's ''Ernani''.
In all, Naples presented 51 of Donizetti's operas.
When ''Don Pasquale'' was presented on 3 January, it was an overwhelming success with performances continuing until late March.
But from around 1843, severe illness began to take hold and to limit his activities.
On the other hand, when the tenor Rubini visited and, together with Giovannina, sang music from ''Lucia di Lammermoor'', Antonio Vasselli reported that there was no sign of recognition at all.
As other biographers also note, there is an increasing sense that, during 1845, Donizetti became more and more aware of the real state of his health and the limitations it has begun to impose on his activities.
Without a commission from any opera house, Donizetti decided to write the music first and then try to find a company to accept it.
While waiting to see if he could be relieved from writing a large-scale work if Mayerbeer would allow ''Le Prophète'' to be staged instead that autumn, he looked forward to the arrival of his brother from Turkey in May and to the prospect of them traveling to Italy together that summer.
The critical reaction in the ''Giornali'' some months later focused on the weaknesses of the ''semiseria'' genre itself, although it did describe Donizetti's music for ''Emilia'' as "pretty".
He remained there for nine years, until 1815.
At the same time, continental audiences of that time seemed to be fascinated by the Tudor period of 16th century English history, revolving as it does around the lives of King Henry VIII (and his six wives), Mary I of England ("Bloody Mary"), Queen Elizabeth I, as well as the doomed Mary Stuart,
Remaining in Bergamo until October 1821, the composer busied himself with a variety of instrumental and choral pieces, but during that year, he had been in negotiation with Giovanni Paterni, intendant of the Teatro Argentina in Rome, and by 17 June had received a contract to compose another opera from a libretto being prepared by Merelli.
Not only were conditions ripe for Donizetti to achieve greater fame as a composer, but there was also an interest across the continent of Europe in the history and culture of Scotland.
Finally, in May 1827 he announced his engagement to Virginia Vasselli, the daughter of the Roman family who had befriended him there and who was then 18 years old.
He wrote that he would work on translations of ''Maria Padilla'' and ''Linda di Chamounix'' and "God knows what else I'll do".
Primarily, however, the opera's failure appears to have been due to the maestro's absence, because he was unable to be present to oversee and control the staging, normally one of Donizetti's strengths.
In late December/early January 1847, visits from a friend from Vienna who lived in Paris—Baron Eduard von Lannoy—resulted in a letter from Lannoy to Giuseppe Donizetti in Constantinople outlining what he saw as a better solution: rather than have friends travel the five hours to see his brother, Lannoy recommended that Gaetano be moved to Paris where he could be taken care of by the same doctors.
This appears to have solidified Donizetti's reputation as a composer of successful serious opera, although other comedies were to appear quite quickly.
As far as  the work for the Opéra-Comique was concerned—''Ne m'oubliez moi'' it was to be called—it appears that he was able to break his contract with that house, although he had already composed and orchestrated seven numbers.
With that, the Prefect informed Andrea that Donizetti could not be moved from Ivry.
By the end of May, Andrea had decided that his uncle would be better off in the Italian climate, and three outside physicians were called in for their opinions.
The opera was given first at the Teatro San Samuele in Venice in December.
Simone Mayr, a German composer of internationally successful operas, had become ''maestro di cappella'' at Bergamo's principal church in 1802.
Finally, action taken by Count Sturmer of the Austrian Embassy in Turkey caused action to be taken from Vienna which, via the Embassy in Paris, sent a formal complaint to the French government.
Immediately busy in the spring months of 1823 with a cantata, an ''opera seria'' for the San Carlo, and an ''opera buffa'' for the Nuovo, Donizetti also had to work on the revised ''Zoraide'' for Rome.
''Otto mesi in due ore'' (1833) was given in Livorno and ''Parisina'' (March 1833) was given in Florence.
Now desperate, Andrea then consulted three lawyers and sent detailed reports to his father in Constantinople.
Arriving once again in Paris in late September 1842, he accomplished the revisions to the two Italian operas and he received a suggestion from Jules Janin, the newly appointed director of the ''Théâtre-Italien'', that he might compose a new opera for that house.
Consulting two additional doctors as well as Dr. Ricord, Andrea received their written opinion after an examination on 28 January 1846.
As his condition worsened, the composer's brother Giuseppe dispatched his son Andrea to Paris from Constantinople.
Andrea left for Bergamo on 7 (or 8) September 1846 taking with him a partial score of ''Le duc d'Albe'', the completed score of ''Rita'', and a variety of personal effects, including jewelry.
Before leaving that city in June 1840, he had time to oversee the translation of ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' into ''Lucie de Lammermoor'' as well as to  write ''La fille du régiment'', his first opera written specifically to a French libretto.
Unwilling to leave Milan, but encouraged to return to Paris by Michele Accursi (with whom the composer was to be involved in Paris in 1843), he oversaw the December production of ''Maria Padilla'' at La Scala, and began writing ''Linda di Chamounix'' in preparation for March 1842 travels to Vienna, in which city he had been engaged by the royal court.
Over the course of his career, Donizetti wrote almost 70 operas.
Donizetti returned once more to Milan where he stayed with the accommodating Giuseppina Appiano Stringeli with whom he had a pleasant time.
Arriving there on 25 December, Andrea lodged at the Hôtel Manchester with his uncle, but  immediately consulted Dr. Ricord on his uncle's condition.
However, when Giovannina Basoni (who eventually became  Baroness Scotti) played and sang arias from the composer's operas, he did appear to pay some attention.
Writing in the ''Journal des débats'' on 6 January, the critic
Their conclusion was the opposite of that of the previous doctors: "we are of the opinion that the trip should be forbidden formally as offering very real dangers and being far from allowing hope of any useful result."
However, evidence provided from friends who visited Donizetti over the following months, states that he was being treated very well, the facility having a reputation for the care given to its patients.
Finally, after the intense night of 7 April, Gaetano Donizetti died on the afternoon of 8 April.
Within a few days—realizing that he was being confined—Donizetti wrote urgent letters seeking help from friends, but they were never delivered.
That summer was to see the successful presentations at the Teatro Nuovo of the adapted version of ''L'ajo nell'imbarazzo'' given as ''Don Gregorio'' and, a month later, a one-act ''melodramma'' or opera, ''Elvida'', a ''pièce d'occasion'' for the birthday of Queen Maria of the Two Sicilies, which contained some florid music for the tenor Giovanni Battista Rubini; but it only received three performances.
In addition, he was appointed kapellmeister to the chapel of the royal court, the same post which had been held by Mozart.
This became another success.
Waltz in C major "The Invitation"
Unfortunately however, the music set for the San Carlo premiere of ''Alfredo il grande'' on 2 July was described in the ''Giornali'' as "...one could not recognize the composer of ''La zingara''."
The opera was based on ''The Bride of Lammermoor'', the novel by Sir Walter Scott, and it was to become his most famous opera, one of the high points of the ''bel canto'' tradition, the opera reaching a stature similar to that achieved by Bellini's ''Norma''.
As it turned out, he was able to revive a half-completed work which had been started for Vienna, but only after receiving a rejection to his request to be released from his Naples' obligations did he work on finishing ''Caterina Cornaro'' by May for a production in Naples in January 1844, but without the composer being present.
Opening night was a triumph for Donizetti; as reported in the weekly ''Notizie del giorno'':
There, he staged his 1824 version of ''L'ajo nell'imbarazzo'' as well as his new opera ''Alahor in Granata''.
/ I, with a sufficiently modest air, / Will go around with my head bent... /  I’ll have eulogies in the newspaper / I know how to make myself immortal.
However, he was held under virtual house arrest by the police for several more months, although able to be visited by friends and even by Verdi while he was in Paris.
In October and for the remainder of the year, he was back in Rome where time was spent adding five new pieces to ''Zoraida'' which was performed at the Teatro Argentina on 7 January 1824.
It was given at the San Carlo in Naples in October 1837.
By nine years, he was the younger brother of Giuseppe Donizetti, who had become, in 1828, Instructor General of the Imperial Ottoman Music at the court of Sultan Mahmud II (1808–1839).
Although he did not come from a musical background, at an early age he was taken under the wing of composer Simon Mayr who had enrolled him by means of a full scholarship in a school which he had set up.
Then he rushed back to Milan for Christmas, but returned almost immediately and by late February 1841 was preparing a new opera, ''Rita, ou Deux hommes et une femme''.
Donizetti was born in Bergamo in Lombardy.
From about 1836, he became interested in working in Paris, where he saw much greater freedom to choose subject matter, in addition to receiving larger fees and greater prestige.
Then came ''Maria Stuarda'' (''Mary Stuart''), based on Schiller's play and given at La Scala in December 1835.
Little more is known about it except its lack of success and the fact the score has totally disappeared.
News of this work impressed Domenico Barbaja, the prominent Intendant of the Teatro San Carlo and other royal houses in the city such as the smaller Teatro Nuovo and the Teatro del Fondo.
Before 1830, success came primarily with his comic operas, the serious ones failing to attract significant audiences.
However, his main preoccupation was to complete the orchestration of ''Maria di Rohan'', which was accomplished by 13 February for planned performances in June.
Within two months he had written another ''opera semiseria'', ''Gianni di Calais'', from a libretto by Gilardoni.
He was able to go on to convince the Paris Prefect, by threats of family action and general public concern, and the composer should be moved to an apartment in Paris.
Musicologist and Donizetti scholar William Ashbrook provides a quotation from a review in the ''Nuovo osservatore veneziano'' of 17 November in which the reviewer notes some of these performance issues which faced the composer, but he adds: "one cannot but recognize a regular handling and expressive quality in his style.
Rome presented ''Il furioso all'isola di San Domingo'' (January 1833) and ''Torquato Tasso'' (September 1833).
Just as importantly, after the success of his ''Lucia'' at the Théâtre-Italien in Paris in December 1837, approaches came from the Paris Opéra.
Based on the report of the accompanying doctor, Donizetti did not appear to have suffered from the journey.
The libretto had been started by August and, between then and 1 October when Donizetti was provided with a letter of introduction from Mayr to Jacopo Ferretti, the Roman poet and librettist who was to later feature in the young composer's career, much of the music had been composed.
All their talent was not enough to save me from "a sea of pause, space – applause....Everything went well.
However, in spite of all this, Mayr not only persuaded Gaetano's parents to allow him to continue studies, but also secured funding from the Congregazione di Carità in Bergamo for two years of scholarships.
Two doctors, including Dr. Philippe Ricord (a specialist in syphilis), recommended that, along with various remedies, he abandon work altogether and both agreed that the Italian climate would be better for his health.
The couple were married in July 1828 and immediately settled in a new home in Naples.
It received only one performance, while his two-act ''farsa'', ''Il fortunato inganno'', given in September at the Teatro del Fondo received only three performances.
In Paris, he offered ''Poliuto'' to the Opéra and it was set to a new and expanded four-act French-language libretto by Eugène Scribe with the title, ''Les Martyrs''.
There he received detailed training in the arts of fugue and counterpoint.
Other work included expansion of ''Il nozze in villa'', a project which he had started in mid-1819, but the opera was not presented until the carnival season of 1820/21 in Mantua.
The composer's  activities in Naples became limited because 1825 was a Holy Year in Rome and the death of Ferdinand I in Naples caused little or no opera to be produced in both cities for a considerable time.
But, as Andrea began to make plans for his uncle's journey to and upkeep in Bergamo, he was forced by the Paris Prefect of Police to have his uncle undergo another examination by other physicians appointed by the Prefect.
/ They'll say to me, "Bravo, Maestro!
Both were successful, although author Herbert Weinstock states that "the older opera was an immediate, unquestioned success with both audience and critics".
Friends—including his brother-in-law, Antonio Vasselli (known as Totò)—continually attempted to persuade him to take up an academic position in Bologna rather than the Vienna court engagement, if for no other reason that it would give the composer a base from which to work and teach and not be continually exhausting himself with travel between cities.
In Bologna, he would justify the faith which Mayr had placed in him.
Two  new operas were also given in Paris at that time.
He was able to do so when Paolo Zancla, the impresario of the Teatro San Luca (an early theatre built in 1629, which later became the Teatro Goldoni) in Venice accepted it.
Maestro Donizetti has known how to take advantage of them...", therefore a reaffirmation of the growing dramatic skills displayed by the young composer.
They were ''Elisabetta al castello di Kenilworth'', based on Scribe's ''Leicester'' and Hugo's ''Amy Robsart'' (given in Naples in July 1829 and revised in 1830).
Donizetti's obligations in Vienna included overseeing the annual Italian season at the Theater am Kärntnertor which began in May.
He left Vienna on 1 July 1842 after the Spring Italian season, travelling to Milan, Bergamo (in order to see the now-aging Mayr, but where the deterioration of his own heath became more apparent), and then on to Naples in August, a city he had not visited since 1838.
Within a few days, Donizetti was given permission to leave and he set out from Paris on what was to be a seventeen-day trip to Bergamo.
He was offered commissions by both La Fenice in Venice—a house he had not visited for about seventeen years and to which he returned to present ''Belisario'' on 4 February 1836.
It was set to a libretto by Salvadore Cammarano, the first of eight for the composer.
Finally, ''Maria di Rohan'' was given on 5 June.
After three hours they arrived at the Maison Esquirol in Ivry-sur-Seine, a suburb of Paris, where an explanation involving an accident was concocted to explain the need to spend the night at a "comfortable inn".
Antonio's sister Virginia was at that point only 13.
One of the later performances became the occasion for Donizetti to meet the then-21-year-old music student, Vincenzo Bellini, an event recounted by Francesco Florimo some sixty years later.
Eventually, by early 1846 he was obliged to be confined to an institution for the mentally ill and, by late 1847, friends had him moved back to Bergamo, where he died in April 1848.
In reporting the reaction to this opera in a teasing letter to Antonio Vasselli in Rome, he tried to build suspense, stating that "With the utmost sorrow, I must announce to you that last evening I have given my ''Maria di Rohan'' and he names the singers.
After leaving Paris in June 1840, Donizetti was to write ten new operas, although not all were performed in his lifetime.
An offer in 1822 from Domenico Barbaja, the impresario of the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples, which followed the composer's ninth opera, led to his move to that city and his residency there which lasted until the production of ''Caterina Cornaro'' in January 1844.
In 1810 he applied for and was accepted by the local art school, the Academia Carrara, but it is not known whether he attended classes.
However, as Donizetti scholar William Ashbrook notes, in 1809 he was threatened with having to leave because his voice was changing.
Author John Stewart Allitt describes
Many of these historical characters appear in Donizetti's dramas, operas which both preceded and followed ''Anna Bolena''.
But overall, his experience in Palermo does not appear to have been pleasant, mainly because of the poorly managed theatre, the continual indisposition of singers, or their failure to appear on time.
At the same time, he rejected offers to compose, one offer coming from London and requiring an opera four months away; the objection of having limited time was given.
He spent the early months of 1819 working on some sacred and instrumental music, but little else came of his efforts until the latter part of the year when he wrote ''Il falegname di Livonia'' from a libretto by Gherardo Bevilacqua-Aldobrandini.
In 1830, when ''Anna Bolena'' was premiered, Donizetti made a major impact on the Italian and international opera scene and this shifted the balance of success away from primarily comedic operas, although even after that date, his best-known works included comedies such as ''L'elisir d'amore'' (1832) and ''Don Pasquale'' (1843).
The following two years were somewhat precarious for the young Donizetti: the 16-year-old created quite a reputation for what he did do—which is regularly to fail to attend classes—and also for what he did instead, which as to make something of a spectacle of himself in the town.
However, by early February, he is already writing via an intermediary to Vincenzo Flauto, then the impresario at the San Carlo in Naples, in an attempt to break his agreement to compose for that house in July.
Finally—on 16 August—in Constantinople, Giuseppe filed a formal complaint with the Austrian ambassador (given that the composer was an Austrian citizen).
I am in the hands of a doctor."
From 1838 onward, with an offer from the Paris Opéra for two new works, he spent a considerable period of the following ten years in that city, and set several operas to French texts as well as overseeing staging of his Italian works.
However, Virginia was to become Donizetti's wife in 1828.
In Paris, the police insisted on a further medical examination.
Writer John Stewart Allitt observes that, by 1827/28, three important elements in Donizetti's professional and personal life came together: Firstly, he met and began to work with the librettist Domenico Gilardoni who wrote eleven librettos for him, beginning with ''Otto mesi in due ore'' in 1827 and continuing until 1833.
It was the ''opera buffa'' ''L'ajo nell'imbarazzo'' (''The Tutor Embarrassed''), the premiere of which  took place on 4 February 1824 and "was greeted with wild enthusiasm and it was with this opera that ... Donizetti had his first really lasting success" Allitt notes that with a good libretto to hand, "Donizetti never failed its dramatic content" and he continues by saying that "Donizetti had a far better sense of what would succeed on the stage than his librettists."
Janin's idea was that it should be a new ''opera buffa'' and tailored to the talents of some major singers including Giulia Grisi, Antonio Tamburini, and Luigi Lablache who had been hired.
The result turned out to be the comic opera, ''Don Pasquale'', planned for January 1843.
Étienne-Jean Delécluze proclaimed:
The first opera was a French version of the then-unperformed ''Poliuto'' which, in April 1840, was revised to become ''Les martyrs''.
The culmination of the crisis in Donizetti's health came in August 1845 when he was diagnosed with cerebro-spinal syphilis and severe mental illness.
However, it was less successful than the original version.
Donizetti finally returned to Naples by late March.
Visiting his uncle the following day, he found himself recognized.
The second opera for Rome's Teatro Valle also had a libretto by Ferretti, one which has since been regarded as one of his best.
In addition, he was to be appointed to the position of Director of the Royal Theatres of Naples beginning in 1829, a job that the composer accepted and held until 1838.
These issues caused a delay until January 1827 for the premiere of ''Alahor'', after which he went back in Naples in February, but with no specific commitments until midsummer.
This new ''opera seria'' became Donizetti's ''Zoraida di Granata'', his ninth work.
Other appeals came from Paris, one directly from Vatel, the new impresario of the Théâtre-Italien, who traveled to Vienna to see the composer.
Initially, Donizetti was buried in the cemetery of Valtesse but in the late 19th century his body was transferred to Bergamo's Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore near the grave of his teacher Simon Mayr.
For these the public wanted to salute Signor Donizetti on stage at the end of the opera."
Back in Naples, he embarked upon his first venture into English Romanticism  with the ''opera semiseria'', ''Emilia di Liverpool'', which was given only seven performances in July 1824 at the Nuovo.
The perceived romance of its violent wars and feuds, as well as its folklore and mythology, intrigued 19th century readers and audiences, and Scott made use of these stereotypes in his novel.
The twenty-four-year-old composer arrived in Rome on 21 October, but plans for staging the opera were plagued with a major problem: the tenor cast in the major role died a few days before the opening night on 28 January 1822 and the role had to be re-written for a ''musico'', a mezzo-soprano singing a male role, a not uncommon feature of the era and of Rossini's operas.
The youngest of three sons, Donizetti was born in 1797 in Bergamo's ''Borgo Canale'' quarter located just outside the city walls.
He delayed his departure for as long as possible, but Mayr died on 2 December shortly after Donizetti had left Bergamo.
With rehearsals in progress at the Opéra for ''Dom Sébastien'', the first performance being planned for 13  November, the composer was also working on readying ''Maria di Rohan'' for the Théâtre-Italien on the following evening, 14 November.
Writing to unnamed Paris friends on 7 February, even after the very positive reaction received at the premiere of a specially-prepared ''Dom Sébastien'' on 6 February 1845 (which he had conducted for three performances of the total of 162 given over the following years until 1884), he grumbles about the reactions of the Parisian audiences and continues with a brief report on his health which, he says, "if it is no better and this continues, I'll find myself forced to go to spend some months resting in Bergamo."
