Many barred spiral galaxies are active, possibly as a result of gas being channeled into the core along the arms.
The cycle of stellar birth and death slowly increases the abundance of heavy elements, eventually allowing the formation of planets.
For instance, Bodifee and Berger propose the informal, descriptive name '''' for the well-formed barred galaxy Messier 109 in Ursa Major.
Clusters of galaxies consist of hundreds to thousands of galaxies bound together by gravity.
These observations led to the hypothesis of a rotating bar structure in the center of our galaxy.
Galaxies come in three main types: ellipticals, spirals, and irregulars.
At the other extreme, an ''Sc'' galaxy has open, well-defined arms and a small core region.
The spiral arms are thought to be areas of high-density matter, or "density waves".
In 1922, the Estonian astronomer Ernst Öpik gave a distance determination that supported the theory that the Andromeda Nebula is indeed a distant extra-galactic object.
Ultraviolet flares are sometimes observed when a star in a distant galaxy is torn apart from the tidal forces of a nearby black hole.
This effect is akin to a "wave" of slowdowns moving along a highway full of moving cars.
Ultra-compact dwarf galaxies have recently been discovered that are only 100&nbsp;parsecs across.
Infrared galaxies emit more energy in the infrared than at all other wavelengths combined.
On page 73, Wright called the Milky Way the ''Vortex Magnus'' (the great whirlpool) and estimated its diameter at 8.64×1012 miles (13.9×1012 km).
Possibly related to active galactic nuclei (as well as starburst regions) are low-ionization nuclear emission-line regions (LINERs).
Mergers can result in significant changes to morphology, as compared to the original galaxies.
English translation:  Galileo Galilei with Edward Stafford Carlos, trans., ''The Sidereal Messenger'' (London, England:  Rivingtons, 1880),  pages 42 and 43.
In the 1970s, Vera Rubin uncovered a discrepancy between observed galactic rotation speed and that predicted by the visible mass of stars and gas.
The emission from LINER-type galaxies is dominated by weakly ionized elements.
However, the word ''Universe'' was later understood to mean the entirety of existence, so this expression fell into disuse and the objects instead became known as galaxies.
Quasars are extremely luminous and were first identified as being high redshift sources of electromagnetic energy, including radio waves and visible light, that appeared to be similar to stars, rather than extended sources similar to galaxies.
On the largest scale, the Universe is continually expanding, resulting in an average increase in the separation between individual galaxies (see Hubble's law).
These galaxies are relatively small when compared with other galactic formations, being about one hundredth the size of the Milky Way, containing only a few billion stars.
Luminous Infrared Galaxies or (LIRG's) are galaxies with luminosities, the measurement of brightness, above 1011 L☉.
Infrared is also used to observe distant, red-shifted galaxies that were formed much earlier in the history of the Universe.
Can have a diameter of 437,000 light-years.
Seyfert galaxies are one of the two largest groups of active galaxies, along with quasars.
Curtis noticed that these novae were, on average, 10 magnitudes fainter than those that occurred within our galaxy.
In top-down theories (such as the Eggen–Lynden-Bell–Sandage ELS model), protogalaxies form in a large-scale simultaneous collapse lasting about one hundred million years.
While some scientists have claimed other objects (such as Abell 1835 IR1916) have higher redshifts (and therefore are seen in an earlier stage of the Universe's evolution), IOK-1's age and composition have been more reliably established.
In June 2015, astronomers reported evidence for Population III stars in the Cosmos Redshift 7 galaxy at .
The majority of galaxies are gravitationally organized into associations known as galaxy groups, clusters, and superclusters.
Among other things, Hubble data helped establish that the missing dark matter in our galaxy cannot solely consist of inherently faint and small stars.
The resulting disk of stars can be seen as a band on the sky from our perspective inside the disk.
The excitation sources for the weakly ionized lines include post-AGB stars, AGN, and shocks.
Such stars are likely to have existed in the very early universe (i.e., at high redshift), and may have started the production of chemical elements heavier than hydrogen that are needed for the later formation of planets and life as we know it.
Astronomers work with numbers from certain catalogues, such as the Messier catalogue, the NGC (New General Catalogue), the IC (Index Catalogue), the CGCG (Catalogue of Galaxies and of Clusters of Galaxies), the MCG (Morphological Catalogue of Galaxies) and UGC (Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies).
The space between galaxies is filled with a tenuous gas having an average density of less than one atom per cubic meter.
The evolution of galaxies can be significantly affected by interactions and collisions.
The Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy are the two brightest galaxies within the group; many of the other member galaxies are dwarf companions of these two galaxies.
In 1755, Immanuel Kant used the term "island Universe" to describe these distant nebulae.
Many elliptical galaxies are believed to form due to the interaction of galaxies, resulting in a collision and merger.
About 70–80% of the mass in a cluster is in the form of dark matter, with 10–30% consisting of this heated gas and the remaining few percent of the matter in the form of galaxies.
These massive stars produce supernova explosions, resulting in expanding remnants that interact powerfully with the surrounding gas.
The Neoplatonist philosopher Olympiodorus the Younger (–570 CE) was critical of this view, arguing that if the Milky Way is sublunary (situated between Earth and the Moon) it should appear different at different times and places on Earth, and that it should have parallax, which it does not.
These primordial structures would eventually become the galaxies we see today.
The largest galaxies are giant ellipticals.
All of the well-known galaxies appear in one or more of these catalogues but each time under a different number.
In a treatise in 1755, Immanuel Kant elaborated on Wright's idea about the structure of the Milky Way.Available in English translation by Ian Johnston at:   Vancouver Island University, British Columbia, Canada
Instead they are dominated by generally older, more evolved stars that are orbiting the common center of gravity in random directions.
He became a proponent of the so-called "island universes" hypothesis, which holds that spiral nebulae are actually independent galaxies.
Seyfert galaxies account for about 10% of all galaxies.
Mergers of galaxies were common during the early epoch, and the majority of galaxies were peculiar in morphology.
The detailed process by which early galaxies formed is an open question in astrophysics.
In 1750, Thomas Wright speculated (correctly) that the Milky Way is a flattened disk of stars, and that some of the nebulae visible in the night sky might be separate Milky Ways.
LIRG's are more abundant than starburst galaxies, Seyfert galaxies and quasi-stellar objects at comparable total luminosity.
However, gravitational stripping of the interstellar gas and dust that makes up the spiral arms produces a long train of stars known as tidal tails.
In 1920  a debate took place between Harlow Shapley and Heber Curtis (the Great Debate), concerning the nature of the Milky Way, spiral nebulae, and the dimensions of the Universe.
It contains about two hundred billion (2×1011) stars and has a total mass of about six hundred billion (6×1011) times the mass of the Sun.
The Hubble Deep Field, an extremely long exposure of a relatively empty part of the sky, provided evidence that there are about 125 billion () galaxies in the observable universe.
In 1750 the English astronomer Thomas Wright, in his ''An original theory or new hypothesis of the Universe'', speculated (correctly) that the galaxy might be a rotating body of a huge number of stars held together by gravitational forces, akin to the Solar System but on a much larger scale.
Elliptical galaxies are largely devoid of this gas, and so form few new stars.
Improved technology in detecting the spectra invisible to humans (radio telescopes, infrared cameras, and x-ray telescopes) allow detection of other galaxies that are not detected by Hubble.
Above this scale, the Universe appears to be the same in all directions (isotropic and homogeneous).
The Milky Way galaxy is currently in the process of cannibalizing the Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy and the Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy.
The Persian astronomer al-Bīrūnī (973–1048) proposed the Milky Way galaxy to be "a collection of countless fragments of the nature of nebulous stars."
Aristotle (384–322 BCE), however, believed the Milky Way to be caused by "the ignition of the fiery exhalation of some stars that were large, numerous and close together" and that the "ignition takes place in the upper part of the atmosphere, in the region of the World that is continuous with the heavenly motions."
A concept known as the universal rotation curve of spirals, moreover, shows that the problem is ubiquitous in these objects.
Approximately one-third of nearby galaxies are classified as containing LINER nuclei.
At the supercluster scale, galaxies are arranged into sheets and filaments surrounding vast empty voids.
Using a refined approach, Kapteyn in 1920 arrived at the picture of a small (diameter about 15&nbsp;kiloparsecs) ellipsoid galaxy with the Sun close to the center.
In this case the relative momentum of the two galaxies is insufficient to allow the galaxies to pass through each other.
This radiation is not affected by dust absorption, and so its Doppler shift can be used to map the motion of the gas in our galaxy.
He found that the majority of these nebulae are moving away from us.
Because it is customary in science to assign names to most of the studied objects, even to the smallest ones, the Belgian astrophysicist Gerard Bodifee and the classicist Michel Berger started a new catalogue (CNG-Catalogue of Named Galaxies) in which a thousand well-known galaxies are given meaningful, descriptive names in Latin (or Latinized Greek) in accordance with the binomial nomenclature that one uses in other sciences such as biology, anatomy, paleontology and in other fields of astronomy such as the geography of Mars.
In 1936 Hubble produced a classification of galactic morphology that is used to this day.
Hence starburst activity usually lasts for only about ten million years, a relatively brief period in the history of a galaxy.
In 964, Al-Sufi identified the Large Magellanic Cloud in his ''Book of Fixed Stars''; it was not seen by Europeans until Magellan's voyage in the 16th century.
Galaxies range in size from dwarfs with just a few billion (109) stars to giants with one hundred trillion (1014) stars, each orbiting its galaxy's center of mass.
At the largest scale, these associations are generally arranged into sheets and filaments surrounded by immense voids.
The more massive larger galaxy will remain relatively undisturbed by the merger, while the smaller galaxy is torn apart.
The current era of star formation is expected to continue for up to one hundred billion years, and then the "stellar age" will wind down after about ten trillion to one hundred trillion years (1013–1014&nbsp;years), as the smallest, longest-lived stars in our universe, tiny red dwarfs, begin to fade.
At the end of the stellar age, galaxies will be composed of compact objects: brown dwarfs, white dwarfs that are cooling or cold ("black dwarfs"), neutron stars, and black holes.
In the astronomical literature, the capitalized word "Galaxy" is often used to refer to our galaxy, the Milky Way, to distinguish it from the other galaxies in our universe.
This on-going merger process (as well as an influx of infalling gas) heats the inter-galactic gas within a cluster to very high temperatures, reaching 30–100 megakelvins.
Superclusters contain tens of thousands of galaxies, which are found in clusters, groups and sometimes individually.
Today, the galaxy rotation problem is thought to be explained by the presence of large quantities of unseen dark matter.
Ultraviolet and X-ray telescopes can observe highly energetic galactic phenomena.
As time passes, mergers of two systems of equal size become less common.
Galaxies are categorized according to their visual morphology as elliptical, spiral and irregular.
Large radio interferometers have been used to map the active jets emitted from active nuclei.
Previously, as of July 2015, EGSY8p7 was the most distant known galaxy, estimated to have a light travel distance of 13.2 billion light-years away.
Examples of these formations can be seen in NGC 4676 or the Antennae Galaxies.
This has led to the suggestion that galaxies are largely formed by dark matter, and that the minimum size may indicate a form of warm dark matter incapable of gravitational coalescence on a smaller scale.
If one of the merging galaxies is much more massive than the other merging galaxies then the result is known as cannibalism.
Despite the prominence of large elliptical and spiral galaxies, most galaxies in the Universe are dwarf galaxies.
As of May 5, 2015, the galaxy EGS-zs8-1 is the most distant and earliest galaxy measured, forming 670 million years after the Big Bang.
Nearly all the hydrogen was neutral (non-ionized) and readily absorbed light, and no stars had yet formed.
It was from density fluctuations (or anisotropic irregularities) in this primordial matter that larger structures began to appear.
The English term ''Milky Way'' can be traced back to a story by Chaucer :
The prototype example of such a starburst-forming interaction is M82, which experienced a close encounter with the larger M81.
Approximately 170&nbsp;billion () to 200&nbsp;billion () galaxies exist in the observable universe.
The existence of supermassive black holes at the cores of galaxies was confirmed through X-ray astronomy.
The Milky Way is about 100,000 light-years in diameter.
The light from EGS-zs8-1 has taken 13 billion years to reach Earth, and is now 30 billion light-years away, because of the expansion of the universe during 13 billion years.
The dust present in the interstellar medium is opaque to visual light.
A shell galaxy is a type of elliptical galaxy where the stars in the galaxy's halo are arranged in concentric shells.
The first project to describe the shape of the Milky Way and the position of the Sun was undertaken by William Herschel in 1785 by counting the number of stars in different regions of the sky.
The supply of star-forming material is finite; once stars have converted the available supply of hydrogen into heavier elements, new star formation will come to an end.
The Andalusian astronomer Ibn Bajjah ("Avempace",  1138) proposed that the Milky Way is made up of many stars that almost touch one another and appear to be a continuous image due to the effect of refraction from sublunary material, citing his observation of the conjunction of Jupiter and Mars as evidence of this occurring when two objects are near.
About 300,000 years after this event, atoms of hydrogen and helium began to form, in an event called recombination.
A galaxy with poorly defined arms is sometimes referred to as a flocculent spiral galaxy; in contrast to the grand design spiral galaxy that has prominent and well-defined spiral arms.
Most of the galaxies are 1,000 to 100,000 parsecs in diameter and usually separated by distances on the order of millions of parsecs (or megaparsecs).
A collision can severely distort the shape of the galaxies, forming bars, rings or tail-like structures.
Nearby groups later merged to form larger-scale clusters.
The word galaxy is derived from the Greek '''' (), literally "milky", a reference to the Milky Way.
He produced a diagram of the shape of the galaxy with the Solar System close to the center.
In Greek mythology, Zeus places his son born by a mortal woman, the infant Heracles, on Hera's breast while she is asleep so that the baby will drink her divine milk and will thus become immortal.
Water vapor and carbon dioxide absorb a number of useful portions of the infrared spectrum, so high-altitude or space-based telescopes are used for infrared astronomy.
Solitary galaxies that have not significantly interacted with another galaxy of comparable mass during the past billion years are relatively scarce.
Starbursts are often associated with merging or interacting galaxies.
Collisions occur when two galaxies pass directly through each other and have sufficient relative momentum not to merge.
An LIRG's luminosity is 100 billion times that of our Sun.
Since the Hubble sequence is entirely based upon visual morphological type(shape), it may miss certain important characteristics of galaxies such as star formation rate in starburst galaxies and activity in the cores of active galaxies.
The mechanism for producing these jets is not well understood.
Eventually, as a result of gravitational relaxation, all stars will either fall into central supermassive black holes or be flung into intergalactic space as a result of collisions.
A study of 27 Milky Way neighbors found that in all dwarf galaxies, the central mass is approximately 10 million solar masses, regardless of whether the galaxy has thousands or millions of stars.
Galactic formation and evolution is an active area of research in astrophysics.
For example, galaxy NGC 3923 has over twenty shells.
Beginning in the 1990s, the Hubble Space Telescope yielded improved observations.
Current cosmological models of the early Universe are based on the Big Bang theory.
It appears the reason that some spiral galaxies are fat and bulging while some are flat discs is because of how fast they rotate.
One of the arguments to do so is that these impressive objects deserve better than uninspired codes.
* Seyfert galaxies or quasars, are classified depending on the luminosity, are active galaxies that emit high-energy radiation in the form of x-rays.
Dwarf galaxies may also be classified as elliptical, spiral, or irregular.
Using the new 100&nbsp;inch Mt.
Seen in visible light, most Seyfert galaxies look like normal spiral galaxies, but when studied under other wavelengths, the luminosity of their cores is equivalent to the luminosity of whole galaxies the size of the Milky Way.
Isolated galaxies can produce stars at a higher rate than normal, as their gas is not being stripped by other nearby galaxies.
A unified model of these types of active galaxies explains their differences based on the viewing angle of the observer.
A majority of spiral galaxies, including our own Milky Way galaxy, have a linear, bar-shaped band of stars that extends outward to either side of the core, then merges into the spiral arm structure.
Subsequently, William Herschel assembled a catalog of 5,000 nebulae.
Our own galaxy, the Milky Way, is a large disk-shaped barred-spiral galaxy about 30&nbsp;kiloparsecs in diameter and a kiloparsec thick.
A different method by Harlow Shapley based on the cataloguing of globular clusters led to a radically different picture: a flat disk with diameter approximately 70&nbsp;kiloparsecs and the Sun far from the center.
(The ionosphere blocks signals below this range.)
This first generation of stars re-ionized the surrounding neutral hydrogen, creating expanding bubbles of space through which light could readily travel.
(The velocity returns to normal after the stars depart on the other side of the arm.)
During this early epoch, galaxies undergo a major burst of star formation.
Within a billion years of a galaxy's formation, key structures begin to appear.
Hera wakes up while breastfeeding and then realizes she is nursing an unknown baby: she pushes the baby away, some of her milk spills and, produces the faint band of light known as the Milky Way.
Consequently, these galaxies also have a low portion of open clusters and a reduced rate of new star formation.
The shell-like structures are thought to develop when a larger galaxy absorbs a smaller companion galaxy.
Starburst galaxies are the result of a galactic collision that can result in the formation of an elliptical galaxy.
In bottom-up theories (such as the Searle-Zinn SZ model), small structures such as globular clusters form first, and then a number of such bodies accrete to form a larger galaxy.
With improved radio telescopes, hydrogen gas could also be traced in other galaxies.
They can grow to enormous sizes (compared to spiral galaxies, for example), and giant elliptical galaxies are often found near the core of large galaxy clusters.
The Milky Way galaxy and the nearby Andromeda Galaxy are moving toward each other at about 130&nbsp;km/s, and—depending upon the lateral movements—the two might collide in about five to six billion years.
Many galaxies are thought to have black holes at their active centers.
Radio telescopes can also be used to observe neutral hydrogen (via 21&nbsp;cm radiation), including, potentially, the non-ionized matter in the early Universe that later collapsed to form galaxies.
In about 10% of these galaxies, a diametrically opposed pair of energetic jets ejects particles from the galaxy core at velocities close to the speed of light.
Tens of thousands of galaxies have been catalogued, but only a few have well-established names, such as the Andromeda Galaxy, the Magellanic Clouds, the Whirlpool Galaxy, and the Sombrero Galaxy.
Certain astronomical objects known as ''spiral nebula'' such as M31 would later be recognized as conglomerations of stars when the true distance to these objects began to be discovered, and they would be deemed ''island universes.''
It is more transparent to far-infrared, which can be used to observe the interior regions of giant molecular clouds and galactic cores in great detail.
Most bright galaxies have remained fundamentally unchanged for the last few billion years, and the net rate of star formation probably also peaked approximately ten billion years ago.
Wilson telescope, Edwin Hubble was able to resolve the outer parts of some spiral nebulae as collections of individual stars and identified some Cepheid variables, thus allowing him to estimate the distance to the nebulae: they were far too distant to be part of the Milky Way.
Spiral galaxies consist of a rotating disk of stars and interstellar medium, along with a central bulge of generally older stars.
Deep sky surveys show that galaxies are often found in groups and clusters.
Globular clusters, the central supermassive black hole, and a galactic bulge of metal-poor Population II stars form.
A galaxy will continue to absorb infalling material from high-velocity clouds and dwarf galaxies throughout its life.
In spiral galaxies, the spiral arms do have the shape of approximate logarithmic spirals, a pattern that can be theoretically shown to result from a disturbance in a uniformly rotating mass of stars.
Particularly, galaxy surveys in the Zone of Avoidance (the region of the sky blocked by the Milky Way) have revealed a number of new galaxies.
The arms are visible because the high density facilitates star formation, and therefore they harbor many bright and young stars.
The stars contain low abundances of heavy elements because star formation ceases after the initial burst.
A '''galaxy''' is a gravitationally bound system of stars, stellar remnants, interstellar gas, dust, and dark matter.
Their luminosity can be 100 times greater than that of the Milky Way.
The distribution of hot gas in galactic clusters can be mapped by X-rays.
Associations of galaxies can overcome this expansion on a local scale through their mutual gravitational attraction.
And the Virgo Supercluster itself is a part of the Pisces-Cetus Supercluster Complex, a giant galaxy filament.
The Hubble classification system rates elliptical galaxies on the basis of their ellipticity, ranging from E0, being nearly spherical, up to E7, which is highly elongated.
To remain gravitationally bound to such a group, each member galaxy must have a sufficiently low velocity to prevent it from escaping (see Virial theorem).
A slightly more extensive description of galaxy types based on their appearance is given by the Hubble sequence.
Irregular galaxies often exhibit spaced knots of starburst activity.
Slipher discovered that the spiral nebulae have high Doppler shifts, indicating that they are moving at a rate exceeding the velocity of the stars he had measured.
To support his claim that the Great Andromeda Nebula is an external galaxy, Curtis noted the appearance of dark lanes resembling the dust clouds in the Milky Way, as well as the significant Doppler shift.
In 1845, Lord Rosse constructed a new telescope and was able to distinguish between elliptical and spiral nebulae.
As a result, this period has been called the "dark ages".
The Andromeda Galaxy was independently noted by Simon Marius in 1612.
The stars of interacting galaxies will usually not collide, but the gas and dust within the two forms will interact, sometimes triggering star formation.
Their appearance shows little structure and they typically have relatively little interstellar matter.
These outbursts trigger a chain reaction of star building that spreads throughout the gaseous region.
They create new stars 30 times faster than the Milky Way.
Blazars are believed to be an active galaxy with a relativistic jet that is pointed in the direction of Earth.
Like the stars, the spiral arms rotate around the center, but they do so with constant angular velocity.
As a result, masses of baryonic matter started to condense within cold dark matter halos.
They can have a mass of 340 billion solar masses and generate large amount of  ultraviolet and mid-infrared light.
The radiation from an active galactic nucleus results from the gravitational energy of matter as it falls toward the black hole from the disc.
This matter is mostly hydrogen and helium.
These were composed almost entirely of hydrogen and helium, and may have been massive.
If they continue to do so, then they would consume their reserve of gas in a time span less than the lifespan of the galaxy.
If so, these huge stars would have quickly consumed their supply of fuel and became supernovae, releasing heavy elements into the interstellar medium.
Theories can be divided into two categories: top-down and bottom-up.
