As the title, ''Doubts on Galen'' by Rhazes implies, as well as the writings of physicians such as Ibn Zuhr (Avenzoar) and Ibn al-Nafis, the works of Galen were not accepted unquestioningly, but as a challengeable basis for further inquiry.
Another one of Galen's major works, ''On the Diagnosis and Cure of the Soul’s Passion,'' contained how to approach and treat psychological problems.
The appetitive spirit also regulated the pleasures of the body and was moved by feelings of enjoyment.
After AD 750, Muslims had these Syrian Christians make the first translations of Galen into Arabic.
Other contemporary authors in the Greek world confirm this including Theodotus the Shoemaker, Athenaeus and Alexander of Aphrodisias.
Galen's theory of the physiology of the circulatory system endured until 1628, when William Harvey published his treatise entitled ''De motu cordis'', in which he established that blood circulates, with the heart acting as a pump.
This was sharply criticised by the Erasistrateans, who predicted dire outcomes, believing that it was not blood but ''pneuma'' that flowed in the veins.
Otto Seeck believes that over half the population of the empire perished.
Galen went to Rome in 162 and made his mark as a practicing physician.
Galen describes his father as a "highly amiable, just, good and benevolent man".
The Stoics, according to Galen, failed to give a credible answer for the localization of functions of the psyche, or the mind.
Galenism's final defeat came from a combination of the negativism of Paracelsus and the constructivism of the Italian Renaissance anatomists, such as Vesalius in the 16th century.
The first major translator of Galen into Arabic was the Syrian Christian Hunayn ibn Ishaq.
In 157, aged 28, he returned to Pergamon as physician to the gladiators of the High Priest of Asia, one of the most influential and wealthy men in Asia.
The influence of Galen's writings, including humorism, remains strong in modern Unani medicine, now closely identified with Islamic culture, and widely practiced from India (where it is officially recognized) to Morocco.
The ancient world never recovered from the blow inflicted upon it by the plague that visited it in the reign of M.
However, Galen states that in around AD 145 his father had a dream in which the god Asclepius (Aesculapius) appeared and commanded Nicon to send his son to study medicine.
This idea is now referred to as localization of function.
Often, this was in the form of restating and reinterpreting, such as in Magnus of Nisibis' 4th-century work on urine, which was in turn translated into Arabic.
In the Abbasid period (after AD 750) Arab Muslims began to be interested in Greek scientific and medical texts for the first time, and had some of Galen's texts translated into Arabic, often by Syrian Christian scholars (see below).
So profuse was Galen's output that the surviving texts represent nearly half of all the extant literature from ancient Greece.
Galen notes that the exanthema covered the victim’s entire body and was usually black.
According to Dio Cassius 72.14.3–4, in about 189, under Commodus’ reign, a pestilence occurred which at its height killed 2,000 people a day in Rome.
He was the first to recognize that there are distinct differences between venous (dark) and arterial (bright) blood.
In addition to the more numerous translations of Arabic texts in this period, there were a few translations of Galenic works directly from the Greek, such as Burgundio of Pisa's translation of ''De complexionibus''.
The Renaissance and fall of the Byzantine Empire (1453) was accompanied by an influx of Greek scholars and manuscripts to the West, allowing direct comparison between the Arabic commentaries and the original Greek texts of Galen.
His father had planned a traditional career for Galen in philosophy or politics and took care to expose him to literary and philosophical influences.
For him, to understand a clinical case technically, ‘to diagnose’, was, among other things, to know with greater or lesser certainty the outcome for the patient, ‘to prognosticate’.
Galen, like the Hippocratics, was not.
and attracted both Stoic and Platonic philosophers, to whom Galen was exposed at age 14.
From the 11th century onwards, Latin translations of Islamic medical texts began to appear in the West, alongside the Salerno school of thought, and were soon incorporated into the curriculum at the universities of Naples and Montpellier.
Galen, following Plato's idea, came up with two more parts to the soul.
A. J. Brock describes them as representing the foundation and apex respectively.
Although his anatomical experiments on animal models led him to a more complete understanding of the circulatory system, nervous system, respiratory system, and other structures, his work contained scientific errors.
Among Galen’s major contributions to medicine was his work on the circulatory system.
In medieval Europe, Galen's writings on anatomy became the mainstay of the medieval physician's university curriculum; but they suffered greatly from stasis and intellectual stagnation.
From then on, Galen and the Greek medical tradition in general became assimilated into the medieval and early modern Islamic Middle East.
The blood was then regenerated in either the liver or the heart, completing the cycle.
In contrast, in the predominantly Greek-speaking eastern half of the Roman empire (Byzantium), many commentators of the subsequent centuries, such as Oribasius, physician to the emperor Julian who compiled a ''Synopsis'' in the 4th century, preserved and disseminated Galen's works, making Galenism more accessible.
The book provides an insight into understanding the traditions and methods of treatment in the Greek and Roman eras.
He was left behind to act as physician to the imperial heir Commodus.
The exanthem became rough and scabby where there was no ulceration.
The leading individual, or therapist, had to be a male, preferably of an older, wiser, age, as well as free from the control of the passions.
Over 20,000 pages in length, it is divided into 22 volumes, with 676 index pages.
), Hygiene (12), Aetiology (19), Semeiotics (14), Pharmacy (10), Blood letting (4) and Therapeutics (17), in addition to 4 of aphorisms, and spurious works.
Galen became physician to Septimius Severus during his reign in Rome.
Galen states that the skin rash was close to the one Thucydides described.
In some cases scholars have even attempted to translate from the Latin or Arabic back into Greek where the original is lost.
He was ordered to accompany Marcus and Verus to Germany as the court physician.
An imbalance of each humor corresponded with a particular human temperament (blood—sanguine, black bile—melancholic, yellow bile—choleric, and phlegm—phlegmatic).
In AD 191, a fire in the Temple of Peace destroyed many of his works, in particular treatises on philosophy.
Many of his works have been preserved and/or translated from the original Greek, although many were destroyed and some credited to him are believed to be spurious.
Niccolò worked at the Angevin Court during the reign of king Robert of Naples.
Among Niccolò's translations is a piece from a medical treatise by Galen, of which the original text is lost.
According to Galen, it was black because of a remnant of blood putrefied in a fever blister that was pustular.
A strong emphasis on experimentation and empiricism led to new results and new observations, which were contrasted and combined with those of Galen by writers such as Rhazes, Ali ibn Abbas al-Majusi (Haly Abbas), Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi (Abulasis), Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Ibn Zuhr and Ibn al-Nafis.
Thus Galen summarised and synthesised the work of his predecessors, and it is in Galen's words (Galenism) that Greek medicine was handed down to subsequent generations, such that Galenism became the means by which Greek medicine was known to the world.
Galen claims that the High Priest chose him over other physicians after he eviscerated an ape and challenged other physicians to repair the damage.
There are also statements in Arabic sources that he died in Sicily at age 87, after 17 years studying medicine and 70 practicing it, which would mean he died about 217.
In the middle of the 16th Century, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius challenged the anatomical knowledge of Galen by conducting dissections on human cadavers.
One of Galen’s major works, ''On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and Plato'', sought to demonstrate the unity of the two subjects and their views.
This New Learning and the Humanist movement, particularly the work of Linacre, promoted ''literae humaniores'' including Galen in the Latin scientific canon, ''De Naturalibus Facultatibus'' appearing in London in 1523.
It depicts pagan sages at the foot of the Tree of Jesse, with Galen between the Sibyl and Aristotle.
This was a controversial argument of the time-period (mind–body problem), and Galen fell with the Greeks in believing that the mind and body were not separate faculties.
Although highly criticized for comparing animal anatomy to human anatomy, Galen was convinced that his knowledge was abundant enough in both anatomies to base one off of the other.
This third part of the soul is the animalistic, or more natural, side of the soul, it deals with the natural urges of the body and survival instincts.
These investigations allowed Vesalius to refute aspects of Galen's anatomy.
Arabic sources, such as Rhazes (Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi AD 865–925), continue to be the source of discovery of new or relatively inaccessible Galenic writings.
Galen was a skilled surgeon, operating on human patients.
The Methodists mainly utilized pure observation, showing greater interest in studying the natural course of ailments than making efforts to find remedies.
Some of Galen's treatises have appeared under many different titles over the years.
Although the main focus of his work was on medicine, anatomy, and physiology, Galen also wrote about logic and philosophy.
Galen saw himself as both a physician and a philosopher, as he wrote in his treatise entitled ''That the Best Physician is also a Philosopher''.
One of Hunayn's Arabic translations, ‘Kitab ila Aglooqan fi Shifa al Amrad’, which is extant in the Library of Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine & Sciences, is regarded as a masterpiece of Galen's literary works.
Medical students continued to study Galen's writings until well into the 19th century.
His studies also took in each of the principal philosophical systems of the time, including Aristotelian and Epicurean.
Galen clarified the anatomy of the trachea and was the first to demonstrate that the larynx generates the voice.
Over his four years there he learned the importance of diet, fitness, hygiene and preventive measures, as well as living anatomy, and the treatment of fractures and severe trauma, referring to their wounds as "windows into the body".
The more extreme liberal movements began to challenge the role of authority in medicine, as exemplified by Paracelsus' symbolically burning the works of Avicenna and Galen at his medical school in Basle.
In the 1530s, Belgian anatomist and physician Andreas Vesalius took on a project to translate many of Galen's Greek texts into Latin.
In his time, Galen's reputation as both physician and philosopher was legendary, the Emperor Marcus Aurelius describing him as "Primum sane medicorum esse, philosophorum autem solum" (first among doctors and unique among philosophers ''Praen 14: 660'').
Using their theories, combined with Aristotle's, Galen developed a tripartite soul consisting of similar aspects.
Many of his procedures and techniques would not be used again for centuries, such as the procedures he performed on brains and eyes.
Unfortunately, his references to the plague are scattered and brief.
Forgeries in Latin, Arabic or Greek continued until the Renaissance.
Through his use of medicine, he was convinced that he came up with a better answer, the brain.
Galen's original Greek texts gained renewed prominence during the early modern period.
The 11th-century ''Suda'' lexicon states that Galen died at the age of 70, which would place his death in about the year 199.
He also believed that this could be scientifically proven.
It was here in court that Galen wrote extensively on medical subjects.
It has been reported that Galen employed twenty scribes to write down his words.
Galen wrote: "I return to the case of Eudemus.
He had first-hand knowledge of the disease, and was present in Rome when it first struck in 166 AD, and was also present in the winter of 168–69 during an outbreak among troops stationed at Aquileia.
Many of Galen's works are included in the ''Thesaurus Linguae Graecae'', a digital library of Greek literature started in 1972.
His demonstrations there antagonized the less skilled and more conservative physicians in the city.
Nevertheless, Galen's pre-eminence amongst the great thinkers of the millennium is exemplified by a 16th-century mural in the refectory of the Great Lavra of Mt Athos.
In addition, this book provides a direct source for the study of more than 150 single and compound drugs used during the Greco-Roman period.
Galen placed the vital pneuma in the heart and the psychic pneuma within the brain.
Galen was concerned to combine philosophical thought with medical practice, as in his brief work ''That the Best Physician is also a Philosopher''.
Michael Servetus, using the name "Michel de Villeneuve" during his stay in France, was Vesalius' fellow student and the best Galenist at the University of Paris, according to Johann Winter von Andernach, who taught both.
Lastly, he connected many of his theories to the pneuma, which is where he most strongly opposed the Stoics definition and use of the pneuma.
During the autumn of 169 when Roman troops were returning to Aquileia, a great plague broke out, and the emperor summoned Galen back to Rome.
To correct cataracts in patients, Galen performed an operation similar to a modern one.
Even in his own time, forgeries and unscrupulous editions of his work were a problem, prompting him to write ''On his Own Books''.
The Lyon edition has commentaries on breathing and blood streaming that correct the work of earlier renowned authors such as Vesalius, Caius or Janus Cornarius.
J. F. Gilliam believes that the Antonine plague probably caused more deaths than any other epidemic during the empire before the mid-3rd century.
The rational soul was in the brain, the spiritual soul was in the heart, and the appetitive soul was in the liver.
In one experiment Galen used bellows to inflate the lungs of a dead animal.
These passions, according to Galen, caused the psychological problems that people experienced.
Galen's works on anatomy and medicine became the mainstay of the medieval physician's university curriculum, alongside Ibn Sina's ''The Canon of Medicine'', which elaborated on Galen's works.
From that time, Galenism took on a new, unquestioned authority, Galen even being referred to as the "Medical Pope of the Middle Ages".
Just one edition was produced from Lyon between 1548 and 1551.
He was born in September AD 129 ; his father, Aelius Nicon, was a wealthy patrician, an architect and builder, with eclectic interests including philosophy, mathematics, logic, astronomy, agriculture and literature.
Although there is some debate over the date of his death, he was no younger than seventy when he died.
When Galen's animosity with the Roman medical practitioners became serious, he feared he might be exiled or poisoned, so he left the city.
This was where his opposition to the Stoics became most prevalent.
Various attempts have been made to classify Galen's vast output.
In his work ''De motu musculorum'', Galen explained the difference between motor and sensory nerves, discussed the concept of muscle tone, and explained the difference between agonists and antagonists.
He had experience with the epidemic, referring to it as very long lasting, and described its symptoms and his treatment of it.
Both of these theories of the circulation of blood were later shown to be incorrect by Ibn al-Nafis.
Nutton refers to these authors as the "medical refrigerators of antiquity".
Because Galen's works were not translated into Latin in the ancient period, and because of the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West, the study of Galen, along with the Greek medical tradition as a whole, went into decline in Western Europe during the Early Middle Ages, when very few Latin scholars could read Greek.
Magnus of Nisibis was a pure theorist, as were John of Alexandria and Agnellus of Ravenna with their lectures on Galen's ''De Sectis''.
Galen was concerned to distinguish it from divination or prophecy, both to improve diagnosis technically and to enhance the physician’s reputation."
Galen believed there to be no distinction between the mental and the physical.
Galen's writings were shown by Vesalius to describe details present in monkeys but not in humans, and he demonstrated Galen's limitations through books and hands-on demonstrations despite fierce opposition from orthodox pro-Galenists such as Jacobus Sylvius.
It was begun in Venice in 1541–1542 by the Guinta.
As a result, some texts of Galen exist only in Arabic translation, while others exist only in medieval Latin translations of the Arabic.
He states that those that were going to survive developed a black exanthem.
Because of this restriction, Galen performed anatomical dissections on living (vivisection) and dead animals, mostly focusing on pigs and primates.
Copies of his works translated by Robert M. Green are held at the National Library of Medicine in Bethesda, Maryland.
There he came under the influence of men like Aeschrion of Pergamon, Stratonicus and Satyrus.
Some of Galen's ideas were incorrect: he did not dissect a human body nor did the medieval lecturers.
He took aspects from each group and combined them with his original thought.
He says that the amount of black stools varied.
He also developed his own personality theory which was connected to liquids in the body and believed that there was a physiological basis for mental disorders.
Melancholics are creative, kind, and considerate.
The Stoics only recognized the soul as having one part, which was the rational soul and they claimed it would be found in the heart.
Galen’s principal interest was in human anatomy, but Roman law had prohibited the dissection of human cadavers since about 150 BC.
His anatomical reports, based mainly on dissection of monkeys, especially the Barbary macaque, and pigs, remained uncontested until 1543, when printed descriptions and illustrations of human dissections were published in the seminal work ''De humani corporis fabrica'' by Andreas Vesalius where Galen's physiological theory was accommodated to these new observations.
"Eudemus said this, and more to the same effect; he added that if they were not able to harm me by unscrupulous conduct they would proceed to attempts at poisoning.
In late antiquity, medical writing veered increasingly in the direction of the theoretical at the expense of the practical, with many authors merely debating Galenism.
It was also the haunt of notable people such as Claudius Charax the historian, Aelius Aristides the orator, Polemo the sophist, and Cuspius Rufinus the Consul.
Galen may have produced more work than any author in antiquity, rivaling the quantity of work issued from Augustine of Hippo.
Using a needle-shaped instrument, Galen attempted to remove the cataract-affected lens of the eye.
If the stool was very black, the patient died.
The Antonine Plague was named after Marcus Aurelius’ family name of Antoninus.
Galen promoted this theory and the typology of human temperaments.
According to these sources, the tomb of Galenus in Palermo was still well preserved in tenth century.
Sources are often in obscure and difficult-to-access journals or repositories.
Since Galen states that he is using observations of monkeys (human dissection was prohibited) to give an account of what the body looks like, Vesalius could portray himself as using Galen's approach of description of direct observation to create a record of the exact details of the human body, since he worked in a time when human dissection was allowed.
The spirited soul also contained our passions, such as anger.
In direct opposition to the Empiricists were the Rationalists, who valued the study of established teachings in order to create new theories in the name of medical advancements.
This collection consists of 122 of Galen's treatises, translated from the original Greek into Latin (the text is presented in both languages).
Unlike pagan Rome, Christian Europe did not exercise a universal prohibition of the dissection and autopsy of the human body and such examinations were carried out regularly from at least the 13th century.
Galen, however, staunchly defended venesection in his three books on the subject and in his demonstrations and public disputations.
After the collapse of the Western Empire the study of Galen and other Greek works almost disappeared in the Latin West.
The most complete compendium of Galen's writings, surpassing even modern projects like the ''Corpus Medicorum Graecorum'', is the one compiled and translated by Karl Gottlob Kühn of Leipzig between 1821 and 1833.
More important is that it includes details of more than 150 single and compound formulations of both herbal and animal origin.
Another convincing case where understanding of the body was extended beyond where Galen had left it came from these demonstrations of the nature of human circulation and the subsequent work of Andrea Cesalpino, Fabricio of Acquapendente and William Harvey.
Debates on medical science now had two traditions, the more conservative Arabian and the liberal Greek.
Rome engaged in foreign wars in 161.
He also listed “imagination, memory, recollection, knowledge, thought, consideration, voluntary motion and sensation" as being found within the rational soul.
Vesalius' most famous work, ''De humani corporis fabrica'', was greatly influenced by Galenic writing and form.
Galen describes symptoms of the alimentary tract via a patient’s diarrhea and stools.
Galen was the first scientist and philosopher to assign specific parts of the soul to locations in the body because of his extensive background in medicine.
His impatience brought him into conflict with other doctors and he felt menaced by them.
Galen believed the circulatory system to consist of two separate one-way systems of distribution, rather than a single unified system of circulation.
Galen's understanding of anatomy and medicine was principally influenced by the then-current theory of humorism (also known as the four humors – black bile, yellow bile, blood, and phlegm), as advanced by ancient Greek physicians such as Hippocrates.
Galen proposed that when the soul is moved by too much enjoyment, it reaches states of “incontinence” and “licentiousness”, the inability to willfully cease enjoyment, which was a negative consequence of too much pleasure.
An example of this is Mondino de Liuzzi, who describes rudimentary blood circulation in his writings but still asserts that the left ventricle should contain air.
He believed venous blood to be generated in the liver, from where it was distributed and consumed by all organs of the body.
Galen describes his early life in ''On the affections of the mind''.
He developed his own tripartite soul following the examples of Plato; some scholars reference him as a Platonist.
He posited that arterial blood originated in the heart, from where it was distributed and consumed by all organs of the body.
Several schools of thought existed within the medical field during Galen's lifetime, the main two being the Empiricists and Rationalists (also called Dogmatists or Philosophers), with the Methodists being a smaller group.
Galen also believed in the existence of a group of blood vessels he called the rete mirabile in the carotid sinus.
A few centuries after Galen, Palladius Iatrosophista stated, in his commentary on Hippocrates, that Hippocrates sowed and Galen reaped.
At first reluctantly but then with increasing vigour, Galen promoted Hippocratic teaching, including venesection and bloodletting, then unknown in Rome.
The term Galenism has subsequently taken on both a positive and pejorative meaning as one that transformed medicine in late antiquity yet so dominated subsequent thinking as to stifle further progress.
Choleric people have energy, passion, and charisma.
Garcia-Ballester quotes Galen as saying: "In order to diagnose, one must observe and reason.
Ironically, Lucius Verus died in 169, and Marcus Aurelius himself died in 180, both victims of the plague.
His surgical experiments included ligating the arteries of living animals.
Galen's approach to medicine became and remains influential in the Islamic world.
The 7th-century poet George of Pisida went so far as to refer to Christ as a second and neglected Galen.
Galen retaliated against his detractors by defending his own methods.
Galen was well known for his advancements in the medical field and the circulatory system; he was also quite involved with philosophy.
At that time Pergamon (modern-day Bergama, Turkey) was a major cultural and intellectual centre, noted for its library (Eumenes II), second only to that in Alexandria,
In the Galenism of the Renaissance, editions of the ''Opera Omnia'' by Galen were very important.
At the same time he pursued studies in theoretical medicine and philosophy.
This practice conflicted with the then-current standard of care, which relied upon divination and mysticism.
When the Peripatetic philosopher Eudemus became ill with Quartan fever, Galen felt obliged to treat him "since he was my teacher and I happened to live nearby."
For instance Coxe (1846) lists a Prolegomena, or introductory books, followed by 7 classes of treatise embracing Physiology (28 vols.
A part of the Alexandrian compendium of Galen’s work, this 10th-century manuscript comprises two parts that include details regarding various types of fevers (Humyat) and different inflammatory conditions of the body.
He was thoroughly attacked by the three attacks of quartan ague, and the doctors had given him up, as it was now mid-winter."
According to Galen, the Stoics' lack of scientific justification discredited their claims of the separateness of mind and body, which is why he spoke so strongly against them.
Again, no expense was spared, and following his earlier liberal education, at 16 he began studies at the prestigious local sanctuary or Asclepieum dedicated to Asclepius, god of medicine, as a θεραπευτής (''therapeutes'', or attendant) for four years.
However, there is a reference in Galen's treatise ''"On Theriac to Piso"'' (which may, however, be spurious) to events of 204.
Vesalius's most famous work, ''De humani corporis fabrica'', was greatly influenced by Galenic writing and form.
