However, he was eventually persuaded to admit that, contrary to his true intention, a reader of his ''Dialogue'' could well have obtained the impression that it was intended to be a defence of Copernicanism.
A dispute over priority in the discovery of sunspots, and in their interpretation, led Galileo to a long and bitter feud with the Jesuit Christoph Scheiner.
The time between the first observer's opening his shutter and seeing the light from the second observer's lamp indicates the time it takes light to travel back and forth between the two observers.
Galileo is lesser known for, yet still credited with, being one of the first to understand sound frequency.
Galileo proposed that a falling body would fall with a uniform acceleration, as long as the resistance of the medium through which it was falling remained negligible, or in the limiting case of its falling through a vacuum.
Galileo's theoretical and experimental work on the motions of bodies, along with the largely independent work of Kepler and René Descartes, was a precursor of the classical mechanics developed by Sir Isaac Newton.
Philosophical ideas relating to inertia had been proposed by John Philoponus and Jean Buridan.
The evidence for this is at best equivocal, however.
Most historians agree Galileo did not act out of malice and felt blindsided by the reaction to his book.
The rings reappeared when he observed the planet in 1616, further confusing him.
Galileo and his contemporaries were aware of this inadequacy because there are two daily high tides at Venice instead of one, about twelve hours apart.
Because of their illegitimate birth, their father considered the girls unmarriageable, if not posing problems of prohibitively expensive support or dowries, which would have been similar to Galileo's previous extensive financial problems with two of his sisters.
He then was educated in the Camaldolese Monastery at Vallombrosa, 35&nbsp;km southeast of Florence.
He was tried by the Inquisition, found "vehemently suspect of heresy", and forced to recant.
He finally arrived in February 1633 and was brought before inquisitor Vincenzo Maculani to be charged.
In his study he also made topographical charts, estimating the heights of the mountains.
He discovered the fourth on 13 January.
As described in his ''Dialogue Concerning the two Chief World Systems'', his method was to hang a thin rope in his line of sight to the star and measure the maximum distance from which it would wholly obscure the star.
which did not actually take place.
Prompted by this incident, Galileo wrote a letter to Castelli in which he argued that heliocentrism was actually not contrary to biblical texts, and that the bible was an authority on faith and morals, not on science.
On the other hand, in Ptolemy's geocentric model it was impossible for any of the planets' orbits to intersect the spherical shell carrying the Sun.
He also derived the correct kinematical law for the distance travelled during a uniform acceleration starting from rest—namely, that it is proportional to the square of the elapsed time (&nbsp;''d''&nbsp;∝&nbsp;''t''&nbsp;2&nbsp;).
When he returned home, he set up two pendulums of equal length and swung one with a large sweep and the other with a small sweep and found that they kept time together.
In 1592, he moved to the University of Padua where he taught geometry, mechanics, and astronomy until 1610.
As a geometric instrument, it enabled the construction of any regular polygon, computation of the area of any polygon or circular sector, and a variety of other calculations.
According to popular legend, after recanting his theory that the Earth moved around the Sun, Galileo allegedly muttered the rebellious phrase ''And yet it moves''.
It also subscribed to the Philoponan impetus dynamics in which impetus is self-dissipating and free-fall in a vacuum would have an essential terminal speed according to specific weight after an initial period of acceleration.
According to Maurice Finocchiaro, Ingoli had probably been commissioned by the Inquisition to write an expert opinion on the controversy, and the essay provided the "chief direct basis" for the Inquisition's actions.
While under house arrest, he wrote one of his best-known works, ''Two New Sciences'', in which he summarized work he had done some forty years earlier on the two sciences now called kinematics and strength of materials.
However most of his experiments with falling bodies were carried out using inclined planes where both the issues of timing and wind resistance were much reduced.
(It remained for others to re-express the law in algebraic terms).
On 15 February 1990, in a speech delivered at the Sapienza University of Rome, Cardinal Ratzinger (later to become Pope Benedict XVI) cited some current views on the Galileo affair as forming what he called "a symptomatic case that permits us to see how deep the self-doubt of the modern age, of science and technology goes today".
His telescopes were also a profitable sideline for Galileo, who sold them to merchants who found them useful both at sea and as items of trade.
The name was derived from the Greek ''tele'' = 'far' and ''skopein'' = 'to look or see'.
Following the success of The Assayer, Galileo published the ''Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems'' (Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo) in 1632.
It appears in his notebooks as one of many unremarkable dim stars.
He understood the parabola, both in terms of conic sections and in terms of the ordinate (y) varying as the square of the abscissa (x).
Indeed, although Galileo states in the preface of his book that the character is named after a famous Aristotelian philosopher (Simplicius in Latin, "Simplicio" in Italian), the name "Simplicio" in Italian also has the connotation of "simpleton".
Up to this point, Galileo had deliberately been kept away from mathematics, since a physician earned a higher income than a mathematician.
To him it seemed, by comparison with his heartbeat, that the chandelier took the same amount of time to swing back and forth, no matter how far it was swinging.
This principle provided the basic framework for Newton's laws of motion and is central to Einstein's special theory of relativity.
It was greeted with wide acclaim, and particularly pleased the new pope, Urban VIII, to whom it had been dedicated.
At the start of 1616, Monsignor Francesco Ingoli initiated a debate with Galileo, sending him an essay disputing the Copernican system.
His proposed solution, that infinite numbers cannot be compared, is no longer considered useful.
He circulated his first account of the tides in 1616, addressed to Cardinal Orsini.
In 2009, the Galileoscope was also released.
He gave one of these instruments to Cardinal Zollern in May of that year for presentation to the Duke of Bavaria, and in September he sent another to Prince Cesi.
Galileo's resulting book, ''Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems'', was published in 1632, with formal authorization from the Inquisition and papal permission.
For sea navigation, where delicate telescopic observations were more difficult, the longitude problem eventually required development of a practical portable marine chronometer, such as that of John Harrison.
Opposition to heliocentrism and Galileo's writings combined religious and scientific objections and were fueled by political events.
Galileo also found that the square of the period varies directly with the length of the pendulum.
In fact, there is little doubt that both of them were beaten by David Fabricius and his son Johannes.
These observations lay within the framework of the Pythagorean tradition of music, well-known to instrument makers, which included the fact that subdividing a string by a whole number produces a harmonious scale.
For Galileo, the tides were caused by the sloshing back and forth of water in the seas as a point on the Earth's surface sped up and slowed down because of the Earth's rotation on its axis and revolution around the Sun.
In 1619, Galileo became embroiled in a controversy with Father Orazio Grassi, professor of mathematics at the Jesuit Collegio Romano.
He revived his project of writing a book on the subject, encouraged by the election of Cardinal Maffeo Barberini as Pope Urban VIII in 1623.
Interest in the Galileo affair was revived in the early 19th century, when Protestant polemicists used it (and other events such as the Spanish Inquisition and the Flat Earth Myth) to attack Roman Catholicism.
Because ''The Assayer'' contains such a wealth of Galileo's ideas on how science should be practised, it has been referred to as his scientific manifesto.
* He was sentenced to formal imprisonment at the pleasure of the Inquisition.
Galileo later stated that he believed this essay to have been instrumental in the action against Copernicanism that followed.
As a general account of the cause of tides, however, his theory was a failure.
Galileo dismissed this anomaly as the result of several secondary causes including the shape of the sea, its depth, and other factors.
Galileo was one of the first modern thinkers to clearly state that the laws of nature are mathematical.
In his 1638 ''Discorsi'', Galileo's character Salviati, widely regarded as Galileo's spokesman, held that all unequal weights would fall with the same finite speed in a vacuum.
Galileo considered his theory of the tides to provide the required physical proof of the motion of the earth.
He was required to "abjure, curse and detest" those opinions.
In 1623, Galileo published ''The Assayer—Il Saggiatore'', which attacked theories based on Aristotle's authority and promoted experimentation and the mathematical formulation of scientific ideas.
It was, however, also possible to place it entirely on the far side of the Sun, where it could exhibit only gibbous and full phases.
In the ''Starry Messenger'', Galileo reported that stars appeared as mere blazes of light, essentially unaltered in appearance by the telescope, and contrasted them to planets, which the telescope revealed to be discs.
Traditionally the orbit of Venus was placed entirely on the near side of the Sun, where it could exhibit only crescent and new phases.
(Galileo also took no interest in Kepler's elliptical orbits of the planets.)
Interest in it has waxed and waned ever since.
Grassi's arguments and conclusions were criticised in a subsequent article, ''Discourse on the Comets'', published under the name of one of Galileo's disciples, a Florentine lawyer named Mario Guiducci, although it had been largely written by Galileo himself.
However, after accidentally attending a lecture on geometry, he talked his reluctant father into letting him study mathematics and natural philosophy instead of medicine.
From that point forward, he continued to report that telescopes showed the roundness of stars, and that stars seen through the telescope measured a few seconds of arc in diameter.
Michelangelo was unable to contribute his fair share of their father's promised dowries to their brothers-in-law, who would later attempt to seek legal remedies for payments due.
Her verdict against Galileo was rational and just and the revision of this verdict can be justified only on the grounds of what is politically opportune."
Galileo observed and discussed Kepler's supernova in 1604.
And the annual variations in sunspots' motions, discovered by Francesco Sizzi and others in 1612–1613, provided a powerful argument against both the Ptolemaic system and the geoheliocentric system of Tycho Brahe.
Scheiner quickly adopted Kepler's 1615 proposal of the modern telescope design, which gave larger magnification at the cost of inverted images; Galileo apparently never changed to Kepler's design.
Thus in the early 17th century as a result of his discovery the great majority of astronomers converted to one of the various geo-heliocentric planetary models, such as the Tychonic, Capellan and Extended Capellan models, each either with or without a daily rotating Earth.
While a young teacher at the Accademia, he began a lifelong friendship with the Florentine painter Cigoli, who included Galileo's lunar observations in one of his paintings.
In 1741 Pope Benedict XIV authorised the publication of an edition of Galileo's complete scientific works which included a mildly censored version of the ''Dialogue''.
In 1619, Mario Guiducci, a pupil of Galileo's, published a lecture written largely by Galileo under the title ''Discourse on the Comets'' (''Discorso Delle Comete''), arguing against the Jesuit interpretation of comets.
Galileo stated: "Imagine any particle projected along a horizontal plane without friction; then we know, from what has been more fully explained in the preceding pages, that this particle will move along this same plane with a motion which is uniform and perpetual, provided the plane has no limits" This was incorporated into Newton's laws of motion (first law).
The heliocentric model of the solar system developed by Nicolaus Copernicus predicted that all phases would be visible since the orbit of Venus around the Sun would cause its illuminated hemisphere to face the Earth when it was on the opposite side of the Sun and to face away from the Earth when it was on the Earth-side of the Sun.
Scientific opposition came from Tycho Brahe and others, and arose from the fact that, if heliocentrism were true, an annual stellar parallax should be observed, though none was.
Galileo observed the Milky Way, previously believed to be nebulous, and found it to be a multitude of stars packed so densely that they appeared from Earth to be clouds.
In view of Galileo's rather implausible denial that he had ever held Copernican ideas after 1616 or ever intended to defend them in the ''Dialogue'', his final interrogation, in July 1633, concluded with his being threatened with torture if he did not tell the truth, but he maintained his denial despite the threat.
The decree of the Congregation of the Index banned Copernicus's ''De Revolutionibus'' and other heliocentric works until correction.
Only the latter of those requests was fulfilled by Galileo.
More typical of science at the time were the qualitative studies of William Gilbert, on magnetism and electricity.
The essay focused on eighteen physical and mathematical arguments against heliocentrism.
In the silver ring other telescopes are depicted: the Isaac Newton Telescope, the observatory in Kremsmünster Abbey, a modern telescope, a radio telescope and a space telescope.
A 1640s painting by the Spanish painter Bartolomé Esteban Murillo or an artist of his school, in which the words were hidden until restoration work in 1911, depicts an imprisoned Galileo apparently gazing at the words "E pur si muove" written on the wall of his dungeon.
Under Galileo's direction, instrument maker Marc'Antonio Mazzoleni produced more than 100 of these compasses, which Galileo sold (along with an instruction manual he wrote) for 50 lire and offered a course of instruction in the use of the compasses for 120 lire.
Cardinal Bellarmine had written in 1615 that the Copernican system could not be defended without "a true physical demonstration that the sun does not circle the earth but the earth circles the sun".
It was in three essential parts:
He spent the rest of his life under house arrest.
The method was first successfully applied by Giovanni Domenico Cassini in 1681 and was later used extensively for large land surveys; this method, for example, was used to survey France, and later by Zebulon Pike of the midwestern United States in 1806.
We now know that the speed of light is far too fast to be measured by such methods (with human shutter-openers on Earth).
On 7 January 1610, Galileo observed with his telescope what he described at the time as "three fixed stars, totally invisible by their smallness", all close to Jupiter, and lying on a straight line through it.
His multiple interests included the study of astrology, which at the time was a discipline tied to the studies of mathematics and astronomy.
In 1612, having determined the orbital periods of Jupiter's satellites, Galileo proposed that with sufficiently accurate knowledge of their orbits, one could use their positions as a universal clock, and this would make possible the determination of longitude.
Galileo observed the planet Saturn, and at first mistook its rings for planets, thinking it was a three-bodied system.
Prior to Galileo, Nicole Oresme, in the 14th century, had derived the times-squared law for uniformly accelerated change, and Domingo de Soto had suggested in the 16th century that bodies falling through a homogeneous medium would be uniformly accelerated.
Copernicus had correctly postulated that parallax was negligible because the stars were so distant.
His observations of the satellites of Jupiter caused a revolution in astronomy: a planet with smaller planets orbiting it did not conform to the principles of Aristotelian cosmology, which held that all heavenly bodies should circle the Earth, and many astronomers and philosophers initially refused to believe that Galileo could have discovered such a thing.
In March 2008 the head of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, Nicola Cabibbo, announced a plan to honour Galileo by erecting a statue of him inside the Vatican walls.
In December 1613 the Grand Duchess Christina of Florence confronted one of Galileo's friends and followers, Benedetto Castelli, with biblical objections to the motion of the earth.
Since these new stars displayed no detectable diurnal parallax, Galileo concluded that they were distant stars, and therefore disproved the Aristotelian belief in the immutability of the heavens.
Prior to Galileo's construction of his version of a telescope, Thomas Harriot, an English mathematician and explorer, had already used what he dubbed a "perspective tube" to observe the moon.
When he observed the planet later, Saturn's rings were directly oriented at Earth, causing him to think that two of the bodies had disappeared.
Galileo had alienated one of his biggest and most powerful supporters, the Pope, and was called to Rome to defend his writings in September 1632.
During this period, Galileo made significant discoveries in both pure fundamental science (for example, kinematics of motion and astronomy) as well as practical applied science (for example, strength of materials and pioneering the telescope).
Against the assertion that Galileo was deceptive in making these arguments, Albert Einstein expressed the opinion that Galileo developed his "fascinating arguments" and accepted them uncritically out of a desire for physical proof of the motion of the Earth.
A global scheme was laid out by the International Astronomical Union (IAU), also endorsed by UNESCO—the UN body responsible for educational, scientific and cultural matters.
But this had previously been proposed by Lucretius and Simon Stevin.
The experiment described was actually performed by Simon Stevin (commonly known as Stevinus) and Jan Cornets de Groot, although the building used was actually the church tower in Delft in 1586.
In about 1593, Galileo constructed a thermometer, using the expansion and contraction of air in a bulb to move water in an attached tube.
After Galileo's telescopic observations of the crescent, gibbous and full phases of Venus, therefore, this Ptolemaic model became untenable.
*the Galilean moons
He worked on this problem from time to time during the remainder of his life; but the practical problems were severe.
In 1591, his father died, and he was entrusted with the care of his younger brother Michelagnolo.
His close advisor of 40 years, Professor Robert Leiber, wrote: "Pius XII was very careful not to close any doors (to science) prematurely.
Grassi concluded that the comet was a fiery body which had moved along a segment of a great circle at a constant distance from the earth, and since it moved in the sky more slowly than the moon, it must be farther away than the moon.
Galileo's discovery of the phases of Venus was thus arguably his most empirically practically influential contribution to the two-stage transition from full geocentrism to full heliocentrism via geo-heliocentrism.
Early in 1619, Father Grassi had anonymously published a pamphlet, ''An Astronomical Disputation on the Three Comets of the Year 1618'', which discussed the nature of a comet that had appeared late in November of the previous year.
However, his daughter Maria Celeste relieved him of the burden after securing ecclesiastical permission to take it upon herself.
These all had the virtue of explaining the phases of Venus without the vice of the 'refutation' of full heliocentrism's prediction of stellar parallax.
He also concluded that objects ''retain their velocity'' in the absence of any impediments to their motion, thereby contradicting the generally accepted Aristotelian hypothesis that a body could only remain in so-called "violent", "unnatural", or "forced" motion so long as an agent of change (the "mover") continued to act on it.
He also devised a method for measuring the apparent size of a star without a telescope.
On the following day this was commuted to house arrest, which he remained under for the rest of his life.
Galileo dismissed the idea, held by his contemporary Johannes Kepler, that the moon caused the tides.
The moon was not what was long thought to have been a translucent and perfect sphere, as Aristotle claimed, and hardly the first "planet", an "eternal pearl to magnificently ascend into the heavenly empyrian", as put forth by Dante.
He was energetic on this point and regretted that in the case of Galileo."
Galileo defended heliocentrism based on his astronomical observations of 1609 (''Sidereus Nuncius'' 1610).
His theory gave the first insight into the importance of the shapes of ocean basins in the size and timing of tides; he correctly accounted, for instance, for the negligible tides halfway along the Adriatic Sea compared to those at the ends.
He located many other stars too distant to be visible with the naked eye.
Galileo made original contributions to the science of motion through an innovative combination of experiment and mathematics.
*the existence of a large number of stars invisible to the naked eye, particularly those responsible for the appearance of the Milky Way
However, Galileo's values were much smaller than previous estimates of the apparent sizes of the brightest stars, such as those made by Tycho Brahe (see Magnitude) and enabled Galileo to counter anti-Copernican arguments such as those made by Tycho that these stars would have to be absurdly large for their annual parallaxes to be undetectable.
*differences between the appearances of the planets and those of the fixed stars—the former appearing as small discs, while the latter appeared as unmagnified points of light
The Galileo affair was largely forgotten after Galileo's death, and the controversy subsided.
Virginia took the name Maria Celeste upon entering the convent.
Galileo later defended his views in ''Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems'', which appeared to attack Pope Urban VIII and thus alienated him and the Jesuits, who had both supported Galileo up until this point.
In Brahe's system, by contrast, the stars were a little more distant than Saturn, and the Sun and stars were comparable in size.
This provided a reliable foundation on which to confirm mathematical laws using inductive reasoning.
According to Maurice Finocchiaro this was done in a friendly and gracious manner, out of curiosity.
In February 1616, an Inquisitorial commission declared heliocentrism to be "foolish and absurd in philosophy, and formally heretical since it explicitly contradicts in many places the sense of Holy Scripture."
Late in his life, when totally blind, Galileo designed an escapement mechanism for a pendulum clock (called Galileo's escapement), although no clock using this was built until after the first fully operational pendulum clock was made by Christiaan Huygens in the 1650s.
The Inquisition's ban on reprinting Galileo's works was lifted in 1718 when permission was granted to publish an edition of his works (excluding the condemned ''Dialogue'') in Florence.
Galileo conducted several experiments with pendulums.
Lorini specifically cited Galileo's letter to Castelli.
In it he made a point of quoting Acts 1:11, "Ye Men of Galilee, why stand you gazing up in heaven?
Galileo went to Rome to defend himself and his Copernican and biblical ideas.
The sentence of the Inquisition was delivered on 22 June.
The biblical roots of Galileo's name and surname were to become the subject of a famous pun.
Galileo put forward the basic principle of relativity, that the laws of physics are the same in any system that is moving at a constant speed in a straight line, regardless of its particular speed or direction.
In fact, this is only approximately true, as was discovered by Christiaan Huygens.
The essay also included four theological arguments, but Ingoli suggested Galileo focus on the physical and mathematical arguments, and he did not mention Galileo's biblical ideas.
The Linceans played a role again in naming the "microscope" a year later when fellow academy member Giovanni Faber coined the word for Galileo's invention from the Greek words ''μικρόν'' (''micron'') meaning "small", and ''σκοπεῖν'' (''skopein'') meaning "to look at".
Later astronomers, however, renamed them ''Galilean satellites'' in honour of their discoverer.
The obverse shows a portion of his portrait and his telescope.
Having been accused of weakness in defending the church, Urban reacted against Galileo out of anger and fear.
The Inquisition found that the idea of the Earth's movement "receives the same judgement in philosophy and... in regard to theological truth it is at least erroneous in faith".
As a result of this work, Galileo is often called the "father of modern physics".
He later made improved versions with up to about 30x magnification.
She died on 2 April 1634, and is buried with Galileo at the Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence.
*the roughness of the Moon's surface
By 1615 Galileo's writings on heliocentrism had been submitted to the Roman Inquisition by Father Niccolo Lorini, who claimed that Galileo and his followers were attempting to reinterpret the Bible, which was seen as a violation of the Council of Trent and looked dangerously like Protestantism.
This coin also commemorates the 400th anniversary of the invention of Galileo's telescope.
Galileo's dispute with Grassi permanently alienated many of the Jesuits who had previously been sympathetic to his ideas, and Galileo and his friends were convinced that these Jesuits were responsible for bringing about his later condemnation.
However, the Pope did not take the suspected public ridicule lightly, nor the Copernican advocacy.
It began as a dispute over the nature of comets, but by the time Galileo had published ''The Assayer'' (''Il Saggiatore'') in 1623, his last salvo in the dispute, it had become a much wider controversy over the very nature of science itself.
After a period with the friendly Ascanio Piccolomini (the Archbishop of Siena), Galileo was allowed to return to his villa at Arcetri near Florence in 1634, where he spent the remainder of his life under house arrest.
From September 1610, Galileo observed that Venus exhibited a full set of phases similar to that of the Moon.
Reporting his observations, Harriot noted only "strange spottednesse" in the waning of the crescent, but was ignorant to the cause.
(See Engineering above.)
Michelangelo would also occasionally have to borrow funds from Galileo to support his musical endeavours and excursions.
Thus, a limited amount of mathematics had long related music and physical science, and young Galileo could see his own father's observations expand on that tradition.
Based only on uncertain descriptions of the first practical telescope which Hans Lippershey tried to patent in the Netherlands in 1608, Galileo, in the following year, made a telescope with about 3x magnification.
(The  original document from the Inquisitorial commission was made widely available in 2014.)
A month later, however, the head of the Pontifical Council for Culture, Gianfranco Ravasi, revealed that the plan to erect a statue of Galileo in the grounds of the Vatican had been suspended.
Despite the publication ban, Galileo published his ''Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences'' (''Discorsi e Dimostrazioni Matematiche, intorno a due nuove scienze'') in 1638 in Holland, outside the jurisdiction of the Inquisition.
All traces of official opposition to heliocentrism by the church disappeared in 1835 when these works were finally dropped from the Index.
Galileo reported that when he tried this at a distance of less than a mile, he was unable to determine whether or not the light appeared instantaneously.
In 1939 Pope Pius XII, in his first speech to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, within a few months of his election to the papacy, described Galileo as being among the "most audacious heroes of research... not afraid of the stumbling blocks and the risks on the way, nor fearful of the funereal monuments".
The concept now named Galileo's paradox was not original with him.
Some of the views he cited were those of the philosopher Paul Feyerabend, whom he quoted as saying "The Church at the time of Galileo kept much more closely to reason than did Galileo himself, and she took into consideration the ethical and social consequences of Galileo's teaching too.
The analysis and proofs relied heavily on the Eudoxian theory of proportion, as set forth in the fifth book of Euclid's Elements.
It was while Galileo was under house arrest that he dedicated his time to one of his finest works, ''Two New Sciences''.
Ottavio Brenzoni's letter of 15 January 1605 to Galileo brought the 1572 supernova and the less bright nova of 1601 to Galileo's notice.
Unfortunately for his relationship with the Pope, Galileo put the words of Urban VIII into the mouth of Simplicio.
These financial burdens may have contributed to Galileo's early fire to develop inventions that would bring him additional income.
The Jesuits were offended, and Grassi soon replied with a polemical tract of his own, ''The Astronomical and Philosophical Balance'', under the pseudonym Lothario Sarsio Sigensano, purporting to be one of his own pupils.
Religious opposition to heliocentrism arose from Biblical references such as Psalm , , and 1 Chronicles  which include text stating that "the world is firmly established, it cannot be moved."
Galileo's son, Vincenzo, sketched a clock based on his father's theories in 1642.
In Rome, in the previous decade, Barberini, the future Urban VIII, had come down on the side of Galileo and the Lincean Academy.
It borrowed primarily from the arguments of Tycho Brahe, and it notedly mentioned Brahe's argument that heliocentrism required the stars to be much larger than the Sun.
