It is 37&nbsp;m long, 5.7&nbsp;m wide, has a draught of about 2&nbsp;m, weighs about 140 tons, and has 48 oars powered by 144 oarsmen.
As offensive weapons, firearms could be stored for years with minimal maintenance and did not require the expenses associated with soldiers.
The relative speed and nimbleness of ships became important, since a slower ship could be outmaneuvered and disabled by a faster one.
Galleys therefore were still the only ship type capable of coastal raiding and amphibious landings, both key elements of medieval warfare.
Attacking them in a strong defensive position head-on would have been very dangerous since it offered good cohesion, allowed rowers to escape ashore and made it possible to reinforce weak positions by transferring infantry along the shore.
These early galleys apparently lacked a keel meaning they lacked stiffness along their length.
The initial stages in naval battles was an exchanges of missiles, ranging from combustible projectiles to arrows, caltrops and javelins.
To low-freeboard oared vessels, the bulkier sailing ships like the carrack and the cog were almost like floating fortresses, being difficult to board and even harder to capture.
This way the ram could twist off if got stuck after ramming rather than breaking the integrity of the hull.
Sweden was late in the game when it came to building an effective oared fighting fleet, while the Russian galley forces under Tsar Peter I developed into a supporting arm for the sailing navy and a well-functioning auxiliary of the army which infiltrated and conducted numerous raids on the eastern Swedish coast in the 1710s.
Names were based on the changing designs that evolved after the ancient rowing schemes were forgotten.
Today it is best known by a modernized Latin terminology based on numerals with the ending "-reme" from ''rēmus'', "oar".
In Latin they were called ''actuaria (navis)'' ("ship that moves") in Latin, stressing that they were capable of making progress regardless of weather conditions.
Lepanto became the last large all-galley battle ever, and was also one of the largest battle in terms of participants anywhere in early modern Europe before the Napoleonic Wars.
Contrary to the popular image of rowers chained to the oars, conveyed by movies such as ''Ben Hur'', there is no evidence that ancient navies ever made use of condemned criminals or slaves as oarsmen, with the possible exception of Ptolemaic Egypt.
Galleys required less timber to build, the design was relatively simple and they carried fewer guns.
In this, the planking of the hull was strong enough to hold the ship together structurally, and was also watertight without the need for caulking.
This made them cumbersome to steer and it was virtually impossible to sail into the wind direction.
The response came in the building of a considerable fleet of oared vessels, including hybrids with a complete three-masted rig, as well as a Mediterranean-style galleys (that were even attempted to be manned with convicts and slaves).
They had possibly developed a primitive type of keel, but still retained the large cables intended to prevent hogging.
In some very large command galleys, there could be as many as seven to an oar.
The core of their fleets were concentrated in the three major, wholly dependable naval bases in the Mediterranean: Constantinople, Venice and Barcelona.
In ancient galleys under sail, most of the moving power came from a single square sail.
After its introduction, the rambade became a standard detail on every fighting galley until the very end of galley era in the early 19th century.
It was only in the early 16th century that the modern idea of the galley slave became commonplace.
Traditionally the English in the North and the Venetians in the Mediterranean are seen as some the earliest to move in this direction.
The origin of the Greek word is unclear but could possibly be related to ''galeos'', "dog-fish; small shark".
The later Ottoman navy used similar designs, but they were generally faster under sail, and smaller, but slower under oars.
The low freeboard of the galley meant that in close action with a sailing vessel, the sailing vessel would usually maintain a height advantage.
A third smaller mast further astern, akin to a mizzen mast, was also introduced on large galleys, possibly in the early 17th century, but was standard at least by the early 18th century.
They were so safe that merchandise was often not insured.
This temporarily upended the strength of older seaside fortresses, which had to be rebuilt to cope with gunpowder weapons.
While galleys were too vulnerable to be used in large numbers in the open waters of the Atlantic, they were well-suited for use in much of the Baltic Sea by Denmark, Sweden, Russia and some of the Central European powers with ports on the southern coast.
Since the spar was often much longer than the mast itself, and not much shorter than the ship itself, it was a complex and time-consuming maneuver.
The profile has therefore been that of a markedly elongated hull with a ratio of breadth to length at the waterline of at least 1:5, and in the case of ancient Mediterranean galleys as much as 1:10 with a small draught, the measurement of how much of a ship's structure that is submerged under water.
The Knights of Saint John used slaves extensively, as did the Papal States, Florence and Genoa.
The number of benches could not be increased without lengthening hulls beyond their structural limits, and more than three oars per bench was not practicable.
The zenith of galley usage in warfare came in the late 16th century with battles like that at Lepanto in 1571, one of the largest naval battles ever fought.
The earliest medieval galley specification comes from an order of Charles I of Sicily, in 1275 AD.
To counter the threat, local rulers began to build large oared vessels, some with up to 30 pairs of oars, that were larger, faster and with higher sides than Viking ships.
From around 1450, three major naval powers established a dominance over different parts of the Mediterranean using galleys as their primary weapons at sea: the Ottomans in the east, Venice in the center and Habsburg Spain in the west.
These were the mainstay of all Christian powers until the 14th century, including the great maritime republics of Genoa and Venice, the Papacy, the Hospitallers, Aragon and Castile, as well as by various pirates and corsairs.
Ancient rowing was done in a fixed seated position, the most effective rowing position, with rowers facing the stern.
The weak points of a galley remained the sides and especially the rear, the command center.
The new type descended from the ships used by Byzantine and Muslim fleets in the early Middle Ages.
No large all galley battles were fought after the gigantic clash at Lepanto in 1571, and galleys were mostly used as cruisers or for supporting sailing warships as a rearguard in fleet actions, similar to the duties performed by frigates outside the Mediterranean.
Medieval galleys instead developed a projection, or "spur", in the bow that was designed to break oars and to act as a boarding platform for storming enemy ships.
In the late 18th century, the term "galley" was in some contexts used to describe minor oared gun-armed vessels which did not fit into the category of the classic Mediterranean type.
They could be manned by crews of up to 1,000 men and were employed in both trade and warfare.
In the mid 1990s, a sunken galley was found close to the island of San Marco in Boccalama, in the Venice Lagoon.
The earliest Greek single-banked galleys are called triaconters (from ''triakontoroi'', "thirty-oars") and penteconters (''pentēkontoroi'', "fifty-oars").
By the 8th century BC the first galleys rowed at two levels had been developed, among the earliest being the two-level penteconters which were considerably shorter than the one-level equivalents, and therefore more maneuverable.
"bean pod") for passenger transport and the ''lembus'', a small-scale express carrier.
Burgundian records from the mid-15th century describe galleys with some form of guns, but do not specify the size.
As galleys became an integral part of an advanced, early modern system of warfare and state administration, they were divided into a number of ranked grades based on the size of the vessel and the number of its crew.
The first true Mediterranean galleys usually had between 15 and 25 pairs of oars and were called triaconters or penteconters, literally "thirty-" and "fifty-oared", respectively.
The introduction of heavy guns and small arms did not change tactics considerably.
Galleys had little room for provisions and depended on frequent resupplying and were often beached at night to rest the crew and cook meals.
The galley was capable of outperforming sailing vessel in early battles.
Arrangements of the three levels are believed to have varied, but the most well-documented design made use of a projecting structure, or outrigger, where the oarlock in the form of a ''thole pin'' was placed.
After Augustus' victory at Actium, most of the Roman fleet was dismantled and burned.
Gunpowder weapons began to displace men as the fighting power of armed forces, making individual soldiers more deadly and effective.
Manpower could thus be exchanged for capital investments, something which benefited sailing vessels that were already far more economical in their use of manpower.
Foremast and middle mast respectively heights 16.08&nbsp;m, 11.00&nbsp;m; circumference both 0.79&nbsp;m, yard lengths 26.72&nbsp;m, 17.29&nbsp;m. Overall deadweight tonnage approximately 80 metric tons.
Bulk trade fell around 600-750 while the luxury trade increased.
By the 9th century lateens were firmly established as part of the standard galley rig.
The battle of Gibraltar between Castile and Portugal in 1476 was another important sign of change; it was the first recorded battle where the primary combatants were full-rigged ships armed with wrought-iron guns on the upper decks and in the waists, foretelling of the slow decline of the war galley.
The improving sail rigs of northern vessels also allowed them to navigate in the coastal waters of the Mediterranean to a much larger degree than before.
In the Baltic, the Swedish king Gustav I, the founder of the modern Swedish state, showed particular interest in galleys, as was befitting a Renaissance prince.
The design of the earliest oared vessels is mostly unknown and highly conjectural.
Galleys had looked more or less the same for over four centuries and a fairly standardized classification system for different sizes of galleys had been developed by the Mediterranean bureaucracies, based mostly on the number of benches in a vessel.
Galleys remained useful as warships throughout the entire Middle Ages because of their maneuverability.
Rowing in headwinds or even moderately rough weather was difficult as well as exhausting.
The primary warship of the Byzantine navy until the 12th century was the dromon and other similar ship types.
To make it possible to efficiently row the vessels, the freeboard, the height of the railing to the surface of the water, was by necessity kept low.
In 1909, French author Albert Savine (1859–1927) wrote that "after the Bastille, the galleys were the greatest horror of the old regime".
A huge ''forty''-rowed ship was built during the reign of Ptolemy IV in Egypt.
The ancient terms for galleys was based on the numbers of rows or rowers plying the oars, not the number of rows of oars.
One suggested design was that of a huge trireme catamaran with up to 14 men per oar and it is assumed that it was intended as a showpiece rather than a practical warship.
Hulls had sharp bottoms without keelsons in order to support the structure and were reinforced by transverse framing secured with dowels with nails driven through them.
Since the maximum banks of oars was three, any expansion above that did not refer to additional banks of oars, but of additional rowers for every oar.
The Roman galley fleets were turned into provincial patrol forces that were smaller and relied largely on ''liburnians'', compact biremes with 25 pairs of oars.
Sweden and especially Russia began to launch galleys and various rowed vessels in great numbers during the Great Northern War in the first two decades of the 18th century.
The terms are based on contemporary language use combined with more recent compounds of Greek and Latin words.
Long after convicts stopped serving in the galleys, and even after the reign of Napoleon, the term ''galérien'' ("galley rower") remained a symbolic general term for forced labor and convicts serving harsh sentences.
There was a minor revival of galley warfare in the 18th century in the wars between Russia, Sweden and Denmark.
The ship was 60&nbsp;m long and 6.2&nbsp;m wide, had a draught of 2.1&nbsp;m, weighing 239 tons empty, was propelled by 290 rowers, and carried about 400 crew and fighting soldiers at Lepanto.
A second, shorter mast could be raised temporarily in the bows, but became permanent by the early 17th century.
Despite the attempts to counter increasingly heavy ships, ramming tactics were gradually superseded in the last centuries BC by the Macedonians and Romans, both primarily land-based powers.
This did not actually sink an ancient galley unless it was heavily laden with cargo and stores.
With high freeboard (up to 3&nbsp;m) and additional tower structures from which missiles could be shot down onto enemy decks, they were intended to be like floating fortresses.
With the consolidation of Roman imperial power, the size of both fleets and galleys decreased considerably.
Around the same time, English king Henry VIII had high ambitions to live up to the reputation of the omnipotent Renaissance ruler and also had a few Mediterranean-style galleys built (and even manned them with slaves), though the English navy relied mostly on sailing ships at the time.
An accumulation and generalizing of bronze cannons and small firearms in the Mediterranean during the 16th century increased the cost of warfare, but also made those dependent on them more resilient to manpower losses.
The best depictions found so far have been small, highly stylized images on seals which depict crescent-shape vessels equipped with one mast and banks of oars.
The situation was worsened by raiding Scandinavian Vikings who used longships, vessels that in many ways were very close to galleys in design and functionality and also employed similar tactics.
A ''monoreme'' has one bank of oars, a ''bireme'' two and a ''trireme'' three.
Before that, particularly in antiquity, there was a wide variety of terms used for different types of galleys.
It was maintained as a functional fighting force right up until its abolishment in 1748, though its primary function was more of a symbol of Louis XIV's absolutist ambitions.
One was the open sea, suitable for large sailing fleets; the other was the coastal areas and especially the chain of small islands and archipelagos that ran almost uninterrupted from Stockholm to the Gulf of Finland.
The documentary evidence for the construction of ancient galleys is fragmentary, particularly in pre-Roman times.
This attracted a business of carrying affluent pilgrims to the Holy Land, a trip that could be accomplished in as little 29 days on the route Venice-Jaffa, despite landfalls for rest and watering or for respite from rough weather.
The galley is characterized by its long, slender hull, shallow draft and low clearance between sea and railing.
Some of these are rowed, but others are paddled with men laboriously bent over the railings.
It would allow the wings of the fleet to crash their bows straight into the sides of the enemy ships at the edge of the formation.
The emergence of more advanced states and intensified competition between them spurred on the development of advanced galleys with multiple banks of rowers.
With the introduction of guns in the bows of galleys, a permanent wooden structure called ''rambade'' (French: ''rambade''; Italian: ''rambata''; Spanish: ''arrumbada'') was introduced.
Galleys and similar oared vessels remained uncontested as the most effective gun-armed warships in theory until the 1560s, and in practice for a few decades more, and were actually considered a grave risk to sailing warships.
They were used for amphibious operations in Russo-Swedish wars of 1741–43 and 1788–90.
The size of the new naval forces also made it difficult to find enough skilled rowers for the one-man-per-oar system of the earliest triremes.
The earliest designs had only one row of rowers that sat in undecked hulls, rowing against tholes, or oarports, that were placed directly along the railings.
As civilizations around the Mediterranean grew in size and complexity, both their navies and the galleys that made up their numbers became successively larger.
Hand-to-hand fighting with large complements of heavy infantry supported by ship-borne catapults dominated the fighting style during the Roman era, a move that was accompanied by the conversion to heavier ships with larger rowing complements and more men per oar.
Gun crews would therefore hold their fire until the last possible moment, somewhat similar to infantry tactics in the pre-industrial era of short range firearms.
It was based on the form of the ''galea'', the smaller Byzantine galleys, and would be known mostly by the Italian term ''gallia sottila'' (literally "slender galley").
River boats plied the waterways of ancient Egypt during the Old Kingdom (2700–2200 BC) and seagoing galley-like vessels were recorded bringing back luxuries from across the Red Sea in the reign of pharaoh Hatshepsut.
The maximum distance at which contemporary cannons were effective, c. 500&nbsp;m (1600&nbsp;ft), could be covered by a galley in about two minutes, much faster than the reload time of any heavy artillery.
By adding another level of oars, a development that occurred no later than c. 750 BC, the galley could be made shorter with as many rowers, while making them strong enough to be effective ramming weapons.
The availability of oars enabled these ships to navigate close to the shore where they could exploit land and sea breezes and coastal currents, to work reliable and comparatively fast passages against the prevailing wind.
The term "galley" derives from the medieval Greek ''galea'', a smaller version of the dromon, the prime warship of the Byzantine navy.
The dromons that Procopius described were single-banked ships of probably 25 oars per side.
Not long after they appeared, a third row of oars was added by the addition to a bireme of an outrigger, a projecting construction that gave more room for the projecting oars.
In the Mediterranean galleys were used for raiding along coasts, and in the constant fighting for naval bases.
According to a highly influential study by military historian John F. Guilmartin, this transition in warfare, along with the introduction of much cheaper cast iron guns in the 1580s, proved the "death knell" for the war galley as a significant military vessel.
The relic is mostly intact and it was not recovered due to high costs.
Even though the carracks themselves were soon surpassed by other types of sailing vessels, their greater range, great size and high superstructures, armed with numerous wrought iron guns easily outmatched the short-ranged, low-freeboard Turkish galleys.
Depictions of upward-pointing beaks in the 4th-century ''Vatican Vergil'' manuscript may well illustrate that the ram had already been replaced by a spur in late Roman galleys.
In Northern Europe, Viking longships and their derivations, knarrs, dominated trading and shipping, though developed separately from the Mediterranean galley tradition.
In the western Mediterranean and Atlantic, the division of the Carolingian Empire in the late 9th century brought on a period of instability, meaning increased piracy and raiding in the Mediterranean, particularly by newly arrived Muslim invaders.
These could have reached an estimated top speed of up to 7.5 knots, making them the first genuine warships when fitted with bow rams.
Literary evidence indicates that Greek and Roman navies relied on paid labor or ordinary soldiers to man their galleys.
Spain sent galley squadrons to the Netherlands during the later stages of the Eighty Years' War which successfully operated against Dutch forces in the enclosed, shallow coastal waters.
The standard size of the galley remained stable from the 14th until the early 16th century, when the introduction of naval artillery began to have effects on design and tactics.
Christian and Muslim corsairs had been using galleys in sea roving and in support of the major powers in times of war, but largely replaced them with xebecs, various sail/oar hybrids, and a few remaining light galleys in the early 17th century.
Attempts were made to stave this off such as the addition of fighting castles in the bow, but such additions to counter the threats brought by larger sailing vessels often offset the advantages of galley.
It has been hypothesized that early types of triremes existed as early as 700 BC, but the earliest conclusive literary reference dates to 542 BC.
The exceptions were the significantly larger "flagships" (often called ''lanternas'', "lantern galleys") that had 30 pairs of oars and up to seven rowers per oar.
A further boost to the development of the large merchant galleys was the upswing in Western European pilgrims traveling to the Holy Land.
The battle of Actium in 31 BC between the forces of Augustus and Mark Antony marked the peak of the Roman fleet arm.
The ram, the primary weapon of ancient galleys from around the 8th to the 4th century, was not attached directly on the hull but to a structure extending from it.
Occasionally the Mediterranean powers employed galley forces for conflicts outside the Mediterranean.
Fleets with large galleys were put in action in conflicts such as the Punic Wars (246-146) between the Roman republic and Carthage, which included massive naval battles with hundreds of vessels and tens of thousands of soldiers, seamen and rowers.
The ruler Dionysius I of Syracuse (ca.
If anything, it accentuated the bow as the offensive weapon, being both a staging area for boarders and the given position for small arms and cannons.
The bow spur was intended to ride over an enemy ship's oars, breaking them and rendering it helpless against missile fire and boarding actions.
The most basic types were the following: large commander "lantern galleys", half-galleys, galiots, fustas, brigantines and ''fregatas''.
To change tacks, the entire spar had to be lifted over the mast and to the other side.
The older method of employing professional rowers using the ''alla sensile'' method (one oar per man, with two to three sharing the same bench) was gradually phased out in favor of rowing ''a scaloccio'', which required less skill.
''Ivlia'' is a replica Greek bireme built at Sochi on the Black Sea in 1989 which spent six seasons touring round Europe with volunteer crews.
As shown in commemorative reliefs of the battle, Egyptian archers on ships and the nearby shores of the Nile rain down arrows on the enemy ships.
Up to 170 oarsmen sat on three levels with one oar each that varied slightly in length.
Galley fleets as well as the size of individual vessels increase in size, which required more rowers.
As galleys were intended to be fought from the bows, and were at their weakest along the sides, especially in the middle.
During the American Revolutionary War, and other wars with France and Britain, the early US Navy and other navies built vessels that were called "galleys" or "row galleys", though they were actually brigantines or Baltic gunboats.
The first guns were fixed directly on timbers in the bow and aimed directly forwards, a placement that would remain largely unchanged until the galley disappeared from active service in the 19th century.
Where cooking areas were actually present, they consisted of a clay-lined box with a hearth or similar cooking equipment fitted on the vessel in place of a rowing bench, usually on the port (left) side.
French Protestants were particularly ill-treated at the oar and though they were only a small minority, their experiences came to dominate the legacy of the king's galleys.
Its eastern successor, the Byzantine Empire, neglected to revive overland trade routes but was dependent on keeping the sea lanes open to keep the empire together.
They likely used a mortise construction, but were sewn together rather than pinned together with nails and dowels.
By 1650, war galleys were used primarily in the wars between Venice and the Ottoman Empire in their struggle for strategic island and coastal trading bases and until the 1720s by both France and Spain but for largely amphibious and cruising operations or in combination with heavy sailing ships in a major battle, where they played specialized roles.
Throughout their long history, galleys relied on rowing as the most important means of propulsion.
The later Athenian historian Thucydides described it as having been "without stigma" before his time.
The length-to-width ratio of the ships was about 8:1, with two main masts carrying one large lateen sail each.
The demand for more rowers also meant that the relatively limited number of skilled oarsmen could not keep up with the demand of large galley fleets.
With the development of triremes, penteconters disappeared altogether.
Ancient galleys were built very light and the original triremes are assumed to never have been surpassed in speed.
In Genoa, the other major maritime power of the time, galleys and ships in general were more produced by smaller private ventures.
What fleets remained were treated as auxiliaries of the land forces, and galley crewmen themselves called themselves ''milites'', "soldiers", rather than ''nautae'', "sailors".
The only exception has been a partial wreckage of a small Punic liburnian from the Roman era, the Marsala Ship.
The Roman civil wars were fought mostly by land forces, and from the 160s until the 4th century AD, no major fleet actions were recorded.
They were highly susceptible to high waves, and could become unmanageable if the rowing frame (''apostis'') came awash.
The properties of Greek fire were close to that of napalm and was a key to several major Byzantine victories.
The sailing vessel was always at the mercy of the wind for propulsion, and those that did carry oars were placed at a disadvantage because they were not optimized for oar use.
However, archaeologists believe that the Stone Age colonization of islands in the Mediterranean around 8,000 BC required fairly large, seaworthy vessels that were paddled and possibly even equipped with sails.
Anything above six or seven rows of rowers was not common, though even a very exceptional "forty" is attested in contemporary source.
The galley did have disadvantages compared to the sailing vessel though.
Louis and the French state created a tool and symbol of royal authority that did little fighting, but was a potent extension of absolutist ambitions.
The Romans maintained numerous bases around the empire: along the rivers of Central Europe, chains of forts along the northern European coasts and the British Isles, Mesopotamia and North Africa, including Trabzon, Vienna, Belgrade, Dover, Seleucia and Alexandria.
Despite the huge loss of men and material after the loss of the Spanish Armada in 1588 Spain maintained four permanent galley squadrons.
A cruising speed of no more than 2-3 knots has been estimated.
The galley originated among the seafaring civilizations around the Mediterranean Sea in the early first millennium BC and remained in use in various forms until the early 19th century in warfare, trade and piracy.
Atlantic-style warfare based on heavily armed sailing ships began to change the nature of naval warfare in the Mediterranean in the 17th century.
During the Dutch Revolt (1566–1609) both the Dutch and Spanish found galleys useful for amphibious operations in the many shallow waters around the Low Countries where deep-draft sailing vessels could not enter.
It also served to increase their strategic range and to out-compete galleys as fighting ships.
In the second half of the 18th century, the role of Baltic galleys in coastal fleets was replaced first with hybrid "archipelago frigates" (like the turuma or pojama) and xebecs, and after the 1790s with various types of gunboats.
Under King Henry VIII, the English navy used several kinds of vessels that were adapted to local needs.
By 835, the weapon had spread to the Arabs, who equipped ''harraqas'', "fireships", with it.
These new galleys were called ''triērēs'' ("three-fitted") in Greek.
While the galley still remained the primary warship in southern waters, a similar transition had begun also among the Mediterranean powers.
Major routes in the time of the early Crusades carried the pilgrim traffic to the Holy Land.
It was associated with the latest in warship technology around the 4th century BC and could only be employed by an advanced state with an advanced economy and administration.
Though early 20th-century historians often dismissed the galleys as hopelessly outclassed with the first introduction of naval artillery on sailing ships, it was the galley that was favored by the introduction of heavy naval guns.
Galleys had been synonymous with warships in the Mediterranean for at least 2,000 years, and continued to fulfill that role with the invention of gunpowder and heavy artillery.
They also required few skilled seamen and were difficult for sailing ships to catch, but vital in hunting down catching other galleys and oared raiders.
It retained a distinct tactical advantage even after the initial introduction of naval artillery because of the ease with which it could be brought to bear upon an opposing vessel.
Considered an evolution of the Roman liburnian, the term first appeared in the late 5th century, and was commonly used for a specific kind of war-galley by the 6th century.
Oared military vessels built on the British Isles in the 11th to 13th centuries were based on Scandinavian designs, but were nevertheless referred to as "galleys".
Fleets thereby became less dependent on rowers with a lifetime of experience at the oar.
Byzantine dromons had pavesades, racks along the railings, on which marines could hang their shields, providing protection to the deck crew.
In the 15th century BC, Egyptian galleys were still depicted with the distinctive extreme sheer, but had by then developed the distinctive forward-curving stern decorations with ornaments in the shape of lotus flowers.
