While many regional heads of state tried to emulate Nasser, Podeh opined that the "parochialism" of successive Arab leaders "transformed imitation of Nasser into parody".
He started writing his book ''Philosophy of the Revolution'' during the siege.
The state of Nasser's health was not known to the public prior to his death.
Historian Adeed Dawisha credited Nasser's status to his "charisma, bolstered by his perceived victory in the Suez Crisis".
Also in 1969, Colonel Gaafar Nimeiry, a supporter of Nasser, took power in Sudan.
The party carried minor political influence, and splits between its members beginning in 1995 resulted in the gradual establishment of splinter parties, including Hamdeen Sabahi's 1997 founding of Al-Karama.
Nasser blamed Arab divisions for what he deemed "the disastrous situation".
The Free Officers' intention was not to install themselves in government, but to re-establish a parliamentary democracy.
Nasser also ordered blockage of the canal by sinking or otherwise disabling forty-nine ships at its entrance.
Nasser exchanged letters with his mother and visited her on holidays.
Nasser ordered a crackdown against Syrian communists, dismissing many of them from their governmental posts.
With his rivals neutralized, Nasser became the undisputed leader of Egypt.
Upon returning to Cairo, he ordered one of the largest political crackdowns in the modern history of Egypt, with the arrests of thousands of dissenters, mostly members of the Brotherhood, but also communists, and the dismissal of 140 officers loyal to Naguib.
In a move to stave off foreign intervention two days before the revolution, Nasser had notified the American and British governments of his intentions, and both had agreed not to aid Farouk.
Nasser confronted Amer about the coup plot, which he denied before being arrested by Mohieddin.
According to Boghdadi's memoirs, Nasser described the Egyptian Army as "shattered" as he saw the wreckage of Egyptian military equipment en route.
His funeral in Cairo drew five million mourners and an outpouring of grief across the Arab world.
Nasser refused the call upon determination that the air force lacked pilots and Amer's handpicked officers were incompetent.
The motion was technically in breach of the international agreement he had signed with the UK on 19 October 1954, although he ensured that all existing stockholders would be paid off.
By 3 March, Nasser directed Egypt's intelligence apparatus to focus on external rather than domestic espionage, and declared the "fall of the mukhabarat state".
During the summit, Nasser developed cordial relations with King Hussein, and ties were mended with the rulers of Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Morocco.
In Nasser's eyes, this law gave the RCC its own identity and transformed the coup into a revolution.
By then, the organization had expanded to around ninety members; according to Khaled Mohieddin, "nobody knew all of them and where they belonged in the hierarchy except Nasser".
Let them kill me; it does not concern me so long as I have instilled pride, honor, and freedom in you.
Lebanese sympathizers of Nasser and the Egyptian embassy in Beirut—the press center of the Arab world—bought out Lebanese media outlets to further disseminate Nasser's ideals.
Nasser's personal hobbies included playing chess, American films, reading Arabic, English, and French magazines, and listening to classical music.
Convinced that he needed a ''wasta'', or an influential intermediary to promote his application above the others, Nasser managed to secure a meeting with Under-Secretary of War Ibrahim Khairy Pasha, the person responsible for the academy's selection board, and requested his help.
In September, Turkish troops massed along the Syrian border, giving credence to rumors that the Baghdad Pact countries were attempting to topple Syria's leftist government.
The message had been originally received by Amer on 2 May, but was withheld from Nasser until the Sinai deployment on 14 May.
Egypt experienced a "golden age" of culture during Nasser's presidency, according to historian Joel Gordon, particularly in film, television, theater, radio, literature, fine arts, comedy, poetry, and music.
However he is not known to have ever again publicly called the figure of six million into question, perhaps because his advisors and East German contacts had corrected him on the subject.
Despite opposition from the governments of Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Lebanon, Nasser maintained his prestige among their citizens and those of other Arab countries.
The NU was a reconfiguration of the Liberation Rally, which Nasser determined had failed in generating mass public participation.
Nasser had also felt bitter that his brigade had not been relieved despite the resilience it displayed.
After their wedding, the couple moved into a house in Manshiyat al-Bakri, a suburb of Cairo, where they would live for the rest of their lives.
He also determined that a ceasefire could serve as a tactical step toward the strategic goal of recapturing the Suez Canal.
Observers noted that the declaration signaled an important shift from political repression to liberalization, although its promises would largely go unfulfilled.
To varying degrees, Nasser's statist system of government was continued in Egypt and emulated by virtually all Arab republics, namely Algeria, Syria, Iraq, Tunisia, Yemen, Sudan, and Libya.
Nasser delegated oversight of the issue to Sarraj, who provided limited aid to Nasser's Lebanese supporters through money, light arms, and officer training—short of the large-scale support that Chamoun alleged.
In Lebanon, clashes between pro-Nasser factions and supporters of staunch Nasser opponent, then-President Camille Chamoun, culminated in civil strife by May.
On 1 February, the United Arab Republic (UAR) was proclaimed and, according to Dawisha, the Arab world reacted in "stunned amazement, which quickly turned into uncontrolled euphoria."
Beginning in 1958, Nasser had a key role in the discussions among African leaders that led to the establishment of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) in 1963.
Moreover, he feared that if the armored corps was dispatched to confront the Israeli invading force and the British and French subsequently landed in the canal city of Port Said, Egyptian armor in the Sinai would be cut off from the canal and destroyed by the combined tripartite forces.
He also advised Arafat to think of peace with Israel and the establishment of a Palestinian state comprising the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
Nasser did not covet Lebanon, seeing it as a "special case", but sought to prevent Chamoun from a second presidential term.
Abdel Salam Aref, a Nasserist, was chosen to be the new president.
His presidency also encouraged and coincided with an Egyptian cultural boom, and launched large industrial projects, including the Aswan Dam and Helwan City.
Amer strongly disagreed, insisting that Egyptian tanks meet the Israelis in battle.
Although Nasser was an opponent of communism in the region, his promotion of pan-Arabism was viewed as a threat by pro-Western states in the region.
In January 1955, the RCC appointed him as their president, pending national elections.
Relations between Nasser and King Hussein deteriorated in April when Hussein implicated Nasser in two coup attempts against him—although Nasser's involvement was never established—and dissolved al-Nabulsi's cabinet.
According to Heikal, after this agreement, "Nasser estimated that the danger of invasion had dropped to 10 per cent".
Nasser was sent as a member of the Egyptian delegation to Rhodes in February 1949 to negotiate a formal armistice with Israel, and reportedly considered the terms to be humiliating, particularly because the Israelis were able to easily occupy the Eilat region while negotiating with the Arabs in March.
Shortly thereafter, however, the UK, France, and Israel made a secret agreement to take over the Suez Canal, occupy the Suez Canal zone, and topple Nasser.
Aburish states that Nasser was not fully capable of addressing Syrian problems because they were "foreign to him".
Historian Abd al-Azim Ramadan wrote that Nasser was an irrational and irresponsible leader, blaming his inclination to solitary decision-making for Egypt's losses during the Suez War, among other events.
Nasser had few personal vices other than chain smoking.
During his presidency, ordinary citizens enjoyed unprecedented access to housing, education, jobs, health services and nourishment, as well as other forms of social welfare, while feudalistic influence waned.
With great emotion he exclaimed the following:
Nasser was known for his intimate relationship with ordinary Egyptians.
He had previously suffered heart attacks in 1966 and September 1969.
In 1944, Nasser married Tahia Kazem, the 22-year-old daughter of a wealthy Iranian father and an Egyptian mother, both of whom died when she was young.
If Gamal Abdel Nasser should die, each of you shall be Gamal Abdel Nasser ... Gamal Abdel Nasser is of you and from you and he is willing to sacrifice his life for the nation.
He privately blamed interference by hostile Arab governments.
According to his associates, Nasser orchestrated the campaign himself.
He was diagnosed with diabetes in the early 1960s and by the time of his death in 1970, he also had arteriosclerosis, heart disease, and high blood pressure.
After witnessing clashes between protesters and police in Manshia Square, he joined the demonstration without being aware of its purpose.
A 350-member National Assembly was established, elections for which were held in July 1957.
By the end of his presidency, employment and working conditions improved considerably, although poverty was still high in the country and substantial resources allocated for social welfare had been diverted to the war effort.
Amer committed suicide on 14 September.
Nasser's entry into the officer corps in 1937 secured him relatively well-paid employment in a society where most people lived in poverty.
Nasser subsequently ordered the tightening of the blockade on Israeli shipping through the Straits of Tiran and restricted the use of airspace over the Gulf of Aqaba by Israeli aircraft in early September.
But this was different—in origin, meaning and impact.
His followers were numerous and well-funded, but lacked any permanent structure and organization.
Gamal Abdel Nasser was born on 15 January 1918 in Bakos, Alexandria, the first son of Fahima and Abdel Nasser Hussein.
Nasser forestalled any movement toward direct negotiations with Israel.
Some of Nasser's liberal and Islamist critics in Egypt, including the founding members of the New Wafd Party and writer Jamal Badawi, dismissed Nasser's popular appeal with the Egyptian masses during his presidency as being the product of successful manipulation and demagoguery.
In this case Nasser's opponent could see his hand in the mirror and knew he was only holding a pair of deuces" and Nasser knew that his army is not prepared yet.
At the 29 August Arab League summit in Khartoum, Nasser's usual commanding position had receded as the attending heads of state expected Saudi King Faisal to lead.
Nasser returned to Sudan in September 1942 after a brief stay in Egypt, then secured a position as an instructor in the Cairo Royal Military Academy in May 1943.
"All of this was out of character...His tendencies in this regard may have been accentuated by diabetes... That was the only rational explanation for his actions in 1967".
Historian Elie Podeh wrote that a constant theme of Nasser's image was "his ability to represent Egyptian authenticity, in triumph or defeat".
Nasser attended a primary school for the children of railway employees until 1924, when he was sent to live with his paternal uncle in Cairo, and to attend the Nahhasin elementary school.
When Naguib began showing signs of independence from Nasser by distancing himself from the RCC's land reform decrees and drawing closer to Egypt's established political forces, namely the Wafd and the Brotherhood, Nasser resolved to depose him.
As a ruse to rally opposition against a return to the pre-1952 order, the RCC decreed an end to restrictions on monarchy-era parties and the Free Officers' withdrawal from politics.
According to Sadat, it was only when the Israelis cut off the Egyptian garrison at Sharm el-Sheikh that Nasser became aware of the situation's gravity.
From his readings, Nasser, who frequently spoke of "dignity, glory, and freedom" in his youth, became enchanted with the stories of national liberators and heroic conquerors; a military career became his chief priority.
King Hussein and Arafat cried openly, and Muammar Gaddafi of Libya fainted from emotional distress twice.
The official reason given for the nationalization was that funds from the canal would be used for the construction of the dam in Aswan.
On 25 March 1959, Chehab and Nasser met at the Lebanese–Syrian border and compromised on an end to the Lebanese crisis.
Abdel Hadi was also hesitant to take drastic measures against the army, especially in front of its chief of staff, who was present during the interrogation, and subsequently released Nasser.
Nasser told an East German newspaper in 1964 that "no person, not even the most simple one, takes seriously the lie of the six million Jews that were murdered in the Holocaust."
According to veteran journalist Eric Margolis, the defenders of Faluja, "including young army officer Gamal Abdel Nasser, became national heroes" for enduring Israeli bombardment while isolated from their command.
Following the announcement of Nasser's death, Egypt and the Arab world were in a state of shock.
Nasser acquiesced, but delayed Naguib's reinstatement until 4 March, allowing him to promote Amer to Commander of the Armed Forces—a position formerly occupied by Naguib.
The final destination was the Nasr Mosque, which was afterwards renamed Abdel Nasser Mosque, where Nasser was buried.
The Israelis re-militarized the al-Auja Demilitarized Zone on the Egyptian border on 21 September.
Despite it having the almost unanimous backing of Egypt's political forces, Nasser strongly objected to the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty because it stipulated the continued presence of British military bases in the country.
As a testament to his unchallenged leadership of the Arab people, following his death, the headline of the Lebanese ''Le Jour'' read, "One hundred million human beings—the Arabs—are orphans."
Nasser also enjoyed the support of Arab nationalist civilian and paramilitary organizations throughout the region.
Others produced plays denigrating his political opponents.
The extent of Nasser's centrality in the region made it a priority for incoming Arab nationalist heads of state to seek good relations with Egypt, in order to gain popular legitimacy from their own citizens.
By then, relations with his other original military comrades, namely Khaled and Zakaria Mohieddin and former vice president Sabri, had become strained.
According to Heikal, ensuing anti-Nasser developments until the present day led to an Egypt "half at war with Abdel-Nasser, half at war with Anwar El-Sadat".
Nasser recalled that her wails "haunted" him and firmly dissuaded him from undertaking similar actions in the future.
In early 1962 Nasser again attempted to wrest control of the military command from Amer.
General malaise in Egyptian society, particularly during the Mubarak era, augmented nostalgia for Nasser's presidency, which increasingly became associated with the ideals of national purpose, hope, social cohesion, and vibrant culture.
Through his actions and speeches, and because he was able to symbolize the popular Arab will, Nasser inspired several nationalist revolutions in the Arab world.
Two days later, British and French planes bombarded Egyptian airfields in the canal zone.
His parents married in 1917, and later had two more boys, Izz al-Arab and al-Leithi.
Nasser played a significant part in the strengthening of African solidarity in the late 1950s and early 1960s, although his continental leadership role had increasingly passed to Algeria since 1962.
President Sadat's Infitah policy sought to open Egypt's economy for private investment.
Despite setbacks to his pan-Arabist cause, by 1963 Nasser's supporters gained power in several Arab countries, but he became embroiled in the North Yemen Civil War.
Miles Copeland, Jr., a Central Intelligence Agency officer known for his close personal relationship with Nasser, said that the barriers between Nasser and the outside world have grown so thick that all but the information that attest to his infallibility, indispensability, and immortality has been filtered out.
On 26 February, Nasser accepted the resignation, put Naguib under house arrest, and the RCC proclaimed Nasser as both RCC chairman and prime minister.
Later that day, hundreds of thousands of protesters, mainly belonging to the Brotherhood, called for Naguib's return and Nasser's imprisonment.
He suffered two major heart attacks (in 1966 and 1969), and was on bed rest for six weeks after the second episode.
On 15 July, US marines landed in Lebanon, and British special forces in Jordan, upon the request of those countries' governments to prevent them from falling to pro-Nasser forces.
This effort achieved a measure of success, with increased agricultural production and investment in industrialization.
While most members of the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) favored Iraqi-UAR unity, Qasim sought to keep Iraq independent and resented Nasser's large popular base in the country.
Nasser made Egypt fully independent of British influence, and the country became a major power in the developing world under his leadership.
The war resumed in March 1969.
As a result of the Suez Crisis, Nasser brought in a set of regulations imposing rigorous requirements for residency and citizenship as well as forced expulsions, mostly affecting British and French nationals and Jews with foreign nationality, as well as some Egyptian Jews.
By December, the political situation in Syria was faltering and Nasser responded by appointing Amer as governor-general alongside Sarraj.
Nasser's street following was still too small to sustain his plans for reform and to secure him in office.
Addressing the UAR's breakup on 5 October, Nasser accepted personal responsibility and declared that Egypt would recognize an elected Syrian government.
Nasser later remarked in 1968 that intervention in Yemen was a "miscalculation".
On 25 January 1952, a confrontation between British forces and police at Ismailia resulted in the deaths of 40 Egyptian policemen, provoking riots in Cairo the next day which left 76 people dead.
He began his second presidential term in March 1965 after his political opponents were banned from running.
State media reported that Nasser's absence from the public view at that time was a result of influenza.
At the academy, he met Abdel Hakim Amer and Anwar Sadat, both of whom became important aides during his presidency.
During this period, Nasser made Egypt a refuge for anti-colonial leaders from several African countries and allowed the broadcast of anti-colonial propaganda from Cairo.
Nasser also decided to cooperate with the Soviet Union in the construction of the Aswan Dam to replace the withdrawal of US funds.
Nasser felt that if he was to maintain Egypt's regional leadership position he needed to acquire modern weaponry to arm his military.
They asked former prime minister Ali Maher to accept reappointment to his previous position, and to form an all-civilian cabinet.
The NU would select a nominee for the presidential election whose name would be provided for public approval.
On 26 October 1954, Muslim Brotherhood member Mohammed Abdel Latif attempted to assassinate Nasser while he was delivering a speech in Alexandria to celebrate the British military withdrawal.
Islamists in Egypt, particularly members of the politically persecuted Brotherhood, viewed Nasser as oppressive, tyrannical, and demonic.
The  procession to his burial site began at the old RCC headquarters with a flyover by MiG-21 jets.
Khrushchev was reportedly taken aback and denied he had meant to interfere in the UAR's affairs.
In order to organize and solidify his popular base with Egypt's citizens and counter the army's influence, Nasser introduced the National Charter in 1962 and a new constitution.
The crowd roared in approval and Arab audiences were electrified.
However, on 27 February, Nasser's supporters in the army launched a raid on the GHQ, ending the mutiny.
On 29 March, Nasser announced the decrees' revocation in response to the "impulse of the street".
To counterbalance the Egyptian Army's dismal performance, Nasser authorized the distribution of about 400,000 rifles to civilian volunteers and hundreds of militias were formed throughout Egypt, many led by Nasser's political opponents.
Nasser and Tahia had two daughters and three sons: Hoda, Mona, Khaled, Abdel Hamid, and Abdel Hakim.
France and the UK, the largest shareholders in the Suez Canal Company, saw its nationalization as yet another hostile measure aimed at them by the Egyptian government.
Nasser was arrested and detained for a night before his father bailed him out.
Amer reassured him that the army was prepared for confrontation, but Nasser doubted Amer's assessment of the military's readiness.
By the end of December, British and French forces had totally withdrawn from Egyptian territory, while Israel completed its withdrawal in March 1957 and released all Egyptian prisoners of war.
He preferred to spend most of his free time with his children.
Naguib was removed from the presidency and put under house arrest, but was never tried or sentenced, and no one in the army rose to defend him.
His supporters claimed Nasser's move was meant to buy time to prepare for another confrontation with Israel, while his detractors believed his acceptance of the resolution signaled a waning interest in Palestinian independence.
According to Aburish, after assuming power, Nasser and the Free Officers expected to become the "guardians of the people's interests" against the monarchy and the pasha class while leaving the day-to-day tasks of government to civilians.
A public referendum approved the proposed measures in May, and held subsequent elections for the Supreme Executive Committee, the ASU's highest decision-making body.
It was in Alexandria that Nasser became involved in political activism.
The charter called for universal health care, affordable housing, vocational schools, greater women's rights and a family planning program, as well as widening the Suez Canal.
Nasser sent a contingent force to Syria as a symbolic display of solidarity, further elevating his prestige in the Arab world, and particularly among Syrians.
On 28 February 1955, Israeli troops attacked the Egyptian-held Gaza Strip with the stated aim of suppressing Palestinian fedayeen raids.
When efforts to offer tax incentives and attract outside investments yielded no tangible results, he nationalized more companies and made them a part of his economic development organization.
Towards the end of May, Nasser increasingly exchanged his positions of deterrence for deference to the inevitability of war, under increased pressure to act by both the general Arab populace and various Arab governments.
Until the present day, Nasser serves as an iconic figure throughout the Arab world, a symbol of Arab unity and dignity, and a towering figure in modern Middle Eastern history.
Aburish asserts that Nasser was not distressed by his frequent relocations, which broadened his horizons and showed him Egyptian society's class divisions.
According to Kandil, without Nasser's authorization, Amer used the Soviet warnings as a pretext to dispatch troops to Sinai on 14 May, and Nasser subsequently demanded UNEF's withdrawal.
Nasser stayed in touch with the group's members primarily through Amer, who continued to seek out interested officers within the Egyptian Armed Force's various branches and presented Nasser with a complete file on each of them.
Nasser ordered the military's high command to withdraw the Egyptian Army from Sinai to bolster the canal's defenses.
That same day, Egypt closed the canal to Israeli shipping.
On a surprise visit to Damascus to celebrate the union on 24 February, Nasser was welcomed by crowds in the hundreds of thousands.
The Egyptian Army commander in the city was preparing to request terms for a ceasefire, but Nasser ordered him to desist.
In 1937, Nasser applied to the Royal Military Academy for army officer training, but his police record of anti-government protest initially blocked his entry.
In September, the Agrarian Reform Law was put into effect.
Between 750 and 1,000 Egyptians were killed in the battle for Port Said.
According to journalist Lamis Andoni, Nasser had become a "symbol of Arab dignity" during the mass demonstrations.
As a consequence of Saud's plot, he was forced by senior members of the Saudi royal family to informally cede most of his powers to his brother, King Faisal, a major Nasser opponent who advocated pan-Islamic unity over pan-Arabism.
Egyptian political scientist Mahmoud Hamad wrote that, prior to 1956, Nasser had consolidated control over Egypt's military and civilian bureaucracies, but it was only after the canal's nationalization that he gained near-total popular legitimacy and firmly established himself as the "charismatic leader" and "spokesman for the masses not only in Egypt, but all over the Third World".
Before the day ended, Israeli armored units had cut through Egyptian defense lines and captured the town of el-Arish.
On 30 May, King Hussein committed Jordan in an alliance with Egypt and Syria.
American political scientist Mark Cooper asserted that Nasser's charisma and his direct relationship with the Egyptian people "rendered intermediaries (organizations and individuals) unnecessary".
During Mubarak's presidency, Nasserist political parties began to emerge in Egypt, the first being the Arab Democratic Nasserist Party (ADNP).
Nasser is played by Ahmed Zaki in Mohamed Fadel's 1996 ''Nasser 56''.
By 1968, Nasser had appointed himself prime minister, launched the War of Attrition to regain lost territory, began a process of depoliticizing the military, and issued a set of political liberalization reforms.
Meanwhile, tensions in Jordan between an increasingly autonomous PLO and King Hussein's government had been simmering; following the Dawson's Field hijackings, a military campaign was launched to rout out PLO forces.
Nasser commended Eisenhower, stating he played the "greatest and most decisive role" in stopping the "tripartite conspiracy".
British diplomat Anthony Nutting claimed the crisis "established Nasser finally and completely" as the ''rayyes'' (president) of Egypt.
Nasser initially turned down the request, citing the two countries' incompatible political and economic systems, lack of contiguity, the Syrian military's record of intervention in politics, and the deep factionalism among Syria's political forces.
After Nasser sacked thirty of the loyalists in response, Amer and his allies devised a plan to topple him on 27 August.
The former sought to unite with the UAR, while the latter sought Lebanon's continued independence.
Coinciding with the new constitution and Nasser's presidency, the RCC dissolved itself and its members resigned their military commissions as part of the transition to civilian rule.
Upon returning to Khatatba, he learned that his mother had died after giving birth to his third brother, Shawki, and that his family had kept the news from him.
He began to form a group of young military officers with strong nationalist sentiments who supported some form of revolution.
It was here that Nasser and his closest comrades, including Sadat and Amer, first discussed their dissatisfaction at widespread corruption in the country and their desire to topple the monarchy.
After graduating from the academy in July 1938, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the infantry, and posted to Mankabad.
For Nasser was a man of the Egyptian soil who had overthrown the Middle East's most established and sophisticated monarchy in a swift and bloodless move—to the acclaim of millions of poor, oppressed Egyptians—and ushered in a programme of 'social justice', 'progress and development', and 'dignity'.
On the morning of 5 June, the Israeli Air Force struck Egyptian air fields, destroying much of the Egyptian Air Force.
On 8 April, the canal was reopened, and Nasser's political position was enormously enhanced by the widely perceived failure of the invasion and attempt to topple him.
Nasser was informed of the British–American withdrawal via a news statement while aboard a plane returning to Cairo from Belgrade, and took great offense.
Despite the relative ease in which Sinai was occupied, Nasser's prestige at home and among Arabs was undamaged.
Its success and evident popular support among the Syrian people encouraged Nasser's revolutionary pursuits.
Sirri Amer was close to King Farouk, and was nominated for the presidency of the Officer's Club—normally a ceremonial office—with the king's backing.
Ahmed Ben Bella, Algeria's first president, was a staunch Nasserist.
