The 1975 Hindi film ''Jai Santoshi Maa'' shows Ganesha married to Riddhi and Siddhi and having a daughter named Santoshi Ma, the goddess of satisfaction.
He is also associated with the goddess of luck and prosperity, Lakshmi.
A reference to '''' ("Creator of Obstacles") in ''Vanaparva'' is also believed to be an interpolation and does not appear in the critical edition.
Ganesha appears in Mahayana Buddhism, not only in the form of the Buddhist god , but also as a Hindu demon form with the same name.
Anita Thapan reviews comments about dating and provides her own judgement.
Ganesha images were prevalent in many parts of India by the 6th century.
Today, Hindus across India celebrate the Ganapati festival with great fervour, though it is most popular in the state of Maharashtra.
A virtually identical statue has been dated between 973–1200 by Paul Martin-Dubost, and another similar statue is dated c. 12th century by Pratapaditya Pal.
In rejecting any claim that this passage is evidence of Ganesha in the ''Rig Veda'', Ludo Rocher says that it "clearly refers to —who is the deity of the hymn—and  only".
Hindus of all denominations invoke him at the beginning of prayers, important undertakings, and religious ceremonies.
While the kernel of the text must be old, it was interpolated until the 17th and 18th centuries as the worship of Ganapati became more important in certain regions.
Hazra suggests that the ''Mudgala Purana'' is older than the ''Ganesha Purana'', which he dates between 1100 and 1400.
Ganesha is often shown riding on or attended by a mouse, shrew or rat.
Prominent Ganesha temples in southern India include the following:
Some devotees see similarities between the shape of Ganesha's body in iconography and the shape of Aum in the Devanāgarī and Tamil scripts.
The description of Dantin, possessing a twisted trunk () and holding a corn-sheaf, a sugar cane, and a club, is so characteristic of the Puranic Ganapati that Heras says "we cannot resist to accept his full identification with this Vedic Dantin".
Dancers and musicians, particularly in southern India, begin art performances such as the Bharatnatyam dance with a prayer to Ganesha.
Tibetan representations of Ganesha show ambivalent views of him.
Ganesha is also invoked as patron of letters and learning during writing sessions.
The festival also assumes huge proportions in Mumbai, Pune, and in the surrounding belt of Ashtavinayaka temples.
The earliest Ganesha icons in stone were carved in Mathura during Kushan times (2nd-3rd centuries CE).
Because Shiva considered Ganesha too alluring, he gave him the head of an elephant and a protruding belly.
Thapan reports that these passages are "generally considered to have been interpolated".
Both names are Sanskrit compounds describing his belly (IAST: '''').
Ganesha has been represented with the head of an elephant since the early stages of his appearance in Indian art.
According to Ellawala, the elephant-headed Ganesha as lord of the Ganas was known to the people of Sri Lanka in the early pre-Christian era.
The 13th century statue pictured is typical of Ganesha statuary from 900–1200, after Ganesha had been well-established as an independent deity with his own sect.
The most recurrent motif in these stories is that Ganesha was created by Parvati using clay to protect her and Shiva beheaded him when Ganesha came between Shiva and Parvati.
The title "Leader of the group" (Sanskrit: '''') occurs twice in the ''Rig Veda'', but in neither case does it refer to the modern Ganesha.
He did so "to bridge the gap between the Brahmins and the non-Brahmins and find an appropriate context in which to build a new grassroots unity between them" in his nationalistic strivings against the British in Maharashtra.
The 9th-century philosopher Adi Shankara popularized the "worship of the five forms" (Panchayatana puja) system among orthodox Brahmins of the Smarta tradition.
However, Ganesha is worshipped by most Jains, for whom he appears to have taken over certain functions of the god of wealth, Kubera.
Two verses in texts belonging to Black Yajurveda, ''''   (2.9.1) and '''' (10.1), appeal to a deity as "the tusked one" (), "elephant-faced" (Hastimukha), and "with a curved trunk" ().
Ganesha appears in China and Japan in forms that show distinct regional character.
Depictions of elephant-headed human figures, which some identify with Ganesha, appear in Indian art and coinage as early as the 2nd century.
The motif of Ganesha turning his trunk sharply to his left to taste a sweet in his lower-left hand is a particularly archaic feature.
This name is reflected in the naming of the eight famous Ganesha temples in Maharashtra known as the ''Ashtavinayak'' (, ).
Some of the earliest images of Ganesha show him holding his broken tusk.
The number of Ganesha's arms varies; his best-known forms have between two and sixteen arms.
The sage agreed, but found that to get any rest he needed to recite very complex passages so Ganesha would have to ask for clarifications.
A distinct form of Ganesha called ''Bhalachandra'' (IAST: ''''; "Moon on the Forehead") includes that iconographic element.
As Skanda fell, Ganesha rose.
Richard L. Brown dates the story to the 8th century, and Moriz Winternitz concludes that it was known as early as c. 900, but it was not added to the ''Mahabharata'' some 150 years later.
In Thailand, Cambodia, and among the Hindu classes of the Chams in Vietnam, Ganesha was mainly thought of as a remover of obstacles.
Although he is known by many attributes, Ganesha's elephant head makes him easy to identify.
As the god of transitions, he is placed at the doorway of many Hindu temples to keep out the unworthy, which is analogous to his role as Parvati’s doorkeeper.
The forms of Ganesha found in the Hindu art of Java, Bali, and Borneo show specific regional influences.
"It seems likely that the core of the Ganesha Purana appeared around the twelfth and thirteenth centuries", she says, "but was later interpolated."
Winternitz also notes that a distinctive feature in South Indian manuscripts of the ''Mahabharata'' is their omission of this Ganesha legend.
Ganesha is ''Vighneshvara'' or ''Vighnaraja'' or ''Vighnaharta'' (Marathi), the Lord of Obstacles, both of a material and spiritual order.
The story of Ganesha acting as the scribe occurs in 37 of the 59 manuscripts consulted during preparation of the critical edition.
A sect of devotees called the ''Ganapatya'' arose, who identified Ganesha as the supreme deity.
The ''Ganesha Purana'' prescribes a ''tilaka'' mark as well as a crescent moon on the forehead.
While some texts say that Ganesha was born with an elephant head, he acquires the head later in most stories.
Forms with 14 and 20 arms appeared in Central India during the 9th and the 10th centuries.
Devotion to Ganesha is widely diffused and extends to Jains and Buddhists.
The festival begins with people bringing in clay idols of Ganesha, symbolising Ganesha's visit.
In northern India, Skanda is generally said to be the elder, while in the south, Ganesha is considered the first born.
Details of the battle and where the replacement head came from vary from source to source.
These figures are small, with elephant head, two arms, and chubby physique.
An annual festival honours Ganesha for ten days, starting on Ganesha Chaturthi, which typically falls in late August or early September.
Ganesha holds, supports and guides all other chakras, thereby "governing the forces that propel the wheel of life".
Dhavalikar says, "the references to the elephant-headed deity in the '''' have been proven to be very late interpolations, and thus are not very helpful for determining the early formation of the deity".
One of the most famous mantras associated with Ganesha is ''Om  Ganapataye Namah'' (Om, , Salutation to the Lord of Hosts).
Each name in the sahasranama conveys a different meaning and symbolises a different aspect of Ganesha.
The concept of buddhi is closely associated with the personality of Ganesha, especially in the Puranic period, when many stories stress his cleverness and love of intelligence.
In 1993, a metal plate depiction of an elephant-headed figure, interpreted as Ganesha, was discovered in Lorestan Province, Iran, dating back to 1,200 BCE.
A Tibetan rendering of Ganapati is ''tshogs bdag''.
Ganesha is a popular figure in Indian art.
The earliest Ganesha images are without a vahana (mount/vehicle).
Examples of sculptures from the 5th to the 7th centuries have survived, suggesting that the worship of Ganesha was then in vogue in the region.
Another highly regarded scripture, the Ganapati Atharvashirsa, was probably composed during the 16th or 17th centuries.
It was essential to subdue the rat as a destructive pest, a type of ''vighna'' (impediment) that needed to be overcome.
The term '''' is found in some recensions of the '''' and '''' that are regarded as interpolations.
The same combination of four arms and attributes occurs in statues of Ganesha dancing, which is a very popular theme.
Before the arrival of Islam, Afghanistan had close cultural ties with India, and the adoration of both Hindu and Buddhist deities was practiced.
This feature is so important that, according to the ''Mudgala Purana'', two different incarnations of Ganesha use names based on it: ''Lambodara'' (Pot Belly, or, literally, Hanging Belly) and ''Mahodara'' (Great Belly).
He holds his own broken tusk in his lower-right hand and holds a delicacy, which he samples with his trunk, in his lower-left hand.
Jain depictions of Ganesha show his vahana variously as a mouse, elephant, tortoise, ram, or peacock.
During this time, Ganesha became the principal deity associated with traders.
In 1893, Lokmanya Tilak transformed this annual Ganesha festival from private family celebrations into a grand public event.
The Ganapati Atharvashirsa includes a meditation verse on Ganesha that describes the mouse appearing on his flag.
Brahma Purana and Brahmanda Purana are other two Puranic genre encyclopedic texts that deal with Ganesha.
Located within a 100-kilometer radius of the city of Pune, each of the eight shrines celebrates a particular form of Ganapati, complete with its own lore and legend.
At entrances of villages and forts, below '''' (Sacred fig)  trees&nbsp;... in a niche&nbsp;... in temples of '''' (Vishnu) as well as '''' (Shiva) and also in separate shrines specially constructed in '''' temples&nbsp;... the figure of '''' is invariably seen."
The family includes his brother, the god of war, Kartikeya, who is also called Skanda and Murugan.
''Ekadanta-Ganapati'' is visualized as blue during meditation in that form.
The earliest known Jain Ganesha statue dates to about the 9th century.
Equally clearly, the second passage (RV 10.112.9) refers to Indra, who is given the epithet '', translated "Lord of the companies (of the ''Maruts'')."
Hindu sects worship him regardless of affiliations.
His image is found throughout India, Sri Lanka and Nepal.
Another story says that Ganesha was created directly by Shiva's laughter.
Tilak was the first to install large public images of Ganesha in pavilions, and he established the practice of submerging all the public images on the tenth day.
Ganesha has the head of an elephant and a big belly.
Along these lines, Michael Wilcockson says it symbolizes those who wish to overcome desires and be less selfish.
These names are suggestive of Ganesha, and the 14th century commentator Sayana explicitly establishes this identification.
The word ''priya'' can mean "fond of", and in a marital context it can mean "lover" or "husband", so the name may mean either "Fond of Intelligence" or "Buddhi's Husband".
However, both functions continue to be vital to his character.
While this verse doubtless refers to Brahmanaspati, it was later adopted for worship of Ganesha and is still used today.
The influence of this old constellation of iconographic elements can still be seen in contemporary representations of Ganesha.
Some commentators interpret the name "Lord of the " to mean "Lord of Hosts" or "Lord of created categories", such as the elements.
In Hindu temples, Ganesha is depicted in various ways: as an acolyte or subordinate deity (''''); as a deity related to the principal deity (''''); or as the principal deity of the temple (), treated similarly to the highest gods of the Hindu pantheon.
Paul Courtright says that "his task in the divine scheme of things, his ''dharma'', is to place and remove obstacles.
Other depictions of snakes include use as a sacred thread (IAST: '''') wrapped around the stomach as a belt, held in a hand, coiled at the ankles, or as a throne.
Of the eight incarnations of Ganesha described in the ''Mudgala Purana'', Ganesha uses a mouse (shrew) in five of them, a lion in his incarnation as ''Vakratunda'', a peacock in his incarnation as ''Vikata'', and Shesha, the divine serpent, in his incarnation as ''Vighnaraja''.
He is popularly worshipped as a remover of obstacles, though traditionally he also places obstacles in the path of those who need to be checked.
In Sanskrit, the word ''buddhi'' is a feminine noun that is variously translated as intelligence, wisdom, or intellect.
In one modern form, the only variation from these old elements is that the lower-right hand does not hold the broken tusk but is turned towards the viewer in a gesture of protection or fearlessness (abhaya mudra).
''Ganesha Sahasranama'' is part of the Puranic literature, and is a litany of a thousand names and attributes of Ganesha.
''Mohotkata'' uses a lion, '''' uses a peacock, ''Dhumraketu'' uses a horse, and ''Gajanana'' uses a mouse, in the four incarnations of Ganesha listed in the ''Ganesha Purana''.
grass (''Cynodon dactylon'') and other materials are also used in his worship.
Ganesha does not appear in Indian epic literature that is dated to the Vedic period.
He may be portrayed standing, dancing, heroically taking action against demons, playing with his family as a boy, sitting down or on an elevated seat, or engaging in a range of contemporary situations.
Krishan notes that some of Ganesha's names reflect shadings of multiple roles that have evolved over time.
Today in Buddhist Thailand, Ganesha is regarded as a remover of obstacles, the god of success.
Shanti Lal Nagar says that the earliest known iconic image of Ganesha is in the niche of the Shiva temple at Bhumra, which has been dated to the Gupta period.
He adds that the words ''pallu'', ''pella'', and ''pell'' in the Dravidian family of languages signify "tooth or tusk", also "elephant tooth or tusk".
This name also appears in a list of 21 names at the end of the ''Ganesha Sahasranama'' that Ganesha says are especially important.
In one Tibetan form, he is shown being trodden under foot by ,(Shiva) a popular Tibetan deity.
'''Ganesha''' (; , ''''; ), also known as '''Ganapati''' and '''Vinayaka''',  is one of the best-known and most worshipped deities in the Hindu pantheon.
Upon Ganesha's forehead may be a third eye or the sectarian mark (IAST: ), which consists of three horizontal lines.
This statue has four arms, which is common in depictions of Ganesha.
One of his popular forms, ''Heramba-Ganapati'', has five elephant heads, and other less-common variations in the number of heads are known.
Ganesha appears in China by the 6th century, states Brown, and his artistic images in temple setting as "remover of obstacles" in South Asia appear by about 400 CE.
She bases her reasoning on the fact that, among other internal evidence, the ''Mudgala Purana'' specifically mentions the ''Ganesha Purana'' as one of the four Puranas (the ''Brahma'', the ''Brahmanda'', the ''Ganesha'', and the ''Mudgala'' Puranas) which deal at length with Ganesha.
His image appears in Buddhist sculptures during the late Gupta period.
Ganesha agreed but only on condition that Vyasa recite the poem uninterrupted, that is, without pausing.
Narain summarizes the lack of evidence about Ganesha's history before the 5th century as follows:
Brown notes while the Puranas "defy precise chronological ordering", the more detailed narratives of Ganesha's life are in the late texts, c. 600–1300.
The names '''' (mouse-mount) and '''' (rat-banner) appear in the ''Ganesha Sahasranama''.
One of the most important Sanskrit texts, that enjoys authority in ''Ganapatya'' tradition states John Grimes, is the ''Ganapati Atharvashirsa''.
The mouse is interpreted in several ways.
It is his particular territory, the reason for his creation."
Another pattern connects Ganesha with the goddess of culture and the arts, Sarasvati or  (particularly in Maharashtra).
Several stories tell of sibling rivalry between the brothers and may reflect sectarian tensions.
This form, called  Ganapati, was popular in northern India, later adopted in Nepal, and then in Tibet.
The eight shrines are: Morgaon, Siddhatek, Pali, Mahad, Theur, Lenyadri,  Ozar and Ranjangaon.
Ganesha's association with mental agility and learning is one reason he is shown as scribe for 's dictation of the ''Mahabharata'' in this interpolation.
The term more generally means a category, class, community, association, or corporation.
The ''Ganapati Atharvashirsa'' attests to this association.
Because of Ganesha's wide appeal as "the god for Everyman", Tilak chose him as a rallying point for Indian protest against British rule.
One of Ganesha's names in the ''Ganesha Purana'' and the ''Ganesha Sahasranama'' is ''Buddhipriya''.
In his survey of Ganesha's rise to prominence in Sanskrit literature, Ludo Rocher notes that:
Festivals associated with Ganesh are Ganesh Chaturthi or Vināyaka chaturthī in the '''' (the fourth day of the waxing moon) in the month of ''Bhadrapada'' (August/September) and the Ganesh Jayanti (Ganesha's birthday) celebrated on the ''cathurthī'' of the '''' (fourth day of the waxing moon) in the month of ''magha'' (January/February)."
In Indochina, Hinduism and Buddhism were practiced side by side, and mutual influences can be seen in the iconography of Ganesha in the region.
The term '''' (Aum is his form), when identified with Ganesha, refers to the notion that he personifies the primal sound.
Another pattern associates him with the concepts of ''Buddhi'' (intellect), ''Siddhi'' (spiritual power), and ''Riddhi'' (prosperity); these qualities are sometimes personified as goddesses, said to be Ganesha's wives.
Details of the other hands are difficult to make out on the statue shown.
As the Buddhist god , he is often shown dancing.
Ganesha's marital status, the subject of considerable scholarly review, varies widely in mythological stories.
However, Krishan considers these hymns to be post-Vedic additions.
From approximately the 10th century onwards, new networks of exchange developed including the formation of trade guilds and a resurgence of money circulation.
In rare instances, he may be depicted with a human head.
Both works were developed over time and contain age-layered strata.
The name Vināyaka is a common name for Ganesha both in the  and in Buddhist Tantras.
Ganesha is often described as red in color.
Puranic myths provide many explanations for how he got his elephant head.
The Sanskrit word '''' (mouse) is derived from the root '''' (stealing, robbing).
One theory of the origin of Ganesha is that he gradually came to prominence in connection with the four Vinayakas ().
Courtright translates this passage as follows: "You continually dwell in the sacral plexus at the base of the spine ."
The symbolic form and identity of Ganesha, in his classic form, is generally accepted to have occurred between the 4th and 5th centuries CE.
Another pattern, mainly prevalent in the Bengal region, links Ganesha with the banana tree, Kala Bo.
For example, white is associated with his representations as ''Heramba-Ganapati'' and ''Rina-Mochana-Ganapati'' (Ganapati Who Releases from Bondage).
The festival culminates on the day of Ananta Chaturdashi, when idols (''murtis'') of Ganesha are immersed in the most convenient body of water.
"eight Ganesha (shrines)") in Maharashtra are particularly well known.
''Ganapati'' (; ), a synonym for ''Ganesha'', is a compound composed of '''', meaning "group", and '''', meaning "ruler" or "lord".
Many examples of color associations with specific meditation forms are prescribed in the Sritattvanidhi, a treatise on Hindu iconography.
Martin-Dubost says that the rat began to appear as the principal vehicle in sculptures of Ganesha in central and western India during the 7th century; the rat was always placed close to his feet.
In Japan, where Ganesha is known as Kangiten, the Ganesha cult was first mentioned in 806.
The story is not accepted as part of the original text by the editors of the critical edition of the ''Mahabharata'', in which the twenty-line story is relegated to a footnote in an appendix.
Devotees believe that if Ganesha is propitiated, he grants success, prosperity and protection against adversity.
This formalized the role of Ganesha as a complementary deity.
According to the ''Ganesha Purana'', Ganesha wrapped the serpent Vasuki around his neck.
However, Phyllis Granoff finds problems with this relative dating and concludes that the ''Mudgala Purana'' was the last of the philosophical texts concerned with Ganesha.
He elaborates on the matter to say that references to Ganesha in the earlier Puranas, such as the Vayu and Brahmanda Puranas, are later interpolations made during the 7th to 10th centuries.
Some have noted the roots of Ganesha worship, dating back to 3,000 BCE since the times of Indus Valley Civilization.
Statues of Ganesha are found throughout the region, often beside Shiva sanctuaries.
There are many other important Ganesha temples at the following locations: Wai in Maharashtra; Ujjain in Madhya Pradesh; Jodhpur, Nagaur and Raipur (Pali) in Rajasthan; Baidyanath in Bihar; Baroda, Dholaka, and Valsad in Gujarat and Dhundiraj Temple in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh.
Adi Shankara instituted the tradition primarily to unite the principal deities of these five major sects on an equal status.
Shiva then replaced Ganesha's original head with that of an elephant.
The widespread name of Ganesha in Thailand is ''Phra Phikanet''.
The principal scriptures dedicated to Ganesha are the ''Ganesha Purana'', the ''Mudgala Purana'', and the ''Ganapati Atharvashirsa''.
Versions of the Ganesha Sahasranama are found in the ''Ganesha Purana''.
Ganesha is a non-sectarian deity.
In the standard configuration, Ganesha typically holds an axe or a goad in one upper arm and a pasha (noose) in the other upper arm.
He is often shown carrying a bowl of sweets, called a ''''.
Ganesha is widely revered as the remover of obstacles, the patron of arts and sciences and the deva of intellect and wisdom.
A more primitive statue in one of the Ellora Caves with this general form has been dated to the 7th century.
He is, states Bailey, recognized as goddess Parvati's son and integrated into Shaivism theology by early centuries of the common era.
T. A. Gopinatha notes, "Every village however small has its own image of '''' (Vigneshvara) with or without a temple to house it in.
As the god of beginnings, he is honoured at the start of rituals and ceremonies.
Thus, Ganesha has a permanent abode in every being at the Muladhara.
In northern Indian variants of this story, the sons are often said to be  (auspiciouness) and .
This association is also attested to in the ''Ganapati Atharvashirsa''.
Krishan notes that the rat is destructive and a menace to crops.
In Nepal, the Hindu form of Ganesha, known as Heramba, is popular; he has five heads and rides a lion.
Because of his identification with the color red, he is often worshipped with red sandalwood paste () or red flowers.
A. K. Narain differentiates these terms by saying that ''pillai'' means a "child" while ''pillaiyar'' means a "noble child".
According to this theory, showing Ganesha as master of the rat demonstrates his function as ''Vigneshvara'' (Lord of Obstacles) and gives evidence of his possible role as a folk ''grāma-devatā'' (village deity) who later rose to greater prominence.
This example features some of Ganesha's common iconographic elements.
