Recent studies by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) say that the river is so full of killer pollutants that those living along its banks in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Bengal are more prone to cancer than anywhere else in the country.
The failure of the Ganga Action Plan, has also been variously attributed to "environmental planning without proper understanding of the human–environment interactions," Indian "traditions and beliefs," "corruption and a lack of technical knowledge" and "lack of support from religious authorities."
The Ghaghara (Karnali), with its average annual flow of about , is the largest tributary of the Ganges.
All these made the Action Plan a failure.
Bangladesh, in particular, frequently experiences drought during the dry season and regularly suffers extreme floods during the monsoon.
By the seventh century it had become an established feature, as seen, for example, the Dashavatara temple, Deogarh, Uttar Pradesh (seventh century), the Trimurti temple, Badoli, Chittorgarh, Rajasthan, and at the Lakshmaneshwar temple, Kharod, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh, (ninth or tenth century), and seen very clearly in frame 3 above and less clearly in the remaining frames.
Further downstream, the Padma joins the Meghna River, the second largest distributary of the Brahmaputra, and takes on the Meghna's name as it enters the Meghna Estuary, which empties into the Bay of Bengal.
The combined Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin (abbreviated GBM or GMB) drainage basin is spread across Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and China.
The largest is the Damodar River, which is  long, with a drainage basin of .
The Hooghly River empties into the Bay of Bengal near Sagar Island.
The ''avatarana'' is an old theme in Hinduism with a number of different versions of the story.
The two largest rivers, the Ganges and Brahmaputra, both split into distributary channels, the largest of which merge with other large rivers before themselves joining.
The IPCC has now withdrawn that prediction, as the original source admitted that it was speculative and the cited source was not a peer reviewed finding.
The Indo-Gangetic Plain is geologically known as a foredeep or foreland basin.
I come, my heart dry with thirst, to you, ocean of sweet wine.
Do with me whatever you will.
The forests of the lower Gangetic Plain, despite thousands of years of human settlement, remained largely intact until the early 20th century.
Some sections of the river are already completely dry.
In the 21st century there are few large wild animals, mostly deer, boars, wildcats, and small numbers of wolves, jackals, and foxes.
Now known as the Western Yamuna Canal, it has fallen into disrepair and been restored several times.
The ''Maha'' (great) Kumbh Mela which comes after 12 'Purna Kumbh Melas', or 144 years, is held at Prayag (Allahabad).
There, the divine waters break up, with one stream, the Alaknanda, flowing down one petal into Bharatvarsha (India) as the Ganga.
(See, for example, frames 1, 2, and 4 above.)
This results in a total average annual discharge of about , or .
The Shiva-Ganga relationship is both perpetual and intimate.
Unlike other goddesses, she has no destructive or fearsome aspect, destructive though she might be as a river in nature.
The continuing customs of burning dead bodies, throwing carcasses, washing of dirty clothes by washermen, and immersion of idols and cattle wallowing were not checked.
The Ganga river dolphin is one of only five freshwater dolphins in the world.
One result of this shift to the Padma was that the Ganges joined the Meghna and Brahmaputra rivers before emptying into the Bay of Bengal, together instead of separately.
After passing through Varanasi, and receiving 32 streams of raw sewage from the city, the concentration of fecal coliforms in the river's waters rises from 60,000 to 1.5 million, with observed peak values of 100 million per 100 ml.
In these cases the river's source is usually assumed to be the source of the Bhagirathi River, Gangotri Glacier at Gomukh, and its mouth being the mouth of the Meghna River on the Bay of Bengal.
Over time the rivers in Ganges Delta have changed course, sometimes altering the network of channels in significant ways.
As if to illustrate this truism, the ''Kashi Khanda'' (Varanasi Chapter) of the Skanda Purana recounts the remarkable story of ''Vahika'', a profligate and unrepentant sinner, who is killed by a tiger in the forest.
At Haridwar, a dam diverts some of its waters into the Ganges Canal, which irrigates the ''Doab'' region of Uttar Pradesh, whereas the river, whose course has been roughly southwest until this point, now begins to flow southeast through the plains of northern India.
The Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin has a huge hydroelectric potential, on the order of 200,000 to 250,000 megawatts, nearly half of which could be easily harnessed.
Human development, mostly agriculture, has replaced nearly all of the original natural vegetation of the Ganga basin.
Livid at being disturbed, Kapila sears them with his angry gaze, reduces them to ashes, and dispatches them to the netherworld.
However, within a year the flow at Farakka fell to levels far below the historic average, making it impossible to implement the guaranteed sharing of water.
The Hooghly River is formed by the confluence of the Bhagirathi River and Jalangi River at Nabadwip, and Hooghly has a number of tributaries of its own.
This is despite the fact that quarrying has been banned in Kumbh Mela area zone covering 140&nbsp;km2 area in Haridwar.
In March 1997, flow of the Ganges in Bangladesh dropped to its lowest ever, .
They curse each other to become rivers, and to carry within them, by washing, the sins of their human worshippers.
Jawaharlal Nehru, a religious iconoclast himself, asked for a handful of his ashes to be thrown into the Ganga.
As recently as the 16th and 17th centuries the upper Gangetic Plain harboured impressive populations of wild Asian elephants (''Elephas maximus''), tigers (''Panthera tigris''), Indian rhinoceros (''Rhinoceros unicornis''), gaurs (''Bos gaurus''), barasinghas (''Rucervus duvaucelii''), sloth bears (''Melursus ursinus'') and Indian lions.
10&nbsp;billion, around US$226 million, or less than 4 cents per person per year, were spent on the Ganga Action Plan, an environmental initiative that was "the largest single attempt to clean up a polluted river anywhere in the world."
It fell into disuse until 1830, when it was reopened as the Eastern Yamuna Canal, under British control.
The Ganges and its tributaries provide a perennial source of irrigation to a large area.
In November 2008, the Ganga, alone among India's rivers, was declared a "National River", facilitating the formation of a National Ganga River Basin Authority that would have greater powers to plan, implement and monitor measures aimed at protecting the river.
Bhagirathi is called Ganga after Devprayag.
The Ganga and its tributaries, especially the Yamuna, have been used for irrigation since ancient times.
The Ganges follows an  arching course passing through the cities of Kannauj, Farukhabad, and Kanpur.
Local rivers are said to be ''like'' the Ganga, and are sometimes called the local Ganga.
More than 95% of the upper Gangetic Plain has been degraded or converted to agriculture or urban areas.
The concerning governments and the related agencies were not very prompt to make it a success.
About 84% of the total rainfall occurs in the monsoon from June to September.
It was assumed that during the worst dry season the Ganges flow would be around , thus leaving  for the then East Pakistan.
After the cremation of the deceased at Varanasi's ghats the bones and ashes are thrown into the Ganga.
The war-god Skanda addresses the sage Agastya in the ''Kashi Khand'' of the ''Skanda Purana'' in these words:  One should not be amazed ... that this Ganga is really Power, for is she not the Supreme Shakti of the Eternal Shiva, taken in the form of water?
The Ganges is the most sacred river to Hindus.
While Lakshmi attempts to mediate the quarrel, Ganga and Sarasvati heap misfortune on each other.
The Ganga is the embodiment of all sacred waters in Hindu mythology.
The Bhagirathi is considered to be the source in Hindu culture and mythology, although the Alaknanda is longer.
The Ganges basin ranges from the Himalaya and the Transhimalaya in the north, to the northern slopes of the Vindhya range in the south, from the eastern slopes of the Aravalli in the west to the Chota Nagpur plateau and the Sunderbans delta in the east.
Hindus consider the waters of the Ganga to be both pure and purifying.
Tourism is another related activity.
A counterpoise to the dazzling heat of the Indian summer, the Ganga came to be imbued with magical qualities and to be revered in anthropomorphic form.
Between 1985 and 2000, Rs.
But the result was not very appreciable.
''triloka''= "three worlds", ''patha'' = "road", ''gamini'' = "one who travels") of the Hindu tradition, she flows in heaven, earth, and the netherworld, and, consequently, is a "tirtha," or crossing point of all beings, the living as well as the dead.
After the Ghaghara (Karnali) confluence the Ganges is joined from the south by the Son River, contributing about .
In 1787 there was a great flood on the Teesta River, which at the time was a tributary of the Ganges-Padma River.
Ganga and Sarasvati, however, are so distraught at this dispensation, and wail so loudly, that Vishnu is forced to take back his words.
Around Varanasi the river once had an average depth of , but in some places it is now only .
Many types of birds are found throughout the basin, such as myna, parrots, crows, kites, partridges, and fowls.
Along with ever-increasing pollution, water shortages are getting noticeably worse.
There are over forty protected areas in the ecoregion, but over half of these are less than .
In December 2009 the World Bank agreed to loan India US$1 billion over the next five years to help save the river.
If the ashes have been immersed in another body of water, a relative can still gain salvation for the deceased by journeying to the Ganga, if possible during the lunar "fortnight of the ancestors" in the Hindu calendar month of Ashwin (September or October), and performing the ''Shraaddha'' rites.
If the death has occurred elsewhere, salvation can be achieved by immersing the ashes in the Ganga.
The five confluences, known as the Panch Prayag, are all along the Alaknanda.
Ganga is a consort to all three major male deities of Hinduism.
The incidence of water-borne and enteric diseases – such as gastrointestinal disease, cholera, dysentery, hepatitis A and typhoid – among people who use the river's waters for bathing, washing dishes and brushing teeth is high, at an estimated 66% per year.
Only the Amazon and Congo rivers have a greater average discharge than the combined flow of the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Surma-Meghna river system.
After the 16th century the Padma grew to become the main channel of the Ganges.
As he recites each verse of the poem, the water of the Ganga rises up one step, until in the end it envelops the lovers and carry them away.
Just before the border with Bangladesh the Farakka Barrage controls the flow of the Ganges, diverting some of the water into a feeder canal linked to the Hooghly for the purpose of keeping it relatively silt-free.
This river is the longest in India.
What the Ganga removes, however, is not necessarily physical dirt, but symbolic dirt; it wipes away the sins of the bather, not just of the present, but of a lifetime.
In 1996 a 30-year treaty was signed with Bangladesh.
This barrage, which feeds the Hooghly branch of the river by a  long feeder canal, and its water flow management has been a long-lingering source of dispute with Bangladesh.
Very little provision of public latrines was made and the open defecation of lakhs of people continued along the riverside.
Sewage from many cities along the river's course, industrial waste and religious offerings wrapped in non-degradable plastics add large amounts of pollutants to the river as it flows through densely populated areas.
Blessed by this happenstance, Vahika, on his way to hell, is rescued by a celestial chariot which takes him instead to heaven.
The average dry season to monsoon discharge ratio is about 1:6, as measured at Hardinge Bridge.
The name ''Ganges'' is used for the river between the confluence of the Bhagirathi and Alaknanda rivers, in the Himalayas, and the India-Bangladesh border, near the Farakka Barrage and the first bifurcation of the river.
&hellip;Necklace adorning the worlds!
According to official standards, water safe for bathing should not contain more than 500 faecal coliforms per 100ml, yet upstream of Varanasi's ghats the river water already contains 120 times as much, 60,000 faecal coliform bacteria per 100 ml.
The Ganges joins the Yamuna at the Triveni Sangam at Allahabad, a holy confluence in Hinduism.
In the Vedic version, Indra, the Lord of Svarga (Heaven) slays the celestial serpent, Vritra, releasing the celestial liquid, the ''soma'', or the nectar of the gods which then plunges to the earth and waters it with sustenance.
Only one large block of relatively intact habitat remains, running along the Himalayan foothills and including Rajaji National Park, Jim Corbett National Park, and Dudhwa National Park.
Bansagar Dam was built on the Son River, a tributary of the Ganga, for both irrigation and hydroelectric power generation.
Also, several cities such as Kanpur, Kolkata and Patna have developed riverfront walkways along the banks to attract tourists.
The Gomti contributes an average annual flow of about .
When a loved one dies, Hindus bring the ashes of the deceased person to the Ganga River.
Today only about 3% of the ecoregion is under natural forest and only one large block, south of Varanasi, remains.
In other cases the length is said to be about , from the source of the Bhagirathi to the Bangladesh border, where its name changes to ''Padma''.
Their numbers have now dwindled to a quarter of their numbers of fifteen years before, and they have become extinct in the Ganga's main tributaries.
Also the major industrial towns of Unnao, Kanpur, situated on the banks of the river with the predominance of tanning industries add to the pollution.
Varanasi, a city of one million people that many pilgrims visit to take a "holy dip" in the Ganga, releases around 200 million litres of untreated human sewage into the river each day, leading to large concentrations of faecal coliform bacteria.
Governor, and in British India with Lord Dalhousie as Governor-General.
The Ganga Action Plan, an environmental initiative to clean up the river, has been a major failure thus far, due to corruption, lack of technical expertise, poor environmental planning, and lack of support from religious authorities.
"from the foot of").
During the early Vedic Age of the ''Rigveda'', the Indus and the Sarasvati River were the major sacred rivers, not the Ganges.
The ''Gangashtakam'' expresses this longing fervently: O Mother!
On the journey back home from the Ganga, they carry small quantities of river water with them for use in rituals (''ganga jal'', literally water of the Ganga).
Drinking and bathing in its waters therefore carries a high risk of infection.
I come without refuge to you, giver of sacred rest.
(The parasol can be clearly seen in frame 3 above; its stem can be seen in frame 4, but the rest has broken off.)
Ganga descends, is tamed in Shiva's locks, and arrives in the Himalayas.
A similar situation is found in the lower Gangetic Plain, which includes the lower Brahmaputra River.
This union produces Skanda, or Kartikeya, the god of war.
The Ganges Delta, formed mainly by the large, sediment-laden flows of the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers, is the world's largest delta, at about .
In 1951 a water sharing dispute arose between India and Bangladesh (then East Pakistan), after India declared its intention to build the Farakka Barrage.
There are a few small patches of forest left, and they suggest that much of the upper plains may have supported a tropical moist deciduous forest with sal (''Shorea robusta'') as a climax species.
The disintegration of the Harappan civilisation, in the early 2nd millennium BC, marks the point when the centre of Indian civilisation shifted from the Indus basin to the Ganges basin.
Ganga is the ''shakti'' or the moving, restless, rolling energy in the form of which the otherwise recluse and unapproachable Shiva appears on earth.
The ''makara'' has a dual symbolism.
The Gandaki River, then the Kosi River, join from the north flowing from Nepal, contributing about  and , respectively.
She emanates from his foot as ''Vishnupadi'' in the ''avatarana'' story, and is also, with Sarasvati and Lakshmi, one of his wives.
The site of the old Brahmaputra-Meghna confluence, in the locality of Langalbandh, is still considered sacred by Hindus.
In its statement, the IPCC stands by its general findings relating to the Himalayan glaciers being at risk from global warming (with consequent risks to water flow into the Gangetic basin).
She has been a symbol of India's age-long culture and civilization, ever-changing, ever-flowing, and yet ever the same Ganga."
There are several marine dolphins whose ranges include some freshwater habitats, but these five are the only dolphins who live only in freshwater rivers and lakes.
Having no compensating virtue, Vahika's soul is at once dispatched to hell.
Tehri Dam was constructed on Bhagirathi River, tributary of the Ganga.
The day of the celebration, ''Ganga Dashahara'', the ''dashami'' (tenth day) of the waxing moon of the Hindu calendar month Jyestha, brings throngs of bathers to the banks of the river.
In most places forests fail to reach climax conditions due to human causes.
Her divinity is immediate and everlasting.
In her earliest depictions at temple entrances, the goddess Ganga appeared standing beneath the overhanging branch of a tree, as seen as well in the Udayagiri caves.
The Ganga is also the mother, the ''Ganga Mata'' (''mata''="mother") of Hindu worship and culture, accepting all and forgiving all.
The earliest extant unambiguous pairing of the ''makara'' with Ganga is at Udayagiri Caves in Central India (circa 400 CE).
An ancient symbol in India, it pre-dates all appearances of the goddess Ganga in art.
The Ganga is invoked whenever water is used in Hindu ritual, and is therefore present in all sacred waters.
It is thought that the Bhagirathi-Hooghly became increasingly choked with silt, causing the main flow of the Ganges to shift to the southeast and the Padma River.
The '''Ganges''' ( ), also '''Ganga''' () is a trans-boundary river of Asia which flows through the nations of India and Bangladesh.
It is worshipped as the goddess ''Ganga'' in Hinduism.
Along with his beloved, Jagannatha sits at the top of the flight of steps leading to the water at the famous ''Panchganga'' Ghat in Varanasi.
The hydrologic cycle in the Ganges basin is governed by the Southwest Monsoon.
A soak in the Ganga on this day is said to rid the bather of ten sins (dasha = Sanskrit "ten"; hara = to destroy) or alternatively, ten lifetimes of sins.
As of 1999, India tapped about 12% of the hydroelectric potential of the Ganga and just 1% of the vast potential of the Brahmaputra.
By the time of his return to India even more supportive men were at the helm, both in the North-Western Provinces, with James Thomason as Lt.
Appearing first also in the relief in Udayagiri Caves (5th century), it gradually appeared more frequently as the theme of the goddess matured.
The Himalayan portion of the basin includes the south-eastern portion of the state of Himachal Pradesh, the entire state of Uttarakhand, the entire country of Nepal and the extreme north-western portion of the state of West Bengal.
Conducted by the National Cancer Registry Programme under the ICMR, the study throws up shocking findings indicating that the river is thick with heavy metals and lethal chemicals that cause cancer.
Early in ancient Indian culture, the river Ganga was associated with fecundity, its redeeming waters and its rich silt providing sustenance to all who lived along its banks.
Indo-Bangladesh Ganga Water Treaty signed in December 1996 addressed some of the water sharing issues between India and Bangladesh.
It stretches  along the Bay of Bengal.
When Bhishma is mortally wounded in battle, Ganga comes out of the water in human form and weeps uncontrollably over his body.
A significant portion of the discharge from the Ganges comes from the Himalayan mountain system.
It is the third largest river in the world by discharge.
Pollution threatens not only humans, but also more than 140 fish species, 90 amphibian species and the endangered Ganges river dolphin.
Soon their husband, Vishnu, arrives and decides to calm the situation by separating the goddesses.
This section of the Himalaya contains 9 of the 14 highest peaks in the world over 8,000m in height, including Mount Everest which is the high point of the Ganges basin.
The releasing of urban and industrial wastes in the river was not controlled fully.
One plan is for another barrage to be built in Bangladesh at Pangsha, west of Dhaka.
As he completes his celebrated three strides—of earth, sky, and heaven—Vishnu as Vamana stubs his toe on the vault of heaven, punches open a hole, and releases the ''Vishnupadi'', which until now had been circling around the cosmic egg within.
Its defining geological processes commenced seventy-five million years ago, when, as a part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, it began a northeastwards drift—lasting fifty million years—across the then unformed Indian Ocean.
The seasonality of flow is so acute it can cause both drought and floods.
The Kosi is the third largest tributary of the Ganges, after the Ghaghara (Karnali) and Yamuna.
Only in 1844, when a new Governor-General, Lord Hardinge, was appointed, did official enthusiasm and funds return to the Ganga canal project.
A descendant of these sons, King Bhagiratha, anxious to restore his ancestors, undertakes rigorous penance and is eventually granted the prize of Ganga's descent from heaven.
Shiva is depicted in Hindu iconography as ''Gangadhara'', the "Bearer of the Ganga," with Ganga, shown as spout of water, rising from his hair.
In the Ganges Delta many large rivers come together, both merging and bifurcating in a complicated network of channels.
Firuz Shah Tughlaq had many canals built, the longest of which, , was built in 1356 on the Yamuna River.
The Ganga River itself supports the mugger crocodile (''Crocodylus palustris'') and the gharial (''Gavialis gangeticus'').
Contemplated first by Col. John Russell Colvin in 1836, it did not at first elicit much enthusiasm from its eventual architect Sir Proby Thomas Cautley, who balked at idea of cutting a canal through extensive low-lying land in order to reach the drier upland destination.
A relief similar to the depiction in frame 4 above, is described in  as follows:  A typical relief of about the ninth century that once stood at the entrance of a temple, the river goddess Ganga is shown as a voluptuously endowed lady with a retinue.
She accepts Shiva's incandescent seed from the fire-god Agni, which is too hot for this world, and cools it in her waters.
Within the Himalaya, the Ganges basin spreads almost 1,200&nbsp;km from the Yamuna-Satluj divide along the Simla ridge forming the boundary with the Indus basin in the west to the Singalila Ridge along the Nepal-Sikkim border forming the boundary with the Brahmaputra basin in the east.
Those who cannot journey to the river, however, can achieve the same results by bathing in any nearby body of water, which, for the true believer, in the Hindu tradition, takes on all the attributes of the Ganga.
As Brahma's partner she always travels with him in the form of water in his kamandalu (water-pot).
Some, called ''naga sanyasis'', may not wear any clothes.
His death put a spotlight on the activity and resulted in the intervention of the Union Environment minister.
Furthermore, The river goddesses Ganga and Saraswati were both born from Brahma's pot, containing the celestial waters.
She is also Vishnu's consort.
At their confluence the Yamuna is larger than the Ganges, contributing about , or about 58.5% of the combined flow.
According to 2010 Planning Commission estimates, an investment of almost Rs.
The Bhagirathi rises at the foot of Gangotri Glacier, at Gomukh, at an elevation of , being mythologically referred to as, residing in the matted locks of Shiva, symbolically Tapovan, being a meadow of ethereal beauty at the feet of Mount Shivling, just  away.
Dry season flows returned to normal levels in the years following, but efforts were made to address the problem.
In one popular story, envious of being outdone by each other, the wives begin to quarrel.
Near the confluence is a major early historic site called Wari-Bateshwar.
The Gangetic Plain became the centre of successive powerful states, from the Maurya Empire to the Mughal Empire.
Megasthenes, a Greek ethnographer who visited India during third century BCE when Mauryans ruled India described the existence of canals in the gangetic plain.
Since Ganga had descended from heaven to Earth, she is also the vehicle of ''ascent'', from Earth to heaven.
Told and retold in the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and several Puranas, the story begins with a sage, Kapila, whose intense meditation has been disturbed by the sixty thousand sons of King Sagara.
In 1839, the Governor General of India, Lord Auckland, with the Court's assent, granted funds to Cautley for a full survey of the swath of land that underlay and fringed the projected course of the canal.
Even today, holy men, pregnant women, people with leprosy/chicken pox, people who had been bitten by snakes, people who had committed suicide, the poor, and children under 5 are not cremated at the ghats but are floated free to decompose in the waters.
The Ganga Action Plan, which was taken on priority and with much enthusiasm, was delayed for two years.
The Ganges basin, including the delta but not the Brahmaputra or Meghna basins, is about , of which  are in India (about 80%),  in Nepal (13%),  in Bangladesh (4%), and  in China (3%).
It is located 1.5&nbsp;km downstream of Ganesh Prayag, the place where Bhilangana meets Bhagirathi.
