After the start of principal photography in the Sierra Nevada in late 1942, Ingrid Bergman was brought in to replace ballerina Vera Zorina as the female lead—a change supported by Cooper and Hemingway.
In the biographical film ''Sergeant York'', Cooper portrays war hero Alvin C. York, one of the most decorated American soldiers in World War I.
For over two years, they maintained a fragile and uneasy family life with their daughter.
In 1932, after completing ''Devil and the Deep'' with Tallulah Bankhead to fulfill his old contract, Cooper appeared in ''A Farewell to Arms'', the first film adaptation of an Ernest Hemingway novel.
During the filming of ''Vera Cruz'', he reinjured his hip falling from a horse, and was burned when Lancaster fired his rifle too close and the wadding from the blank shell pierced his clothing.
The American Film Institute (AFI) ranked Cooper eleventh on its list of the twenty five greatest male stars of classic Hollywood cinema.
Tensions came to a head after von Sternberg yelled directions at Cooper in German.
In Henry Hathaway's ''The Real Glory'' (1939), he plays a military doctor who accompanies a small group of American Army officers to the Philippines to help the Christian Filipinos defend themselves against Muslim radicals.
In 1947, Cooper appeared in Cecil B. DeMille's epic adventure film ''Unconquered'' with Paulette Goddard, about a Virginia militiaman who defends settlers against an unscrupulous gun trader and hostile Indians on the Western frontier during the eighteenth century.
Audiences embraced Cooper's character, and the film was one of the top box-office pictures of the year—a testament to Cooper's still vital audience appeal.
Neal ended their relationship in late December 1951.
Deeds Goes to Town'' (1936), ''Meet John Doe'' (1941), ''Sergeant York'' (1941), ''The Pride of the Yankees'' (1942), and ''For Whom the Bell Tolls'' (1943).
The film was one of the year's top ten pictures and received eleven Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor (Cooper's third).
Cooper concluded the year with appearances in two unsuccessful films: ''I Take This Woman'' with Carole Lombard, and ''His Woman'' with Claudette Colbert.
He also confessed that he was in love with Neal, and continued to see her.
According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, Cooper, who struggled with moral conflicts in his personal life, "understood the anguish of a character striving to retain his integrity ... and brought authentic feeling to the role of a tempted and tormented, yet essentially decent man".
The film earned $3.75 million in the United States and $18 million worldwide.
Actor John Barrymore said of Cooper, "This fellow is the world's greatest actor.
His English teacher, Ida Davis, encouraged him to focus on academics, join the school's debating team, and get involved in dramatics.
Based on the novel by Ayn Rand who also wrote the screenplay, the film reflects her Objectivist philosophy and attacks the concepts of altruism and collectivism while promoting the virtues of selfishness and individualism.
In 1906, Charles purchased the  Seven-Bar-Nine cattle ranch about  north of Helena near the town of Craig on the Missouri River.
The fledgling studio's first offering was Sam Wood's romantic comedy ''Casanova Brown'' with Teresa Wright, about a man who learns his soon-to-be ex-wife is pregnant with his child, just as he is about to marry another woman.
The year 1936 marked an important turning point in Cooper's career.
Cooper especially admired and studied Russell's ''Lewis and Clark Meeting Indians at Ross' Hole'' (1910), which still hangs in the state capitol building in Helena.
His career spanned thirty-five years, from 1925 to 1960, and included leading roles in eighty-four feature films.
Impressed by Temple's intelligence and charm, Cooper developed a close rapport with her, both on and off screen.
During this time, he was earning as much as $2,750 per film and receiving a thousand fan letters a week.
Despite receiving some positive reviews—including from Bosley Crowther who praised the film's "charming performances"—most reviewers concluded that Cooper was simply too old for the part.
In late 1936, while Paramount was preparing a new contract for Cooper that would raise his salary to $8,000 a week, Cooper signed a contract with Samuel Goldwyn for six films over six years with a minimum guarantee of $150,000 per picture.
That's all I can say ...
Like ''Sergeant York'' and ''High Noon'', the film addresses the conflict between religious pacifism and civic duty.
In the film, Cooper plays American doctor and missionary Corydon M. Wassell, who leads a group of wounded sailors through the jungles of Java to safety.
In April 1908, the Hauser Dam failed and flooded the Missouri River valley along portions of the Cooper property, but Cooper and his family were able to evacuate in time.
Despite receiving generally favorable reviews, the film was not popular with American audiences, who may have been offended by the film's depiction of an extramarital affair and its tragic ending.
They saw each other often, and their friendship remained strong through the years.
In his final films, Cooper's hero rejects the violence of the past, and seeks to reclaim lost honor and find redemption (''Friendly Persuasion'' and ''Man of the West'').
In June 1943, he visited military hospitals in San Diego, and often appeared at the Hollywood Canteen serving food to the servicemen.
Looking to exploit Cooper's growing audience appeal, the studio placed him opposite popular leading ladies such as Evelyn Brent in ''Beau Sabreur'', Florence Vidor in ''Doomsday'', and Esther Ralston in ''Half a Bride''.
On May 6, 1961, he was awarded the French Order of Arts and Letters in recognition of his significant contribution to the arts.
During this period, Cooper struggled with health problems.
While the former was more successful in Europe than in the United States, the latter was nominated for six Academy Awards and became one of Cooper's most popular and successful adventure films.
In 1929, while filming ''The Wolf Song'', Cooper began an intense affair with Lupe Vélez, which was the most important romance of his early life.
In the film, Cooper plays an idealistic and uncompromising architect who struggles to maintain his integrity and individualism in the face of societal pressures to conform to popular standards.
In the coming weeks, after working a series of unpromising jobs, Cooper met two friends from Montana, Jim Galeen and Jim Calloway, who were working as film extras and stunt riders in low-budget Western films for the small movie studios on Poverty Row on Gower Street.
While more successful than its predecessor, the film was Cooper's fourth consecutive box-office failure in American market.
On June 26, 1953, Cooper accompanied his wife and daughter, who were devout Catholics, to Rome, where they had an audience with Pope Pius XII.
During his time abroad, Cooper stayed with the Countess Dorothy di Frasso at the Villa Madama in Rome, where she taught him about good food and vintage wines, how to read Italian and French menus, and how to socialize among Europe's nobility and upper classes.
In the film, Cooper plays an American adventurer hired by Emperor Maximilian I to escort a countess to Vera Cruz during the Mexican Rebellion of 1866.
Knowing that other actors were using the name "Frank Cooper", Collins suggested he change his first name to "Gary" after her hometown of Gary, Indiana.
Cooper and Rocky were quietly married at her parents' Park Avenue residence on December 15, 1933.
Cooper was formally introduced to his future wife, twenty-year-old New York debutante Veronica Balfe, on Easter Sunday 1933 at a party given by her uncle, art director Cedric Gibbons.
On February 6, 1960, Cooper was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6243 Hollywood Boulevard for his contribution to the film industry.
He was also awarded a star on the sidewalk outside the Ellen Theater in Bozeman, Montana.
His family decided not to tell him immediately.
In late 1943, Cooper undertook a  tour of the South West Pacific with actresses Una Merkel and Phyllis Brooks, and accordionist Andy Arcari.
They refuse to say or do anything they feel not to be consonant with their own characters."
Beyond the challenges of effectively portraying such a popular and nationally recognized figure, Cooper knew very little about baseball and was not left-handed like Gehrig.
After Gehrig's widow visited the actor and expressed her desire that he portray her husband, Cooper accepted the role that covered a twenty-year span of Gehrig's life—his early love of baseball, his rise to greatness, his loving marriage, and his struggle with illness, culminating in his farewell speech at Yankee Stadium on July 4, 1939 before 62,000 fans.
His ravaged face and discomfort in some scenes "photographed as self-doubt", according to biographer Hector Arce, and contributed to the effectiveness of his performance.
At first they kept their affair discreet, but eventually it became an open secret in Hollywood, and Cooper's wife confronted him with the rumors, which he admitted were true.
She organized their social life, and her wealth and social connections provided Cooper access to New York high society.
With it goes all the friendship and affection and the admiration and deep respect of all of us.
The screen persona he developed and sustained throughout his career represented the ideal American hero—a tall, handsome, and sincere man of steadfast integrity who emphasized action over intellect, and combined the heroic qualities of the romantic lover, the adventurer, and the common man.
Bosley Crowther, in ''The New York Times'',  wrote that Cooper was "at the top of his form", and John McCarten, in ''The New Yorker'', wrote that Cooper was never more effective.
The film premiered on October 14 and was a major success.
When Frank Capra offered him the lead role in ''Meet John Doe'' before Robert Riskin even developed the script, Cooper accepted his friend's offer, saying, "It's okay, Frank, I don't need a script."
A requiem mass was held on May 18 at the Church of the Good Shepherd, attended by many of Cooper's friends, including James Stewart, Henry Hathaway, Joel McCrea, Audrey Hepburn, Jack L. Warner, John Ford, John Wayne, Edward G. Robinson, Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Randolph Scott, Walter Pidgeon, Bob Hope and Marlene Dietrich.
Considered by some critics to be Capra's best film at the time, ''Meet John Doe'' was received as a "national event" with Cooper appearing on the front cover of ''Time'' magazine on March 3, 1941.
In the next two years, Cooper made four poorly received films: Michael Curtiz' period drama ''Bright Leaf'' (1950), Stuart Heisler's Western melodrama ''Dallas'' (1950), Henry Hathaway's wartime comedy ''You're in the Navy Now'' (1951), and Raoul Walsh's Western action film ''Distant Drums'' (1951).
In his review for the ''New York Herald Tribune'', Howard Barnes wrote that Cooper handled the role with "great skill and comic emphasis" and that his performance was "utterly delightful".
In 1934, Cooper was loaned out to MGM for the Civil War drama film ''Operator 13'' with Marion Davies, about a beautiful Union spy who falls in love with a Confederate soldier.
William Wyler, who directed Cooper in two films, called him a "superb actor, a master of movie acting".
On May 4, Cooper, in his last public statement, said, "I know that what is happening is God's will.
On July 30, 1961, he was posthumously awarded the David di Donatello Special Award in Italy for his career achievements.
Cooper's daughter Maria Veronica Cooper was born on September 15, 1937.
According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, the romantic image of the tall, handsome, and shy cowboy hero who embodied male freedom, courage, and honor was created in large part by Cooper in the film.
Cooper's first important film role was in ''The Winning of Barbara Worth'' (1926) with Ronald Colman and Vilma Bánky.
During the height of his career, from 1936 to 1943, he played a new type of hero—a champion of the common man willing to sacrifice himself for others (''Mr.
In the coming days he received numerous messages of appreciation and encouragement, including telegrams from Pope John XXIII and Queen Elizabeth II, and a phone call from President John F. Kennedy.
As well as admiring Cooper's hunting skills and knowledge of the outdoors, Hemingway believed his character matched his screen persona, once telling a friend, "If you made up a character like Coop, nobody would believe it.
Cooper did not serve in the military during World War II due to his age and health, but like many of his colleagues, he got involved in the war effort by entertaining the troops.
Gradually, he began to land credited roles that offered him more screen time, in films such as ''Tricks'' (1925), in which he played the film's antagonist, and the short film ''Lightnin' Wins'' (1926).
His drawings and watercolors were exhibited throughout the dormitory, and he was named art editor for the college yearbook.
This was the last film in Cooper's contract with Paramount.
Unlike some silent film actors who had trouble adapting to the new sound medium, Cooper transitioned naturally, with his "deep and clear" and "pleasantly drawling" voice, which was perfectly suited for the characters he portrayed on screen, also according to  Meyers.
That year, Cooper also appeared in his first starring roles in ''Arizona Bound'' and ''Nevada''—both films directed by John Waters.
In his review in the ''New York Herald Tribune'', Howard Barnes called Cooper's performance a "splendid and utterly persuasive portrayal" and praised his "utterly realistic acting which comes through with such authority".
He gets at it from the inside, from his own clear way of looking at life."
In his review in ''The New York Times'', Frank Nugent wrote that Cooper was "proving himself one of the best light comedians in Hollywood".
Their on-screen chemistry failed to generate much excitement with audiences.
In May 1931, Cooper left Hollywood and sailed to Algiers and then Italy, where he lived for the next year.
Attended by many of his industry friends, the dinner concluded with a brief speech by Cooper who said, "The only achievement I'm proud of is the friends I've made in this community."
Cooper was a conservative Republican like his father, and voted for Calvin Coolidge in 1924, Herbert Hoover in 1928 and 1932, and campaigned for Wendell Willkie in 1940.
In Quigley's list of all-time money-making stars, Cooper is listed fourth, after John Wayne, Clint Eastwood, and Tom Cruise.
More than a half century after his death, Cooper's enduring legacy, according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, is his image of the ideal American hero preserved in his film performances.
While the film distorted the novel's original political themes and meaning, ''For Whom the Bell Tolls'' was a critical and commercial success and received ten Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor (Cooper's fourth).
He married New York debutante Veronica Balfe in 1933, and the couple had one daughter.
On October 23, 1947, Cooper appeared before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and was asked if he had observed any "communistic influence" in Hollywood.
I am not afraid of the future."
Written by playwright Clifford Odets, the film was a critical and commercial success.
In November 1945, Cooper appeared in Sam Wood's nineteenth century period drama ''Saratoga Trunk'' with Ingrid Bergman, about a Texas cowboy and his relationship with a beautiful fortune-hunter.
In 1931, after returning to the Western genre in Zane Grey's ''Fighting Caravans'' with French actress Lili Damita, Cooper appeared in the Dashiell Hammett crime film ''City Streets'' playing a westerner who gets involved with big-city gangsters in order to save the woman he loves.
Despite his ongoing health problems and several operations for ulcers and hernias, Cooper continued to work in action films.
Cooper and his wife were still separated at the time, but the papal visit marked the beginning of their gradual reconciliation.
On January 9, 1961, Cooper attended a dinner given in his honor at the Friars Club hosted by Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin.
The American Film Institute (AFI) ranked Cooper eleventh on its list of the 25 male stars of classic Hollywood.
As a family they vacationed together in Sun Valley, Idaho, spent time at Rocky's parents' country house in Southampton, New York, and took frequent trips to Europe.
Initially, Cooper was nervous and uncertain about playing a living hero, so he traveled to Tennessee to visit York at his home, and the two quiet men established an immediate rapport and discovered they had much in common.
He appeared on the ''Motion Picture Herald'' exhibitor's poll of top ten film personalities for twenty-three consecutive years, from 1936 to 1958.
The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, was awarded the Palme d'Or at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival, and went on to earn $8 million worldwide.
His friends and colleagues described him as charming, well-mannered, and thoughtful, with a lively boyish sense of humor.
Commenting on Cooper's impact on the character and the film, Capra observed:
In the next two years, Cooper was more discerning about the roles he accepted and made four successful large-scale adventure and cowboy films.
Cooper and his wife were legally separated in May 1951, but he did not seek a divorce.
In the film, Cooper plays the character of Longfellow Deeds, a quiet, innocent writer of greeting cards who inherits a fortune, leaves behind his idyllic life in Vermont, and travels to New York where he faces a world of corruption and deceit.
Three of his characters—Will Kane, Lou Gehrig, and Sergeant York—made AFI's list of the one hundred greatest heroes and villains, all of them as heroes.
Cooper was reluctant to play the seven-time All-Star, who only died the previous year from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) —now commonly called "Lou Gehrig's disease".
In his review for ''The New York Times'', Bosley Crowther concluded he was "Mr.
The organization—whose membership included Walt Disney, Clark Gable, Ronald Reagan, Barbara Stanwyck, and John Wayne—pressured the United States Congress to investigate communist influence in the motion picture industry.
That same year, Cooper appeared in his first all-Technicolor feature, Cecil B. DeMille's adventure film ''North West Mounted Police'' (1940).
At Dunstable, Cooper studied Latin and French, and took several courses in English history.
The following day, newspapers around the world announced the news that Cooper was dying.
Frank James Cooper was born on May 7, 1901, at 730 Eleventh Avenue in Helena, Montana to English immigrants Alice (née Brazier, 1873–1967) and Charles Henry Cooper (1865–1946).
Hoping to move beyond the risky stunt work and obtain acting roles, Cooper paid for a screen test and hired casting director Nan Collins to work as his agent.
Cooper quickly learned the physical movements of a baseball player and developed a fluid, believable swing.
For his work in ''Vera Cruz'', Cooper earned $1.4 million in salary and percent of the gross.
In 1958, he appeared in Anthony Mann's Western drama ''Man of the West'' (1958) with Julie London and Lee J. Cobb, about a reformed outlaw and killer who is forced to confront his violent past when the train he is riding in is held up by his former gang members.
According to his friends, the marriage had a positive impact on Cooper, who turned away from past indiscretions and took control of his life.
Called "Rocky" by her family and friends, she grew up on Park Avenue and attended finishing schools.
In Delmer Daves' Western drama ''The Hanging Tree'', Cooper plays a frontier doctor who saves a criminal from a lynch mob, and later tries to exploit his sordid past.
He also received an Academy Honorary Award for his career achievements in 1961.
In the film, Cooper plays a middle-aged American playboy in Paris who pursues and eventually falls in love with a much younger woman.
In 1919, his father arranged for his son to complete his high school education at Gallatin County High School in Bozeman, Montana.
Both men admired the work of Rudyard Kipling—Cooper kept a copy of the poem "If—" in his dressing room—and retained as adults Kipling's sense of boyish adventure.
The screen persona he sustained throughout his career represented the ideal American hero.
The misguided therapy left him with his characteristic stiff, off-balanced walk and slightly angled riding style.
Funny when I was dreaming I always made a better speech."
In a relatively short period, he appeared in five critically successful and popular films that produced some of his finest performances.
His close friend Joel McCrea recalled, "Coop never fought, he never got mad, he never told anybody off that I know of; everybody that worked with him liked him."
In 1955, he appeared in Otto Preminger's biographical war drama ''The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell'', about the World War I general who tried to convince government officials of the importance of air power, and was court-martialed after blaming the War Department for a series of air disasters.
After guiding him through the great art museums and galleries of Italy, she accompanied him on a ten-week big-game hunting safari on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa, where he was credited with over sixty kills, including two lions, a rhinoceros, and various antelopes.
I didn't see myself as quite that dashing, and later, when I saw Clark Gable play the role to perfection, I knew I was right."
Cooper also found work in a variety of non-Western films, appearing, for example, as a masked Cossack in ''The Eagle'' (1925), as a Roman guard in ''Ben-Hur'' (1925), and as a flood survivor in ''The Johnstown Flood'' (1926).
With his Goldwyn and Paramount contracts now concluded, Cooper decided to remain independent and formed his own production company, International Pictures, with Leo Spitz, William Goetz, and Nunnally Johnson.
His Lou Gehrig line, "Today, I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth.
That year, Cooper appeared for the first time on the ''Motion Picture Herald'' exhibitor's poll of top ten film personalities, where he would remain for the next twenty-three years.
Paramount brought suit against Goldwyn and Cooper, and the court ruled that Cooper's new Goldwyn contract afforded the actor sufficient time to also honor his Paramount agreement.
Critics singled out Cooper as a "dynamic new personality" and future star.
In 1933, after making ''Today We Live'' with Joan Crawford and ''One Sunday Afternoon'' with Fay Wray, Cooper appeared in the Ernst Lubitsch comedy film ''Design for Living'', based on the successful Noël Coward play.
He received the last rites on May 12. Cooper died quietly the following day, Saturday, May 13, 1961, at 12:47 pm, less than a week after his sixtieth birthday.
Cooper later admitted, "It was one of the best roles ever offered in Hollywood ...
Cooper was producer David O. Selznick's first choice for the part.
Cooper's social life generally centered on sports, outdoor activities, and dinner parties with his family and friends from the film industry, including directors Henry Hathaway, Howard Hawks, William Wellman, and Fred Zinnemann, and actors Joel McCrea, James Stewart, Barbara Stanwyck, and Robert Taylor.
In his final films, Cooper played non-violent characters searching for redemption in films such as ''Friendly Persuasion'' (1956) and ''Man of the West'' (1958).
Cooper's heroic screen image changed with each period of his career.
On April 14, 1960, Cooper underwent surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston for prostate cancer after it had metastasized to his colon.
Like her father, she developed a love for art and drawing.
Despite Richard Boleslawski's imaginative direction and George J. Folsey's lavish cinematography, the film did poorly at the box office.
Despite the clever screenplay by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder, and solid performances by Cooper and Colbert, American audiences had trouble accepting Cooper in the role of a shallow philanderer.
He was a major movie star from the end of the silent film era through the end of the golden age of Classical Hollywood.
Sam Wood, who directed Cooper in four films, had similar observations about Cooper's performance in ''Pride of the Yankees'', noting, "What I thought was underplaying turned out to be just the right approach.
In the early 1930s, he expanded his heroic image to include more cautious characters in adventure films and dramas such as ''A Farewell to Arms'' (1932) and ''The Lives of a Bengal Lancer'' (1935).
As well as hunting, Cooper enjoyed riding, fishing, skiing, and later in life, scuba diving.
He also testified that he had rejected several scripts because he thought they were "tinged with communist ideas".
In 1948, after finishing work on ''The Fountainhead'', Cooper began an affair with actress Patricia Neal, his co-star.
Accepting his first Academy Award for Best Actor from his friend James Stewart, Cooper said, "It was Sergeant Alvin York who won this award.
His natural and authentic acting style appealed powerfully to both men and women, and his range of performances included roles in most major movie genres, including Westerns, war films, adventure films, drama films, crime films, romance films, comedy films, and romantic comedy films.
On February 27, after returning to Los Angeles, Cooper learned that he was dying.
Cooper moved back into their home in November 1953, and their formal reconciliation occurred in February 1954.
While Cooper received positive reviews, ''Variety'' and ''Films in Review'' felt he was too old for the part.
In a radio address that he paid for himself just prior to the election, Cooper said, "I disagree with the New Deal belief that the America all of us love is old and worn-out and finished—and has to borrow foreign notions that don't even seem to work any too well where they come from ... Our country is a young country that just has to make up its mind to be itself again."
I thought he was marvelous; the most underplaying and the most natural actor I ever worked with."
Some critics felt that Cooper was miscast, and that his dull, tight-lipped performance did not reflect Mitchell's dynamic and caustic personality.
In 1945, Cooper starred in and produced Stuart Heisler's Western comedy ''Along Came Jones'' with Loretta Young for International.
At the age of fifteen, Cooper injured his hip in a car accident and returned to the Seven-Bar-Nine ranch to recuperate by horseback riding at the recommendation of his doctor.
Cooper and Hemingway hiked through the snow together for the last time.
He was a strange actor because you'd look at him during a scene and you'd think ... this isn't going to be any good.
Sharing many of her parents' interests, she accompanied them on their travels and was often photographed with them.
The group often shared the same sparse living conditions and K-rations as the troops.
Cooper's twenty-year friendship with Ernest Hemingway began at Sun Valley in October 1940.
Bow was also responsible for getting Cooper a role in ''Wings'', which generated an enormous amount of fan mail for the young actor.
He fell ill again on May 31 and underwent further surgery at Lebanon Hospital in Los Angeles in early June to remove a malignant tumor from his large intestine.
In 1938, he appeared in Archie Mayo's biographical film ''The Adventures of Marco Polo''.
In the fall of 1938, Cooper appeared in H. C. Potter's romantic comedy ''The Cowboy and the Lady'' with Merle Oberon, about a sweet-natured rodeo cowboy who falls in love with the wealthy daughter of a presidential hopeful, believing her to be a poor, hard-working lady's maid.
After becoming a major star, his Western screen persona was replaced by a more cautious hero in adventure films and dramas (''A Farewell to Arms'').
Cooper began his career as a film extra and stunt rider and soon landed acting roles.
In 1922, Cooper enrolled in Grinnell College in Iowa to continue his art education.
His mother emigrated from Gillingham, Kent and married Charles in Montana.
He began attending church with them regularly, and met with their parish priest, who offered Cooper spiritual guidance.
A critical and box-office failure, Cooper referred to it as his "almost picture", saying, "It was almost exciting, and almost interesting.
Cooper became a major movie star in 1929 with the release of his first sound picture, ''The Virginian'', which was directed by Victor Fleming and co-starred Mary Brian and Walter Huston.
'''Gary Cooper''' (born '''Frank James Cooper'''; May 7, 1901 – May 13, 1961) was an American film actor known for his natural, authentic, and understated acting style and screen performances.
The film was barely profitable.
After establishing himself as a Western hero in his early silent films, Cooper became a movie star in 1929 with his first sound picture, ''The Virginian''.
The shows concluded with Cooper's moving recitation of Lou Gehrig's farewell speech.
In over half of his feature films, Cooper portrayed Westerners, soldiers, pilots, sailors, and explorers—all men of action.
Watch him inoculate the girl against cholera—the casual jab of the needle, and the dressing slapped on while he talks, as though a thousand arms had taught him where to stab and he doesn't have to think anymore."
His interest in art was inspired years earlier by the Western paintings of Charles Marion Russell and Frederic Remington.
Traveling on a B-24A Liberator bomber, the group toured the Cook Islands, Fiji, New Caledonia, Queensland, Brisbane—where General Douglas MacArthur told Cooper he was watching ''Sergeant York'' in a Manila theater when Japanese bombs began falling—New Guinea, Jayapura, and throughout the Solomon Islands.
The film received poor reviews, with the ''New York Daily News'' calling it "delightful nonsense", and Bosley Crowther, in ''The New York Times'', criticizing Cooper's "somewhat obvious and ridiculous clowning".
