According to UNRWA figures, there are 640 schools in Gaza:  383 government schools, 221 UNRWA schools and 36 private schools, serving a total of 441,452 students.
Primary exports are citrus and cut flowers, while primary imports are food, consumer goods, and construction materials.
It subsequently moved to Cairo and dissolved in 1959 by decree of Egyptian President Gamal Abdul Nasser.
Gaza residents also closed UNRWA's emergency department, social services office and ration stores.
Exports are now down to 2% of 2007 levels."
Egyptian security forces uncovered 60 tunnels in 2007.
At the same time, Israel increased its state of alert along the length of the Israel-Egypt Sinai border, and warned its citizens to leave Sinai "without delay."
Youth in Gaza are also arrested by security officers for wearing shorts and for showing their legs, which have been described by youth as embarrassing incidents, and one youth explained that "My saggy pants did not harm anyone."
After the dissolution of the All-Palestine Government in 1959, under the excuse of pan-Arabism, Egypt continued to occupy the Gaza Strip until 1967.
UNOCHA called on Israel to reduce restrictions on exports and the import of construction materials, and to lift the general ban on movement between Gaza and the West Bank via Israel.
The opening ceremony was held by the Islamic Society.
Most of the Gaza Strip administration funding comes from outside as an aid, with large portion delivered by UN organizations directly to education and food supply.
Following the 2013 Egyptian coup d'état, Egypt's military has destroyed most of the 1,200 tunnels which are used for smuggling food, weapons, and other goods to Gaza.
Because the Egyptian government restricted movement to and from the Gaza Strip, its inhabitants could not look elsewhere for gainful employment.
As agreed between Israel and the Palestinian Authority in the Oslo Accords, Israel has exclusive control over the airspace.
The EU considers Gaza to be occupied.
Of those funds, the major part is supported by the U.S. and the European Union.
From the time of the dissolution of the All-Palestine Government until 1967, the Gaza Strip was directly administered by an Egyptian military governor.
In November 2005, an "Agreement on Movement and Access" between Israel and the Palestinian Authority was brokered by then US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to improve Palestinian freedom of movement and economic activity in the Gaza Strip.
After the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza, the flow of a limited number of workers into Israel resumed, although Israel said it would reduce or end such permits due to the victory of Hamas in the 2006 parliamentary elections.
Israel captured the Gaza Strip from Egypt in the Six-Day War in 1967.
In 2009/2010, Israel expanded the buffer zone to 300 meters.
Mohammed Dormosh, the Army of Islam's leader, is known for his close relationships to the Hamas leadership.
The Rafah crossing remained closed into mid-February.
Per capita income (PPP) was estimated at US$3,100 in 2009, a position of 164th in the world.
Egypt had attempted for a while to stop the use of underground tunnels for delivery of Egyptian fuel purchased by Palestinian authorities, and had severely reduced supply through the tunnel network.
In July 2007, after winning the 2006 Palestinian legislative election, Hamas became the elected government.
Ongoing violence prompted fear that it could bring the end of the Fatah-Hamas coalition government, and possibly the end of the Palestinian authority.
and security-related ramifications of the high population density and overcrowding are
Environmental problems include desertification; salination of fresh water; sewage treatment; water-borne diseases; soil degradation; and depletion and contamination of underground water resources.
Despite plans under the Oslo Peace Accords to expand the port, it has been under a blockade since Hamas was elected as a majority party in the 2006 elections.
In 2011, Salafists abducted and murdered a pro-Palestinian Italian activist, Vittorio Arrigoni.
The conflict damaged or destroyed tens of thousands of homes, 15 of Gaza’s 27 hospitals and 43 of its 110 primary health care facilities, 800 water wells, 186 greenhouses, and nearly all of its 10,000 family farms; leaving 50,000 homeless, 400,000-500,000 without running water, one million without electricity, and resulting in acute food shortages.
Pursuant to the Oslo Accords signed in 1993, the Palestinian Authority became the administrative body that governed Palestinian population centers while Israel maintained control of the airspace, territorial waters and border crossings with the exception of the land border with Egypt which is controlled by Egypt.
Egypt never annexed the Gaza Strip, but instead treated it as a controlled territory and administered it through a military governor.
In 2001, and even more so in early 2002, internal turmoil and Israeli military measures led to widespread business closures and a sharp drop in GDP.
In 2014, the EU's opinion was: "Today, Gaza is facing a dangerous and pressing humanitarian and economic situation with power outages across Gaza for up to 16 hours a day and, as a consequence, the closure of sewage pumping operations, reduced access to clean water; a reduction in medical supplies and equipment; the cessation of imports of construction materials; rising unemployment, rising prices and increased food insecurity.
On September 25, 2014, Hamas agreed to let the Palestinian Authority resume control over the Gaza Strip and its border crossings with Egypt and Israel.
Insecurity in obtaining sufficient food as of 2016 affects roughly 70% of Gaza households, as the number of people requiring assistance from UN agencies has risen from 72,000 in 2000, to 800,000 in 2014
Israel imposed a blockade, and the only goods permitted into the Strip through the land crossings were goods of a humanitarian nature, and these were permitted in limited quantities.
Aggression by Hamas led to Israeli military action on 1 March 2008, resulting in over 110 Palestinians being killed according to BBC News, as well as 2 Israeli soldiers.
Despite the 2005 Israeli disengagement from Gaza, the United Nations, international human rights organisations, and the majority of governments and legal commentators consider the territory to be still occupied by Israel, supported by additional restrictions placed on Gaza by Egypt.
Iran is a major financial supporter of the PIJ.
The Palestinian Authority demanded that Egypt deal only with the Authority in negotiations relating to borders.
There has also been successful resistance to attempts by local Hamas officials to impose Islamic dress on women.
Iran was the largest state supporter of Hamas, and the Muslim Brotherhood also gave support, but these political relationships have recently been disrupted following the Arab Spring by Iranian support for and the position of Hamas has declined as support diminishes.
Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip or Egypt were issued All-Palestine passports.
In late March 2012, Hamas began offering carpools for people to use Hamas state vehicles to get to work.
Environmental problems include desertification; salination of fresh water; water-borne disease; soil degradation; lack of adequate sewage treatment; and depletion and contamination of underground water resources.
In February 2008, 2008 Israel-Gaza conflict intensified, with rockets launched at Israeli cities.
349 Palestinians were killed in fighting between factions in 2007.
53% of women of reproductive age and 44% of children were found to be anemic.
A Gaza Seaport was planned to be built in Gaza with help from France and The Netherlands, but the project was bombed by Israel in 2001.
Due to continued rocket attacks including 50 in one day, on March 2008, air strikes and ground incursions by the IDF led to the deaths of over 110 Palestinians and extensive damage to Jabalia.
The Second Intifada led to a steep decline in the economy of Gaza, which was heavily reliant upon external markets.
The Yasser Arafat International Airport opened on 24 November 1998 after the signing of the Oslo II Accord and the Wye River Memorandum.
In 2012, two hospitals funded by Turkey and Saudi Arabia were under construction.
Islamic Jihad is the second largest militant Islamic group in Gaza with 8,000 fighters present in the Gaza strip.
Any external travel from Gaza requires cooperation from either Egypt or Israel.
After Hamas' June win, it ousted Fatah-linked officials from positions of power and authority (such as government positions, security services, universities, newspapers, etc.)
After the Hamas takeover of the Gaza Strip health conditions in Gaza Strip faced new challenges.
Although most of the area's inhabitants are tribal Bedouins, there has been a recent increase in al-Qaeda inspired global jihadi militant groups operating in the region.
Sunni Muslims make up the predominant part of the Palestinian population in the Gaza Strip.
On 5 June 2014 Fatah signed a unity agreement with Hamas political party.
$1.1 million was invested in an upscale restaurant, Roots, and plans were made to turn one of the Israeli settlements into a family resort.
Retiring Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said on 11 November 2008, "The question is not whether there will be a confrontation, but when it will take place, under what circumstances, and who will control these circumstances, who will dictate them, and who will know to exploit the time from the beginning of the ceasefire until the moment of confrontation in the best possible way.” On 14 November 2008, Israel blockaded its border with Gaza after a five-month ceasefire broke down.
The IDF strictly controlled travel within the area of the crossing points between Israel and the Gaza Strip, and sealed its border with Gaza.
However, there are no government laws imposing dress and other moral standards, and the Hamas education ministry reversed one effort to impose Islamic dress on students.
Gaza is dependent on Israel for its water, electricity, telecommunications, and other utilities.
Both sides declared that the boundary was not an international border.
Due to the crisis, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak ordered his troops to allow the Palestinians in but to verify that they did not bring weapons back across the border.
As a result, international transports (both trade and aid) had to go through Israel, which was hindered by the imposition of generalized border closures.
Israeli drones routinely patrol over Gaza.
Gaza Strip industries are generally small family businesses that produce textiles, soap, olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl souvenirs.
The highest point is Abu 'Awdah (Joz Abu 'Auda), at  above sea level.
The road is named after the 12th-century Ayyubid general Salah al-Din.
In spite of Israel's withdrawal from Gaza in 2005, the Hamas Government in Gaza considers Gaza as occupied territory.
It has been placed under an Israeli and U.S.-led international economic and political boycott from that time onwards.
A total of 1,100-1,400 Palestinians (295-926 civilians) and 13 Israelis were killed in the 22-day war.
The Gush Katif bloc of Israeli settlements used to exist on the sand dunes adjacent to Rafah and Khan Yunis, along the southwestern edge of the  Mediterranean coastline.
An extensive Israeli buffer zone within the Strip renders much land off-limits to Gaza's Palestinians.
The population is expected to increase to 2.1 million in 2020.
A brief civil war between the two groups had broken out in Gaza when, apparently under a U.S.-backed plan, Fatah contested Hamas’s administration.
In 2010, the UN estimated that 30 percent of the arable land in Gaza had been lost to the buffer zone.
Following the takeover of Gaza by Hamas, the territory has been subjected to a blockade, maintained by Israel and Egypt, with Israel arguing that it is necessary to impede Hamas from rearming and to restrict Palestinian rocket attacks and Egypt preventing Gaza residents from entering Egypt.
The deadliest clashes occurred in the northern Gaza Strip, where General Muhammed Gharib, a senior commander of the Fatah-dominated Preventive Security Force, died when a rocket hit his home.
The main agricultural products are olives, citrus, vegetables, Halal beef, and dairy products.
It has a  border with Israel, and an  border with Egypt, near the city of Rafah.
By that time, Gaza may be rendered unliveable, if present trends continue.
Following the 2005 Israeli disengagement from Gaza, an undefined buffer zone was maintained, including a no-fishing zone along the coast.
Israel also shipped 150,000 liters of diesel through the crossing, which was paid for by the Red Cross.
A buffer zone was also created on the Egyptian side of the Gaza–Egypt border.
Israel's use of comprehensive closures decreased over the next few years.
In early March 2012, the head of Gaza's energy authority stated that Egypt wanted to transfer energy via the Kerem Shalom Crossing, but he personally refused it to go through the "Zionist entity" (Israel) and insisted that Egypt transfer the fuel through the Rafah Crossing, although this crossing is not equipped to handle the half-million liters needed each day.
This downturn was attributed to Israeli closure policies and, to a lesser extent, corruption and mismanagement by Yasser Arafat.
), the 13th highest in the world, and is often referred to as overcrowded.
On January 2012, some diplomatic sources said that Turkey promised to provide Haniyeh's Gaza Strip administration with $300 million to support its annual budget.
A barrier on the Gaza Strip-Egypt border was constructed starting in 2004.
According to Hamas, the deliveries to the Presidential Guard were intended to instigate sedition (against Hamas), while withholding money and assistance from the Palestinian people.
Foreign Affairs Minister of Israel Tzipi Livni stated in January 2008: "Israel got out of Gaza.
After a round of tit-for-tat arrests between Fatah and Hamas in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, the Hilles clan from Gaza were relocated to Jericho on 4 August 2008.
Fighting spread in the Gaza Strip, with both factions attacking vehicles and facilities of the other side.
In January and February 2011, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) assessed measures taken to ease the blockade and concluded that they were helpful but not sufficient to improve the lives of the local inhabitants.
In May 2007, new fighting broke out between the factions.
Gaza has an annual population growth rate of 2.91% (2014 est.
PNA security forces in the West Bank arrested a number of Hamas members.
Following a breakdown in an Egyptian-brokered truce, Israel launched an air strike which destroyed a building used by Hamas.
In the Palestinian parliamentary elections held on 25 January 2006, Hamas won a plurality of 42.9% of the total vote and 74 out of 132 total seats (56%).
In 2012, Hamas leader Mahmoud Zahar said that Gaza's economic situation has improved and Gaza has become self-reliant "in several aspects except petroleum and electricity" despite Israel's blockade.
In April 2012, the issue was resolved as certain amounts of fuel were supplied with the involvement of the Red Cross, after the Palestinian Authority and Hamas reached a deal.
It is the reenactment, under a religious guise, of the experience of other totalitarian regimes and dictatorships."
In 2015, a Gazan woman was not allowed to travel through Israel to Jordan on her way to her own wedding.
A diplomatic source told Reuters that Iran had funded Hamas in the past with up to $300 million per year, but the flow of money had not been regular in 2011.
The Israeli government uses economic means to pressure Hamas.
On 23 January 2008, after months of preparation during which the steel reinforcement of the border barrier was weakened, Hamas destroyed several parts of the wall dividing Gaza and Egypt in the town of Rafah.
The reshuffle of the previous government was approved by Gaza-based Hamas MPs from the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) or parliament.
Ahmed Abu Al-Amreen of the Hamas-run Energy Authority refused it on the grounds that the crossing is operated by Israel and Hamas' fierce opposition to the existence of Israel.
While the import of food is restricted through the Gaza blockade, the Israeli military destroys agricultural crops by spraying toxic chemicals over the Gazan lands, using aircraft flying over the border zone.
Hamas officials denied having any plans to impose Islamic law.
Salah al-Din Road (also known as the Salah ad-Deen Highway) is the main highway of the Gaza Strip and extends over , spanning the entire length of the territory from the Rafah Crossing in the south to the Erez Crossing in the north.
Much of the Strip (except for the settlement blocs and military areas) came under Palestinian control.
Khan Yunis is located  northeast of Rafah, and several towns around Deir el-Balah are located along the coast between it and Gaza City.
The people of Gaza still suffer from the loss of these facilities and homes, especially since they have great challenges to rebuild them.
Israeli human rights group B'Tselem estimated that 45 of those killed were not involved in hostilities, and 15 were minors.
The Israeli forces left Gaza City and other urban areas, leaving the new Palestinian Authority to administer and police those areas.
The Arab League accused Israel of waging a financial war.
In January 2008, Israel curtailed travel from Gaza, the entry of goods, and cut fuel supplies, resulting in power shortages.
Egypt cannot ship diesel fuel to Gaza directly through the Rafah crossing point, because it is limited to the movement of individuals.
In 6 months, however, 11 Palestinians civilians, including four children, had been killed by Israeli fire and at least 70 Palestinian civilians were injured in the same period, including at least 49 who were working collecting rubble and scrap metal.
The study found that 17.5% of children aged 6–59 months suffered from chronic malnutrition.
In January 2007, fighting erupted between Hamas and Fatah.
According to Israel, between the Hamas takeover and the end of January 2008, 697 rockets and 822 mortar bombs were fired at Israeli towns.
Palestinian medical staff claimed at least 434 Palestinians were killed, and at least 2,800 wounded, consisting of many civilians and an unknown number of Hamas members, in the first five days of Israeli strikes on Gaza.
The final status of the Gaza Strip, and other relations between Israel and Palestinians, was not dealt with in the treaty.
During the Suez Crisis (1956), the Gaza Strip and the Sinai Peninsula were occupied by Israeli troops, who withdrew under international pressure.
The rest were demolished by the departing settlers before there were offered a compensation as an inducement to leave them behind.
Due to the Israeli and Egyptian border closures and the Israeli sea and air blockade, the population is not free to leave or enter the Gaza Strip, nor allowed to freely import or export goods.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas agreed with the destruction of smuggling tunnels by flooding them, and then punishing the owners of the houses that contained entrances to the tunnels, including demolishing their houses, arguing that the tunnels had produced 1,800 millionaires, and were used for smuggling weapons, drugs, cash, and equipment for forging documents.
However, the failure of Hamas to lift the Israeli blockade of Gaza despite thousands of casualties and much destruction during 2008-9 and 2014 wars has weakened Hamas's support and led some in Hamas to be concerned about the possibility of defections to the Salafist "Islamic State".
The '''Gaza Strip''' (; '''' ), or simply '''Gaza''', is a small self-governing Palestinian territory on the eastern coast of the Mediterranean Sea, that borders Egypt on the southwest for  and Israel on the east and north along a  border.
Among other things, it caused Israeli commercial enterprises like banks and fuel companies to stop doing business with the Gaza Strip.
Israel has alternately restricted or allowed goods and people to cross the terrestrial border and handles vicariously the movement of goods into and out of Gaza by air and sea.
The Gaza Strip is largely dependent on water from Wadi Gaza, which also supplies Israel.
Under its terms, the Rafah crossing with Egypt was to be reopened, with transits monitored by the Palestinian National Authority and the European Union.
Israel largely provides for Gaza's water supply, electricity, and communications infrastructure.
Most of the Gaza GDP comes as foreign humanitarian and direct economic support.
In 2005, Israel withdrew from the Gaza Strip under their unilateral disengagement plan.
In 2014, following reconciliation talks, Hamas and Fatah formed a Palestinian unity government within the West Bank and Gaza.
In June 2011, some Gazans, upset that UNRWA did not rebuild their homes that were lost in the Second Intifada, blocked UNRWA from performing its services and shut down UNRWA's summer camps.
In the aftermath of the Gaza War, a series of violent acts killed 54 Palestinians, while hundreds have claimed they were tortured.
Human Rights Watch has advised the UN Human Rights Council that it (and others) consider Israel to be the occupying power of the Gaza Strip because Israel controls Gaza Strip's airspace, territorial waters and controls the movement of people or goods in or out of Gaza by air or sea.
Israel maintains direct external control over Gaza and indirect control over life within Gaza: it controls Gaza's air and maritime space, and six of Gaza's seven land crossings.
They view the group as a terrorist organization, and have pressured Hamas to recognize Israel, renounce violence, and make good on past agreements.
According to Sara Roy, one senior IDF officer told an UNWRA official in 2015 that Israel's policy towards the Gaza Strip consisted of: "No development, no prosperity, no humanitarian crisis.”
One legislator stated that "what you are seeing are incidents, not policy" and that "we believe in persuasion".
In Gaza, there are hospitals and additional healthcare facilities.
The southern border with Egypt continued to be the international border which had been drawn in 1906 between the Ottoman Empire and the British Empire.
"Payment has been in suspension since August," said the source.
Jewish enterprises shut down, work relationships were severed, and job opportunities in Israel dried up.
In September 1995, Israel and the PLO signed a second peace agreement, extending the Palestinian Authority to most West Bank towns.
The amount of electricity has consistently been limited to 120 megawatts, which is the amount Israel undertook to sell to Gaza pursuant to the Oslo Accords.
The government was accused of being little more than a façade for Egyptian control, with negligible independent funding or influence.
Associated Press reporter Ibrahim Barzak wrote an eyewitness account stating: "Today I have seen people shot before my eyes, I heard the screams of terrified women and children in a burning building, and I argued with gunmen who wanted to take over my home.
The closure has effectively cut off access for exports to traditional markets in Israel, transfers to the West Bank and has severely restricted imports.
In March 2010 the department had seen 55 cases that year, compared to 20 to 25 cases normally seen in an entire year.According to the United Nations Development Programme, the average life expectancy in the Gaza Strip is 72.
Israel, the United States, Canada, and the European Union have frozen all funds to the Palestinian government after the formation of a Hamas-controlled government after its democratic victory in the 2006 Palestinian legislative election.
In December 2015, Egypt asked Israel not to  allow Turkish aid to get through to the Gaza Strip.
On April 2012, the Hamas government in Gaza approved its budget for 2012, which was up 25 percent year-on-year over 2011 budget, indicating that donors, including Iran, benefactors in the Islamic world, and Palestinian expatriates, are still heavily funding the movement.
The EU Border Monitors initially monitored the border because Hamas guaranteed their safety, but they later fled.
Many Gazans began to wonder how these vehicles have fuel themselves, as diesel was completely unavailable in Gaza, ambulances could no longer be used, but Hamas government officials still had fuel for their own cars.
Article V of the Agreement declared that the demarcation line was not to be an international border.
On 22 September 1948, towards the end of the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, the All-Palestine Government was proclaimed in the Egyptian-occupied Gaza City by the Arab League.
Egypt has alternately restricted or allowed goods and people to cross that terrestrial border.
Moussa and 19 other people were killed when Hamas forces stormed his mosque and house.
Egypt controls Gaza Strip's southern border, under an agreement between it and Israel.
In October 2012 Gaza youth complained that security officers had obstructed their freedom to wear saggy pants and to have haircuts of their own choosing, and that they faced being arrested.
Among other things, the treaty provided for the withdrawal by Israel of its armed forces and civilians from the Sinai Peninsula, which Israel had captured during the Six-Day War.
I have seen a lot in my years as a journalist in Gaza, but this is the worst it's been."
After the 2006 elections, fighting broke out between Fatah and Hamas, which Hamas won in the Gaza Strip on 14 June 2007.
In 2005, after the Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, Gaza businessmen envisaged a "magnificent future."
All-Palestine in the Gaza Strip was managed under the military authority of Egypt, functioning as a puppet state, until it officially merged into the United Arab Republic and dissolved in 1959.
The Gaza Strip has rudimentary land line telephone service provided by an open-wire system, as well as extensive mobile telephone services provided by PalTel (Jawwal) and Israeli providers such as Cellcom.
With the Agreement on Movement and Access, known as the Rafah Agreement, in 2005, Israel ended its presence in the Philadelphi Route and transferred responsibility for security arrangements to Egypt and the PA under the supervision of the EU.
Despite multiple reports from within the Strip that food and other essentials were in short supply, Israel said that Gaza had enough food and energy supplies for weeks.
By 14 June, Hamas fully controlled the Gaza Strip.
In response, the spokesman for the Israeli embassy in London said, "The people of Gaza are the prisoners of the terrorist organization Hamas.
The organization also observed chronic malnutrition in children under five "is not improving and may be deteriorating."
The current rate of trucks entering Gaza through Kerem Shalom is 250 trucks per day.
In 2013 Israel and Qatar brought Gaza’s lone power plant back to life for the first time in seven weeks, bringing relief to the Palestinian coastal enclave where a lack of cheap fuel has contributed to the overflow of raw sewage, 21-hour blackouts and flooding after a ferocious winter storm.
In 2014, scores of homes in Rafah were destroyed for the buffer zone.
In 2009, a Salafist leader, Abdul Latif Moussa, declared an Islamic emirate in the town of Rafah, on Gaza's southern border.
In June 2013, the Islamic Jihad broke ties with Hamas leaders after Hamas police fatally shot the commander of Islamic Jihad's military wing.
Recently, natural gas was discovered.
The 1994 Gaza Jericho Agreement allows 20&nbsp;nautical miles, and the 2002 Bertini Commitment allows 12&nbsp;nautical miles.
Notable artists include painters Ismail Ashour, Shafiq Redwan, Bashir Senwar, Majed Shalla, Fayez Sersawi, Abdul Rahman al Muzayan and Ismail Shammout, and media artists Taysir Batniji (who lives in France) and Laila al Shawa (who lives in London).
On 25 November 2008, Israel closed its cargo crossing with Gaza after Qassam rockets were fired into its territory.
In 2007, Hamas expelled the rival party Fatah from Gaza.
The Israeli army makes use of drones, which can launch precise missiles.
When this collapsed under joint Israeli and United States pressure, the Palestinian Authority instituted a non-Hamas government in the West Bank while Hamas formed a government on its own in Gaza.
Israel began a ground invasion of the Gaza Strip on 3 January 2009.
