Gear components are mounted with a backlash capability similar to other mechanical gearings.
Many gears are done when they leave the mold (including injection molded plastic and die cast metal gears), but powdered metal gears require sintering and sand castings or investment castings require gear cutting or other machining to finish them.
; Angular pitch, θN, τ : Angle subtended by the circular pitch, usually expressed in radians.
Torque can be converted to linear force by meshing a rack with a pinion: the pinion turns; the rack moves in a straight line.
Spiral bevel gears have the same advantages and disadvantages relative to their straight-cut cousins as helical gears do to spur gears.
Several other helix parameters can be viewed either in the normal or transverse planes.
The teeth on the two meshing gears all have the same shape.
The pitch surfaces appear conical but, to compensate for the offset shaft, are in fact hyperboloids of revolution.
; Clearance : Distance between the root circle of a gear and the addendum circle of its mate.
; Line of action, pressure line : Line along which the force between two meshing gear teeth is directed.
It has the same direction as the force vector.
This arrangement cancels out the net axial thrust, since each half of the gear thrusts in the opposite direction resulting in a net axial force of zero.
In both arrangements, the total (or ''net'') axial force on each gear is zero when the gears are aligned correctly.
If the gear in a worm-and-gear set is an ordinary helical gear only a single point of contact is achieved.
For bevel gears it is a cone.
In a stable orientation, the helical gear faces are oriented so that each axial force is directed toward the center of the gear.
; Measurement over pins : Measurement of the distance taken over a pin positioned in a tooth space and a reference surface.
If the direction of rotation is reversed, the direction of the axial thrusts is also reversed, so a stable configuration becomes unstable, and ''vice versa''.
Sometimes used in clocks, the ''cage gear'' should always be driven by a gearwheel, not used as the driver.
Thus, if the pitch diameter of a gear is 40&nbsp;mm and the number of teeth 20, the module is 2, which means that there are 2&nbsp;mm of pitch diameter for each tooth.
The joint rotates like mechanical gears and synchronizes Issus's legs when it jumps.
In gearing of other types, axial pitch may be confined to the pitch surface and may be a circular measurement.
; Arc of approach, Qa : The arc of the pitch circle through which a tooth profile moves from its beginning of contact until the point of contact arrives at the pitch point.
A worm gear is a species of helical gear, but its helix angle is usually somewhat large (close to 90 degrees) and its body is usually fairly long in the axial direction.
The units of module are customarily millimeters; an ''English Module'' is sometimes used with the units of inches.
Though the teeth are not straight-sided (but usually of special form to achieve a constant drive ratio, mainly involute but less commonly cycloidal), the edge of each tooth is straight and aligned parallel to the axis of rotation.
The usual screw nomenclature applies: a one-toothed worm is called ''single thread'' or ''single start''; a worm with more than one tooth is called ''multiple thread'' or ''multiple start''.
A crown gear can only mesh accurately with another bevel gear, although crown gears are sometimes seen meshing with spur gears.
A crown gear is also sometimes meshed with an escapement such as found in mechanical clocks.
A gear can mesh with a linear toothed part, called a rack, thereby producing translation instead of rotation.
The American Gear Manufacturers Association was organized in 1916 to formulate quality standards for gear inspection to reduce noise from automotive timing gears; in 1993 AGMA assumed leadership of the ISO committee governing international standards for gearing.
In general, the line of action changes from moment to moment during the period of engagement of a pair of teeth.
There are several outcomes of gear shifting in motor vehicles.
For both possible rotational directions, there exist two possible arrangements for the oppositely-oriented helical gears or gear faces.
''Crown gears'' or ''contrate gears'' are a particular form of bevel gear whose teeth project at right angles to the plane of the wheel; in their orientation the teeth resemble the points on a crown.
If medium to high power transmission is desired, the tooth shape of the gear is modified to achieve more intimate contact by making both gears partially envelop each other.
Cycloidal gears only work properly if the center spacing is exactly right.
It is the summation of the paths of action in all sections of the engaging teeth.
The module, just like the circular pitch, can be used for all types of cogs, not just evolvent based straight cogs.
These gears mesh together correctly only if fitted to parallel shafts.
An undercut is a condition in generated gear teeth when any part of the fillet curve lies inside of a line drawn tangent to the working profile at its point of juncture with the fillet.
; Whole depth,  : The distance from the top of the tooth to the root; it is equal to addendum plus dedendum or to working depth plus clearance.
Bringing hypoid gears to market for mass-production applications was an engineering improvement of the 1920s.
A ''cage gear'', also called a ''lantern gear'' or ''lantern pinion'' has cylindrical rods for teeth, parallel to the axle and arranged in a circle around it, much as the bars on a round bird cage or lantern.
Could be measured in teeth per inch or teeth per centimeter, but conventionally has units of per inch of diameter.
File:Base pitch.jpg|Base pitch relationships
; Diametral pitch (transverse), ''P''d : Ratio of the number of teeth to the standard pitch diameter in inches.
; Surface of action : The imaginary surface in which contact occurs between two engaging tooth surfaces.
Corresponding sides of involute gear teeth are parallel curves, and the base pitch is the constant and fundamental distance between them along a common normal in a transverse plane.
Manufacturers have used plastic gears to reduce costs in consumer items including copy machines, optical storage devices, cheap dynamos, consumer audio equipment, servo motors, and printers.
A properly designed plastic gear can replace steel in many cases because it has many desirable properties, including dirt tolerance, low speed meshing, the ability to "skip" quite well and the ability to be made with materials that don't need additional lubrication.
Since the gear is curved, this angling makes the tooth shape a segment of a helix.
When two bevel gears mesh, their imaginary vertices must occupy the same point.
:  in English units
A ''harmonic gear'' is a specialized gearing mechanism often used in industrial motion control, robotics and aerospace for its advantages over traditional gearing systems, including lack of backlash, compactness and high gear ratios.
The angled teeth engage more gradually than do spur gear teeth, causing them to run more smoothly and quietly.
In a simple way, it can be defined as a measure of the average number of teeth in contact during the period during which a tooth comes and goes out of contact with the mating gear.
Hypoid gears resemble spiral bevel gears except the shaft axes do not intersect.
All traditional bevel gear generators (like Gleason, Klingelnberg, Heidenreich & Harbeck, WMW Modul) manufacture bevel gears with an octoidal tooth profile.
In cases where driver and follower are proximal, gears also have an advantage over other drives in the reduced number of parts required; the downside is that gears are more expensive to manufacture and their lubrication requirements may impose a higher operating cost per hour.
In cases of severe jamming (as of the paper in a printer), the plastic gear teeth would be torn free of their substrate, allowing the drive mechanism to then spin freely (instead of damaging itself by straining against the jam).
In the illustration, the sun is yellow, the planet red, the reciprocating arm is blue, the flywheel is green and the driveshaft is gray.
When gear dimensions are in the metric system the pitch specification is generally in terms of ''module'' or ''modulus'', which is effectively a length measurement across the ''pitch diameter''.
A pair of gears could be designed to have zero backlash, but this would presuppose perfection in manufacturing, uniform thermal expansion characteristics throughout the system, and no lubricant.
Examples are sun and planet gearing (see below), cycloidal drive, and mechanical differentials.
; Pressure angle,  : The complement of the angle between the direction that the teeth exert force on each other, and the line joining the centers of the two gears.
This is done by making both concave and joining them at a saddle point; this is called a '''cone-drive''' or "Double enveloping".
Particularly if the lead angle is small, the gear's teeth may simply lock against the worm's teeth, because the force component circumferential to the worm is not sufficient to overcome friction.
; Face contact ratio, mF, εβ : The contact ratio in an axial plane, or the ratio of the face width to the axial pitch.
Module is a direct dimension, unlike diametral pitch, which is an inverse dimension ("threads per inch").
Another advantage of the use of plastics, formerly (such as in the 1980s), was the reduction of repair costs for certain expensive machines.
Spur gears are excellent at moderate speeds but tend to be noisy at high speeds.
An advantage of gears is that the teeth of a gear prevent slippage.
Therefore, gear pairs are designed to have some backlash.
No axial thrust is created by the tooth loads.
; Arc of action, Qt : The arc of the pitch circle through which a tooth profile moves from the beginning to the end of contact with a mating profile.
As long as the measuring device has parallel measuring surfaces that contact on an unmodified portion of the involute, the measurement wis along a line tangent to the base cylinder.
Such a mechanism is used in automobiles to convert the rotation of the steering wheel into the left-to-right motion of the tie rod(s).
In the nineteenth century, James Clerk Maxwell developed a model of electromagnetism in which magnetic field lines were rotating tubes of incompressible fluid.
; Path of contact: The curve on either tooth surface along which theoretical single point contact occurs during the engagement of gears with crowned tooth surfaces or gears that normally engage with only single point contact.
A double helical gear can be thought of as two mirrored helical gears joined together.
The Three Wave Hypothesis compares the wave–particle duality to a bevel gear.
With undercut the fillet curve intersects the working profile.
It is used to determine tooth thickness.
In an unstable orientation, both axial forces are directed away from the center of the gear.
Maxwell used a gear wheel and called it an "idle wheel" to explain the electric current as a rotation of particles in opposite directions to that of the rotating field lines.
''Spur gears'' or ''straight-cut gears'' are the simplest type of gear.
Bevel gears with equal numbers of teeth and shaft axes at 90 degrees are called ''miter gears''.
More recently, quantum physics uses "quantum gears" in their model.
; Length of action: The distance on the line of action through which the point of contact moves during the action of the tooth profile.
There are a great many tooth profiles that provides a constant velocity ratio.
Backlash can also be provided by moving the gears further apart.
The term axial pitch is preferred to the term linear pitch.
Two or more meshing gears, working in a sequence, are called a gear train or a ''transmission''.
: degrees or  radians
; Limit diameter : Diameter on a gear at which the line of action intersects the maximum (or minimum for internal pinion) addendum circle of the mating gear.
This arrangement can remove the need for thrust bearings.
These attributes give it screw like qualities.
Modern physics adopted the gear model in different ways.
; Pitch diameter, d : A predefined diametral position on the gear where the circular tooth thickness, pressure angle and helix angles are defined.
The radius of the base circle is somewhat smaller than that of the pitch circle
Double helical gears overcome the problem of axial thrust presented by single helical gears by using two sets of teeth that are set in a V shape.
This method has been superseded, in more recent designs, by the use of clutches and torque- or current-limited motors.
While a regular gear is optimized to transmit torque to another engaged member with minimum noise and wear and maximum efficiency, a non-circular gear's main objective might be ratio variations, axle displacement oscillations and more.
File:Principal pitches.jpg|Principal pitches
Using ''inch'' measurements, standard diametral pitch values with units of "per inch" are chosen; the ''diametral pitch'' is the number of teeth on a gear of one inch pitch diameter.
A group of gears can serve as a model for several different systems, such as an artificially constructed nanomechanical device or a group of ring molecules.
Domestic American clock movements often used them.
: where a is the axis distance, z1 and z2 are the number of cogs (teeth) for each of the two wheels (gears).
The standard pitch diameter is a basic dimension and cannot be measured, but is a location where other measurements are made.
Conversely, an ''internal gear'' is one with the teeth formed on the inner surface of a cylinder or cone.
When the diametral pitch, DP, is in English units,
In transmissions with multiple gear ratios—such as bicycles, motorcycles, and cars—the term "gear" as in "first gear" refers to a gear ratio rather than an actual physical gear.
; Circular pitch, ''p'' : Arc distance along a specified pitch circle or pitch line between corresponding profiles of adjacent teeth.
The leading edges of the teeth are not parallel to the axis of rotation, but are set at an angle.
Quite commonly, helical gears are used with the helix angle of one having the negative of the helix angle of the other; such a pair might also be referred to as having a right-handed helix and a left-handed helix of equal angles.
Plastic is commonly used where cost or weight is a concern.
; Normal circular pitch, ''p''n, ''p''e : Circular pitch in the normal plane, and also the length of the arc along the normal pitch helix between helical teeth or threads.
The axial pitch of a helical worm and the circular pitch of its worm gear are the same.
; Base pitch, normal pitch,  : In involute gears, distance from one face of a tooth to the corresponding face of an adjacent tooth on the same gear, measured along the base circle
The term module is understood to mean the pitch diameter in millimeters divided by the number of teeth.
It exists because there is always some gap between the trailing face of the driving tooth and the leading face of the tooth behind it on the driven gear, and that gap must be closed before force can be transferred in the new direction.
Common applications include textile machines, potentiometers and continuously variable transmissions.
; Angle of action : Angle with vertex at the gear center, one leg on the point where mating teeth first make contact, the other leg on the point where they disengage.
They can be used in configurations that are not possible for gears that must be physically touching and can operate with a non-metallic barrier completely separating the driving force from the load.
Worm-and-gear sets are a simple and compact way to achieve a high torque, low speed gear ratio.
; Interference : Contact between teeth other than at the intended parts of their surfaces
Their shaft axes also intersect at this point, forming an arbitrary non-straight angle between the shafts.
(This is the case with the gears in the illustration above: they mesh correctly in the crossed configuration: for the parallel configuration, one of the helix angles should be reversed.
; Zone of action (contact zone) : For involute, parallel-axis gears with either spur or helical teeth, is the rectangular area in the plane of action bounded by the length of action and the effective face width.
When the module is based upon inch measurements, it is known as the ''English module'' to avoid confusion with the metric module.
The gear mechanism was previously considered exclusively artificial—but in 2013, scientists from the University of Cambridge announced their discovery that the juvenile form of a common insect ''Issus'' (species Issus coleoptratus), found in many European gardens, has a gear-like mechanism in its hind legs.
It is usually provided by reducing the tooth thickness of each gear by half the desired gap distance.
The backlash of a gear train equals the sum of the backlash of each pair of gears, so in long trains backlash can become a problem.
; Axis : Axis of revolution of the gear; center line of the shaft.
The ''cage gear'' was not initially favoured by conservative clock makers.
Non-circular gears are designed for special purposes.
A worm may have as few as one tooth.
Geared devices can change the speed, torque, and direction of a power source.
; Modified addendum teeth : Teeth of engaging gears, one or both of which have non-standard addendum.
The gears in a transmission are analogous to the wheels in a crossed belt pulley system.
For involute gears, the teeth always exert force along the line of action, which, for involute gears, is a straight line; and thus, for involute gears, the pressure angle is constant.
The most common form of gear cutting is hobbing, but gear shaping, milling, and broaching also exist.
The former refers to when the shafts are parallel to each other; this is the most common orientation.
GCD(16,25)=1; If a 1:1 gear ratio is desired a relatively prime gear may be inserted in between the two gears; this maintains the 1:1 ratio but reverses the gear direction; a second relatively prime gear could also be inserted to restore the original rotational direction while maintaining uniform wear with all 4 gears in this case.
The definite velocity ratio that teeth give gears provides an advantage over other drives (such as traction drives and V-belts) in precision machines such as watches that depend upon an exact velocity ratio.
Undercut may be deliberately introduced to facilitate finishing operations.
; Full-depth teeth : Teeth in which the working depth equals 2.000 divided by the normal diametral pitch.
Without undercut the fillet curve and the working profile have a common tangent.
The gears illustrated cannot mesh with the shafts parallel.)
It is the ratio of the angle of action to the angular pitch.
: The distance between the two axis becomes
The preferred standard module values are 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 16, 20, 25, 32, 40 and 50.
; Operating pitch diameters : Diameters determined from the number of teeth and the center distance at which gears operate.
Numerous nonferrous alloys, cast irons, powder-metallurgy and plastics are used in the manufacture of gears.
For instance, the gear can be split along a plane perpendicular to the axis, one half fixed to the shaft in the usual manner, the other half placed alongside it, free to rotate about the shaft, but with springs between the two halves providing relative torque between them, so that one achieves, in effect, a single gear with expanding teeth.
Since then, the involute has largely superseded it, particularly in drive train applications.
: where m is the module and p the circular pitch.
In many cases, given an arbitrary tooth shape, it is possible to develop a tooth profile for the mating gear that provides a constant velocity ratio.
This is also referred to as the start of active profile, the start of contact, the end of contact, or the end of active profile.
Depending on which side the shaft is offset to, relative to the angling of the teeth, contact between hypoid gear teeth may be even smoother and more gradual than with spiral bevel gear teeth, but also have a sliding action along the meshing teeth as it rotates and therefore usually require some of the most viscous types of gear oil to avoid it being extruded from the mating tooth faces, the oil is normally designated HP (for hypoid) followed by a number denoting the viscosity.
Pitch is a property associated with linear dimensions and so differs whether the standard values are in the Imperial (inch) or Metric systems.
However, double helical gears are more difficult to manufacture due to their more complicated shape.
This use of "sacrificial" gear teeth avoided destroying the much more expensive motor and related parts.
A bevel gear is shaped like a right circular cone with most of its tip cut off.
It became popular in turret clocks where dirty working conditions were most commonplace.
*  3D Animation of helical gears (parallel axis)
For involute gears it is most directly obtained as the ratio of the length of action to the base pitch.
: in metric units or  in imperial units.
A disadvantage of helical gears is a resultant thrust along the axis of the gear, which must be accommodated by appropriate thrust bearings, and a greater degree of sliding friction between the meshing teeth—often addressed with additives in the lubricant.
Furthermore, the "involute bevel gear sets" cause more noise.
Worm gears can be right or left-handed, following the long-established practice for screw threads.
The magnetic coupling can transmit force into a hermetically sealed enclosure without using a radial shaft seal, which may leak.
They consist of a cylinder or disk with teeth projecting radially.
Although gears can be made with any pitch, for convenience and interchangeability standard pitches are frequently used.
For bevel gears, an internal gear is one with the pitch angle exceeding 90 degrees.
In the latter, the shafts are non-parallel, and in this configuration the gears are sometimes known as "skew gears".
A disadvantage is the potential for considerable sliding action, leading to low efficiency.
In the case of a large gear and a small pinion, however, the backlash is usually taken entirely off the gear and the pinion is given full sized teeth.
Where the module, m, is in metric units
IMPORTANT: For 5-axis milled bevel gear sets it is important to choose the same calculation / layout like the conventional manufacturing method.
The angle between the shafts can be anything except zero or 180 degrees.
However, steels are most commonly used because of their high strength-to-weight ratio and low cost.
In the case of vehicle noise emissions, there are higher sound levels emitted when the vehicle is engaged in lower gears.
Backlash is the error in motion that occurs when gears change direction.
If that tooth persists for several turns around the helix, the worm appears, superficially, to have more than one tooth, but what one in fact sees is the same tooth reappearing at intervals along the length of the worm.
When two gears mesh, if one gear is bigger than the other, a mechanical advantage is produced, with the rotational speeds, and the torques, of the two gears differing in proportion to their diameters.
than the helical gears used for the high ratios.
; Outside diameter,  : Diameter of the gear, measured from the tops of the teeth.
It is a dimension measured along a line or curve in the transverse, normal, or axial directions.
; Arc of recess, Qr : The arc of the pitch circle through which a tooth profile moves from contact at the pitch point until contact ends.
In helical gears and worms, axial pitch has the same value at all diameters.
File:Tooth pitches.jpg|Tooth pitch
; Normal base pitch, ''p''N, ''p''bn :An involute helical gear is the base pitch in the normal plane.
A rack is a toothed bar or rod that can be thought of as a sector gear with an infinitely large radius of curvature.
A predefined diametral position on the gear where the circular tooth thickness, pressure angle and helix angles are defined.
Certain standard pitches such as ''1/10'' and ''1/20'' in inch measurements, which mesh with linear rack, are actually (linear) ''circular pitch'' values with units of "inches"
An even uniform gear wear is achieved by ensuring the tooth counts of the two gears meshing together are relatively prime to each other; this occurs when the greatest common divisor (GCD) of each gear tooth count equals 1, e.g.
Cage gears are more efficient than solid pinions, and dirt can fall through the rods rather than becoming trapped and increasing wear.
Cycloidal gears are still used in mechanical clocks.
