Historically, geisha did sometimes marry their clients, but marriage necessitated retirement, as there were never married geisha.
After the imperial court moved the capital to Heian-kyō (Kyoto) in 794 the conditions that would form Japanese Geisha culture began to emerge, as it became the home of a beauty-obsessed elite.
Marshall wrote that geisha's purpose was "to entertain their customer, be it by dancing, reciting verse, playing musical instruments, or engaging in light conversation.
A ''kimono'' can take from two to three years to complete, due to painting and embroidering.
Either must be regularly tended by highly skilled artisans.
A woman entering the geisha community does not have to begin as a maiko, having the opportunity to begin her career as a full geisha.
Another name for geisha is ''geiko'' (), which is usually used to refer to geisha from western Japan, which includes Kyoto.
(/ˈɡeɪʃə/; Japanese: ɡeːɕa), , or  are traditional Japanese female entertainers who act as hostesses and whose skills include performing various arts such as classical music, dance, games and conversation, mainly to entertain male customers.
This stage lasts only about a month or so.
The okasan makes arrangements through the geisha union office ( ''kenban''), which keeps each geisha's schedule and makes her appointments both for entertaining and for training.
In the 1920s, there were over 80,000 geisha in Japan, but today, there are far fewer.
If the maiko's head rolled off the support while she slept, rice would stick to the pomade in her hair.
Many modern geisha use wigs in their professional lives, while maiko use their natural hair.
These hairstyles are decorated with elaborate hair-combs and hairpins (kanzashi).
In her book ''Geisha, a Life'', Mineko Iwasaki said: "I lived in the karyukai during the 1960s and 1970s, a time when Japan was undergoing the radical transformation from a post-feudal to a modern society.
In 1944, the geisha world, including the teahouses, bars and geisha houses, was forced to close, and all employees were put to work in factories.
Now, girls must go to school until they are 15 years old and have graduated from middle school and then make the personal decision to train to become a geisha.
Gion Kōbu, Ponto-chō and Kamishichiken have the highest status; they are very expensive and are frequented by powerful businessmen and politicians (Gion Kobu is sometimes seen as having the very highest ranking).
The Tokyo ''hanamachi'' of Shimbashi, Asakusa and Kagurazaka are also well known.
In the 1680s, they were popular paid entertainers in the private homes of upper-class samurai, though many had turned to prostitution by the early 18th century.
Prostitutes posing as geisha often used this term to refer to their acts with customers.
The wording of this statute was the subject of controversy.
This practice was completely outlawed in 1959.
It is extremely disciplined, similar to t'ai chi.
The onee-san will teach her proper ways of serving tea, playing shamisen, dancing, casual conversation and more.
Maiko of Kyoto wear the obi tied in a style called "darari" (dangling obi), while Tokyo "hangyoku" wear it tied in various ways, including taiko musubi.
Her kimono is bright and colourful with an elaborately tied ''obi'' hanging down to her ankles.
, these geisha also serve beer in a beer garden at Kamishichiken Kaburenjo Theatre during summer months (July to early September); another geisha beer garden is available at the Gion Shinmonso ryokan in the Gion district.
Additional hairstyles are Ofuku, Katsuyama, Yakko-shimada, and Sakko.
In the seventeenth century and after the Meiji Restoration period, hair-combs were large and conspicuous, generally more ornate for higher-class women.
During the Edo period, courtesans undergoing mizuage were sponsored by a patron who had the right of taking their virginity.
After a maiko has been working for three years, she changes her make-up to a more subdued style.
Furthermore, Sheridan Prasso wrote that Americans had "an incorrect impression of the real geisha world, where geisha means "arts person" trained in music and dance, not in the art of sexual pleasure."
The geisha name also lost some status during this time because prostitutes began referring to themselves as "geisha girls" to American military men.
Such prostitutes often called themselves "geisha" in the company of foreign soldiers and even Japanese customers, thus leading to the confusion between the roles of the two.
The highly accomplished courtesans of these districts entertained their clients by dancing, singing, and playing music.
Modern geisha still live in traditional geisha houses called ''okiya'' in areas called ''hanamachi'' ( "flower towns"), particularly during their apprenticeship.
This repayment may continue after the maiko becomes a full-fledged geisha and only when her debts are settled is she permitted to move out to live and work independently.
There were many rumors that stated before the war, a maiko's virginity would be auctioned (the original "mizuage").
In the geisha society, women run everything.
Geisha wear raised wooden sandals, called ''geta'' while maiko wear a special wooden sandal known as ''okobo'' and wear only ''tabi'' (white split-toed socks) indoors.
A successful geisha can entertain her male customers with music, dance, and conversation.
Next the eyes and eyebrows are drawn in.
Without the impeccable business skills of the female tea house owners, the world of geisha would cease to exist.
This could happen after three to five years of her life as a ''maiko'' or ''hangyoku'', depending on at what age she debuted.
Along with the shamisen and the flute, geisha also learned to play a ''ko-tsuzumi'', a small, hourglass-shaped shoulder drum, and a large floor ''taiko'' (drum).
In the early stages of Japanese history, there were female entertainers: ''saburuko'' (serving girls) were mostly wandering girls whose families were displaced from struggles in the late 600s.
This illusion is of course more pronounced at a distance.
"The image of the geisha was formed during Japan's feudal past, and this is now the image they must keep in order to remain geisha".
The application of makeup is hard to perfect and is time-consuming.
For geisha over thirty, the heavy white make-up is only worn during those special dances that require it.
Apprentice geisha are called ''maiko'' (), (literally "dance child") or ''hangyoku'' (半玉), "half-jewel" (meaning that they were paid half of the wage of a full geisha), or by the more generic term ''o-shaku'' (), literally "one who pours (alcohol)".
Young women who wish to become geisha now most often begin their training after high school or even college.
''Geisha'' (; ), like all Japanese nouns, has no distinct singular or plural variants.
Some women would have sex with their male customers, whereas others would entertain strictly with their art forms.
Another notable event is that the geisha (including maiko) of the Kamishichiken district in northwest Kyoto serve tea to 3,000 guests on February 25 in an annual open-air tea ceremony (野点, ''nodate'') at the plum-blossom festival (梅花祭, ''baikasai'') at Kitano Tenman-gū shrine.
Following the Meiji Restoration and into the modern era, smaller and less conspicuous hair-combs became more popular.
The term geisha literally translates to mean "entertainer".
The only major role men play in geisha society is that of guest, though women sometimes take that role as well.
In the past, it has been common for women to wear their hair down in some periods and up in others.
The first is the formal arts training.
All the Kyoto hanamachi hold these annually (mostly in spring, with one exclusively in autumn), dating to the Kyoto exhibition of 1872, and there are many performances, with tickets being inexpensive, ranging from around 1500 yen to 4500 yen – top-price tickets also include an optional tea ceremony (tea and wagashi served by maiko) before the performance; see Kyoto hanamachi for a detailed listing.
Infrequently, men take contingent positions such as hair stylists, dressers (dressing a maiko requires considerable strength) and accountants, but men have a limited role in geisha society.
Crystallized sugar is then added to give the lips luster.
Isn't that what feminists are?
Traditionally, Geisha began their training at a young age.
It is still said that geisha inhabit a separate reality which they call the ''karyūkai'' or "the flower and willow world."
It has a very distinct, melancholy sound that is often accompanied by flute.
There were many different classifications and ranks of geisha.
Maiko of Pontochō will wear an additional six hairstyles leading up to the Sakko, including Umemodoki, Oshidori no Hina, Kikugasane, and Osafune.
A sluggish economy, declining interest in the traditional arts, the exclusive nature of the flower and willow world, and the expense of being entertained by geisha have all contributed to the tradition's decline.
However, the flower and willow world has seen a resurgence in new members over the last 10 years due to the accessibility that the internet has provided for young girls wanting to know more about the profession and not needing a formal introduction to an okiya.
Makeup is applied before dressing to avoid dirtying the kimono.
These beer gardens also feature traditional dances by the geisha in the evenings.
At the pinnacle of the complex ''geisha ranking system'' are the grand dowagers of Kyoto.
Prostitution was legal up until the 1900s (decade), so it was practiced in many quarters throughout Japan.
The few women who returned to the geisha areas decided to reject Western influence and revert to traditional ways of entertainment and life.
A geisha and her danna may or may not be in love, but intimacy is never viewed as a reward for the danna's financial support.
A maiko wears red with white printed patterns.
Over their years of apprenticeship they learn to adapt to different situations and personalities, mastering the art of the hostess.
The ''onee-san'' and ''imouto-san'' (senior/junior, literally "older sister/younger sister") relationship is important.
Geiko wear red or pink ''nagajuban'', or under-kimono.
For formal occasions, the mature geisha will still apply white make-up.
Before the twentieth century, geisha training began when a girl was around the age of four.
The second element is the entertainment training which the maiko learns at various tea houses and parties by observing her ''onee-san''.
By 1800, being a geisha was considered a female occupation (though there are still a handful of male geisha working today).
The dance of the geisha has evolved from the dance performed on the noh and kabuki stages.
Now they are flat fees charged by the hour.
Newly full-fledged geisha will colour in only the top lip fully.
Tokyo and Kanazawa geisha wear , taiko musubi and .
A geisha's appearance changes throughout her career, from the girlish, heavily made-up maiko, to the more somber appearance of an older established geisha.
The white make-up and elaborate kimono and hair of a maiko is the popular image held of geisha.
Many experienced geisha are successful enough to choose to live independently.
Short eyebrows are for the young and long eyebrows display maturity.
The obi is brighter than the kimono she is wearing to give a certain exotic balance.
The money acquired for an apprentice's mizuage was a great sum and it was used to promote her debut as a full-fledged courtesan.
A woman above 21 is considered too old to be a maiko and becomes a full geisha upon her initiation into the geisha community.
Some of these ''saburuko'' girls sold sexual services, while others with a better education made a living by entertaining at high-class social gatherings.
Geisha are often hired to attend parties and gatherings, traditionally at  or at traditional Japanese restaurants (ryōtei).
The first woman known to have called herself ''geisha'' was a Fukagawa prostitute, in about 1750.
Thus, some argue that geisha women live in a women-centered society.
Eventually, the term "geisha girl" became a general word for any female Japanese prostitute or worker in the mizu shōbai and included bar hostesses and streetwalkers.
This practice became illegal in 1959.
This is a way in which she will gain insights of the job, and seek out potential clients.
This takes place in special geisha schools which are found in every ''hanamachi''.
The reason for this is that she has now become mature, and the simpler style shows her own natural beauty.
The scarlet-fringed collar of a maiko's kimono hangs very loosely in the back to accentuate the nape of the neck, which is considered a primary erotic area in Japanese sexuality.
Apprentice geisha wear highly colourful kimono with extravagant obi.
By the 1830s, the evolving geisha style was emulated by fashionable women throughout society.
Some officials thought that prostitutes and geisha worked at different ends of the same profession—selling sex— and that all prostitutes should henceforth be called "geisha".
The first geishas were men, entertaining customers waiting to see the most popular and gifted courtesans (''oiran'').
The majority of women were wives who did not work outside of their familial duties.
Minarai can be hired for parties but are usually uninvited (yet welcomed) guests at parties that their ''onee-san'' attends.
In a social style that is common in Japan, men are amused by the illusion of that which is never to be."
This shamisen, originating in Okinawa, is a banjo-like three-stringed instrument that is played with a plectrum.
A maiko is an apprentice and is therefore bonded under a contract to her okiya.
After a short period the final stage of training begins, and the students are now called "maiko", rather than minarai.
Geisha always wear kimono.
Geisha still study traditional instruments: the ''shamisen'', ''shakuhachi'', and drums, as well as learning games, traditional songs, calligraphy, Japanese traditional dances (in the nihonbuyō style), tea ceremony, literature, and poetry.
Many Americans unfamiliar with the Japanese culture could not tell the difference between legitimate geisha and these costumed performers.
A ''danna'' was typically a wealthy man, sometimes married, who had the means to support the very large expenses related to a geisha's traditional training and other costs.
A geisha's sex and love life is usually distinct from her professional life.
The dances are accompanied by traditional Japanese music.
The forerunners of the ''female geisha'' were the teenage ''odoriko'' ("dancing girls"): expensively trained as chaste dancers-for-hire.
Maiko sleep with their necks on small supports (takamakura), instead of pillows, so they keep their hairstyle perfect.
As of October 2015, Kimicho, an American, was in training in the Oimachi district of Shinagawa, Tokyo.
Her training is very expensive and her debt must be repaid to the okiya with the earnings she makes.
In Kyoto, the terms ''ohana'' () and ''hanadai'' (), meaning "flower fees", are preferred.
The tea house owners are entrepreneurs, whose service to the geisha is highly necessary for the society to run smoothly.
Historically, Japanese feminists have seen geisha as exploited women but some modern geisha see themselves as liberated feminists.
It was traditional in the past for established geisha to take a ''danna'', or patron.
In modern Japan, geisha and maiko are now a rare sight outside ''hanamachi''.
Their kimono, more elaborate than a geiko's, are intended to do the talking for them.
Although minarai attend ''ozashiki'', they do not participate at an advanced level.
She was, however, kicked out of Asakusa in 2011 for not following the rules laid out by her teachers and her elders.
The ideal geisha showed her skill, while the ideal wife was modest.
The instrument is described as "melancholy" because traditional shamisen music uses only minor thirds and sixths.
The primary instrument is the shamisen.
Skilled female performers, such as Shirabyōshi dancers, thrived.
Geisha round the bottom lips to create the illusion of a flower bud.
They only charge a third of the usual fee.
The elegant, high-culture world that geisha are a part of is called ''karyūkai'' ( "the flower and willow world").
She was a skilled singer and shamisen-player named Kikuya who was an immediate success, making female geisha extremely popular in 1750s Fukagawa.
The ideal wife was a modest mother and manager of the home; by Confucian custom love had secondary importance.
The "wild and outrageous" dances transformed into a more subtle, stylized, and controlled form of dance.
As a result, residents and local businesses have joined forces to protect the geisha by launching patrols of the streets of the Gion entertainment district of the city in order to prevent tourists from pestering them.
but this was confused with the girls who were apprentices to yujo and courtesans.
In contrast to these "one-night geisha", the true onsen geisha are in fact competent dancers and musicians.
In the end, the government decided to maintain a line between the two groups, arguing that geisha were more refined and should not be soiled by association with prostitutes.
Other foreign nationals who have worked as geisha in Japan include Ibu, a geiko of Ukrainian ancestry working in Anjo, Juri, a Peruvian geisha working in the resort town of Yugawara, and Fukutarō (Isabella Onou), a Romanian national working in the Izu-Nagaoka district of Shizuoka.
The word consists of two kanji,  (''gei'') meaning "art" and  (''sha'') meaning "person" or "doer".
The appeal of a high-ranking geisha to her typical male guest has historically been very different from that of his wife.
They are at the peak of traditional Japanese femininity.
Maiko learn from their senior maiko and geiko mentors.
It was up to these returning geisha to bring back traditional standards in the profession, though with increased rights for the geisha:
The most visible form of this are public dances, or ''odori'' (generally written in traditional kana spelling as をどり, rather than modern おどり), featuring both maiko and geisha.
The highest ''yūjo'' class was the Geisha's predecessor, called "''Tayuu''", a combination of actress and prostitute, originally playing on stages set in the dry Kamo riverbed in Kyoto.
While it is true that a geisha is free to pursue personal relationships with men she meets through her work, such relationships are carefully chosen and unlikely to be casual.
In 1872, shortly after the Meiji Restoration, the new government passed a law liberating "prostitutes (shōgi) and geisha (geigi)".
Becoming a geisha was a way for women to support themselves without becoming a wife.
Walled-in pleasure quarters known as  were built in the 16th century, and in 1617 the shogunate designated "pleasure quarters", outside of which prostitution would be illegal, and within which ''"yūjo"'' ("play women") would be classified and licensed.
As reported by Dalby (1983) from her impressions in 1975 Geiko from the other two ''hanamachi'' (Gion Higashi and Miyagawa-chō) have high prestige but are considered to be one rank lower.
This practice used to be common among married women in Japan and, earlier, at the imperial court, but survives only in some districts.
The colour comes in a small stick, which is melted in water.
Minarai generally work with a particular tea house (''minarai-jaya'') learning from the ''okaa-san'' (literally "mother," the proprietress of the house).
The ideal geisha seemed carefree, the ideal wife somber and responsible.
Maiko who are in their last stage of training sometimes colour their teeth black for a brief period.
Maiko are considered one of the great sights of Japanese tourism, and look very different from fully qualified geisha.
Compulsory education laws passed in the 1960s made traditional geisha apprenticeships difficult, leading to a decline in women entering the field.
Maiko can develop a bald spot on their crown caused by rubbing from Kanzashi strips and tugging in hairdressing.
These women dressed in ''kimono'' and imitated the look of geisha.
Geisha remain as such until they retire.
Many more women begin their careers in adulthood.
Geisha may gracefully flirt with their guests, but they will always remain in control of the hospitality.
The early ''shikomi'' (in-training) and ''minarai'' (learns by watching) stages of geisha training lasted years, which is significantly longer than in contemporary times.
There are three major elements of a maiko's training.
These pleasure quarters quickly became glamorous entertainment centers, offering more than sex.
The charge for a geisha's time used to be determined by (measured by burning incense stick) is called ''senkōdai'' (, "incense stick fee") or gyokudai ( "jewel fee").
The ''onee-san'', any maiko or geiko who is senior to a girl, teaches her maiko everything about working in the hanamachi.
'''Mizuage''' () was a ceremony frequently undergone by courtesans and prostitutes where a man paid money for the privilege of having sex with the apprentice.
Australian national Fiona Graham debuted as a trainee under the name Sayuki in the Asakusa district of Tokyo.
She wears the same white makeup for her face on her nape, leaving two or sometimes three stripes of bare skin exposed.
Different hairstyles and hairpins signify different stages of a girl's development and even a detail as minute as the length of one's eyebrows is significant.
As they became more widespread throughout the 1760s and 1770s, many began working only as entertainers (rather than prostitutes) often in the same establishments as male geisha.
Once the mizuage patron's function was served (of deflowering the young courtesan) he was to have no further relations with the girl.
They performed erotic dances and skits, and this new art was dubbed ''kabuku,'' meaning "to be wild and outrageous".
There are four major types of the shimada: the ''taka shimada'', a high chignon usually worn by young, single women; the ''tsubushi shimada'', a more flattened chignon generally worn by older women; the ''yuiwata'', a chignon that is usually bound up with a piece of coloured cotton crepe.
First, a wax or oil substance called ''bintsuke-abura'' is applied to the skin.
Kyoto is considered by many to be where the geisha tradition is the strongest today.
There are 5 different hairstyles that a maiko wears, that mark the different stages of her apprenticeship.
Rarely will a geisha colour in both lips fully in the Western style, as white creates optical illusions and colouring the lips fully would make them appear overly large.
This sometimes occurs today as well, but very rarely.
Maiko (literally "dance girl") are apprentice geisha, and this stage can last for up to 5 years.
Shortly after their arrival in 1945, some occupying American GIs are said to have congregated in Ginza and shouted, "We want geesha girls!"
Geisha and apprentices wear the flat-soled sandal ''zōri'' outdoors during inclement weather.
Two to three years into her apprenticeship, the red collar will be entirely embroidered in white (when viewed from the front) to show her seniority.
Gradually, they all became specialized and the new profession, purely of entertainment, arose.
Onsen geisha have been given a bad reputation due to the prevalence of prostitutes in such towns who market themselves as "geisha", as well as sordid rumors of dance routines like Shallow River (which involves the "dancers" lifting the skirts of their kimono higher and higher).
Other hanamachi also hold public dances, including some in Tokyo, but have fewer performances.
But I existed in a world apart, a special realm whose mission and identity depended on preserving the time-honored traditions of the past."
