Some believe society is constructed in a way that splits gender into a dichotomy via social organisations that constantly invent and reproduce cultural images of gender.
The theory was that human nature is essentially epicene and social distinctions based on sex are arbitrarily constructed.
The same principle explains why chimpanzees and humans are distinct, despite sharing nearly all their genes.
In the last two decades of the 20th century, the use of ''gender'' in academia has increased greatly, outnumbering uses of ''sex'' in the social sciences.
MDG Goal 3 does not comprise a reference to learner achievement and good quality basic education, but goes beyond the school level.
The question then arises as to what legally determines whether someone is female or male.
The gender objective of the Dakar Framework for Action is somewhat different from the MDG Goal 3 (Target 1): "Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of education no later than 2015".
In a number of North American Indigenous cultures, non-man/-woman individuals sometimes carried specific roles within that nation's religious structures.
Joan Roughgarden argues that some non-human animal species also have more than two genders, in that there might be multiple templates for behavior available to individual organisms with a given biological sex.
Money refers to attempts to distinguish a difference between biological sex and social gender as "scientifically debased", because of our increased knowledge of a continuum of dimorphic features (Money's word is "dipolar") that link biological and behavioral differences.
However, it does contain an exemption in record keeping.
Some organizations working in developing countries and in the development field have incorporated advocacy and empowerment for women into their work.
Political scientist Mary Hawkesworth addresses gender and feminist theory, stating that since the 1970s the concept of gender has transformed and been used in significantly different ways within feminist scholarship.
Drawing from insights developed in psychology, sociology, and gender studies, GAD theorists shifted from understanding women’s problems as based on their sex (i.e.
Different jurisdictions have adopted different answers to this question.
* Many languages include terms that are used asymmetrically in reference to men and women.
In many countries, the financial sector largely neglects women even though they play an important role in the economy, as Nena Stoiljkovic pointed out in ''D+C Development and Cooperation''.
Authors of ''Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Belief’s and Social Relations'', Cecilia Ridgeway and Shelley Correll, argue that gender is more than an identity or role but is something that is institutionalized through "social relational contexts."
Generally, gender approaches to climate change address gender- differentiated consequences of climate change, as well as unequal adaptation capacities and gendered contribution to climate change.
Sometimes they are organized in the same order, other times they have been "edited"—deleted, copied, changed, moved, even relocated to another "book", as species evolve.
A person's sex as male or female has legal significance—sex is indicated on government documents, and laws provide differently for men and women.
This framework first appeared in a feminist paper on transsexualism in 1978.
There is huge incentive for a child to concede to their socialisation with gender shaping the individual’s opportunities for education, work, family, sexuality, reproduction, authority, and to make an impact on the production of culture and knowledge.
), antiandrogens, progestogens, and others;
As the child grows, "...society provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviors appropriate to the one sex or the other," which socialises the child into belonging to a culturally specific gender.
Gender is a topic of increasing concern within climate change policy and science.
This was often justified by the stereotype that women were naturally more suited to jobs that required concentration, patience, and dexterity, rather than creativity, leadership, or intellect.
She reasoned that her actions are limited because she is female.
This was essentially an expression of local community attitudes with ... the preference for male offspring.
Social media goes beyond the role of helping individuals express themselves, as it has grown to help individuals create relationships, particularly romantic relationships.
Boserup argued that women were marginalized in the modernization process and practices of growth, development, and development policy threatened to actually make women worse off.
The oldest documented language, Sumerian, records a distinctive sub-language only used by female speakers.
Females who identify as males and males who identify as females will not be forced to undergo a gender reassignment surgery in order to identify with that specific gender.
Some of the other possibilities are listed above.
The World Health Organization defines gender as the result of socially constructed ideas about the behavior, actions, and roles a particular sex performs.
Conceptions of the gender of God notwithstanding, traditional Judaism places a strong emphasis on individuals following Judaism's traditional gender roles, though many modern denominations of Judaism strive for greater egalitarianism.
One's biological sex is directly tied to specific social roles and the expectations.
The United Nations Millennium Declaration signed at the United Nations Millennium Summit in 2000 including eight goals that were to be reached by 2015, and although it would be a difficult task to reach them, all of them could be monitored.
The Taijitu and concept of the Zhou period reach into family and gender relations.
Genes are a particularly important part of understanding biological processes because they are directly associated with observable objects, outside chromosomes, called ''proteins'', whose influence on cell chemistry can be measured.
They fit together as two parts of a whole.
Other gender systems exist with no distinction between masculine and feminine; examples include a distinction between animate and inanimate things, which is common to, amongst others, Ojibwe, Basque and Hittite; and systems distinguishing between people (whether human or divine) and everything else, which are found in the Dravidian languages and Sumerian.
Ova always have the same sex chromosome, labelled ''X''.
However, just as WID had its critics, so did WAD.
In this article, Fausto-Sterling states that Western culture has only two sexes and that even their language restricts the presence of more than two sexes.
It appears that the ability to reproduce sexually has evolved independently in various species on many occasions.
Prior to 1970, it was believed that development affected men and women in the same way and no gendered perspective existed for development studies.
Social media plays a big role when it comes to communication between genders.
*The construction of symbols and images such as language, ideology, dress and the media, that explain, express and reinforce, or sometimes oppose, those divisions
Although sexual reproduction is ''defined'' at the cellular level, key features of sexual reproduction operate ''within'' the structures of the gamete cells themselves.
The first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED1, Volume 4, 1900) notes the original meaning of ''gender'' as "kind" had already become obsolete.
According to proponents of GAD, women are cast not as passive recipients of development aid, but rather as active agents of change whose empowerment should be a central goal of development policy.
Yin is female and yang is male.
More recent criticisms of Judith Butler's theories critique her writing for reinforcing the very conventional dichotomies of gender.
Schwalbe comments that humans "are the results of many people embracing and acting on similar ideas".
their biological differences from men) to understanding them as based on gender – the social relations between women and men, their social construction, and how women have been systematically subordinated in this relationship.
These roles are learned from various, intersecting sources such as parental influences, the socialization a child receives in school, and what is portrayed in the local media.
According to recent research, gender plays a strong role in structuring our social lives, especially since society assigns and creates "male" and "female" categories.
Contemporary socialisation theory proposes the notion that when a child is first born it has a biological sex but no social gender.
She brings up multiple instances where gender in history was not split into strictly male or female, Fausto-Sterling mentioned that by the end of the Middle Age, intersex individuals were forced to pick a side in the binary gender code and to adhere by it.
Nor would they accept feminizing surgery for their child.
Intersections and crossing of the prescribed boundaries have no place in the arena of the social construct of the term "gender".
This prejudice plays out in our legal system when a person is judged differently because they do not present themselves as the "correct" gender.
Therefore, it is possible that although sex seems fixed and only related to biology, it may be actually deeply related to historical and social factors as well as biology and other natural sciences.
Gender ambiguity deals with having the freedom to choose, manipulate and create a personal niche within any defined socially constructed code of conduct while gender fluidity is outlawing all the rules of cultural gender assignment.
There are cases where it has also been lost, notably among the Fungi Imperfecti.
Concern that current language may be biased in favor of men has led some authors in recent times to argue for the use of a more gender-neutral vocabulary in English and other languages.
Teen girls and boys differ in what they post in their online profiles.
Thus, for example, in many jurisdictions a person with XY chromosomes but female gonads could be recognized as female at birth.
Thus it may be said that determining the sex of children is actually a cultural act, and the sex of children is in fact socially constructed.
Women are more vulnerable to chronic poverty because of gender inequalities in the distribution of income, property ownership, credit, and control over earned income.
The eight goals are:
The World Health Organization states, "'sex' refers to the biological and physiological characteristics that define men and women," and "'gender' refers to the socially constructed roles, behaviours, activities, and attributes that a given society considers appropriate for men and women."
and people are a part of an ontologically and epistemologically constructed set of names and labels.
This decision would allow transgender individuals the opportunity to gain access to jobs and education, because a quota must now be fulfilled to incorporate these individuals.
Trinity) are all mentioned with the masculine pronoun; though the exact meaning of the masculinity of the Christian triune God is contended.
These traits provide the foundations for the creation of hegemonic gender difference.
Increasingly, jurisdictions also provide a procedure for changes of legal gender for transgender people.
Gender assignment, when there are indications that genital sex might not be decisive in a particular case, is normally not defined by a single definition, but by a combination of conditions, including chromosomes and gonads.
Because of this, "power" is what determines individual attributes, behaviors, etc.
In fact, women were tied to domestic work hence were almost invisible in development programs.
''Gender identity'' refers to a personal identification with a particular gender and gender role in society.
Australian Commonwealth guidelines on the recognition of sex and gender, passed the Sex Discrimination Amendment Act on 25 June 2013 without a vote.
Gender should not be conceived merely as the cultural inscription of meaning based on a given sex (a juridical conception); gender must also designate the very apparatus of production whereby the sexes themselves are established.
*Interactions between men and women, women and women and men and men that involve any form of dominance and submission.
Causation is known to operate from chromosome to gonads, and from gonads to hormones.
Furthermore, the intersection of climate change and gender raises questions regarding the complex and intersecting power relations arising from it.
Social media is more than just the communication of words.
Gendering is a socially constructed process based on culture, though often cultural expectations around women and men have a direct relationship to their biology.
#Promote gender equality and empower women
The blacktip shark (''Carcharhinus limbatus''), flatworm (''Dugesia tigrina'') and some other species can reproduce either sexually or asexually depending on various conditions.
Marriage is usually only available to opposite-sex couples; in some countries and jurisdictions there are same-sex marriage laws.
#Improve maternal health
It shows that there are many women in the world's population but only a few represent world's wealth.
Research conducted in 2013 found that over 57% of pictures posted on social networking sites were sexual and were created to gain attention.
They believe that the difference in religiousity between genders is due to biological differences, for instance usually people seeking security in life are more religious, and as men are considered to be greater risk takers than women, they are less religious.
Some feminist scholars hold that the debate on climate change is not only dominated by men but also primarily shaped in ‘masculine’ principles, which limits discussions about climate change to a perspective that focuses on technical solutions.
Oftentimes this may include tasks such as tilling land, grinding grain, carrying water and cooking.
Studies reveal that even though males and females are equally likely to react to a strain with anger, the origin of the anger and their means of coping with it can vary drastically.
In conclusion, research has found that images shared online through social networking sites help establish personal self-reflections that individuals want to share with the world.
''Social identity'' refers to the common identification with a collectivity or social category that creates a common culture among participants concerned.
For example, the most toxic insect, the harvester ant ''Pogonomyrmex'', has two kinds of female and two kinds of male.
While the spread of the word in science publications can be attributed to the influence of feminism, its use as a synonym for sex is attributed to the failure to grasp the distinction made in feminist theory, and the distinction has sometimes become blurred with the theory itself: "Among the reasons that working scientists have given me for choosing gender rather than sex in biological contexts are desires to signal sympathy with feminist goals, to use a more academic term, or to avoid the connotation of copulation".
She argues that male and female genitals were considered inherently the same in Western society until the 18th century.
The platypus has a complex hybrid system, the male has ten sex chromosomes, half X and half Y.
With social media increasing in popularity, pictures have become a large role in how many people communicate.
One hypothesis is that the species is a hybrid, evolved from two closely related preceding species.
In the 1974 edition of ''Masculine/Feminine or Human'', the author uses "innate gender" and "learned sex roles", but in the 1978 edition, the use of ''sex'' and ''gender'' is reversed.
The social label of being classified into one or the other sex is necessary for the medical stamp on birth certificates.
Thus, for a period, it was possible for the same person to have two different genders under Australian law.
The gender system is the basis of social patterns in many societies, which include the separation of sexes, and the primacy of masculine norms.
* erotic preference:
As well, quite a few sign languages have a gendered distinction due to boarding schools segregated by gender, such as Irish Sign Language.
She mentions this quote to inform the prevailing thought that hermaphrodites, without medical intervention, are assumed to live a life full of psychological pain when in fact, there is no evidence in which that is the case.
Also, women are more likely to earn low incomes because of gender discrimination, as men are more likely to receive higher pay, have more opportunities, and have overall more political and social capital then women.
#Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases
At that time, female genitals were regarded as incomplete male genitals, and the difference between the two was conceived as a matter of degree.
The modern academic sense of the word, in the context of social roles of men and women, dates from the work of John Money (1955), and was popularized and developed by the feminist movement from the 1970s onwards (see  below).
Chromosomes were likened to books (above), also like books they have been studied at more detailed levels.
Assumptions of the unidimensional model were challenged as societal stereotypes changed, which led to the development of a two-dimensional gender identity model.
The Bugis people of Sulawesi, Indonesia have a tradition that incorporates all the features above.
Some species, like the Japanese Ash, ''Fraxinus lanuginosa'', only have males and hermaphrodites, a rare reproductive system called ''androdioecy''.
Biologist and feminist academic Anne Fausto-Sterling rejects the discourse of biological versus social determinism and advocates a deeper analysis of how interactions between the biological being and the social environment influence individuals' capacities.
The social sciences have a branch devoted to gender studies.
Although these stereotypes have been dispelled in modern times, women are still underrepresented in prestigious "hard science" fields such as physics, and are less likely to hold high-ranking positions.
By noticing the independent variables (neighborhood violence) and the dependent variable (individual violence), it's possible to analyze gender roles.
Current gender studies classes seek to move away from that and examine the intersectionality of these factors in determining people's lives.
Thus, modern-day parents have been urged by medical doctors to decide the sex for their hermaphroditic child immediately after childbirth.
Even after universities began admitting women in the 19th century, women were still largely relegated to certain scientific fields, such as home science, nursing, and child psychology.
: one’s sense of oneself as a man, woman, or gender non-conforming;
In short, the WID approach blamed patriarchy, which did not consider women’s productive and reproductive work.
Boys share more personal information, like their hometown and phone number.
In the United States and Europe, such children, because they have the potential to bear children later in life, are usually raised as girls.
In context, this is a philosophical statement.
"This is so because gender is politically and therefore socially controlled.
In the New Testament, Jesus at several times mentions with the masculine pronoun i.e.
In most cases this can appear obvious, but the matter is complicated for intersex or transgender people.
A few rare species that push the boundaries of the definitions are the subject of active research for light they may shed on the mechanisms of the evolution of sex.
Many cultures have different systems of norms and beliefs based on gender, but there is no universal standard to a masculine or feminine role across all cultures.
In this context, ''gender'' explicitly excludes reference to biological differences, to focus on cultural differences.
She emphasizes that the role of the medical community is that of an institutionalized discipline on society that there can only be two sexes: male and female and only the two listed are considered "normal."
"The idea that men and women are more different from one another than either is from anything else, must come from something other than nature… far from being an expression of natural differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural similarities."
It follows then, that gender can be assumed as the acquisition and internalisation of social norms.
Adolescent girls generally use social networking sites as a tool to communicate with peers and reinforce existing relationships; boys on the other hand tend to use social networking sites as a tool to meet new friends and acquaintances.
Verbs, adjectives and nouns are not gendered.
Other societies include well-developed roles that are explicitly considered more or less distinct from archetypal female and male roles in those societies.
* primary sexual characteristics:
According to the general strain theory, men would more likely engage in aggressive behavior directed towards others due to externalized anger whereas women would direct their anger towards themselves rather than others.
''Gender'' is a term used to exemplify the attributes that a society or culture constitutes as "masculine" or "feminine".
Schwalbe believes that these distinctions are important, because society wants to identify and categorize people as soon as we see them.
Recent studies suggest that men and women value and use technology differently.
The philosopher and feminist Simone de Beauvoir applied existentialism to women's experience of life: "One is not born a woman, one becomes one."
Butler argues that gender is not an expression of what one is, but rather something that one does.
Research has found that almost all U.S. teens (95%) aged 12 through 17 are online, compared to only 78% of adults.
These may be of various kinds, more or less loosely associated by analogy with various actual or perceived differences between men and women.
'''Gender''' is the range of characteristics pertaining to, and differentiating between, masculinity and femininity.
Some feminists argued that the key concept for women and development should be subordination in the context of new capitalist forms of insecure and hierarchical job structures, rather than marginalization as WID approaches emphasized.
For example, the sociological approach to "gender" (social roles: female versus male) focuses on the difference in (economic/power) position between a male CEO (disregarding the fact that he is heterosexual or homosexual) to female workers in his employ (disregarding whether they are straight or gay).
She continues:It would make no sense, then, to define gender as the cultural interpretation of sex, if sex is itself a gender-centered category.
Males are likely to put the blame on others for adversity and therefore externalize feelings of anger.
In addition, drawing from the empirical research of intersex children, Anne Fausto-Sterling, a professor of biology and gender studies, describes how the doctors address the issues of intersexuality.
The Gender-related Development Index (GDI), developed by the United Nations, aims to show the inequalities between men and women in the following areas: long and healthy life, knowledge, and a decent standard of living.
Philosopher Michel Foucault said that as sexual subjects, humans are the object of power, which is not an institution or structure, rather it is a signifier or name attributed to "complex strategical situation".
On the other hand, Christian theology in many churches distinguishes between the masculine images used of God (Father, King, God the Son) and the reality they signify, which transcends gender, embodies all the virtues of both genders perfectly, which may be seen through the doctrine of Imago Dei.
In other contexts, including some areas of social sciences, ''gender'' includes ''sex'' or replaces it.
It is relevant to almost every biological science.
* Grammatical gender is a property of some languages in which every noun is assigned a gender, often with no direct relation to its meaning.
Cognitive science is another important discipline in the field of brain research.
Also, rising criticism of the exclusion of men in WID and WAD led to a new theory termed Gender and Development (GAD).
Before his work, it was uncommon to use the word ''gender'' to refer to anything but grammatical categories.
Because of this, Newman argues, many privilege sex as being a cause of oppression and ignore other issues like race, ability, poverty, etc.
The male principle was equated with the sun: active, bright, and shining; the female principle corresponds to the moon: passive, shaded, and reflective.
Natural languages often make gender distinctions.
Feminist scholars in Political Science began employing gender as an analytical category, which highlighted "social and political relations neglected by mainstream accounts".
It has also been demonstrated that brain processing responds to the external environment.
In the language of the sociology of gender, they comprise a third gender,
Conversational theorists, for example, have studied the way that interruptions, turn taking and the setting of topics re-create gender inequality in the flow of ordinary talk
However, the researchers did state that perhaps the hypothesis Hill and Lynch proposed was true in the past but is not true now due to changes in the population of teens in respect to their gender-role identities.
More importantly, social networking sites have allowed individuals to truly express themselves, as they are able to create an identity and socialize with other individuals that can relate.
The MDGs have three goals specifically focused on women: Goal 3, 4 and 5 but women’s issues also cut across all of the goals.
It is a program focused on the gender development of women to empower them and decrease the level of inequality between men and women.
The guidelines also clarify that the federal government will now collect data on gender, rather than sex.
The Dakar Framework for Action (2000) set out ambitious goals: to eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and to achieve gender equality in education by 2015.
In some species hermaphrodites can self-fertilize (see Selfing), in others they can achieve fertilization with females, males or both.
One such gender role is that adopted by the hijras of India and Pakistan.
Teens are avid internet and social media users in the United States.
Elements surrounding gender roles include clothing, speech patterns, movement, occupations, and other factors not limited to biological sex.
Multiplicity of gamete ''types'' within a species would still be considered a form of sexual reproduction.
In Taoism, yin and yang are considered feminine and masculine, respectively.
The WID approach, however, began to gain criticism as ignoring how women’s economic marginalization was linked to the development model itself.
The popular use of ''gender'' simply as an alternative to ''sex'' (as a biological category) is also widespread, although attempts are still made to preserve the distinction.
Sexologist John Money introduced the terminological distinction between biological sex and gender as a role in 1955.
This emerged from a number of different areas: in sociology during the 1950s; from the theories of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan; and in the work of French psychoanalysts like Julia Kristeva, Luce Irigaray, and American feminists such as Judith Butler.
The conception that people are gendered rather than sexed also coincides with Judith Butler’s theories of gender performativity.
In modern times, the study of gender and development has become a broad field that involves politicians, economists, and human rights activists.
For example, Michael Schwalbe believes that humans must be taught how to act appropriately in their designated gender to fill the role properly, and that the way people behave as masculine or feminine interacts with social expectations.
Priess and among other’s study did not support the hypothesis of Hill and Lynch which stated "that as adolescents experience these and other socializing influences, they will become more stereotypical in their gender-role identities and gendered attitudes and behaviors."
The article ''Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited'' focuses on the work of Heather A. Priess, Sara M. Lindberg, and Janet Shibley Hyde on whether or not girls and boys diverge in their gender identities during adolescent years.
Butler argues that "bodies only appear, only endure, only live within the productive constraints of certain highly gendered regulatory schemas," and sex is "no longer as a bodily given on which the construct of gender is artificially imposed, but as a cultural norm which governs the materialization of bodies."
Whether male or female birds influence the sex of offspring is not known for all species.
