As a rule, genealogists begin with the present and work backward in time.
Genealogical research is a complex process that uses historical records and sometimes genetic analysis to demonstrate kinship.
The quality of census data has been of special interest to historians, who have investigated reliability issues.
Prior to 1752 it was 25 March; this was changed to 1 January.
Personal names have periods of popularity, so it is not uncommon to find many similarly named people in a generation, and even similarly named families; e.g., "William and Mary and their children David, Mary, and John".
In England and Germany, for example, such record keeping started with parish registers in the 16th century.
Some family histories even emphasize links to celebrity criminals, such as the bushranger Ned Kelly in Australia.
Other benefits include family medical histories with families with serious medical conditions that are hereditary.
Since skilled trades are often passed from father to son, occupation may also be indirect evidence of a family relationship.
paternal grandmother
These indexes can be used as finding aids to locate original records.
The terms "genealogy" and "family history" are often used synonymously, but some offer a slight difference in definition.
A person's occupation may have been related to his or her social status, political interest, and migration pattern.
Both birth and marriage dates may have been adjusted to cover for pre-wedding pregnancies.
In that format it can be shared with other genealogists, added to databases, or converted into family web sites.
Many genealogical records were recorded at the time of a loved one's death, and so genealogists should consider the effect that grief may have had on the informant of these records.
Bloodlines of Salem is an example of a specialized family-history group.
Identity errors usually occur when two or more individuals are assumed to be the same person.
They may work for companies that provide software or produce materials of use to other professionals and to amateurs.
Finally, many apparently obscure jobs are part of a larger trade community, such as watchmaking, framework knitting or gunmaking.
Genealogy software is used to collect, store, sort, and display genealogical data.
In addition to copying errors, compiled sources (such as published genealogies and online pedigree databases) are susceptible to misidentification errors and incorrect conclusions based on circumstantial evidence.
a single village or parish, such as in a one-place study; or a particular, often famous, person.
Even in areas that tended to use naming conventions, however, they were by no means universal.
These tests are limited to either the patrilineal or the matrilineal line.
Professional genealogists may also conduct research for others, publish books on genealogical methods, teach, or produce their own databases.
Many cultures used patronymics before surnames were adopted or came into use.
Several trades have regionally preferred terms.
An original source is one that is not based on another source.
would be answered by a description of father, mother, and tribe.
Many other European countries had already made the calendar changes before England had, sometimes centuries earlier.
Source citation is also important when conducting genealogical research.
Genealogists use oral interviews, historical records, genetic analysis, and other records to obtain information about a family and to demonstrate kinship and pedigrees of its members.
The term "family history" may be more popular in Europe, "genealogy" more popular in the United States.
Genealogists who seek to reconstruct the lives of each ancestor consider all historical information to be "genealogical" information.
In communitarian societies, one's identity is defined as much by one's kin network as by individual achievement, and the question "Who are you?"
mother's oldest sister
For example, "shoemaker" and "cordwainer" have the same meaning.
He corresponded with other antiquarians in New England, where antiquarianism and genealogy were well established, and became a coordinator, booster, and contributor to the growing movement.
Genealogists locate these records in local, regional or national offices or archives and extract information about family relationships and recreate timelines of persons' lives.
The term often overlapped with heraldry, in which the ancestry of royalty was reflected in their coats of arms.
A pattern might also be broken to name a newborn after a recently deceased sibling, aunt or uncle.
Most 20th-century sources remain unavailable to the public on privacy grounds.
When a woman remarried, she may have changed her name and the names of her children; only her name; or changed no names.
Genealogical research in the United States was first systematized in the early 19th century, especially by John Farmer (1789–1838).
Dates of birth in vital records or civil registrations and in church records at baptism are generally accurate because they were usually recorded near the time of the event.
As more of the population was recorded, there were sufficient records to follow a family.
In Nazi Germany, family histories were compiled to affirm individuals' affiliation with the "master race" and to adhere to legal requirements for marriage.
Genealogical societies are almost exclusively staffed by volunteers and may offer a broad range of services, including maintaining libraries for members' use, publishing newsletters, providing research assistance to the public, offering classes or seminars, and organizing record preservation or transcription projects.
Amateur genealogists typically pursue their own ancestry and that of their spouses.
Traditionally, the basic information needed to ensure correct identification of each person are place names, occupations, family names, first names, and dates.
The types of derivatives include: photocopies, transcriptions, abstracts, translations, extractions, and compilations.
As Fourth of July celebrations commemorating the Founding Fathers and the heroes of the Revolutionary War became increasingly popular, however, the pursuit of 'antiquarianism,' which focused on local history, became acceptable as a way to honor the achievements of early Americans.
Major life events, such as births, marriages, and deaths, were often documented with a license, permit, or report.
By 1751 there was an 11-day discrepancy between the date in England and the date in other European countries.
See, for example, the Molecular Genealogy Research Project.
Volunteers and professionals participate in the indexing process.
It is wise to exercise extreme caution with dates.
The French Republican Calendar or French Revolutionary Calendar was a calendar proposed during the French Revolution, and used by the French government for about 12 years from late 1793 to 1805, and for 18 days in 1871 in Paris.
Calendar changes must also be considered.
Their members may also index records to make them more accessible, and engage in advocacy and other efforts to preserve public records and cemeteries.
Genealogists must consider the effects that copying and compiling errors may have had on the information in a source.
Oral tradition is also an important source, although it must be used with caution.
Old records may contain references to farms and villages that have ceased to exist.
Establishing descent from these was, and is, important to such groups as the Daughters of the American Revolution.
Because official records may reflect many kinds of surname change, without explaining the underlying reason for the change, the correct identification of a person recorded identified with more than one name is challenging.
For example, the village name Brockton occurs six times in the border area between the English counties of Shropshire and Staffordshire.
Perhaps the most outstanding example of this genre is Leabhar na nGenealach/The Great Book of Irish Genealogies, by Dubhaltach MacFhirbhisigh (d. 1671), published in 2004.
In many cultures, the name of a person refers to the family to which he or she belongs.
Census returns may contain some embellishment; e.g., from labourer to mason, or from journeyman to master craftsman.
A person with a distressed state of mind may not be able to accurately recall information.
maternal grandfather
Parish, county, and national borders have frequently been modified.
When a source does not provide clues about the informant, genealogists should treat the source with caution.
The Internet has become not only a major source of data for genealogists, but also of education and communication.
One should first consider who was alive (and nearby) when the record was created.
For example, Beth, Lizzie or Betty are all common for Elizabeth, and Jack, John and Jonathan may be interchanged.
Occupational information may be important to understanding an ancestor's life and for distinguishing two people with the same name.
Modern family history explores new sources of status, such as celebrating the resilience of families that survived generations of poverty or slavery, or the success of families in integrating across racial or national boundaries.
Most societies have a unique area of focus, such as a particular surname, ethnicity, geographic area, or descendancy from participants in a given historical event.
The results are often displayed in charts or written as narratives.
There is a proposal to implement and launch a Wikimedia project for genealogy and open pedigrees.
With the advent of the Internet, the number of resources readily accessible to genealogists has vastly increased, resulting in an explosion of interest in the topic.
Such societies generally serve a specific geographical area.
All evidence and conclusions, together with the documentation that supports them, is then assembled to create a cohesive genealogy or family history.
A derivative source is information taken from another source.
The family tree of Confucius has been maintained for over 2,500 years and is listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the largest extant family tree.
Formerly handwritten, these can now be generated by genealogical software.
It is important to remember that a person may change occupations, and that titles change over time as well.
Most genealogy software programs can export information about persons and their relationships in a standardized format called GEDCOM.
Genealogists use a wide variety of records in their research.
The Genealogical Society of Utah, founded in 1894, later became the Family History Department of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS).
There are various websites which do this.
When the informant is also the person recording the information, the handwriting can be compared to other handwriting samples.
Farmer capitalized on the acceptability of antiquarianism to frame genealogy within the early republic's ideological framework of pride in one's American ancestors.
An example of a naming tradition from England, Scotland and Ireland:
Some workers no longer fit for their primary trade often took less prestigious jobs later in life, while others moved upwards in prestige.
Some projects prepare name indexes for records, such as probate cases, and publish the indexes, either online or off.
Most programs can generate basic kinship charts and reports, allow for the import of digital photographs and the export of data in the GEDCOM format (short for GEnealogical Data COMmunication) so that data can be shared with those using other genealogy software.
Available sources may include vital records (civil or church registration), censuses, and tax assessments.
Both try to understand not just where and when people lived, but also their lifestyles, biographies, and motivations.
The pursuit of family history and origins tends to be shaped by several motives, including the desire to carve out a place for one's family in the larger historical picture, a sense of responsibility to preserve the past for future generations, and a sense of self-satisfaction in accurate storytelling.
Children may sometimes assume stepparent, foster parent, or adoptive parent names.
Other projects transcribe or abstract records.
For further detail on the changes involved in moving from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar, see: Gregorian calendar.
Occupational dictionaries are available to explain many obscure and archaic trades.
The publication date of the Bible also provides a clue about when the dates were recorded since they could not have been recorded at any earlier date.
For example, an ostler (a keeper of horses) and a hostler (an innkeeper) could easily be confused for one another.
In many instances, genealogists must skillfully assemble indirect or circumstantial evidence to build a case for identity and kinship.
paternal grandfather
In China, India and other Asian countries, genealogy books are used to record the names, occupations, and other information about family members, with some books dating back hundreds or even thousands of years.
Secondary sources are records that are made days, weeks, months, or even years after an event.
A genealogical DNA test allows two individuals to find the probability that they are, or are not, related within an estimated number of generations.
The informant is the individual who provided the recorded information.
Historically, in Western societies the focus of genealogy was on the kinship and descent of rulers and nobles, often arguing or demonstrating the legitimacy of claims to wealth and power.
These collaborations take numerous forms.
This distinction is important because each time a source is copied, information about the record may be lost and errors may result from the copyist misreading, mistyping, or miswriting the information.
When the same ink and handwriting is used for all entries, the dates were probably written at the same time and therefore will be less reliable since the earlier dates were probably recorded well after the event.
In Germany today, family history is still often perceived as a threat to privacy rather than as a source of self-esteem.
For instance, women in many cultures have routinely used their spouse's surnames.
However, when censuses for several years concur on a piece of information that would not likely be guessed by a neighbor, it is likely that the information in these censuses was provided by a family member or other informed person.
For instance, in some Latin cultures, both the mother's family name and the father's family name are used by the children.
Shifts in political borders must also be understood.
To keep track of their citizens, governments began keeping records of persons who were neither royalty nor nobility.
To effectively conduct genealogical research, it is important to understand how the records were created, what information is included in them, and how and where to access them.
Many genealogists participate in loosely organized projects, both online and off.
Individual genetic test results are collected in databases to match people descended from a relatively recent common ancestor.
Volunteers do record lookups or take photos in their home areas for researchers who are unable to travel.
Although baptismal dates are often used to approximate birth dates, some families waited years before baptizing children, and adult baptisms are the norm in some religions.
Families may have used them some of the time, among some of their children, or not at all.
This creates a foundation for documentary research, which involves examining and evaluating historical records for evidence about ancestors and other relatives, their kinship ties, and the events that occurred in their lives.
When working with older records from Poland, where borders and place names have changed frequently in past centuries, a source with maps and sample records such as ''A Translation Guide to 19th-Century Polish-Language Civil-Registration Documents'' can be invaluable.
Primary sources are records that were made at the time of the event, for example a death certificate would be a primary source for a person's death date and place.
However, modern genealogists greatly expand this list, recognizing the need to place this information in its historical context in order to properly evaluate genealogical evidence and distinguish between same-name individuals.
Compilers sometimes draw hasty conclusions from circumstantial evidence without sufficiently examining all available sources, without properly understanding the evidence, and without appropriately indicating the level of uncertainty.
Her birth name (maiden name) may be reflected in her children's middle names; her own middle name; or dropped entirely.
Middle names may be inherited, follow naming customs, or be treated as part of the family name.
Genealogists begin their research by collecting family documents and stories.
In many cases the informant is identified in the record itself.
Likewise, descriptions of such occupations may also be problematic.
Those looking for a structured volunteer environment can join one of thousands of genealogical societies worldwide.
According to some sources, genealogy is one of the most popular topics on the Internet.
This curiosity can be particularly strong among those whose family histories were lost or unknown due to, for example, adoption or separation from family, perhaps as a result of bereavement.
a Scottish clan; a particular surname, such as in a one-name study; a small community, e.g.
For example, a census record by itself cannot be given much weight because the informant is unknown.
Many unskilled ancestors had a variety of jobs depending on the season and local trade requirements.
Family history plays a part in the practice of some religious belief systems.
FamilySearch's website includes many resources for genealogists: a FamilyTree database, historical records, digitized family history books, resources and indexing for  African American genealogy such as slave and bank records, and a Family History Research Wiki containing research guidance articles.
When the informant is not identified, one can sometimes deduce information about the identity of the person by careful examination of the source.
NEHGS publishes the ''New England Historical and Genealogical Register.''
Some schools engage students in such projects as a means to reinforce lessons regarding immigration and history.
The fifth edition of the Confucius Genealogy was printed in 2009 by the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee (CGCC).
A person may have lied in order to obtain a government benefit (such as a military pension), avoid taxation, or cover up an embarrassing situation (such as the existence of a non-marital child).
Names for old or unfamiliar local occupations may cause confusion if poorly legible.
The Dutch in New York, for example, used the patronymic system of names until 1687 when the advent of English rule mandated surname usage.
Some family trees have been maintained for considerable periods.
LDS members believe that this fulfilled a biblical prophecy stating that the prophet Elijah would return to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers."
In the same year, the date the new year began was changed.
Reliable conclusions are based on the quality of sources, ideally original records, the information within those sources, ideally primary or firsthand information, and the evidence that can be drawn, directly or indirectly, from that information.
Historically, naming traditions existed in some places and cultures.
In addition to the (SNS) websites, there are other resources that encourage genealogists to connect and share information such as http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.com/ and http://rsl.rootsweb.ancestry.com/.
Even individuals who had knowledge of the fact, sometimes intentionally or unintentionally provided false or misleading information.
Many names may be identified strongly with a particular gender; e.g., William for boys, and Mary for girls.
For example, Marga Olafsdottir is Marga, daughter of Olaf, and Olaf Thorsson is Olaf, son of Thor.
It welcomes members who can prove descent from a participant of the Salem Witch Trials or who simply choose to support the group.
Therefore, one should determine whether the date was recorded at the time of the event or at a later date.
Historical, social, and family context is essential to achieving correct identification of individuals and relationships.
For this reason, sources are generally categorized in two categories: original and derivative.
Additionally, the use of nicknames is very common.
In the 1820s, he and fellow antiquarians began to produce genealogical and antiquarian tracts in earnest, slowly gaining a devoted audience among the American people.
In 1752, England and her American colonies changed from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar.
There is a network of LDS Family HIstory Centers all over the country and around the world, where volunteers assist the public with tracing their ancestors.
Even today these records are consulted prior to marriages.
Genealogists and family historians often join family history societies, where novices can learn from more experienced researchers.
The department's research facility, the Family History Library, which has developed the most extensive genealogical record-gathering program in the world, was established to assist in tracing family lineages for special religious ceremonies which LDS adherents believe will seal family units together for eternity.
Genealogists must carefully consider who provided the information and what he or she knew.
Locations may have identical or very similar names.
People sometimes reduce their age on marriage, and those under "full age" may increase their age in order to marry or to join the armed forces.
Between 2006 and 2012, the FamilySearch indexing effort produced more than 1 billion searchable records.
Also the ability to recall is affected by the significance that the event had to the individual.
For example, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has a doctrine of baptism for the dead, which necessitates that members of that faith engage in family history research.
Maps and gazetteers are important sources for understanding the places researched.
Social networking service (SNS) websites allow genealogists to share data and build their family trees online.
Before Farmer's efforts, tracing one's genealogy was seen as an attempt by colonists to secure a measure of social standing within the British Empire, an aim that was counter to the new republic's egalitarian, future-oriented ethos.
They show the relationship of an area to neighboring communities and may be of help in understanding migration patterns.
Not until 1856 in Denmark and 1923 in Norway were there laws requiring surnames.
One type especially prone to recollection errors is dates.
German family historians thus tend to emphasize instead how family history can contribute to learning and science.
New Zealand Māori, for example, learn whakapapa (genealogies) to discover who they are.
A great deal of information is available for British ancestry with growing resources for other ethnic groups.
Immigrants to America often Americanized their names.
While the locations of ancestors' residences and life events are core elements of the genealogist's quest, they can often be confusing.
Ages over 15 in the 1841 census in the UK are rounded down to the next lower multiple of five years.
Though Farmer died in 1839, his efforts led to the creation of the New England Historic Genealogical Society (NEHGS), one of New England's oldest and most prominent organizations dedicated to the preservation of public records.
Family Bibles are often a source for dates, but can be written from memory long after the event.
In genealogical research, information can be obtained from primary or secondary sources.
Patronymics are names that identify an individual based on the father's name.
Members can upload their family trees and contact other family historians to fill in gaps in their research.
Occupational data may be reported in occupational licenses, tax assessments, membership records of professional organizations, trade directories, census returns, and vital records (civil registration).
Offering record lookups for particular geographic areas is another common service.
