The deflection of light by gravity is responsible for a new class of astronomical phenomena.
This solution laid the groundwork for the description of the final stages of gravitational collapse, and the objects known today as black holes.
Using the initial-value-formulation of general relativity (cf.
In special relativity, conservation of energy–momentum corresponds to the statement that the energy–momentum tensor is divergence-free.
In this geometric description, tidal effects—the relative acceleration of bodies in free fall—are related to the derivative of the connection, showing how the modified geometry is caused by the presence of mass.
More recently, it has been measured for test masses aboard the satellite Gravity Probe B to a precision of better than 0.3%.
Also the Mars Global Surveyor probe around Mars has been used.
Given the difficulty of finding exact solutions, Einstein's field equations are also solved frequently by numerical integration on a computer, or by considering small perturbations of exact solutions.
Various pulsar timing arrays are using millisecond pulsars to detect gravitational waves in the 10−9 to 10−6 Hertz frequency range, which originate from binary supermassive blackholes.
Even more remarkably, there is a general set of laws known as black hole mechanics, which is analogous to the laws of thermodynamics.
Using this formalism, it can be shown that black holes emit a blackbody spectrum of particles known as Hawking radiation, leading to the possibility that they evaporate over time.
General relativity generalizes special relativity and Newton's law of universal gravitation, providing a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time, or spacetime.
Passage from the exterior to the interior is still possible, showing that the boundary, the black hole's ''horizon'', is not a physical barrier.
Approximate solutions may also be found by perturbation theories such as linearized gravity and its generalization, the post-Newtonian expansion, both of which were developed by Einstein.
In 1907, beginning with a simple thought experiment involving an observer in free fall, he embarked on what would be an eight-year search for a relativistic theory of gravity.
a description which is valid in any desired coordinate system.
Spacetime can be explored by following up on timelike and lightlike geodesics—all possible ways that light and particles in free fall can travel.
Predictions, all successful, include the initial abundance of chemical elements formed in a period of primordial nucleosynthesis, the large-scale structure of the universe, and the existence and properties of a "thermal echo" from the early cosmos, the cosmic background radiation.
Furthermore, each Riemannian metric is naturally associated with one particular kind of connection, the Levi-Civita connection, and this is, in fact, the connection that satisfies the equivalence principle and makes space locally Minkowskian (that is, in suitable locally inertial coordinates, the metric is Minkowskian, and its first partial derivatives and the connection coefficients vanish).
This is readily described by the expanding cosmological solutions found by Friedmann in 1922, which do not require a cosmological constant.
These are one of several analogies between weak-field gravity and electromagnetism in that, they are analogous to electromagnetic waves.
Whenever the ratio of an object's mass to its radius becomes sufficiently large, general relativity predicts the formation of a black hole, a region of space from which nothing, not even light, can escape.
However, the theorems say little about the properties of singularities, and much of current research is devoted to characterizing these entities' generic structure (hypothesized e.g.
Even if the multiple images are too close to each other to be resolved, the effect can still be measured, e.g., as an overall brightening of the target object; a number of such "microlensing events" have been observed.
The core concept of general-relativistic model-building is that of a solution of Einstein's equations.
About 90% of all matter appears to be dark matter, which has mass (or, equivalently, gravitational influence), but does not interact electromagnetically and, hence, cannot be observed directly.
Semi-classical calculations indicate that indeed they do, with the surface gravity playing the role of temperature in Planck's law.
Such effects are known as gravitational lensing.
With this additional condition—the covariant divergence of the energy–momentum tensor, and hence of whatever is on the other side of the equation, is zero— the simplest set of equations are what are called Einstein's (field) equations:
Predicted in 1916 by Albert Einstein,  there are gravitational waves: ripples in the metric of spacetime that propagate at the speed of light.
On the left-hand side is the Einstein tensor, a specific divergence-free combination of the Ricci tensor  and the metric.
According to Newton's law of gravity, and independently verified by experiments such as that of Eötvös and its successors (see Eötvös experiment), there is a universality of free fall (also known as the weak equivalence principle, or the universal equality of inertial and passive-gravitational mass): the trajectory of a test body in free fall depends only on its position and initial speed, but not on any of its material properties.
The best-known exact solutions, and also those most interesting from a physics point of view, are the Schwarzschild solution, the Reissner–Nordström solution and the Kerr metric, each corresponding to a certain type of black hole in an otherwise empty universe, and the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker and de Sitter universes, each describing an expanding cosmos.
As in the Newtonian case, this is suggestive of a more general geometry.
Examples are Brans–Dicke theory, teleparallelism, f(R) gravity and Einstein–Cartan theory.
This is not the case for a close binary pulsar, a system of two orbiting neutron stars, one of which is a pulsar: from the pulsar, observers on Earth receive a regular series of radio pulses that can serve as a highly accurate clock, which allows precise measurements of the orbital period.
For example, it implies the existence of black holes—regions of space in which space and time are distorted in such a way that nothing, not even light, can escape—as an end-state for massive stars.
Due to this loss, the distance between the two orbiting bodies decreases, and so does their orbital period.
This was the first detection of gravitational waves, albeit indirect, for which they were awarded the 1993 Nobel Prize in physics.
Once a small number of parameters (for example the universe's mean matter density) have been fixed by astronomical observation, further observational data can be used to put the models to the test.
There is strong evidence that the laws of black hole mechanics are, in fact, a subset of the laws of thermodynamics, and that the black hole area is proportional to its entropy.
They are defined by the set of light cones (see image).
When there is no matter present, so that the energy–momentum tensor vanishes, the results are the vacuum Einstein equations,
A simplified version of this is embodied in Einstein's elevator experiment, illustrated in the figure on the right: for an observer in a small enclosed room, it is impossible to decide, by mapping the trajectory of bodies such as a dropped ball, whether the room is at rest in a gravitational field, or in free space aboard a rocket that is accelerating at a rate equal to that of the gravitational field.
Matter and geometry must satisfy Einstein's equations, so in particular, the matter's energy–momentum tensor must be divergence-free.
Space, in this construction, still has the ordinary Euclidean geometry.
Just as in classical physics, it can be shown that these masses are positive.
This limits the energy that can be extracted by classical means from a rotating black hole (e.g.
One attempt to overcome these limitations is string theory, a quantum theory not of point particles, but of minute one-dimensional extended objects.
By 1929, however, the work of Hubble and others had shown that our universe is expanding.
But some solutions of Einstein's equations have "ragged edges"—regions known as spacetime singularities, where the paths of light and falling particles come to an abrupt end, and geometry becomes ill-defined.
In consequence, an exploration of all light worldlines (null geodesics) yields key information about the spacetime's causal structure.
These theories rely on general relativity to describe a curved background spacetime, and define a generalized quantum field theory to describe the behavior of quantum matter within that spacetime.
This and related predictions follow from the fact that light follows what is called a light-like or null geodesic—a generalization of the straight lines along which light travels in classical physics.
In principle, such methods may be applied to any system, given sufficient computer resources, and may address fundamental questions such as naked singularities.
Nevertheless, there are possibilities to define a system's total mass, either using a hypothetical "infinitely distant observer" (ADM mass) or suitable symmetries (Komar mass).
Einstein's theory has important astrophysical implications.
This is stated by the black hole uniqueness theorems: "black holes have no hair", that is, no distinguishing marks like the hairstyles of humans.
But using different assumptions about the special-relativistic frames (such as their being earth-fixed, or in free fall), one can derive different predictions for the gravitational redshift, that is, the way in which the frequency of light shifts as the light propagates through a gravitational field (cf.
Matching the theory's prediction to observational results for planetary orbits (or, equivalently, assuring that the weak-gravity, low-speed limit is Newtonian mechanics), the proportionality constant can be fixed as κ = 8π''G''/''c''4, with ''G'' the gravitational constant and ''c'' the speed of light.
Closely related to light deflection is the gravitational time delay (or Shapiro delay), the phenomenon that light signals take longer to move through a gravitational field than they would in the absence of that field.
This leads to a modification of the original laws of black hole mechanics: for instance, as the second law of black hole mechanics becomes part of the second law of thermodynamics, it is possible for black hole area to decrease—as long as other processes ensure that, overall, entropy increases.
As thermodynamical objects with non-zero temperature, black holes should emit thermal radiation.
In general relativity, the apsides of any orbit (the point of the orbiting body's closest approach to the system's center of mass) will precess—the orbit is not an ellipse, but akin to an ellipse that rotates on its focus, resulting in a rose curve-like shape (see image).
A European space-based detector, eLISA / NGO, is currently under development, with a precursor mission (LISA Pathfinder) having launched in December 2015.
Ever more precise solar system tests confirmed the theory's predictive power, and relativistic cosmology, too, became amenable to direct observational tests.
Since then, several other binary pulsars have been found, in particular the double pulsar PSR J0737-3039, in which both stars are pulsars.
The main reason is that the gravitational field—like any physical field—must be ascribed a certain energy, but that it proves to be fundamentally impossible to localize that energy.
Observational data that is taken as evidence for dark energy and dark matter could indicate the need for new physics.
Lemaître used these solutions to formulate the earliest version of the Big Bang models, in which our universe has evolved from an extremely hot and dense earlier state.
However, at the current level of accuracy, these observations cannot distinguish between general relativity and other theories in which the equivalence principle is valid.
Gravitational time dilation in the Earth's gravitational field has been measured numerous times using atomic clocks, while ongoing validation is provided as a side effect of the operation of the Global Positioning System (GPS).
(The defining symmetry of special relativity is the Poincaré group, which includes translations and rotations.)
In order to describe situations in which gravity is strong enough to influence (quantum) matter, yet not strong enough to require quantization itself, physicists have formulated quantum field theories in curved spacetime.
The resulting Newton–Cartan theory is a geometric formulation of Newtonian gravity using only covariant concepts, i.e.
In an expanding universe, an observer may find that some regions of the past cannot be observed ("particle horizon"), and some regions of the future cannot be influenced (event horizon).
The preferred inertial motions are related to the geometry of space and time: in the standard reference frames of classical mechanics, objects in free motion move along straight lines at constant speed.
Accretion, the falling of dust or gaseous matter onto stellar or supermassive black holes, is thought to be responsible for some spectacularly luminous astronomical objects, notably diverse kinds of active galactic nuclei on galactic scales and stellar-size objects such as microquasars.
In Newtonian gravity, the source is mass.
But as early as 1916, the astrophysicist Karl Schwarzschild found the first non-trivial exact solution to the Einstein field equations, the Schwarzschild metric.
Some exact solutions describe gravitational waves without any approximation, e.g., a wave train traveling through empty space or Gowdy universes, varieties of an expanding cosmos filled with gravitational waves.
It predicts an overall rotation (precession) of planetary orbits, as well as orbital decay caused by the emission of gravitational waves and effects related to the relativity of direction.
Gravitational lensing has developed into a tool of observational astronomy.
In the same year, the first steps towards generalizing Schwarzschild's solution to electrically charged objects were taken, which eventually resulted in the Reissner–Nordström solution, now associated with electrically charged black holes.
Using the equivalence principle, this tensor is readily generalized to curved space-time.
where '''' is the spacetime metric.
General relativity can be understood by examining its similarities with and departures from classical physics.
The first observation of a decrease in orbital period due to the emission of gravitational waves was made by Hulse and Taylor, using the binary pulsar PSR1913+16 they had discovered in 1974.
All candidate theories still have major formal and conceptual problems to overcome.
There have been numerous successful tests of this prediction.
They are expected to yield information about black holes and other dense objects such as neutron stars and white dwarfs, about certain kinds of supernova implosions, and about processes in the very early universe, including the signature of certain types of hypothetical cosmic string.
Light sent down into a gravity well is blueshifted, whereas light sent in the opposite direction (i.e., climbing out of the gravity well) is redshifted; collectively, these two effects are known as the gravitational frequency shift.
This radiation is known as Hawking radiation (cf.
As briefly mentioned above, this radiation plays an important role for the thermodynamics of black holes.
It must be combined with a coordinate condition, which is analogous to gauge fixing in other field theories.
Since then other—similarly impractical—GR solutions containing CTCs have been found, such as the Tipler cylinder and traversable wormholes.
Einstein first derived this result by using an approximate metric representing the Newtonian limit and treating the orbiting body as a test particle.
The relation is specified by the Einstein field equations, a system of partial differential equations.
Some follow directly from the theory's axioms, whereas others have become clear only in the course of many years of research that followed Einstein's initial publication.
An extension of this expansion is the parametrized post-Newtonian (PPN) formalism, which allows quantitative comparisons between the predictions of general relativity and alternative theories.
Merging black hole binaries should lead to some of the strongest gravitational wave signals reaching detectors here on Earth, and the phase directly before the merger ("chirp") could be used as a "standard candle" to deduce the distance to the merger events–and hence serve as a probe of cosmic expansion at large distances.
A distant observer will determine that objects close to the mass get "dragged around".
For instance, by the second law of black hole mechanics, the area of the event horizon of a general black hole will never decrease with time, analogous to the entropy of a thermodynamic system.
Each solution of Einstein's equation encompasses the whole history of a universe&nbsp;— it is not just some snapshot of how things are, but a whole, possibly matter-filled, spacetime.
The Einstein field equations are nonlinear and very difficult to solve.
Several relativistic effects are directly related to the relativity of direction.
Corresponding global definitions exist for momentum and angular momentum.
Special relativity is defined in the absence of gravity, so for practical applications, it is a suitable model whenever gravity can be neglected.
Drawing further upon the analogy with geometric Newtonian gravity, it is natural to assume that the field equation for gravity relates this tensor and the Ricci tensor, which describes a particular class of tidal effects: the change in volume for a small cloud of test particles that are initially at rest, and then fall freely.
The Ricci tensor itself is related to the more general Riemann curvature tensor as
General relativity is a metric theory of gravitation.
During that period, general relativity remained something of a curiosity among physical theories.
General relativity plays a central role in modelling all these phenomena, and observations provide strong evidence for the existence of black holes with the properties predicted by the theory.
Furthermore, the theory does not contain any invariant geometric background structures, i.e.
Observations of gravitational waves promise to complement observations in the electromagnetic spectrum.
In global geometry, the object of study is not one particular solution (or family of solutions) to Einstein's equations.
At very high energies, however, the perturbative results are badly divergent and lead to models devoid of predictive power ("perturbative non-renormalizability").
After numerous detours and false starts, his work culminated in the presentation to the Prussian Academy of Science in November 1915 of what are now known as the Einstein field equations.
As it is constructed using tensors, general relativity exhibits general covariance: its laws—and further laws formulated within the general relativistic framework—take on the same form in all coordinate systems.
The solutions require extreme physical conditions unlikely ever to occur in practice, and it remains an open question whether further laws of physics will eliminate them completely.
Physicists began to understand the concept of a black hole, and to identify quasars as one of these objects' astrophysical manifestations.
The matter must, of course, also satisfy whatever additional equations were imposed on its properties.
The cosmic censorship hypothesis states that all realistic future singularities (no perfect symmetries, matter with realistic properties) are safely hidden away behind a horizon, and thus invisible to all distant observers.
The predictions of general relativity have been confirmed in all observations and experiments to date.
The hope is to obtain a quantity useful for general statements about isolated systems, such as a more precise formulation of the hoop conjecture.
In February 2016, the Advanced LIGO team announced that they had detected gravitational waves from a black hole merger.
Aware of the importance of causal structure, Roger Penrose and others developed what is known as global geometry.
Although general relativity is not the only relativistic theory of gravity, it is the simplest theory that is consistent with experimental data.
Instead, gravity corresponds to changes in the properties of space and time, which in turn changes the straightest-possible paths that objects will naturally follow.
Astronomically, the most important property of compact objects is that they provide a supremely efficient mechanism for converting gravitational energy into electromagnetic radiation.
In mathematical terms, this defines a Conformal structure or conformal geometry.
In special relativity, mass turns out to be part of a more general quantity called the energy–momentum tensor, which includes both energy and momentum densities as well as stress (that is, pressure and shear).
If a massive object is situated between the astronomer and a distant target object with appropriate mass and relative distances, the astronomer will see multiple distorted images of the target.
More generally, processes close to a massive body run more slowly when compared with processes taking place farther away; this effect is known as gravitational time dilation.
General relativity differs from classical mechanics in a number of predictions concerning orbiting bodies.
If one excludes from the system's total mass the energy being carried away to infinity by gravitational waves, the result is the Bondi mass at null infinity.
These equations specify how the geometry of space and time is influenced by whatever matter and radiation are present, and form the core of Einstein's general theory of relativity.
is the curvature scalar.
Rather, relations that hold true for all geodesics, such as the Raychaudhuri equation, and additional non-specific assumptions about the nature of matter (usually in the form of energy conditions) are used to derive general results.
by the BKL conjecture).
However, for weak fields, a linear approximation can be made.
On February 11, 2016, the Advanced LIGO team announced that they had directly detected gravitational waves from a pair of black holes merging.
Irrespective of the complexity of a gravitating object collapsing to form a black hole, the object that results (having emitted gravitational waves) is very simple.
it is background independent.
However, there is a bewildering variety of possible inflationary scenarios, which cannot be restricted by current observations.
These decompositions show that the spacetime evolution equations of general relativity are well-behaved: solutions always exist, and are uniquely defined, once suitable initial conditions have been specified.
The notion of evolution equations is intimately tied in with another aspect of general relativistic physics.
As can be shown using simple thought experiments following the free-fall trajectories of different test particles, the result of transporting spacetime vectors that can denote a particle's velocity (time-like vectors) will vary with the particle's trajectory; mathematically speaking, the Newtonian connection is not integrable.
Isotropic and homogeneous solutions of these enhanced equations, the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker solutions, allow physicists to model a universe that has evolved over the past 14&nbsp;billion&nbsp;years from a hot, early Big Bang phase.
According to general relativity, a binary system will emit gravitational waves, thereby losing energy.
The metric tensor that defines the geometry—in particular, how lengths and angles are measured—is not the Minkowski metric of special relativity, it is a generalization known as a semi- or pseudo-Riemannian metric.
The best-known example is the ADM formalism.
Observations of binary pulsars provide strong indirect evidence for the existence of gravitational waves (see Orbital decay, above).
There is no generally accepted description of this new kind of matter, within the framework of known particle physics or otherwise.
This is done in "3+1" formulations, where spacetime is split into three space dimensions and one time dimension.
Even in flat Minkowski space, when described by an accelerated observer (Rindler space), there will be horizons associated with a semi-classical radiation known as Unruh radiation.
The best-known examples are black holes: if mass is compressed into a sufficiently compact region of space (as specified in the hoop conjecture, the relevant length scale is the Schwarzschild radius), no light from inside can escape to the outside.
Although the bending of light can also be derived by extending the universality of free fall to light, the angle of deflection resulting from such calculations is only half the value given by general relativity.
To understand Einstein's equations as partial differential equations, it is helpful to formulate them in a way that describes the evolution of the universe over time.
One is geodetic precession: the axis direction of a gyroscope in free fall in curved spacetime will change when compared, for instance, with the direction of light received from distant stars—even though such a gyroscope represents the way of keeping a direction as stable as possible ("parallel transport").
As one examines suitable model spacetimes (either the exterior Schwarzschild solution or, for more than a single mass, the post-Newtonian expansion), several effects of gravity on light propagation emerge.
In general relativity the perihelion shift &sigma;, expressed in radians per revolution, is approximately given by:
As intriguing as geometric Newtonian gravity may be, its basis, classical mechanics, is merely a limiting case of (special) relativistic mechanics.
At its core are Einstein's equations, which describe the relation between the geometry of a four-dimensional, pseudo-Riemannian manifold representing spacetime, and the energy–momentum contained in that spacetime.
Such formulations of Einstein's field equations are the basis of numerical relativity.
General relativity has emerged as a highly successful model of gravitation and cosmology, which has so far passed many unambiguous observational and experimental tests.
The problem of quantum gravity and the question of the reality of spacetime singularities remain open.
Kurt Gödel showed that solutions to Einstein's equations exist that contain closed timelike curves (CTCs), which allow for loops in time.
However, there is an ambiguity once gravity comes into play.
Statistical evaluations of lensing data provide valuable insight into the structural evolution of galaxies.
The expansion involves a series of terms; the first terms represent Newtonian gravity, whereas the later terms represent ever smaller corrections to Newton's theory due to general relativity.
Where  is symmetric.
Such linearized gravitational waves are sufficiently accurate to describe the exceedingly weak waves that are expected to arrive here on Earth from far-off cosmic events, which typically result in relative distances increasing and decreasing by  or less.
At the base of classical mechanics is the notion that a body's motion can be described as a combination of free (or inertial) motion, and deviations from this free motion.
A sine wave propagating through such a ring towards the reader distorts the ring in a characteristic, rhythmic fashion (animated image to the right).
This formula, too, is readily generalized to curved spacetime by replacing partial derivatives with their curved-manifold counterparts, covariant derivatives studied in differential geometry.
From this, one can deduce that spacetime is curved.
The actual measurements show that free-falling frames are the ones in which light propagates as it does in special relativity.
Paraphrasing the relativist John Archibald Wheeler, spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve.
Relativistic precession has been observed for all planets that allow for accurate precession measurements (Mercury, Venus, and Earth), as well as in binary pulsar systems, where it is larger by five orders of magnitude.
The derivation outlined in the previous section contains all the information needed to define general relativity, describe its key properties, and address a question of crucial importance in physics, namely how the theory can be used for model-building.
The Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker solutions and other spacetimes describing universes have past singularities on which worldlines begin, namely Big Bang singularities, and some have future singularities (Big Crunch) as well.
However, there are strong indications the theory is incomplete.
But for gravitational waves produced in astrophysically relevant situations, such as the merger of two black holes, numerical methods are presently the only way to construct appropriate models.
The same experimental data shows that time as measured by clocks in a gravitational field—proper time, to give the technical term—does not follow the rules of special relativity.
In particular, accretion can lead to relativistic jets, focused beams of highly energetic particles that are being flung into space at almost light speed.
In the long run, they are rather simple objects characterized by eleven parameters specifying energy, linear momentum, angular momentum, location at a specified time and electric charge.
Similarly, a 1919 expedition led by Eddington confirmed general relativity's prediction for the deflection of starlight by the Sun during the total solar eclipse of May 29, 1919, making Einstein instantly famous.
On the right-hand side, '''' is the energy–momentum tensor.
Attempts to generalize ordinary quantum field theories, used in elementary particle physics to describe fundamental interactions, so as to include gravity have led to serious problems.
It describes the state of matter and geometry everywhere and at every moment in that particular universe.
Phenomena that in classical mechanics are ascribed to the action of the force of gravity (such as free-fall, orbital motion, and spacecraft trajectories), correspond to inertial motion within a curved geometry of spacetime in general relativity; there is no gravitational force deflecting objects from their natural, straight paths.
All tensors are written in abstract index notation.
Having formulated the relativistic, geometric version of the effects of gravity, the question of gravity's source remains.
Bringing gravity into play, and assuming the universality of free fall, an analogous reasoning as in the previous section applies: there are no global inertial frames.
In the language of spacetime geometry, it is not measured by the Minkowski metric.
Einstein's equations are nonlinear partial differential equations and, as such, difficult to solve exactly.
Since Einstein's equations are non-linear, arbitrarily strong gravitational waves do not obey linear superposition, making their description difficult.
Given both Einstein's equations and suitable equations for the properties of matter, such a solution consists of a specific semi-Riemannian manifold (usually defined by giving the metric in specific coordinates), and specific matter fields defined on that manifold.
Assuming that the equivalence principle holds, gravity influences the passage of time.
