In 1977, Kelly starred in the poorly received action film Viva Knievel, with the popular stuntman, Evel Knievel.
''For Me and My Gal'' performed very well and, in the face of much internal resistance, Arthur Freed of MGM picked up the other half of Kelly's contract.
They also performed in local nightclubs.
Bosley Crowther described it as, "...whoop-de-doo'' ... one of the finest ever put on the screen."
He had been hired by Robert Alton, who had staged a show at the Pittsburgh Playhouse where he was impressed by Kelly's teaching skills.
MGM had lost faith in Kelly's box-office appeal, and as a result ''It's Always Fair Weather'' "premiered" at seventeen drive-in theatres around the Los Angeles metroplex.
''—as the American ambassador's secretary who supports Mary Martin while she sings ''My Heart Belongs to Daddy''.
However, his main interest was in ballet, which he studied under Kotchetovsky in the early Thirties.
After Kelly returned to Hollywood in 1946, MGM had nothing planned and used him in a routine, black-and-white movie: ''Living in a Big Way''.
The film also marked the debut of Leslie Caron, who Kelly had spotted in Paris and brought to Hollywood.
He acknowledged that, in spite of his efforts — in TV programs such as ''Dancing: A Man's Game'' (1958) for example — the situation changed little over the years.
When we came to do ''On the Town'', I knew it was time for Stanley to get screen credit because we weren't boss-assistant anymore but co-creators."
In Kelly's next film, ''Anchors Aweigh'' (1945), MGM gave him a free hand to devise a range of dance routines—including a celebrated animated dance with Jerry Mouse, and his duets with co-star Frank Sinatra.
In particular, he wanted to create a completely different image from that associated with Fred Astaire, not least because he believed his physique didn't suit such refined elegance: "I used to envy his cool aristocratic style, so intimate and contained.
He created a memorable routine dancing to his own reflection.
When Alton moved on to choreograph ''One for the Money'' he hired Kelly to act, sing, and dance in eight routines.
Though the film did not initially generate the same enthusiasm as ''An American in Paris'', it subsequently overtook the earlier film to occupy its current pre-eminent place among critics and filmgoers alike.
He was also heavily influenced by an African-American dancer, Dancing Dotson, whom he saw perform at Loew's Penn Theatre around 1929.
Kelly's athleticism gave his moves a distinctive broad, muscular quality, and this was a very deliberate choice on his part, as he explained: "There's a strong link between sports and dancing, and my own dancing springs from my early days as an athlete...I think dancing is a man's game and if he does it well he does it better than a woman."
However, after becoming disenchanted by the Roman Catholic Church's support for Francisco Franco against the Spanish Republic during the Spanish Civil War, he officially severed his ties with the church in September 1939.
He was raised as a Roman Catholic, and he was a member of the Good Shepherd Parish and the Catholic Motion Picture Guild in Beverly Hills, California.
According to Kelly: "...when you are involved in doing choreography for film you must have expert assistants.
He also sought to break from the class-conscious conventions of the 1930s and early 40s, when top hat and tails or tuxedos were the norm, by dancing in casual or everyday work clothes, so as to make his dancing more relevant to the cinema-going public.
They both rebelled, as recalled by Kelly: "We didn't like it much and were continually involved in fistfights with the neighborhood boys who called us sissies&nbsp;...
Kelly was born in the East Liberty neighborhood of Pittsburgh.
Prior to his contract, he also managed to fit in choreographing the stage production of ''Best Foot Forward''.
When he was eight, Kelly's mother enrolled him and his brother James in dance classes.
His father was born in Peterborough, Ontario, Canada, to an Irish Canadian family.
In 1939, he was selected for a musical revue, ''One for the Money'', produced by the actress Katharine Cornell, who was known for finding and hiring talented young actors.
Johnny Green, head of music at MGM at the time, said of him:
Reviewing the film, Farber enthused, "Kelly is the most exciting dancer to appear in Hollywood movies."
The third picture he completed was a co-production between MGM and himself, a cheapie B-film, ''The Happy Road'', set in his beloved France, his first foray in a new role as producer-director-actor.
It is also notable for Kelly's work with The Nicholas Brothers – the leading black dancers of their day – in a virtuoso dance routine.
His first wife, Betsy Blair, was suspected of being a Communist sympathizer and when United Artists, who had offered Blair a part in ''Marty'' (1955), were considering withdrawing her under pressure from the American Legion, Kelly successfully threatened MGM's influence on United Artists with a pullout from ''It's Always Fair Weather'' unless his wife was restored to the part.
His period of greatest prominence coincided with the McCarthy era in the U.S.
I just say that if a man dances effeminately he dances badly — just as if a woman comes out on stage and starts to sing bass.
His colleagues at this time noticed his great commitment to rehearsal and hard work.
He directed veteran actors James Stewart and Henry Fonda in the comedy western ''The Cheyenne Social Club'' (1970) which performed poorly at the box-office.
John Wayne is a graceful man and so are some of the great ball players...but, of course, they don't run the risk of being called sissies."
You can spot many male dancers who have this tuition by their arm movements — they are soft, limp and feminine."
He joined 20th Century Fox in 1965, but had little to do—partly due to his decision to decline assignments away from Los Angeles for family reasons.
Kelly himself refused to categorize his style: "I don't have a name for my style of dancing...It's certainly hybrid...I've borrowed from the modern dance, from the classical, and certainly from the American folk dance – tap-dancing, jitterbugging...But I have tried to develop a style which is indigenous to the environment in which I was reared."
I never let technique get in the way of mood or continuity."
In 1947, he was part of the Committee for the First Amendment, the Hollywood delegation that flew to Washington to protest at the first official hearings by the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
The result was ''Pas de Dieux'', based on Greek mythology, combined with the music of George Gershwin's ''Concerto in F''.
The first of these, ''It's Always Fair Weather'' (1956) co-directed with Donen, was a musical satire on television and advertising, and includes his famous roller skate dance routine to ''I Like Myself'', and a dance trio with Michael Kidd and Dan Dailey that Kelly used to experiment with the widescreen possibilities of Cinemascope.
There followed in quick succession two musicals which have secured Kelly's reputation as a major figure in the American musical film, ''An American in Paris'' (1951) and – probably the most popular and admired of all film musicals – ''Singin' in the Rain'' (1952).
In 1958, he directed Rodgers and Hammerstein's musical play ''Flower Drum Song''.
He isn't cruel but he is tough, and if Gene believed in something he didn't care who he was talking to, whether it was Louis B. Mayer or the gatekeeper.
He also appeared in three major TV specials: ''New York, New York'' (1966), ''The Julie Andrews' Show'' (1965), and ''Jack and the Beanstalk'' (1967)—a show he produced and directed that again combined cartoon animation and live dance, winning him an Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program.
In the interim, he capitalized on his swashbuckling image as d'Artagnan in ''The Three Musketeers''—and also appeared with Vera-Ellen in the ''Slaughter on Tenth Avenue'' ballet in ''Words and Music'' (1948).
Among others, he starred in many successful musical films throughout the 1940s, including ''For Me and My Gal'' (1942), ''Du Barry Was a Lady'' (1943), ''Thousands Cheer'' (1943), ''The Three Musketeers'' (1948) and ''On the Town'' (1949).
This venture was successful enough that they retained his services for seven years, until he departed for New York.
Kelly continued to make some film appearances, such as Hornbeck in the 1960 Hollywood production of ''Inherit the Wind''.
He remained married to Coyne until her death in 1973.
He especially acknowledged the influence of George M. Cohan: "I have a lot of Cohan in me.
He was briefly taught by Frank Harrington, an African-American tap specialist from New York.
His first Broadway assignment, in November 1938, was as a dancer in Cole Porter's ''Leave It to Me!
In the same year he received his first assignment as a Broadway choreographer, for ''Billy Rose's Diamond Horseshoe''.
It was a major success, and led to his being honored with the Chevalier of the Legion d'Honneur by the French Government.
He attended St. Raphael Elementary School in the Morningside neighborhood of Pittsburgh and graduated from Peabody High School at age sixteen.
Despite this, noted critic Manny Farber was moved to praise Kelly's "attitude", "clarity", and "feeling" as an actor while inauspiciously concluding, "The two things he does least well – singing and dancing – are what he is given most consistently to do."
Best known today for his performances in films such as ''An American in Paris'' (1951), ''Anchors Aweigh'' (1945), and ''Singin' in the Rain'' (1952), he was a dominant force in musical films until they fell out of fashion in the late 1950s.
I don't object to that as long as they don't dance effeminately.
This separation was prompted, in part, by a trip Kelly made to Mexico in which he became convinced of the Church’s failure in helping the poor.
It too sold few movie tickets.
He became involved in the university's Cap and Gown Club, which staged original musical productions.
He's a hard taskmaster and he loves hard work.
The iconic performance was enough for Manny Farber to completely reverse his previous assessment of Kelly's skills.
In December 1951, he signed a contract with MGM that sent him to Europe for nineteen months to use MGM funds frozen in Europe to make three pictures while personally benefiting from tax exemptions.
They had one child, Kerry (b.
He was stationed in the Photographic Section, Washington D.C., where he was involved in writing and directing a range of documentaries, and this stimulated his interest in the production side of film-making.
5'' (1943) and in ''Christmas Holiday'' (1944), he took the male lead in Cole Porter's ''Du Barry Was a Lady'' (1943) opposite Lucille Ball (in a part originally intended for Ann Sothern).
'', although his 1955 film ''It's Always Fair Weather'', in later life, gained recognition among his fans largely due to his musical and dance performances.
Kelly continued to make frequent TV appearances and, in 1980, appeared in an acting and dancing role with Olivia Newton-John in ''Xanadu'' (1980)—an expensive theatrical flop that has since attained a cult following.
I needed one to watch my performance, and one to work with the cameraman on the timing..without such people as Stanley, Carol Haney and Jeanne Coyne I could never have done these things.
In 1985 Kelly served as executive producer and co-host of ''That's Dancing!''
Naval Air Service and was commissioned as lieutenant junior grade.
His final film project was in 1994 for the animated film ''Cats Don't Dance'', released in 1997 and dedicated to him, on which Kelly acted as an uncredited choreographic consultant.
Kelly received an Academy Honorary Award in 1952 for his career achievements.
Kelly served as a teacher at the studio during his undergraduate and law student years at Pitt.
After leaving MGM, Kelly returned to stage work.
Next followed Kelly's last musical film for MGM, ''Les Girls'' (1957), in which he partnered a trio of leading ladies, Mitzi Gaynor, Kay Kendall and Taina Elg.
He began to increasingly focus on performing, and later claimed: "With time I became disenchanted with teaching because the ratio of girls to boys was more than ten to one, and once the girls reached sixteen the dropout rate was very high."
Now regarded as a classic, the film was ahead of its time, but flopped at the box-office.
– a celebration of the history of dance in the American musical.
It was midnight and we had been rehearsing since eight in the morning.
''Singin' in the Rain'' featured Kelly's celebrated and much imitated solo dance routine to the title song, along with the "Moses Supposes" routine with Donald O'Connor and the "Broadway Melody" finale with Cyd Charisse.
It's an Irish quality, a jaw-jutting, up-on-the-toes cockiness – which is a good quality for a male dancer to have."
This led to a lead part in his next picture, with Judy Garland and director Vincente Minnelli— a musical film version of S.N.
He achieved a significant breakthrough as a dancer on film when MGM loaned him to Columbia to work with Rita Hayworth in ''Cover Girl'' (1944), a film that foreshadowed the best of his future work.
At the peak of his creative powers, Kelly made what in retrospect some see as a mistake.
Kelly's first big breakthrough was in the Pulitzer Prize-winning ''The Time of Your Life'', which opened on October 25, 1939—in which, for the first time on Broadway, he danced to his own choreography.
His many innovations transformed the Hollywood musical and he is credited with almost single-handedly making the ballet form commercially acceptable to film audiences.
Unfortunately, people confuse gracefulness with softness.
After graduating in 1933, he continued to be active with the Cap and Gown Club, serving as the director from 1934 to 1938.
He was the third son of James Patrick Joseph Kelly, a phonograph salesman, and his wife Harriet Catherine Curran.
In 1970, he made another TV special: ''Gene Kelly and 50 Girls'' and was invited to bring the show to Las Vegas, Nevada—which he did for an eight-week stint on the condition he be paid more than any artist had ever been paid there.
After his death it was reported that Kelly had donated money to the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) during the 1970s.
A breakthrough in the musical film genre, it has been described as "the most inventive and effervescent musical thus far produced in Hollywood."
I didn't dance again until I was fifteen."
In 1951, he summed up his vision as follows: "If the camera is to make a contribution at all to dance, this must be the focal point of its contribution; the fluid background, giving each spectator an undistorted and altogether similar view of dancer and background.
He also studied Spanish dancing under Angel Cansino, Rita Hayworth's uncle.
He began dating a cast member, Betsy Blair, and they got married on October 16, 1941.
He was known as a big fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers and New York Yankees.
I was making my way sleepily down the long flight of stairs when I heard staccato steps coming from the stage...I could see just a single lamp burning.
He experimented with lighting, camera techniques and special effects in order to achieve true integration of dance with film, and was one of the first to use split screens, double images, live action with animation and is credited as the person who made the ballet form commercially acceptable to film audiences.
Kelly married actress Betsy Blair in 1941.
In 1962 he directed Jackie Gleason in ''Gigot'' in Paris, but the film was drastically re-cut by Seven Arts Productions and flopped.
There followed ''Take Me Out to the Ball Game'' (1949), his second film with Sinatra, where Kelly paid tribute to his Irish heritage in ''The Hat My Father Wore on St. Patrick's Day'' routine.
This year also saw him appear as guest star with his brother Fred in the celebrated ''I Love to Go Swimmin' with Wimmen'' routine in ''Deep in My Heart''.
After appearing in a cheap B-movie drama, ''Pilot No.
This role propelled him to stardom.
According to Delamater, Kelly's work "seems to represent the fulfillment of dance-film integration in the 1940s and 1950s".
This musical film persuaded Arthur Freed to have Kelly make ''On the Town'', in which he partnered with Frank Sinatra for the third and final time.
While I am a hundred percent for ballet technique, I use only what I can adapt to my own use.
He was married to Patricia Ward from 1990 until his death in 1996.
Offers from Hollywood began to arrive, but Kelly was in no hurry to leave New York.
Kelly went much further than before in introducing modern ballet into his dance sequences, going so far in the "Day in New York" routine as to substitute four leading ballet specialists for Sinatra, Munshin, Garrett and Miller.
The film was even nominated in 1969 for the Academy Award for Best Picture at the 42nd Academy Awards.
The film was considered so weak that the studio asked Kelly to design and insert a series of dance routines, and they noticed his ability to carry off such assignments.
Under it, a figure was dancing...Gene."
Together, they opened up the musical form, taking the film musical out of the studio and into real locations, with Donen taking responsibility for the staging and Kelly handling the choreography.
However, most of his efforts were now concentrated on film production and directing.
Even in 1950, however, Hollywood had to tread gingerly whenever dealing with big-time crime, it being safer to go after a "dead" criminal organization than a "live" one.
MGM's refusal to loan him out for ''Guys and Dolls'' and ''Pal Joey'' put further strains on his relationship with the studio.
As his first wife, actress and dancer Betsy Blair explained: "A sailor suit or his white socks and loafers, or the T-shirts on his muscular torso, gave everyone the feeling that he was a regular guy, and perhaps they too could express love and joy by dancing in the street or stomping through puddles...he democratized the dance in movies."
In 1960 Kelly married his choreographic assistant Jeanne Coyne, who had divorced Stanley Donen in 1949 after a brief marriage.
Ballet gave him the same feeling of exhilaration, and in 1933 he was convinced it was the most satisfying form of self-expression."
Throughout his career he had directed films, some of which he starred in.
In 1937, having successfully managed and developed the family's dance school business, he finally did move to New York City in search of work as a choreographer.
Kelly's health declined steadily in the late 1980s.
He later received lifetime achievement awards in the Kennedy Center Honors (1982), and from the Screen Actors Guild and American Film Institute.
It gained an Emmy nomination for choreography and now stands as the key document explaining Kelly's approach to modern dance.
In 1932, they renamed it The Gene Kelly Studio of the Dance and opened a second location in Johnstown, Pennsylvania in 1933.
It was a measure of his powers of persuasion that he managed to coax the 77-year-old Astaire – who had insisted that his contract rule out any dancing, having long since retired—into performing a series of song and dance duets, evoking a powerful nostalgia for the glory days of the American musical film.
Only one of these pictures was a musical, ''Invitation to the Dance'', a pet project of Kelly's to bring modern ballet to mainstream film audiences.
In real-life incidents upon which this film is based, it was the Mafia, not the Black Hand, who functioned as the villain.
His first foray into television was a documentary for NBC's ''Omnibus'', ''Dancing is a Man's Game'' (1958), where he assembled a group of America's greatest sportsmen – including Mickey Mantle, Sugar Ray Robinson and Bob Cousy – and re-interpreted their moves choreographically, as part of his lifelong quest to remove the effeminate stereotype of the art of dance, while articulating the philosophy behind his dance style.
He appeared as himself in George Cukor's ''Let's Make Love'' (1960).
Van Johnson—who also appeared in ''Pal Joey''—recalled: "I watched him rehearsing, and it seemed to me that there was no possible room for improvement.
Kelly asked the studio for a straight acting role and he took the lead role in the early mafia melodrama: ''Black Hand'' (1950).
As co-director, lead star and choreographer, Kelly was the central driving force.
He created dance routines with his younger brother Fred to earn prize money in local talent contests.
This exposé of organized crime is set in New York's "Little Italy" during late 19th century, and focuses on the Black Hand, a group which extorts money upon threat of death.
If you want to play on his team you'd better like hard work, too.
Kelly's final on-screen appearance was to introduce ''That's Entertainment!
While Fred Astaire had revolutionized the filming of dance in the 1930s by insisting on full-figure photography of dancers while allowing only a modest degree of camera movement, Kelly freed up the camera, making greater use of space, camera movement, camera angles and editing, creating a partnership between dance movement and camera movement without sacrificing full-figure framing.
Kelly appeared frequently on television shows during the 1960s, including ''Going My Way'', which was based on the 1944 film same name.
Examples of this abound in Kelly's work and are well illustrated in the "Prehistoric Man" sequence from ''On the Town'' and "The Hat My Father Wore on St. Patrick's Day" from ''Take Me Out to the Ball Game''.
In his book "Easy the Hard Way", Joe Pasternak, head of one of the other musical units within MGM, singled out Kelly for his patience and willingness to spend as much time as necessary to enable the ailing Garland to complete her part.
Kelly eventually decided to pursue a career as a dance teacher and full-time entertainer, so he dropped out of law school after two months.
Behrman's play, ''The Pirate'', with songs by Cole Porter, in which Kelly plays the lead.
The film was nominated for seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and won three.
Kelly returned to Pittsburgh, to his family home at 7514 Kensington Street by 1940, and worked as a theatrical actor.
In 1931 he was approached by the Rodef Shalom synagogue in Pittsburgh to teach dance, and to stage the annual Kermess.
He subsequently directed and co-starred with his friend Fred Astaire in the sequel ''That's Entertainment, Part II'' (1976).
In his view, "one of our problems is that so much dancing is taught by women.
They had two children, Timothy (b.
There was a clear progression in his development, from an early concentration on tap and musical comedy style to greater complexity using ballet and modern dance forms.
Original film choreographyNominated — Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Choreography
It enjoyed great popularity in Roman Catholic countries outside the U.S.
After his departure from the Catholic Church, Kelly became an agnostic, and had previously described himself as such.
Generally speaking, he tended to use tap and other popular dance idioms to express joy and exuberance – as in the title song from ''Singin' in the Rain'' or "I Got Rhythm" from ''An American in Paris'', whereas pensive or romantic feelings were more often expressed via ballet or modern dance, as in "Heather on the Hill" from ''Brigadoon'' or "Our Love Is Here to Stay" from ''An American in Paris''.
He was due to play the male lead opposite Garland in ''Easter Parade'' (1948), but broke his ankle playing volleyball.
Late in life, Gene Kelly was awarded Irish citizenship under Ireland's Citizenship by Foreign Birth program.
His first opportunity to dance to his own choreography came in his next picture, ''Thousands Cheer'' (1943), where he performed a mock-love dance with a mop.
1962) and Bridget (b.
In his later career he starred in two notable films which were outside the musical genre.
He choreographed his own movement, along with that of the ensemble, with the assistance of Jeanne Coyne, Stanley Donen, Carol Haney and Alex Romero.
In 1963, Kelly joined Universal Pictures for a two-year stint.
During its run he told reporters: "I don't believe in conformity to any school of dancing.
Fred wears top hat and tails to the Manor born — I put them on and look like a truck driver."
He entered Pennsylvania State College as a journalism major, but the 1929 crash forced him to work to help his family.
He retained a lifelong passion for sports and relished competition.
I create what the drama and the music demand.
To accomplish this, the camera is made fluid, moving with the dancer, so that the lens becomes the eye of the spectator, ''your eye''".
In 1931, Kelly enrolled at the University of Pittsburgh to study economics, joining the Phi Kappa Theta fraternity.
1942), and divorced in April 1957.
From the mid-1940s through the early 1950s, he and Blair organized weekly parties at their Beverly Hills home, and they often played an intensely competitive and physical version of charades, known as "The Game".
In 1973, he worked again with Frank Sinatra as part of Sinatra's Emmy nominated TV special, ''Magnavox Presents Frank Sinatra''.
Stanley Donen, brought to Hollywood by Kelly to be his assistant choreographer, received co-director credit for ''On the Town''.
His perseverance finally paid off, with the major box-office hit ''A Guide for the Married Man'' (1967) where he directed Walter Matthau.
Although Coppola's ambition was for him to establish a production unit to rival the Freed Unit at MGM, the film's failure put an end to this idea.
The application was initiated on his behalf by his wife Patricia Ward Kelly.
In ''Ziegfeld Follies'' (1946) – which was produced in 1944 but not released until 1946 – Kelly collaborated with Fred Astaire, for whom he had the greatest admiration, in the famous "The Babbitt and the Bromide" challenge dance routine.
Kelly was a lifelong supporter of the Democratic Party.
Kelly was admitted to the University of Pittsburgh Law School.
Yet he wasn't satisfied.
In 1940 he got the lead role in Rodgers and Hart's ''Pal Joey'', again choreographed by Robert Alton.
As biographer Clive Hirschhorn explains: "As a child he used to run for miles through parks and streets and woods – anywhere, just as long as he could feel the wind against his body and through his hair.
A stroke in July 1994 resulted in a seven-week hospital stay and another stroke in early 1995 left Kelly mostly bedridden in his Beverly Hills home.
There followed ''Summer Stock'' (1950) – Garland's last musical film for MGM – in which Kelly performed the celebrated "You, You Wonderful You" solo routine with a newspaper and a squeaky floorboard.
''The Pirate'' gave full rein to Kelly's athleticism.
Eventually, he signed with David O. Selznick, agreeing to go to Hollywood at the end of his commitment to ''Pal Joey'', in October 1941.
Its dream ballet sequence, lasting an unprecedented seventeen minutes, was the most expensive production number ever filmed at that time.
''An American in Paris'' won six Academy Awards, including Best Picture and, in the same year, Kelly received an honorary Academy Award for his contribution to film musicals and the art of choreography.
He was asked to direct the film version of ''The Sound of Music'', which had been previously turned down by Stanley Donen.
They are ''Inherit the Wind'' (1960) and ''What a Way to Go!
Then, a major opportunity arose when Fox – buoyed by the returns from ''The Sound of Music'' (1965) – commissioned Kelly to direct ''Hello, Dolly!''
