Simple single-celled eukaryotes have relatively small amounts of such DNA, whereas the genomes of complex multicellular organisms, including humans, contain an absolute majority of DNA without an identified function.
He proposed an evolutionary concept of the gene as a unit of natural selection with the definition: "that which segregates and recombines with appreciable frequency."
Binary fission is extremely fast compared to the rates of cell division in eukaryotes.
DNA replication is for the most part extremely accurate, however errors (mutations) do occur.
RNA-mediated epigenetic inheritance has also been observed in plants and very rarely in animals.
Most different alleles are functionally equivalent, however some alleles can give rise to different phenotypic traits.
The repair, even with mutation, is more important to survival than restoring an exact copy, for example when repairing double-strand breaks.
The products of operon genes typically have related functions and are involved in the same regulatory network.
Some genetic traits are instantly visible, such as eye colour or number of limbs, and some are not, such as blood type, risk for specific diseases, or the thousands of basic biochemical processes that comprise life.
Similarly, a gene's introns can be much larger than its exons.
The two strands of a double-helix run in opposite directions.
The genetic code is nearly the same for all known organisms.
Additionally, genes can have regulatory regions many kilobases upstream or downstream of the open reading frame.
The existence of discrete inheritable units was first suggested by Gregor Mendel (1822–1884).
Nucleic acid synthesis, including DNA replication and transcription occurs in the 5'→3'&nbsp;direction, because new nucleotides are added via a dehydration reaction that uses the exposed 3'&nbsp;hydroxyl as a nucleophile.
For multicellular organisms, typically the embryo is engineered which grows into the adult genetically modified organism.
Eukaryotic cell division is a more complex process known as the cell cycle; DNA replication occurs during a phase of this cycle known as S phase, whereas the process of segregating chromosomes and splitting the cytoplasm occurs during M phase.
A broad operational definition is sometimes used to encompass the complexity of these diverse phenomena, where a gene is defined as a union of genomic sequences encoding a coherent set of potentially overlapping functional products.
For example, genes are easily added to bacteria and lineages of knockout mice with a specific gene's function disrupted are used to investigate that gene's function.
Many organisms have been genetically modified for applications in agriculture, industrial biotechnology, and medicine.
Genes evolve due to natural selection or survival of the fittest of the alleles.
The theories developed in the 1930s and 1940s to integrate molecular genetics with Darwinian evolution are called the modern evolutionary synthesis, a term introduced by Julian Huxley.
Evolutionary biologists subsequently refined this concept, such as George C. Williams' gene-centric view of evolution.
Second, that mRNA is ''translated'' to protein.
Sometimes, gene duplication may result in a nonfunctional copy of a gene, or a functional copy may be subject to mutations that result in loss of function; such nonfunctional genes are called pseudogenes.
Small mutations can be caused by DNA replication and the aftermath of DNA damage and include point mutations in which a single base is altered and frameshift mutations in which a single base is inserted or deleted.
However, more recent analyses suggest that, although protein-coding DNA makes up barely 2% of the human genome, about 80% of the bases in the genome may be expressed, so the term "junk DNA" may be a misnomer.
Some RNAs known as ribozymes are capable of enzymatic function, and microRNA has a regulatory role.
Alleles at a locus may be dominant or recessive; dominant alleles give rise to their corresponding phenotypes when paired with any other allele for the same trait, whereas recessive alleles give rise to their corresponding phenotype only when paired with another copy of the same allele.
In bacteria, an estimated 250–400 genes are essential for ''Escherichia coli'' and ''Bacillus subtilis'', which is less than 10% of their genes.
Additionally, DNA repair mechanisms can introduce mutational errors when repairing physical damage to the molecule.
This requires first making a duplicate copy of every gene in the genome in a process called DNA replication.
Eukaryotic promoter regions are much more complex and difficult to identify than prokaryotic promoters.
Larger mutations can be caused by errors in recombination to cause chromosomal abnormalities including the duplication, deletion, rearrangement or inversion of large sections of a chromosome.
The term cistron in this context is equivalent to gene.
In asexually reproducing organisms, the offspring will be a genetic copy or clone of the parent organism.
In other cases, the RNA molecules are the actual functional products, as in the synthesis of ribosomal RNA and transfer RNA.
Housekeeping genes are used as experimental controls when analysing gene expression, since they are constitutively expressed at a relatively constant level.
The resulting genes (paralogs) may then diverge in sequence and in function.
Gene expression can be regulated at any step: from transcriptional initiation, to RNA processing, to post-translational modification of the protein.
Genes can acquire mutations in their sequence, leading to different variants, known as alleles, in the population.
De novo genes are typically shorter and simpler in structure than most eukaryotic genes, with few if any introns.
Defining exactly what section of a DNA sequence comprises a gene is difficult.
The rate of DNA replication in living cells was first measured as the rate of phage T4 DNA elongation in phage-infected ''E.
In all organisms, two steps are required to read the information encoded in a gene's DNA and produce the protein it specifies.
Thus, a major mechanism of gene regulation is the blocking or sequestering the promoter region, either by tight binding by repressor molecules that physically block the polymerase, or by organizing the DNA so that the promoter region is not accessible.
Other mutations can be neutral if they lead to amino acid sequence changes, but the protein still functions similarly with the new amino acid (e.g.
The promoter is recognized and bound by transcription factors and RNA polymerase to initiate transcription.
Essential genes include Housekeeping genes (critical for basic cell functions) as well as genes that are expressed at different times in the organisms development or life cycle.
Mendel's work went largely unnoticed after its first publication in 1866, but was rediscovered in the late 19th century by Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns, and Erich von Tschermak, who (claimed to have) reached similar conclusions in their own research.
Some mutations do not change the amino acid sequence because multiple codons encode the same amino acid (synonymous mutations).
Transcription produces a single-stranded RNA molecule known as messenger RNA, whose nucleotide sequence is complementary to the DNA from which it was transcribed.
The regulation of lactose metabolism genes in ''E.
A chromosome consists of a single, very long DNA helix on which thousands of genes are encoded.
Estimates of the number of genes with no homologs outside humans range from 18 to 60.
Genes are regulated so that they are expressed only when the product is needed, since expression draws on limited resources.
However, the genomes of cells in an adult organism can be edited using gene therapy techniques to treat genetic diseases.
Similarly, some eukaryotic organelles contain a remnant circular chromosome with a small number of genes.
There are 64&nbsp;possible codons (four possible nucleotides at each of three positions, hence 43&nbsp;possible codons) and only 20&nbsp;standard amino acids; hence the code is redundant and multiple codons can specify the same amino acid.
The subsequent development of chain-termination DNA sequencing in 1977 by Frederick Sanger improved the efficiency of sequencing and turned it into a routine laboratory tool.
From 1857 to 1864, he studied inheritance patterns in 8000 common edible pea plants, tracking distinct traits from parent to offspring.
conservative mutations).
This is in fact only true for genes that do not reside on the same chromosome, or are located very far from one another on the same chromosome.
In 1972, Walter Fiers and his team at the University of Ghent were the first to determine the sequence of a gene: the gene for Bacteriophage MS2 coat protein.
The mRNA matches the sequence of the gene's DNA coding strand because it is synthesised as the complement of the template strand.
Although horizontal gene transfer is rare in eukaryotes, likely examples have been identified of protist and alga genomes containing genes of bacterial origin.
Mendel was also the first to demonstrate independent assortment, the distinction between dominant and recessive traits, the distinction between a heterozygote and homozygote, and the phenomenon of discontinuous inheritance.
Gene duplications and losses within a family are common and represent a major source of evolutionary biodiversity.
RNA-coding genes must still go through the first step, but are not translated into protein.
One of the modifications performed is the splicing of introns which are sequences in the transcribed region that do not encode protein.
Genetic engineering is now a routine research tool with model organisms.
The degree of sequence similarity between homologous genes is called conserved sequence.
Every multicellular organism has all its genes in each cell of its body but not every gene functions in every cell .
Although he did not use the term ''gene'', he explained his results in terms of discrete inherited units that give rise to observable physical characteristics.
Most biological traits are under the influence of polygenes (many different genes) as well as the gene–environment interactions.
In the budding yeast ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'' the number of essential genes is slightly higher, at 1000 genes (~20% of their genes).
Sets of three nucleotides, known as codons, each correspond to a specific amino acid.
Subsequently, the sequencing in the Human Genome Project indicated that many of these transcripts were alternative variants of the same genes, and the total number of protein-coding genes was revised down to ~20,000 with 13 genes encoded on the mitochondrial genome.
"Orphan" genes, whose sequence shows no similarity to existing genes, are less common than gene duplicates.
alt=DNA chemical structure diagram showing how the double helix consists of two chains of sugar-phosphate backbone with bases pointing inwards and specifically base pairing A to T and C to G with hydrogen bonds.
For example, the genes for antibiotic resistance are usually encoded on bacterial plasmids and can be passed between individual cells, even those of different species, via horizontal gene transfer.
The length of the telomeres decreases each time the genome is replicated and has been implicated in the aging process.
The genetic code specifies the correspondence during protein translation between codons and amino acids.
Over long evolutionary time periods, de novo gene birth may be responsible for a significant fraction of taxonomically-restricted gene families.
The principle that three sequential bases of DNA code for each amino acid was demonstrated in 1961 using frameshift mutations in the rIIB gene of bacteriophage T4 (see Crick, Brenner et al.
According to Mendelian inheritance, variations in an organism's phenotype (observable physical and behavioral characteristics) are due in part to variations in its genotype (particular set of genes).
Collectively, this body of research established the central dogma of molecular biology, which states that proteins are translated from RNA, which is transcribed from DNA.
In order to be expressed, genes require a promoter sequence.
The growth, development, and reproduction of organisms relies on cell division, or the process by which a single cell divides into two usually identical daughter cells.
Each gene specifies a particular trait with different sequence of a gene (alleles) giving rise to different phenotypes.
The genes in an operon are transcribed as a continuous messenger RNA, referred to as a polycistronic mRNA.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was shown to be the molecular repository of genetic information by experiments in the 1940s to 1950s.
The nucleotide sequence of a gene's DNA specifies the amino acid sequence of a protein through the genetic code.
and is the molecular unit of heredity.
This dogma has since been shown to have exceptions, such as reverse transcription in retroviruses.
The gametes produced by females are called eggs or ova, and those produced by males are called sperm.
The majority of eukaryotic genes are stored on a set of large, linear chromosomes.
For example, if the allele specifying tall stems in pea plants is dominant over the allele specifying short stems, then pea plants that inherit one tall allele from one parent and one short allele from the other parent will also have tall stems.
The structure of DNA was studied by Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins using X-ray crystallography, which led James D. Watson and Francis Crick to publish a model of the double-stranded DNA molecule whose paired nucleotide bases indicated a compelling hypothesis for the mechanism of genetic replication.
For example, enhancers increase transcription by binding an activator protein which then helps to recruit the RNA polymerase to the promoter; conversely silencers bind repressor proteins and make the DNA less available for RNA polymerase.
The genome size, and the number of genes it encodes varies widely between organisms.
The chromosomes are packed within the nucleus in complex with storage proteins called histones to form a unit called a nucleosome.
Regulatory regions of a gene such as enhancers do not necessarily have to be close to the coding sequence on the linear molecule because the intervening DNA can be looped out to bring the gene and its regulatory region into proximity.
One end of a DNA polymer contains an exposed hydroxyl group on the deoxyribose; this is known as the 3'&nbsp;end of the molecule.
He described these mathematically as 2n&nbsp;combinations where n is the number of differing characteristics in the original peas.
The duplication and transmission of genetic material from one generation of cells to the next is the basis for molecular inheritance, and the link between the classical and molecular pictures of genes.
Therefore, a broad, modern working definition of a gene is any discrete locus of heritable, genomic sequence which affect an organism's traits by being expressed as a functional product or by regulation of gene expression.
When multiple different alleles for a gene are present in a species's population it is called polymorphic.
Early experimental measures indicated there to be 50,000–100,000 ''transcribed'' genes (expressed sequence tags).
Promoter regions have a consensus sequence, however highly transcribed genes have "strong" promoter sequences that bind the transcription machinery well, whereas others have "weak" promoters that bind poorly and initiate transcription less frequently.
The concept of a gene continues to be refined as new phenomena are discovered.
Whereas the chromosomes of prokaryotes are relatively gene-dense, those of eukaryotes often contain regions of DNA that serve no obvious function.
The transmission of genes to an organism's offspring is the basis of the inheritance of phenotypic traits.
Conversely, plants can have extremely large genomes, with rice containing >46,000 protein-coding genes.
Only a small portion of an organism's genes are essential.
Prior to Mendel's work, the dominant theory of heredity was one of blending inheritance, which suggested that each parent contributed fluids to the fertilisation process and that the traits of the parents blended and mixed to produce the offspring.
organisms have two copies of each chromosome because they inherit one complete set from each parent.
The experiments of Benzer using mutants defective in the rII region of bacteriophage T4 (1955-1959) showed that individual genes have a simple linear structure and are likely to be equivalent to a linear section of DNA.
Half of these genes are orthologs in both organisms and are largely involved in protein synthesis.
This definition categorizes genes by their functional products (proteins or RNA) rather than their specific DNA loci, with regulatory elements classified as ''gene-associated'' regions.
The related term synthetic biology is sometimes used to refer to extensive genetic engineering of an organism.
The synthetic organism, ''Syn 3'', has a minimal genome of 473 essential genes and quasi-essential genes (necessary for fast growth), although 149 have unknown function.
Replication origins are the sequence regions where DNA replication is initiated to make two copies of the chromosome.
Advances in understanding genes and inheritance continued throughout the 20th century.
The gene's DNA is used as a template to generate a complementary mRNA.
Horizontal gene transfer refers to the transfer of genetic material through a mechanism other than reproduction.
The centromere is required for binding spindle fibres to separate sister chromatids into daughter cells during cell division.
The Mendelian principle of independent assortment asserts that each of a parent's two genes for each trait will sort independently into gametes; which allele an organism inherits for one trait is unrelated to which allele it inherits for another trait.
In prokaryotes&nbsp;(bacteria and archaea) this usually occurs via a relatively simple process called binary fission, in which each circular genome attaches to the cell membrane and is separated into the daughter cells as the membrane invaginates to split the cytoplasm into two membrane-bound portions.
Prokaryotes sometimes supplement their chromosome with additional small circles of DNA called plasmids, which usually encode only a few genes and are transferable between individuals.
Recently developed genome engineering techniques use engineered nuclease enzymes to create targeted DNA repair in a chromosome to either disrupt or edit a gene when the break is repaired.
The genome is the total genetic material of an organism and includes both the genes and non-coding sequences.
Norman Horowitz, an early colleague on the ''Neurospora'' research, reminisced in 2004 that “these experiments founded the science of what Beadle and Tatum called ''biochemical genetics''.
This is known as genetic linkage.
The transcribed pre-mRNA contains untranslated regions at both ends which contain a ribosome binding site, terminator and start and stop codons.
The process of DNA replication is semiconservative; that is, the copy of the genome inherited by each daughter cell contains one original and one newly synthesized strand of DNA.
Many prokaryotic genes are organized into operons, with multiple protein-coding sequences that are transcribed as a unit.
Because the DNA double helix is held together by base pairing, the sequence of one strand completely specifies the sequence of its complement; hence only one strand needs to be read by the enzyme to produce a faithful copy.
In prokaryotes, transcription occurs in the cytoplasm; for very long transcripts, translation may begin at the 5'&nbsp;end of the RNA while the 3'&nbsp;end is still being transcribed.
The DNA sequences from which such RNAs are transcribed are known as non-coding RNA genes.
The mRNA acts as an intermediate between the DNA gene and its final protein product.
During the period of exponential DNA increase at 37 °C, the rate of elongation was 749 nucleotides per second.
The error rate in eukaryotic cells can be as low as 10−8 per nucleotide per replication, whereas for some RNA viruses it can be as high as 10−3.
Additionally, a "start codon", and three "stop codons" indicate the beginning and end of the protein coding region.
Many mutations, however, are deleterious or even lethal, and are removed from populations by natural selection.
available nutrients, temperature and other stresses), its internal environment (e.g.
It is often assumed that the functions of orthologous genes are more similar than those of paralogous genes, although the difference is minimal.
Genetic disorders are the result of deleterious mutations and can be due to spontaneous mutation in the affected individual, or can be inherited.
The modern study of genetics at the level of DNA is known as molecular genetics.
Firstly, flanking the open reading frame, all genes contain a regulatory sequence that is required for their expression.
RNA molecules are less stable than DNA and are typically single-stranded.
Charles Darwin developed a theory of inheritance he termed pangenesis, from Greek pan ("all, whole") and genesis ("birth") / genos ("origin").
The sequences at the ends of the introns, dictate the splice sites to generate the final mature mRNA which encodes the protein or RNA product.
The sequence differences between genes can be used for phylogenetic analyses to study how those genes have evolved and how the organisms they come from are related.
The correspondence between codons and amino acids is nearly universal among all known living organisms.
Sixteen years later, in 1905, the word ''genetics'' was first used by William Bateson, while Eduard Strasburger, amongst others, still used the term pangene for the fundamental physical and functional unit of heredity.
Alternative splicing mechanisms can result in mature transcripts from the same gene having different sequences and thus coding for different proteins.
Genes with a most recent common ancestor, and thus a shared evolutionary ancestry, are known as homologs.
Due to the chemical composition of the pentose residues of the bases, DNA strands have directionality.
Symbols are chosen to be unique, and each gene has only one symbol (although approved symbols sometimes change).
The other end contains an exposed phosphate group; this is the 5'&nbsp;end.
First, the gene's DNA is ''transcribed'' to messenger RNA (mRNA).
On the other hand, RNA retroviruses, such as HIV, require the reverse transcription of their genome from RNA into DNA before their proteins can be synthesized.
Genes under stabilizing selection are constrained and so change more slowly whereas genes under directional selection change sequence more rapidly.
Prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) typically store their genomes on a single large, circular chromosome.
In actuality they proved to be the opening gun in what became molecular genetics and all the developments that have followed from that.” The one gene-one protein concept has been refined since the discovery of genes that can encode multiple proteins by alternative splicing and coding sequences split in short section across the genome whose mRNAs are concatenated by trans-splicing.
For example, regulatory regions of a gene can be far removed from its coding regions, and coding regions can be split into several exons.
before they can carry out their cellular functions.
Each locus contains one allele of a gene; however, members of a population may have different alleles at the locus, each with a slightly different gene sequence.
The transcription of an operon’s mRNA is often controlled by a repressor that can occur in an active or inactive state depending on the presence of certain specific metabolites.
Although the number of base-pairs of DNA in the human genome has been known since the 1960s, the estimated number of genes has changed over time as definitions of genes, and methods of detecting them have been refined.
In 1909 the Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen shortened the name to "gene".
The RNA molecule produced by the polymerase is known as the primary transcript and undergoes post-transcriptional modifications before being exported to the cytoplasm for translation.
This concept (originally called the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis) emerged from an influential 1941 paper by George Beadle and Edward Tatum on experiments with mutants of the fungus Neurospora crassa.
The process of producing a biologically functional molecule of either RNA or protein is called gene expression, and the resulting molecule is called a gene product.
Additionally, any selection on a gene will cause its sequence to diverge at a different rate.
This can result in reassortment of otherwise linked alleles.
A gene can have more than one promoter, resulting in messenger RNAs (mRNA) that differ in how far they extend in the 5'&nbsp;end.
This is a major form of regulation in eukaryotic cells and also occurs in some prokaryotes.
Two gametes fuse to form a diploid fertilized egg, a single cell that has two sets of genes, with one copy of each gene from the mother and one from the father.
Genetic engineering is the modification of an organism's genome through biotechnology.
Although Mendelian inheritance remains a good model for many traits determined by single genes (including a number of well-known genetic disorders) it does not include the physical processes of DNA replication and cell division.
In sexually reproducing organisms, a specialized form of cell division called meiosis produces cells called gametes or germ cells that are haploid, or contain only one copy of each gene.
RNA also contains the base uracil in place of thymine.
The genetic variation in relative frequencies of different alleles in a population is due to both natural selection and genetic drift.
Mendel's work demonstrated that alleles assort independently in the production of gametes, or germ cells, ensuring variation in the next generation.
Regulatory regions can even be on entirely different chromosomes and operate ''in trans'' to allow regulatory regions on one chromosome to come in contact with target genes on another chromosome.
In this view, the molecular gene ''transcribes'' as a unit, and the evolutionary gene ''inherits'' as a unit.
When active, the repressor binds to a DNA sequence at the beginning of the operon, called the operator region, and represses transcription of the operon; when the repressor is inactive transcription of the operon can occur (see e.g.
It is a common means of spreading antibiotic resistance, virulence, and adaptive metabolic functions.
Colloquial usage of the term "having a gene" (e.g., "good genes," "hair colour gene") typically refers to having a different allele of the gene.
The most common source of new genes in eukaryotic lineages is gene duplication, which creates copy number variation of an existing gene in the genome.
Darwin used the term ''gemmule'' to describe hypothetical particles that would mix during reproduction.
Either of these mutations can change the gene by missense (change a codon to encode a different amino acid) or nonsense (a premature stop codon).
Finally, a small fraction of mutations are beneficial, improving the organism's fitness and are extremely important for evolution, since their directional selection leads to adaptive evolution.
Some viruses store their genome in RNA instead of DNA and some gene products are functional non-coding RNAs.
De Vries called these units "pangenes" (''Pangens'' in German), after Darwin's 1868 pangenesis theory.
This description prefigured the distinction between genotype (the genetic material of an organism) and phenotype (the visible traits of that organism).
Two chains of DNA twist around each other to form a DNA double helix with the phosphate-sugar backbone spiralling around the outside, and the bases pointing inwards with adenine base pairing to thymine and guanine to cytosine.
This definition assumes the abundant availability of all relevant nutrients and the absence of environmental stress.
