Some historians have estimated that Iran's population did not again reach its pre-Mongol levels until the mid-20th century."
This force contained the bulk of the elite Mongolian cavalry.
While heading home, his father ran into the neighboring Tatars, who had long been Mongol enemies, and they offered him food that poisoned him.
Genghis Khan also had many other children with his other wives, but they were excluded from succession.
The assault on Urgench proved to be the most difficult battle of the Mongol invasion and the city fell only after the defenders put up a stout defense, fighting block for block.
Subutai agreed but was in no mood to pardon the princes.
His descendants extended the Mongol Empire across most of Eurasia by conquering or creating vassal states in all of modern-day China, Korea, the Caucasus, Central Asia, and substantial portions of modern Eastern Europe, Russia, and Southwest Asia.
His military strategies showed a deep interest in gathering intelligence and understanding the motivations of his rivals, exemplified by his extensive spy network and Yam route systems.
However, there is a chasm in the perception of his brutality.
He decreed the adoption of the Uyghur script as the Mongol Empire's writing system.
Between 1232 and 1233, Kaifeng fell to the Mongols under the reign of Genghis's third son, Ögedei Khan.
He also practiced meritocracy and encouraged religious tolerance in the Mongol Empire while unifying the nomadic tribes of Northeast Asia.
Mongolian casualties were higher than normal, due to the unaccustomed difficulty of adapting Mongolian tactics to city fighting.
This allowed increased communication and trade between the West, Middle East and Asia, thus expanding the horizons of all three cultural areas.
The Mongol Empire was one of the most ethnically and culturally diverse empires in history, as befitted its size.
Genghis Khan left behind an army of more than 129,000 men; 28,000 were given to his various brothers and his sons.
He also realised that such administrators could not be found among his Mongol people because they were nomads and thus had no experience governing cities.
Senggum, son of Toghrul (Wang Khan), envied Temüjin's growing power and affinity with his father.
Various Mongol tribes were Shamanist, Buddhist or Christian.
After several days only a few remaining soldiers, loyal supporters of the Shah, held out in the citadel.
The next direct threat to Temüjin was the Naimans (Naiman Mongols), with whom Jamukha and his followers took refuge.
As previously arranged by his father, Temüjin married Börte of the Onggirat tribe when he was around 16 in order to cement alliances between their two tribes.
He correctly believed that the more powerful young ruler of the Jin dynasty would not come to the aid of Xi Xia.
Many of the empire's nomadic inhabitants considered themselves ''Mongols'' in military and civilian life, including Mongols, Turks and others and included many diverse Khans of various ethnicities as part of the Mongol Empire such as Muhammad Khan.
With the help of a sympathetic guard, he escaped from the ger (yurt) at night by hiding in a river crevice.
For this purpose Genghis Khan invited a Khitan prince, Chu'Tsai, who worked for the Jin and had been captured by the Mongol army after the Jin dynasty was defeated.
The people of Samarkand were ordered to evacuate and assemble in a plain outside the city, where they were killed and pyramids of severed heads raised as a symbol of victory.
The Mongol army under Genghis Khan, generals and his sons crossed the Tien Shan mountains by entering the area controlled by the Khwarazmian Empire.
These two campaigns are generally regarded as reconnaissance campaigns that tried to get the feel of the political and cultural elements of the regions.
Jamukha's assumption of this title was the final breach with Temüjin, and Jamukha formed a coalition of tribes to oppose him.
Jamukha escaped during the conflict.
Major Genghis Khan statues stand before the parliament and near Ulaanbaatar.
Genghis Khan led the main army on a raid through Afghanistan and northern India towards Mongolia, while another 20,000 (two tumen) contingent marched through the Caucasus and into Russia under generals Jebe and Subutai.
Although the campaign recaptured Börte and utterly defeated the Merkits, it also paved the way for the split between Temüjin and Jamukha.
In his rule and his conquest of rival tribes, Temüjin broke with Mongol tradition in a few crucial ways.
This fragmentation was decisive in Khwarazmia's defeats, as it allowed the Mongols, although exhausted from the long journey, to immediately set about defeating small fractions of the Khwarazmian forces instead of facing a unified defense.
One theory suggests the name stems from a palatalised version of the Mongolian and Turkic word ''tenggis'', meaning "ocean", "oceanic" or "wide-spreading".
However, Inalchuq, the governor of the Khwarazmian city of Otrar, attacked the caravan that came from Mongolia, claiming that the caravan contained spies and therefore was a conspiracy against Khwarazmia.
One of the later ruptures between Temüjin and Toghrul was Toghrul's refusal to give his daughter in marriage to Jochi, Temüjin's first son.
His father arranged a marriage for him and delivered him at age nine to the family of his future wife Börte of the tribe Khongirad.
The closest depiction generally accepted by most historians is the portrait currently in the National Palace Museum in Taipei, Taiwan, which was drawn under the supervision of his grandson Khubilai during the Mongol Yuan dynasty and depicts Genghis Khan with typical Mongol features.
According to ''The Secret History of the Mongols'', Genghis Khan fell from his horse while hunting and died because of the injury.
Under the suggestion of Subutai, the Mongol army was split into two forces.
The second division under Jebe marched secretly to the southeast part of Khwarazmia to form, with the first division, a pincer attack on Samarkand.
This relationship was first reinforced when Börte was captured by the Merkits.
In much of Russia, Middle East, Korea, China, Ukraine, Poland and Hungary, Genghis Khan and his regime are blamed for considerable destruction and loss of population.
Jochi had attempted to protect Urgench from destruction, as it belonged to territory allocated to him as a fief.
He was already old and tired from his journeys.
Among the Iranian peoples, Genghis Khan, along with Hulagu and Timur are among the most despised conquerors in the region.
According to the ''Secret History of the Mongols'', Temüjin was named after a powerful warrior of the Tatar tribe that his father Yesügei had taken prisoner.
Threatened by this rise, Jamukha attacked Temujin in 1187 with an army of 30,000 troops.
But the tribe refused this and abandoned the family, leaving it without protection.
Survivors from the citadel were executed, artisans and craftsmen were sent back to Mongolia, young men who had not fought were drafted into the Mongolian army and the rest of the population was sent into slavery.
Genghis told Chu'Tsai, who was a lineal descendant of Khitan rulers, that he had avenged Chu'Tsai's forefathers.
He was buried in an unmarked grave somewhere in Mongolia.
The Naimans did not surrender, although enough sectors again voluntarily sided with Temüjin.
In addition to most of the Mongol nobility up to the 20th century, the Mughal emperor Babur's mother was a descendant.
The new Tangut emperor quickly surrendered to the Mongols, and the rest of the Tanguts officially surrendered soon after.
He therefore decided to divide his empire among his sons and make all of them Khan in their own right, while appointing one of his sons as his successor.
Rashid al-Din reports that the great Khan sent for his sons in the spring of 1223, and while his brothers heeded the order, Jochi remained in Khorasan.
However, the dispute between Toghrul and Jamukha, plus the desertion of a number of their allies to Temüjin, led to Toghrul's defeat.
The Mongols learned from captives of the abundant green pastures beyond the Bulgar territory, allowing for the planning for conquest of Hungary and Europe.
It resulted in peace between previously warring tribes, and a single political and military force.
In ''The Secret History of the Mongols'', just before the invasion of the Khwarezmid Empire by Genghis Khan, Chagatai declared before his father and brothers that he would never accept Jochi as Genghis Khan's successor.
Although known for the brutality of his campaigns and considered by many to have been a genocidal ruler, Genghis Khan is also credited with bringing the Silk Road under one cohesive political environment.
Genghis Khan became one of the central figures of the national identity.
Genghis Khan, and the following Yuan Emperors forbade Islamic practices like Halal butchering, forcing Mongol methods of butchering animals on Muslims, and other restrictive degrees continued.
The city of Bukhara was not heavily fortified, with a moat and a single wall, and the citadel typical of Khwarazmian cities.
In Turkey, Genghis Khan is considered a great military leader, and it is popular for male children to carry his title as name.
Genghis Khan, after conquering Deshun, went to Liupanshan (Qingshui County, Gansu Province) to escape the severe summer.
Other tales state that his grave was stampeded over by many horses, and that trees were then planted over the site, and the permafrost also did its part in hiding the burial site.
These invasions added Transoxiana and Persia to an already formidable empire while destroying any resistance along the way.
Toghrul, as Temüjin's patron, was exiled to the Qara Khitai.
In 1968 during the Cultural Revolution, Red Guards destroyed almost everything of value.
Soon after the marriage, Börte was kidnapped by the Merkits and reportedly given away as a wife.
This was disrespectful in Mongolian culture and led to a war.
Before this, they were blood brothers (''anda'') vowing to remain eternally faithful.
Another important aspect of the military organization of Genghis Khan was the communications and supply route or ''Yam'', adapted from previous Chinese models.
The invasions of Baghdad, Samarkand, Urgench, Kiev, Vladimir among others caused mass murders, such as when portions of southern Khuzestan were completely destroyed.
Thus, Genghis Khan is also referred to as ''Yuan Taizu'' (Emperor Taizu of Yuan, ) in Chinese historiography.
According to traditional historical accounts, the issue over Jochi's paternity was voiced most strongly by Chagatai.
Genghis Khan organized his people, army, and his state to first prepare for war with Western Xia, or Xi Xia, which was close to the Mongolian lands.
At the time of his death in 1227, the empire stretched from the Caspian Sea to the Sea of Japan.
Modern scholars refer to the alleged policy of encouraging trade and communication as the Pax Mongolica (Mongol Peace).
Chu'Tsai responded that his father served the Jin dynasty honestly and so did he; also he did not consider his own father his enemy, so the question of revenge did not apply.
Many of these invasions repeated the earlier large-scale slaughters of local populations.
I would be doing a service if I killed my father when he is hunting, made an alliance with Sultan Muhammad, brought this land to life and gave assistance and support to the Muslims."
The exception was the role of Genghis Khan and his family.
The population of north China decreased from 50 million in the 1195 census to 8.5&nbsp;million in the Mongol census of 1235–36.
The Jin bestowed Toghrul with the honorable title of Ong Khan, and Temüjin with a lesser title of ''j'aut quri''."
Temujin's resentment erupted during one hunting excursion when Temüjin and his brother Khasar killed Begter.
According to legend, the funeral escort killed anyone and anything across their path to conceal where he was finally buried.
Temüjin learned of Senggum's intentions and eventually defeated him and his loyalists.
The Shah died under mysterious circumstances on a small island within his empire.
Beyond his military accomplishments, Genghis Khan also advanced the Mongol Empire in other ways.
According to the works of the Persian historian Rashid-al-Din Hamadani, the Mongols killed more than 70,000 people in Merv and more than 190,000 in Nishapur.
Wanyan Jiujin, the field commander of the Jin army, made a tactical mistake in not attacking the Mongols at the first opportunity.
The "relics" were remade in the 1970s and a great marble statue of Genghis was completed in 1989.
He seemed to be a quick student, adopting new technologies and ideas that he encountered, such as siege warfare from the Chinese.
In Mongolia today, Genghis Khan's name and likeness appear on products, streets, buildings, and other places.
They and the guard's son Chilaun eventually became generals of Genghis Khan.
As the Mongol soldiers looted the city, a fire broke out, razing most of the city to the ground.
In 1226, immediately after returning from the west, Genghis Khan began a retaliatory attack on the Tanguts.
By the end of his life, the Mongol Empire occupied a substantial portion of Central Asia and China.
He delegated authority based on merit and loyalty, rather than family ties.
By this time the Mongol army was exhausted from ten years of continuous campaigning in China against the Western Xia and Jin dynasty.
According to legend, it was here that Genghis Khan reportedly saw a line of five stars arranged in the sky and interpreted it as an omen of his victory.
Therefore, Genghis sent only two tumen (20,000 soldiers) against Kuchlug, under his younger general, Jebe, known as "The Arrow".
His earlier defeat of the Merkits, and a proclamation by the shaman Kokochu that the Eternal Blue Sky had set aside the world for Temüjin, Temüjin began rising to power.
Genghis Khan supported the Chinese Daoist sect leader Qiu Chuji and after personally meeting him in what is now Afghanistan, gave him control of all religious affairs in northern China.
They often cite the systematic slaughter of civilians in conquered regions, cruelties and destruction by Mongol armies.
Later under Genghis Khan's grandson Batu and the Golden Horde, the Mongols returned to conquer Volga Bulgaria and Kievan Rus' in 1237, concluding the campaign in 1240.
The name "Temüjin" is believed to derive from the word ''temür'', meaning iron (modern Mongolian: , ''tömör'').
They also pushed further into Russia and eastern Europe.
At this time, none of the tribal confederations of Mongolia were united politically, and arranged marriages were often used to solidify temporary alliances.
In the early 13th century, the Central Asian plateau north of China was divided into several tribes of confederation, including Naimans, Merkits, Tatars, Khamag Mongols, and Keraites, that were all prominent and often unfriendly toward each other, as evidenced by random raids, revenge attacks, and plundering.
After the capital Samarkand fell, the capital was moved to Bukhara by the remaining men, while Genghis Khan ordered two of his generals and their forces to completely destroy the remnants of the Khwarazmian Empire, including not only royal buildings, but entire towns, populations, and even vast swaths of farmland.
His descendant Hulagu Khan destroyed much of Iran's north and sacked Baghdad although his forces were halted by the Mamluks of Egypt, but Hulagu's descendant Ghazan Khan returned to beat the Mamluks out of Levant, Palestine and even Gaza.
The Russian princes then sued for peace.
''The Secret History of the Mongols'' reports that Temüjin was born grasping a blood clot in his fist, a traditional sign that he was destined to become a great leader.
His son Jochi led the first division into the northeast of Khwarazmia.
When the Tatars grew too powerful after 1161, the Jin switched their support from the Tatars to the Keraites.
Heading home, Subutai's forces attacked the allied forces of the Cuman–Kipchaks and the poorly coordinated 80,000 Kievan Rus' troops led by Mstislav the Bold of Halych and Mstislav III of Kiev who went out to stop the Mongols' actions in the area.
He continued the expansion that his father had begun and was a world figure when the Mongol Empire reached its farthest extent west and south during the invasions of Europe and Asia.
Other authors also cite positive aspects of Genghis Khan's conquests.
Contrary to popular belief, Genghis Khan did not conquer the whole area of the eventual Mongol Empire.
As Jamukha and Temüjin drifted apart in their friendship, each began consolidating power, and they became rivals.
Like other tribes, they were nomads.
Genghis Khan also left Muqali, one of his most trusted generals, as the commander of all Mongol forces in Jin China while he was out battling the Khwarezmid Empire to the west.
Jamukha requested this form of death, although he was known to have boiled his opponents' generals alive.
No evidence has survived to indicate that Genghis Khan had any exceptional training or reputation as a blacksmith.
Even at this time some Iranians pronounce his name as "Ghengiss".
He was a man who knew that the good laws and rules lived longer than fancy palaces."
Over the course of three years, the Mongols annihilated all of the major cities of Eastern Europe with the exception of Novgorod and Pskov.
His mother and the descendants of his three brothers received 3,000 men each.
Some historians have noted that Genghis Khan instituted certain levels of meritocracy in his rule, was tolerant of religions and explained his policies clearly to all his soldiers.
Its expansion continued for one or more generations.
Temujin's older half-brother Begter began to exercise power as the eldest male in the family and would eventually have the right to claim Hoelun (who was not his own mother) as wife.
These political innovations inspired great loyalty among the conquered people, making Temüjin stronger with each victory.
But the latter interpretation (a man strong like iron) is supported by the names of Genghis Khan's siblings, Temülin and Temüge, which are derived from the same root word.
In Inner Mongolia there are a monument and buildings dedicated to him and considerable number of ethic Mongols in the area with a population of around 5 million, almost twice the population of Mongolia.
Jews were also affected, and forbidden by the Mongols to eat Kosher.
From 2012, Mongolia is to celebrate Chinggis Khaan's birthday as a national holiday, on the first day of winter according to the Mongolian lunar calendar (not to be confused with the Asian new year).
Subutai sent emissaries to the Slavic princes calling for a separate peace, but the emissaries were executed.
The legacy of Genghis and his successors, who completed the conquest of China after 65 years of struggle, remains a mixed topic.
Muslims had to slaughter sheep in secret.
Folklore says that a river was diverted over his grave to make it impossible to find (the same manner of burial as the Sumerian King Gilgamesh of Uruk and Atilla the Hun).
At the Battle of Kalka River in 1223, Subutai's forces defeated the larger Kievan force.
Börte had three more sons, Chagatai (1187–1241), Ögedei (1189–1241), and Tolui (1190–1232).
Temüjin was the first son of his mother Hoelun.
Meanwhile, the wealthy trading city of Urgench was still in the hands of Khwarazmian forces.
In 1227, Genghis Khan's army attacked and destroyed the Tangut capital of Ning Hia and continued to advance, seizing Lintiao-fu, Xining province, Xindu-fu, and Deshun province in quick succession in the spring.
In summary, Mongolians see him as the fundamental figure in the founding of the Mongol Empire and therefore the basis for Mongolia as a country.
Temüjin commanded part of this attack, and after victory, he and Toghrul were restored by the Jin to positions of power.
He was also ruthless, demonstrated by his tactic of measuring against the linchpin, used against the tribes led by Jamukha.
Genghis Khan realised that he needed people who could govern cities and states conquered by him.
One of the Tangut generals challenged the Mongols to a battle near Helan Mountains but was defeated.
By 1956 a new temple was erected there to house them.
With such a small force, the invading Mongols were forced to change strategies and resort to inciting internal revolt among Kuchlug's supporters, leaving the Qara Khitai more vulnerable to Mongol conquest.
On October 6, 2004, a joint Japanese-Mongolian archaeological dig uncovered what is believed to be Genghis Khan's palace in rural Mongolia, which raises the possibility of actually locating the ruler's long-lost burial site.
Jin had captured power by displacing Khitan.
Near the end of the battle the Shah fled rather than surrender.
After founding the Empire and being proclaimed "Genghis Khan", he started the Mongol invasions that conquered most of Eurasia.
Like many of the nomads of Mongolia, Temüjin's early life was difficult.
Tolui, his youngest son, inherited more than 100,000 men.
Chu'Tsai administered parts of the Mongol Empire and became a confidant of the successive Mongol Khans.
In Afghanistan (along with other non-Turkic Muslim countries), he is generally viewed unfavorably, though some groups display ambivalence as it is believed that the Hazara of Afghanistan are descendants of a large Mongol garrison stationed there.
The Mongol Empire practiced religious tolerance because Mongol tradition had long held that religion was a personal concept, and not subject to law or interference.
Temüjin was to live there serving the head of the household Dai Setsen until the marriageable age of 12.
Temüjin was probably born in 1162 in Delüün Boldog, near the mountain Burkhan Khaldun and the rivers Onon and Kherlen in modern-day northern Mongolia, close to the current capital Ulaanbaatar.
The Mongol Empire was governed by a civilian and military code, called the Yassa, created by Genghis Khan.
Despite speculation over Jochi, Börte would be Temüjin's only empress, though he did follow tradition by taking several morganatic wives.
He was the second son of his father Yesügei who was a Kiyad chief prominent in the Khamag Mongol confederation and an ally of Toghrul Khan of the Keraite tribe.
In 1939 Chinese Nationalist soldiers took the mausoleum from its position at the 'Lord's Enclosure' (Mongolian: ''Edsen Khoroo'') in Mongolia to protect it from Japanese troops.
Genghis Khan put absolute trust in his generals, such as Muqali, Jebe and Subutai, and regarded them as close advisors, often extending them the same privileges and trust normally reserved for close family members.
However, review of historical Persian sources does not confirm this.
Temüjin began his ascent to power by offering himself as an ally (or, according to other sources, a vassal) to his father's ''anda'' (sworn brother or blood brother) Toghrul, who was Khan of the Keraites, and is better known by the Chinese title "Wang Khan", which the Jurchen Jin dynasty granted him in 1197.
Temüjin had killed the men who betrayed Jamukha, stating that he did not want disloyal men in his army.
Mongol armies pushed into Persia, finished off the Western Xia and the remnants of the Khwarezmids, and clashed with the imperial Song dynasty of China, and eventually took control of all of China in 1279.
The succession of Genghis Khan was already a significant topic during the later years of his reign, as he reached old age.
However, there is no evidence of this, or of the lifting of discriminatory policies towards sedentary peoples such as the Chinese.
Around 1200, the main rivals of the Mongol confederation (traditionally the "Mongols") were the Naimans to the west, the Merkits to the north, the Tanguts to the south, and the Jin to the east.
At this engagement fought at Yehuling, the Mongols massacred hundreds of thousands of Jin troops.
There is no historical record except a short account by the Arab historian Ibn al-Athir, writing in Mosul some 1100 miles away from the event.
Temüjin had three brothers Hasar, Hachiun, and Temüge, one sister Temülen, and two half-brothers Begter and Belgutei.
One chronicle from the early 17th century even relates the legend that the princess hid a small dagger and stabbed him, though some Mongol authors have doubted this version and suspected it to be an invention by the rival Oirads.
Negative views persist in histories written by many cultures from different geographical regions.
Genghis Khan is credited with bringing the Silk Road under one cohesive political environment.
Temüjin rescued her with the help of his friend and future rival, Jamukha, and his protector, Toghrul Khan of the Keraite tribe.
Temüjin grew up observing the tough political climate, which included tribal warfare, thievery, raids, corruption, and revenge between confederations, compounded by interference from abroad such as from China to the south.
As a result, Kuchlug's army was defeated west of Kashgar.
Campaigns initiated in his lifetime include those against the Qara Khitai, Caucasus, and Khwarazmian, Western Xia and Jin dynasties.
The Persian scholar Juvayni states that 50,000 Mongol soldiers were given the task of executing twenty-four Urgench citizens each, which would mean that 1.2&nbsp;million people were killed.
Genghis Khan died in August 1227, during the fall of Yinchuan, which is the capital of Western Xia.
He would even have his mother adopt orphans from the conquered tribe, bringing them into his family.
Genghis Khan is regarded as one of the prominent leaders in Mongolia's history.
Genghis Khan saw the potential advantage in Khwarazmia as a commercial trading partner using the Silk Road, and he initially sent a 500-man caravan to establish official trade ties with the empire.
Women played a relatively important role in Mongol Empire and in family, for example Töregene Khatun was briefly in charge of the Mongol Empire when next male Khagan was being chosen.
The union became known as the Mongols.
The Mongols' conquest, even by their own standards, was brutal.
