One part was formal, juridical, and priestly, but rooted in this world.
It was not only the religious, but also the social and political aspects of which were interwoven in the life of the Church in the Middle Ages.
Some sources, such as Xunzi, list farmers before the gentry, based on the Confucian view that they directly contributed to the welfare of the state.
This influence was so great that western Ukrainians were accused of wanting to create a theocracy in western Ukraine by their Polish rivals.
Wealth had little influence on what estate one belonged to.
Ecclesiastical heraldry is the tradition of heraldry developed by Christian clergy.
Besides the gentry there have been other analogous traditional elites.
* '''Greece (Sparta)''' – Homoioi, Perioeci, Helots
In the absence of a significant native nobility and enjoying a virtual monopoly on education and wealth within western Ukrainian society, the clergy came to form that group's native aristocracy.
* cultivate humaneness.
The most common occurrence of term ''Esquire'' today is the conferral as the suffix ''Esq.''
Such practices are not unique to the British either geographically or historically.
After the Union of Lublin in 1569, they became less distinguishable from Polish ''szlachta'', although preserved Lithuanian national awareness.
The Catholic,  Eastern Orthodox, Anglican and the Church of Sweden (including former dominions of the Swedish Empire: Finland, Estonia and Livonia) have applied the formal, church-based leadership or an ordained clergy in matters of either the church or broader political and sociocultural import.
# Duties to countrymen and fellow Christians
Many of the early settlers came from the West Midlands in England, although the Maryland families were composed of a variety of European nationalities, e.g., French, Irish, Welsh, Scottish, and Swedish, in addition to English.
Charles I of England granted the province palatinate status under Cecilius Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore.
The term ''Jūnzǐ'' (君子) is a term crucial to classical Confucianism.
* cultivate themselves morally;
In the Middle Ages, celibacy in the Catholic Church had been a natural barrier to the formation of an hereditary priestly class.
In Germany, the high church movement is much smaller than in Sweden.
Several also had interests in the Colony of Virginia, and the two are sometimes referred to as the Chesapeake Colonies.
The second estate was the nobility.
The Confucian ideals in the Japanese culture emphasised the importance of productive members of society, so farmers and fishermen were considered of a higher status than merchants.
Much of the population that comprised the upper class consisted of aristocrats, ruling families, titled people, and religious hierarchs.
The  European coronation ceremonies of the Middle Ages were essentially a combination of the Christian rite of anointing with additional elements.
In Sweden, there was not outright serfdom.
A knight can be either a mediaeval tenant giving military service as a mounted man-at-arms to a feudal landholder, or a mediaeval gentleman-soldier, usually high-born, raised by a sovereign to privileged military status after training as a page and squire (for a contemporary reference, see British honours system).
In the latter half of the period in which they ruled 800 AD onwards, the clergy were as free from family cares as even Plato could desire for such guardians ...
He further subdivided sovereignty into two distinct and complementary sub-parts.
Some of the greatest theologians of the High Middle Ages, Thomas Aquinas and Robert Grosseteste, were products of the mediaeval university.
The Protestant Reformation brought about great change in the Baltic Region of Europe.
During the Early Middle Ages, the monasteries of the Catholic Church were the centres of European education and literacy, preserving Latin learning and maintaining the art of writing.
Only the samurai could have proper surnames, which after the Meiji Restoration, became compulsory to all inhabitants (see Japanese name).
The provisional government of Russia after 1917 revolution gave the Estonians and Latvians self-governance which meant the end of the Baltic German era in Baltics.
Some 5 per cent of the population were samurai.
The church became more tolerant of war in the defence of faith, espousing theories of the just war.
Because of several unions between Lutheran and Reformed churches since the Prussian Union, resulting in the simple spread of Calvinist concepts from the Reformed Churches by "osmosis", Lutheranism has often taken on a Reformed context.
The coat of arms is drawn with heraldic rules for a person, family or organisation.
Royalists left England on the accession to power of Oliver Cromwell and his Parliament.
The Lithuanian gentry consisted mainly of Lithuanians, but due to strong ties to Poland, had been culturally Polonized.
At the head of the Swedish clergy stood the Archbishop of Uppsala since 1164.
* '''Greece (Attica)''' – Eupatridae, Geomori, Demiurgi
In many countries, the term ''upper class'' was intimately associated with hereditary land ownership and titles.
Learning became essential to advancing in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, and teachers also gained prestige.
The term ''landed gentry'', although originally used to mean nobility, came to be used for the lesser nobility in England around 1540.
Hence continued the medieval Church legacy of the intermingling between noble class and clerical upper class and the intermarriage as the distinctive element in several Nordic countries after the Reformation.
To a degree, ''gentleman'' signified a man with an income derived from landed property, a legacy or some other source and was thus independently wealthy and did not need to work.
The nobility and the third estate were born into their class, and change in social position was slow.
The Lutheran Church in the Baltics did not come to have the institutional importance or independence its counterpart had in the Nordic countries.
Numbering approximately 2,000–2,500 by the 19th century, priestly families tended to marry within their group, constituting a tight-knit hereditary caste.
* '''Anglo-Saxon''' – Gebedmen (prayer-men), Fyrdmen (army-men), Weorcmen (workmen) (according to Alfred the Great)
Modern systems of education in Europe derive their origins from the schools of the High Middle Ages.
The other was powerful, unpredictable, and also priestly, but rooted in the "other", the supernatural and spiritual world.
Until the Reformation, the clergy was the first estate but was relegated to the secular estate in the Protestant North Europe.
As a very practical form of displaying patriotism, it has been at times "fashionable" for "gentlemen" to participate in the military.
* '''Indo-Iranian''' – Brahmin/Athravan, Kshatriyas/Rathaestar, Vaishyas
After compulsory celibacy was abolished in Sweden during the Reformation, the formation of an hereditary priestly class became possible, whereby wealth and clerical positions were frequently inheritable.
Being a noble meant that one had responsibilities to lead, manage and so on.
Beyond the fact that Clerical celibacy functioned as a spiritual discipline it also was guarantor of the independence of the Church.
In the later Middle Ages, wealthy merchants strove to adopt chivalric attitudes.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, the surname was only rarely the original family name of the ennobled; usually, a more imposing new name was chosen.
The Church in Lithuania remained Catholic, but a large part of Livonia came under the sway of the Reformation.
The central role played by the Ukrainian clergy or their children in western Ukrainian society would weaken somewhat at the end of the 19th century but would continue until the mid-20th century.
These concepts of "religious chivalry" were further elaborated in the era of the Crusades.
Gaetano Mosca wrote on the same subject matter in his book The Ruling Class concerning the Medieval Church and its structure that
This usage was devised in 1917, derived from the practice, up to the 17th century (and still also in legal proceedings), for the wife of a knight.
Until the reformation, the clergy was the first estate but was relegated to the secular estate in the Protestant Northern Europe.
Like English "small", the word in this context in Chinese can mean petty in mind and heart, narrowly self-interested, greedy, superficial, and materialistic.
Following Europe's conversion to Christianity,  crowning ceremonies became more and more ornate, depending on the country in question, and their Christian elements—especially anointing—became the paramount concern.
The exception was the Medieval Church, which was the only institution where competent men (and women) of merit could reach, in one lifetime, the highest positions in society.
The term ''gentry'' (from the Old French ''genterise'' for ''gentelise'') has much of the social-class significance of the French ''noblesse'' or of the German ''Adel'', but without the strict technical requirements of those traditions (such as quarters of nobility).
The given name was preceded by Herr (Sir), such as Herr Lars, Herr Olof, Herr Hans, followed by a Latinized form of patronymic  names, e.g., Lars Petersson Latinized as Laurentius Petri.
In the Imperial census of 1897, 98,573 Germans (7.58% of total population) lived in the Governorate of Livonia, 51,017 (7.57%) in the Governorate of Curonia, and 16,037 (3.89%) in the Governorate of Estonia.
The "classic" formulation of the caste system as largely described by Georges Dumézil was that of a priestly or religiously occupied caste, a warrior caste, and a worker caste.
* show filial piety and loyalty where these are due; and
The idea of ''gentry'' in the continental sense of "noblesse" is extinct in common parlance in England, despite the efforts of enthusiasts to revive it.
Social division was based on the dominance of the Baltic Germans which formed the upper classes while the majority of indigenous population, called "Undeutsch", composed the peasantry.
With the increasing growth and urbanisation of European society during the 12th and 13th centuries, a demand grew for professional clergy.
Before the 12th century, the intellectual life of Western Europe had been largely relegated to monasteries, which were mostly concerned with performing the liturgy and prayer; relatively few monasteries could boast true intellectuals.
Another classification of chivalry divides it into warrior, religious and courtly love strands.
The first to accept the ideas of the Reformation were the merchants of Riga and Reval, which subsequently functioned as the centers of the Reformation.
The fundamental idea of gentry had come to be that of the essential superiority of the fighting man, usually maintained in the granting of arms.
Though the untitled nobility in England are normally termed ''gentry'', the older sense of "nobility" is that of a quality identical to gentry.
Esquire (abbreviated Esq.)
in order to pay an informal compliment to a male recipient by way of implying gentle birth.
* '''Celtic''' – Druids, Equites, Plebes (according to Julius Caesar)
Samurai became ''Shizoku'' (), but the right to wear a katana in public was eventually abolished along with the right to execute commoners who paid them disrespect.
In Plato's ideal state there are three major classes (producers, auxiliaries and guardians), which was representative of the idea of the "tripartite soul", which is expressive of three functions or capacities of the human soul: "appetites" (or "passions"), "the spirited element" and "reason" the part that must guide the soul to truth.
The first estate comprised the entire clergy, traditionally divided into "higher" and "lower" clergy.
Anthropologists see social rituals as one of many cultural universals.
Because, like their Orthodox brethren, Ukrainian Catholic priests could marry, they were able to establish "priestly dynasties", often associated with specific regions, for many generations.
One was not to simply spend one's time in idle pursuits.
The social changes faced by the emancipation, both social and national, of the Estonians and Latvians where not taken seriously by the Baltic German gentry.
The two historically legally privileged classes in Sweden were the Swedish nobility ''(Adeln)'' and the clergy, which were part of the so-called ''frälse'' (a classification defined by tax exemptions and representation in the diet).
Later, the Baltic Germans faced fierce attacks from the Russian nationalist press, which accused the Baltic aristocracy of separatism, and advocated closer linguistic and administrative integration with Russia.
A noticeable part of the clergy were recruited from the local inhabitants, and the celibacy of clergy constrained the rise of structure-based inheritable privileges in the Church.
The only universal European institution was the Catholic Church, and even there, fragmentation of authority was the rule; all the power within the church hierarchy was in the hands of the local bishops and finally the Bishop of Rome.
Historically, Sweden, including the former Swedish province of Finland, has had a more elaborate form of liturgy, which preserved more than other Nordic countries links to the Mediaeval Catholic tradition.
It is most formalised within the Catholic Church, where most bishops, including the pope, have a personal coat of arms.
At the last, the wearing of a sword on all occasions was the outward and visible sign of a "gentleman"; the custom survives in the sword worn with "court dress".
The Western Ukrainian Clergy of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church were a hereditary tight-knit social caste that dominated western Ukrainian society from the late eighteenth until the mid-20th centuries, following the reforms instituted by Joseph II, Emperor of Austria.
In Japan, this caste essentially equates to the samurai class.
Upper-class status commonly derived from the social position of one's family and not from one's own achievements or wealth.
The last group, though small in number, monopolized the instruments and opportunities of culture, and ruled with almost unlimited sway half of the most powerful continent on the globe.
When examining mediaeval literature, chivalry can be classified into three basic but overlapping areas:
Initially used to mark documents, ecclesiastical heraldry evolved as a system for identifying people and dioceses.
The term gentleman (from Latin ''gentilis'', belonging to a race or ''gens'', and  "man", cognate with the French word ''gentilhomme'', the Spanish ''hombre gentil'' and the Italian ''gentil uomo'' or ''gentiluomo''), in its original and strict signification, denoted a man of good family, analogous to the Latin ''generosus'' (its invariable translation in English-Latin documents).
In this sense the word equates with the French ''gentilhomme'' ("nobleman"), which was in Great Britain long confined to the peerage.
Some upper classes were almost entirely untitled, for example, the Szlachta of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
Following the Gregorian Reform's emphasis on canon law and the study of the sacraments, bishops formed cathedral schools to train the clergy in these and the more secular aspects of religious administration.
One particular similarity between all three of these categories is honour.
The division into nobles and ignobles in smaller regions of Europe in the Middle Ages was less exact due to a more rudimentary feudal order.
There were two leading classes, i.e.
Clergy in Anglican, Lutheran, Eastern Catholic, and Orthodox churches follow similar customs.
However, the  backgrounds of both men were considered to be essentially patrician, and they were thus deemed suitable husbands for a princess.
Absolutism was characterized by the ending of feudal partitioning, consolidation of power with the monarch, rise of state, rise of professional standing armies, professional bureaucracies, the codification of state laws, and the rise of ideologies that justify the absolutist monarchy.
In the 11th century, the concept of a "knight of Christ" (''miles Christi'') gained currency in France, Spain and Italy.
Although now much diminished, the practice has not totally disappeared.
The rest of the nobility are referred to as landed gentry (abbreviated "gentry").
In the British peerage, only the senior family member (typically the eldest son) inherits a substantive title (duke, marquess, earl, viscount, baron); these are referred to as peers or lords.
Historically in some cultures, members of an upper class often did not have to work for a living, as they were supported by earned or inherited investments (often real estate), although members of the upper class may have had less actual money than merchants.
For a thousand years Europe was ruled by an order of guardians considerably like that which was visioned by our philosopher.
is a term of British origin, referring only to males, and used to denote a high but indeterminate social status.
Financially, the clergy were tied to the Baltic German nobility's estates, which provided revenues.
Literally meaning "son of a ruler", "prince" or "noble", the ideal of a "gentleman", "proper man", "exemplary person", or "perfect man" is that for which Confucianism exhorts all people to strive.
The Church had been from the beginning the foundation of the learned society in the Baltic region.
The names of these were usually in Swedish, Latin, German or Greek.
The opposite of the ''Jūnzǐ'' was the ''Xiǎorén'' (小人), literally "small person" or "petty person".
In the post-mediaeval world, the title of ''esquire'' came to belong to all men of the higher landed gentry; an esquire ranked socially above a gentleman but below a knight.
Surnames in Sweden can be traced to the 15th century, when they were first used by the Gentry (Frälse), i.e., priests and nobles.
The clergy encompassed almost all of the era's educated men in Europe and was furthermore strengthened by considerable wealth, and thus, it naturally came to play a significant political role.
From the middle of the 1860s the privileged position of Baltic Germans in the Russian Empire began to waver.
Most Ukrainian social and political movements in Austrian-controlled territory emerged or were highly influenced by the clergy themselves or by their children.
Kings were born out of the warrior or noble class.
Therefore no real dynasties of abbots and bishops have ever been able to establish themselves.
It is used post-nominally, usually in abbreviated form (for example, "Thomas Smith, Esq.
The fundamental social division in most parts of Europe in the Middle Ages was between the "nobiles", i.e., the tenants in chivalry (whether counts, barons, knights, esquires or franklins), and the "ignobles", i.e., the villeins, citizens and burgesses.
Honour is the foundational and guiding principle of chivalry.
Private, independent schools reappeared in mediaeval Europe during this time, but they, too, were religious in nature and mission.
The foundational charter created an aristocracy of lords of the manor for Maryland.
In the modern world, where all men are assumed to be gentlemen, the term has often been extended (albeit only in very formal writing) to all men without any higher title.
The significance of a right to a coat of arms was that it was definitive proof of the status of gentleman, but it recognised rather than conferred such a status, and the status could be and frequently was accepted without a right to a coat of arms.
In formal protocol, ''Sir'' is the correct styling for a knight or a baronet, used with (one of) the knight's given name(s) or full name, but not with the surname alone.
Free education for the poor was officially mandated by the Church at the Third Lateran Council (1179), which decreed that every cathedral must assign a master to teach boys too poor to pay the regular fee; parishes and monasteries also established free schools teaching at least basic literary skills.
The regular difference with Britain was that it became the new surname of the whole house, and the old surname was dropped altogether.
In the Edo period, with the creation of the Domains (''han'') under the rule of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, all land was confiscated and reissued as fiefdoms to the daimyo.
A coat of arms is a heraldic device dating to the 12th century in Europe.
Hence the bishops and the vicars, who formed the clerical upper class, would frequently have manors similar to those of other country gentry.
The British upper classes consist of two sometimes overlapping entities, the peerage and landed gentry; any male member of either may regard himself as a gentleman, in a special sense mutually understood between hereditary members of the class, which will often exclude life peers.
The small lords, the , were ordered either to give up their swords and rights and remain on their lands as peasants or to move to the castle cities to become paid retainers of the daimyo.
It was originally a cloth tunic worn over or in place of armour to establish identity in battle.
Emperor Meiji abolished the samurai's right to be the only armed force in favor of a more modern, Western-style, conscripted army in 1873.
The precept that exhorts the Church to abhor bloodshed has never dropped completely out of sight, and in relatively tranquil and orderly times it has always been very much to the fore.
Among these central traditions have been  baptism, Confirmation, Penance, Anointing of the Sick, Holy Orders, marriage, the Mass or the Divine Service, and coronations.
The clergy adopted Austria's role for them as bringers of culture and education to the Ukrainian countryside.
The classical heritage flourished throughout the Middle Ages in both the Byzantine Greek East and Latin West.
They formed part of the southern elite in America.
These people were usually born into their status, and historically, there was not much movement across class boundaries.
Power began to shift from upper-class landed families to the general population in the early modern age, leading to marital alliances between the two groups, providing the foundation for the modern upper classes in the West.
The feudal system was, for the people of the Middle Ages and early modern period, fitted into a God-given order.
Landed gentry is a traditional British social class consisting of gentlemen in the original sense; that is, those who owned land in the form of country estates to such an extent that they were not required to actively work, except in an administrative capacity on their own lands.
This is to say that it was much harder for an individual to move up in class simply because of the structure of society.
The idea of ''noblesse oblige'', "nobility obliges", among gentry is, as the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' expresses, that the term "suggests noble ancestry constrains to honorable behaviour; privilege entails to responsibility".
By the 13th century, almost half of the highest offices in the Church were occupied by degreed masters (abbots, archbishops, cardinals).
Although there was no formal demarcation between the two categories, the upper clergy were, effectively, clerical nobility, from the families of the second estate or as in the case of Cardinal Wolsey, from more humble backgrounds.
For many years, the British Army, together with the Church, was seen as the ideal career for the younger sons of the aristocracy.
The Christian clergy has traditionally officiated over of acts worship, reverence, rituals and ceremonies in Europe.
The Colonial families of Maryland were the leading families in the Province of Maryland.
Before the Age of Absolutism, institutions, such as the church, legislatures, or social elites, restrained monarchical power.
Many of the earliest universities, such as the University of Paris founded in 1160, had a Christian basis.
Both Captain Mark Phillips and Vice Admiral Sir Timothy Laurence, the respective first and second husbands of HRH Princess Anne, lacked any rank of peerage at the time of their marriage to Princess Anne.
Finally, there was a third group, ruled by the other two, whose role was productivity: herding, farming, and crafts.
* participate in the correct performance of ritual;
During the Middle Ages it was customary to classify the population of Christendom into laboratores (workers), bellatores (soldiers), and oratores (clergy).
Hence, the gentry was basically a class of well-off citizens that had grown from the wealthier or more powerful members of the peasantry.
However, the city of Rome, under the guidance of the Catholic Church, still remained a centre of learning and did much to preserve classic Roman thought in Western Europe.
This caste would comprise both the more-or-less hereditary aristocracy as well as the meritocratic scholars that rise through the rank by public service and, later, by imperial exams.
Following the independence of Latvia and Estonia, the re-founded national churches took steps to distance itself from its Baltic German association and emphasise Estonian and Latvian aspects.
Most schools during this era were founded upon religious principles with the primary purpose of training the clergy.
The difference between the Japanese and European feudal systems was that European feudalism was grounded in Roman legal structure, while Japan feudalism had Chinese Confucian morality as its basis.
The adoption of Latin names was first used by the Catholic clergy in the 15th century.
Only a few samurai were allowed to remain in the countryside; the .
* '''Roman''' – Flamines, Milites, Quirites
Starting form the time of the Reformation, the Latinized form of their birthplace (Laurentius Petri Gothus, from Östergötland) became a common naming practice for the clergy.
Upper-class landowners in Europe were often also members of the titled nobility, though not necessarily: the prevalence of titles of nobility varied widely from country to country.
The Far East also held similar ideas to the West of what a gentleman is, which are based on Confucian principles.
Celibacy has generally been required of the clergy and of monks.
The clergy encompassed almost all the educated men of the day and furthermore was strengthened by considerable wealth, and thus it came naturally to play a significant political role.
Historically, the nobles in Europe became soldiers; the aristocracy in Europe can trace their origins to military leaders from the migration period and the Middle Ages.
Gentry (士) means different things in different countries.
The clergy, like Plato's guardians, were placed in authority ... by their talent as shown in ecclesiastical studies and administration, by their disposition to a life of meditation and simplicity, and ... by the influence of their relatives with the powers of state and church.
As the Jesuits and other preceding monastical orders did during Europe's Dark Ages, the Buddhist monks became the purveyors and guardians of Korea's literary traditions while documenting Korea's written history and legacies from the Silla period to the end of the Goryeo dynasty.
* '''Slavic ''' – Volkhvs, Voin, Krestyanin/Smerd
This was a period which produced a myriad of two-word Swedish-language family names for the nobility (very favored prefixes were Adler, "eagle"; Ehren – "ära", "honor"; Silfver, "silver"; and Gyllen, "golden").
A suggestion that a gentleman must have a coat of arms was vigorously advanced by certain 19th- and 20th-century heraldists, notably Arthur Charles Fox-Davies in England and Thomas Innes of Learney in Scotland.
Titles, while often considered central to the upper class, are not strictly so.
the gentry, in the time of feudal Japan: the Daimyo and the Samurai.
the Catholic Church has always aspired to a preponderant share in political power, it has never been able to monopolize it entirely, because of two traits, chiefly, that are basic in its structure.
Already during the reign of Nicholas I (1825–55), who was under pressure from Russian nationalists, some sporadic steps had been taken towards the russification of the provinces.
