Hawley-Green a community in Syracuse has also under gone gentrification due to the work of people in LGBT community.
Measures protecting these marginal groups from gentrification may reduce those.
The technology industry has been identified as a driver of gentrification in Silicon Valley cities such as San Francisco.
Businesses can become more stable by securing long-term commercial leases.
In the 1970s, after neighborhood opposition blocked two freeways from being built through the east side, its neighborhoods such as Inman Park and Virginia-Highland became the starting point for the city's gentrification wave, first becoming affordable neighborhoods attracting young people, and by 2000 having become relatively affluent areas attracting people from across Metro Atlanta to their upscale shops and restaurants.
Barnsbury was built around 1820, as a middle-class suburb, but after the Second World War (1939–1945), people moved to the suburbs.
Gentrification provided a means for the 'stylization of life' and an expression of realized profit and social rank.
The economic changes that occur as a community goes through gentrification are often favorable for local governments.
Displacement and housing demand pressures on surrounding poor areas
Although developers may recognize value in responding to living patterns, extensive zoning policies often prevent affordable homes from being constructed within urban development.
In its early days, this area of Darien Street housed only Italian families, however, after the Second World War (1939–1945), when the municipal government spoke of building a cross-town highway, the families moved out.
*Virginia Beach 46.2%
The opposing side of this argument is that dominant, or recurring, American values determine where people decide to live, not the changing values previously cited.
Moreover, the rehabilitating spark was ''The 1959 Housing Purchase and Housing Act'', investing £100&nbsp;million to rehabilitating old properties and infrastructure.
The city's Prenzlauer Berg district is, however, a poster child of the capital's gentrification, as this area in particular has experienced a rapid transformation over the last two decades.
Manuel Castells has researched the role of gay communities, especially in San Francisco, as early gentrifiers.
Especially Berlin is a showcase of intense debates about symbols of gentrification, while the actual processes are much slower than in other cities.
In Zona Tortona, some of important landmarks, related to culture, design and arts, are located such as ''Fondazione Pomodoro'', the ''Armani/Silos'', ''Spazio A'' and ''MUDEC''.
A characteristic example is a combined community effort to win historic district designation for the neighborhood, a phenomenon that is often linked to gentrification activity.
It conveys a social rise that brings new standards in consumption, particularly in the form of excess and superfluity, to the area that were not held by the pre-existing residents.
Gay people would have gained acceptance by adopting anti-Islamic positions.
Under occupancy and population loss to gentrified areas
The buyers in stage two cited Peabody schools and the socioeconomic mix of the neighborhood as primary reasons for their residential choice, as well as a desire to avoid job commutes and a disenchantment with the suburban life.
The opposing side, the community saved side, argues that community activity increases when neighborhoods are gentrified because these neighborhoods are being revitalized.
As such, human geographer David Ley posits a rehabilitated post-industrial city influenced by a this "new middle class".
Gentrification is a housing, economic, and health issue that affects a community's history and culture and reduces social capital.
The process of gentrification stemmed as the new middle class, often with politically progressive ideals, was employed in the city and recognized not only the convenient commute of a city residence, but also the appeal towards the urban lifestyle as a means of opposing the "deception of the suburbanite".
Furthermore, the houses were very small&nbsp;— approximately  wide and  deep, each had three one-room stories (locally known, and still currently advertised as a "Trinity" style house) and the largest yard was  deep.
Commercial/industrial displacement
Vacancy decontrol encourages landlords to find ways of shortening their residents' tenure, most aggressively through landlord harassment.
However, displacement was not cited as a problem because the primary reason of housing sale remained the death of the sole-surviving member of the household or the death of a spouse.
Home ownership is a significant variable when it comes to economic impacts of gentrification.
Another semi-central district that has undergone this phenomenon in Milan is Zona Tortona.
*Portland, Oregon 58.1%
A majority of the area had also been designated a National Historic District.
Displacement through rent/price increases
Ley's research cites a quote from a Vancouver printmaker talking about the importance of inner city life to an artist, that it has, "energy, intensity, hard to specify but hard to do without" (1996).
British sociologist Ruth Glass coined the term "gentrification"  in 1964 to describe the influx of middle-class people displacing lower-class worker residents in urban neighborhoods; her example was London, and its working-class districts such as Islington:
The stereotypical gentrifiers also have shared consumer preferences and favor a largely consumerist culture.
The change gentrification brings in class distinction also has been shown to contribute to residential polarization by income, education, household composition, and race.
Of the homebuyers in Bay Village from 1957 to 1975, 92% had careers as white-collar professionals.
Historians say that gentrification took place in ancient Rome and in Roman Britain, where large villas were replacing small shops by the 3rd century, AD.
In a recent example of restrictive urban zoning requirements, Arcadia Development Co. was prevented from rezoning a parcel for residential development in an urban setting within the city of Morgan Hill, California.
In the first wave of attacks, eight holiday homes were destroyed in a month, and in 1980, Welsh Police carried out a series of raids in Operation Tân.
These conditions have been met in the U.S. largely as a result of suburbanization and other postindustrial phenomena.
What is generally agreed upon, however, is that those displaced are primarily minority, elderly, and transient groups, and they are nearly always driven out in areas where gentrification occurs.
In five years, from 1977 to 1982, the gentrification of Darien Street reduced the original population from seven black households and one white household, to two black households and eleven white households.
This can include requiring developers to continue with a current commercial tenant or offering development incentives for keeping existing businesses, as well as creating and maintaining industrial zones.
They develop countermovements in order to gain the power necessary to defend themselves against the movements of the elite.
That part of Darien Street was a "back street", because it does not connect to any of the city's main arteries and was unpaved for most of its existence.
The gentrification during this time period resulted in a significant problem of displacement for marginalized D.C. residents in the 1970s.
Source: Loretta Lees, Tom Slater, and Elvin Wyly, ''Gentrification Reader,'' p.&nbsp;196.
Designing zoning to allow new housing near to a commercial corridor but not on top of it increases foot traffic to local businesses without redeveloping them.
The economic and cultural changes of the world in the 1960s have been attributed to these consumption changes.
However, more specific research has shown that gentrification does not necessarily correlate with "social mixing," and that the effects of the new composition of a gentrified neighborhood can both weaken as well as strengthen community cohesion.
Unsustainable property prices
Zoning ordinances and other urban planning tools can be used to recognize and support local business and industries.
The post-World War II economy experienced a service revolution, which created white-collar jobs and larger opportunities for women in the work force, as well as an expansion in the importance of centralized administrative and cooperate activities.
Since then, a lot has been invested in the close suburbs (with new public transports set to open and urban renewal programs) they fled, but almost nobody cares of these "invisible" plots of land.
While this upgrade of housing value is the superficial keynote to the gentrification process, there is a greater number of less-visible shifts the gentry bring with them into their new neighborhoods in the community.
They are quintessential city people, and the city is often a functional choice as well, for city life has advantages that include connections to customers and a closer proximity to a downtown art scene, all of which are more likely to be limited in a suburban setting.
This change in consumption causes a fall in inner city land prices, often resulting in poor upkeep and a neglect of repair for these properties by owners and landlords.
Rent control restricts the rent that can be charged, so that incumbent tenants are not forced out by rising rents.
*Minneapolis, Minnesota 50.6%
As a result, a lot of poor people have been forced to go first to the close suburbs (1970 to 2000) and then more and more to remote "periurban areas" where public transport is almost nonexistent.
As a result, the principal population influx occurred between 1961 and 1975; the UK Census reports that "between the years of 1961 and 1981, owner-occupation increased from 7 to 19 per cent, furnished rentals declined from 14 to 7 per cent, and unfurnished rentals declined from 61 to 6 per cent"; another example of urban gentrification is the super-gentrification, in the 1990s, of the neighboring working-class London Borough of Islington, where Prime minister Tony Blair moved upon his election in 1997.
Their activities drew hostile responses from the San Francisco Police Department, real estate interests, and "work-within-the-system" housing activists.
42% of these homebuyers were 25–34&nbsp;years old.
Professional occupations were overrepresented in homebuyers during this 15-year period, as well as the age group of 25–34&nbsp;years old.
The first theory, demographic-ecological, attempts to explain gentrification through the analysis of demographics: population, social organization, environment, and technology.
The German approach uses en (milieu conservation municipal law), e.g.
These communities have been disrupted by the arrival of new people and already suffered of high unemployment due to the dwindling numbers of industrial jobs.
These are: an excess supply of deteriorated housing in central areas, as well as a considerable growth in the availability of professional jobs located in central business districts.
These "marginal" gentrifiers made significant efforts towards superficial beautification as well as rehabilitation of their new homes, setting the stage for realtors to promote the rising value of the area.
The baby boomers in pursuit of housing were very different, demographically, from their house-hunting predecessors.
It is then favorable to seek investment outside the industrial sphere to hold off onset of an economic crisis.
To wit, the American urban theorist John Friedman's seven-part theory posits a bifurcated service industry in world cities, composed of "a high percentage of professionals specialized in control functions and&nbsp;... a vast army of low-skilled workers engaged in&nbsp;... personal services&nbsp;... that cater to the privileged classes, for whose sake the world city primarily exists".
This is often deemed as "marginal gentrification," for the city can offer an easier solution to combining paid and unpaid labor.
This section of Smith's theory attempts to describe the timing of the process of gentrification.
Gentrification has been substantially advocated by local governments, often in the form of 'urban restructuring' policies.
Stage two of the process brought more architects to the area as well as non-architect professionals, often employed at a university institution.
Thus, the expanding effect of suburbanization as well as agglomeration to city centers can coexist.
In the 2000s vigorous efforts to make Isola as a symbolic place of the Milan of the future were carried out and, with this aim, the Porta Garibaldi-Isola districts became attractors for stylists and artists.
"This permanent tension on two fronts is evident in the architecture of gentrification: in the external restorations of the Victoriana, the middle classes express their candidature for the dominant classes; in its internal renovation work this class signifies its distance from the lower orders."
Because these couples were child-free and were not concerned with the conditions of schools and playgrounds, they elected to live in the inner city in close proximity to their jobs.
In contrast to the production-side argument, the ''consumption-side'' theory of urban gentrification posits that the "socio-cultural characteristics and motives" of the gentrifiers are most important to understanding the gentrification of the ''post-industrial city''.
Smith emphasizes that demographic and life-style changes are more of an exhibition of the ''form'' of gentrification, rather than real factors behind gentrification.
The third theoretical explanation of gentrification is political-economic and is divided into two approaches: traditional and Marxist.
This means that people choose to live in a gentrified area to restore it, not to alter it, because restoration is a "new way to realize old values" (London and Palen, 1984).
The traditional approach argues that economic and political factors have led to the invasion of the inner-city, hence the name political-economic.
Since these white-collar workers wanted to live closer to work, a neighborhood with more white-collar jobs was more likely to be invaded; the relationship between administrative activity and invasion was positively correlated (London and Palen, 1984).
Meibion Glyndŵr (), also known as the Valley Commandos, was a Welsh nationalist movement violently opposed to the loss of Welsh culture and language.
An excellent example was the turned around gang in Chicago who fought for years against the Richard J. Daley machine: the Young Lords led by Jose Cha Cha Jimenez.
The community lost perspective argues that the role of the neighborhood is becoming more limited due to technological advances in transportation and communication.
; Rowland Atkinson and Gary Bridge, eds., ''Gentrification in a Global Context: the New Urban Colonialism,'' p.&nbsp;5.
In the Brookings Institution report ''Dealing with Neighborhood Change: A Primer on Gentrification and Policy Choices'' (2001), Maureen Kennedy and Paul Leonard say that "the term 'gentrification' is both imprecise and quite politically charged", suggesting its redefinition as "the process by which higher income households displace lower income residents of a neighborhood, changing the essential character and flavour of that neighborhood", so distinguishing it from the different socio-economic process of "neighborhood (or urban) revitalization", although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably.
Those who are 'gentrified' not only lack the economic resources to compete with these changes, but stereotypically lack political power, are easily exploited by landlords and developers, and eventually are simply forced to leave due to these inabilities to resist the gentrification process.
Community resentment and conflict
Research has also shown subgroups of gentrifiers that fall outside of these stereotypes.
The group were responsible for setting fire to English-owned holiday homes in Wales from 1979 to the mid-1990s.
''Flag Wars'' (Linda Goode Bryant) shows tensions as of 2003 between LGBT-newcomers and a black middle-class neighborhood in Columbus, Ohio.
Another phenomenon is "loft conversion," which rehabilitates mixed-use areas, often abandoned industrial buildings or run-down apartment buildings to housing for the incoming gentrifiers.
These descendants of artisans and political captives, brought to the Cape as early as the 18th century as slaves and indentured workers, were housed in small barrack-like abodes on what used to be the outskirts of town.
When the poor lived in the close suburbs, their problems were very visible to the wealthy population.
The 2–3 story brick row houses were largely converted to low-cost lodging houses, and the neighborhood came to be described as "blighted" and "down at heel".
Gentrification by young African Americans was also taking place in the 1990s in southwest Atlanta neighborhoods, .
Inner city concentration increases the efficiency of commodities parents need by minimizing time constraints among multiple jobs, childcare, and markets.
The effect is a lower speed of gentrification and a broader social mix.
These changes can create positive feedback as well, encouraging other forms of development of the area that promote general economic growth.
There is also evidence to support that gentrification can strengthen and stabilize when there is a consensus about a community's objectives.
There are also theories that suggest the inner-city lifestyle is important for women with children where the father does not care equally for the child, because of the proximity to professional childcare.
The Peabody Schools also served as an enticing factor for the new gentrifiers for both stages of new homebuyers.
However, the process is mitigated by social housing and most cities tend to favor a "social mix"; that is, having both low and high-income residents in the same neighborhoods.
Stage one began with various architects and architectural students who were attracted to the affordability of the neighborhood.
Despite the decay, Darien Street remained charmed with European echoes, each house was architecturally different, contributing to the street's community character; children were safe, there was no car traffic.
"Liberal Ideology and the Post-Industrial City" (1980) describes and deconstructs the TEAM committee's effort to rendering Vancouver, BC, Canada, a "livable city".
Increased social mix
Increasingly, this close-knit community is "facing a slow dissolution of its distinctive character as wealthy outsiders move into the suburb to snap up homes in the City Bowl at cut-rate prices".
Gentrification may be viewed as "correction" of blockbusting and urban flight as many gentrified neighborhoods of the present were once affluent neighborhoods of the past.
However, somewhat counter-intuitively, globalization also is accompanied by spatial centralization of urban centers, mainly from the growth of the inner city as a base for headquarter and executive decision-making centers.
Secondary psychological costs of displacement
In other cases social housing owned by local authorities may be sold to tenants and then sold on.
Typically, areas to be gentrified are deteriorated and old, though structurally sound, and often have some obscure amenity such as a historical significance that attracts the potential gentrifiers.
Economic pressure and market price changes relate to the speed of gentrification.
Affluent gentrifiers expand the local tax base as well as support local shops and businesses, a large part of why the process is frequently alluded to in urban policies.
Most of the houses date from 1885 (built for the artisans and craftsmen who worked and lived in the area), but, when the Italian Americans moved out, the community's low-rent houses went to poor African American families.
The upper and middle classes were fleeing from the working class residents of London; the modern railway allowed it.
In the early stages, renters are largely driven out because of the changing incentives of landlords.
The basis of inclusionary zoning is partial replacement as opposed to displacement of the embedded communities.
Volkskunde scholar Barbara Lang introduced the term 'symbolic gentrification' with regard to the ''Mythos Kreuzberg'' in Berlin.
Often their incomes cannot continue to cover these increased living costs.
D.C. is one of the top three cities with the most pronounced capital flow into its "core" neighborhoods, a measurement that has been used to detect areas experiencing gentrification.
This electorate voted overwhelmingly in favor of Marine Le Pen and Sarkozy while the city centers and close suburbs voted overwhelmingly for François Hollande.
Private shuttle buses operated by companies such as Google have driven up rents in areas near their stops, leading to some protests.
In jurisdictions where local or national government has these powers, there may be rent control regulations.
The cities of southwestern Santa Monica and eastern West Hollywood in California, United States gentrified despite—or perhaps, because of—rent control.
If applicable to private landlords, it is a disincentive to speculating with property values, reduces the incidence of dwellings left empty, and limits availability of housing for new residents.
In Boston's North End, the destruction of the noisy Central Artery elevated highway attracted younger, more affluent new residents, in place of the traditional Italian immigrant culture.
These differing norms can lead to conflict, which potentially serves to divide changing communities.
Dennis Gale studied these 'Revitalization Areas,' which include Dupont Circle, Adams Morgan, and Capitol Hill neighborhoods, and as compared to the rest of the district found that these areas were experiencing a faster rate of depopulation in the 1970s than the surrounding areas.
They married at an older age and had fewer children.
The year 1957 began the upgrading of what was to become Bay Village, and these changes were mainly attributed to new artists and gay men moving to the area.
As the bohemian character of the community grows, it appeals "not only to committed participants, but also to sporadic consumers," and the rising property values that accompany this migration often lead to the eventual pushing out of the artists that began the movement in the first place.
The gentrification of a mixed-income community raises housing affordability to the fore of the community's politics.
As the process continues, owners of single residential units are strained with the surge in property values that translates to increased tax assessments.
This is a common and controversial topic in urban planning.
Similarly, Michael Jager contended that the consumption pattern of the new middle class explains gentrification because of the new appeal of embracing the historical past as well as urban lifestyle and culture.
These people have labelled themselves "les invisibles".
The identity residence in the inner city provides is important for the gentrifier, and this is particularly so in the artists' case.
German municipalities  and other cooperative actors have and maintain strong roles on the real estate markets in their realm.
The principal detriment was residential displacement via higher priced housing.
This views the community as an "interactive social group".
This theoretical approach is focused on the analysis of ideologically based movements, usually in terms of leader-follower relationships.
The construction of the Prudential Tower complex that was finished in 1964 along the northwest border of South End was a spark for this urban-renewal effort and the gentrification process for the area that surrounded it.
When former students and bohemians started raising families and earning money in better paid jobs, they become the yuppies they claim to dislike.
In particular, it focuses on the section of Darien Street (a north-south street running intermittently from South to North Philadelphia) which is essentially an alley in the populous Bella Vista neighborhood.
Moreover, in the second half of the same decade, a massive urban rebranding project, known as ''Progetto Porta Nuova'', started and the neighborhood of Isola, despite the compliances residents have had, has been one of the regenerated areas, with the ''Bosco Verticale'' and the new ''Giardini di Porta Nuova''.
German (speaking) municipalities have a strong legal role in zoning and on the real estate market in general and a long tradition of integrating social aspects in planning schemes and building regulations.
Berlin's gay community is predominantly in Schöneberg.
Often they are single people or young couples without children who lack demand for good schools.
Many of the social effects of gentrification have been based on extensive theories about how socioeconomic status of an individual's neighborhood will shape one's behavior and future.
Rehabilitation of property both with and without state sponsorship
But the periurban population and its problem is mainly "invisible" from recent presidential campaign promises.
By this time, the period of expansion has inevitably led to the creation of rent gap, providing opportunity for capital reinvestment in this surrounding environment.
The world city's inherent socio-economic inequality illustrates the causes of gentrification, reported in "Where Did They Go?
German geographers have a more distanced view on gentrification.
Studies have also shown that there seem to be two waves of displacement of these original residents.
This fuels the rapid expansion of trendy restaurant, shopping, and entertainment spheres that often accompany the gentrification process.
Bruce London and J. John Palen (1984) compiled a list of five explanations: (1) demographic-ecological, (2) sociocultural, (3) political-economical, (4) community networks, and (5) social movements.
This increased the demand for inner city residences, which were readily available cheaply after much of the movement towards central city abandonment of the 1950s.
The benefits of the Darien Street gentrification included increased property tax revenues and better-quality housing.
The consumption theory contends that it is the demographics and consumption patterns of this "new middle class" that is responsible for gentrification.
Therefore, they are willing and able to take the investment risk in the housing market.
Abandoned industrial areas create availability for land for the rent gap process.
German speaking countries provide a higher share of rented property and have a much stronger role of municipalities, cooperatives, guilds and unions offering low-price-housing.
These urban pioneers demonstrated that the inner-city was an "appropriate" and "viable" place to live, resulting in what is called "inner city chic" (London and Palen, 1984).
Because the number of people that sought housing increased, the demand for housing increased also.
Unfortunately, tension characterized the relationship between these new residents and the previous residents of the neighborhood.
Holcomb and Beauregard described these groups as those who are "attracted by low prices and toleration of an unconventional lifestyle".
During the dot-com boom of the late 1990s, the gentrification of San Francisco's predominantly working class Mission District led some long-term neighborhood residents to create what they called the "Mission Yuppie Eradication Project.
Prince George's County saw a huge spark of violent crimes in 2008 and 2009, but the rate has decreased since then.
In U.S. cities in the time period from 1970 to 1978, growth of the central business district at around 20% did not dictate conditions for gentrification, while growth at or above 33% yielded appreciably larger gentrification activity.
Gentrifiers are likely searching for inexpensive housing close to the workplace and often already reside in the inner city, sometimes for educational reasons, and do not want to make the move to suburbia.
On the other side, the eviction of the poorest people to periurban areas since 2000 has been analyzed as the main cause for the rising political far-right national front.
This theory argues that values, sentiments, attitudes, ideas, beliefs, and choices should be used to explain and predict human behavior, not demographics, or "structural units of analysis" (i.e., characteristics of populations) (London and Palen, 1984).
English-speaking countries have a higher amount of property owners and a higher mobility.
This rehabilitation can be seen as a superior alternative to expansion, for the location of the central city offers an intact infrastructure that should be taken advantage of: streets, public transportation, and other urban facilities.
Thus, gentrification is not so much the result of a return to the inner city but is more of a positive action to remain there.
Starting in the 1960s and 1970s, U.S. industry has created a surplus of housing units as construction of new homes has far surpassed the rate of national household growth.
Their children were born later.
These simultaneous processes can translate to gentrification activities when professionals have a high demand to live near their executive workplaces in order to reduce decision-making time.
Reduced strain on local infrastructure and services
Suburban development derives from outward expansion of cities, often driven by sought profit and the availability of cheap land.
Communities have strong ties to the history and culture of their neighborhood, and causing its dispersal can have detrimental costs.
The de-industrialization of cities in developed nations reduces the number of blue-collar jobs available to the urban working class as well as middle-wage jobs with the opportunity for advancement, creating lost investment capital needed to physically maintain the houses and buildings of the city.
Inter-community conflict has also arisen as some residents object to the sale of buildings and the resultant eviction of long-term residents.
''Gentrification Amid Urban Decline: Strategies for America's Older Cities'', by Michael Lang, reports the process and impact (social, economic, cultural) of gentrification.
Going towards the outskirts of the city, other gentrified areas of Milan are Lambrate-Ventura (where others events of the ''Fuorisalone'' are hosted), Bicocca and Bovisa (in which universities have contributed to the gentrification of the areas), Sesto San Giovanni, Via Sammartini, and the so-called NoLo district (which means ''Nord di Loreto'').
The BeltLine trail construction is expected to bring further gentrification in the neighborhoods alongside which it runs.
Because land speculation tends to raise property values, removing real estate (houses, buildings, land) from the open market stabilizes property values, and thereby prevents the economic eviction of the community's poorer residents.
