In 1994, Iowa State University awarded Carver a Doctor of Humane Letters.
Missouri senator Harry S. Truman sponsored a bill in favor of a monument.
Both he and the peanut industry seemed unaware that in 1917 William Melhuish had secured  for a milk substitute made from peanuts and soybeans.
This lasted three years until she took a teaching job in California.
Although he only published six agricultural bulletins after 1922, he published articles in peanut industry journals and wrote a syndicated newspaper column, "Professor Carver's Advice".
In August 1886, Carver traveled by wagon with J. F. Beeler from Highland to Eden Township in Ness County, Kansas.
He was as concerned with his students' character development as he was with their intellectual development.
Carver is also associated with developing sweet potato products.
He consulted with Carver.
Carver did research at the Iowa Experiment Station under Pammel during the next two years.
His master, Moses Carver, was a German American immigrant who had purchased George's parents, Mary and Giles, from William P. McGinnis on October 9, 1855, for $700.
National Basketball Association star David Robinson and his wife, Valerie, founded an academy named after Carver; it opened on September 17, 2001, in San Antonio, Texas.
Carver's testifying to Congress made him widely known as a public figure.
The younger Wallace served as U.S. Secretary of Agriculture from 1933 to 1940, and as Franklin Delano Roosevelt's vice president from 1941 to 1945.
He homesteaded a claim near Beeler, where he maintained a small conservatory of plants and flowers and a geological collection.
George's brother, James, was rushed to safety from the kidnappers.
Carver designed a mobile classroom to take education out to farmers.
Because he had earned a master's in a scientific field from a "white" institution, some faculty perceived him as arrogant when a young man.
His art teacher, Etta Budd, recognized Carver's talent for painting flowers and plants; she encouraged him to study botany at Iowa State Agricultural College in Ames.
''Time'' magazine reported that all but three of the 48 Carver paintings at the museum were destroyed.
Carver had 10 sisters and a brother, all of whom died prematurely.
Carver's work to provide small farmers with resources for more independence from the cash economy foreshadowed the "appropriate technology" work of E. F. Schumacher.
By the time Carver published "How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of Preparing it For Human Consumption" in 1916, many methods of preparation of peanut butter had been developed or patented by various pharmacists, doctors and food scientists working in the US and Canada.
These crops both restored nitrogen to the soil and were good for human consumption.
Carver wrote in 'The Need of Scientific Agriculture in the South': "The virgin fertility of our soils and the vast amount of unskilled labor have been more of a curse than a blessing to agriculture.
There he manufactured and sold peanut-based personal care products.
He wanted poor farmers to grow alternative crops both as a source of their own food and as a source of other products to improve their quality of life.
With his increasing notability, Carver became the subject of biographies and articles.
The kidnappers sold the slaves in Kentucky.
There was a school for black children 10 miles (16&nbsp;km) south in Neosho, George decided to go there.
Dozens of elementary schools and high schools are named after him.
Carver worked on improving soils, growing crops with low inputs, and using species that fixed nitrogen (hence, the work on the cowpea and the peanut).
In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed George Washington Carver as one of 100 Greatest African Americans.
Carver's research was intended to produce replacements from common crops for commercial products, which were generally beyond the budget of the small one-horse farmer.
"The bill is not simply a momentary pause on the part of busy men engaged in the conduct of the war, to do honor to one of the truly great Americans of this country, but it is in essence a blow against the Axis, it is in essence a war measure in the sense that it will further unleash and release the energies of roughly 15,000,000 Negro people in this country for full support of our war effort."
After witnessing a black man killed by a group of whites, Carver left the city.
Ultimately researchers found that the massages, not the peanut oil, provided the benefits of maintaining some mobility to paralyzed limbs.
When he began there in 1891, he was the first black student.
In 1900, Carver complained that the physical work and the letter-writing required were too much.
He relied on them especially when criticized by the scientific community and media regarding his research methodology.
When he reached the town, he found the school closed for the night.
He was often on the road promoting Tuskegee University, peanuts, and racial harmony.
Carver was featured on U.S. 1948 commemorative stamps.
He did not keep a laboratory notebook.
Carver had been frugal in his life, and in his seventies he established a legacy by creating a museum of his work, as well as the George Washington Carver Foundation at Tuskegee in 1938 to continue agricultural research.
They did original research as well as promoting applications and recipes which they collected from others.
That year Carver's health declined, and Ford later installed an elevator at the Tuskegee dormitory where Carver lived, so that the elderly man would not have to climb stairs.
He lived well past the age of twenty-one, and his belief deepened as a result.
This young black man, a graduate of Cornell University, had some teaching experience before coming to Tuskegee.
The Fordney-McCumber Tariff of 1922 was passed including one on imported peanuts.
To encourage better nutrition in the South, he widely distributed recipes using the alternative crops.
From 1915 to 1923, Carver concentrated on researching and experimenting with new uses for peanuts, sweet potatoes, soybeans, pecans, and other crops, as well as having his assistants research and compile existing uses.
This work, and especially his speaking to a national conference of the Peanut Growers Association in 1920 and in testimony before Congress in 1921 to support passage of a tariff on imported peanuts, brought him wide publicity and increasing renown.
When George was only a week old, he, a sister, and his mother were kidnapped by night raiders from Arkansas.
It is displayed together with several of his other paintings.
Carver had specialized in plant diseases and mycology for his master's degree.
He also earned money by odd jobs in town and worked as a ranch hand.
Business leaders came to seek his help, and he often responded with free advice.
In 2005, Carver's research at the Tuskegee Institute was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society.
Carver's discoveries commercially.
In these years, he became one of the most well-known African Americans of his time.
He was buried next to Booker T. Washington at Tuskegee University.
At age forty, he began a courtship with Sarah L. Hunt, an elementary school teacher and the sister-in-law of Warren Logan, Treasurer of Tuskegee Institute.
Canadian pharmacist Marcellus Gilmore Edson was awarded  (for its manufacture) in 1884, 12 years before Carver began his work at Tuskegee.
Carver developed techniques to improve soils depleted by repeated plantings of cotton.
He taught methods of crop rotation, introduced several alternative cash crops for farmers that would also improve the soil of areas heavily cultivated in cotton, initiated research into crop products (chemurgy), and taught generations of black students farming techniques for self-sufficiency.
Due to his frugality, Carver's life savings totaled $60,000, all of which he donated in his last years and at his death to the Carver Museum and to the George Washington Carver Foundation.
While a professor at Tuskegee, Carver joined the Gamma Sigma chapter of Phi Beta Sigma fraternity.
Three patents (one for cosmetics; , and two for paints and stains;  and ) were issued to Carver in 1925 to 1927; however, they were not commercially successful.
* Always be considerate of women, children, and older people.
He slept in a nearby barn.
After slavery was abolished, Moses Carver and his wife Susan raised George and his older brother James as their own children.
Carvoline Antiseptic Hair Dressing was a mix of peanut oil and lanolin.
Carver never married.
Aside from these patents and some recipes for food, Carver left no records of formulae or procedures for making his products.
From 1951 to 1954, he was depicted on a commemorative half dollar coin.
129, U. S. Department of Agriculture".
In 1941, ''Time'' magazine dubbed Carver a "Black Leonardo".
The Aztec were known to have made peanut butter from ground peanuts as early as the 15th century.
Carver's reputation is largely based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes, which also aided nutrition for farm families.
Carver distributed his information as agricultural bulletins.
Carvoline Rubbing Oil was a peanut oil for massages.
He spoke at the 1930 Conclave that was held at Tuskegee, Alabama, in which he delivered a powerful and emotional speech to the men in attendance.
This was the first national monument dedicated to an African American and the first to honor someone other than a president.
* Take your share of the world and let others take theirs.
He left Alabama and resettled in Detroit.
Black people were not allowed at the public school in Diamond Grove.
From 1935 to 1937, Carver participated in the USDA Disease Survey.
In her 2015 biography, Christina Vella reviews his relationships and suggests that Carver was bisexual and constrained by mores of his historic period.
He responded to critics with this: "When you do the common things in life in an uncommon way, you will command the attention of the world."
He was not expected to live past his twenty-first birthday due to failing health.
Three American presidents—Theodore Roosevelt, Calvin Coolidge and Franklin Roosevelt—met with him, and the Crown Prince of Sweden studied with him for three weeks.
Following the crop rotation practice resulted in improved cotton yields and gave farmers alternative cash crops.
Carver taught there for 47 years, developing the department into a strong research center and working with two additional college presidents during his tenure.
"When it comes to the organization of classes, the ability required to secure a properly organized and large school or section of a school, you are wanting in ability.
Carver died January 5, 1943, at the age of 78 from complications (anemia) resulting from this fall.
This canvas survived and has undergone conservation.
On February 15, 2005, an episode of ''Modern Marvels'' included scenes from within Iowa State University's Food Sciences Building and about Carver's work.
He knew Carver personally as his son Henry A. Wallace and the researcher were friends.
In 1990, Carver was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.
By June he left the area.
He was widely recognized and praised in the white community for his many achievements and talents.
He also had listings for vinegars, dry coffee and instant coffee, candy, after-dinner mints, orange drops, and lemon drops.
In 2000, Carver was a charter inductee in the USDA Hall of Heroes as the "Father of Chemurgy".
Some other individual bulletins dealt with alfalfa, wild plum, tomato, ornamental plants, corn, poultry, dairying, hogs, preserving meats in hot weather, and nature study in schools.
In 1937, Carver attended two chemurgy conferences, an emerging field in the 1930s, during the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl, concerned with developing new products from crops.
A misconception grew that his research on products for subsistence farmers were developed by others commercially to change Southern agriculture.
From 1933 to 1935, Carver worked to develop peanut oil massages to treat infantile paralysis (polio).
As he talked about the importance of the peanut and its uses for American agriculture, the committee members repeatedly extended the time for his testimony.
In 1921 peanut farmers and industry representatives planned to appear at Congressional hearings to ask for a tariff.
George liked Mariah Watkins, and her words, "You must learn all you can, then go back out into the world and give your learning back to the people", made a great impression on him.
His work at the experiment station in plant pathology and mycology first gained him national recognition and respect as a botanist.
They encouraged George to continue his intellectual pursuits, and "Aunt Susan" taught him the basics of reading and writing.
When he identified himself as "Carver's George," as he had done his whole life, she replied that from now on his name was "George Carver".
During Washington's last five years at Tuskegee, Carver submitted or threatened his resignation several times: when the administration reorganized the agriculture programs, when he disliked a teaching assignment, to manage an experiment station elsewhere, and when he did not get summer teaching assignments in 1913–14.
In 1890, Carver started studying art and piano at Simpson College in Indianola, Iowa.
Due to segregation, it was highly unusual for an African American to appear as an expert witness at Congress representing European-American industry and farmers.
To train farmers to successfully rotate and cultivate the new crops, Carver developed an agricultural extension program for Alabama that was similar to the one at Iowa State.
He also published six bulletins on sweet potatoes, five on cotton, and four on cowpeas.
In December 1947, a fire broke out in the Carver Museum, and much of the collection was damaged.
From 1923 to 1933, Carver toured white Southern colleges for the Commission on Interracial Cooperation.
Unmarried faculty members normally had to share rooms, with two to a room, in the spartan early days of the institute.
His best-known painting, displayed at the World's Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago, depicts a yucca and cactus.
In 1911, Washington wrote a letter to him complaining that Carver had not followed orders to plant particular crops at the experiment station.
After Carver died in 1943, Curtis was fired from Tuskegee Institute.
Carver worked for years to create a company to market his products.
He called it a "Jesup wagon" after the New York financier and philanthropist Morris Ketchum Jesup, who provided funding to support the program.
He compiled a list of eight cardinal virtues for his students to strive toward:
In his 1922 sweet potato bulletin, Carver listed a few dozen recipes, "many of which I have copied verbatim from Bulletin No.
Other ventures were The Carver Products Company and the Carvoline Company.
He manually plowed  of the claim, planting rice, corn, Indian corn and garden produce, as well as various fruit trees, forest trees, and shrubbery.
Moses Carver hired John Bentley to find them, but he located only the infant George.
In 1916 Carver was made a member of the Royal Society of Arts in England, one of only a handful of Americans at that time to receive this honor.
His article, "A Boy Who Was Traded for a Horse" (1932), in ''The American Magazine'', and its 1937 reprint in ''Reader's Digest'', contributed to this myth about Carver's influence.
The Carver Community Cultural Center, a historic center located in San Antonio, is named for him.
He was also a leader in promoting environmentalism.
* Win without bragging.
Former professors of Carver's from Iowa State University were appointed to positions as Secretary of Agriculture: James Wilson, a former dean and professor of Carver's, served from 1897 to 1913.
Carver taught as the first black faculty member at Iowa State.
When he arrived, however, they rejected him because of his race.
In each case, Washington smoothed things over.
After Washington died in 1915, his successor made fewer demands on Carver for administrative tasks.
Upon returning home one day, Carver took a bad fall down a flight of stairs; he was found unconscious by a maid who took him to a hospital.
A second stamp honoring Carver, of face value 32¢, was issued on 3 February 1998 as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.
A garden and statue of him are dedicated in the noted Missouri Botanical Gardens in St. Louis.
His most popular bulletin, ''How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of Preparing it for Human Consumption,'' was first published in 1916 and was reprinted many times.
He soon proved to be a poor administrator.
Southern congressmen, reportedly shocked at Carver's arriving to testify, were said to have mocked him.
Carver applied to several colleges before being accepted at Highland College in Highland, Kansas.
Many institutions continue to honor George Washington Carver.
In 1896, Booker T. Washington, the first principal and president of the Tuskegee Institute, invited Carver to head its Agriculture Department.
He discussed "The Possibilities of the Peanut" and exhibited 145 peanut products.
Based on the quality of Carver's presentation at their convention, they asked the African-American professor to testify on the tariff issue before the Ways and Means Committee of the United States House of Representatives.
Sales were lackluster and the product was ineffective according to the Food and Drug Administration.
Iowa State professors Joseph Budd and Louis Pammel convinced Carver to continue there for his master's degree.
He received numerous honors for his work, including the Spingarn Medal of the NAACP.
The national monument opened July 1953.
He says that he is merely scratching the surface of scientific investigations of the possibilities of the peanut and other Southern products."
Washington praised Carver's abilities in teaching and original research but said about his administrative skills:
He was invited by Henry Ford to speak at the conference held in Dearborn, Michigan, and they developed a friendship.
In 1904, an Institute committee reported that Carver's reports on yields from the poultry yard were exaggerated, and Washington confronted Carver about the issue.
The  national monument complex includes a bust of Carver, a ¾-mile nature trail, a museum, the 1881 Moses Carver house, and the Carver cemetery.
Beginning in 1906 at Tuskegee, Carver led a Bible class on Sundays for several students at their request.
The bill passed unanimously in both houses.
In 1932 the writer James Saxon Childers wrote that Carver and his peanut products were almost solely responsible for the rise in U.S. peanut production after the boll weevil devastated the American cotton crop beginning about 1892.
Carver started his academic career as a researcher and teacher.
He spent years developing and promoting numerous products made from peanuts; none were commercially successful.
To recruit Carver to Tuskegee, Washington gave him an above average salary and two rooms for his personal use, although both concessions were resented by some other faculty.
Carver's Bachelor's thesis was "Plants as Modified by Man", dated 1894.
Carver's was far from the first American agricultural bulletin devoted to peanuts, but his bulletins did seem to be more popular and widespread than previous ones.
On his grave was written, ''He could have added fortune to fame, but caring for neither, he found happiness and honor in being helpful to the world.''
Carver was born into slavery in Diamond Grove, Newton County, near Crystal Place, now known as Diamond, Missouri, possibly in 1864 or 1865, though the exact date is not known.
Carver bequeathed to Curtis his royalties from an authorized 1943 biography by Rackham Holt.
Carver viewed faith in Jesus Christ as a means of destroying both barriers of racial disharmony and social stratification.
The United Peanut Associations of America invited Carver to speak at their 1920 convention.
Carver's work was known by officials in the national capital before he became a public figure.
Washington praised Carver in his 1911 memoir, ''My Larger Education: Being Chapters from My Experience''.
* Lose, if need be, without squealing.
By his own account, the next morning he met a kind woman, Mariah Watkins, from whom he wished to rent a room.
* Be too brave to lie.
During the last two decades of his life, Carver seemed to enjoy his celebrity status.
By 1920, the U.S. peanut farmers were being undercut by low prices on imported peanuts from the Republic of China.
During his more than four decades at Tuskegee, Carver's official published work consisted mainly of 44 practical bulletins for farmers.
One of Carver's duties was to administer the Agricultural Experiment Station farms.
Carver's records included the following sweet potato products: 73 dyes, 17 wood fillers, 14 candies, 5 library pastes, 5 breakfast foods, 4 starches, 4 flours, and 3 molasses.
* Be clean both inside and out.
Other popular media tended to exaggerate Carver's impact on the peanut industry.
Carver replied in writing, "Now to be branded as a liar and party to such hellish deception it is more than I can bear, and if your committee feel that I have willfully lied or was party to such lies as were told my resignation is at your disposal."
He attended a series of schools before earning his diploma at Minneapolis High School in Minneapolis, Kansas.
The American industrialist, farmer, and inventor William Edenborn of Winn Parish, Louisiana, grew peanuts on his demonstration farm.
The most popular of his 44 practical bulletins for farmers contained 105 food recipes using peanuts.
Carver's promotion of peanuts gained him the most notice.
In 1919, Carver wrote to a peanut company about the potential he saw for peanut milk.
Henry Cantwell Wallace served from 1921 to 1924.
When it comes to the matter of practical farm managing which will secure definite, practical, financial results, you are wanting again in ability.
He also complained about Institute committee meetings.
This revealed Washington's micro-management of Carver's department, which he had headed for more than 10 years by then.
The most important was the Carver Penol Company, which sold a mixture of creosote and peanuts as a patent medicine for respiratory diseases such as tuberculosis.
Carver is often mistakenly credited with the invention of peanut butter.
Washington at the same time refused Carver's requests for a new laboratory, research supplies for his exclusive use, and respite from teaching classes.
