She subsequently moved in with Eric Clapton, and they married in 1979.
Harrison's friend and former bandmate Tom Petty agreed: "He just had a way of getting right to the business, of finding the right thing to play."
Soon after, the two went into business together.
So we said&nbsp;... we'll call it Handmade Films."
They received their insignia from the Queen at an investiture at Buckingham Palace on 26 October.
It appeared on Jools Holland's album ''Small World, Big Band''.
In 1971 the Beatles received an Academy Award for the best Original Song Score for the film ''Let It Be''.
In June 1972, UNICEF honoured Harrison and Shankar with the "Child Is the Father of Man" award at an annual ceremony in recognition of their fundraising efforts for Bangladesh.
Harrison and McCartney were the first of the Beatles to meet, having shared a school bus, and often learned and rehearsed new guitar chords together.
They went away ecstatic, conscious that they had just witnessed something so uplifting that it could never be repeated."
''Rolling Stone'' magazine ranked him number 11 in their list of the "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time".
After the band's break-up, Ravi Shankar consulted Harrison about how to provide aid to the people of Bangladesh after the 1970 Bhola cyclone and the Bangladesh Liberation War.
Although apprehensive about his son's interest in pursuing a music career, in late 1956 Harrison's father bought him a Dutch Egmond flat top acoustic guitar.
Around this time, he obtained a Gibson Jumbo J-200, which he used for early demos of "While My Guitar Gently Weeps".
Eric Idle, who described Harrison as "one of the few morally good people that rock and roll has produced", performed Monty Python's "Lumberjack Song".
There's about half the songs I like and the other half I can't stand."
In 1971 he played electric slide guitar on "How Do You Sleep?"
Harrison became part of the Beatles when they were still a skiffle group called the Quarrymen, with McCartney and John Lennon as members.
From the moment I had that, I wanted to have it all the time – these thoughts about the yogis and the Himalayas, and Ravi's music."
They took radically different paths thereafter, Harrison finding God and Lennon coming to the conclusion that people are the creators of their own lives.
In 1969, McCartney told Lennon: "Until this year, our songs have been better than George's.
His use of this guitar during the recording of ''A Hard Day's Night'' helped to popularise the model, and the jangly sound became so prominent that ''Melody Maker'' termed it the Beatles' "secret weapon".
Harrison's guitar work with the Beatles was varied and flexible; although not fast or flashy, his lead guitar playing was solid and typified the more subdued lead guitar style of the early 1960s; his rhythm guitar playing was as innovative, such as using a capo to shorten the strings on an acoustic guitar, as on the ''Rubber Soul'' album and "Here Comes the Sun", to create a bright, sweet sound.
''Revolver'' (1966) included three of his compositions: "Taxman", "Love You To" and "I Want to Tell You".
In 1960, promoter Allan Williams arranged for the band, now calling themselves the Beatles, to play at the Kaiserkeller club in Hamburg owned by Bruno Koschmider.
He performed at a Formby convention in 1991, and served as the honorary president of the George Formby Appreciation Society.
Although his father wanted him to continue his education, Harrison left school at 16 and worked for several months as an apprentice electrician at Blacklers, a local department store.
His laryngitis-affected vocals also disappointed fans and critics, who began calling the tour "dark hoarse".
Harrison co-wrote songs and music with Dylan, Clapton, Preston, Doris Troy, David Bromberg, Gary Wright, Wood, Jeff Lynne, and Tom Petty, among others.
I'd been to Wooky Hole in Somerset&nbsp;... near an old paper mill where they show you how to make old underpants into paper.
He also co-wrote a new song with his son Dhani, "Horse to the Water", which was recorded on 1 October, eight weeks before his death.
Harrison and Boyd had met in 1964 during the production of the film ''A Hard Day's Night'', in which the 19-year-old Boyd had been cast as a schoolgirl.
Harrison's widow Olivia, the actor Tom Hanks and Idle made speeches at the ceremony, and Harrison's son Dhani spoke the Hare Krishna mantra.
Regarding other faiths he once remarked: "All religions are branches of one big tree.
Other reviewers were less enthusiastic, describing the release as awkward, sanctimonious and overly sentimental, a reaction that left Harrison despondent.
So I bought a few rolls, and they had this watermark 'British Handmade Paper'&nbsp;...
Harrison was posthumously honoured with The Recording Academy's Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award at the Grammy Awards in February 2015.
Most Beatles albums from 1965 onwards contain at least two Harrison compositions; three of his songs appear on ''Revolver'', "the album on which Harrison came of age as a songwriter", according to Inglis.
Before his religious conversion, the only British performer known for similar activities had been Cliff Richard, whose conversion to Christianity in 1966 had gone largely unnoticed by the public.
Rodriguez commented: "Even to the end of George's days, theirs was a volatile relationship".
Some fans found Shankar's significant presence a bizarre disappointment, having expected to see only Harrison perform, and many were affronted by what Inglis described as Harrison's "sermonizing".
This, and the naturally rich harmonics produced by a twelve-string guitar provided the distinctive overtones found on many of the Beatles' recordings.
1'', was released in October 1988 and recorded under pseudonyms as half-brothers, supposed sons of Charles Truscott Wilbury, Sr. Harrison's pseudonym on the first album was "Nelson Wilbury"; he used the name "Spike Wilbury" for their second album.
Their second album, ''With the Beatles'' (1963), included "Don't Bother Me", Harrison's first solo writing credit.
Harrison did not release any new albums for five years after 1982's ''Gone Troppo'' received little notice from critics or the public.
Harrison's songwriting contributions to the double album included "While My Guitar Gently Weeps", which featured Eric Clapton on lead guitar, "Piggies", "Long, Long, Long" and "Savoy Truffle".
Recorded at his estate in Friar Park, Harrison's slide guitar playing featured prominently on the album, which included several of his long-time musical collaborators, including Clapton, Jim Keltner, and Jim Horn, who recalled Harrison's relaxed and friendly demeanour during the sessions: "George made you feel at home, in his home&nbsp;...
On 6 July, Harrison travelled to India to buy a sitar from Rikhi Ram & Sons in New Delhi.
His autobiography, ''I, Me, Mine'', is dedicated "to gardeners everywhere".
According to Mikal Gilmore of ''Rolling Stone'', "Harrison's openness to new sounds and textures cleared new paths for his rock and roll compositions.
So we went there and had a few of these Mexican beers – and had a few more&nbsp;... Bob says, 'Hey, why don't we all get up and play, and you can sing?'
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'' in 1967.
In 1978, in an effort to produce ''Monty Python's Life of Brian'', they formed the film production and distribution company HandMade Films.
He considered it the least satisfactory of the three he had recorded since ''All Things Must Pass''.
In December 1991, Harrison joined Clapton for a tour of Japan.
According to author and musicologist Kenneth Womack: "'Something' meanders toward the most unforgettable of Harrison's guitar solos&nbsp;... A masterpiece in simplicity, it reaches toward the sublime".
I am shocked and stunned."
In 1971 Bright Tunes sued Harrison for copyright infringement over "My Sweet Lord" owing to its similarity to the 1963 Chiffons hit "He's So Fine".
The first time I had acid, it just opened up something in my head that was inside of me, and I realized a lot of things.
In October 1992 he performed at a Bob Dylan tribute concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City, playing alongside Dylan, Clapton, McGuinn, Petty and Neil Young.
According to Kenneth Womack, "Harrison comes into his own on ''Abbey Road''&nbsp;... 'Here Comes the Sun' is matched – indeed, surpassed – only by 'Something', his crowning achievement".
When Brian Epstein became their manager in December 1961, he polished their image and secured them a recording contract with EMI.
Harrison was involved in humanitarian and political activism throughout his life.
The song's guitar solo shows a varied range of influences, incorporating the blues guitar style of Clapton and the styles of Indian gamakas.
His increased productivity and the Beatles' reluctance to include his songs on their albums meant that by the time of their break-up he had amassed a stockpile of unreleased compositions.
The accompanying music video received substantial airplay, and another single, "When We Was Fab", a retrospective of the Beatles' career, earned two MTV Music Video Awards nominations in 1988.
In 1974 Harrison said of his former bandmate: "John Lennon is a saint and he's heavy-duty, and he's great and I love him.
From 1968 onward Harrison collaborated with other musicians; he brought in Eric Clapton to play lead guitar on "While My Guitar Gently Weeps" for the 1968 Beatles' White Album, and collaborated with John Barham on his 1968 debut solo album, ''Wonderwall Music'', which included contributions from Clapton again, as well as Peter Tork from the Monkees.
The film grossed $21 million at the box office in the US.
Lavezzoli described Harrison's slide playing on the Grammy-winning instrumental "Marwa Blues" (2002) as demonstrating Hawaiian influences while comparing the melody to an Indian sarod or veena, calling it "yet another demonstration of Harrison's unique slide approach".
Dylan and the Band were a major musical influence on Harrison at the end of his career with the Beatles.
Other artists signed by Dark Horse include Attitudes, Henry McCullough, Jiva, and Stairsteps.
The dark timbre of his guitar playing on the track was accentuated by his use of uncomplicated yet effective C+9 chord voicings and a solo in the minor pentatonic scale.
Harrison's final studio album for EMI and Apple Records was the soul music-inspired ''Extra Texture (Read All About It)'' (1975).
For most of the Beatles' career the relationships in the group were close.
Born in Liverpool, England, on 25 February 1943, Harrison was the youngest of four children of Harold Hargreaves Harrison and his wife Louise (née French).
"Don't Bother Me" appeared on the band's second album, ''With the Beatles'', later that year, then on ''Meet the Beatles!''
Lavezzoli described Harrison's sitar playing on the ''Revolver'' track "Love You To" as an "astonishing improvement" over "Norwegian Wood" and "the most accomplished performance on sitar by any rock musician".
''Thirty Three & 1/3'' (1976), Harrison's first album release on his own Dark Horse Records label, produced the hit singles "This Song" and "Crackerbox Palace", both of which reached the top 25 in the US.
This coincided with a prolific period in his songwriting and a growing desire to assert his independence from the Beatles, tensions among whom  surfaced again in January 1969, during the filming of rehearsals at Twickenham Studios for what became the album ''Let It Be''.
His guitar playing on "I Want to Tell You" exemplified the pairing of altered chordal colours with descending chromatic lines and his guitar part for ''Sgt Pepper''s "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" mirrors Lennon's vocal line in much the same way that a sarangi player accompanies a khyal singer in a Hindu devotional song.
Harrison modified the lyrics of a song he had written for Starr to make it a tribute song to Lennon.
In 1974 Harrison founded Dark Horse Records.
He played backwards guitar on Lennon's composition "I'm Only Sleeping" and a guitar counter-melody on "And Your Bird Can Sing" that moved in parallel octaves above McCartney's bass downbeats.
It was me sort of getting out of the Beatles and just going my own way&nbsp;... it was a very happy occasion."
Derived from a quotation from the ''Tao Te Ching'', the song's lyric reflected Harrison's deepening interest in Hinduism and meditation, while musically it embraced the Karnatak discipline of Indian music, rather than the Hindustani style of his previous work in the genre.
In addition to eventually releasing his own albums on the label, he initially used the company as an avenue for collaboration with other musicians.
He also organised the 1971 Concert for Bangladesh with Indian musician Ravi Shankar, a precursor for later benefit concerts such as Live Aid.
In March 1958, Harrison auditioned for the Quarrymen at Rory Storm's Morgue Skiffle Club, playing Arthur "Guitar Boogie" Smith's "Guitar Boogie Shuffle", but Lennon felt that Harrison, having just turned 15, was too young to join the band.
A prolific recording artist, he was featured as a guest guitarist on tracks by Badfinger, Ronnie Wood and Billy Preston, and collaborated on songs and music with Dylan, Eric Clapton, Ringo Starr and Tom Petty, among others.
In early 1966 Harrison, Lennon, and McCartney each purchased Epiphone Casinos, which they used on ''Revolver''.
Harrison married Dark Horse Records' secretary Olivia Trinidad Arias on 2 September 1978.
In 2002, on the first anniversary of his death, the Concert for George was held at the Royal Albert Hall.
Harrison's music projects during the final years of the Beatles included producing Apple Records artists Doris Troy, Jackie Lomax and Billy Preston.
Despite numerous positive reviews the consensus reaction to the tour was negative, with complaints about the content, structure, and length; the show's duration of two and a half hours was seen as excessive at the time.
It was also a deep personal loss, although unlike McCartney and Starr, Harrison had had little contact with Lennon in the years before his death.
On release, ''All Things Must Pass'' was received with critical acclaim; Ben Gerson of ''Rolling Stone'' described it as being "of classic Spectorian proportions, Wagnerian, Brucknerian, the music of mountain tops and vast horizons".
McCartney told Lennon about his friend George Harrison, who could play "Raunchy" on his guitar.
In February 1987 he joined Dylan, John Fogerty and Jesse Ed Davis on stage for a two-hour performance with the blues musician Taj Mahal.
He commented: "For me, it was like a flash.
Harrison responded by organising the Concert for Bangladesh, which raised more than $240,000.
"By contrast," wrote Inglis, "Harrison's spiritual journey was seen as a serious and important development that reflected popular music's increasing maturity&nbsp;... what he, and the Beatles, had managed to overturn was the paternalistic assumption that popular musicians had no role other than to stand on stage and sing their hit songs."
Tax troubles and questionable expenses later tied up many of the proceeds, but Harrison commented: "Mainly the concert was to attract attention to the situation&nbsp;...
The following year, he appeared at The Prince's Trust concert at London's Wembley Arena, performing "While My Guitar Gently Weeps" and "Here Comes the Sun".
On 13 October 2009, the first George Harrison Humanitarian Award went to Ravi Shankar for his efforts in saving the lives of children, and his involvement with the Concert for Bangladesh.
He initially stayed in Bombay, then moved to a houseboat on a remote lake where Shankar taught him for six weeks.
Lennon stated that his relationship with Harrison was "one of young follower and older guy&nbsp;... he was like a disciple of mine when we started."
The band's first residency in Hamburg ended prematurely when Harrison was deported for being too young to work in nightclubs.
as a departure for "the sweet soloist of 'Something'", calling his playing "rightly famed&nbsp;... one of Harrison's greatest guitar statements".
He played this guitar in the ''Magical Mystery Tour'' film and throughout his solo career.
According to Boyd, Harrison's mother was particularly supportive: "All she wanted for her children is that they should be happy, and she recognized that nothing made George quite as happy as making music."
In 1978 the death of his father in May and the birth of his son in August had influenced his decision to devote more time to his family than to his career.
Lennon commented: "That's the best he's ever fucking played in his life."
Regarded by many as his best work, the album topped the charts on both sides of the Atlantic.
The impromptu musical education Harrison received while playing long hours with the Beatles, as well as the guitar lessons he took from Tony Sheridan while they briefly served as his backing group, laid the foundations of his sound and of his quiet, professional role within the group; he was later known as "the quiet Beatle".
He commented: "I decided&nbsp;...
It doesn't matter what you call Him just as long as you call."
In April 1970 when Harrison's "For You Blue" was released in America as a double A-side with McCartney's "The Long and Winding Road", it became the band's second chart-topping double A-side and "For You Blue" became Harrison's second number one hit.
The album was co-produced by Phil Spector using his "Wall of Sound" approach, and the musicians included Starr, Clapton, Gary Wright, Preston, Klaus Voormann, the whole of Delaney and Bonnie's Friends band and the Apple group Badfinger.
In January 1998, Harrison attended Carl Perkins's funeral in Jackson, Tennessee, performing a brief rendition of Perkins's song "Your True Love".
The LP, ''Traveling Wilburys Vol.
in the US in early 1964.
Stephen Holden, writing in ''Rolling Stone'', felt the album was "vastly appealing" and "profoundly seductive", and that it stood "alone as an article of faith, miraculous in its radiance."
While Harrison grew as a songwriter, his compositional presence on Beatles albums remained limited to two or three songs, increasing his frustration, and significantly contributing to the band's break-up.
His mother was a shop assistant from a Catholic family with Irish roots, and his father was a bus conductor who had worked as a ship's steward on the White Star Line.
In the 1960s, the Beatles supported the civil rights movement and protested against the Vietnam War.
The LP produced the number-one hit single "My Sweet Lord" and the top-ten single "What Is Life".
I didn't learn them because I already knew them, but that happened to be the key that opened the door to reveal them.
Starr said, "We really looked out for each other and we had so many laughs together.
Harrison refused to participate in the completion of a third song.
I should get back to the guitar because I'm not getting any better at it, and I'm not going to be a great sitar player&nbsp;... because I should have started at least fifteen years earlier."
He commented on his beliefs:
During the tour that included Clapton, Bobby Whitlock, drummer Jim Gordon and band leaders Delaney and Bonnie Bramlett, Harrison began to write  "My Sweet Lord", which became his first single as a solo artist.
His future wife, the model Pattie Boyd, described Harrison's parents as "quite short and very Liverpudlian".
Harrison explained: "The name of the company came about as a bit of a joke.
Harrison's ex-wife Pattie Boyd described how the Beatles "all belonged to each other" and admitted, "George has a lot with the others that I can never know about.
The album reached number 4 on the ''Billboard'' chart and the single "Dark Horse" reached number 15, but they failed to make an impact in the UK.
According to Lavezzoli, Harrison's introduction of the instrument on the Beatles' song "Norwegian Wood" "opened the floodgates for Indian instrumentation in rock music, triggering what Shankar would call 'The Great Sitar Explosion' of 1966–67".
He used the same volume-swell technique on "Yes It Is", applying what Everett described as "ghostly articulation" to the song's natural harmonics.
Leng called the tour "groundbreaking" and "revolutionary in its presentation of Indian Music".
Perhaps the most significant obstacle to a Beatles reunion after the death of Lennon was Harrison and McCartney's personal relationship, as both men admitted that they often got on each other's nerves.
Harrison received an Ivor Novello award in July 1970 for "Something", as "The Best Song Musically and Lyrically of the Year".
He described Harrison's contributions to the LP as "exquisite", declaring them equal to any previous Beatles songs.
His introduction of the drone-like tambura part on Lennon's "Tomorrow Never Knows" exemplified the band's ongoing exploration of non-Western instruments.
Another of Harrison's musical techniques was the use of guitar lines written in octaves, as on "I'll Be on My Way".
Lennon considered it the best song on ''Abbey Road'', and it became the Beatles' second most covered song after "Yesterday".
''Time Bandits'' became one of HandMade's most successful and acclaimed efforts; with a budget of $5 million, it earned $35 million in the US within ten weeks of its release.
A triple album, ''The Concert for Bangladesh'', was released by Apple Corps that year, followed by a concert film in 1972.
He is a two-time Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee – as a member of the Beatles in 1988, and (posthumously) for his solo career in 2004.
in the Bahamas, they met the founder of Sivananda Yoga, Swami Vishnu-devananda, who gave each of them a signed copy of his book, ''The Complete Illustrated Book of Yoga''.
In 2004, Harrison was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a solo artist by his former bandmates Lynne and Petty, and into the Madison Square Garden Walk of Fame in 2006 for the Concert for Bangladesh.
"Marwa Blues" went on to receive the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Pop Instrumental Performance, while "Any Road" was nominated for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance.
He identified Chuck Berry as an early influence and Ry Cooder as an important later influence.
In November 1974 Harrison began his 45-date Dark Horse Tour, becoming the first ex-Beatle to tour North America.
He often sat at the back of the class drawing guitars in his schoolbooks, and later commented, "I was totally into guitars."
The single "Any Road", released in May 2003, reached number 37 on the UK Singles Chart.
He was cremated and his ashes were scattered in the Ganges and Yamuna rivers in India, in a private ceremony according to Hindu tradition.
He had collected photos of racing drivers and their cars since he was young; at 12 he had attended his first race, the 1955 British Grand Prix at Aintree.
On 30 December 1999, Harrison and his wife were attacked at their home, Friar Park.
In 1949 the family were offered a council house and moved to 25 Upton Green, Speke.
Harrison would not again release an album that matched the critical and commercial achievements of ''All Things Must Pass''; however, his next solo album, 1973's ''Living in the Material World'', held the number one spot on the ''Billboard'' album chart for five weeks, and the album's single, "Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth)", also reached number one in the US.
Also that year, he produced and played slide guitar on Badfinger's top ten hit "Day After Day", and a dobro on Preston's "I Wrote a Simple Song".
McCartney stated that he and Harrison usually shared a bedroom while touring.
Harrison wrote the chord progression of his first published song, "Don't Bother Me" (1963), almost exclusively in the Dorian mode, demonstrating an interest in exotic tones that eventually culminated in his embrace of Indian music.
He publicly blamed years of smoking for the illness.
The money we raised was secondary, and although we had some money problems&nbsp;... they still got plenty&nbsp;... even though it was a drop in the ocean.
But at the same time, he's such a ''bastard'' – but that's the great thing about him, you see?"
Eric Clapton felt that Harrison was "clearly an innovator" as he was "taking certain elements of R&B and rock and rockabilly and creating something unique".
The minor planet 4149 Harrison, discovered in 1984, was named after him, as was a variety of Dahlia flower.
Harrison's songwriting ability improved throughout the Beatles' career, but his material did not earn full respect from Lennon, McCartney and producer George Martin until near the group's break-up.
The home had an outdoor toilet and its only heat came from a single coal fire.
Harrison financed the production of ''Life of Brian'' in part by mortgaging his home, which Idle later called "the most anybody's ever paid for a cinema ticket in history."
Pepper'' album: "It was a millstone and a milestone in the music industry&nbsp;...
Harrison co-wrote the song "Badge" with Clapton, which was included on Cream's 1969 album, ''Goodbye''.
He wanted Dark Horse to serve as a creative outlet for artists, as Apple Records had for the Beatles.
A friend of his father's taught Harrison how to play "Whispering", "Sweet Sue" and "Dinah", and, inspired by Donegan's music, Harrison formed a skiffle group called the Rebels with his brother Peter and a friend, Arthur Kelly.
Beatles biographer Bob Spitz described "Something" as a masterpiece, and "an intensely stirring romantic ballad that would challenge 'Yesterday' and 'Michelle' as one of the most recognizable songs they ever produced".
Harrison's final album, the posthumously released ''Brainwashed'' (2002), was completed by his son Dhani and Jeff Lynne.
Author and musicologist Ian Inglis considers the lyrics of the album's title track "a recognition of the impermanence of human existence&nbsp;... a simple and poignant conclusion" to Harrison's former band.
In the old days we'd have the biggest hotel suites, the whole floor of the hotel, and the four of us would end up in the bathroom, just to be with each other".
In March 1996, they released a second single, "Real Love".
''Wonderwall Music'', a soundtrack to the 1968 film ''Wonderwall'', blends Indian and Western instrumentation, while ''Electronic Sound'' is an experimental album that prominently features a Moog synthesizer.
In 1996 he recorded "Distance Makes No Difference With Love" with Carl Perkins, and played slide guitar on the title track of Dylan's ''Under the Red Sky'' album.
Harrison recalled: "Bob rang me up and asked if I wanted to come out for the evening and see Taj Mahal&nbsp;...
Harrison also used a Gibson J-160E and a Gibson SG Standard while recording the album.
He began socialising with the group, filling in on guitar as needed, and became accepted as a member.
In 2000 Apple Records released a thirtieth anniversary edition of the album and Harrison actively participated in its promotion, giving an interview during which he reflected on the work: "It's just something that was like my continuation from the Beatles, really.
Harrison recorded the song "Bangla Desh", and pushed Apple Records to release his song alongside Shankar's "Joy Bangla" in an effort to raise funds.
Though the institute did offer a music course, Harrison was disappointed with the absence of guitars, and felt the school "moulded students into being frightened".
During the album's recording, Harrison asserted more creative control than before, proactively rejecting suggestions for changes to his music or lyrics, particularly from McCartney.
Harrison's liberal use of the diatonic scale in his guitar playing reveals the influence of Buddy Holly, and his interest in Berry inspired him to compose songs based on the blues scale while incorporating a rockabilly feel in the style of Perkins.
Often referred to as "the quiet Beatle", Harrison embraced Hindu mythology and helped broaden the horizons of his fellow Beatles as well as their Western audience by incorporating Indian instrumentation in their music.
In late 1968 Fender Musical Instruments Corporation gave Harrison a custom-made Fender Telecaster Rosewood prototype, made especially for him by Philip Kubicki (who years later would start his own business, Factor), a Fender master builder who also crafted a prototype Stratocaster for Jimi Hendrix.
Harrison was born and lived the first six years of his life at 12 Arnold Grove, Wavertree, Liverpool, a terraced house in a dead end street.
The first acts signed to the new label were Ravi Shankar and Splinter, whose album Harrison produced, which provided Dark Horse with their first hit, "Costafine Town".
This included the recording of two new Beatles songs built around solo vocal and piano tapes recorded by Lennon as well as lengthy interviews about the Beatles' career.
The two later bonded over their LSD experiences, finding common ground as seekers of spirituality.
"All Those Years Ago", which included vocal contributions from Paul and Linda McCartney, as well as Starr's original drum part, peaked at number two in the US charts.
Harrison obtained his first Fender Stratocaster in 1965 and used it in recording ''Rubber Soul'', notably on the song "Nowhere Man".
Lennon called the song one of Harrison's best: "His mind and his music are clear.
