116, "The Age of Bach and Handel", resembles two melodies from Handel's ''Messiah''.
According to Mainwaring, in 1706 Handel travelled to Italy at the invitation of Ferdinando de' Medici.
Musicologist Winton Dean writes that his operas show that "Handel was not only a great composer; he was a dramatic genius of the first order."
In 1797 Ludwig van Beethoven published the ''12 Variations in G major on ‘See the conqu’ring hero comes’ from Judas Maccabaeus by Handel'', for cello and piano.
5 March – 14 April 1759) was a German, later British baroque composer who spent the bulk of his career in London, becoming well known for his operas, oratorios, anthems, and organ concertos.
The board of chief investors expected Handel to retire when his contract ended, but Handel immediately looked for another theatre.
Throughout the 19th century and first half of the 20th century, particularly in the Anglophone countries, his reputation rested primarily on his English oratorios, which were customarily performed by enormous choruses of amateur singers on solemn occasions.
In 1733 the Earl of Essex received a letter with the following sentence: "Handel became so arbitrary a prince, that the Town murmurs".
In 1719 the Duke of Chandos became one of the composer's important patrons and main subscribers to his new opera company, the Royal Academy of Music, but his patronage declined after Chandos lost money in the South Sea bubble, which burst in 1720 in one of history's greatest financial cataclysms.
Among the works with opus numbers published and popularised in his lifetime are the Organ Concertos Op.
24, one of his most successful works (praised by Richard Wagner).
''Alcina'', his last opera with a magic content, and ''Alexander's Feast or the Power of Music'' based on John Dryden's ''Alexander's Feast'' starred Anna Maria Strada del Pò and John Beard.
In March 1734 Handel composed a wedding anthem ''This is the day which the Lord hath made'', and a serenata ''Parnasso in Festa'' for Anne of Hanover.
But whether the affliction was rheumatism, a stroke or a nervous breakdown, he recovered remarkably quickly .
Mozart is reputed to have said of him, "Handel understands affect better than any of us.
The strong support by Frederick, Prince of Wales caused conflicts in the royal family.
Handel owned an art collection that was auctioned posthumously in 1760.
'''George Frideric''' (or '''Frederick''') '''Handel''' (; born , ; 23 February 1685 (O.S.)
The cause was a cataract which was operated on by the great charlatan Chevalier Taylor.
It is evident how much he learned from Arcangelo Corelli about writing for instruments, and from Alessandro Scarlatti about writing for the solo voice; but there is no single composer who taught him how to write for chorus.
His most famous work, the oratorio ''Messiah'' with its "Hallelujah" chorus, is among the most popular works in choral music and has become the centrepiece of the Christmas season.
Between 1787 and 1797 Samuel Arnold compiled a 180-volume collection of Handel's works—however it was far from complete.
In the Lutheran Calendar of Saints Handel and J.S.
In cooperation with John Rich he started his third company at Covent Garden Theatre.
Handel's compositions include 42 operas, 29 oratorios, more than 120 cantatas, trios and duets, numerous arias, chamber music, a large number of ecumenical pieces, odes and serenatas, and 16 organ concerti.
Also incomplete was the collection produced between 1843 and 1858 by the English Handel Society (found by Sir George Macfarren).
This work was produced at Covent Garden Theatre, on March 23, 1748, and to the aria ''Hark!
Handel was buried in Westminster Abbey.
In July 1717 Handel's ''Water Music'' was performed more than three times on the Thames for the King and his guests.
The continuing ''Hallische Händel-Ausgabe'' edition was first inaugurated in 1955 in the Halle region in Saxony-Anhalt, Eastern Germany.
He strictly forbade him to meddle with any musical instrument but Handel found means to get a little clavichord privately convey'd to a room at the top of the house.
The first movement from Louis Spohr's ''Symphony No.
In 1698 Handel played for Frederick I of Prussia and met Giovanni Bononcini in Berlin.
Between 1978 and 1986 the German academic Bernd Baselt catalogued Handel's works in his ''Händel-Werke-Verzeichnis'' publication.
During twelve months between 1724 and 1725, Handel wrote three outstanding and successful operas, ''Giulio Cesare'', ''Tamerlano'' and ''Rodelinda''.
He bequeathed a copy of ''Messiah'' to the institution upon his death.
In 1710, Handel became ''Kapellmeister'' to German prince George, the Elector of Hanover, who in 1714 would become King George I of Great Britain and Ireland.
''L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato'' has a rather diverting character; the work is light and fresh.
After his success with ''Messiah'' (1742) he never performed an Italian opera again.
Handel left for Rome and, since opera was (temporarily) banned in the Papal States, composed sacred music for the Roman clergy.
The most significant reason for this change was the dwindling financial returns from his operas.
Handel introduced previously uncommon musical instruments in his works: the viola d'amore and violetta marina (''Orlando''), the lute (''Ode for St. Cecilia's Day''), three trombones (Saul), clarinets or small high cornetts (''Tamerlano''), theorbo, French horn (''Water Music''), lyrichord, double bassoon, viola da gamba, carillon (bell chimes), positive organ, and harp (''Giulio Cesare'', ''Alexander's Feast'').
As such, they are sometimes performed onstage by small chamber ensembles.
Then he used the first sixteen bars of his set of variations to create ''Handel in the Strand'', one of his most beloved pieces, of which he made several versions (for example, the piano solo version from 1930).
Handel never married, and kept his personal life private.
The original form of his name, Georg Friedrich Händel, is generally used in Germany and elsewhere, but he is known as "Haendel" in France.
In addition to the Foundling Hospital, Handel also gave to a charity that assisted impoverished musicians and their families.
In his next works Handel changed his course.
He also composed cantatas in pastoral style for musical gatherings in the palaces of cardinals Pietro Ottoboni, Benedetto Pamphili and Carlo Colonna.
Handel travelled to Italy to engage new singers and also composed seven more operas, among them the comic masterpiece ''Partenope'' and the "magic" opera ''Orlando''.
French composer and flautist Philippe Gaubert wrote his ''Petite marche'' for flute and piano based on the fourth movement of Handel's Trio Sonata, Op.
Handel may have invited John Smith, his fellow student in Halle, and his son Johann Christoph Schmidt, to become his secretary and amanuensis.
Recent decades have revived his secular cantatas and what one might call 'secular oratorios' or 'concert operas'.
Since 1831, when William Crotch raised the issue in his ''Substance of Several Lectures on Music,'' scholars have extensively studied Handel's "borrowing" of music from other composers.
With the rediscovery of his theatrical works, Handel, in addition to his renown as instrumentalist, orchestral writer, and melodist, is now perceived as being one of opera's great musical dramatists.
More than three thousand mourners attended his funeral, which was given full state honours.
Zachow composed music for the Lutheran services at the church, and from him Handel learned about harmony and counterpoint, copying and analysing scores, and gained instruction on the oboe, violin, harpsichord and organ.
Another work, which he wrote for The 1st Duke of Chandos, the owner of Cannons, was ''Acis and Galatea'': during Handel's lifetime it was his most performed work.
John Beard appeared for the first time as one of Handel's principal singers and became Handel's permanent tenor soloist for the rest of Handel's life.
He earned an appointment for one year as the organist in the former cathedral, by then an evangelical reformed church.
Handel reworked his ''Acis and Galatea'' which then became his most successful work ever.
''Saul'' and ''Israel in Egypt'' both from 1739 head the list of great, mature oratorios, in which the da capo aria became the exception and not the rule.
He produced two other operas, ''Daphne'' and ''Florindo'', in 1708.
Bach attempted, unsuccessfully, to meet with Handel while he was visiting Halle.
''Agrippina'' was first produced in 1709 at Teatro San Giovanni Grisostomo, owned by the Grimanis.
De' Medici, who had a keen interest in opera, was trying to make Florence Italy's musical capital by attracting the leading talents of his day.
The performance was considered a great success and was followed by annual concerts that continued throughout his life.
Guitar virtuoso Mauro Giuliani composed his ''Variations on a Theme by Handel, Op.
Two oratorios, ''La resurrezione'' and ''Il trionfo del tempo'', were produced in a private setting for Ruspoli and Ottoboni in 1709 and 1710, respectively.
For the young Lord Burlington, Handel wrote ''Amadigi di Gaula'', a magical opera, about a damsel in distress, based on the tragedy by Antoine Houdar de la Motte.
His involvement with the Foundling Hospital is today commemorated with a permanent exhibition in London's Foundling Museum, which also holds the ''Gerald Coke Handel Collection''.
After Handel's death, many composers wrote works based on or inspired by his music.
This performance helped Handel and the duke to convince his father to allow him to take lessons in musical composition and keyboard technique from Friedrich Wilhelm Zachow, the organist of Halle's Marienkirche.
Thus a tradition was created for oratorios which was to govern their future performance.
In Italy Handel met librettist Antonio Salvi, with whom he later collaborated.
To Beethoven he was "the master of us all... the greatest composer that ever lived.
During six weeks he took long hot baths, and ended up playing the organ for a surprised audience.
The Queen's Theatre at the Haymarket (now Her Majesty's Theatre), established in 1705 by architect and playwright John Vanbrugh, quickly became an opera house.
After two commercially successful English oratorios ''Esther'' and ''Deborah'', he was able to invest again in the South Sea Company.
When he chooses, he strikes like a thunder bolt."
By 1723 he had moved into a Georgian house at 25 Brook Street, which he rented for the rest of his life.
In recognition of his patronage, Handel was made a governor of the Hospital the day after his initial concert.
Influenced in part by cold-war realities, editorial work was inconsistent: misprints are found in abundance and editors failed to consult important sources.
In 1717 Handel became house composer at Cannons in Middlesex, where he laid the cornerstone for his future choral compositions in the twelve ''Chandos Anthems''.
One of his four Coronation Anthems, ''Zadok the Priest'' (1727), composed for the coronation of George II, has been performed at every subsequent British coronation, traditionally during the sovereign's anointing.
To aid his recovery, Handel had travelled to Aachen, a spa in Germany.
He suggested Handel use his small chorus and introduce the dancing of Marie Sallé, for whom Handel composed ''Terpsicore''.
He saw ''Teofane'' by Antonio Lotti, and engaged members of the cast for the Royal Academy of Music, founded by a group of aristocrats to assure themselves a constant supply of baroque opera or opera seria.
''Israel in Egypt'' consists of little else but choruses, borrowing from the ''Funeral Anthem for Queen Caroline''.
After nine years the Royal Academy of Music ceased to function but Handel soon started a new company.
The first public catalogue of Handel's works appeared in John Mainwaring's ''Memoirs'' of the composer (1760).
One of his most important patrons was The 3rd Earl of Burlington and 4th Earl of Cork, a young and incredibly wealthy member of an Anglo-Irish aristocratic family.
Handel secured a balance between soloists and chorus which he never surpassed.
He strikes the golden lyre'', Handel wrote the accompaniment for mandolin, harp, violin, viola, and violoncello.
Beethoven emphasised above all the simplicity and popular appeal of Handel's music when he said, "Go to him to learn how to achieve great effects, by such simple means."
Romain Rolland stated that these anthems were as important for his oratorios as the cantatas were for his operas.
His father, 63 when George Frideric was born, was an eminent barber-surgeon who served the court of Saxe-Weissenfels and the Margraviate of Brandenburg.
In summer the disorder seemed at times to affect his understanding.
His funeral was given full state honours, and he was buried in Westminster Abbey in London.
As ''Alexander's Feast'' (1736) was well received, Handel made a transition to English choral works.
Also notable are his sixteen keyboard suites, especially ''The Harmonious Blacksmith''.
According to Handel's first biographer, John Mainwaring, he "had discovered such a strong propensity to Music, that his father who always intended him for the study of the Civil Law, had reason to be alarmed.
One of these, ''Zadok the Priest'', has been played at every British coronation ceremony since.
Handel travelled to Dresden to attend the newly built opera.
It was even possible for him to write one of his most popular operas, Serse (including the famous aria Ombra mai fù, better known as "Handel's largo", he wrote for the famous castrato Caffarelli), just one year after his stroke.
Handel is honoured with a feast day on 28 July in the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church, with Johann Sebastian Bach and Henry Purcell.
Hanmer and her husband, Mr. and Mrs. Percival, Sir John Stanley and my brother, Mrs. Donellan, Strada star soprano of Handel's operas  and Mr. Coot.
Mr. Handel was in the best humour in the world, and played lessons and accompanied Strada and all the ladies that sang from seven o'clock till eleven.
In 1729 Handel became joint manager of the theatre with John James Heidegger.
Financially, ''Ariodante'' was a failure, although he introduced ballet suites at the end of each act.
Handel composed more than forty operas in over thirty years, and since the late 1960s, with the revival of baroque music and historically informed musical performance, interest in Handel's operas has grown.
I gave them tea and coffee, and about half an hour after nine had a salver brought in of chocolate, mulled white wine and biscuits.
Three earlier performances aroused such interest that they naturally prompted the idea of introducing it to a larger public.
In 1702, following his father's wishes, Handel started studying law under Christian Thomasius at the University of Halle.
In 1985 a committee was formed to establish better standards for the edition.
Handel became sure of himself, broader in his presentation, and more diverse in his composition.
The last performance he attended was of ''Messiah''.
In 1736 Handel produced ''Alexander's Feast''.
In 1750 he arranged a performance of ''Messiah'' to benefit the Foundling Hospital.
Between 1711 and 1739, more than 25 of Handel's operas premièred there.
The performances were given without costumes and action; the singers appeared in their own clothes.
There he met the composers Johann Mattheson, Christoph Graupner and Reinhard Keiser.
Everybody was easy and seemed pleased.
He received a yearly income of £200 from Queen Anne after composing for her the ''Utrecht Te Deum and Jubilate'', first performed in 1713.
In 1727 Handel was commissioned to write four anthems for the Coronation ceremony of King George II.
Handel received critical training in Halle, Hamburg and Italy before settling in London in 1712; he became a naturalised British subject in 1727.
The audience, thunderstruck with the grandeur and sublimity of his style, applauded for ''Il caro Sassone'' ("the dear Saxon" – referring to Handel's German origins).
In August 1750, on a journey back from Germany to London, Handel was seriously injured in a carriage accident between The Hague and Haarlem in the Netherlands.
The opera, with a libretto by Cardinal Vincenzo Grimani, ran for 27 nights successively.
Of the former, ''Ode for St. Cecilia's Day'' (1739) (set to texts by John Dryden) and ''Ode for the Birthday of Queen Anne'' (1713) are noteworthy.
In these works he laid greater stress on the effects of orchestra and soloists; the chorus retired into the background.
He was completely blind by 1752.
The conception of an opera as a coherent structure was slow to capture Handel's imagination and he composed no operas for five years.
Other sources say Handel was invited by Gian Gastone de' Medici, whom Handel had met in 1703–1704 in Hamburg.
The 105-volume ''Händel-Gesellschaft'' ("Handel Society") edition was published between 1858 and 1902 – mainly due to the efforts of Friedrich Chrysander.
For the first time Handel allowed Gioacchino Conti, who had no time to learn his part, to substitute arias.
In 1822 Beethoven composed ''The Consecration of the House'' overture, which also bears the influence of Handel.
In an essay published in 1985, John H. Roberts demonstrated that Handel's borrowings were unusually frequent even for his own era, enough to have been criticised by contemporaries (notably Johann Mattheson); Roberts suggested several reasons for Handel's practice, including Handel's attempts to make certain works sound more up-to-date and more radically, his "basic lack of facility in inventing original ideas" – though Roberts took care to argue that this does not "diminish Handel's stature", which should be "judged not by his methods, still less by his motives in employing them, but solely by the effects he achieves."
Handel himself invested in South Sea stock in 1716, when prices were low and sold before 1720.
Among the composers whose music has been shown to have been re-used by Handel are Alessandro Stradella, Gottlieb Muffat, Alessandro Scarlatti, Domenico Scarlatti Giacomo Carissimi, Georg Philipp Telemann, Carl Heinrich Graun, Leonardo Vinci, Jacobus Gallus, Francesco Antonio Urio, Reinhard Keiser, Francesco Gasparini, Giovanni Bononcini, William Boyce, Agostino Steffani, Francesco Gasparini, Franz Johann Habermann, and numerous others.
Another 12 years had passed when an act of piracy caused him to take up ''Esther'' once again.
He was strongly influenced both by the great composers of the Italian Baroque and the middle-German polyphonic choral tradition.
''Rodrigo'', his first all-Italian opera, was produced in the Cocomero theatre in Florence in 1707.
107'' for guitar, based on Handel's Suite No.
Within fifteen years, Handel had started three commercial opera companies to supply the English nobility with Italian opera.
It is unclear whether Handel directed these performances.
In May 1719, The 1st Duke of Newcastle, the Lord Chamberlain, ordered Handel to look for new singers.
Handel failed to compete with the Opera of the Nobility, who engaged musicians such as Johann Adolph Hasse, Nicolo Porpora and the famous castrato Farinelli.
The centenary of his death, in 1859, was celebrated by a performance of ''Messiah'' at The Crystal Palace, involving 2,765 singers and 460 instrumentalists, who played for an audience of about 10,000 people.
His first two operas, ''Almira'' and ''Nero'', were produced in 1705.
In Summer 1713 he lived at Mr Mathew Andrews in Barn Elms Surrey.
''Jephtha'' was first performed on 26 February 1752; even though it was his last oratorio, it was no less a masterpiece than his earlier works.
To this room he constantly stole when the family was asleep".
The auction catalogue listed approximately seventy paintings and ten prints (other paintings were bequeathed).
It did not start as a critical edition, but after heavy criticism of the first volumes, which were performing editions without a critical apparatus (for example, the opera Serse was published with the title character recast as a tenor reflecting pre-war German practice), it repositioned itself as a critical edition.
Summarising the field in 2005, Richard Taruskin wrote that Handel "seems to have been the champion of all parodists, adapting both his own works and those of other composers in unparalleled numbers and with unparalleled exactitude."
In 1712, Handel decided to settle permanently in England.
His ''Messiah'' was first performed at the New Music Hall in Fishamble Street on 13 April 1742, with 26 boys and five men from the combined choirs of St Patrick's and Christ Church cathedrals participating.
They also share the lyrical and dramatic qualities of Handel's Italian operas.
The unification of Germany in 1990 removed communication problems, and the volumes issued have since shown a significant improvement in standards.
This work contains one of Handel's favourite arias, ''Cara sposa, amante cara'', and the famous Lascia ch'io pianga.
Despite the problems the Opera of the Nobility was causing him at the time, Handel's neighbour in Brook Street, Mary Delany, reported on a party she invited Handel to at her house on 12 April 1734 where he was in good spirits:I had Lady Rich and her daughter, Lady Cath.
His initial will bequeathed the bulk of his estate to his niece Johanna, however four codicils distributed much of his estate to other relations, servants, friends and charities.
In 1861, using a theme from the second of Handel's harpsichord suites, Johannes Brahms wrote the ''Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel'', Op.
Vocal scores drawn from the edition were published by Novello in London, but some scores, such as the vocal score to Samson are incomplete.
Handel and his father travelled to Weissenfels to visit either Handel's half-brother, Carl, or nephew, Georg Christian, who was serving as valet to Duke Johann Adolf I.
This did not improve his eyesight, but possibly made it worse.
He died in 1759 at home in Brook Street, at age 74.
At an early age Handel became a skilful performer on the harpsichord and pipe organ.
Born the same year as Johann Sebastian Bach and Domenico Scarlatti, Handel is regarded as one of the greatest composers of the Baroque era, with works such as ''Water Music'', ''Music for the Royal Fireworks'' and ''Messiah'' remaining steadfastly popular.
5 in E major, HWV 430, for harpsichord.
Handel was born in 1685 in Halle, Duchy of Magdeburg, to Georg Händel and Dorothea Taust.
Winton Dean wrote, "the music catches breath and disturbs the memory".
5 in E major (just like Giuliani).
Almost blind, and having lived in England for nearly fifty years, he died in 1759, a respected and rich man.
It is said the compositions spurred reconciliation between the King and Handel.
On this trip, young Handel was lifted onto an organ's stool, where he surprised everyone with his playing.
Handel's operas are filled with da capo arias, such as ''Svegliatevi nel core''.
Rich was renowned for his spectacular productions.
After his death, Handel's Italian operas fell into obscurity, except for selections such as the aria from ''Serse'', "Ombra mai fù".
In 1747 Handel wrote his oratorio ''Alexander Balus''.
It was made at Denham Studios by the Rank Organisation, and shot in technicolour.
During the summer of 1741, The 3rd Duke of Devonshire invited Handel to Dublin, capital of the Kingdom of Ireland, to give concerts for the benefit of local hospitals.
Handel has generally been accorded high esteem by fellow composers, both in his own time and since.
In 1735 he introduced organ concertos between the acts.
7, together with the Opus 3 and Opus 6 concerti grossi; the latter incorporate an earlier organ concerto ''The Cuckoo and the Nightingale'' in which birdsong is imitated in the upper registers of the organ.
The use of English soloists reached its height at the first performance of ''Samson''.
This house, where he rehearsed, copied music and sold tickets, is now the Handel House Museum.
Handel seems to have been dissatisfied, and in 1703 he accepted a position as violinist and harpsichordist in the orchestra of the Hamburg Oper am Gänsemarkt.
Bach share that date with Heinrich Schütz, and Handel and Bach are commemorated in the calendar of saints prepared by The Order of Saint Luke for the use of the United Methodist Church.
In these three oratorios Handel laid the foundation for the traditional use of the chorus which marks his later oratorios.
''Scipio'', from which the regimental slow march of the British Grenadier Guards is derived, was performed as a stopgap, waiting for the arrival of Faustina Bordoni.
In 1749 Handel composed ''Music for the Royal Fireworks''; 12,000 people attended the first performance.
For his secular oratorios, Handel turned to classical mythology for subjects, producing such works as ''Acis and Galatea'' (1719), ''Hercules'' (1745) and ''Semele'' (1744).
In 1751 one eye started to fail.
His famous ''Dixit Dominus'' (1707) is from this era.
In 1728 John Gay's ''The Beggar's Opera'' premiered at Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre and ran for 62 consecutive performances, the longest run in theatre history up to that time.
Lord Shaftesbury begged of Mr. Percival to bring him, and being a profess'd friend of Mr. Handel (who was here also) was admitted; I never was so well entertained at an opera!
''Il trionfo del tempo e del disinganno'', an allegory, Handel's first oratorio was composed in Italy in 1707, followed by ''La resurrezione'' in 1708 which uses material from the Bible.
The piece was a great success and it encouraged Handel to make the transition from writing Italian operas to English choral works.
