"They didn't even dare to attack me from the front."
The publication of ''Le Bloc'' lasted until 15 March 1902.
It was generally agreed that Germany should not pay more than it could afford, but the estimates of what it could afford varied greatly.
Too dangerous to remove, the bullet remained with him for the rest of his life.
He was one of the principal architects of the Treaty of Versailles at the France Peace Conference of 1919.
In 1919 France adopted a new electoral system and the legislative election gave the National Bloc (a coalition of right-wing parties) a majority.
He burned all of his private letters.
One issue that had not changed at all was a dispute over France's long-running eastern frontier and control of the German Rhineland.
But all that will now be placed in jeopardy...It will take less time and less thought to destroy the edifice so patiently and painfully erected than it took to complete it.
As soon as the war started, Clemenceau advised Interior Minister Malvy to invoke Carnet B, a list of known and suspected subversives who were supposed to be arrested on mobilisation.
This meant that the French government was not directly involved in the issue of reparations.
The poilus had great respect for Clemenceau and his disregard for danger, as he often visited soldiers only yards away from German frontlines.
It was a policy no Frenchman, no republican Frenchman could accept for a moment, except in the hope of obtaining other guarantees, other advantages.
He decided to run the controversial article, which would become a famous part of the Dreyfus Affair, in the form of an open letter to the Félix Faure, the president of France.
In 1877, after the Crisis of 16 May 1877, he was one of the republican majority who denounced the ministry of the Duc de Broglie.
The claims that Clemenceau's "firm government" was a dictatorship found little support.
Clemenceau's main speech on the treaty was delivered on 25 September.
Clemenceau declined to join the government of national unity as Justice Minister in autumn 1914.
Clemenceau was heard to say "Sacrebleu the Germans marched in backwards and we thought they were leaving".
His father, Benjamin Clemenceau (1810–1897), came from a long line of physicians, but he lived off his lands and investments and did not practice medicine.
Difficulties with Germany and criticism by the Socialist party in connection with the handling of the First Moroccan Crisis in 1905–06 were settled at the Algeciras Conference.
He would speak to them and assure them that their government was actually looking after them.
Clemenceau was still held accountable to the people and media.
Lloyd George insisted on a clause allowing for the early withdrawal of Allied troops if the Germans fulfilled the treaty; Clemenceau inserted Article 429 into the treaty that permitted the Allied occupation beyond the fifteen years if adequate guarantees for Allied security against unprovoked aggression were not met.
He finally graduated as a doctor of medicine on 13 May 1865, founded several literary magazines, and wrote many articles, most of which attacked the imperial regime of Napoleon III.
Clemenceau now had to defend the treaty against critics who viewed the compromises Clemenceau had negotiated as inadequate for French national interests.
We leave that sort of thing to Bismarck".
The many trials and arrests aroused great public excitement, one newspaper ironically reported, "The war must be over, for no one is talking about it anymore".
In it, he led the campaign to revisit the Dreyfus affair, and to create a separation of Church and State in France.
Clemenceau argued that even German restitution of Alsace-Lorraine and the liberation of Belgium would not be enough to justify France abandoning her Allies.
Article 429 ensured that a refusal of the U.S. Senate to ratify the treaties of guarantee would not weaken them.
In 1918, Clemenceau thought that France should adopt Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points, mainly because of its point that called for the return of Alsace-Lorraine to France.
Leading the far left in the Chamber of Deputies, he was an active opponent of the colonial policy of Prime Minister Jules Ferry, which he opposed on moral grounds and also as a form of diversion from the more important goal of “Revenge against Germany”) for the annexation of Alsace and Lorraine after the Franco-Prussian War.
In June 1903, he undertook the direction of the journal ''L'Aurore'', which he had founded.
Clemenceau's assailant, anarchist Émile Cottin, was seized by the crowd following the leader's procession and nearly lynched.
In response, Clemenceau refused to be put forward for the vote in the National Assembly because he did not want to win by a small majority, but by a near-unanimous vote.
Writing this occupied most of his time between 1923 and 1927.
Clemenceau only intervened once in the election campaign, delivering a speech on 4 November at Strasbourg, praising the manifesto and men of the National Bloc and urging that the victory in the war needed to be safeguarded by vigilance.
As well as talking strategy with the generals, he also went to the trenches to see the poilus, the French infantrymen.
Clemenceau's final tenure as prime minister witnessed the implementation of various reforms aimed at regulating the hours of labour.
In a short time, he believed, the German economy would be much stronger than the French.
He nominated General Henri Mordacq to be his military chief of staff.
Clemenceau ordered the military against the strikers and repressed the wine-growers' strike in the Languedoc-Roussillon.
Clemenceau left France for the United States when the imperial agents began cracking down on dissidents, sending most of them to the ''bagne de Cayennes'' (Devil's Island Penal System) in French Guiana.
Life is a perpetual struggle in war, as in peace...That struggle cannot be avoided.
Lloyd George came to a compromise; the coal mines were given to France and the territory placed under French administration for 15 years, after which a vote would determine whether the region would rejoin Germany.
Between 1909 and 1912, Clemenceau dedicated his time to travel, conferences and the treatment of his illness.
The reason for Serrail's dismissal was his links with the socialist politicians Joseph Caillaux and Louis Malvy (at that time suspected of treasonable contacts with the Germans)
The barrier is the Rhine.
At a Cabinet meeting on 25 April Foch spoke against the deal Clemenceau had brokered and pushed for a separate Rhineland.
Clemenceau governed from the Ministry of War in the Rue Saint-Dominique.
He said that any attempt to partition Germany would be self-defeating and that France must find a way of living with sixty million Germans.
On 11 November 1918, an armistice with Germany was signed.
Only then, he claimed, could he negotiate with confidence with the Allies.
The Treaty of Versailles was signed on 28 June 1919.
This forced Alexandre Ribot and Aristide Briand (both the previous two Prime Ministers, of whom the latter was by the far more powerful politician and had been approached by a German diplomat) to agree in public that there would be no separate peace.
This was in case the U.S. Senate refused to ratify the treaty of guarantee, thereby making null and void the British guarantee as well, since that was dependent on the Americans being part of it.
Unlike previous ministers, Clemenceau moved against Caillaux publicly.
He ran for election to the Paris Commune council,   but received less than eight hundred votes and took no part in its governance.
After his 1893 defeat, Clemenceau confined his political activities to journalism for nearly a decade.
He had declined Grévy's request to form a cabinet upon the downfall of the cabinet of Maurice Rouvier by advising his followers to vote for neither Charles Floquet, Jules Ferry, nor Charles de Freycinet, he was primarily responsible for the election of an "outsider," Marie François Sadi Carnot, as president.
In response, Clemenceau changed the newspaper's name to ''L'Homme enchaîné'' ("The Chained Man").
He joined the far left, and his energy and mordant eloquence speedily made him the leader of the radical section.
In June, he visited England and received an honorary degree from the University of Oxford.
In response to accusations of corruption leveled by the nationalist politician Paul Déroulède, Clemenceau fought a duel with him on 23 December 1892.
His speech of 8 March advocating this policy was so effective that it left a vivid impression on Winston Churchill, who would make similar speeches on becoming British prime minister in 1940.
Clemenceau replied that he was sure the Senate would ratify both and that he had inserted Article 429 into the treaty, providing for "new arrangements concerning the Rhine".
Benjamin had a reputation as an atheist and a political activist; he was arrested and briefly held in 1851 and again in 1858.
Clemenceau's assumption of power meant little to the men in the trenches at first.
During the period of the French Revolution, the Vendée had been a hotbed of monarchist sympathies, but by the time of his birth, its people were fiercely republican.
During this time, he joined French exile clubs in New York opposing the imperial regime.
He said he believed that Germany had won the war industrially and commercially as its factories were intact and its debts would soon be overcome through "manipulation".
I am quite indifferent on that point.
He was a strong, energetic, positive leader who was key to the allied victory of 1918.
In his last speech to the Cabinet on 18 January he said, "We must show the world the extent of our victory, and we must take up the mentality and habits of a victorious people, which once more takes its place at the head of Europe.
"They shot me in the back," Clemenceau told him.
Clemenceau believed that France was entitled to the region and its coal mines after Germany deliberately damaged the coal mines in northern France.
Clemenceau was embraced in the streets and attracted admiring crowds.
They thought of him as "just another politician", and the monthly assessment of troop morale found that only a minority found comfort in his appointment.
He was in Bordeaux when the Commune was suppressed by the French Army in May 1871.
He also said that the bourgeoisie, like the aristocracy before them in the ''ancien régime'', had failed as a ruling class.
Clemenceau realized at their first meeting that he was a man of principle and conscience.
In Paris, the young Clemenceau became a political activist and writer.
In August 1919, a similar limit was introduced for all those employed in French vessels.
During his last months, he wrote his memoirs, despite declaring previously that he would not write them.
Famously, the Treaty of Versailles between Germany and the Allied Powers to conclude the conflict was signed in the Palace of Versailles, but the deliberations on which it was based were conducted in Paris, hence the name given to the meeting of the victorious heads of state that produced the treaties signed with the defeated powers: the Paris Peace Conference of 1919.
He defended the policy of France, including war debts and reparations, and condemned American isolationism.
''“Messieurs, les Allemands sont toujours à Noyon”'' (Gentlemen, the Germans are still at Noyon) wrote Clemenceau’s paper endlessly.
Clemenceau believed that Germany's possession of this territory left France without a natural frontier in the East and thus simplified invasion into France for an attacking army.
The British ambassador reported in December 1918 on Clemenceau's views on the future of the Rhineland: "He said that the Rhine was a natural boundary of Gaul and Germany and that it ought to be made the German boundary now, the territory between the Rhine and the French frontier being made into an Independent State whose neutrality should be guaranteed by the great powers".
Clemenceau worked in New York City in the years 1865-69, following the American Civil War.
When negotiations reached a stalemate, Clemenceau had a habit of shouting at the other heads of state and storming out of the room rather than participating in further discussion.
After the fall of the Commune, he was elected to the Paris municipal council on 23 July 1871 for the Clignancourt quarter, and retained his seat till 1876.
He met Lloyd George and said to him that after the Armistice he had become the enemy of France.
When Clemenceau became prime minister in 1917 victory seemed to be elusive.
He wanted to surrender to Germany and negotiate a peace, thus Clemenceau viewed Caillaux as a threat to national security.
Yes, we must have vigilance, we must have a great deal of vigilance.
She was the daughter of William Kelly Plummer and wife Harriet A. Taylor.
France's diplomatic position at the Paris Peace Conference was repeatedly jeopardized by Clemenceau's mistrust of David Lloyd George and Woodrow Wilson, and his intense dislike of French President Raymond Poincaré.
Wilson, however, resisted the French claim so firmly that Clemenceau accused him of being "pro-German".
Almost his first act as prime minister was to relieve General Maurice Sarrail from his command of the Salonika Front.
His inflexibility was driven by a will to regain the province of Alsace-Lorraine, a view shared by public opinion.
That does not mean that I am afraid of losing office.
He supported the formation of scientific police by Alphonse Bertillon, and founded the ''Brigades mobiles'' (French for "mobile squads") led by Célestin Hennion.
Clemenceau remained the leading spokesman for French radicalism, but his hostility to the Franco-Russian Alliance so increased his unpopularity that in the French legislative elections of 1893, he was defeated for his seat in the Chamber of Deputies, after having held it continuously since 1876.
This interpretation of Article 429 was disputed by Barthou.
The Clemenceaus had three children together before the marriage ended in a contentious divorce.
He said later to Jean Martel: "The policy of Foch and Poincaré was bad in principle.
In 1900, he withdrew from ''La Justice'' to found a weekly review, ''Le Bloc'', to which he was practically the sole contributor.
This confidence began to spread from the trenches to the home front and it was said, "We believed in Clemenceau rather in the way that our ancestors believed in Joan of Arc."
He went to Paris to study medicine, eventually graduating with the completetion of his thesis "De la génération des éléments anatomiques" in 1865.
All the more reason not to show her that we fear her...M. Marin went to the heart of the question, when he turned to us and said in despairing tones, ‘You have reduced us to a policy of vigilance.’ Yes, M. Marin, do you think that one could make a treaty which would do away with the need for vigilance among the nations of Europe who only yesterday were pouring out their blood in battle?
It was believed that if "the tiger" as well as Foch and Philippe Pétain stayed in power, for even another week, France would be lost.
There was little activity on the Western Front because it was believed that there should be limited attacks until the American support arrived.
The Prefect of Police gave the same advice, but the government did not follow it, with the result that 80% of the 2,501 people listed on Carnet B volunteered for service.
He instilled in his son a love of learning, devotion to radical politics, and a hatred of Catholicism.
Although Clemenceau had little knowledge of the Austrian-Hungarian empire, he supported the causes of its smaller ethnic groups and his adamant stance lead to the stringent terms in the Treaty of Trianon that dismantled Hungary.
After years of criticism against the French army for its conservatism and Catholicism, Clemenceau would need help to get along with the military leaders in order to achieve a sound strategic plan.
These visits, his speech, and his verbal threats directly to the enemy impressed the soldiers and contributed to Clemenceau's title  "Père la Victoire" (Father of Victory).
During the French legislative elections of 1885, he advocated a strong radical programme and was returned both for his old seat in Paris and for the Var, district of Draguignan.
The French Parliament debated the treaty and Louis Barthou on 24 September claimed that the U.S. Senate would not vote for the treaty of guarantee or the Treaty of Versailles and therefore it would have been wiser to have the Rhine as a frontier.
His mother, Sophie Eucharie Gautreau (1817–1903), was of Huguenot descent.
Refusing to form a ministry to replace the one he had overthrown, he supported the right in keeping Prime Minister Charles de Freycinet in power in 1886 and was responsible for the inclusion of Georges Ernest Boulanger in the Freycinet cabinet as War Minister.
In December 1861, he co-founded a weekly newsletter, ''Le Travail,'' along with some friends.
Clemenceau first served as Prime Minister from 1906 to 1909, and then again from 1917 to 1920.
At the outbreak of World War I in France in August 1914, Clemenceau's newspaper was one of the first to be censored by the government; it was suspended from 29 September 1914 to 7 October.
He was well received and attracted large audiences, but America's policy remained unchanged.
He took a holiday in Egypt and the Sudan from February to April 1920, then embarked for the Far East in September, returning to France in March 1921.
Churchill later wrote that Clemenceau "looked like a wild animal pacing to and fro behind bars" in front of "an assembly which would have done anything to avoid putting him there, but, having put him there, felt they must obey".
The German line continued to advance, and Clemenceau believed that they could not rule out the fall of Paris.
On 19 February 1919, during the Paris Peace Conference, as Clemenceau was leaving his apartment in the  to drive to a meeting with Woodrow Wilson's aide Edward M. House and British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour at the Hôtel de Crillon, a man jumped out and fired several shots at the car.
Mordacq helped to inspire trust and mutual respect from the army to the government which proved essential to the final victory.
Clemenceau's speech positioned him as the strong man of the day in French politics; when the Sarrien ministry resigned in October, Clemenceau became premier.
It was decided that since the conference was being held in France, Clemenceau would be the most appropriate president.
He went to South America in 1910, traveling to Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina (where he went as far as Santa Ana de Tucuman in northwest Argentina).
It was also believed that many politicians secretly wanted peace.
Six shots were discharged, but neither participant was injured.
As a result, a parliamentary committee decided that Caillaux would be arrested and imprisoned for three years.
He did not have close links with any parliamentary leaders (especially after he had antagonized them so relentlessly during the course of the war) and so had to rely on himself and his own circle of friends.
There were skeptics, however, that believed that Clemenceau, like other war time leaders, would have a short time in office.
Clemenceau was not experienced in the fields of economics or finance, but was under strong public and parliamentary pressure to make Germany's reparations bill as large as possible.
I must take national feelings into account.
The progress at the conference was much slower than anticipated, and decisions were constantly being tabled.
He said that he knew the treaty was not perfect, but that the war had been fought by a coalition and therefore the treaty would express the lowest common denominator of those involved.
They began to meet in a smaller group, called the Council of Four, Vittorio Orlando of Italy being the fourth, though less weighty, member.
The new government of Ferdinand Sarrien appointed Clemenceau as Minister of the Interior in the cabinet.
In late 1922, Clemenceau gave a lecture tour in the major cities of the American northeast.
In spite of the censorship imposed by the French government on Clemenceau's journalism at the beginning of World War I, he still wielded considerable political influence.
His career was further clouded by the long-drawn-out Dreyfus case, in which he took an active part as a supporter of Émile Zola and an opponent of the anti-Semitic and nationalist campaigns.
Unlike his predecessors, he discouraged internal disagreement and called for peace among the senior politicians.
Clemenceau returned to Paris after the French defeat at the Battle of Sedan in 1870 during the Franco-Prussian War and the fall of the Second French Empire.
It voted their confidence in him by 377 votes to 110.
He first held the offices of secretary and vice-president, then became president in 1875.
On 13 January 1898, Clemenceau, published Émile Zola's "J'accuse" on the front page of the Paris daily newspaper ''L'Aurore'', of which he was owner and editor.
The region was remote from Paris, rural and poor.
He was succeeded as premier by Aristide Briand, with a reconstructed cabinet.
In April 1919, an enabling Act was approved for an eight-hour day and a six-day week, although farmworkers were excluded from the Act.
He was also isolated politically.
There was increasing discontent among Clemenceau, Lloyd George and Woodrow Wilson about slow progress and information leaks surrounding the Council of Ten.
On 6 April 1902, he was elected senator for the Var district of Draguignan, although he had previously called for the suppression of the French Senate, as he considered it a strong-house of conservatism.
In 1876, Clemenceau stood for the Chamber of Deputies (which replaced the National Assembly in 1875) and was elected for the 18th arrondissement.
After his studies in the Lycée in Nantes, Georges received his French baccalaureate of letters in 1858.
His friend Georges Mandel urged Clemenceau to stand for the presidency in the upcoming election and on 15 January 1920 he let Mandel announce that he would be prepared to serve if elected.
On 9 August 1926, he wrote an open letter to the American President Calvin Coolidge that argued against France paying all its war debts: "France is not for sale, even to her friends".
Joseph Caillaux, a former French prime minister, disagreed with Clemenceau's policies.
Nicknamed "Père la Victoire" (''Father Victory'') or "Le Tigre" (''The Tiger''), he took a harsh position against defeated Germany, though not quite as much as the President Raymond Poincaré, and won agreement on Germany's payment of large sums for reparations.
This was the main topic of discussion at the first meeting of the War Committee on 6 December, at which Clemenceau stated, “Sarrail cannot remain there”.
He relaxed censorship on political views as he believed that newspapers had the right to criticize political figures: "The right to insult members of the government is inviolable".
But I will not, by giving up the occupation, do something which will break the willpower of our people".
In these media, Clemenceau focused increasingly on foreign policy and condemned the Socialists' anti-militarism.
He also penned a huge two-volume tome, covering philosophy, history and science, titled ''Au Soir de la Pensée''.
This meant that victory would fulfill the war aim that was crucial for the French public.
This appeal went unheard.
A further misfortune occurred in the Panama affair, as Clemenceau's relations with the businessman and politician Cornelius Herz led to his being included in the general suspicion.
These trials, far from making the public fear the government, inspired confidence as they felt that for the first time in the war, action was being taken and they were being firmly governed.
These squads were nicknamed ''Brigades du Tigre'' ("The Tiger's Brigades") after Clemenceau himself.
The only powers that Clemenceau assumed were those that he thought necessary to win the war.
The entire Czechoslovakian state was seen a potential buffer from Communism and this encompassed majority Hungarian territories.
At this time, Italy was on the defensive, Russia had virtually stopped fighting  – and it was believed (correctly - see the Treaty of Brest Litovsk) that they would be making a separate peace with Germany.
On 23 June 1869, he married one of his students, Mary Eliza Plummer (1848-1923), in New York City.
Slowly, however, as time passed, the confidence he inspired in a few began to grow throughout all the fighting men.
He was spurred into doing so by the appearance of Marshal Foch's memoirs, which were highly critical of Clemenceau, mainly for his policy at the Paris Peace Conference.
We are told that she will revive.
He criticized the government for its lack of transparency and its ineffectiveness, while defending the patriotic ''union sacrée'' against the German Empire.
Figures ranged between £2,000&nbsp;million and £20,000&nbsp;million.
When General Boulanger revealed himself as an ambitious pretender, Clemenceau withdrew his support and became a vigorous opponent of the heterogeneous Boulangist movement, though the radical press continued to patronize the general.
He advocated national unity and a demographic revolution: "The treaty does not state that France will have many children, but it is the first thing that should have been written there.
Yes, this treaty will bring us burdens, troubles, miseries, difficulties, and that will continue for long years.
The Chamber of Deputies ratified the treaty by 372 votes to 53, with the Senate voting unanimously for its ratification.
From this time, throughout the presidency of Jules Grévy (1879-1887), he became widely known as a political critic and destroyer of ministries (''le Tombeur de ministères'') who avoided taking office himself.
The mistakes have begun already".
It was said, "Like everyone else … Clemenceau will not last long- only long enough to clean up the war."
One bullet hit Clemenceau between the ribs, just missing his vital organs.
Clemenceau often joked about the "assassin's" bad marksmanship – “We have just won the most terrible war in history, yet here is a Frenchman who misses his target 6 out of 7 times at point-blank range.
He spent 77 days in the Mazas Prison.
By his exposure of the Wilson scandal, and by his personal plain speaking, Clemenceau contributed largely to Jules Grévy's resignation of the presidency of France in 1887.
His actions alienated the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) socialist party, from which he definitively broke in his notable reply in the Chamber of Deputies to Jean Jaurès, leader of the SFIO, in June 1906.
Having fought a dozen duels against political opponents, Clemenceau knew the imporrtance of exercise and practiced fencing every morning even when he was an old man.
In private he was concerned at this huge swing to the right.
As war minister, Clemenceau was also in close contact with his generals,but he did not always make the most effective decisions concerning military issues (though he did heed the advice of the more experienced generals).
