A number of other works on the philosophy of history, religion, aesthetics, and the history of philosophy were compiled from the lecture notes of his students and published posthumously.
: ''Phenomenology of Spirit'', translated by Terry Pinkard, 2012
Later in the year Hegel's first book, ''The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy'', was completed.
This is because, as Hegel suggests by his introduction of the concept of "reality", what determines itself—rather than depending on its relations to other things for its essential character—is more fully "real" (following the Latin etymology of "real:" more "thing-like") than what does not.
Recently, two prominent American philosophers, John McDowell and Robert Brandom (sometimes referred to as the "Pittsburgh Hegelians"), have produced philosophical works exhibiting a marked Hegelian influence.
In Britain, the Hegelian British Idealism school (members of which included Francis Herbert Bradley, Bernard Bosanquet, and, in the United States, Josiah Royce) was challenged and rejected by analytic philosophers Moore and Russell; Russell, in particular, considered "almost all" of Hegel's doctrines to be false.
The essential nature of being-for-itself is that it is free "in itself;" that is, it does not depend on anything else, such as matter, for its being.
The idea of the absolute excludes multiplicity so the subjective and objective must achieve synthesis to become whole.
Hegel preserves this essential Platonic and Kantian concern in the form of infinity going beyond the finite (a process that Hegel in fact relates to "freedom" and the "ought"), the universal going beyond the particular (in the Concept), and Spirit going beyond Nature.
Now in a weak state of health, Hegel seldom went out.
They both know their obligations, and choose to fulfill their obligations.
The finite has to become infinite in order to achieve reality.
This contradiction leads to the dissolution of the thing or idea in the simple form in which it presented itself and to a higher-level, more complex thing or idea that more adequately incorporates the contradiction.
III:) ''Hegel's Philosophy of Mind'', tr.
During his adolescence Hegel read voraciously, copying lengthy extracts in his diary.
Twentieth-century interpretations of Hegel were mostly shaped by British Idealism, logical positivism, Marxism, and Fascism.
Christened Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, he was known as Wilhelm to his close family.
Hegel was fascinated by the works of Kant, Rousseau, and Johann Wolfgang Goethe, and by the French Revolution.
According to Walter Kaufmann, the basic idea of Hegel's works, especially the ''Phenomenology of the Spirit'' is that a philosopher should not "confine him or herself to views that have been held but penetrate these to the human reality they reflect."
'', as a mystic and Hermetic thinker.
Authors he read include the poet Klopstock and writers associated with the Enlightenment, such as Christian Garve and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing.
Walter Jaeschke and Otto Pöggeler in Germany, as well as Peter Hodgson and Howard Kainz in America are notable for their recent contributions to post-USSR thinking about Hegel.
This concept of Hegel as a Hermetic thinker was elaborated by Glenn Alexander Magee who argued that interpreting Hegel's body of work as an expression of mysticism and Hermetic ideas leads to a more accurate understanding of Hegel.
Sharing a dislike for what they regarded as the restrictive environment of the Seminary, the three became close friends and mutually influenced each other's ideas.
Klaus Brinkmann and Daniel O. Dahlstrom 2010
T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting and H. S. Harris, 1991; tr.
Furthermore, in Hegel's language, the "dialectical" aspect or "moment" of thought and reality, by which things or thoughts turn into their opposites or have their inner contradictions brought to the surface, what he called "Aufhebung", is only preliminary to the "speculative" (and not "synthesizing") aspect or "moment", which grasps the unity of these opposites or contradiction.
However, only five students ended up attending Schopenhauer's lectures, so he dropped out of academia.
Just as humans continually correct their concepts of reality through a dialectical process, so God himself becomes more fully manifested through the dialectical process of becoming.
Marcuse, in ''Reason and Revolution'' (1941), made the case for Hegel as a revolutionary and criticized Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse's thesis that Hegel was a totalitarian.
As a graduate of a Protestant seminary, Hegel's theological concerns were reflected in many of his writings and lectures.
Hegel, unable to find more suitable employment, reluctantly accepted.
Every member, furthermore, both loves the state with genuine patriotism but has transcended mere "team spirit" by reflectively endorsing their citizenship.
Part of his remit being to teach a class called "Introduction to Knowledge of the Universal Coherence of the Sciences", Hegel developed the idea of an encyclopedia of the philosophical sciences, falling into three parts (logic, philosophy of nature, and philosophy of spirit).
In 1802, Schelling and Hegel founded a journal, the ''Kritische Journal der Philosophie'' ("Critical Journal of Philosophy"), to which they each contributed pieces until the collaboration was ended when Schelling left for Würzburg in 1803.
This liberal distinction between political society and civil society was followed by Alexis de Tocqueville.
According to Hegel, the main characteristic of this unity was that it evolved through and manifested itself in contradiction and negation.
It is indeed a wonderful sensation to see such an individual, who, concentrated here at a single point, astride a horse, reaches out over the world and masters it&nbsp;... this extraordinary man, whom it is impossible not to admire.
Hegel was putting the finishing touches to this book, the ''Phenomenology of Spirit'', as Napoleon engaged Prussian troops on October 14, 1806, in the Battle of Jena on a plateau outside the city.
To Hegel, Jesus is both divine and Human.
Hegel's thoughts on the person of Jesus Christ stood out from the theologies of the Enlightenment.
For Hegel, reason is but "speculative", not "dialectical".
His account of the master–slave dialectic has been highly influential, especially in 20th-century France.
His philosophy of spirit conceptually integrates psychology, the state, history, art, religion, and philosophy.
"Mind" and "Spirit" are the common English translations of Hegel's use of the German "Geist."
being–nothingness–becoming, immediate–mediate–concrete, abstract–negative–concrete) is about this movement from inner contradiction to higher-level integration or unification.
Hegel devoted himself primarily to delivering his lectures; his lecture courses on aesthetics, the philosophy of religion, the philosophy of history, and the history of philosophy were published posthumously from lecture notes taken by his students.
The Italian Fascist Giovanni Gentile, according to Benedetto Croce, "...&nbsp;holds the honor of having been the most rigorous neo-Hegelian in the entire history of Western philosophy and the dishonor of having been the official philosopher of Fascism in Italy."
On the day before the battle, Napoleon entered the city of Jena.
Hegel's State is the final culmination of the embodiment of freedom or right (''rechte'') in the ''Elements of the Philosophy of Right.''
All three find common ground on the unique position of humans in the scheme of things, known by the discussed categorical differences from animals and inanimate objects.
Those without this background would be well-advised to begin with one of the many general introductions to his thought.
In 1799, he wrote another essay entitled "The Spirit of Christianity and Its Fate", unpublished during his lifetime.
Some have argued that either of these terms overly "psychologize" Hegel, implying a kind of disembodied, solipsistic consciousness like ghost or "soul."
In 1820, Schopenhauer became a lecturer at the University of Berlin, and he scheduled his lectures to coincide with those of Hegel, whom Schopenhauer had also described as a "clumsy charlatan".
Hegel, however, interprets not-A as not existing at all, not nothing at all, which cannot be conceived, but indeterminate or "pure" being without particularity or specificity.
Nevertheless, Hegel assumes that his readers are well-versed in Western philosophy.
After the period of Bruno Bauer, Hegel's influence did not make itself felt again until the philosophy of British Idealism and the 20th century Hegelian Western Marxism that began with György Lukács.
Pure being and pure non-being or nothingness are for Hegel pure abstractions from the reality of becoming, and this is also how he interprets Heraclitus.
In addition to his beloved Greeks, Hegel saw before him the example of Spinoza and, in his own time, the poetry of Goethe, Schiller, and Hölderlin, who also liked to speak of gods and the divine.
W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers, 2 vols., 1929; tr.
Böhme had written that the Fall of Man was a necessary stage in the evolution of the universe.
Since human thought is the image and fulfillment of God's thought, God is not ineffable (so incomprehensible as to be unutterable) but can be understood by an analysis of thought and reality.
All greatly admired Hellenic civilization, and Hegel additionally steeped himself in Rousseau and Lessing during this time.
As the new semester began in October, Hegel returned to Berlin, with the (mistaken) impression that the epidemic had largely subsided.
Hegel has influenced many thinkers and writers whose own positions vary widely.
Rather than simply rejecting Kant's dualism of freedom versus nature, Hegel aims to subsume it within "true infinity", the "Concept" (or "Notion": ''Begriff''), "Spirit", and "ethical life" in such a way that the Kantian duality is rendered intelligible, rather than remaining a brute "given."
Hegel was born on August 27, 1770 in Stuttgart, in the Duchy of Württemberg in southwestern Germany.
Whatever the nous thinks at any time is actual substance and is identical to limited being, but more remains to be thought in the substrate of non-being, which is identical to pure or unlimited thought.
the French Revolution) would cause the creation of its "antithesis" (e.g.
:''Science of Logic'', tr.
Scientist Ludwig Boltzmann also criticized the obscure complexity of Hegel's works, referring to Hegel's writing as an "unclear thoughtless flow of words."
It is widely admitted today that the old-fashioned description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of thesis–antithesis–synthesis is inaccurate.
Walter Kaufmann has argued that as unlikely as it may sound, it is not the case that Hegel was unable to write clearly, but that Hegel felt that "he must and should not write in the way in which he was gifted."
A. Pelczynski and Shlomo Avineri.
Many philosophers who came after Hegel and were influenced by him, whether adopting or rejecting his ideas, did so without fully absorbing his new speculative or dialectical logic.
Kierkegaard criticized Hegel's 'absolute knowledge' unity.
The result of this argument is that finite and infinite—and, by extension, particular and universal, nature and freedom—don't face one another as two independent realities, but instead the latter (in each case) is the ''self-transcending'' of the former.
:''Elements of the Philosophy of Right'', tr.
In other words, it is not enough to consider propositions, or even the content of consciousness; "it is worthwhile to ask in every instance what kind of spirit would entertain such propositions, hold such views, and have such a consciousness.
The more recent movement of communitarianism has a strong Hegelian influence.
In 1805, the University promoted Hegel to the position of Extraordinary Professor (unsalaried), after Hegel wrote a letter to the poet and minister of culture Johann Wolfgang Goethe protesting at the promotion of his philosophical adversary Jakob Friedrich Fries ahead of him.
His father, Georg Ludwig, was ''Rentkammersekretär'' (secretary to the revenue office) at the court of Karl Eugen, Duke of Württemberg.
In March 1807, aged 37, Hegel moved to Bamberg, where Niethammer had declined and passed on to Hegel an offer to become editor of a newspaper, the ''''.
He is said to have uttered the last words "And he didn't understand me" before expiring.
This interpretation of Heraclitus cannot be ruled out, but even if present is not the main gist of his thought.
Isaiah Berlin listed Hegel as one of the six architects of modern authoritarianism who undermined liberal democracy, along with Rousseau, Claude Adrien Helvétius, Fichte, Saint-Simon, and Joseph de Maistre.
Hegel has been seen in the 20th century as the originator of the thesis, antithesis, synthesis triad;  however, as an explicit phrase, this originated with Johann Gottlieb Fichte.
All three together are called "ethical life" (''Sittlichkeit'').
Hegel's studies at the ''Gymnasium'' were concluded with his ''Abiturrede'' ("graduation speech") entitled "The abortive state of art and scholarship in Turkey."
The triadic form that appears in many places in Hegel (e.g.
T. M. Knox, 1942; tr.
After less than a generation, Hegel's philosophy was suppressed and even banned by the Prussian right-wing, and was firmly rejected by the left-wing in multiple official writings.
Here Hölderlin exerted an important influence on Hegel's thought.
In his discussion of "Spirit" in his ''Encyclopedia'', Hegel praises Aristotle's ''On the Soul'' as "by far the most admirable, perhaps even the sole, work of philosophical value on this topic."
Scholars such as Kaufmann and Shlomo Avineri have criticized Popper's theories about Hegel.
Soon after, in April 1817, his illegitimate son Ludwig Fischer (now ten years old) joined the Hegel household, having thus far spent his childhood in an orphanage.
According to Hegel himself, his philosophy was consistent with Christianity.
The individual has "substantial freedom in the state".
I saw the Emperor – this world-spirit – riding out of the city on reconnaissance.
When he entered the "Latin School" two years later, he already knew the first declension, having been taught it by his mother.
In 1776, Hegel entered Stuttgart's ''gymnasium illustre''.
Hegel made the distinction between civil society and state in his ''Elements of the Philosophy of Right''.
This sparked a renewed interest in Hegel reflected in the work of Herbert Marcuse, Adorno, Ernst Bloch, Dunayevskaya, Alexandre Kojève and Gotthard Günther among others.
Of special importance is his concept of spirit (''Geist'': sometimes also translated as "mind") as the historical manifestation of the logical concept and the "sublation" (''Aufhebung'': integration without elimination or reduction) of seemingly contradictory or opposing factors; examples include the apparent opposition between nature and freedom and between immanence and transcendence.
Hegel cites a number of fragments of Heraclitus in his ''Lectures on the History of Philosophy''.
Hegel and his father also caught the disease but narrowly survived.
Voegelin argued that Hegel should be understood not as a philosopher, but as a "sorcerer" -- ''i.e.
While Aristotle criticizes Plato's "Forms", he preserves Plato's cornerstones of the ontological implications for self-determination: ethical reasoning, the soul's pinnacle in the hierarchy of nature, the order of the cosmos, and an assumption with reasoned arguments for a prime mover.
This whole is mental because it is mind that can comprehend all of these phases and sub-parts as steps in its own process of comprehension.
Hegel's contemporary Schopenhauer was particularly critical, and wrote of Hegel's philosophy as "a pseudo-philosophy paralyzing all mental powers, stifling all real thinking."
Hegel at this time envisaged his future as that of a ''Popularphilosoph'', i.e., a "man of letters" who serves to make the abstruse ideas of philosophers accessible to a wider public; his own felt need to engage critically with the central ideas of Kantianism did not come until 1800.
* ''Wissenschaft der Logik'', 1812, 1813, 1816, "Doctrine of Being" revised 1831
His is the persistent Idea that is the same in all philosophers up to the present day, as it was the Idea of Plato and Aristotle."
Hegel had a sister, Christiane Luise (1773–1832), and a brother, Georg Ludwig (1776–1812), who was to perish as an officer in Napoleon's Russian campaign of 1812.
It is rational because the same, underlying, logical, developmental order underlies every domain of reality and is ultimately the order of self-conscious rational thought, although only in the later stages of development does it come to full self-consciousness.
In his political philosophy, he criticized Karl Ludwig von Haller's reactionary work, which claimed that laws were not necessary.
The "thesis–antithesis–synthesis" approach gives the sense that things or ideas are contradicted or opposed by things that come from outside them.
In this work, civil society (Hegel used the term "''bürgerliche Gesellschaft''" though it is now referred to as ''Zivilgesellschaft'' in German to emphasize a more inclusive community) was a stage in the dialectical relationship that occurs between Hegel's perceived opposites, the macro-community of the state and the micro-community of the family.
Beginning in the 1960s, Anglo-American Hegel scholarship has attempted to challenge the traditional interpretation of Hegel as offering a metaphysical system: this has also been the approach of Z.
This means that Jesus as the Son of God is posited by God over against himself as other.
An individual's "supreme duty is to be a member of the state."
He lectured on "Logic and Metaphysics" and gave joint lectures with Schelling on an "Introduction to the Idea and Limits of True Philosophy" and held a "Philosophical Disputorium."
The State subsumes family and civil society and fulfills them.
Hegel was appointed Rector of the University in October 1829, when he was 59.
The State involves three "moments".
For Hegel, the inner movement of reality is the process of God thinking, as manifested in the evolution of the universe of nature and thought; that is, Hegel argued that, when fully and properly understood, reality is being thought by God as manifested in a person's comprehension of this process in and through philosophy.
Hegel attempted to enlist the help of the poet and translator Johann Heinrich Voß to obtain a post at the newly renascent University of Heidelberg, but failed; to his chagrin, Fries was later in the same year made Ordinary Professor (salaried) there.
Geist combines the meaning of spirit—as in god, ghost or mind—with an intentional force.
The mystical writings of Böhme had a strong effect on Hegel.
According to their argument, although Hegel refers to "the two elemental considerations: first, the idea of freedom as the absolute and final aim; secondly, the means for realising it, i.e.
One especially difficult aspect of Hegel's work is his innovation in logic.
She died of a "bilious fever" (''Gallenfieber'') when Hegel was thirteen.
During this period he composed the text which has become known as the "Life of Jesus" and a book-length manuscript titled "The Positivity of the Christian Religion."
Logical positivists such as Ayer and the Vienna Circle criticized both Hegelian philosophy and its supporters, such as Bradley.
A. V. Miller, 1969; tr.
Hegel's thinking can be understood as a constructive development within the broad tradition that includes Plato and Immanuel Kant.
Allen W. Wood, 1991
Thus, it was perfectly legitimate in the eyes of Hegel for a conqueror, such as Napoleon, to come along and destroy that which was not fully realized.
Here he published his ''Philosophy of Right'' (1821).
However, since the fall of the USSR, a new wave of Hegel scholarship arose in the West, without the preconceptions of the prior schools of thought.
Heraclitus does not form any abstract nouns from his ordinary use of "to be" and "to become" and in that fragment seems to be opposing any identity A to any other identity B, C, etc., which is not-A.
Marx plays little-to-no role in these new readings.
So he, too, sometimes spoke of God and, more often, of the divine; and because he occasionally took pleasure in insisting that he was really closer to this or that Christian tradition than some of the theologians of his time, he has sometimes been understood to have been a Christian
This evolution was, itself, the result of God's desire for complete self-awareness.
Each is avowedly influenced by the late Wilfred Sellars, also of Pittsburgh, who referred to his seminal work, ''Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind'' (1956) as a series of "incipient ''Méditations Hegeliennes''" (in homage to Edmund Husserl's 1931 work, ''Méditations cartésiennes'').
Although Hegel began his philosophizing with commentary on the Christian religion and often expresses the view that he is a Christian, his ideas of God are not acceptable to some Christians, although he has had a major influence on 19th- and 20th-century theology.
Hegel published four books during his lifetime: the ''Phenomenology of Spirit'' (or ''Phenomenology of Mind''), his account of the evolution of consciousness from sense-perception to absolute knowledge, published in 1807; the ''Science of Logic'', the logical and metaphysical core of his philosophy, in three volumes, published in 1812, 1813, and 1816 (with a revised Book One published in 1831); ''Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences'', a summary of his entire philosophical system, which was originally published in 1816 and revised in 1827 and 1830; and the ''Elements of the Philosophy of Right'', his political philosophy, published in 1820.
Some historians have spoken of Hegel's influence as represented by two opposing camps.
Having received his theological certificate (''Konsistorialexamen'') from the Tübingen Seminary, Hegel became ''Hofmeister'' (house tutor) to an aristocratic family in Bern (1793–96).
While in Frankfurt Hegel composed the essay "Fragments on Religion and Love."
He espouses that, "God is not an abstraction but a concrete God&nbsp;... God, considered in terms of his eternal Idea, has to generate the Son, has to distinguish himself from himself; he is the process of differentiating, namely, love and Spirit."
Members of a Hegelian State are happy even to sacrifice their lives for the state.
In Hegel's early philosophy of nature (draft manuscripts written during his time at the University of Jena), Hegel's notion of "Geist" was tightly bound to the notion of "Aether" from which Hegel also derived the concepts of space and time; however in his later works (after Jena) Hegel did not explicitly use his old notion of "Aether" any more.
Hegel recounted his impressions in a letter to his friend Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer:
His term as Rector ended in September 1830; he was deeply disturbed by the riots for reform in Berlin in that year.
Finite things don't determine themselves, because, as "finite" things, their essential character is determined by their boundaries, over against other finite things.
Karl Barth described Hegel as a "Protestant Aquinas", while Maurice Merleau-Ponty wrote that "All the great philosophical ideas of the past century—the philosophies of Marx and Nietzsche, phenomenology, German existentialism, and psychoanalysis—had their beginnings in Hegel."
The physicians pronounced the cause of death as cholera, but it is likely he died from a different gastrointestinal disease.
One to which he attributes great significance is the fragment he translates as "Being is not more than Non-being", which he interprets to mean Sein und Nichts sei dasselbeBeing and non-being are the same.
It was written in Hegel's hand but thought to have been authored by either Hegel, Schelling, Hölderlin, or an unknown fourth person.
George di Giovanni, 2010
The Left Hegelians also spawned Marxism, which inspired global movements, encompassing the Russian Revolution, the Chinese Revolution, and myriad revolutionary practices up until the present moment.
Among the first to take a critical view of Hegel's system was the 19th Century German group known as the Young Hegelians, which included Feuerbach, Marx, Engels, and their followers.
Contradiction and negation have a dynamic quality that at every point in each domain of reality—consciousness, history, philosophy, art, nature, society—leads to further development until a rational unity is reached that preserves the contradictions as phases and sub-parts by lifting them up (Aufhebung) to a higher unity.
Karl Popper wrote that "there is so much philosophical writing (especially in the Hegelian school) which may justly be criticized as meaningless verbiage."
Critiques of Hegel offered from the Left Hegelians radically diverted Hegel's thinking into new directions and eventually came to form a disproportionately large part of the literature on and about Hegel.
Believing that the traditional description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of thesis–antithesis–synthesis was mistaken, a few scholars, like Raya Dunayevskaya, have attempted to discard the triadic approach altogether.
Lukács' ''History and Class Consciousness'' (1923) helped to reintroduce Hegel into the Marxist canon.
As is always the case, difficulties are magnified for those reading him in translation.
In this way, Hegel intends to defend the germ of truth in Kantian dualism against reductive or eliminative programs like those of materialism and empiricism.
(Ludwig's mother had died in the meantime.)
For Hegel, Heraclitus's great achievements were to have understood the nature of the infinite, which for Hegel includes understanding the inherent contradictoriness and negativity of reality, and to have grasped that reality is becoming or process, and that "being" and "nothingness" are mere empty abstractions.
* ''Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften'', 1817; 2nd ed.
In fact, Hegel's distinctions as to what he meant by civil society are often unclear.
Late 20th-century literature in Western Theology that is friendly to Hegel includes works by such writers as Walter Kaufmann (1966), Dale M. Schlitt (1984), Theodore Geraets (1985), Philip M. Merklinger (1991), Stephen Rocker (1995), and Cyril O'Regan (1995).
Hegel's principal achievement is his development of a distinctive articulation of idealism sometimes termed "absolute idealism", in which the dualisms of, for instance, mind and nature and subject and object are overcome.
In previous modern accounts of Hegelianism (to undergraduate classes, for example), especially those formed prior to the Hegel renaissance, Hegel's dialectic was most often characterized as a three-step process, "thesis, antithesis, synthesis"; namely, that a "thesis" (e.g.
And Hegel renders these dualities ''intelligible'' by (ultimately) his argument in the "Quality" chapter of the "Science of Logic."
His relations with his employers becoming strained, Hegel accepted an offer mediated by Hölderlin to take up a similar position with a wine merchant's family in Frankfurt, where he moved in 1797.
(''Elements of the Philosophy of Right'', section 258.)
To understand Hegel fully requires paying attention to his critique of standard logic, such as the law of contradiction and the law of the excluded middle.
* ''Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts'', 1821
In a Hegelian State, citizens both know their place and choose their place.
Nevertheless, such is the persistence of this misnomer that the model and terminology survive in a number of scholarly works.
Central to Hegel's conception of knowledge and mind (and therefore also of reality) was the notion of identity in difference, that is that mind externalizes itself in various forms and objects that stand outside of it or opposed to it, and that, through recognizing itself in them, is "with itself" in these external manifestations, so that they are at one and the same time mind and other-than-mind.
God rises again to life, and thus things are reversed."
He achieved wide renown in his day and, while primarily influential within the continental tradition of philosophy, has become increasingly influential in the analytic tradition as well..
:''Phenomenology of Mind'', tr.
In more recent studies, however, this paradigm has been questioned.
This led Hegelian Carl Friedrich Göschel to prepare a treatise to demonstrate the presence of the doctrine of immortality in Hegel's philosophy.
I:) ''The Logic of Hegel'', tr.
On the left, it became the foundation for Karl Marx's civil society as an economic base; to the right, it became a description for all non-state (and the state is the peak of the objective spirit) aspects of society, including culture, society and politics.
Kaufmann also points out that Hegel's references to God or to the divine—and also to spirit—drew on classical Greek as well as Christian connotations of the terms.
Schelling and Hölderlin immersed themselves in theoretical debates on Kantian philosophy, from which Hegel remained aloof.
Regarding Hegel's interpretation of history, Russell commented, "Like other historical theories, it required, if it was to be made plausible, some distortion of facts and considerable ignorance."
For example, while it seems to be the case that he felt that a civil-society such as the German society in which he lived was an inevitable movement of the dialectic, he made way for the crushing of other types of "lesser" and not fully realized types of civil society, as these societies were not fully conscious or aware, as it were, as to the lack of progress in their societies.
Popper also makes the claim in the second volume of ''The Open Society and Its Enemies'' (1945) that Hegel's system formed a thinly veiled justification for the absolute rule of Frederick William III, and that Hegel's idea of the ultimate goal of history was to reach a state approximating that of 1830s Prussia.
The direct and indirect influence of Kojève's lectures and writings (on the ''Phenomenology of Spirit'', in particular) mean that it is not possible to understand most French philosophers from Jean-Paul Sartre to Jacques Derrida without understanding Hegel.
The difficulty in reading Hegel was perceived in Hegel's own day, and persists into the 21st century.
