However, on the night of 28–29 October, the Opéra burned to the ground; the directors, amid other pressing concerns, set ''Don Rodrigue'' aside.
The public's reaction was lukewarm, and Bizet soon became convinced of its failure: "I foresee a definite and hopeless flop".
Bizet then began composing ''Don Rodrigue'', an adaptation of the El Cid story by Louis Gallet and Édouard Blau.
Bizet resumed work on ''Clarissa Harlowe'' and ''Grisélidis'', but plans for the latter to be staged at the Opéra-Comique fell through, and neither work was finished; only fragments of their music survive.
In 1868 he informed Galabert that he had been very ill with abscesses in the windpipe: "I suffered like a dog".
Parts of his moribund ''Vasco da Gama'' and ''Ivan IV'' were incorporated into the score, but a projected production at the Théâtre Lyrique failed to materialise when Carvalho's company finally went bankrupt, and ''Noé'' remained unperformed until 1885.
Georges Bizet was born in Paris on 25 October 1838.
The pair became engaged, although the Halévy family initially disallowed the match.
He eventually submitted a trio of orchestral works: an overture entitled ''La Chasse d'Ossian'', a scherzo and a funeral march.
His keyboard and orchestral compositions were likewise largely ignored; as a result, his career stalled, and he earned his living mainly by arranging and transcribing the music of others.
While ''La jolie fille'' was in rehearsal, Bizet worked with three other composers, each of whom contributed a single act to a four-act operetta ''Marlborough s'en va-t-en guerre''.
She showed little interest in her first husband's musical legacy, made no effort to catalogue Bizet's manuscripts and gave many away as souvenirs.
Relations between the two had been cool for some years, but Bizet responded positively to his former mentor's request for help, writing: "You were the beginning of my life as an artist.
This company had staged the first performances of Gounod's ''Faust'' and his ''Roméo et Juliette'', and of a shortened version of Berlioz's ''Les Troyens''.
After the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, during which Bizet served in the National Guard, he had little success with his one-act opera ''Djamileh'', though an orchestral suite derived from his incidental music to Alphonse Daudet's play ''L'Arlésienne'' was instantly popular.
After Bizet's death many of his manuscripts were lost; works were revised by other hands, and published in these unauthorised versions so that it is often difficult to establish what is authentic Bizet.
According to Bizet they considered him an unsuitable catch: "penniless, left-wing, anti-religious and Bohemian", which Dean observes are odd grounds of objection from "a family bristling with artists and eccentrics".
The challenge was to set the one-act libretto of ''Le docteur Miracle'' by Léon Battu and Ludovic Halévy.
In these he demonstrates a maturity of style that, had he lived longer, might have been the basis for future great orchestral works.
Jean Reiter, Bizet's elder son, had a successful career as press director of ''Le Temps'', became an Officer of the Legion of Honour, and died in 1939 at the age of 77.
On 13 March 1861 Bizet attended the Paris premiere of Wagner's opera ''Tannhäuser'', a performance greeted by audience riots that were stage-managed by the influential Jockey-Club de Paris.
A contemporary asserted that he could have assured a future on the concert platform, but chose to conceal his talent "as though it were a vice".
Since 1862 Bizet had been working intermittently on ''Ivan IV'', an opera based on the life of Ivan the Terrible.
The earlier solo pieces bear the influence of Chopin; later works, such as the ''Variations Chromatiques'' and the ''Chasse Fantastique'', owe more to Liszt.
Pasdeloup resumed his regular Sunday concerts, and on 5 November the Opéra reopened with excerpts from works by Gluck, Rossini and Meyerbeer.
Under the tuition of Antoine François Marmontel, the Conservatoire's professor of piano, Bizet's pianism developed rapidly; he won the Conservatoire's second prize for piano in 1851, and first prize the following year.
Geneviève, suffering from an abscess in her right eye, was unable to be present.
After years of neglect, his works began to be performed more frequently in the 20th century.
After a series of perceived provocations from Prussia, culminating in the offer of the Spanish crown to the Prussian Prince Leopold of Hohenzollern, the French emperor Napoleon III declared war on 15 July 1870.
Bizet also found time to finish his long-gestating ''Roma'' symphony, and wrote numerous keyboard works and songs.
In ''Don Procopio'' Bizet followed the stock devices of Italian opera as typified by Donizetti in ''Don Pasquale'', a work which it closely resembles.
In Bizet's family circle, his father Adolphe died in 1886.
The suddenness of Bizet's death, and awareness of his depressed mental state, fuelled rumours of suicide.
After its premiere on 3 March 1875, Bizet was convinced that the work was a failure; he died of a heart attack three months later, unaware that it would prove a spectacular and enduring success.
However, in April Bizet received an offer, which originated from Count Walewski, to compose the music for a three-act opera.
In Dean's view the symphony has "few rivals and perhaps no superior in the work of any composer of such youth".
By listening at the door of the room where Adolphe conducted his classes, Georges learned to sing difficult songs accurately from memory, and developed an ability to identify and analyse complex chordal structures.
Macdonald suggests that, technically, he surpassed all of these, with a feeling for the human voice that compares with that of Mozart.
Bizet's third envoi was delayed for nearly a year by the prolonged illness and death, in September 1861, of his mother.
Galli-Marié's performance was described by one critic as "the very incarnation of vice".
In 1886 Geneviève married Émile Straus, a rich lawyer; she became a famous Parisian society hostess and a close friend of, among others, Marcel Proust.
At the end of the month he went to his holiday home at Bougival and, feeling a little better, went for a swim in the Seine.
However, Dean contends that the work suffers from poor organisation and an excess of pretentious music; he calls it a "misfire".
Critical opinion was generally hostile, though Berlioz praised the work, writing that it "does M. Bizet the greatest honour".
As a state-subsidised theatre, the Opéra-Comique was obliged from time to time to stage the works of Prix de Rome laureates, and ''La guzla'' duly went into rehearsal in 1863.
Halévy that she could not tolerate the company of her younger daughter Geneviève, who from the age of 15 lived with other family members.
In 1856 Bizet competed for the prestigious Prix de Rome.
He seemed temporarily to recover, but in the early hours of 3 June, his wedding anniversary, he suffered a fatal second attack.
Although French composers were better represented at the Opéra-Comique, the style and character of productions had remained largely unchanged since the 1830s.
There was, however, praise from the poet Théodore de Banville, who applauded Bizet for presenting a drama with real men and women instead of the usual Opéra-Comique "puppets".
After this rebuff Bizet entered an opera competition which Jacques Offenbach had organised for young composers, with a prize of 1,200 francs.
Its many original flourishes include the introduction to the cavatina'' Comme autrefois dans la nuit sombre'' played by two French horns over a cello background, an effect which in the words of analyst Hervé Lacombe, "resonates in the memory like a fanfare lost in a distant forest".
The new government did not sue for peace, and by 17 September the Prussian armies had surrounded Paris.
The best prospect for aspirant opera composers was the Théâtre Lyrique company which, despite repeated financial crises, operated intermittently in various premises under its resourceful manager Léon Carvalho.
Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halévy are doing my piece".
In June 1872 Bizet informed Galabert: "I have just been ordered to compose three acts for the Opéra-Comique.
He was recognised as an outstanding pianist, though he chose not to capitalise on this skill and rarely performed in public.
In July 1866 Bizet signed another contract with Carvalho, for ''La jolie fille de Perth'', the libretto for which, by J.H.
Bizet would later write to Marmontel: "In your class one learns something besides the piano; one becomes a musician".
Bizet's earliest compositions, chiefly songs and keyboard pieces written as exercises, give early indications of his emergent power and his gifts as a melodist.
Nevertheless, this period of Bizet's life was marked by significant disappointments.
After his early Symphony in C, Bizet's purely orchestral output is sparse.
Others complained of a lack of melody, and made unfavourable comparisons with the traditional Opéra-Comique fare of Auber and Boieldieu.
In the year following the marriage he considered plans for at least half a dozen new operas, and began to sketch the music for two of them: ''Clarissa Harlowe'' based on Samuel Richardson's novel ''Clarissa'', and ''Grisélidis'' with a libretto from Victorien Sardou.
Thereafter, accusations of "Wagnerism" were often laid against Bizet, throughout his compositional career.
Among the opera's early champions were Tchaikovsky, Brahms, and particularly Wagner, who commented: "Here, thank God, at last for a change is somebody with ideas in his head."
Under the terms of his prize, Bizet's first envoi was supposed to be a mass, but after his ''Te Deum'' experience, he was averse to writing religious music.
In the winter of 1872–73, Bizet supervised preparations for a revival of the still-absent Gounod's ''Roméo et Juliette'' at the Opéra-Comique.
For most of his life Bizet had suffered from a recurrent throat complaint.
Its press reception was more favourable than that for any of Bizet's other operas; ''Le Ménestral's'' critic hailed the second act as "a masterpiece from beginning to end".
He founded no school and had no obvious disciples or successors.
Among leading musical figures at the premiere were Jules Massenet, Camille Saint-Saëns and Charles Gounod.
A tendency to conceive ambitious projects, only to quickly abandon them, became a feature of Bizet's Rome years; in addition to ''Carmen Saeculare'' he considered and discarded at least five opera projects, two attempts at a symphony, and a symphonic ode on the theme of Ulysses and Circe.
At the burial which followed at the Père Lachaise Cemetery, Gounod gave the eulogy.
By broad consent, ''Carmen'' represents the fulfilment of Bizet's development as a master of music drama, and the culmination of the genre of opéra comique.
After a special performance of ''Carmen'' at the Opéra-Comique that night, the press which had almost universally condemned the piece three months earlier now declared Bizet a master.
Bizet's fourth and final envoi, which occupied him for much of 1862, was a one-act opera, ''La guzla de l'émir''.
Later commentators have acclaimed him as a composer of brilliance and originality whose premature death was a significant loss to French musical theatre.
Winners of the prize include Tony Aubin, Jean-Michel Damase, Henri Dutilleux and Jean Martinon.
Bizet founded no specific school, though Dean names Chabrier and Ravel as composers influenced by him.
He was registered as Alexandre César Léopold, but baptised as "Georges" on 16 March 1840, and was known by this name for the rest of his life.
He also composed a few works, including at least one published song.
She died in 1926; in her will she established a fund for a Georges Bizet prize, to be awarded annually to a composer under 40 who had "produced a remarkable work within the previous five years".
The subject chosen for this project was Prosper Mérimée's short novel ''Carmen''.
It was not performed again until 1886.
Bizet's first preserved compositions, two wordless songs for soprano, date from around 1850.
After its first performance in Switzerland in 1935, the Symphony in C entered the concert repertory, and has been recorded by, among many others, Sir Thomas Beecham.
It has been hailed as the first opera of the verismo school, in which sordid and brutal subjects are emphasised, with art reflecting life—"not idealised life but life as actually lived".
For his 1857 Prix de Rome entry Bizet, with Gounod's enthusiastic approval, chose to set the cantata ''Clovis et Clotilde'' by Amédée Burion.
In 1837 Adolphe married Aimée Delsarte, against the wishes of her family who considered him a poor prospect; the Delsartes, though impoverished, were a cultured and highly musical family.
Ludovic Halévy wrote in his journal: "Bizet has spirit and talent.
Bizet was admitted to the Conservatoire on 9 October 1848, two weeks before his 10th birthday.
This was ''Les pêcheurs de perles'', based on a libretto by Michel Carré and Eugène Cormon.
''Don Procopio'' was revived in Monte Carlo in 1906; an Italian version of ''Les pêcheurs de perles'' was performed at the Metropolitan Opera in New York on 13 November 1916, with Caruso in the leading tenor role, and it has since become a staple at many opera houses.
He now declared Wagner "above and beyond all living composers".
He also met another of Gounod's young students, the 13-year-old Camille Saint-Saëns, who remained a firm friend of Bizet's.
However, his main work in this period was as an arranger of others' works.
Bizet decided that he was no longer safe in the city, and he and Geneviève escaped to Compiègne.
When his Prix de Rome grant expired, Bizet   found he could not make a living from writing music.
It closed after 11 performances, not to be heard again until 1938.
In 1871, and again in 1874 while completing ''Carmen'', he had been disabled by severe bouts of what he described as "throat angina", and suffered a further attack in late March 1875.
Through the winter of 1858–59 Bizet worked on his first envoi, an opera buffa setting of Carlo Cambiaggio's libretto ''Don Procopio''.
Zimmermann gave Bizet private lessons in counterpoint and fugue, which continued until the old man's death in 1853.
According to Dean she was as delighted by the part as Bizet was by her suitability for it.
Despite this distraction, Bizet revised his opinions of Wagner's music, which he had previously dismissed as merely eccentric.
Following an uprising, the city's municipal authority was taken over by dissidents who established the Paris Commune.
Halévy about completing his old tutor's unfinished opera ''Noé''.
''Carmen'', after its lukewarm initial Paris run of 45 performances, became a worldwide popular success after performances in Vienna (1875) and London (1878).
An orchestra under Pasdeloup played ''Patrie'', and the organist improvised a fantasy on themes from ''Carmen''.
Much of Bizet's larger-scale vocal music is lost; the early ''Te Deum'', which survives in full, is rejected by Dean as "a wretched work that merely illustrates Bizet's unfitness to write religious music."
Dean defines the main weaknesses in these songs as an unimaginative repetition of the same music for each verse, and a tendency to write for the orchestra rather than the voice.
On his return to Rome Bizet successfully requested permission to extend his stay in Italy into a third year, rather than going to Germany, so that he could complete "an important work" (which has not been identified).
Bizet was a great admirer of Rossini's music, and wrote not long after their first meeting that "Rossini is the greatest of them all, because like Mozart, he has all the virtues".
From Bizet's unfinished works, Macdonald highlights ''La coupe du roi de Thulé'' as giving clear signs of the power that would reach a pinnacle in ''Carmen'', and suggests that had ''Clarissa Harlowe'' and ''Grisélidis'' been completed, Bizet's legacy would have been "infinitely richer".
Halévy's interference in the couple's affairs.
Bizet greeted with enthusiasm the proclamation in Paris of the Third Republic.
He accepted piano pupils and some composition students, two of whom, Edmond Galabert and Paul Lacombe, became his close friends.
Bizet's marriage was initially happy, but was affected by Geneviève's nervous instability (inherited from both her parents), her difficult relations with her mother and by Mme.
As a belated homage to his late father-in-law, Bizet took up the ''Noé'' manuscript and completed it.
Bizet's symphony was subsequently lost, rediscovered in 1933 and finally performed in 1935.
Initially this step was supported by an outbreak of patriotic fervour and confident expectations of victory.
Newman perceives evidence of Bizet's later achievements in many of his earliest works: "Again and again we light upon some touch or other in them that only a musician with a dramatic root of the matter in him could have achieved."
In the summer of 1859 Bizet and several companions travelled in the mountains and forests around Anagni and Frosinone.
The production of Bizet's final opera, ''Carmen'', was delayed because of fears that its themes of betrayal and murder would offend audiences.
Bizet, along with other composers and artists, joined the National Guard and began training.
Under its director, the painter Jean-Victor Schnetz, the villa provided an ideal environment in which Bizet and his fellow-laureates could pursue their artistic endeavours.
Only when the leading singers threatened to withdraw from the production did the management give way.
Bizet's early one-act opera ''Le docteur Miracle'' provides the first clear signs of his promise in this genre, its sparkling music including, according to Dean, "many happy touches of parody, scoring and comic characterisation".
However, the familiar idiom is interspersed with original touches in which Bizet's fingerprints emerge unmistakably.
Through these classes Bizet met Zimmermann's son-in-law, the composer Charles Gounod, who became a lasting influence on the young pupil's musical style—although their relationship was often strained in later years.
The only other requirement was the submission each year of an "envoi", a piece of original work to the satisfaction of the Académie.
As a pianist, Bizet had showed considerable skill from his earliest years.
Adolphe de Leuven, the co-director of the Opéra-Comique most bitterly opposed to the ''Carmen'' project, resigned early in 1874, removing the main barrier to the work's production.
Two of his songs, "Petite Marguerite" and "La Rose et l'abeille", were published in 1854.
Grout, in his ''History of Western Music'', praises the music's extraordinary rhythmic and melodic vitality, and Bizet's ability to obtain the maximum dramatic effect in the most economical fashion.
Bizet began the music in the summer of 1873, but the Opéra-Comique's management was concerned about the suitability of this risqué story for a theatre that generally provided wholesome entertainment, and work was suspended.
When the play opened on 1 October the music was dismissed by critics as too complex for popular taste.
It is unclear when Geneviève and Bizet became emotionally attached, but in October 1867 he informed Galabert: "I have met an adorable girl whom I love!
It has greatly enriched a period of French music already rich in composers of talent and distinction."
When the work was performed at the Théâtre de l'Athénée on 13 December 1867 it was a great success, and the ''Revue et Gazette Musicale's'' critic lavished particular praise on Bizet's act: "Nothing could be more stylish, smarter and, at the same time, more distinguished".
As life in Paris returned to normal, in June 1871 Bizet's appointment as chorus-master at The Opéra was seemingly confirmed by its director, Émile Perrin.
Despite this, Bizet kept on good terms with his mother-in-law and maintained an extensive correspondence with her.
Neither of his two operas that reached the stage in this time—''Les pêcheurs de perles'' and ''La jolie fille de Perth''—were immediately successful.
Take the Spanish airs and mine out of the score and there remains nothing to Bizet's credit but the sauce that masks the fish".
In 1855 he wrote an ambitious overture for a large orchestra, and prepared four-hand piano versions of two of Gounod's works: the opera ''La nonne sanglante'' and the Symphony in C. Bizet's work on the Gounod symphony inspired him, shortly after his seventeenth birthday, to write his own symphony, which bore a close resemblance to Gounod's—note for note in some passages.
I spring from you".
He said that Bizet had been struck down just as he was becoming recognised as a true artist.
Although no action was taken at that time, Bizet remained on friendly terms with the Halévy family.
Bizet's piano works have not entered the concert pianist's repertoire, and are generally too difficult for amateurs to attempt.
Problems over the casting and other issues delayed its premiere for a year before it was finally performed by the Théâtre Lyrique on 26 December 1867.
He was apprehensive about how this breach of the rules would be received at the Académie, but their response to ''Don Procopio'' was initially positive, with praise for the composer's "easy and brilliant touch" and "youthful and bold style".
Here, Bizet avoided the virtuoso passages which tend to dominate his solo works.
Bizet's other mature orchestral work, the overture ''Patrie'', is similarly dismissed: "an awful warning of the danger of confusing art with patriotism".
While the music of ''Les pêcheurs'' is atmospheric and deeply evocative of the opera's Eastern setting, in ''La jolie fille de Perth'' Bizet made no attempt to introduce Scottish colour or mood, though the scoring includes highly imaginative touches such as a separate band of woodwind and strings during the opera's Act III seduction scene.
Most of Bizet's songs were written in the period 1866–68.
At the end of his first year Bizet was required to submit a religious composition, but due to his atheism, he declined and wrote a comic opera instead which was accepted by the committee.
The critic Ernest Newman suggests that Bizet may at this time have thought that his future lay in the field of instrumental music, before an "inner voice" (and the realities of the French musical world) turned him towards the stage.
In 1853 he joined Fromental Halévy's composition class, and began to produce works of increasing sophistication and quality.
For his second envoi, not wishing to test the Académie's tolerance too far, Bizet proposed to submit a quasi-religious work in the form of a secular mass on a text by Horace.
Dean also suggests that a fascination with Bizet's tragic heroes—Frédéri in ''L'Arlésienne'', José in ''Carmen''—is reflected in Tchaikovsky's late symphonies, particularly the B minor "''Pathetique''".
"The spectacle of great works unwritten either because Bizet had other distractions, or because no one asked him to write them, or because of his premature death, is infinitely dispiriting, yet the brilliance and the individuality of his best music is unmistakable.
This work, entitled ''Carmen Saeculare'', was intended as a song to Apollo and Diana.
In his first significant opera, ''Les pêcheurs de perles'', Bizet was hampered by a dull libretto and a laborious plot; nevertheless, the music in Dean's view rises at times "far above the level of contemporary French opera".
He ''should'' succeed".
Excerpts from ''La coupe du roi de Thulé'', edited by Winton Dean, were broadcast by the BBC on 12 July 1955, and ''Le docteur Miracle'' was revived in London on 8 December 1957 by the Park Lane Group.
After his death, his work, apart from ''Carmen'', was generally neglected.
However, his progress on these projects was brought to a halt in July 1870, with the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War.
He played a piano version to a select audience that included the Opéra's principal baritone Jean-Baptiste Faure, hoping that the singer's approval might influence the directors of the Opéra to stage the work.
The boy was brought up to believe that he was Adolphe Bizet's child; only on her deathbed in 1913 did Reiter reveal her son's true paternity.
Life in the city became frugal and harsh, although by October there were efforts to re-establish normality.
Liszt commented: "I thought there were only two men able to surmount the difficulties&nbsp;... there are three, and&nbsp;... the youngest is perhaps the boldest and most brilliant."
François Delsarte's wife Rosine, a musical prodigy, had been an assistant professor of solfège at the Conservatoire de Paris at the age of 13.
Bizet's single contribution in this capacity appeared on 3 August 1867, after which he quarrelled with the magazine's new editor and resigned.
Aimée was an accomplished pianist, while her brother François Delsarte was a distinguished singer and teacher who performed at the courts of both Louis Philippe and Napoleon III.
They also visited a convict settlement at Anzio; Bizet sent an enthusiastic letter to Marmontel, recounting his experiences.
At least two projected operas were abandoned with little or no work done.
Even ''Carmen'' was altered into grand opera format by the replacement of its dialogue with recitatives written by Guiraud, and by other amendments to the score.
Until ''Carmen'', however, Bizet was not essentially an innovator in the musical theatre.
By summer 1869 their objections had been overcome, and the wedding took place on 3 June 1869.
This piece failed to impress the judges, who awarded the prize to Adrien Barthe, the only other entrant.
At the funeral on 5 June at the Église de la Sainte-Trinité in Montmartre, more than 4,000 people were present.
Although the exact cause of death was never settled with certainty, physicians discounted such theories and eventually determined the cause as "a cardiac complication of acute articular rheumatism".
Adolphe Bizet led the mourners, who included Gounod, Thomas, Ludovic Halévy, Léon Halévy and Massenet.
The musicologist Hugh Macdonald argues that Bizet's best orchestral music is found in the suites that he derived respectively from the piano work ''Jeux d'enfants'' and the incidental music for ''L'Arlésienne''.
Léon Escudier in ''L'Art Musical'' called the music "dull and obscure&nbsp;... the ear grows weary of waiting for the cadence that never comes".
In two years she will be my wife!".
However, the 20th century saw an increase of interest.
Resolving these issues delayed the first night until 3 March 1875 on which morning, by chance, Bizet's appointment as a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour was announced.
Bizet's first orchestral piece was an overture written in 1855 in the manner of Rossini's ''Guillaume Tell''.
Bizet was due to begin his duties in October, but on 1 November the post was assumed by Hector Salomon.
Because a condition of this offer was that the opera should be the composer's first publicly staged work, Bizet hurriedly withdrew ''La guzla'' from production and incorporated parts of its music into the new opera.
''La Coupe du Roi de Thulé'', his entry for an opera competition, was not placed in the first five; from the fragments of this score that survive, analysts have discerned pre-echoes of ''Carmen''.
After ''Don Procopio'' Bizet completed only one further work in Rome, the symphonic poem ''Vasco da Gama''.
Much of the press comment was negative, expressing consternation that the heroine was an amoral seductress rather than a woman of virtue.
Restless for success, he began many theatrical projects during the 1860s, most of which were abandoned.
A number of smaller theatres catered for operetta, a field in which Offenbach was then paramount, while the Théâtre Italien specialised in second-rate Italian opera.
On the next day, 1 June, he was afflicted by high fever and pain, which was followed by an apparent heart attack.
In September 1860, while visiting Venice with his friend and fellow-laureate Ernest Guiraud, Bizet received news that his mother was gravely ill in Paris, and made his way home.
Bizet was discouraged to the extent that he vowed to write no more religious music.
He made an early impression; within six months he had won first prize in solfège, a feat that impressed Pierre-Joseph-Guillaume Zimmermann, the Conservatoire's former professor of piano.
