In 1747, he was named to the Fairfax County Court.
Mason had begun his ''Objections to this Constitution of Government'' in Philadelphia; in October 1787, it was published, though without his permission.
Madison complained that Mason had gone beyond the reasons for opposing he had stated in convention, but Broadwater suggested the major difference was one of tone, since the written work dismissed as useless the constitution and the proposed federal government.
Mason remained a member of the House of Delegates, and in late October 1787, the legislature called a convention for June 1788; in language crafted by John Marshall, it decreed that the Virginia Ratifying Convention would be allowed "free and ample discussion".
A major landmark on the Fairfax campus is a statue of George Mason by Wendy M. Ross, depicted as he presents his first draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights.
Mason had no such need to remain silent, and only four or five delegates spoke as frequently as he did.
In practice, opposition by large states such as New York or Virginia would make it hard for the new government to function.
Despite his involvement in western real estate schemes, Mason saw that land was being cleared and planted with tobacco faster than the market for it could expand, meaning that its price would drop even as more and more capital was tied up in land and slaves.
Due to illness, Mason was three weeks late in arriving at Richmond, to the frustration of Washington, who had faith in Mason's knowledge of financial affairs.
Whatever his motivations, Mason proved a forceful advocate for a bill of rights whose ''Objections'' helped accomplish his aims.
Although the Annapolis Convention saw only about a dozen delegates attend, representing only five states, it called for a meeting to be held in Philadelphia in May 1787, to devise amendments to the Articles of Confederation which would result in a more durable constitutional arrangement.
He found Mason willing to consider a federal tax; Madison had feared the subject might offend his host, and wrote to Jefferson of the evening's conversation.
The Resolves called for a continental congress.
Mason and Jefferson secured legislation authorizing Governor Henry to defend against unspecified western enemies.
There were broad attacks on Mason; the New Haven ''Gazette'' suggested that he had not done much for his country during the war, in marked contrast to Washington.
Many clauses in the document bear his stamp, as he was active in the convention for months before deciding he could not sign it.
On August 6, 1787, the convention received a tentative draft written by a Committee of Detail chaired by South Carolina's John Rutledge; Randolph had represented Virginia.
With the convention deadlocked, on July 2, 1787, a Grand Committee was formed, with one member from each state, to seek a way out.
His conduct was another matter."
He was elected as a vestryman for Truro Parish, and took a position among the officers of the county militia, eventually rising to the rank of colonel.
She noted that Mason "regretted" that there was slavery and was against the slave trade, but wanted slavery protected in the constitution.
The Virginia Declaration of Rights and the 1776 Constitution of Virginia were joint works, but Mason was the main author.
New elections had to be held for burgess and for delegate to the convention which had been called by the rump of the dissolved House of Burgesses, and Fairfax County's were set for July 5, 1774.
Although he lost there, and again at the Virginia Ratifying Convention of 1788, his prominent fight for a bill of rights led his fellow Virginian, James Madison, to introduce one during the First Congress in 1789, and it was ratified in 1791, a year before Mason died.
Although the British were victorious over the French in the war, King George III's government felt that the North American colonies were not paying their way, since little direct tax revenue from the colonies was received.
Mason spent much time on this issue, and reached agreement with Maryland delegates at the meeting in March 1785 known as the Mount Vernon Conference.
Catherine Drinker Bowen, in her widely read 1966 account of the Constitutional Convention, ''Miracle at Philadelphia'', contended that Mason believed slaves to be citizens and was "a fervent abolitionist before the word was coined".
He acted in behalf of Virginia slaveholders, not Virginia slaves".
The Burgesses passed a resolution for a day of fasting and prayer to obtain divine intervention against "destruction of our Civil Rights", but the governor, Lord Dunmore, dissolved the legislature rather than accept it.
Some of this is due to conflation of Mason's views on slavery with that of his desire to ban the African slave trade, which he unquestionably opposed and fought against.
After the Richmond convention, he was, according to Senese, "a prophet without honor in his own country".
When the convention began to debate the declaration, it quickly bogged down on the first sentence of Article 1, which conservatives feared would imply that slaves were their masters' equals.
Mason avoided overdependence on tobacco as a source of income by leasing much of his land holdings to tenant farmers, and diversified his crops to grow wheat for export to the British West Indies as Virginia's economy sank because of tobacco overproduction in the 1760s and 1770s.
According to Robert A. Rutland, "Sick or healthy, Mason was needed for his ability."
In the early days of the convention, Mason supported much of the Virginia Plan, which was introduced by Randolph on May 29.
He also played a major role as the Burgesses deliberated how to divide Prince William County as settlement expanded; in March 1759, Fauquier County was created by legislative act.
The new federal and state governments, short on cash, issued paper money.
In later years, there was a flurry of contradictory statements from convention members (including Mason) about who composed which articles.
During the war, he was a member of the powerful lower house of the Virginia General Assembly, the House of Delegates, but to the irritation of Washington and others, refused to serve in the Continental Congress in Philadelphia, citing health and family commitments.
He also sought a balance of powers, seeking thereby to make a durable government; according to historian Brent Tarter, "Mason designed his home Gunston Hall so that no misplaced window or missing support might spoil the effect or threaten to bring down the roof; he tried to design institutions of government in the same way, so that wicked or unprincipled men could not knock loose any safeguards of liberty".
'''George Mason''' (sometimes referred to as '''George Mason IV''') (December 11, 1725 – October 7, 1792) was a Virginia planter, politician, and a delegate to the U.S.
Older than many who served at Philadelphia and came into prominence with the new federal government, Mason died soon after the constitution came into force and displayed no ambition for federal office, declining a seat in the Senate.
By mid-July, as delegates began to move past the stalemate to a framework built upon the Great Compromise, Mason had considerable influence in the convention.
Rutland suggested that Mason showed only "belated concern over the personal rights of citizens".
The convention elected delegates to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia, including Lee, Washington, and Henry, and in October 1774, Congress adopted a similar embargo.
Judging by his correspondence, Mason softened his stance towards the new federal government, telling Monroe that the constitution "wisely & Properly directs" that ambassadors be confirmed by the Senate.
His writings, including substantial portions of the Fairfax Resolves of 1774, the Virginia Declaration of Rights of 1776, and his ''Objections to this Constitution of Government'' (1787) in opposition to ratification of the constitution, have been a significant influence on political thought and events.
Mason had not taken as strong a position on the legislature as had Madison, and he was appointed to the committee; Mason and Benjamin Franklin were the most prominent members.
Mason, working in a room at the Raleigh Tavern, drafted a declaration of rights and plan of government, likely to prevent frivolous plans with no chance of adoption from being put forward.
Mason sought to remove differences between Virginia and other states, and although he felt the settlement of the boundary dispute with Pennsylvania, the Mason-Dixon line (not named for George Mason) was unfavorable to Virginia, in 1780 he voted for it enthusiastically.
Into this world was born George Mason, fourth of that name, on December 11, 1725.
To deter smuggling, Madison proposed a bill to make Norfolk the state's only legal port of entry.
Mason was skeptical that the thirty-person Cary Committee could collectively compose anything worthwhile, but was surprised at how quickly it moved—though his membership had a role in that speed.
As smaller states ratified the constitution in late 1787 and early 1788, there was an immense quantity of pamphlets and other written matter for and against approval.
The federalists initially did not have a majority, with the balance held by undeclared delegates, mainly from western Virginia (today's Kentucky).
Among the visits between the elite that returned with peace was one by Madison to Gunston Hall in December 1783, while returning from Congress in Philadelphia.
Most of those at Gunston Hall, both family and slaves, fell ill during the summer of 1792, experiencing chills and fever; when those subsided, Mason caught a chest cold.
From the first article, cataloguing the rights of man, Mason derived the following articles, which make clear that the role of government is to secure and protect those rights, and if it fails to do so, the people have a right to amend or abolish it.
He also wrote a constitution for the state; others who sought to have the convention adopt their ideas, like Thomas Jefferson, found Mason's version could not be stopped.
Even the capital, Williamsburg saw little activity when the legislature was not in session.
Mason briefly served in the House of Burgesses and involved himself in community affairs, sometimes serving with his neighbor, George Washington.
Henriques suggested that as Mason was older, intellectually superior, and the owner of a flourishing plantation as Washington struggled to establish Mount Vernon, it would not have been in the future president's character to be close to Mason.
Broadwater asserted, "Mason must have shared the fears of Jefferson and countless other whites that whites and free blacks could not live together".
The roads were difficult because of spring flooding, and Mason was the last Virginia delegate to arrive, on May 17, three days after the convention's scheduled opening.
Following the ratification vote, Mason served on a committee chaired by George Wythe, charged with compiling a final list of recommended amendments, and Mason's draft was adopted, but for a few editorial changes.
Washington, who was in 1789 elected the first president, resented Mason's strong stances against the ratification of the constitution, and these differences destroyed their friendship.
I know of no person better qualified to do this than Colonel Mason".
The draft was acceptable to Mason as a basis for discussion, containing such points important to him as the requirement that money bills originate in the House and not be amendable in the Senate.
Lee was elected in his place.
Mason sent Washington a copy of his objections, but the general believed that the only choice was ratification or disaster.
In 1758, Mason successfully ran for the House of Burgesses when George William Fairfax, holder of one of Fairfax County's two seats, chose not to seek re-election.
Most prominent in support were the pamphlets later collected as ''The Federalist'', written by Madison and two New Yorkers, Alexander Hamilton and John Jay; Mason's objections were widely cited by opponents.
He feared the more numerous Northern states would dominate the union, and would impose restrictions on trade that would harm Virginia, so he sought a supermajority requirement for navigation acts.
Despite this, Mason's ''Objections'' were among the most influential Anti-Federalist works, and its opening line, "There is no Declaration of Rights", likely their most effective slogan.
Mason was elected for Fairfax County, though with great difficulty.
Following the repeal, a committee of London merchants issued a public letter to Americans, warning them not to declare victory.
Henry, far more a foe of a strong federal government than was Mason, took the lead for his side in the debate.
The 1776 constitution remained in force until 1830, when another convention replaced it.
In 1736, George began his education with a Mr. Williams, hired to teach him for the price of  of tobacco per annum.
Mason retained his interest in western affairs, hoping in vain to salvage the Ohio Company's land grant.
Mason and Washington were friends for many years until they finally broke over their differences regarding the federal constitution.
The same month, Mason spent Christmas at Mount Vernon (the only larger estate than his in Fairfax County).
The Anti-Federalists suffered repeated blows during the convention due to the defection of Randolph and as news came other states had ratified.
Washington had a deep respect for Mason's intellectual abilities, several times asking for his advice, and writing in 1777 when learning that Mason had taken charge of an issue before the General Assembly, "I know of no person better qualified&nbsp;... than Colonel Mason, and shall be very happy to hear he has taken it in hand".
The general wrote to Mason directly,
When the house assembled, George Mason was initially appointed to a committee concerned with raising additional militia during that time of war.
Virginians were reluctant to believe that greatly respected figures such as Washington and Franklin would be complicit in setting up a tyrannical system.
Peter Wallenstein, in his article about how writers have interpreted Mason, argued that he could have freed some slaves without harming his children's future, if he had wanted to.
The constitution provided for a popularly-elected House of Delegates, chosen annually by men who owned or leased property, or who had fathered three or more Virginians.
Property could not be taken for public use without the owner's consent, and a citizen could only be bound by a law accepted by that person or by elected representatives.
The convention also weakened the requirement that money bills begin in the House and not be subject to amendment in the Senate, eventually striking the latter clause after debate that stretched fitfully over weeks.
Accordingly, in December 1786, the Virginia General Assembly elected seven men as the commonwealth's delegation: Washington, Mason, Henry, Randolph, Madison, Wythe, and John Blair.
The Stamp Act the following year affected all 13 colonies, as it required revenue stamps to be used on papers required in trade and in the law.
Mason had submitted his plan sometime between June 8 and 10, 1776.
Mason served as a member of the House of Delegates from 1776 to 1781, his longest continuous political service outside Fairfax County, which he represented in Richmond.
Nevertheless, both Lee and Mason believed that if proper amendments were made, the constitution would be a fine instrument of governance.
Mason was a justice for much of the rest of his life, though he was excluded because of nonattendance at court from 1752 to 1764, and resigned in 1789 when continued service meant swearing to uphold a constitution he could not support.
Nevertheless, Broadwater suggested that as most delegates had declared their views before the election, Mason's motion made little difference.
George Mason IV's mother, Ann Thomson Mason, was the daughter of a former Attorney General of Virginia who had immigrated from London, and was of a Yorkshire family.
Although Mason was successful in some of his proposals, such as placing the state militias under federal regulation, and a ban on Congress passing an export tax, he lost on some that he deemed crucial.
In spite of Washington's pleas, Mason remained in Virginia, plagued by illness and heavily occupied, both on the Committee of Safety and elsewhere in defending the Fairfax County area.
Mason's father died when he was young, and his mother managed the family estates until he came of age.
Mason sponsored a non-exportation measure; it was passed by a large majority, though it had to be repealed later in the session to coordinate with one passed by Maryland.
George Mason began to build his home, Gunston Hall, likely beginning in 1755.
Mason sought to expand his land and wealth.
George and Ann Mason would have nine children who survived to adulthood.
The general wrote to Custis, "It is much to be wished that a remedy could be applied to the depreciation of our Currency&nbsp;...
John Marshall, a future Chief Justice of the United States, downplayed the concern regarding the judiciary, but Mason would later be proved correct in the case of ''Chisholm v. Georgia'' (1793), which led to the passage of the Eleventh Amendment.
His refusal disappointed Jefferson, who had hoped that the likelihood that the legislature would consider land legislation would attract Mason to Richmond.
According to Henry C. Riely in his journal article on Mason, "The Virginia Constitution of 1776, whatever may have been the question raised long afterwards as to the contribution of other great leaders, stands, on the authority of Jefferson, Madison, and Randolph—to mention only the highest authority—as his creation."
Mason scuttled efforts to elect him to the House of Delegates in 1784, writing that sending him to Richmond would be "an oppressive and unjust invasion of my personal liberty".
At the time of his marriage, Mason was living at Dogue's Neck, though in which residence is uncertain.
Mason was honored in 1981 by the United States Postal Service with an 18-cent Great Americans series postage stamp.
The draft for the Declaration of Rights drew on Magna Carta, the English Petition of Right of 1628, and that nation's 1689 Bill of Rights.
Additional ailments, possibly pneumonia, set in.
Control of the rivers and of Chesapeake Bay was urgent as Virginians tried to obtain hard currency by trading tobacco to the French and other European nations.
Donald J. Senese, in the conclusion to the collection of essays on Mason published in 1989, noted that several factors contributed to Mason's obscurity in the century after his death.
It was a marriage of convenience, with the new bride able to take some of the burden of parenting Mason's many children off his hands.
Accordingly, the convention was seen as so important that Richard Henry Lee arranged for his temporary recall from Congress to be a part of the convention, and Jefferson tried but failed to arrange to leave Congress as well.
His widow Ann would raise their son George (then 9) and two younger siblings as co-guardian with lawyer John Mercer.
Although Mason's death attracted little notice, aside from a few mentions in local newspapers, Jefferson mourned "a great loss".
Mason dealt with several local concerns, presenting a petition of Fairfax County planters against being assessed for a tobacco wharf at Alexandria, funds they felt should be raised through wharfage fees.
This was resolved by the convention adding the words "when they enter into a state of society", thus excluding slaves.
In 1789, he drafted legislation to move the courthouse to the center of the county, though it did not pass in his lifetime.
Washington by January 1775 was drilling a small force, and he and Mason purchased gunpowder for the company.
Mason had imitated English law in drafting language requiring toleration of those of minority religions, but Madison insisted on full religious liberty, and Mason supported Madison's amendment once made.
Mason served a few months on the committee before resigning on the ground he was not a lawyer; most of the work fell to Jefferson (returned from Philadelphia), Pendleton, and Wythe.
The Virginia Declaration of Rights served as a basis for the United States Bill of Rights, of which he has been deemed the father.
In 1759, he was appointed to the powerful Committee on Privileges and Elections.
Long obscure, Mason is today recognized for his contributions to the United States, and to Virginia.
Richard Henry Lee wrote the day prior to the constitution's passage by unanimous vote, "I have had the pleasure to see our new plan of Government go on well.
George Mason attained his majority in 1746, and continued to reside at Chopawamsic with his siblings and mother.
Randolph, who had just been elected governor, sent three notifications of election to Mason, who accepted without any quibbles.
According to Josephine T. Pacheco in her article about Mason's role at Philadelphia, "since Virginia's leaders regarded Mason as a wise, trustworthy man, it is not surprising that they chose him as a member of the Virginia delegation, though they must have been surprised when he accepted".
As the document was sent to the Articles of Confederation's Congress in New York, Mason sent a copy of his objections to Richard Henry Lee, a member of the Congress.
Though he ended up not signing the constitution, according to Broadwater, Mason won as many convention debates as he lost.
Nevertheless, Mason's health often caused him to miss meetings of the legislature, or to arrive days or weeks late.
Oliver Ellsworth blamed the Virginia opposition on the Lee family, who had long had tensions with the Washington family, and on "the madness of Mason".
The entire convention considered the document between June 26 and 28, and it was signed on the 29th.
The expedition was generally successful, and Mason received a report directly from Clark.
The Virginia economy rose and fell with tobacco, the main crop, which was mostly for export to Britain.
His defense against the Pennsylvania claims, ''Selections from the Virginia Charters'' (1772), originally intended to promote the Ohio Company's claims, was widely applauded as a defense of the rights of Americans against royal decrees.
Palmer, "there was in fact a remarkable parallel between the French Declaration and the Virginia Declaration of 1776".
Mason's image is located above and to the right of the Speaker's chair; he and Jefferson are the only Americans recognized.
The county court not only heard civil and criminal cases, but decided matters such as local taxes.
When word of passage of the Stamp Act reached Williamsburg, the House of Burgesses passed the Virginia Resolves, asserting that Virginians had the same rights as if they resided in Britain, and that they could only be taxed by themselves or their elected representatives.
The Virginia Plan, if implemented, would base representation in both houses of the federal legislature on population.
His 1787 attack on slavery echoes a similar speech to the Virginia Convention of 1776.
Mason then voted in the minority as Virginia ratified the constitution on June 25, 1788 by a vote of 89–79.
On the 15th, as the convention continued a clause-by-clause consideration of the draft, Mason, Randolph and Gerry stated they would not sign the constitution.
On April 4, 1750,  Mason married Ann Eibeck, only child of William and Sarah Eibeck of Charles County, Maryland.
When Mason proffered his resignation from this committee, it was refused.
Although the resolution was not as strong as Mason had liked—he wanted Virginia to threaten to cut off tobacco—Mason worked in the following years for non-importation.
Broadwater suggested that Mason went to Philadelphia because he knew the federal congress needed additional power, and because he felt that body could act as a check on the powers of state legislatures.
He greatly expanded the boundaries of Gunston Hall estate, so that it occupied all of Dogue's Neck, which became known as Mason's Neck.
Even before the convention approved the Declaration of Rights, Mason was busy at work on a constitution for Virginia.
The 1781 Articles of Confederation had tied the states in a loose bond, and Madison sought a sounder federal structure, seeking the proper balance between federal and state rights.
They also did some sightseeing, and were presented to Pennsylvania's president, Benjamin Franklin.
He was not the only one occupying himself so; Jefferson sent several versions from Philadelphia, one of which supplied the eventual constitution's preamble.
These losses included the convention deciding to allow importation of slaves to continue to at least 1800 (later amended to 1808) and to allow a simple majority to pass navigation acts that might require Virginians to export their tobacco in American-flagged ships, when it might be cheaper to use foreign-flagged vessels.
Broadwater did not find it surprising that Mason did not seek re-election, as he did not attend the sessions between 1759 and 1761.
Less than a week after Jefferson's visit, on October 7, George Mason died at Gunston Hall, and was subsequently buried on the estate, within sight of the house he had built and of the Potomac River.
Due to illness, Mason did not come to Richmond during the initial session, though he sent a petition, as a private citizen, to the legislature.
According to Wallenstein, historians and other writers "have had great difficulty coming to grips with Mason in his historical context, and they have jumbled the story in related ways, misleading each other and following each other's errors".
Mason, who may have been angry that Lee had not been chosen, refused on the ground that he was needed at home, and did not feel he could resign from the General Assembly without permission from his constituents.
Connecticut's Roger Sherman noted that the state bills of rights would remain in force, to which Mason responded, "the Laws of the United States are to be paramount supreme to State Bills of Rights."
When Jefferson visited Gunston Hall on October 1, 1792, he found Mason, long a martyr to gout, needing a crutch to walk, though still sound in mind and memory.
When the Richmond convention began in July 1775, Mason was assigned to crucial committees, including one attempting to raise an army to protect the colony.
Mercer was a brilliant man of strong opinions, who expressed his views in ways that sometimes gave offense; Mason proved similar in brilliance of mind and ability to anger.
Broadwater noted, "given the difficulty of the task he had set for himself, his stubborn independence, and his lack, by 1787, of any concern for his own political future, it is not surprising that he left Philadelphia at odds with the great majority of his fellow delegates".
Involvement with the Ohio Company also brought Mason into contact with many prominent Virginians, including his Fairfax County neighbor, George Washington.
The draft was considered by the committee, and it issued a report on June 24, at which time Jefferson's preamble and several amendments authored by him were included—George Wythe, who advocated for Jefferson's draft before the committee, found discussion far enough advanced that members were only willing to yield to Jefferson on a few points.
Feelings were so strong in Massachusetts that voters there in 1778 rejected a constitution drafted by a convention, insisting that a bill of rights had to come first.
Records do not survive of Mason's participation in that committee, but the clause requiring money bills to start in the House most likely came from him or was the price of his support, as he had inserted such a clause in the Virginia Constitution, and he defended that clause once convention debate resumed.
Essex County's Meriwether Smith may have prepared a draft, but the text is unknown.
The ''Objections'' were widely cited in opposition to ratification, and Mason was criticized for placing his own name on it, at a time when political tracts were signed, if at all, with pen names such as Junius, so that the author's reputation would not influence the debate.
The obligations and offices that came with being one of the largest local landowners descended on Mason as they had on his father and grandfather.
In May 1774, Mason was in Williamsburg on real estate business.
Five other ports, including Alexandria, were eventually added, but the Port Act proved unpopular despite the support of Washington.
Mason retained his political influence in Virginia, writing Patrick Henry, who had been elected to the House of Delegates, a letter filled with advice as that body's 1783 session opened.
The divisions in the convention became apparent in late June, when by a narrow vote, the convention voted that representation in the lower house be based on population, but the motion of Connecticut's Oliver Ellsworth for each state to have an equal vote in the upper house failed on a tie.
Although Mason predicted that the amendments to be proposed to the states by the First Congress would be "Milk & Water Propositions", he displayed "much Satisfaction" at what became the Bill of Rights (ratified in 1791) and wrote that if his concerns about the federal courts and other matters were addressed, "I could cheerfully put my Hand & Heart to the new Government".
Within a week of arrival, Mason was bored with the social events to which the delegates were invited, "I begin to grow tired of the etiquette and nonsense so fashionable in this city".
Others took a more nuanced view.
That convention, in May 1776, unanimously instructed Jefferson and other Virginia delegates to Congress to seek "a clear and full Declaration of Independency".
Although the company failed, Mason acquired considerable Western lands independently.
Illness forced Mason to absent himself from the Committee of Safety for several weeks in 1775, and he did not attend the fourth convention, held in December 1775 and January 1776.
Mason left no extensive paper trail, no autobiography like Franklin, no diary like Washington or John Adams.
Most governmental power resided in the House of Delegates—the governor could not even veto a bill, and could only act as head of the state militia on the advice of his Council of State, whose members were elected by the legislature.
On August 31, 1787, Massachusetts' Elbridge Gerry spoke against the document as a whole, as did Luther Martin of Maryland.
The freeholders of Fairfax County approved the Resolves, appointing Mason and Washington to a special committee in the emergency.
He also served as a trustee of Dumfries, in Prince William County, and had business interests there and in Georgetown, on the Maryland side of the Potomac (today in the District of Columbia).
Mason in 1777 was assigned to a committee to revise Virginia's laws, with the expectation that he would take on the criminal code and land law.
Virginia, more dependent on goods imported from Britain, was less enthusiastic, and, as local planters tended to receive goods at their river landings, a boycott would be difficult to enforce.
Mason slowly moved from being a peripheral figure towards the center of Virginia politics, but his published response to the Stamp Act, which he opposed, is most notable for the inclusion of his anti-slavery views.
The Resolves were mostly written by a fiery-spoken new member for Louisa County, Patrick Henry.
Washington was elected the convention's president by unanimous vote, and his tremendous personal prestige as the victorious war general helped legitimize the convention, but also caused him to abstain from debate.
By the signing of the 1783 Treaty of Paris, life along the Potomac had returned to normal.
Although Massachusetts abstained in deference to Gerry, the Virginians showed no desire to conciliate Mason in their votes, as the motion failed with no states in favor and ten opposed.
George Mason's great-grandfather, George Mason I, had been a Cavalier: militarily defeated in the English Civil War, some of them came to America in the 1640s and 1650s.
