Besides his collected music criticism, Shaw has left a varied musical legacy, not all of it of his choosing.
Shaw visited Dublin in August, and met Michael Collins, then head of the Free State's Provisional Government.
In particular, Shaw's parody of Hitler as "Herr Battler" was considered mild, almost sympathetic.
After reading a tract, ''Why Are The Many Poor?
Webb, who chaired the board of trustees appointed to supervise the legacy, proposed to use most of it to found a school of economics and politics.
There had earlier been a romantic liaison between Shaw and Campbell that caused Charlotte Shaw considerable concern, but by the time of the London premiere it had ended.
A later out-of-court agreement provided a sum of £8,300  for spelling reform; the bulk of his fortune went to the residuary legatees—the British Museum, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and the National Gallery of Ireland.
The play was withheld from Dublin's Abbey Theatre, for fear of the affront it might provoke, although it was shown at the city's Royal Theatre in November 1907.
In April 1916 he wrote scathingly  in ''The New York Times'' about militant  Irish nationalism: "In point of learning nothing and forgetting nothing these fellow-patriots of mine leave the Bourbons nowhere."
Shaw's only subsequent fiction of any substance was his 1932 novella ''The Adventures of the Black Girl In Her Search for God'', written during a visit to South Africa in 1932.
On 5 September 1882 Shaw attended a meeting at the Memorial Hall, Farringdon, addressed by the political economist Henry George.
In a study of Shaw's work as a theatre critic, E. J.
''Major Barbara'' (1905) presents ethical questions in an unconventional way, confounding expectations that in the depiction of an armaments manufacturer on the one hand and the Salvation Army on the other the moral high ground must invariably be held by the latter.
By 1933, in the preface to ''On the Rocks'', he was writing that "if we desire a certain type of civilization and culture we must exterminate the sort of people who do not fit into it"; critical opinion is divided on whether this was intended as irony.
He was sceptical about the new party, and scorned the likelihood that it could switch the allegiance of the working class from sport to politics.
In 1890 Shaw produced Tract No.
In 2007 a 316-page volume consisting entirely of Shaw's letters to ''The Times'' was published.
The revival in his popularity did not tempt Shaw to write a new play, and he concentrated on prolific journalism.
He became, and at 2016 remains, the only person to have been awarded a Nobel Prize and an Oscar.
Brooks Atkinson of ''The New York Times'' commenting that Shaw had "yielded to the impulse to write without having a subject", judged the play a "rambling and indifferently tedious conversation".
Shaw returned to the theatre with what he called "a political extravaganza", ''The Apple Cart'', written in late 1928.
The first, ''John Bull's Other Island'', a comedy about an Englishman in Ireland, attracted leading politicians and was seen by Edward VII, who laughed so much that he broke his chair.
In the years after the 1906 election, Shaw felt that the Fabians needed fresh leadership, and saw this in the form of his fellow-writer H. G. Wells, who had joined the society in February 1903.
Collections of his writings on these and other subjects were published, mainly after his death, together with volumes of selected aphorisms, "wit and wisdom" and general journalism.
Thereafter he pursued a full-time career as an author.
Reviewing them, the Shaw scholar Fred Crawford wrote: "Although the primary interest for Shavians is the material that supplements what we already know about Shaw's life and work, the diaries are also valuable as a historical and sociological document of English life at the end of the Victorian age."
The press found the play overlong, and accused Shaw of mediocrity, sneering at heroism and patriotism, heartless cleverness, and copying W.S.Gilbert's style.
His co-star then toured in the piece in the US.
If, as Holroyd and others surmise, George's motives were mercenary, then he was disappointed, as Bessie brought him little of her family's money.
The bride and bridegroom were both aged forty-one.
Although Shaw's works since ''The Apple Cart'' had been received without great enthusiasm, his earlier plays were revived in the West End throughout the Second World War, starring such actors as Edith Evans, John Gielgud, Deborah Kerr and Robert Donat.
After Shaw's death, Pearson wrote:  "No one since the time of Tom Paine has had so definite an influence on the social and political life of his time and country as Bernard Shaw."
He began attending meetings of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), where he discovered the writings of Karl Marx, and thereafter spent much of 1883 reading ''Das Kapital''.
According to Holroyd, the business of the early Fabians, mainly under the influence of Shaw, was to "alter history by rewriting it".
A second American organisation, founded in 1951 as "The Bernard Shaw Society", remains active as of 2016.
When in 1886–87 the Fabians debated whether to embrace anarchism, as advocated by Charlotte Wilson, Besant and others, Shaw joined the majority in rejecting this approach.
As a music critic he had frequently been able to concentrate on analysing new works, but in the theatre he was often obliged to fall back on discussing how various performers tackled well-known plays.
Shaw then read George's book ''Progress and Poverty'', which awakened his interest in economics.
Between 1865 and 1871 Shaw attended four schools, all of which he hated.
Shaw was pleased with his third novel, ''Love Among the Artists'' (1881), feeling that it marked a turning point in his development as a thinker, although he had no more success with it than with its predecessors.
for more than four years.
In his view music criticism should be interesting to everyone rather than just the musical élite, and he wrote for the non-specialist, avoiding technical jargon—"Mesopotamian words like 'the dominant of D major'".
By this time he had embarked in earnest on a career as a playwright: "I had rashly taken up the case; and rather than let it collapse I manufactured the evidence".
The mid 1880s marked a turning point in Shaw's life, both personally and professionally: he lost his virginity, had two novels published, and began a career as a critic.
After their first runs none of the three plays were seen again in the West End during Shaw's lifetime.
His first attempt at drama, begun in 1878, was a blank-verse satirical piece on a religious theme.
In 1938 he provided the screenplay for a filmed version of ''Pygmalion'', for which he received an Academy Award.
In May 1890 he moved back to ''The World'', where he wrote a weekly column as "G.B.S."
In Shaw's view the London theatres of the 1890s presented too many revivals of old plays and not enough new work.
His relatives secured him a sinecure in the civil service, from which he was pensioned off in the early 1850s; thereafter he worked irregularly as a corn merchant.
Shaw's fiction-writing was largely confined to the five unsuccessful novels written in the period 1879–1885.
Otherwise, ''Life'' magazine concluded, "this silliness can be classed with his more innocent bad guesses".
Once again, with ''On the Rocks'' (1933) and ''The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles'' (1934), a political comedy with a clear plot was followed by an introspective drama.
The success of ''Arms and the Man'' was not immediately replicated.
Shaw named Shakespeare (''King Lear'') and Chekhov (''The Cherry Orchard'') as important influences on the piece, and critics have found elements drawing on Congreve (''The Way of the World'') and Ibsen (''The Master Builder'').
In the view of the commentator Nicholas Grene, Shaw's Joan, a "no-nonsense mystic, Protestant and nationalist before her time" is among the 20th century's classic leading female roles.
Thus, although a nominated Fabian delegate, he did not attend the London conference at the Memorial Hall, Farringdon Street in February 1900, that created the Labour Representation Committee—precursor of the modern Labour Party.
1946 saw the publication, as ''The Crime of Imprisonment'', of the preface Shaw had written 20 years previously to a study of prison conditions.
''John Bull's Other Island'' (1904), comically depicting the prevailing relationship between Britain and Ireland, was popular at the time but fell out of the general repertoire in later years.
Despite his contempt for Hollywood and its aesthetic values, Shaw was enthusiastic about cinema, and in the middle of the decade wrote screenplays for prospective film versions of ''Pygmalion'' and ''Saint Joan''.
Two touring companies took his plays all round the country.
The central theme of ''Candida'' (1894) is a woman's choice between two men; the play contrasts the outlook and aspirations of a Christian Socialist and a poetic idealist.
Shaw's next attempt at drama was a one-act playlet in French, ''Un Petit Drame'', written in 1884 but not published in his lifetime.
contending that Britain's social order resulted from the continuing choice of Barabbas over Christ.
After an eccentric campaign, which Holroyd characterises as "making absolutely certain of not getting in", he was duly defeated.
''Fanny's First Play'', a comedy about suffragettes, had the longest initial run of any Shaw play—622 performances.
In a 2001 analysis of Shaw's Shakespearian criticisms, Robert Pierce concludes that Shaw, who was no academic, saw Shakespeare's plays—like all theatre—from an author's practical point of view: "Shaw helps us to get away from the Romantics' picture of Shakespeare as a titanic genius, one whose art cannot be analyzed or connected with the mundane considerations of theatrical conditions and profit and loss, or with a specific staging and cast of actors."
Similarly, ''Mrs Warren's Profession'' (1893) was written five years before publication and nine years before reaching the stage.
Shaw's 10,000-word report, which emphasised the human aspects of the soldier's life, was well received, and he became less of a lone voice.
Nevertheless, when he became convinced that a negotiated peace was impossible, he publicly urged the neutral United States to join the fight.
In 1922 civil war broke out in the south between its pro-treaty and anti-treaty factions, the former of whom had established the Irish Free State.
The latter was never made, but Shaw entrusted the rights to the former to the unknown Gabriel Pascal, who produced it at Pinewood Studios in 1938.
''Getting Married'' (1908) and ''Misalliance'' (1909)—the latter seen by Judith Evans as a companion piece to the former—are both in what Shaw called his "disquisitionary" vein, with the emphasis on discussion of ideas rather than on dramatic events or vivid characterisation.
After Hitler's suicide in May 1945, Shaw approved of the formal condolences offered by the Irish Taoiseach, Éamon de Valera, at the German embassy in Dublin.
Shaw's largest-scale theatrical work was ''Back to Methuselah'', written in 1918–20 and staged in 1922.
Shaw was prepared to tolerate certain dictatorial excesses; Weintraub in his ODNB biographical sketch comments that Shaw's "flirtation with authoritarian inter-war regimes" took a long time to fade, and Beatrice Webb thought he was "obsessed" about Mussolini.
West writes that Shaw "ceaselessly compared and contrasted artists in interpretation and in technique".
He used the weeks at sea to complete two plays—''The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles'' and ''The Six of Calais''—and begin work on a third, ''The Millionairess''.
Shaw felt he had exhausted his remaining creative powers in the huge span of this "Metabiological Pentateuch".
Shaw disapproved of the postwar trials of the defeated German leaders, as an act of self-righteousness: "We are all potential criminals".
The following year, in a contrary assessment, the playwright John Osborne castigated ''The Guardian's'' theatre critic Michael Billington for referring to Shaw as "the greatest British dramatist since Shakespeare".
By the early 20th century, he termed himself a "mystic", although Gary Sloan, in an essay on Shaw's beliefs, disputes his credentials as such.
The first play portrays a British prime minister considering, but finally rejecting, the establishment of a dictatorship; the second is concerned with polygamy and eugenics and ends with the Day of Judgement.
'', issued by the recently formed Fabian Society, Shaw went to the society's next advertised meeting, on 16 May 1884.
A 1946 ''Life'' magazine article observed that Shaw had "always tended to look at people more as a biologist than as an artist".
Their affair continued, not always smoothly, for eight years.
He was employed briefly by the Edison Telephone Company in 1879–80, and as in Dublin achieved rapid promotion.
Shaw's only full-length play from the war years is ''Heartbreak House'' (1917), which in his words depicts "cultured, leisured Europe before the war" drifting towards disaster.
With a reputation for presenting characters who did not resemble real flesh and blood, he was challenged by Archer to present an on-stage death, and here did so, with a deathbed scene for the anti-hero.
After loosening his ties with the Fabian movement in 1911, Shaw's writings were more personal and often provocative; his response to the furore following the issue of ''Common Sense About the War'' in 1914, was to prepare a sequel, ''More Common Sense About the War''.
The book sold well—85,000 copies by the end of the year.
Lee's relations with Bessie deteriorated after their move to London.
He courted unpopularity by denouncing both sides in the First World War as equally culpable, and although not a republican, castigated British policy on Ireland in the postwar period.
Shaw published a collected edition of his plays in 1934, comprising forty-two works.
In January 1893, as a Fabian delegate, Shaw attended the Bradford conference which led to the foundation of the Independent Labour Party.
Shaw's enthusiasm for the Soviet Union dated to the early 1920s when he had hailed Lenin as "the one really interesting statesman in Europe".
He railed against opera productions unrealistically staged or sung in languages the audience did not speak.
The project foundered, but Shaw returned to the draft as the basis of ''Widowers' Houses'' in 1892, and the connection with Archer proved of immense value to Shaw's career.
He was soon at odds with the magazine's editor, Clifford Sharp, who by 1916 was rejecting his contributions—"the only paper in the world that refuses to print anything by me", according to Shaw.
In ''How to Settle the Irish Question'' (1917), he envisaged a federal arrangement, with national and imperial parliaments.
''Arms and the Man'' (1894) conceals beneath a mock-Ruritanian comic romance a Fabian parable contrasting impractical idealism with pragmatic socialism.
The second of these, "Transition", details the case for gradualism and permeation, asserting that "the necessity for cautious and gradual change must be obvious to everyone".
On the advice of Beatrice Webb, this pamphlet remained unpublished.
Despite difference of style and temperament, the two quickly recognised qualities in each other and developed a lifelong friendship.
''The Irrational Knot'' (1880) is a critique of conventional marriage, in which Weintraub finds the characterisations lifeless, "hardly more than animated theories".
Eventually Shaw was driven to applying for office jobs.
Nationally, the 1906 general election produced a huge Liberal majority and an intake of 29 Labour members.
In 1862 Lee and the Shaws agreed to share a large house, No.
These stances had no lasting effect on his standing or productivity as a dramatist; the inter-war years saw a series of often ambitious plays, which achieved varying degrees of popular success.
Early in 1876 Shaw learned from his mother that Agnes was dying of tuberculosis.
In rapid succession he wrote two more novels: ''The Irrational Knot'' (1880) and ''Love Among the Artists'' (1881), but neither found a publisher; each was serialised a few years later in the socialist magazine ''Our Corner''.
In 1884 and 1885, through the influence of Archer, Shaw was engaged to write book and music criticism for London papers.
Wells resigned from the society in September 1908; Shaw remained a member, but left the executive in April 1911.
Shaw's final political treatise, ''Everybody's Political What's What'', was published in 1944.
Despite his expressed wish to be fair to Hitler, he called anti-Semitism "the hatred of the lazy, ignorant fat-headed Gentile for the pertinacious Jew who, schooled by adversity to use his brains to the utmost, outdoes him in business".
Shaw espoused racial equality, and inter-marriage between people of different races.
He plays with everything: with wit, with philosophy, with drama, with actors and audience, with the whole theatre".
Although less active—he blamed his advancing years—Shaw remained a Fabian.
Including eight earlier plays that he chose to omit from his published works, the total is sixty-two.
In a 2003 study Judith Evans describes ''Mrs Warren's Profession'' (1893) as "undoubtedly the most challenging" of the three Plays Unpleasant, taking Mrs Warren's profession—prostitute and, later, brothel-owner—as a metaphor for a prostituted society.
Shaw's political and social commentaries were published variously in Fabian tracts, in essays, in two full-length books, in innumerable newspaper and journal articles and in prefaces to his plays.
Shaw, a sensitive boy, found the less salubrious parts of Dublin shocking and distressing, and he was happier at the cottage.
''Fanny's First Play'' (1911) continues his earlier examinations of middle-class British society from a Fabian viewpoint, with additional touches of melodrama and an epilogue in which theatre critics discuss the play.
During the first decade of the twentieth century, Shaw secured a firm reputation as a playwright.
The three are set, respectively, in 1770s America, Ancient Egypt, and 1890s Morocco.
The Anglo-Irish Treaty of December 1921 led to the partition of Ireland between north and south, a provision that dismayed Shaw.
Wells's ideas for reform—particularly his proposals for closer cooperation with the Independent Labour Party—placed him at odds with the society's "Old Gang", led by Shaw.
Harried by the intrusive attentions of the press, Shaw was glad when his ship sailed from New York harbour.
The play ran from April to July, toured the provinces and was staged in New York.
Shaw's first major work to appear after the war was ''Heartbreak House'', written in 1916–17 and performed in 1920.
Influenced by Henrik Ibsen, he sought to introduce a new realism into English-language drama, using his plays as vehicles to disseminate his political, social and religious ideas.
Weintraub describes it as "Shaw's attempt to fend off 'the bottomless pit of an utterly discouraging pessimism'".
Shaw maintained contact with Lee, who found him work as a rehearsal pianist and occasional singer.
More recent societies have been established in Japan and India.
In ''The Jewish Chronicle'' he wrote in 1932, "In every country you can find rabid people who have a phobia against Jews, Jesuits, Armenians, Negroes, Freemasons, Irishmen, or simply foreigners as such.
In the preface (1915) to ''Androcles and the Lion'', Shaw asks "Why not give Christianity a chance"?
After a rally in Trafalgar Square addressed by Besant was violently broken up by the authorities on 13 November 1887 ("Bloody Sunday"), Shaw became convinced of the folly of attempting to challenge police power.
In the final decade of his life he made fewer public statements, but continued to write prolifically until shortly before his death, aged 94, having refused all state honours, including the Order of Merit in 1946.
Ervine in ''The Observer'' thought the play brilliant but ponderously acted, except for Edith Evans as Lady Utterword.
The story, on publication, offended some Christians and was banned in Ireland by the Board of Censors.
In 1912 Shaw invested £1,000 for a one-fifth share in the Webbs' new publishing venture, a socialist weekly magazine called ''The New Statesman'', which appeared in April 1913.
He described ''The Apple Cart'' to Elgar as "a scandalous Aristophanic burlesque of democratic politics, with a brief but shocking sex interlude".
In his will Shaw ordered that after some specified legacies his remaining assets were to form a trust to pay for fundamental reform of the English alphabet, into a phonetic version of forty letters.
The Shaw family was of English descent and belonged to the dominant Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland; George Carr Shaw, an ineffectual alcoholic, was among the family's less successful members.
The previous year she had proposed that she and Shaw should marry.
Among Shaw's many regular correspondents were his childhood friend Edward McNulty; his theatrical colleagues (and ''amitiés amoureuses'') Mrs Patrick Campbell and Ellen Terry; writers including Lord Alfred Douglas, H. G. Wells and G. K. Chesterton; the boxer Gene Tunney; the nun Laurentia McLachlan; and the art expert Sydney Cockerell.
He requested that no one should imply that he accepted the beliefs of any specific religious organisation, and that no memorial to him should "take the form of a cross or any other instrument of torture or symbol of blood sacrifice."
Shaw was a prolific correspondent throughout his life.
He gave both that play and its successor, ''Too True to Be Good'' (1931), the subtitle "A political extravaganza", although the two works differ greatly in their themes; the first presents the politics of a nation (with a brief royal love-scene as an interlude) and the second, in Judith Evans's words, "is concerned with the social mores of the individual, and is nebulous."
This inconsistency was partly an intentional provocation—the Spanish scholar-statesman Salvador de Madariaga describes Shaw as "a pole of negative electricity set in a people of positive electricity".
''In Good King Charles's Golden Days'' (1939), described by Weintraub as a warm, discursive high comedy, also depicts authoritarianism, but less satirically than ''Geneva''.
The London blitz of 1940–41 led the Shaws, both in their mid-eighties, to live full-time at Ayot St Lawrence.
Shaw strove throughout his adult life to be referred to as "Bernard Shaw" rather than "George Bernard Shaw", but confused matters by continuing to use his full initials—G.B.S.—as a by-line, and often signed himself "G.Bernard Shaw".
It was enthusiastically received there, and at its London premiere the following March.
In 1922 he  had welcomed Mussolini's accession to power in Italy, observing that amid the "indiscipline and muddle and Parliamentary deadlock", Mussolini was "the right kind of tyrant".
In this, he denounced the pacifist line espoused by Ramsay MacDonald and other socialist leaders, and proclaimed his readiness to shoot all pacifists rather than cede them power and influence.
Osborne responded that Shaw "is the most fraudulent, inept writer of Victorian melodramas ever to gull a timid critic or fool a dull public".
''Widower's Houses'' (1892) concerns the landlords of slum properties, and introduces the first of Shaw's New Women—a recurring feature of later plays.
Shaw's sex life has caused much speculation and debate among his biographers, but there is a consensus that the relationship with Patterson was one of his few non-platonic romantic liaisons.
Among many American writers professing a direct debt to Shaw, Eugene O'Neill became an admirer  at the age of seventeen, after reading ''The Quintessence of Ibsenism''.
He became a member in September, and before the year's end had provided the society with its first manifesto, published as Fabian Tract No.
In 1898, as a result of overwork, Shaw's health broke down.
It was followed by one of Shaw's most successful plays, ''Pygmalion'', written in 1912 and staged in Vienna the following year, and in Berlin shortly afterwards.
Shaw's expressed views were often contentious; he promoted eugenics and alphabet reform, and opposed vaccination and organised religion.
Lee was a conductor and teacher of singing; Bessie had a fine mezzo-soprano voice and was much influenced by Lee's unorthodox method of vocal production.
As in earlier decades, the shorter plays were generally comedies, some historical and others addressing various political and social preoccupations of the author.
Having in his youth proclaimed himself an atheist, in middle age he explained this as a reaction against the Old Testament image of a vengeful Jehovah.
Thereafter he largely accepted the principle of "permeation" as advocated by Webb: the notion whereby socialism could best be achieved by infiltration of people and ideas into existing political parties.
By the later 1890s Shaw's political activities lessened as he concentrated on making his name as a dramatist.
His mother allowed him to live free of charge in her house in South Kensington, but he nevertheless needed an income.
In the Fabians' war manifesto, ''Fabianism and the Empire'' (1900), Shaw declared that "until the Federation of the World becomes an accomplished fact we must accept the most responsible Imperial federations available as a substitute for it".
The reception was unenthusiastic.
Shaw had been writing plays for years before his first public success, ''Arms and the Man'' in 1894.
His range of interest and enquiry included vivisection, vegetarianism, religion, language, cinema and photography, on all of which he wrote and spoke copiously.
Shaw's plays of the 1930s were written in the shadow of worsening national and international political events.
Despite his dislike of having his work adapted for the musical theatre ("my plays set themselves to a verbal music of their own") two of his plays were turned into musical comedies: ''Arms and the Man'' was the basis of ''The Chocolate Soldier'' in 1908, with music by Oscar Straus, and ''Pygmalion'' was adapted in 1956 as ''My Fair Lady'' with book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe.
Shaw once estimated his letters would occupy twenty volumes; Laurence commented that, unedited, they would fill many more.
''Augustus Does His Bit'', a genial farce, was granted a licence; it opened at the Royal Court in January 1917.
It was produced on Broadway in November, and was coolly received: "Mr Shaw on this occasion has more than usual to say and takes twice as long as usual to say it".
Many found him difficult to take seriously on the subject; Duff Cooper observed that by attacking Shakespeare, "it is Shaw who appears a ridiculous pigmy shaking his fist at a mountain."
In the 2016 version of the ''Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians'', Robert Anderson writes, "Shaw's collected writings on music stand alone in their mastery of English and compulsive readability."
''Blanco Posnet'' was banned on religious grounds by the Lord Chamberlain (the official theatre censor in England), and was produced instead in Dublin; it filled the Abbey Theatre to capacity.
Shaw's first box-office success was ''Arms and the Man'' (1894), a mock-Ruritanian comedy satirising conventions of love, military honour and class.
In its obituary tribute to Shaw, ''The Times Literary Supplement'' concluded:
He died at the age of ninety-four of renal failure precipitated by injuries incurred when falling while pruning a tree.
Born in Dublin, Shaw moved to London in 1876, where he struggled to establish himself as a writer and novelist, and embarked on a rigorous process of self-education.
Shaw's first three full-length plays dealt with social issues.
13, ''What Socialism Is'', a revision of an earlier tract in which Charlotte Wilson had defined socialism in anarchistic terms.
The book was published in 1928 and sold well.
He later grouped them as "Plays Unpleasant".
She came to despise her ineffectual and often drunken husband, with whom she shared what their son later described as a life of "shabby-genteel poverty".
From 1885 to 1889 Shaw attended the fortnightly meetings of the British Economic Association; it was, Holroyd observes, "the closest Shaw had ever come to university education."
This experience changed his political ideas; he moved away from Marxism and became an apostle of gradualism.
Writing in ''The New Statesman'' in 2012 Daniel Janes commented that Shaw's reputation had declined by the time of his 150th anniversary in 2006 but had recovered considerably.
In December 1932 the couple embarked on a round-the-world cruise.
He later wondered whether the Old Gang should have given way to Wells some years earlier: "God only knows whether the Society had not better have done it".
It was widely praised; a reviewer in ''The American Journal of Public Health'' considered it essential reading for any student of the American criminal justice system.
He joined the society's executive committee in January 1885, and later that year recruited Webb and also Annie Besant, a fine orator.
The young Shaw suffered no harshness from his mother, but he later recalled that her indifference and lack of affection hurt him deeply.
Following a political awakening, he joined the gradualist Fabian Society and became its most prominent pamphleteer.
