Quoted in the ''New York Herald'' on September 2, 1876, Grant said, "I regard Custer's Massacre as a sacrifice of troops, brought on by Custer himself, that was wholly unnecessary – wholly unnecessary."
At the request of Major General Sheridan, who wanted Custer for his planned winter campaign against the Cheyenne, Custer was allowed to return to duty before his one-year term of suspension had expired and joined his regiment to October 7, 1868.
Along the way, the warriors rode them down, counting coup by striking the fleeing troopers with their quirts or lances.
Custer dashed forward on his horse out to the middle of the river and turned to the astonished officers of the staff and shouted triumphantly, "That's how deep it is, Mr.
Throughout his life Custer was known by a variety of nicknames.
Custer established a reputation as an aggressive cavalry brigade commander willing to take personal risks by leading his Michigan Brigade into battle, such as the mounted charges at Hunterstown and East Cavalry Field at the Battle of Gettysburg.
In contrast, some of Custer's critics, including General Sheridan, have asserted several clear tactical errors.
This, the opening action of the battle, cost Reno a quarter of his command.
The allegation that the buckskin-clad officer was Custer, if accurate, might explain the supposed rapid disintegration of Custer's forces.
Days later, Custer and a search party found the bodies of Kidder's patrol.
He married Elizabeth Bacon fourteen months after they formally met.
The Lakota-Cheyenne coalition may have fielded over 1800 warriors.
In 1874 Custer led an expedition into the Black Hills and announced the discovery of gold on French Creek near present-day Custer, South Dakota.
Volunteers) first assignment was to locate the army of Robert E. Lee, moving north through the Shenandoah Valley in the beginning of the Gettysburg Campaign.
Custer was writing magazine articles criticizing Grant's peace policy towards the Indians.
The attack was successful, resulting in the capture of 50 Confederate soldiers and the seizing of the first Confederate battle flag of the war.
Eventually, however, this position became untenable and the troopers were forced into a bloody retreat up onto the bluffs above the river, where they made their own stand.
Brigadier General Terry met Custer in Fort Snelling, Minnesota on May 6.
In the largest all-cavalry engagement of the war, the Battle of Trevilian Station, in which Sheridan sought to destroy the Virginia Central Railroad and the Confederates' western resupply route, Custer captured Hampton's divisional train, but was then cut off and suffered heavy losses (including having his division's trains overrun and his personal baggage captured by the enemy) before being relieved.
Custer was buried again with full military honors at West Point Cemetery on October 10, 1877.
At the conclusion of the Appomattox Campaign, in which he and his troops played a decisive role, Custer was present at General Robert E. Lee's surrender to General Ulysses S. Grant on April 9, 1865.
* At the same time, he left behind at the steamer ''Far West'' on the Yellowstone a battery of Gatling guns, knowing he was facing superior numbers.
Custer's defenders, however, including historian Charles K. Hofling, have asserted that Gatling guns would have been slow and cumbersome as the troops crossed the rough country between the Yellowstone and the Little Bighorn.
The 7th Cavalry, Custer commanding, departed from Fort Abraham Lincoln on May 17, 1876, part of a larger army force planning to round up remaining free Indians.
Custer gave up and took a train to Chicago on May 2, planning to rejoin his regiment.
The women were relatives of Mo-nah-se-tah, who was alleged to have been Custer's one-time lover.
Custer distinguished himself by fearless, aggressive actions in some of the numerous cavalry engagements that started off the campaign, beginning with the  Battle of Aldie on June 17.
An average of the above is 3,500 warriors and leaders.
Custer distinguished himself by his actions at Waynesboro, Dinwiddie Court House, and Five Forks.
The expedition against the Sioux was originally scheduled to leave Fort Abraham Lincoln on April 6, 1876, but on March 15 Custer was summoned to Washington to testify at Congressional hearings.
Custer also had several older half-siblings.
These concerned the corruption scandal involving U.S. Secretary of War William W. Belknap (who had resigned March 2), President Grant's brother Orville, and traders at Army posts in Indian Country, who were charging troops double what they would have paid for the same goods in Bismarck, North Dakota.
The Battle of Washita River was regarded as the first substantial U.S. victory in the Southern Plains War, and it helped force a significant portion of the Southern Cheyenne onto a U.S.-assigned reservation.
In 1864, with the Cavalry Corps of the Army of the Potomac reorganized under the command of Major General Philip Sheridan, Custer (now commanding the 3rd Division) led his "Wolverines" to the Shenandoah Valley where by the year's end they defeated the army of Confederate Lieutenant General Jubal A.
General Sherman advised Custer not to leave Washington before meeting personally with President Grant.
On October 27, the division departed to Austin.
According to Grinnell's account, based on the testimony of the Cheyenne warriors who survived the fight, at least part of Custer's command attempted to ford the river at the north end of the camp but were driven off by stiff resistance from Indian sharpshooters firing from the brush along the west bank of the river.
The controversy over blame for the disaster at Little Bighorn continues to this day.
Stuart was mortally wounded).
Custer was sharply criticized by the Republican press and praised by Democratic editors.
Custer stated that he "could whip any Indian village on the Plains" with his own regiment, and that extra troops would simply be a burden.
He convinced Gregg to allow him to stay and fight, while his own division was stationed to the south out of the action.
Reno began a charge on the southern end of the village, but halted some 500–600 yards short of the camp, and had his men dismount and form a skirmish line.
Pleasonton was promoted on June 22, 1863 to Major General of U.S.
Estimates by the Cheyenne of their casualties were substantially lower (11 warriors plus 19 women and children).
As Marguerite Merrington explains in ''The Custer Story in Letters'', "George Custer meticulously scouted every battlefield, gauged the enemies weak points and strengths, ascertained the best line of attack and only after he was satisfied was the 'Custer Dash' with a Michigan yell focused with complete surprise on the enemy in routing them every time."
Historian Gregory Michno settles on a low number around 1000 based on contemporary Lakota testimony, but other sources place the number at 1800 or 2000, especially in the works by Utley and Fox.
Some historians, however, believe that Custer had become sterile after contracting gonorrhea while at West Point and that the father was, in actuality, his brother Thomas.
Mo-nah-se-tah gave birth to a child in January 1869, two months after the Washita battle.
In June 2005 at a public meeting, the Northern Cheyenne broke almost 130 years of silence about the battle.
The battle site was designated a National Cemetery in 1876.
Custer arrived at Alexandria on June 27 and began assembling his units, which took more than a month to gather and remount.
Custer's body had two bullet holes, one in the left temple and one just below the heart.
Although their occupation of Austin had apparently been pleasant, many veterans harbored deep resentments against Custer, particularly in the 2nd Wisconsin Cavalry, because of his attempts to maintain discipline.
''' George Armstrong Custer''' (December 5, 1839 – June 25, 1876) was a United States Army officer and cavalry commander in the American Civil War and the American Indian Wars.
He reverted to his permanent rank of captain and was appointed a lieutenant colonel in the 7th Cavalry Regiment in July 1866.
Custer had first intended to attack the Indian village the next day, but since his presence was known, he decided to attack immediately and divided his forces into three battalions: one led by Major Marcus Reno, one by Captain Frederick Benteen, and one by himself.
During the 1920s two elderly Cheyenne women spoke briefly with oral historians about their having recognized Custer's body on the battlefield, and had stopped a Sioux warrior from desecrating the body.
Sheridan endorsed his effort, accepting Custer's "guilt" and suggesting his restraint in future.
Some eyewitness reports state that Custer was not identified until after his death by the Native Americans who killed him.
Under Sheridan's orders, Custer took part in establishing Camp Supply in Indian Territory in early November 1868 as a supply base for the winter campaign.
His administration worried that if the "Sioux campaign" failed without Custer, Grant would be blamed for ignoring the recommendations of senior Army officers.
:*Lt. Varnum – not less than 4,000
Traditional white accounts attribute to Gall the attack that drove Custer up onto the ridge, but Indian witnesses have disputed that account.
In his four years at West Point, he amassed a record-total of 726 demerits, one of the worst conduct records in the history of the academy.
Custer's brigade lost 257 men at Gettysburg, the highest loss of any Union cavalry brigade.
As a result, the Battle of the Little Bighorn has come to be popularly known as "Custer's Last Stand".
He was dispatched to the west in 1867 to fight in the American Indian Wars.
Captain Thomas M. McDougall and Company B were with the pack train.
On April 5, he served in the 5th Cavalry Regiment and participated in the Siege of Yorktown, from April 5 to and May 4 and was aide to Major General George B. McClellan; McClellan was in command of the Army of the Potomac during the Peninsula Campaign.
Custer's announcement triggered the Black Hills Gold Rush.
While attending Hopedale, Custer, together with classmate William Enos Emery, was known to have carried coal to help pay for their room and board.
He was called "Autie" (his early attempt to pronounce his middle name) and Armstrong.
Stuart at Hanover and Hunterstown, on the way to the main event at Gettysburg.
The two women then shoved their sewing awls into his ears, to permit Custer's corpse to 'hear better in the afterlife' because he had broken his promise to  Stone Forehead never to fight against Native Americans again.
He was named head of the Soldiers and Sailors Union, regarded as a response to the hyper-partisan Grand Army of the Republic (GAR).
He paid attention to his image; after being promoted to brigadier general in the Civil War, Custer sported a uniform that included shiny cavalry boots, tight olive-colored corduroy trousers, a wide-brimmed slouch hat, tight hussar jacket of black velveteen with silver piping on the sleeves, a sailor shirt with silver stars on his collar, and a red cravat.
As with most wartime promotions, even when issued under the regular army, these senior ranks were only temporary.
He frequently invited journalists to accompany his campaigns (one, Associated Press reporter Mark Kellogg, died at the Little Bighorn), and their favorable reporting contributed to his high reputation, which lasted well into the 20th century.
Cheyenne oral history tells that she also bore a second child, fathered by Custer in late 1869.
Custer may have seen Reno stop and form a skirmish line as Custer led his command to the northern end of the main encampment, where he apparently planned to sandwich the Indians between his attacking troopers and Reno's command in a "hammer and anvil" maneuver.
Custer left Washington on April 20, but instead of immediately returning to Fort Lincoln, he visited the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia and planned to travel to New York City to meet with publishers.
This created lasting impressions of the battle and the brewery’s products in the minds of many bar patrons.
One man on each side was killed.
Moylan – 3,500 to 4,000
Despite having no direct command experience, Custer became one of the youngest generals in the Union Army at age 23.
Custer and his command were prevented from digging in by Crazy Horse, however, whose warriors had outflanked him and were now to his north, at the crest of the ridge.
Early in the Valley Campaigns of 1864.
Benteen, who inspected the body, stated that in his opinion the fatal injuries had not been the result of .45 caliber ammunition, which implies the bullet holes had been caused by ranged rifle fire.
In September 1866 Custer accompanied President Andrew Johnson on a journey by train known as the "Swing Around the Circle" to build up public support for Johnson's policies towards the South.
Custer's division was mustered out beginning in November 1865, replaced by the regulars of the U.S. 6th Cavalry Regiment.
At Hunterstown, in an ill-considered charge ordered by Kilpatrick against the brigade of Wade Hampton, Custer fell from his wounded horse directly before the enemy and became the target of numerous enemy rifles.
A descendant of the second child, who goes by the name Gail Custer, wrote a book about the affair.
As the troopers were cut down, the native warriors stripped the dead of their firearms and ammunition, with the result that the return fire from the cavalry steadily decreased, while the fire from the Indians constantly increased.
A roommate noted, "It was all right with George Custer, whether he knew his lesson or not: he simply did not allow it to trouble him."
Grant was already under pressure for his treatment of Custer.
When Crazy Horse and White Bull mounted the charge that broke through the center of Custer's lines, pandemonium may have broken out among the soldiers of Calhoun's command, though Myles Keogh's men seem to have fought and died where they stood.
Before entering the United States Military Academy, Custer attended the McNeely Normal School, later known as Hopedale Normal College, in Hopedale, Ohio.
How could I resist it?"
They were soon overcome by mounted Lakota and Cheyenne warriors who counterattacked ''en masse'' against Reno's exposed left flank, forcing Reno and his men to take cover in the trees along the river.
Raised in Michigan and Ohio, Custer was admitted to West Point in 1857, where he graduated last in his class in 1861.
:*Spotted Horn Bull – 5,000 braves and leaders
Grant and Custer did not get along.
In the Valley Campaigns of 1864, they pursued the Confederates at the Third Battle of Winchester and effectively destroyed Early's army during Sheridan's counterattack at Cedar Creek.
He served on frontier duty at Fort Riley from October 18 to March 26, and scouted in Kansas and Colorado to July 28.
In his role as aide-de-camp to McClellan, Custer began his life-long pursuit of publicity.
Two other captains—Wesley Merritt and Elon J. Farnsworth—were promoted along with Custer, although they did have command experience.
He participated in the first major engagement, the First Battle of Bull Run on July 21, 1861, near Washington, D.C. His association with several important officers helped his career, as did his success as a highly effective cavalry commander.
Though considered historically accurate, they were clearly slanted in Custer's favor and did much to enhance his reputation after his death.
Custer presented Bloody Knife, his Arikara ("Ree") scout, with several gifts.
Sheridan and Custer, having defeated Early, returned to the main Union Army lines at the Siege of Petersburg, where they spent the winter.
:*Maj. Reno – 2,500 to 5,000 warriors
* While camped at Powder River, Custer refused the support offered by General Terry on June 21, of an additional four companies of the Second Cavalry.
The women allegedly told the warrior to "Stop, he is a relative of ours," and then shooed him away.
Custer was present at the surrender at Appomattox Court House and the table upon which the surrender was signed was presented to him as a gift for his wife by General Philip Sheridan, who included a note to her praising Custer's gallantry.
Custer then was allowed to lead an attack with four companies of the 4th Michigan Infantry across the Chickahominy River above New Bridge.
Connell concludes:"These days it is stylish to denigrate the general, whose stock sells for nothing.
Custer was commissioned a second lieutenant in the 2nd U.S. Cavalry Regiment and was assigned to drilling volunteers in Washington, D.C. On July 21, 1861, he was with his regiment at the First Battle of Bull Run during the Manassas Campaign, where Army commander Winfield Scott detailed him to carry messages to Major General Irvin McDowell.
Custer spent much of his boyhood living with his half-sister and brother-in-law in Monroe, Michigan, where he attended school.
The rider who was hit, mounted next to a rider who bore a flag, had shouted orders that prompted the soldiers to attack, but when the buckskin-clad rider fell off his horse after being shot, many of the attackers reined up.
Custer reported killing 103 warriors and some women and children; 53 women and children were taken as prisoners.
He later recalled, "(Custer) with tears in his eyes, begged for my aid.
Custer was born in New Rumley, Ohio, to Emanuel Henry Custer (1806–1892), a farmer and blacksmith, and Marie Ward Kirkpatrick (1807–1882).
In 1873, Custer was sent to the Dakota Territory to protect a railroad survey party against the Lakota.
Major General Custer became Chief of Cavalry of the Department of Texas, from November 13 to February 1, 1866, succeeding Major General Wesley Merritt.
After the battle, he continued participating in the defenses of Washington D.C. until October when he was sick and absent from his unit until February 1862.
The initial force facing the soldiers, according to this version, was quite small (possibly as few as four warriors) yet challenged Custer's command.
President Theodore Roosevelt's lavish praise pleased Custer's widow.
President Grant, a highly successful general, bluntly criticized Custer's actions in the battle of the Little Bighorn.
McClellan, termed it a "very gallant affair" and congratulated Custer personally.
Sheridan and Mrs. Custer disapproved, however, and when his request for leave was opposed by U.S. Secretary of State William H. Seward, who was against having an American officer commanding foreign troops, Custer refused the alternative of resignation from the Army to take the lucrative post.
He took part in public discussion over the treatment of the American South in the aftermath of the Civil War, advocating a policy of moderation.
Before the close of the war Custer received brevet promotions to brigadier general and major general (as a result of a plea by his patron General Sheridan) on March 13, 1865, in the regular army, and major general of volunteers on April 15, 1865.
One of his greatest attributes during the Civil War was what Custer wrote of as "luck" and he needed it to survive some of these charges.
Custer further stated that if the scouts helped him win a victory, he would become president and look after the Arikaras from the White House.
:*George Herendeen – fully 3,000
* The refusal of an extra battalion reduced the size of his force by at least a sixth, and rejecting the firepower offered by the Gatling guns played into the events of June 25 to the disadvantage of his regiment.
They desired to be mustered out of Federal service rather than continue campaigning, resented imposition of discipline (particularly from an Eastern Theater general), and considered Custer nothing more than a vain dandy.
Offered a position (and $10,000 in gold) as adjutant general of the army of Benito Juárez of Mexico, who was then in a struggle with the Mexican Emperor Maximilian I (a satellite ruler of French Emperor Napoleon III), Custer applied for a one-year leave of absence from the U.S. Army, which was endorsed by Grant and Secretary of War Stanton.
At the time, West Point's course of study was five years long.
President Grant held up Custer's departure from Washington.
The circumstances are, however, consistent with David Humphreys Miller's suggestion that Custer's attendants would not have left his dead body behind to be desecrated.
For a time, Custer's men appear to have been deployed by company, in standard cavalry fighting formation—the skirmish line, with every fourth man holding the horses, though this arrangement would have robbed Custer of a quarter of his firepower.
Three times Custer requested meetings with Grant, but was always turned down.
On July 17, he was reverted to the rank of first lieutenant.
Lt. Kidder was to deliver dispatches to Custer from General Sherman, but his party was attacked by Lakota Sioux and Cheyenne (see ''Kidder massacre'').
During May and June, Sheridan and Custer (Captain, 5th Cavalry, May 8 and Brevet Lieutenant Colonel, May 11) took part in cavalry actions supporting the Overland Campaign, including the Battle of the Wilderness (after which Custer ascended to division command), and the Battle of Yellow Tavern (where J.E.B.
He was rescued by Private Norvell Francis Churchill of the 1st Michigan Cavalry, who galloped up, shot Custer's nearest assailant, and allowed Custer to mount behind him for a dash to safety.
She treasured the gift of the historical table, which is now in the Smithsonian Institution.
A fellow cadet recalled Custer as declaring there were only two places in a class, the head and the foot, and since he had no desire to be the head, he aspired to be the foot.
In November 1868, following the Battle of Washita River, Custer was alleged (by Captain Frederick Benteen, chief of scouts Ben Clark, and Cheyenne oral tradition) to have unofficially married Mo-nah-se-tah, daughter of the Cheyenne chief Little Rock in the winter or early spring of 1868–1869 (Little Rock was killed in the one-day action at Washita on November 27).
Custer's style of battle was often claimed to be reckless or foolhardy, but military planning was always the basis of every Custer "dash".
According to some Lakota accounts, many of the panicking soldiers threw down their weapons and either rode or ran towards the knoll where Custer, the other officers, and about 40 men were making a stand.
Custer told Bloody Knife and some Arikara scouts that this would be his last Indian campaign.
On August 4, 1873, near the Tongue River, Custer and the 7th Cavalry Regiment clashed for the first time with the Lakota.
The surviving troopers apparently shot their remaining horses to use as breastworks for a final stand on the knoll at the north end of the ridge.
President Grant had designated General Terry to command the expedition in Custer's place.
On July 28, 1866, Custer was appointed lieutenant colonel of the newly created 7th Cavalry Regiment, which was headquartered at Fort Riley, Kansas.
General Nelson Miles (who inherited Custer's mantle of famed Indian fighter) and others praised him as a fallen hero betrayed by the incompetence of subordinate officers.
At one point Custer confronted a small group of Ohio men who repeatedly jeered Johnson, saying to them: "I was born two miles and a half from here, but I am ashamed of you."
After graduating from McNeely Normal School in 1856, Custer taught school in Cadiz, Ohio.
Custer led a mounted charge of the 1st Michigan Cavalry, breaking the back of the Confederate assault.
Custer developed a strong reputation during the Civil War.
By the time of Custer's Black Hills expedition in 1874, the level of conflict and tension between the U.S. and many of the Plains Indians tribes (including the Lakota Sioux and the Cheyenne) had become exceedingly high.
To take possession of the Black Hills (and thus the gold deposits), and to stop Indian attacks, the U.S. decided to corral all remaining free Plains Indians.
:*Lt. Godfrey – minimum between 2,500 and 3,000
According to family letters, Custer was named after George Armstrong, a minister, in his devout mother's hope that her son might join the clergy.
Custer rated speed in gaining the battlefield as essential and more important.
Now Custer was accusing Grant's brother and Secretary of War of corruption.
Stunned that he would not be in command, Custer approached the impeachment managers and secured his release.
After Custer testified on March 29 and April 4 before the Clymer Committee, Belknap was impeached and sent to the Senate for trial.
Soldiers were required by regulations to purchase goods from the traders.
In the Cheyenne culture of the time, such a relationship was considered a marriage.
During his rocky tenure at the Academy, Custer came close to expulsion in each of his three years, due to excessive demerits.
Documenting the arc of popular perception in his 1984 biography ''Son of the Morning Star'', author Evan Connell notes the reverential tone of Custer's first biographer Frederick Whittaker (whose book was rushed out the year of Custer's death.)
Initially, Custer had 208 officers and men under his command, with an additional 142 under Reno, just over 100 under Benteen, 50 soldiers with Captain McDougall's rearguard, and 84 soldiers under 1st Lieutenant Edward Gustave Mathey with the pack train.
Later, in his campaigns against the Indians, Custer wore a buckskins outfit, along with his familiar red tie.
On June 3, 1865, at Sheridan's behest, Major General Custer accepted command of the 2nd Division of Cavalry, Military Division of the Southwest, to march from Alexandria, Louisiana, to Hempstead, Texas, as part of the Union occupation forces.
He took part in Major General Winfield Scott Hancock's expedition against the Cheyenne.
Several individuals claimed personal responsibility for the killing, including White Bull of the Miniconjous, Rain-in-the-Face, Flat Lip and Brave Bear.
* On the day of the battle, Custer divided his 600-man command, despite being faced with vastly superior numbers of Sioux and Cheyenne.
Brigadier General Alfred Terry determined there were no available officers of rank to take command, but Sherman refused to intercede.
On April 25, after the war officially ended, Custer had his men search for, then illegally seize a large, prize racehorse "Don Juan" near Clarksville, Virginia, worth then an estimated $10,000 (several hundred thousand today), along with his written pedigree.
Americans continually broke treaty agreements and advanced further westward, resulting in violence and acts of depredation by both sides.
Lieutenant Colonel, 7th Cavalry: July 28, 1866 (killed at the Battle of the Little Bighorn, June 25, 1876)
Belknap had been selling trading post positions.
He had been socially introduced to her in November 1862, when home in Monroe on leave.
Meanwhile, in the spring and summer of 1876, the Hunkpapa Lakota holy man Sitting Bull had called together the largest ever gathering of Plains Indians at Ash Creek, Montana (later moved to the Little Bighorn River) to discuss what to do about the whites.
The warriors closed in for the final attack and killed every man in Custer's command.
Pleasonton was Custer's introduction to the world of extravagant uniforms and political maneuvering, and the young lieutenant had become his protégé, serving on Pleasonton's staff.
His division blocked Lee's retreat on its final day and received the first flag of truce from the Confederate force.
Custer lost no time in implanting his aggressive character on his brigade, part of the division of Brigadier General Judson Kilpatrick.
Custer was promoted to captain in 1864, and was brevetted to major general in 1865.
The 1800–2000 figure is substantially lower than the higher numbers of 3000 or more postulated by Ambrose, Gray, Scott, and others.
He then went on frontier duty, scouting in Kansas and Indian Territory to October 1869.
The deaths of Custer and his troops became the best-known episode in the history of the American Indian Wars, due in part to a painting commissioned by the brewery Anheuser-Busch as part of an advertising campaign.
The enterprising company ordered reprints of a dramatic work that depicted “Custer's Last Stand” and had them framed and hung in many United States saloons.
The Grant government set a deadline of January 31, 1876 for all Lakota and Arapaho wintering in the "unceded territory" to report to their designated agencies (reservations) or be considered "hostile".
On June 9, 1863, Custer became aid to Brevet Lieutenant Colonel Alfred Pleasonton (rank since September 17, 1862), who was now commanding the Cavalry Corps, Army of the Potomac (June 7 to March 26, 1864); after the Battle of Chancellorsville (April 30-May 6, 1863), Pleasonton's (Brigadier General, July 16, 1862, U.S.
Before leaving Fort Snelling, Custer spoke to General Terry's chief engineer, Captain Ludlow, saying he would "cut loose" from Terry and operate independently from him.
