The Princess of Wales thought the family was too pro-German, and the Duchess of Edinburgh disliked England.
In 1922, a Royal Navy ship was sent to Greece to rescue his cousins, Prince and Princess Andrew.
On 9 November 1901, George was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester.
His abandonment of social aloofness conditioned the royal family's behaviour and enhanced its popularity during the economic crises of the 1920s and for over two generations thereafter.
As King, he bore the royal arms.
King Edward wished to prepare his son for his future role as king.
The years between 1922 and 1929 saw frequent changes in government.
Prince Andrew was a nephew of Queen Alexandra through her brother King George I of Greece, and Princess Andrew was a daughter of Prince Louis of Battenberg, one of the German princes granted a British peerage in 1917.
When they returned to Britain, Queen Victoria complained that her grandsons could not speak French or German, and so they spent six months in Lausanne in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to learn another language.
George presented thousands of specially designed South African War medals to colonial troops.
In 1924 he appointed the first Labour ministry and in 1931 the Statute of Westminster recognised the dominions of the Empire as separate, independent states within the Commonwealth of Nations.
On his return to Britain, in a speech at London's Guildhall, George warned of "the impression which seemed to prevail among our brethren across the seas, that the Old Country must wake up if she intends to maintain her old position of pre-eminence in her colonial trade against foreign competitors."
At the request of his father, "out of respect for poor dear Uncle Sasha's memory", George joined his parents in St. Petersburg for the funeral.
Later in 1911, the King and Queen travelled to India for the Delhi Durbar, where they were presented to an assembled audience of Indian dignitaries and princes as the Emperor and Empress of India on 12 December 1911.
George and Mary's coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 22 June 1911, and was celebrated by the Festival of Empire in London.
Negotiations between Britain and the Irish secessionists led to the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty.
On 17 July 1917, George appeased British nationalist feelings by issuing a royal proclamation that changed the name of the British royal house from the German-sounding House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha to the House of Windsor.
Throughout their lives, they remained devoted to each other.
As desired by the Nationalists, Asquith introduced legislation that would give Ireland Home Rule, but the Conservatives and Unionists opposed it.
If George refused, the Liberal government would otherwise resign, which would have given the appearance that the monarch was taking sides&nbsp;– with "the peers against the people"&nbsp;– in party politics.
A week after returning to Britain, George and May travelled to Norway for the coronation of King Haakon VII, George's cousin and brother-in-law, and Queen Maud, George's sister.
George in turn allowed his wife access to his papers, as he valued her counsel and she often helped write her husband's speeches.
A myth later grew that his last words, upon being told that he would soon be well enough to revisit the town, were "Bugger Bognor!"
The Statute established "that any alteration in the law touching the Succession to the Throne or the Royal Style and Titles" would require the assent of the Parliaments of the Dominions as well as the Parliament at Westminster, which could not legislate for the Dominions, except by consent.
Two months after the end of the war, the King's youngest son, John, died at the age of 13 after a lifetime of ill health.
Advanced planning for a rescue was undertaken by MI1, a branch of the British secret service, but because of the strengthening position of the Bolshevik revolutionaries and wider difficulties with the conduct of the war, the plan was never put into operation.
A constitutional conference on the reforms broke down in November 1910 after 21 meetings.
Under pressure from his mother, Queen Alexandra, George also removed the Garter flags of his German relations from St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.
They married on 6 July 1893 at the Chapel Royal in St James's Palace, London.
Two Royal Navy battleships were named HMS ''King George V'' in his honour, one in 1911 and her successor in 1939.
The King's two private secretaries, Lords Knollys and Stamfordham, gave George conflicting advice.
In March 1919, Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Lisle Strutt was dispatched on the personal authority of the King to escort the former Emperor Charles I of Austria and his family to safety in Switzerland.
George and May had five sons and a daughter.
Knollys, who was Liberal, advised George to accept the Cabinet's demands, while Stamfordham, who was Unionist, advised George to accept the resignation.
May God give me strength and guidance in the heavy task which has fallen on me".
George was informed of his death by Queen Mary, who wrote, "John had been a great anxiety to us for many years&nbsp;...
His physicians, led by Lord Dawson of Penn, issued a bulletin with words that became famous: "The King's life is moving peacefully towards its close."
As a result of his stay, the town acquired the suffix "Regis", which is Latin for "of the King".
She was known within the family as "May", nicknamed after her birth month.
The death of his favourite sister Victoria in December 1935 depressed him deeply.
In 1925, on the instruction of his doctors, he was reluctantly sent on a recuperative private cruise in the Mediterranean; it was his third trip abroad since the war, and his last.
Edward had reluctantly agreed, provided the Lords rejected the budget after two successive general elections.
Many white Cape Afrikaners resented the display and expense, the war having weakened their capacity to reconcile their Afrikaner-Dutch culture with their status as British subjects.
George compensated his male relatives by creating them British peers.
He was the second son of the Prince and Princess of Wales, Albert Edward and Alexandra.
In 1932, George agreed to deliver a Royal Christmas speech on the radio, an event that became annual thereafter.
George had never liked his wife's habit of signing official documents and letters as "Victoria Mary" and insisted she drop one of those names.
In an effort to kill off rumours, Mylius was arrested, tried and found guilty of criminal libel, and was sentenced to a year in prison.
Political turmoil in Ireland continued as the Nationalists fought for independence; George expressed his horror at government-sanctioned killings and reprisals to Prime Minister David Lloyd George.
His cousin, Prince Louis of Battenberg, who earlier in the war had been forced to resign as First Sea Lord through anti-German feeling, became Louis Mountbatten, 1st Marquess of Milford Haven, while Queen Mary's brothers became Adolphus Cambridge, 1st Marquess of Cambridge, and Alexander Cambridge, 1st Earl of Athlone.
In reality, there is no direct source for the quotation and it is likely that George's parenting style was little different from that adopted by most people at the time.
George V was interred at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 28 January 1936.
In 1917, he removed, by warrant, the Saxony inescutcheon from the arms of all male-line descendants of the Prince Consort domiciled in the United Kingdom (although the royal arms themselves had never borne the shield).
By the silver jubilee of his reign in 1935, he had become a well-loved king, saying in response to the crowd's adulation, "I cannot understand it, after all I am only a very ordinary sort of fellow."
The socialists no longer believed in their anti-monarchical slogans and were ready to come to terms with the monarchy if it took the first step.
Asquith attempted to curtail the power of the Lords through constitutional reforms, which were again blocked by the Upper House.
The new king, Edward VIII, saw it fall and wondered whether it was a bad omen for his new reign.
As tempers rose over the Home Rule Bill, which would never have been possible without the Parliament Act, relations between the elderly Knollys and the Conservatives became poor, and he was pushed into retirement.
The Parliament Act 1911 established the supremacy of the elected British House of Commons over the unelected House of Lords.
From November 1905 to March 1906, George and May toured British India, where he was disgusted by racial discrimination and campaigned for greater involvement of Indians in the government of the country.
Numerous statues of King George V include one by Bertram Mackennal outside the Flower Poll Bazaar Police Station in Madras, and one by William Reid Dick outside Westminster Abbey, London.
In Letters Patent gazetted on 11 December 1917 the King restricted the style "His (or Her) Royal Highness" and the titular dignity of "Prince (or Princess) of Great Britain and Ireland" to the children of the Sovereign, the children of the sons of the Sovereign and the eldest living son of the eldest living son of a Prince of Wales.
From the time of his birth, he was third in the line of succession behind his father and his elder brother, Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale.
As Duke of York, George's arms were the royal arms, with an inescutcheon of the arms of Saxony, all differenced with a label of three points argent, the centre point bearing an anchor azure.
He was baptised at Windsor Castle on 7 July 1865 by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Charles Longley.
The subsequent Parliament Act 1911 permanently removed&nbsp;– with a few exceptions&nbsp;– the power of the Lords to veto bills.
In 1929, the suggestion of a further rest abroad was rejected by the King "in rather strong language".
In South Africa, the royal party met civic leaders, African leaders, and Boer prisoners, and was greeted by elaborate decorations, expensive gifts, and fireworks displays.
In 1934, the King bluntly told the German ambassador Leopold von Hoesch that Germany was now the peril of the world, and that there was bound to be a war within ten years if she went on at the present rate; he warned the British ambassador in Berlin Eric Phipps to be suspicious of the Nazis.
The King's paternal grandfather was Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha; consequently, the King and his children bore the titles Prince and Princess of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Duke and Duchess of Saxony.
Like his father, George reluctantly agreed to the dissolution and creation of peers, although he felt his ministers had taken advantage of his inexperience to browbeat him.
He suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and pleurisy.
Neither Queen Mary, who was intensely religious and may not have sanctioned euthanasia, nor the Prince of Wales was consulted.
George was disappointed in Edward's failure to settle down in life and appalled by his many affairs with married women.
On 6 May 1910, King Edward died, and George became king.
Before the First World War, most of Europe was ruled by monarchs related to George, but during and after the war, the monarchies of Austria, Germany, Greece, and Spain, like Russia, fell to revolution and war.
May's father, Prince Francis, Duke of Teck, belonged to a morganatic, cadet branch of the house of Württemberg.
After Lausanne, the brothers were separated; Albert Victor attended Trinity College, Cambridge, while George continued in the Royal Navy.
Marie's mother was the only daughter of Tsar Alexander II of Russia.
When Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, George's first cousin (their mothers were sisters), was overthrown in the Russian Revolution of 1917, the British government offered political asylum to the Tsar and his family, but worsening conditions for the British people, and fears that revolution might come to the British Isles, led George to think that the presence of the Russian royals would be seen as inappropriate.
At the procession to George's lying in state in Westminster Hall, part of the Imperial State Crown fell from on top of the coffin and landed in the gutter as the cortège turned into New Palace Yard.
As a young man destined to serve in the navy, Prince George served for many years under the command of his uncle, Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, who was stationed in Malta.
His official biographer, Harold Nicolson, later despaired of George's time as Duke of York, writing: "He may be all right as a young midshipman and a wise old king, but when he was Duke of York&nbsp;... he did nothing at all but kill ''i.e.''
The tour was designed by Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain with the support of Prime Minister Lord Salisbury to reward the Dominions for their participation in the South African War of 1899–1902.
In November 1928, he fell seriously ill with septicaemia, and for the next two years his son Edward took over many of his duties.
Edward abdicated before the year was out, leaving his brother Albert, Duke of York, to ascend the throne (taking the regnal name George VI).
Coat of arms of George V in Scotland
George's cousins Princess Marie Louise and Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein dropped their territorial designations.
Nonetheless, he was earnestly devoted to Britain and its Commonwealth.
The tour was almost immediately followed by a trip to Spain for the wedding of King Alfonso XIII to Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg, a first cousin of George, at which the bride and groom narrowly avoided assassination.
He was the only Emperor of India to be present at his own Delhi Durbar.
He cultivated friendly relations with moderate Labour party politicians and trade union officials.
Guided by her mother, Marie refused George when he proposed to her.
There, he grew close to and fell in love with his uncle's daughter, his first cousin, Marie of Edinburgh.
The King later came to feel that Knollys had withheld information from him about the willingness of the opposition to form a government if the Liberals had resigned.
In the words of historian David Cannadine, George V and Queen Mary were an "inseparably devoted couple" who upheld "character" and "family values".
George was only 17&nbsp;months younger than Albert Victor, and the two princes were educated together.
Later that year, a radical propagandist, Edward Mylius, published a lie that George had secretly married in Malta as a young man, and that consequently his marriage to Queen Mary was bigamous.
The tour, and one short visit to Italy in 1923, were the only times George agreed to leave the United Kingdom on official business after the end of the war.
In 1881 on a visit to Japan, George had a local artist tattoo a blue and red dragon on his arm, and was received in an audience by the Emperor Meiji; George and his brother presented Empress Haruko with two wallabies from Australia.
Coat of arms of George as Prince of Wales
The many places named after him include a reservoir and a dock in London; King George V Park in St. John's, Newfoundland; King George V Memorial Hospital in Sydney, Australia and King George's Medical University, India; Stade George V in Curepipe, Mauritius; major thoroughfares in both Jerusalem and Tel Aviv; an avenue, a hotel and an underground station in Paris; King George V School, Seremban, Malaysia; and a school and two parks in Hong Kong.
George was born on 3 June 1865, in Marlborough House, London.
Coat of arms of George V in the United Kingdom (except Scotland)
The German Kaiser Wilhelm II, who for the British public came to symbolise all the horrors of the war, was the King's first cousin.
Asquith and Lord Crewe, Liberal leader in the Lords, asked George to grant a dissolution, leading to a second general election, and to promise to create sufficient Liberal peers if the Lords blocked the legislation again.
In the wake of a world financial crisis, the King encouraged the formation of a National Government in 1931 led by MacDonald and Baldwin, and volunteered to reduce the civil list to help balance the budget.
George's relationship with his eldest son and heir, Edward, deteriorated in these later years.
She resented the fact that, as the wife of a younger son of the British sovereign, she had to yield precedence to George's mother, the Princess of Wales, whose father had been a minor German prince before being called unexpectedly to the throne of Denmark.
I never had a cross word with him in my life.
George never fully recovered.
George objected to the anti-Catholic wording of the Accession Declaration that he would be required to make at the opening of his first parliament.
He explained, "it has always been my dream to identify myself with the great idea of Empire."
He was third in line to the throne, after his father and elder brother, Prince Albert Victor.
He became gradually weaker, drifting in and out of consciousness.
Dawson's private diary, unearthed after his death and made public in 1986, reveals that the King's last words, a mumbled "God damn you!
When H. G. Wells wrote about Britain's "alien and uninspiring court", George famously replied: "I may be uninspiring, but I'll be damned if I'm alien."
The King and his advisers were concerned about the rise of socialism and the growing labour movement, which they mistakenly associated with republicanism.
On the death of Queen Victoria on 22 January 1901, George's father ascended the throne as King Edward VII.
Randolph Churchill claimed that George was a strict father, to the extent that his children were terrified of him, and that George had remarked to Edward Stanley, 17th Earl of Derby: "My father was frightened of his mother, I was frightened of my father, and I am damned well going to see to it that my children are frightened of me."
He was the second son of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII), and the grandson of the reigning British monarch, Queen Victoria.
The event was described in a poem, ''The King's Pilgrimage'' by Rudyard Kipling.
They toured the colonies of the British Empire in the Caribbean, South Africa and Australia, and visited Norfolk, Virginia, as well as South America, the Mediterranean, Egypt, and East Asia.
George's tactful and understanding reception of the first Labour government (which lasted less than a year) allayed the suspicions of the party's sympathisers.
Neither Albert Victor nor George excelled intellectually.
Her mother, Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge, was a male-line granddaughter of King George&nbsp;III and a first cousin of Queen Victoria.
At the opening session of the Parliament of Northern Ireland on 22 June 1921, the King, in a speech part drafted by Lloyd George and General Jan Smuts, appealed for conciliation.
John Neale Dalton was appointed as their tutor in 1871.
George and his parents remained in Russia for the wedding a week later of Nicholas to another one of George's first cousins, Princess Alix of Hesse-Darmstadt, who Queen Victoria had once hoped would marry George's elder brother.
In 1935, George said of his son Edward: "After I am dead, the boy will ruin himself within 12 months", and of Albert and Elizabeth: "I pray to God my eldest son will never marry and have children, and that nothing will come between Bertie and Lilibet and the throne."
The vigil was not repeated until the death of George's daughter-in-law, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, in 2002.
In November 1891, George's elder brother Albert Victor became engaged to his second cousin once removed, Princess Victoria Mary of Teck.
As a mark of respect to their father, George's four surviving sons, Edward, Albert, Henry, and George, mounted the guard, known as the Vigil of the Princes, at the catafalque on the night before the funeral.
George was an avid stamp collector, which Nicolson disparaged, but George played a large role in building the Royal Philatelic Collection into the most comprehensive collection of United Kingdom and Commonwealth stamps in the world, in some cases setting record purchase prices for items.
The royal family did not want the King to endure pain and suffering and did not want his life prolonged artificially but nor did they approve Dawson's direct actions.
She married Ferdinand, the heir to the King of Romania, in 1893.
He was a keen and expert marksman.
He was not an intellectual: on returning from one evening at the opera he wrote, "Went to Covent Garden and saw Fidelio and damned dull it was."
After his accession to the throne in 1910, George became sovereign of all the orders awarded by the British Empire and (later) Commonwealth, including those awarded him prior to his accession.
The King had brothers-in-law and cousins who were British subjects but who bore German titles such as Duke and Duchess of Teck, Prince and Princess of Battenberg, and Prince and Princess of Schleswig-Holstein.
I am heart-broken and overwhelmed with grief but God will help me in my responsibilities and darling May will be my comfort as she has always been.
George's relatives who fought on the German side, such as Prince Ernst August of Hanover, 3rd Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale (the senior male-line great-grandson of George&nbsp;III) and Prince Carl Eduard, Duke of Albany and reigning Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (a male-line grandson of Queen Victoria), had their British peerages suspended by a 1919 Order in Council under the provisions of the Titles Deprivation Act 1917.
Their tour included Gibraltar, Malta, Port Said, Aden, Ceylon, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand, Mauritius, South Africa, Canada, and the Colony of Newfoundland.
In Australia, the Duke opened the first session of the Australian Parliament upon the creation of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Lloyd George's People's Budget had been rejected the previous year by the Conservative and Unionist-dominated House of Lords, contrary to the normal convention that the Lords did not veto money bills.
His father was the eldest son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, and his mother was the eldest daughter of King Christian IX of Denmark.
The following year, Nicholas's mother (George's aunt) Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark) and other members of the extended Russian imperial family were rescued from the Crimea by British ships.
As Prince of Wales the centre label lost its anchor.
Prime Minister Baldwin later said:
A year after Albert Victor's death, George proposed to May and was accepted.
He succeeded his father in 1910.
On 14 January 1892, six weeks after the formal engagement, Albert Victor died of pneumonia, leaving George second in line to the throne, and likely to succeed after his father.
In May 1922, the King toured Belgium and northern France, visiting the First World War cemeteries and memorials being constructed by the Imperial War Graves Commission.
As Duke and Duchess of York, George and May carried out a wide variety of public duties.
Nevertheless, he invariably wielded his influence as a force of neutrality and moderation, seeing his role as mediator rather than final decision maker.
By 20 January, he was close to death.
In 1926, George hosted an Imperial Conference in London at which the Balfour Declaration accepted the growth of the British Dominions into self-governing "autonomous Communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another".
He had health problems throughout much of his later reign and at his death was succeeded by his eldest son, Edward VIII.
On 18 September 1914, the King&nbsp;– having considered vetoing the legislation&nbsp;– gave his assent to the Home Rule Bill after it had been passed by Westminster, but its implementation was postponed by a Suspensory Act due to the outbreak of the First World War.
A few weeks later, a truce was agreed.
The lie had first surfaced in print in 1893 but George had shrugged it off as a joke.
Dawson, who supported the "gentle growth of euthanasia", wrote that he hastened the King's death by injecting him, at around 11.30 p.m., with two consecutive lethal injections of morphine and cocaine.
Coat of arms of George as Duke of York
During the General Strike of 1926 the King advised the government of Conservative Stanley Baldwin against taking inflammatory action, and took exception to suggestions that the strikers were "revolutionaries" saying, "Try living on their wages before you judge them."
The First World War took a toll on George's health: he was seriously injured on 28 October 1915 when thrown by his horse at a troop review in France, and his heavy smoking exacerbated recurring breathing problems.
He wrote in his diary, "I have lost my best friend and the best of fathers&nbsp;...
The implicit goal was to advertise New Zealand's attractiveness to tourists and potential immigrants, while avoiding news of growing social tensions, by focusing the attention of the British press on a land few knew about.
George preferred a simple, almost quiet, life in marked contrast to the lively social life pursued by his father.
Despite the later claims of Lord Mountbatten of Burma that Prime Minister Lloyd George was opposed to the rescue of the Russian imperial family, the letters of Lord Stamfordham suggest that it was George&nbsp;V who opposed the idea against the advice of the government.
The Duke and Duchess of York lived mainly at York Cottage, a relatively small house in Sandringham, Norfolk, where their way of life mirrored that of a comfortable middle-class family rather than royalty.
Instead, he retired for three months to Craigweil House, Aldwick, in the seaside resort of Bognor, Sussex.
In contrast, he was fond of his second eldest son, Prince Albert (later George&nbsp;VI), and doted on his eldest granddaughter, Princess Elizabeth; he nicknamed her "Lilibet", and she affectionately called him "Grandpa England".
In October 1894, George's uncle-by-marriage, Tsar Alexander III, died and his cousin, Tsar Nicholas II, ascended the Russian throne.
Other memorials include the King George V Playing Fields in the United Kingdom.
He travelled the world, visiting many areas of the British Empire.
George was, on his own admission, unable to express his feelings easily in speech, but they often exchanged loving letters and notes of endearment.
They both thought she should not be called Queen Victoria, and so she became Queen Mary.
His grandmother, father and uncle all approved the match, but the mothers—the Princess of Wales and the Duchess of Edinburgh—both opposed it.
In New Zealand, he praised the military values, bravery, loyalty, and obedience to duty of New Zealanders, and the tour gave New Zealand a chance to show off its progress, especially in its adoption of up-to-date British standards in communications and the processing industries.
By the end of 1922, Ireland was partitioned, the Irish Free State was established, and Lloyd George was out of office.
shoot animals and stick in stamps."
The first break in the family circle is hard to bear but people have been so kind & sympathetic & this has helped us much."
In 1924, George appointed the first Labour Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, in the absence of a clear majority for any one of the three major parties.
He was not in favour of the innovation originally but was persuaded by the argument that it was what his people wanted.
George&nbsp;V gave both his name and donations to many charities, including King George's Fund for Sailors (later known as Seafarers UK).
As a younger son of the Prince of Wales, there was little expectation that George would become king.
On the death of his grandmother in 1901, George's father became King-Emperor of the British Empire, and George was created Prince of Wales.
From 1877 to 1891, George served in the Royal Navy, until the unexpected death of his elder brother in early 1892 put him directly in line for the throne.
Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith had asked the previous king to give an undertaking that he would create sufficient Liberal peers to force the budget through the House.
Dalton wrote an account of their journey entitled ''The Cruise of HMS Bacchante''.
Desperate to avoid the prospect of civil war in Ireland between Unionists and Nationalists, George called a meeting of all parties at Buckingham Palace in July 1914 in an attempt to negotiate a settlement.
His full style as king was "''His Majesty'' George&nbsp;V, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India" until the Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927, when it changed to "''His Majesty'' George&nbsp;V, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, Ireland and the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India".
He appeared hard-working and became widely admired by the people of Britain and the Empire, as well as "the Establishment".
George preferred to stay at home pursuing his hobbies of stamp collecting and game shooting, and lived a life that later biographers would consider dull because of its conventionality.
", were addressed to his nurse, Catherine Black, when she gave him a sedative on the night of 20 January.
Dawson claimed that he acted to preserve the King's dignity, to prevent further strain on the family, and so that the King's death at 11:55&nbsp;p.m. could be announced in the morning edition of ''The Times'' newspaper rather than "less appropriate&nbsp;... evening journals".
As their father thought that the navy was "the very best possible training for any boy", in September 1877, when George was 12&nbsp;years old, both brothers joined the cadet training ship HMS ''Britannia'' at Dartmouth, Devon.
The 1910 general elections had left the Liberals as a minority government dependent upon the support of Irish Nationalists.
The Tsar and his immediate family remained in Russia, where they were killed by Bolsheviks in 1918.
It was performed that same evening in a live broadcast by the BBC, with Adrian Boult conducting the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the composer as soloist.
