EDT after the president's doctor, Richard Tubb, conducted an overall examination.
The 2005 failure of Operation Red Wings showed that the Taliban had returned.
The SCHIP legislation would have significantly expanded federally funded health care benefits and plans to children of some low-income families from about six&nbsp;million to ten&nbsp;million children.
The initiative was introduced to Congress, but failed to make it out of committee.
The White House maintained that the U.S. attorneys were fired for poor performance.
Additional regulation over the housing market would have been beneficial, according to former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan.
On September 19, 2010, former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said that Bush offered to accept 100,000 Palestinian refugees as American citizens if a permanent settlement had been reached between Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
The initial recount also went to Bush, but the outcome was tied up in courts for a month until reaching the U.S. Supreme Court.
Gallup had earlier noted that Bush's favorability ratings in public opinion surveys had begun to rise a year after he had left office, from 40&nbsp;percent in January 2009 and 35&nbsp;percent in March 2009, to 45&nbsp;percent in July 2010, a period during which he had remained largely out of the news.
He also emphasized the need for the nation to come together and comfort the families of the victims.
From 2003 to 2004, Bush authorized U.S. military intervention in Haiti and Liberia to protect U.S. interests.
My administration has worked with Congress to invest in gas-saving technologies like advanced batteries and hydrogen fuel cells...
Bush has English and some German ancestry, along with more distant Dutch, Welsh, Irish, French, and Scottish roots.
Nationally, Bush was both one of the most popular and unpopular presidents in history, having received the highest recorded presidential approval ratings in the wake of the September 11 attacks, as well as one of the lowest approval ratings during the 2008 financial crisis.
The initial success of U.S. operations increased his popularity, but the U.S. and allied forces faced a growing insurgency led by sectarian groups; Bush's "Mission Accomplished" speech was later criticized as premature.
The increase in spending was more than under any predecessor since Lyndon B. Johnson.
It was to be funded by an increase in the cigarette tax.
A shirt-sleeved statue of Bush was unveiled in Fushë-Krujë, a few kilometers northwest of Tirana.
In June 2005, the United States Department of Defense released all the records of Bush's Texas Air National Guard service, which remain in its official archives.
In March 2006, a visit to India led to renewed ties between the two countries, reversing decades of U.S. policy.
Efforts to kill or capture al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden failed as he escaped a battle in December 2001 in the mountainous region of Tora Bora, which the Bush Administration later acknowledged to have resulted from a failure to commit enough U.S. ground troops.
A CNN poll conducted that same month found that 55&nbsp;percent of Americans said Bush's presidency had been a failure, with opinions divided along party lines, and 43&nbsp;percent of independents calling it a success.
Midway through Bush's second term, it was questioned whether Bush was retreating from his freedom and democracy agenda, highlighted in policy changes toward some oil-rich former Soviet republics in central Asia.
Though Bush originally outlined an ambitious domestic agenda, his priorities were significantly altered following the September 11 terrorist attacks in 2001.
By the end of 2008, the U.S. had lost a total of 2.6&nbsp;million jobs.
Later in 2006, Bush declared the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands a national monument, creating the largest marine reserve to date.
In 1978, Bush ran for the House of Representatives from Texas's 19th congressional district.
On September 2, 2007, North Korea agreed to disclose and dismantle all of its nuclear programs by the end of 2007.
Despite the initial success in driving the Taliban from power in Kabul, by early 2003 the Taliban was regrouping, amassing new funds and recruits.
She is named after her two grandmothers.
He was raised in Midland and Houston, Texas, with four siblings, Jeb, Neil, Marvin and Dorothy.
Walt Harrington, a journalist, recalls seeing "books by John Fowles, F. Scott Fitzgerald, James Joyce, and Gore Vidal lying about, as well as biographies of Willa Cather and Queen Victoria" in his home when Bush was a Texas oilman.
Bush was a rugby union player and was on Yale's 1st XV.
He also read 14 Lincoln biographies and, during the last three years of his presidency, he reportedly read 186 books.
They launched the invasion on March 20, 2003.
The Bushes joined the Obamas in New York City to mark the tenth anniversary of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Bush invoked Section 3 at 7:16&nbsp;am.
Bush appeared on NBC's ''The Tonight Show with Jay Leno'' on November 19, 2013, along with the former First Lady, Laura Bush.
Bush made his debut as a motivational speaker on October 26 at the "Get Motivated" seminar in Dallas.
He was honorably discharged from the Air Force Reserve on November 21, 1974.
In 2005, the Tbilisi City Council voted to rename a street in honor of the U.S. president.
While 73&nbsp;percent of military personnel said that they would vote for Bush, 18&nbsp;percent preferred his Democratic rival, John Kerry.
Those designated included: Assaad Halim Hardan, a member of Lebanon's parliament and current leader of the Syrian Socialist National Party; Wi'am Wahhab, a former member of Lebanon's government (Minister of the Environment) under Prime Minister Omar Karami (2004–2005); Hafiz Makhluf, a colonel and senior official in the Syrian General Intelligence Directorate and a cousin of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad; and Muhammad Nasif Khayrbik, identified as a close adviser to Assad.
The move was hailed by conservationists for "its foresight and leadership in protecting this incredible area".
Critics have alleged that the administration misinformed the public and did not do enough to reduce carbon emissions and deter global warming.
In May 1968, Bush was commissioned into the Texas Air National Guard.
Supporters credit Bush's counterterrorism policies with preventing another major terrorist attack from occurring in the US after 9/11 and also praise individual policies such as the Medicare prescription drug benefit and the AIDS relief program known as PEPFAR.
In 2007, the Pew Global Attitudes Project reported that during the Bush presidency, attitudes towards the United States, and towards Americans, became less favorable around the world.
In contrast to his father, who was perceived as having troubles with an overarching unifying theme, Bush embraced larger visions and was seen as a man of larger ideas and associated huge risks.
The previous month, his father asked him to tell White House chief of staff John H. Sununu that he should resign.
Bush's campaign criticized his Democratic opponent, incumbent Vice President Al Gore, over gun control and taxation.
By the beginning of 2008, his final year in office, Bush's approval rating had dropped to a low of just 19&nbsp;percent, largely from the loss of support among Republicans.
Within the United States armed forces, according to an unscientific survey, the president was strongly supported in the 2004 presidential elections.
This became the basis for the Bush Doctrine which weakened the unprecedented levels of international and domestic support for the United States which had followed the September 11 attacks.
Bush says his wife has had a stabilizing effect on his life, and attributes to her influence his 1986 decision to give up alcohol.
During his time as president, Bush read the Bible daily.
It was signed into law by Bush in early 2002.
Bush was also asked about Iran but declined to answer, stating that any answer he gives would be interpreted as undermining President Barack Obama.
The bill aims to protect Americans against discrimination based on their genetic information when it comes to health insurance and employment.
For most of Texas history, governors served two-year terms; a constitutional amendment extended those terms to four years starting in 1975.
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales later resigned over the issue, along with other senior members of the Justice Department.
The U.S. government has spent some $44 billion on the project since 2003 (a figure that includes $7 billion contributed to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, a multilateral organization), saving an estimated 5 million lives.
They included Attorney General Alberto Gonzales and his chief of staff Kyle Sampson, Gonzales' liaison to the White House Monica Goodling, aide to the president Karl Rove and his senior aide Sara Taylor.
Since leaving office, Bush has kept a relatively low profile though he has made public appearances, most notably after the release of his memoirs in 2010 and for the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks in 2011.
And the people who knocked these buildings down will hear all of us soon."
Bush received heavy criticism for his handling of the Iraq War, his response to Hurricane Katrina and to the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse, NSA warrantless surveillance, the Plame affair, and Guantanamo Bay detention camp controversies.
The previous President to win an absolute majority of the popular vote was Bush's father in the 1988 election.
He is also the brother of Jeb Bush, a former Governor of Florida and candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in the 2016 presidential election.
In 2006, most respondents in 18 of 21 countries surveyed around the world were found to hold an unfavorable opinion of Bush.
On August 15, 2008, Bush said of Russia's invasion of the country of Georgia: "Bullying and intimidation are not acceptable ways to conduct foreign policy in the 21st century."
To aid with the situation, Bush signed a $170&nbsp;billion economic stimulus package which was intended to improve the economic situation by sending tax rebate checks to many Americans and providing tax breaks for struggling businesses.
Later that month the UN had installed the Afghan Transitional Administration chaired by Hamid Karzai.
Critics often point to his handling of the Iraq War, specifically the failure to find weapons of mass destruction, that were the main rationale behind the initial invasion—as well as his handling of tax policy, Hurricane Katrina and the 2008 financial crisis as proof that George W. Bush was unfit to be president.
Other pollsters have noted similar trends of slight improvement  in Bush's personal favorability since the end of his presidency.
Bush's campaign advisers were Karen Hughes, Joe Allbaugh, and Karl Rove.
Bush lauded the pro-democracy struggles in Georgia and Ukraine.
"I think people look at him and think John Wayne," said Piers Morgan, editor of the British ''Daily Mirror''.
Nearly 8&nbsp;million immigrants came to the United States from 2000 to 2005, more than in any other five-year period in the nation's history.
And that means we need to increase supply, especially here at home.
Murdering the innocent is always evil, never more so than when the lives taken belong to those who protect our families and communities."
In an interview with ''Playboy'', ''New York Times'' columnist David Brooks said George W. Bush "was 60 IQ points smarter in private than he was in public.
Vince Reinhardt, a former Federal Reserve economist now at the American Enterprise Institute, said "it would have helped for the Bush administration to empower the folks at Treasury and the Federal Reserve and the comptroller of the currency and the FDIC to look at these issues more closely", and additionally, that it would have helped "for Congress to have held hearings".
However, the move was largely symbolic as there is still a federal law banning offshore drilling.
On September 5, following the death of Chief Justice William Rehnquist, this nomination was withdrawn and Bush instead nominated Roberts for Chief Justice to succeed Rehnquist.
Departing from previous practice, he stood among a group of U.S. athletes rather than from a ceremonial stand or box, saying: "On behalf of a proud, determined, and grateful nation, I declare open the Games of Salt Lake City, celebrating the Olympic Winter Games."
The administration pursued a national missile defense.
Bush praised the event as well, saying that the Iraqis "have taken rightful control of their country's destiny".
In all, twelve Justice Department officials resigned rather than testify under oath before Congress.
Bill Arning, director of the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, called his portraits "thickly painted in what I would call 'high-amateur' mode" and wrote, "I would say they need to be less based on photographic reproduction.
Amid high gasoline prices in 2008, Bush lifted a ban on offshore drilling.
Soon after, Bush and Cheney were officially nominated by the Republican Party at the 2000 Republican National Convention.
In an interview published by ''Israel Hayom'' magazine on June 12, 2015, Bush said that "boots on the ground" would be needed in order to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS).
The closeness of the Florida outcome led to a recount.
Bush experienced a number of judicial appointment controversies.
His tenure saw national debates on immigration, Social Security, electronic surveillance, and torture.
Bush expanded economic sanctions on Syria.
The poverty rate increased from 11.3&nbsp;percent in 2000 to 12.3&nbsp;percent in 2006 after peaking at 12.7&nbsp;percent in 2004.
Beginning in the fall of 1973, Bush attended the Harvard Business School, where he earned an M.B.A. degree.
He reclaimed his powers at 9:21&nbsp;am.
Bush argued that the lack of legal status denies the protections of U.S. laws to millions of people who face dangers of poverty and exploitation, and penalizes employers despite a demand for immigrant labor.
According to a CBS News/''New York Times'' poll conducted January 11–15, 2009, Bush's final approval rating in office was 22&nbsp;percent, the lowest in American history.
He was elected president in 2000 after a close and controversial election against Al Gore, becoming the fourth president to be elected while receiving fewer popular votes nationwide than an opponent.
When Bush left office, the average was at 7,949, one of the lowest levels of his presidency.
Commenting on his low poll numbers and accusations of being "the worst president," Bush would say, "I make decisions on what I think is right for the United States based upon principles.
The program proved to be controversial, as critics of the administration, as well as organizations such as the American Bar Association, argued that it was illegal.
The U.S. initially sought a UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of military force but dropped the bid for UN approval due to vigorous opposition from several countries.
In the State of the Union address in January 2003, Bush outlined a five-year strategy for global emergency AIDS relief, the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief.
In early 2007, the Treasury Department, acting on a June 2005 executive order, froze American bank accounts of Syria's Higher Institute of Applied Science and Technology, Electronics Institute, and National Standards and Calibration Laboratory.
Bush used a budget surplus to push through Texas's largest tax-cut, $2 billion.
On the eve of Trump's nomination, it was reported that Bush had privately expressed concern about the current direction of the Republican Party and told a group of his former aides and advisors, "I'm worried that I will be the last Republican president."
On July 19, 2006, Bush used his veto power for the first time in his presidency to veto the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act.
After serving as president, Bush began painting as a hobby.
The bill would have repealed the Dickey-Wicker Amendment, thereby permitting federal money to be used for research where stem cells are derived from the destruction of an embryo.
Senator from Connecticut.
Princeton University scholar Julian Zelizer described Bush's presidency as a "transformative" one, and said that "some people hate him, some people love him, but I do think he'll have a much more substantive perception as time goes on".
Since leaving the White House, Bush has also taken up oil painting.
At the outset, Judicature magazine noted that the "Senate Democrats were gearing up for the approaching confirmation hearings" before the first set of nominees were sent to the Senate.
The CIA had exercised the technique on certain key terrorist suspects under authority given to it in the Bybee Memo from the Attorney General, though that memo was later withdrawn.
The Bush administration pushed for significantly increased regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in 2003, and after two years, the regulations passed the House but died in the Senate.
Despite this, Bush regained momentum and, according to political observers, effectively became the front runner after the South Carolina primary, which according to ''The Boston Globe'' made history for his campaign's negativity; ''The New York Times'' described it as a smear campaign.
He later co-owned the Texas Rangers baseball team before defeating Ann Richards in the 1994 Texas gubernatorial election.
On June 10, 2007, Bush met with Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and became the first president to visit Albania.
After graduating from Yale University in 1968 and Harvard Business School in 1975, he worked in oil businesses.
On June 29, 2002, Bush underwent a colonoscopy and chose to invoke Section 3 of the amendment, making Vice President Dick Cheney the Acting President.
In 2010, the Justice Department investigator concluded that though political considerations did play a part in as many as four of the attorney firings, the firings were "inappropriately political", but not criminal.
The September 11 terrorist attacks were a major turning point in Bush's presidency.
In 2012, he wrote the foreword of ''The 4% Solution: Unleashing the Economic Growth America Needs'', an economics book published by the George W. Bush Presidential Center.
Bush was an advocate of China's entry into the World Trade Organization.
So my administration has repeatedly called on Congress to expand domestic oil production."
The Senate confirmed only 8 out of 60 judicial nominations by October 2001.
2082, a bill that would have expanded congressional oversight over the intelligence community and banned the use of waterboarding as well as other forms of interrogation not permitted under the United States Army Field Manual on Human Intelligence Collector Operations, saying that "the bill Congress sent me would take away one of the most valuable tools in the War on Terror".
During Bush's second term, a controversy arose over the Justice Department's midterm dismissal of seven United States Attorneys.
In December 2007, the United States entered its longest post-World War II recession, often referred to as the "Great Recession", prompting the Bush administration to obtain congressional passage of multiple economic programs intended to preserve the country's financial system.
In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments, Bush appointed 61 judges to the United States courts of appeals and 261 judges to the United States district courts.
In February 2012, Gallup reported that "Americans still rate George W. Bush among the worst presidents, though their views have become more positive in the three years since he left office."
The proposal's legislative prospects were further diminished by the political fallout from Hurricane Katrina in the fall of 2005.
Within months, "both countries had walked away from their respective commitments under the U.S.–DPRK Agreed Framework of October 1994."
The Bush campaign advertised across the U.S. against Democratic candidates, including Bush's emerging opponent, Massachusetts Senator John Kerry.
Bush criticized Obama's handling of Iran, specifically with respect to sanctions and a nuclear deal, saying: "You think the Middle East is chaotic now?
Bush was the first person to win an American presidential election with fewer national votes than another candidate since Benjamin Harrison in 1888.
Bush responded to mounting criticism by accepting full responsibility for the federal government's failures in its handling of the emergency.
Returning to Texas after the successful campaign, he purchased a share in the Texas Rangers baseball franchise in April 1989, where he served as managing general partner for five years.
Bush also urged Congress to provide additional funds for border security and committed to deploying 6,000 National Guard troops to the Mexico–United States border.
After two years of active-duty service while training, he was assigned to Houston, flying Convair F-102s with the 147th Reconnaissance Wing out of the Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base.
While not permitted by the U.S. Army Field Manuals which assert "that harsh interrogation tactics elicit unreliable information", the Bush administration believed these enhanced interrogations "provided critical information" to preserve American lives.
O'Neill disputes the claim, made in Bush's book ''Decision Points'', that he never openly disagreed with him on planned tax cuts.
Bush, was Ronald Reagan's Vice President from 1981 to 1989 and the 41st U.S. President from 1989 to 1993.
In his 2008 State of the Union Address, Bush announced that the U.S. would commit $2&nbsp;billion over the next three years to a new international fund to promote clean energy technologies and fight climate change, saying, "Along with contributions from other countries, this fund will increase and accelerate the deployment of all forms of cleaner, more efficient technologies in developing nations like India and China, and help leverage substantial private-sector capital by making clean energy projects more financially attractive."
There were calls for Bush's impeachment, though most polls showed a plurality of Americans would not support such an action.
Bush had said in June 2008, "In the long run, the solution is to reduce demand for oil by promoting alternative energy technologies.
Bush expressed disappointment upon the defeat of one of his signature domestic initiatives.
His 47&nbsp;percent approval rating was equal to that of President Obama's in the same polling period.
In 2006, the Taliban insurgency appeared larger, fiercer and better organized than expected, with large-scale allied offensives such as Operation Mountain Thrust attaining limited success.
He is currently a public speaker, and has written a memoir, ''Decision Points''.
A March 2007 survey of Arab opinion conducted by Zogby International and the University of Maryland found that Bush was the most disliked leader in the Arab world.
In 2000 and again in 2004, ''Time'' magazine named George W. Bush as its Person of the Year, a title awarded to someone who the editors believe "has done the most to influence the events of the year".
Testing can be done on only 12 of the original lines, and all approved lines have been cultured in contact with mouse cells, which creates safety issues that complicate development and approval of therapies from these lines.
As a result, Bush commissioned 3,500 additional troops to the country in March 2007.
He campaigned on a platform that included bringing integrity and honor back to the White House, increasing the size of the United States Armed Forces, cutting taxes, improving education, and aiding minorities.
The Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument comprises 84&nbsp;million acres (340,000&nbsp;km2) and is home to 7,000 species of fish, birds, and other marine animals, many of which are specific to only those islands.
In Jerusalem, a small plaza with a monument bearing his name is also dedicated to Bush.
Nevertheless, public support for the proposal declined and the House Republican leadership decided not to put Social Security reform on the priority list for the remainder of their 2005 legislative agenda.
The surplus is the people's money."
Bush moved his family to Washington, D.C. in 1988 to work on his father's campaign for the U.S. presidency.
In his 2002 State of the Union Address, Bush referred to an axis of evil including Iraq, Iran and North Korea.
Bush has said that he supports adult stem cell research and has supported federal legislation that finances adult stem cell research.
Alongside the 2014 United States–Africa Leaders Summit, Bush, Michelle Obama, the State Department, and the George W. Bush Institute hosted a daylong forum on education and health with the spouses of the African leaders attending the summit.
By October 2008, due to increases in spending, the national debt had risen to $11.3&nbsp;trillion, an increase of over 100&nbsp;percent from 2000 when the debt was only $5.6&nbsp;trillion.
Bush began his presidency with approval ratings near 50&nbsp;percent.
Bush has been an avid reader throughout his adult life, preferring biographies and histories.
On January 10, 2007, Bush announced a surge of 21,500 more troops for Iraq, as well as a job program for Iraqis, more reconstruction proposals, and $1.2&nbsp;billion for these programs.
According to Iraq Body Count, some 251,000 Iraqis have been killed in the civil war following the U.S.-led invasion, including at least 163,841 civilians.
During a pre-release appearance promoting the book, Bush said he considered his biggest accomplishment to be keeping "the country safe amid a real danger", and his greatest failure to be his inability to secure the passage of Social Security reform.
Bush's upbringing in West Texas, his accent, his vacations on his Texas ranch, and his penchant for country metaphors contribute to his folksy, American cowboy image.
Thereafter, his approval ratings and approval of his handling of domestic and foreign policy issues steadily dropped.
Much of these policies have endured in the administration of Bush's Democratic successor, Barack Obama.
In 2012, Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves awarded Bush the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana for his work in expanding NATO.
Throughout Bush's first term, national attention focused on him as a potential future presidential candidate.
According to Iraqi National Security Advisor Mowaffak al-Rubaie, "This is the greatest day in the history of this country."
Bush addressed the gathering via a megaphone while standing on a heap of rubble, to much applause: "I can hear you.
By May 2009, North Korea had restarted its nuclear program and threatened to attack South Korea.
In May 2004, Gallup reported that 89&nbsp;percent of the Republican electorate approved of Bush.
His campaign focused on four themes: welfare reform, tort reform, crime reduction, and education improvement.
In one instance, on September 4, 1976, he was arrested near his family's summer home in Kennebunkport, Maine, for driving under the influence of alcohol.
Bush responded with what became known as the Bush Doctrine: launching a "War on Terror", an international military campaign which included the war in Afghanistan, in 2001, and the Iraq War, in 2003.
Bush became a member of the Skull and Bones society as a senior.
Many contend that the initiative has been successful, as cited by the fact that students in the U.S. have performed significantly better on state reading and math tests since Bush signed "No Child Left Behind" into law.
Federal funding for medical research involving the creation or destruction of human embryos through the Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institutes of Health has been forbidden by law since the passage in 1995 of the Dickey-Wicker Amendment by Congress and the signature of President Bill Clinton.
The Bush Administration asserted both a right and the intention to wage preemptive war, or preventive war.
Individual income tax revenues increased by 14&nbsp;percent, corporate tax revenues by 50&nbsp;percent, customs and duties by 40&nbsp;percent.
Over an eight-year period, Bush's once-high approval ratings steadily declined, while his disapproval numbers increased significantly.
On March 10, 2008, the Congress filed a federal lawsuit to enforce their issued subpoenas.
Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan warned of a recession and Bush stated that a tax cut would stimulate the economy and create jobs.
He said he would carefully weigh recommendations from his commanding General David Petraeus and Ambassador Ryan Crocker about how to proceed after the end of the military buildup in the summer of 2008.
Many Republican senators, as well as influential members of the Bush Administration, feared that the agency created by these regulations would merely be mimicking the private sector's risky practices.
Following Republican efforts to pass the Medicare Act of 2003, Bush signed the bill, which included major changes to the Medicare program by providing beneficiaries with some assistance in paying for prescription drugs, while relying on private insurance for the delivery of benefits.
In September 2008, the crisis became much more serious beginning with the government takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac followed by the collapse of Lehman Brothers and a federal bailout of American International Group for $85&nbsp;billion.
Bush attended high school at the Phillips Academy, a boarding school (then all-male) in Andover, Massachusetts, where he played baseball, and during his senior year, was the head cheerleader.
Bush's order prohibits Americans from doing business with these institutions suspected of helping spread weapons of mass destruction and being supportive of terrorism.
Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili was seated nearby.
