Washington reorganized the army during the long standoff, and forced the British to withdraw by putting artillery on Dorchester Heights overlooking the city.
His strategy enabled Continental forces to capture two major British armies at Saratoga in 1777 and Yorktown in 1781.
He also enjoyed going to dances and parties, in addition to the theater, races, and cockfights.
The newlywed couple moved to Mount Vernon, near Alexandria, where he took up the life of a planter and political figure.
To protect their privacy, Martha Washington burned the correspondence they had exchanged; only five letters between the couple are known to have survived, two letters from Martha to George and three from him to Martha.
It contains over 17,000 letters and documents and is available online from the University of Virginia.
Washington began to pull himself out of debt in the mid-1760s by diversifying his previously tobacco-centric business interests into other ventures and paying more attention to his affairs, especially in the form of buying fewer imported luxuries.
However, unlike the deists, the theological rationalists believed in the efficacy of prayer to God.
Few people were killed as the Indians fled to British protection in Canada.
Following the expedition, he retired from his Virginia Regiment commission in December 1758.
As conditions worsened, Washington was faced with the task of maintaining morale and discouraging desertion which by February had become common.
He devoted much time to his plantations and other business interests, including his distillery which produced its first batch of spirits in February 1797.
In the United States, memorial processions were held in major cities and thousands wore mourning clothes for months.
He led his men in brutal campaigns against the Indians in the west; in 10 months his regiment fought 20 battles, and lost a third of its men.
Washington frequently accompanied his wife to church services.
Washington appeared at the Second Continental Congress in a military uniform, signaling that he was prepared for war.
Most Americans assumed he was rich because of the well-known "glorified façade of wealth and grandeur" at Mount Vernon.
The Electoral College unanimously elected Washington as the first president in 1789, and again 1792; He remains the only president to receive the totality of electoral votes.
Their leaders were subject to execution upon the scaffold.
Washington had owned slaves since the death of his father in 1743, when at the age of eleven, he inherited 10 slaves.
After 1890 however, historians insisted on scientific research methods to validate every statement, and there was no documentation for this anecdote apart from Weems' report that he learned it from one of the neighbors who knew the young Washington.
If it had been, idolatry and adulation would have been unbounded...Now we can allow a certain citizen to be wise, virtuous, and good, without thinking him a deity or a savior."
This represented the premier instance of the federal government using military force to exert authority over the states and citizens and is also the only time a sitting U.S. president personally commanded troops in the field.
He led his army across the Delaware River to capture nearly 1,000 Hessians in Trenton, New Jersey.
Lawrence's position as Adjutant General (militia leader) of Virginia was divided into four district offices after his death.
The American officers never equaled their opponents in tactics and maneuver, and consequently they lost most of the pitched battles.
The address, however, quickly set American values regarding foreign affairs.
This restored Washington's position as the highest-ranking military officer in U.S. history.
Historian John R. Alden indicates that Washington added the words "So help me God."
In 1754 Lieutenant Governor Dinwiddie had promised land bounties to the soldiers and officers who volunteered to serve during the French and Indian War.
'''Selected Issues :'''
By late February, there were adequate supplies flowing throughout camp.
Braddock accepted the recommendation (likely made in a council of war including other officers) and took command of the lead division.
By the time the three physicians finished their treatments and bloodletting of the president, there had been a massive volume of blood loss—half or more of his total blood content was removed over the course of just a few hours.
Historian John Shy says that by 1783 Washington was "a mediocre military strategist but had become a master political tactician with an almost perfect sense of timing and a developed capacity to exploit his charismatic reputation, using people who thought they were using him".
Washington just missed apprehending him, but did capture his conspirator, Major John André, a British intelligence officer under Clinton, who was later hanged by order of a court-martial called by Washington.
Biographers hailed him as the great exemplar of republicanism.
In 1751 Washington traveled to Barbados with Lawrence, who was suffering from tuberculosis, with the hope that the climate would be beneficial to Lawrence's health.
Austin Washington, the great-nephew of George Washington, maintains that it is unlikely that Parson Weems, a man of the clergy, while writing an account about truth and honesty, would then turn around and outright lie about such a story.
The diagnosis of Washington's final illness and the immediate cause of his death have been subjects of debate since the day he died.
In battle, however, Washington was repeatedly outmaneuvered by British generals with larger armies.
They obtained a barely adequate supply (about 2.5&nbsp;million pounds) by the end of 1776, mostly from France.
The George Washington Masonic National Memorial in Alexandria, Virginia, was constructed between 1922 and 1932 with voluntary contributions from all 52 local governing bodies of the Freemasons in the United States.
In terms of personality, a leading biographer Douglas Southall Freeman concluded, "the great big thing stamped across that man is character."
Whatever responsibility rested on him for the defeat as a result of his recommendation to Braddock, Washington was not included by the succeeding commander, Col. Thomas Dunbar, in planning subsequent force movements.
Washington followed up his victory at Trenton with another over British regulars at Princeton in early January.
In 1769 he became more politically active, presenting the Virginia Assembly with legislation to ban the importation of goods from Great Britain.
He was hard to miss: At over six feet, he was taller than most of his contemporaries.
Young Washington spent much of his boyhood at Ferry Farm in Stafford County near Fredericksburg.
In the end after agreements were hatched however, Washington thought the achievements finally made were monumental.
Together the two raised her two children from her previous marriage, John Parke Custis and Martha Parke (Patsy) Custis; later the Washingtons raised two of Mrs. Washington's grandchildren, Eleanor Parke Custis and George Washington Parke Custis.
He subsequently named Henry "Lighthorse Harry" Lee as field commander to lead the troops into the rebellious districts.
Washington's army went into winter quarters at New Windsor in 1780 and suffered again for lack of supplies.
He served as a vestryman and as church warden for both Fairfax Parish in Alexandria and Truro Parish, administrative positions that, like all positions in Virginia while it had an official religion, required one to swear they would not speak or act in a way that did not conform to the tenets of the Church.
''The Writings of George Washington from the Original Manuscript Sources, 1745–1799'' (1931–44) is a 37 volume set edited by John C. Fitzpatrick.
Clinton was in the end able to shut off Kings Ferry but it was a strategic loss; he could proceed no further up the river, due to American fortifications and Washington's army.
Craik and Brown thought that Washington had "quinsey" or "quincy", while Dick, the younger man, thought the condition was more serious or a "violent inflammation of the throat".
Hamilton obtained the approval of the southern states in exchange for an agreement to place the new national capitol on the Potomac River.
After victory had been finalized in 1783, Washington resigned as commander-in-chief rather than seize power, proving his opposition to dictatorship and his commitment to American republicanism.
A firm believer in bloodletting, a standard medical practice of that era which he had used to treat various ailments of slaves on his plantation, he ordered estate overseer Albin Rawlins to remove half a pint of his blood.
The set made when he became president was carved from hippopotamus and elephant ivory, held together with gold springs.
Jeffersonians supported France and strongly attacked the treaty.
In 1831, for the centennial of his birth, a new tomb was constructed to receive his remains.
However, by 1764, conspicuous consumption of luxuries coupled with a poor tobacco market left Washington ₤1800 in debt.
He gained an understanding of overall strategy, especially in locating strategic geographical points.
His retirement from office after two terms established a tradition that lasted until 1940, when Franklin Delano Roosevelt won an unprecedented third term.
Washington and Congress reorganized the army with increased rewards for staying and punishment for desertion, which raised troop numbers effectively for subsequent battles.
These events had international consequences; the French accused Washington of assassinating Jumonville, who they claimed was on a diplomatic mission.
He often attended services of different denominations.
By 1774 he paid taxes on 135 slaves (this figure does not include the "dowers").
The Federalists made him the symbol of their party but for many years, the Jeffersonians continued to distrust his influence and delayed building the Washington Monument.
Washington's army unsuccessfully attacked the British garrison at Germantown in early October.
The definitive letterpress edition of his writings was begun by the University of Virginia in 1968, and today comprises 52 published volumes, with more to come.
He was embarrassed by a friendly fire episode in which his unit and another British unit thought the other was the French enemy and opened fire, with 14 dead and 26 wounded in the mishap.
By chance, Washington became involved in its beginning.
On November 25, the British evacuated New York City, and Washington and the governor took possession.
Washington demonstrated his resourcefulness and courage in the most difficult situations, including disasters and retreats.
Following the Convention, his support convinced many, but not all of his colleagues, to vote for ratification.
Six of George's siblings reached maturity, including two older half-brothers, Lawrence and Augustine, from his father's first marriage to Jane Butler Washington, and four full siblings, Samuel, Elizabeth (Betty), John Augustine and Charles.
During the United States Bicentennial year, George Washington was posthumously appointed to the grade of General of the Armies of the United States by the congressional joint resolution Public Law 94-479 passed on January 19, 1976, with an effective appointment date of July 4, 1976.
During the Revolutionary and Early Republican periods of American history, many commentators compared Washington with the Roman aristocrat and statesman Cincinnatus.
Washington's introduction to surveying began at an early age through school exercises that taught him the basics of the profession, followed by practical experience in the field.
Washington's third, and most important role in the war effort, was the embodiment of armed resistance to the Crown—the representative man of the Revolution.
He developed a very negative idea of the value of militia, who seemed too unreliable, too undisciplined, and too short-term compared to regulars.
He often used words for the deity, such as "God" and "Providence", while avoiding using the words "Jesus" and "Christ."
Surviving letters suggest that he may have been in love at the time with Sally Fairfax, the wife of a friend.
He retired from the presidency in 1797, returning to his home and plantation at Mount Vernon.
Dental problems left Washington in constant pain, for which he took laudanum.
The Continental Army under Washington engaged the enemy for the first time as an army of the newly independent United States at the Battle of Long Island, the largest battle of the entire war.
On December 18, 1799, a funeral was held at Mount Vernon, where his body was interred.
Washington's Birthday, is a federal holiday in the United States.
The war effort and getting supplies to the troops were under the purview of Congress, but Washington pressured the Congress to provide the essentials.
Many in the Congress and elsewhere in the government profited from trading in the debt paper which was assumed.
However, Washington did not wear a wig; instead, he powdered his hair, as is represented in several portraits, including the well-known, unfinished Gilbert Stuart depiction called the "Athenaeum Portrait."
Sometime around 3&nbsp;a.m. that Saturday, he suddenly awoke with severe difficulty breathing and almost completely unable to speak or swallow.
In February 1777, while encamped at Morristown, New Jersey, Washington became convinced that only smallpox inoculation would prevent the destruction of his Army, by using variolation.
He closely observed British military tactics, gaining a keen insight into their strengths and weaknesses that proved invaluable during the Revolution.
Theologian Peter A. Lillback argues that Washington was neither a deist nor a "theistic rationalist" but a Christian who accepted the core beliefs of Christianity.
His first experiences at surveying occurred in the surrounding territory of Mount Vernon.
In December 1800, the House passed an appropriations bill for $200,000 to build the mausoleum, which was to be a pyramid with a  square base.
Lee and Lafayette, moving with 4000 men and without Washington's immediate knowledge, attempted to launch but bungled the first attack at the British rear guard, where Clinton, also with 4000 men and waiting in anticipation, came about and offered stiff resistance, keeping the Americans in check.
In little time Washington's army under the cover of darkness crossed the East River safely to Manhattan Island, and did so without loss of life or materiel.
His enormous personal and political stature and his political skills kept Congress, the army, the French, the militias, and the states all pointed toward a common goal.
In his youth he became a senior officer in the colonial militia during the first stages of the French and Indian War.
He drank in moderation and precisely recorded gambling wins and losses, but Washington disliked the excessive drinking, gambling, smoking, and profanity that was common in colonial Virginia.
In August, Washington attended the First Virginia Convention, where he was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress.
The federal army was too small to be used, so Washington invoked the Militia Act of 1792 to summon militias from Pennsylvania, Virginia, Maryland and New Jersey.
William Fairfax, Lawrence's father-in-law and cousin of Virginia's largest landowner, Thomas, Lord Fairfax, was also a formative influence.
Washington's army of 11,000 went into winter quarters at Valley Forge north of Philadelphia in December 1777.
Part of the collection is available online from the University of Virginia.
The temperatures fell to 16 below zero, the New York Harbor was frozen over, and snow and ice covered the ground for weeks, with the troops again lacking provisions for a time as at Valley Forge.
The skirmishes at Verplanck's Point and at Stony Point demonstrated that the continental infantry had become quite formidable and were an enormous boost to morale.
Washington was ordered to "act defensively or offensively" as he thought best.
Washington, as commander of the army and as president, was a vigorous promoter of tolerance for all religious denominations.
The new Constitution was subsequently ratified by all thirteen states.
Parliament repealed the Townshend Acts in 1770.
It is said to have been detailed regarding small items, vague concerning large ones and included the expenses incurred from Martha's visits to his headquarters, as well as his compensation for service, none of which had been drawn during the war.
He had several sets of false teeth made, four of them by a dentist named John Greenwood.
The comparison arose as Washington, like Cincinnatus, remained in command of the Continental Army only until the British had been defeated.
His great-grandfather, John Washington, emigrated to Virginia in 1656 and began accumulating land and slaves, as did his son Lawrence and his grandson, George's father, Augustine.
In less than two days he completed his first survey, plotting a 400 acre parcel of land and was well on his way to a promising career.
Washington was appointed by Governor Dinwiddie as one of the four district adjutants in February 1753, with the rank of major in the Virginia militia.
Nevertheless, George and Martha made a compatible marriage, because Martha was intelligent, gracious, and experienced in managing a planter's estate.
In 1749, at the age of 17, Washington began his career as a professional surveyor.
His involvement began in 1767, when he first took political stands against the various acts of the British Parliament.
Furthermore, by voluntarily resigning his commission and disbanding his army when the war was won (rather than declaring himself monarch), he permanently established the principle of civilian supremacy in military affairs.
At this time, Virginia and other southern colonies had employed slave labor, in which slaveholders (and the rich in general) formed the ruling class and much of the economy was based upon slave labor.
Sullivan later reported that "the immediate objects of this expedition are accomplished, viz: total ruin of the Indian settlements and the destruction of their crops, which were designed for the support of those inhuman barbarians."
Like most Virginia planters, he imported luxuries and other goods from England and paid for them by exporting his tobacco crop.
The decisive defeat of Col. Patrick Ferguson's Tory Regiment at King's Mountain demonstrated the superiority of the riflery of American "over-mountain men" over British-trained troops armed with musket and bayonet.
Virginia, the largest colony, deserved recognition, and New England—where the fighting began—realized it needed Southern support.
Despite fears that a democratic system would lead to political violence, he set the standard for tolerance of opposition voices and conducted a smooth transition of power to his successor.
Washington's participation in the debates was minor, although he cast his vote when called upon; his prestige facilitated the collegiality and productivity of the delegates.
Southern representatives and senators, in later opposition to the plan, defeated the measure because they felt it was best to have Washington's body remain at Mount Vernon.
Secretary of the State Thomas Jefferson, founder of the Jeffersonian Republicans, strenuously opposed Hamilton's agenda, but Washington typically favored Hamilton over Jefferson, and it was Hamilton's agenda that went into effect.
Washington biographer Don Higginbotham notes that in such instances people with diametrically opposing opinions frequently base their views of Washington's beliefs on their own beliefs.
At the time, Deism was a theological outlook, not an organized denomination, and was compatible with being an Episcopalian.
Historian Gordon Wood concludes that the greatest act in his life was his resignation as commander of the armies.
He participated in the planning for a Provisional Army to meet any emergency that might arise, but avoided involvement in details as much as possible; he delegated most of the work, including leadership of the army, to Hamilton, then serving as a major general in the U.S. Army.
Historians debate whether or not Washington preferred a Fabian strategy to harass the British with quick, sharp attacks followed by a retreat so the larger British army could not catch him, or whether he preferred to fight major battles.
Although third-hand reports say he took communion, he is usually characterized as never or rarely participating in the rite.
While the British were comfortably quartered in Philadelphia and paid for their supplies in sterling, Washington had difficulty procuring supplies from the few farmers in the area who would not accept rapidly depreciating American paper currency, while the woodlands about the valley had soon been exhausted of game.
Washington's policy of noninvolvement in the foreign affairs of the Old World was largely embraced by the founding generation of American statesmen, including John Adams, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison.
Washington's father was the Justice of the Westmoreland County Court.
In George's youth, the Washingtons were moderately prosperous members of the Virginia gentry, of "middling rank" rather than one of the leading planter families.
He privately opposed slavery as an institution which he viewed as economically unsound and morally indefensible.
For the next four years Washington worked surveying land in Western Virginia and for the Ohio Company, a land investment company funded by Virginia investors.
He was attracted by the movement's dedication to the Enlightenment principles of rationality, reason and fraternalism; the American lodges did not share the anti-clerical perspective that made the European lodges so controversial.
Drafted primarily by Washington himself, with help from Hamilton, it gives advice on the necessity and importance of national union, the value of the Constitution and the rule of law, the evils of political parties and the proper virtues of a republican people.
Washington's Continental Army, also newly funded by $20,000 in French gold, delivered the final blow to the British in 1781, after a French naval victory allowed American and French forces to trap a British army in Virginia, preventing reinforcement by Clinton from the North.
Fairfax organized a professional surveying party to layout large tracts of land along the border of western Virginia where the young Washington gained invaluable experience in the field.
Most importantly, the treaty delayed war with Great Britain and instead brought a decade of prosperous trade with the British.
Even at that early date, there were accusations of medical malpractice, with some believing that Washington had been bled to death.
While many of his generals preferred retreating from the city and engaging in a defensive strategy, Washington believed it personally desirous to engage in a major pitched battle.
From 1768 to 1775, he invited some 2000 guests to his Mount Vernon estate, mostly those he considered "people of rank".
Nevertheless, he did not consider it appropriate to cast his vote in favor of adoption for Virginia, since he was expected to be nominated president thereunder.
There, he confronted squatters, including David Reed and the Covenanters, who vacated, but only after losing a court decision heard in Washington, Pennsylvania in 1786.
In handling routine tasks, he was "systematic, orderly, energetic, solicitous of the opinion of others ... but decisive, intent upon general goals and the consistency of particular actions with them."
The British agreed to depart from their forts around the Great Lakes and the United States-Canadian boundary had to be re-adjusted; numerous pre-Revolutionary debts were liquidated, and the British opened their West Indies colonies to American trade.
These victories alone were not enough to ensure ultimate Patriot victory, however, since many soldiers did not reenlist or deserted during the harsh winter.
Washington then continued his flight across New Jersey; the future of the Continental Army was in doubt due to expiring enlistments and the string of losses.
Washington's retirement to personal business at Mount Vernon was short-lived.
On May 2, 1783, the Commander in Chief submitted his ''Sentiments on a Peace Establishment'' to the Committee, essentially providing an official Continental Army position.
Biographer John R. Alden contends Washington offered "fulsome and insincere flattery to British generals in vain attempts to win great favor" and on occasion showed youthful arrogance, as well as jealousy and ingratitude in the midst of impatience.
He referred to morality as "a necessary spring of popular government", and said, "Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle."
For his entire life Washington was affiliated with the Anglican Church, later called the Episcopal Church.
Revered in life and in death, scholarly and public polling consistently ranks him among the top three presidents in American history; he has been depicted and remembered in monuments, currency, and other dedications through the present day.
After sharp words of criticism Washington relieved Lee and continued fighting to an effective draw in one of the war's largest battles.
Robert Dinwiddie, lieutenant governor of colonial Virginia, was ordered by the British government to guard the British territorial claims including the Ohio River basin.
Washington's marriage to Martha greatly increased his property holdings and social standing, and made him one of Virginia's wealthiest men.
To that end, he preferred the title "Mr. President" to the more majestic names proposed by the Senate.
Washington's victories wrecked the British carrot-and-stick strategy of showing overwhelming force then offering generous terms.
Washington ordered the inoculation of all troops and by some reports, death by smallpox in the ranks dropped from 17% of all deaths to 1% of all reported deaths.
He recruited regulars and assigned Baron von Steuben, a veteran of the Prussian general staff, to train them.
After a couple of months into the task, Washington told Alexander Hamilton, "I almost despair of seeing a favorable issue to the proceedings of our convention and do therefore repent having had any agency in the business."
While it is generally conceded that Washington was a Christian, the exact nature of his religious beliefs has still been debated by some historians and biographers for over two hundred years.
Realizing his army's desperate shortage of gunpowder, Washington asked for new sources.
In 1758 Washington participated in the Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne.
In 1753 he was sent as an ambassador from the British crown to the French officials and Indians as far north as present-day Erie, Pennsylvania.
Washington lived an aristocratic lifestyle—fox hunting was a favorite leisure activity.
Meanwhile, to the north, Burgoyne, beyond the reach of help from Howe, was trapped and forced to surrender after the Battles of Saratoga.
On April 30, 1789, Washington was inaugurated, taking the first presidential oath of office on the balcony of Federal Hall in New York City.
The British evacuated Philadelphia to New York in June, 1778.
In the process, despite his lingering illness, he demonstrated much bravery and stamina—he had two horses shot from underneath him, while his coat was pierced with four bullets.
Washington was an excellent dancer and frequently attended the theater, often referencing Shakespeare in letters.
It contains everything written by Washington, or signed by him, together with most of his incoming letters.
He had a high regard for the Masonic Order and often praised it, but he seldom attended lodge meetings.
He also frequently bought additional land in his own name.
Washington suffered from problems with his teeth throughout his life, and historians have tracked his experiences in great detail.
He never publicly challenged the institution of slavery, possibly because he wanted to avoid provoking a split in the new republic over so inflammatory an issue,  but he did pass the Slave Trade Act of 1794, which limited American involvement in the Atlantic slave trade.
Washington also was known to play cards, backgammon, and billiards.
Biographer Alden relates, "it was inevitable that the defeats of Washington's forces and the concurrent victory of the forces in upper New York should be compared."
In 1788 Washington, with his personal consent, was named Master in the Virginia charter of Alexandria Lodge No.
In the Battle of the Monongahela the French and their Indian allies ambushed Braddock's reduced forces and the general was mortally wounded.
On January 6, 1759, Washington married the wealthy widow Martha Dandridge Custis, then 28 years old.
The Revenue Act authorized the president to select the specific location of the seat of the government on the Potomac; the president was to appoint three commissioners to survey and acquire property for this seat.
As  explains, his plantation operations were only minimally profitable.
Washington was not a member of any political party and hoped that they would not be formed, fearing conflict that would undermine republicanism.
Jefferson's political actions, his support of Philip Freneau's ''National Gazette'', and his attempt to undermine Hamilton, nearly led George Washington to dismiss Jefferson from his cabinet.
The last record of a slave purchase by him was in 1772, although he later received some slaves in repayment of debts.
