Afterwards, he lodged in the Tooley Street kip, but could not stand it for long and with financial help from his parents moved to Windsor Street, where he stayed until Christmas.
He visited his old tutor Gow at Cambridge for advice on becoming a writer.
Between 1945 and 1947, with A. J. Ayer and Bertrand Russell, he contributed a series of articles and essays to ''Polemic'', a short-lived British "Magazine of Philosophy, Psychology, and Aesthetics" edited by the ex-Communist Humphrey Slater.
Various recollections and interpretations were published in the 1950s and '60s, but Sonia saw the 1968 ''Collected Works'' as the record of his life.
His dress sense was unpredictable and usually casual.
Unable to speak, and with blood pouring from his mouth, Orwell was carried on a stretcher to Siétamo, loaded on an ambulance and after a bumpy journey via Barbastro arrived at the hospital at Lérida.
Crick concentrated on the facts of Orwell's life rather than his character, and presented primarily a political perspective on Orwell's life and work.
In his tramping days, he did domestic work for a time.
''Homage to Catalonia'' was published by Secker & Warburg and was a commercial flop.
He criticised and satirised, from the inside, the various social milieux in which he found himself&nbsp;– provincial town life in ''A Clergyman's Daughter''; middle-class pretension in ''Keep the Aspidistra Flying''; preparatory schools in "Such, Such Were the Joys"; colonialism in ''Burmese Days'', and some socialist groups in ''The Road to Wigan Pier''.
He also often stayed at the homes of Ruth Pitter and Richard Rees, where he could "change" for his sporadic tramping expeditions.
He wished to publish under a different name to avoid any embarrassment to his family over his time as a "tramp".
Orwell returned to Wallington, which he found in disarray after his absence.
The unit was then sent on to Huesca.
Orwell was declared "unfit for any kind of military service" by the Medical Board in June, but soon afterwards found an opportunity to become involved in war activities by joining the Home Guard.
Literature: An Examination of Gulliver's Travels" (1946) Orwell wrote: "If I had to make a list of six books which were to be preserved when all others were destroyed, I would certainly put ''Gulliver's Travels'' among them."
Orwell took over the tenancy and moved in on 2 April 1936.
Early in 1941 he started writing for the American ''Partisan Review'' which linked Orwell with The New York Intellectuals, like him anti-Stalinist, but committed to staying on the Left, and contributed to Gollancz anthology ''The Betrayal of the Left'', written in the light of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact (although Orwell referred to it as the Russo-German Pact and the Hitler-Stalin Pact).
Orwell spent time in Wallington and Southwold working on a Dickens essay and it was in July 1939 that Orwell's father, Richard Blair, died.
At the BBC, in the 1940s, "everybody would pull his leg," and Spender described him as having real entertainment value "like, as I say, watching a Charlie Chaplin movie."
In September 1925 he went to Insein, the home of Insein Prison, the second largest jail in Burma.
Orwell had an affair with his secretary at ''Tribune'' which caused Eileen much distress, and others have been mooted.
Orwell's health was in decline again by Christmas.
Although Orwell was frequently heard on the BBC for panel discussion and one-man broadcasts, no recorded copy of his voice is known to exist.
They aren't like these chaps in the old days who crucified people and chopped their heads off and so forth, just for the fun of it&nbsp;...
He knew nothing of the reduced fees although he "soon recognised that he was from a poorer home".
On 29 March 1940 his long association with ''Tribune'' began with a review of a sergeant's account of Napoleon's retreat from Moscow.
Blair and his sister Avril spent the holidays making the house habitable while he also worked on ''Burmese Days''.
Ben Wattenberg stated: "Orwell's writing pierced intellectual hypocrisy wherever he found it."
Cyril Connolly followed Blair to Eton, but because they were in separate years, they did not associate with each other.
Orwell had met her when she was assistant to Cyril Connolly, at Horizon literary magazine.
At St. Cyprian's, Blair first met Cyril Connolly, who became a writer.
David Astor was looking for a provocative contributor for ''The Observer'' and invited Orwell to write for him—the first article appearing in March 1942.
Crick observed that Orwell displayed "a pronounced anti-Catholicism".
(emphasis in original) Rodden goes on to explain how, during the McCarthy era, the introduction to the Signet edition of ''Animal Farm'', which sold more than 20 million copies, makes use of "the politics of ellipsis":
Stephen Spender, however, "thought Orwell's occasional homophobic outbursts were part of his rebellion against the public school".
On anarchism, Orwell wrote in ''The Road to Wigan Pier'': "I worked out an anarchistic theory that all government is evil, that the punishment always does more harm than the crime and the people can be trusted to behave decently if you will only let them alone."
His 1945 essay ''In Defense of P.G.
In April 1926 he moved to Moulmein, where his maternal grandmother lived.
His nephew recalled Uncle Eric laughing louder than anyone in the cinema at a Charlie Chaplin film.
More concerned with the literary nature of Orwell's work, he sought explanations for Orwell's character and treated his first-person writings as autobiographical.
The Communist line was that the POUM were "objectively" Fascist, hindering the Republican cause.
Three pieces appeared in successive weeks in ''Progrès Civique'': discussing unemployment, a day in the life of a tramp, and the beggars of London, respectively.
He went to Paris after the liberation of France and to Cologne once it had been occupied by the Allies.
Blair liked to carry out practical jokes.
In Part 2 of ''The Road to Wigan Pier'', published by the Left Book Club, Orwell stated: "a real Socialist is one who wishes&nbsp;– not merely conceives it as desirable, but actively wishes&nbsp;– to see tyranny overthrown."
His sister Marjorie died of kidney disease in May and shortly after, on 22 May 1946, Orwell set off to live on the Isle of Jura.
There is Blair leading a respectable, outwardly eventless life at his parents' house in Southwold, writing; then in contrast, there is Blair as Burton (the name he used in his down-and-out episodes) in search of experience in the kips and spikes, in the East End, on the road, and in the hop fields of Kent."
Although he was never a Trotskyist, he was strongly influenced by the Trotskyist and anarchist critiques of the Soviet regime, and by the anarchists' emphasis on individual freedom.
Orwell used the homophobic epithets "Nancy" and "pansy" as terms of abuse, notably in his expressions of contempt for what he called the "pansy Left", and "nancy poets", i.e.
He was writing to many of his friends, including Jacintha Buddicom, who had "rediscovered" him, and in March 1949, was visited by Celia Kirwan.
Plans to go to the Swiss Alps were mooted.
He was writing for the ''Adelphi'' and preparing ''A Clergyman's Daughter'' and ''Burmese Days'' for publication.
This job was as a part-time assistant in Booklovers' Corner, a second-hand bookshop in Hampstead run by Francis and Myfanwy Westrope, who were friends of Nellie Limouzin in the Esperanto movement.
Jack Harrison visited later and claimed that Orwell gave him 25% of the company.
In a letter to Ann Popham he wrote: "I was sometimes unfaithful to Eileen, and I also treated her badly, and I think she treated me badly, too, at times, but it was a real marriage, in the sense that we had been through awful struggles together and she understood all about my work, etc."
Speaking at the 2003 George Orwell Centenary Conference, Daphne Patai said: "Of course he was homophobic.
Visiting Eileen's family in Greenwich brought him face-to-face with the effects of the blitz on East London.
Orwell's wedding took place in the hospital room on 13 October 1949, with David Astor as best man.
He proposed marriage to four women, including Celia Kirwan, and eventually Sonia Brownell accepted.
He started work on ''The Road to Wigan Pier'' by the end of April, but also spent hours working on the garden and testing the possibility of re-opening the Stores as a village shop.
Connolly remarked of him as a schoolboy, "The remarkable thing about Orwell was that alone among the boys he was an intellectual and not a parrot for he thought for himself".
In early 1930 he stayed briefly in Bramley, Leeds, with his sister Marjorie and her husband Humphrey Dakin, who was as unappreciative of Blair as when they knew each other as children.
He was one of those boys who thought for himself&nbsp;..."
In an autobiographical piece that Orwell sent to the editors of ''Twentieth Century Authors'' in 1940, he wrote: "The writers I care about most and never grow tired of are: Shakespeare, Swift, Fielding, Dickens, Charles Reade, Flaubert and, among modern writers, James Joyce, T. S. Eliot and D. H. Lawrence.
He had a similarly ambivalent attitude to G. K. Chesterton, whom he regarded as a writer of considerable talent who had chosen to devote himself to "Roman Catholic propaganda".
''Why Orwell Matters'' (released in the UK as ''Orwell's Victory'') was published by Christopher Hitchens in 2002.
Around this time, Blair had started to write reviews for the ''New English Weekly''.
Their own anti-Semitism has caused this vast crime to bounce off their consciousness."
In addition to that, he always lived frugally and seemed unable to care for himself properly.
At Wigan, he visited many homes to see how people lived, took detailed notes of housing conditions and wages earned, went down Bryn Hall coal mine, and used the local public library to consult public health records and reports on working conditions in mines.
After a time at the Lenin Barracks in Barcelona he was sent to the relatively quiet Aragon Front under Georges Kopp.
Shortly afterwards, the political crisis began in Spain and Orwell followed developments there closely.
The bullet had missed his main artery by the barest margin and his voice was barely audible.
While on leave in England and on holiday with his family in Cornwall in September 1927, he reappraised his life.
The graveyards in central London had no space, and fearing that he might have to be cremated against his wishes, his widow appealed to his friends to see whether any of them knew of a church with space in its graveyard.
Although Salkeld rejected his offer of marriage, she remained a friend and regular correspondent for many years.
Later in Southwold his sister Avril recalled him blowing up the garden.
Kingsley Martin rejected two of his works and Gollancz was equally cautious.
"Although he did not think much of the Communists, Orwell was still ready to treat them as friends and allies.
Blair worked at the shop in the afternoons and had his mornings free to write and his evenings free to socialise.
In December 1940 he wrote in ''Tribune'' (the Labour left's weekly): "We are in a strange period of history in which a revolutionary has to be a patriot and a patriot has to be a revolutionary."
In September 1911 Eric arrived at St Cyprian's.
He admitted that what they said was "more truthful than the lying propaganda found in most of the press" but added that he could not "associate himself with an essentially Conservative body" that claimed to "defend democracy in Europe" but had "nothing to say about British imperialism."
''Prolefeed'' is homogenised, manufactured superficial literature, film and music, used to control and indoctrinate the populace through docility.
Not wishing to commit himself until he had seen the situation ''in situ'', Orwell instead used his Independent Labour Party contacts to get a letter of introduction to John McNair in Barcelona.
He wrote: "For quite six years the English admirers of Hitler contrived not to learn of the existence of Dachau and Buchenwald.&nbsp;...
Baby Richard joined them there, and Eileen gave up her work at the Ministry of Food to look after her family.
His father had retired to Southwold, Suffolk, by this time; Blair was enrolled at a crammer there called Craighurst, and brushed up on his Classics, English, and History.
In July Susan Watson arrived with Orwell's son Richard.
During the Battle of Britain he used to spend weekends with Warburg and his new Zionist friend, Tosco Fyvel, at Warburg's house at Twyford, Berkshire.
Modern readers are more often introduced to Orwell as a novelist, particularly through his enormously successful titles ''Animal Farm'' and ''Nineteen Eighty-Four''.
In Southwold he had the best cloth from the local tailor, but was equally happy in his tramping outfit.
He fell seriously ill in February 1929 and was taken to the Hôpital Cochin in the 14th arrondissement, a free hospital where medical students were trained.
James Burnham's theory has been much discussed, but few people have yet considered its ideological implications—this is, the kind of world-view, the kind of beliefs, and the social structure that would probably prevail in a State which was at once unconquerable and in a permanent state of 'cold war' with its neighbours.
Orwell, with his Cadet Corps and police training, was quickly made a corporal.
"His history in these years is marked by dualities and contrasts.
Eric had two sisters: Marjorie, five years older, and Avril, five years younger.
Similarly he suggested to Celia Kirwan that they had both been unfaithful.
In late 1945 and early 1946 Orwell made several hopeless and unwelcome marriage proposals to younger women, including Celia Kirwan (who was later to become Arthur Koestler's sister-in-law), Ann Popham who happened to live in the same block of flats and Sonia Brownell, one of Connolly's coterie at the ''Horizon'' office.
David Astor was instrumental in arranging a place for Orwell on Jura.
It was while he was there that Eileen went into hospital for a hysterectomy and died under anaesthetic on 29 March 1945.
Deciding against returning to Burma, he resigned from the Indian Imperial Police to become a writer.
At the end of 1924, he was promoted to Assistant District Superintendent and posted to Syriam, closer to Rangoon.
He kept a diary about his experiences there.
He appreciated English beer, taken regularly and moderately, despised drinkers of lager and wrote about an imagined, ideal British pub in his 1946 newspaper article "The Moon Under Water".
On the evening of 20 January 1950, Potts visited Orwell and slipped away on finding him asleep.
Pollitt was suspicious of Orwell's political reliability; he asked him whether he would undertake to join the International Brigade and advised him to get a safe-conduct from the Spanish Embassy in Paris.
Professor E. H. Carr, have switched their allegiance from Hitler to Stalin."
That has nothing to do with his relations with his homosexual friends.
He would generally win the arguments—or think he had anyhow."
A few days later, in Barcelona, Orwell met John McNair of the Independent Labour Party (ILP) Office who quoted him: ''"I've come to fight against Fascism"''.
It was a genre in which he was greatly interested and which appeared on ''Animal Farm''s title-page.
His birthplace and ancestral house in Motihari has been declared a protected monument of historical importance.
The upshot was that Heppenstall ended up with a bloody nose and was locked in a room.
One of his former pupils recalled being beaten so hard he could not sit down for a week.
In mid-1933 Blair left Hawthorns to become a teacher at Frays College, in Uxbridge, West London.
Yet, he was married according to the rites of the Church of England in both his first marriage at the church at Wallington, and in his second marriage on his deathbed in University College Hospital, and he left instructions that he was to receive an Anglican funeral.
In October 2015 Finlay Publisher, for the Orwell Society, published ''George Orwell 'The Complete Poetry''', compiled and presented by Dione Venables.
Wodehouse'' contains an amusing assessment of his writing and also argues that his broadcasts from Germany (during the war) did not really make him a traitor.
At the BBC, Orwell introduced ''Voice'', a literary programme for his Indian broadcasts, and by now was leading an active social life with literary friends, particularly on the political left.
Orwell had been looking for the opportunity throughout the war, but his failed medical reports prevented him from being allowed anywhere near action.
Later Blair was expelled from the crammer at Southwold for sending a dead rat as a birthday present to the town surveyor.
Orwell had to spend some days in hospital with a poisoned hand and had most of his possessions stolen by the staff.
Meanwhile, back in England, Eileen had been handling the issues relating to the publication of ''The Road to Wigan Pier'' before setting out for Spain herself, leaving Aunt Nellie Limouzin to look after The Stores.
In January, Blair took up the place at Wellington, where he spent the Spring term.
His parents could not afford to send him to a university without another scholarship, and they concluded from his poor results that he would not be able to win one.
Blair had an interest in natural history which stemmed from his childhood.
Eleven volumes eventually appeared, of which Orwell's ''The Lion and the Unicorn: Socialism and the English Genius'', published on 19 February 1941, was the first.
There were thoughts of going to India to work on the ''Pioneer'', a newspaper in Lucknow, but by March 1938 Orwell's health had deteriorated.
In 1927 he moved to London.
In the latter part of his stay at the clinic Orwell was able to go for walks in the countryside and study nature.
His resignation followed a report confirming his fears that few Indians listened to the broadcasts, but he was also keen to concentrate on writing ''Animal Farm''.
On the arrival of a British ILP Contingent about three weeks later, Orwell and the other English militiaman, Williams, were sent with them to Monte Oscuro.
Orwell was noted for very close and enduring friendships with a few friends, but these were generally people with a similar background or with a similar level of literary ability.
She died on 11 December 1980, aged 62.
He was both an admirer and a critic of Rudyard Kipling, praising Kipling as a gifted writer and a "good bad poet" whose work is "spurious" and "morally insensitive and aesthetically disgusting," but undeniably seductive and able to speak to certain aspects of reality more effectively than more enlightened authors.
At the end of the year, concerned by Francisco Franco's military uprising, (supported by Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy and local groups such as Falange), Orwell decided to go to Spain to take part in the Spanish Civil War on the Republican side.
On his first outing he set out to Limehouse Causeway, spending his first night in a common lodging house, possibly George Levy's 'kip'.
In imitation of Jack London, whose writing he admired (particularly ''The People of the Abyss''), Blair started to explore the poorer parts of London.
At Eton he played tricks on John Crace, his Master in College, among which was to enter a spoof advertisement in a College magazine implying pederasty.
His lecture notes for instructing platoon members include advice on street fighting, field fortifications, and the use of mortars of various kinds.
A fan of Orwell since school days, he found the reality very different, with Orwell hostile and disagreeable probably because of Holbrook's membership of the Communist Party.
The Republican government was supported by a number of factions with conflicting aims, including the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM&nbsp;– Partido Obrero de Unificación Marxista), the anarcho-syndicalist Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) and the Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia (a wing of the Spanish Communist Party, which was backed by Soviet arms and aid).
Blair was briefly taught French by Aldous Huxley.
Another bombshell was Cape's reversal of his plan to publish ''Animal Farm''.
Orwell's first published article in his home country, "A Farthing Newspaper", was a critique of the new French daily the ''Ami de Peuple''.
These experiences provided background for the novel ''Keep the Aspidistra Flying'' (1936).
Susan Watson could no longer stand being with Avril and she and her boyfriend left.
Orwell's work has taken a prominent place in the school literature curriculum in England, with ''Animal Farm'' a regular examination topic at the end of secondary education (GCSE), and ''Nineteen Eighty-Four'' a topic for subsequent examinations below university level (A Levels).
His attire in the Spanish Civil War, along with his size-12 boots, was a source of amusement.
Jeffrey Meyers, a prolific American biographer, was first to take advantage of this and published a book in 2001 that investigated the darker side of Orwell and questioned his saintly image.
He made a quick visit to Liverpool and during March, stayed in south Yorkshire, spending time in Sheffield and Barnsley.
His own explanation was that the rise of the "puritan middle class," who had stricter morals than the aristocracy, tightened the rules of censorship in the 19th century.
Eric was brought up in the company of his mother and sisters, and apart from a brief visit in mid-1907, they did not see the husband and father Richard Blair until 1912.
Finally with their passports in order, they escaped from Spain by train, diverting to Banyuls-sur-Mer for a short stay before returning to England.
He then became tutor to three young brothers, one of whom, Richard Peters, later became a distinguished academic.
In 2008, ''The Times'' ranked him second on a list of "The 50 greatest British writers since 1945".
Orwell's health had continued to decline since the diagnosis of tuberculosis in December 1947.
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Orwell's wife Eileen started working in the Censorship Department of the Ministry of Information in central London, staying during the week with her family in Greenwich.
In August 1941, Orwell finally obtained "war work" when he was taken on full-time by the BBC's Eastern Service.
left-wing homosexual or bisexual writers and intellectuals such as Stephen Spender and W. H. Auden.
In his reply (dated 15 November 1943) to an invitation from the Duchess of Atholl to speak for the British League for European Freedom, he stated that he did not agree with their objectives.
Limouzin, who was a proficient golfer, knew of the school and its headmaster through the Royal Eastbourne Golf Club, where he won several competitions in 1903 and 1904.
His experiences there were the basis of his essay "How the Poor Die", published in 1946.
He chose not to identify the hospital, and indeed was deliberately misleading about its location.
Writing in early 1945 a long essay titled "Antisemitism in Britain," for the ''Contemporary Jewish Record'', Orwell stated that anti-Semitism was on the increase in Britain, and that it was "irrational and will not yield to arguments."
In June, ''Burmese Days'' was published and Cyril Connolly's review in the ''New Statesman'' prompted Orwell (as he then became known) to re-establish contact with his old friend.
Just six days before his last day of service, on 24 November 1943, his adaptation of the fairy tale, Hans Christian Andersen's ''The Emperor's New Clothes'' was broadcast.
On one of these expeditions he became soaked and caught a chill that developed into pneumonia.
His grandfather, Thomas Richard Arthur Blair, was a clergyman.
The depression had also introduced a number of working-class writers from the North of England to the reading public.
Arriving in Manchester after the banks had closed, he had to stay in a common lodging-house.
''Coming Up for Air'', his last novel before World War II is the most "English" of his novels; alarms of war mingle with images of idyllic Thames-side Edwardian childhood of protagonist George Bowling.
Shelden introduced new information that sought to build on Crick's work.
As well as visiting mines, including Grimethorpe, and observing social conditions, he attended meetings of the Communist Party and of Oswald Mosley&nbsp;– "his speech the usual claptrap—The blame for everything was put upon mysterious international gangs of Jews"&nbsp;– where he saw the tactics of the Blackshirts&nbsp;– "one is liable to get both a hammering and a fine for asking a question which Mosley finds it difficult to answer."
Orwell and his wife were under threat and had to lie low, although they broke cover to try to help Kopp.
Orwell's gravestone bears the simple epitaph: "Here lies Eric Arthur Blair, born June 25th 1903, died January 21st 1950"; no mention is made on the gravestone of his more famous pen name.
In December a chest specialist was summoned from Glasgow who pronounced Orwell seriously ill and a week before Christmas 1947 he was in Hairmyres Hospital in East Kilbride, then a small village in the countryside, on the outskirts of Glasgow.
This was a much larger establishment with 200 pupils and a full complement of staff.
By October 1935 his flatmates had moved out and he was struggling to pay the rent on his own.
At this time, Victor Gollancz suggested Orwell spend a short time investigating social conditions in economically depressed northern England.
His sister Avril accompanied him there and young novelist Paul Potts made up the party.
The headmaster undertook to help Blair to win the scholarship, and made a private financial arrangement that allowed Blair's parents to pay only half the normal fees.
One of these, the trade union official Frank Meade, suggested Wigan, where Orwell spent February staying in dirty lodgings over a tripe shop.
Dr Thomas S Veale, in ''The Banality of Virtue: A Multifaceted view of George Orwell as champion of the common man'', refers to Orwell's "homophobia most probably based on the perceived weakness of homosexuals and their preferences' betrayal of the natural order".
Meanwhile, he was still writing reviews of books and plays and at this time met the novelist Anthony Powell.
According to Newsinger, although Orwell "was always critical of the 1945–51 Labour government's moderation, his support for it began to pull him to the right politically.
She did appoint Malcolm Muggeridge as official biographer, but later biographers have seen this as deliberate spoiling as Muggeridge eventually gave up the work.
Jack Harrison left the details at this stage to junior colleagues.
He preferred traditional English dishes, such as roast beef and kippers.
At this time Jonathan Cape rejected ''A Scullion's Diary'', the first version of ''Down and Out''.
During that time his sister's family visited, and Orwell led a disastrous boating expedition, on 19 August, which nearly led to loss of life whilst trying to cross the notorious gulf of Corryvreckan and gave him a soaking which was not good for his health.
He maintains a public profile as patron of the Orwell Society.
He returned to the front and saw some action in a night attack on the Nationalist trenches where he chased an enemy soldier with a bayonet and bombed an enemy rifle position.
Given the post-war shortages, both parties agreed not to publish it.
Barnhill was an abandoned farmhouse with outbuildings near the northern end of the island, situated at the end of a five-mile (8&nbsp;km), heavily rutted track from Ardlussa, where the owners lived.
Raymond Williams in Politics and Letters: Interviews with New Left Review describes Orwell as a "successful impersonation of a plain man who bumps into experience in an unmediated way and tells the truth about it."
By the middle of June the political situation in Barcelona had deteriorated and the POUM—painted by the pro-Soviet Communists as a Trotskyist organisation—was outlawed and under attack.
By September 1944 they had set up home in Islington, at 27b Canonbury Square.
