On November 22, 2004, New York Republican Governor George Pataki named Ford and the other living former Presidents (Carter, George H.W.
After mulling various options the Ford administration decided that it was necessary to respond with a major show of force.
In 2001, the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation awarded the John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award to Ford for his pardon of Nixon.
James M. Cannon, a member of the Ford administration, wrote in a biography of Ford that the Kings' separation and divorce were sparked when, a few days after Ford's birth, Leslie King took a butcher knife and threatened to kill his wife, his infant son, and Ford's nursemaid.
After the service, Ford was interred at his Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan.
His teammates later voted Ford their most valuable player, with one assistant coach noting, "They felt Jerry was one guy who would stay and fight in a losing cause."
Ford said that "My stepfather was a magnificent person and my mother equally wonderful.
In the early 1950s, Ford declined offers to run for either the Senate or the Michigan governorship.
Ford's transition chairman and first Chief of Staff was former congressman and ambassador Donald Rumsfeld.
Dorothy separated from King just sixteen days after her son's birth.
He was the first sitting President since Abraham Lincoln to testify before the House of Representatives.
From the ship's commissioning on June 17, 1943, until the end of December 1944, Ford served as the assistant navigator, Athletic Officer, and antiaircraft battery officer on board the ''Monterey''.
As president, Ford's position on abortion was that he supported "a federal constitutional amendment that would permit each one of the 50 States to make the choice".
'We gave Nixon no choice but Ford,' House Speaker Carl Albert recalled later".
Still in place from the Nixon Administration was the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT).
Although the ship was not damaged by Japanese forces, the ''Monterey'' was one of several ships damaged by the typhoon that hit Admiral William Halsey's Third Fleet on December 18–19, 1944.
He did so safely, and reported his findings back to the ship's commanding officer, Captain Stuart Ingersoll.
In spite of his athletic record and remarkable career accomplishments, Ford acquired a reputation as a clumsy, likable, and simple-minded Everyman.
This policy continued until 1999.
In Congress, the proposed amount of the tax reduction increased to $22.8&nbsp;billion in tax cuts and lacked spending cuts.
As part of this program, he urged people to wear "WIN" buttons.
Ford's 1976 election campaign benefitted from his being an incumbent president during several anniversary events held during the period leading up to the United States Bicentennial.
The Nixon pardon was highly controversial.
In 1977, he shot a hole in one during a Pro-am held in conjunction with the Danny Thomas Memphis Classic at Colonial Country Club in Memphis, Tennessee.
And at the time of Watergate, he gave us Gerald Ford—the right man at the right time who was able to put our nation back together again."
Encouraged by U.S. difficulties in Vietnam, North Korea had been waging a campaign of diplomatic pressure and minor military harassment to try and convince the U.S. to withdraw from South Korea.
Speaking in New Hampshire on the previous day, Ford condemned the growing trend toward big government bureaucracy and argued for a return to "basic American virtues".
Though he lost, in the three months between the Republican National Convention and the election Ford had managed to close what was once an alleged 33-point Carter lead to a 2-point margin.
Ford was not aware of his biological father until he was 17, when his parents told him about the circumstances of his birth.
Just hours before the Indonesian invasion of East Timor (now Timor Leste) on December 7, 1975, Ford and Kissinger had visited Indonesian President Suharto in Jakarta and guaranteed American compliance with the Indonesian operation.
And I said, 'Betty, I don't think we're ever going to live in the vice president's house.
*'''Director of Central Intelligence'''
During Ford's brief administration, all members were replaced except Secretary of State Kissinger and Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon.
* Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor, Michigan
Although the vaccination program was plagued by delays and public relations problems, some 25% of the population was vaccinated by the time the program was canceled in December 1976.
There were three main events in the fall campaign.
Ford was the team's star nonetheless.
Regardless, historians believe the controversy was one of the major reasons Ford lost the election in 1976, an observation with which Ford agreed.
In retirement Ford also devoted much time to his love of golf, often playing both privately and in public events with comedian Bob Hope, a longtime friend.
He is the only Eagle Scout to have ascended to the U.S. presidency.
Ford received the following military awards: the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal with nine " bronze stars (for operations in the Gilbert Islands, Bismarck Archipelago, Marshall Islands, Asiatic and Pacific carrier raids, Hollandia, Marianas, Western Carolines, Western New Guinea, and the Leyte Operation), the Philippine Liberation Medal with two " bronze stars (for Leyte and Mindoro), and the World War II Victory Medal.
Rabin notes it was "an innocent-sounding term that heralded one of the worst periods in American-Israeli relations".
Also in 1999, Ford was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Bill Clinton.
The accords declared a cease fire across both North and South Vietnam, and required the release of American prisoners of war.
One hour after the confirmation vote in the House, Ford took the oath of office as Vice President of the United States.
Then, in August 1976, North Korean forces killed two U.S. officers and injured South Korean guards who were engaged in trimming a tree in Panmunjom's Joint Security Area.
With the conquest of South Vietnam by North Vietnam nine months into his presidency, U.S. involvement in Vietnam essentially ended.
Dorothy and King divorced in December 1913; she gained full custody of her son.
Three years later, he wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives, along with Carter and Reagan, in support of the assault weapons ban.
"I came back a converted internationalist", Ford wrote, "and of course our congressman at that time was an avowed, dedicated isolationist.
On April 23, 2006, President George W. Bush visited Ford at his home in Rancho Mirage for a little over an hour.
With that large majority, and a majority in the U.S. Senate, the Johnson Administration proposed and passed a series of programs that was called by Johnson the "Great Society."
Thousands more escaped in the years that followed.
Pieces of Ford's common Everyman image have also been attributed to Ford's inevitable comparison to Nixon, as well as his perceived Midwestern stodginess and self-deprecation.
* Gerald Ford Memorial Highway, I-70 in Eagle County, Colorado
Ford did appear in a campaign commercial for the Reagan-Bush ticket, in which he declared that the country would be "better served by a Reagan presidency rather than a continuation of the weak and politically expedient policies of Jimmy Carter".
Bork's nomination was rejected by a vote of 58-42.
On August 21, it was reported that he had been fitted with a pacemaker.
He went on to state:
The agreement guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam and, like the Geneva Conference of 1954, called for national elections in the North and South.
She had previously been married to and divorced from William G. Warren.
*'''United States Ambassador to the United Nations'''
While attending Yale Law School, Ford joined a group of students led by R. Douglas Stuart Jr., and signed a petition to enforce the 1939 Neutrality Act.
But I had no idea that I would ever be added to the company of the Father of our Country and 12 other members of the order who also served as Presidents of the United States."
When, on a 1974 trip to California, White House correspondent Fred Barnes pressed Ford on the matter, Ford replied in surprisingly frank manner: "I just can’t bring myself to do it.”
Domestically, Ford presided over the worst economy in the four decades since the Great Depression, with growing inflation and a recession during his tenure.
In addition to the pardon dispute and lingering anti-Republican sentiment, Ford had to counter a plethora of negative media imagery.
Following his years as President, Ford remained active in the Republican Party.
The announced reassessments upset the American Jewish community and Israel's well-wishers in Congress.
At the time, this was the only part of the DMZ where forces from the North and the South came into contact with each other.
* Gerald R. Ford Freeway (Michigan)
Ford was initiated into Freemasonry on September 30, 1949.
In the Middle East and eastern Mediterranean, two ongoing international disputes developed into crises.
Critics derided the move and said a "corrupt bargain" had been struck between the men.
The federal budget ran a deficit every year Ford was President.
At the time of the Civil War, he gave us Abraham Lincoln.
**William Colby (1974–1976)
Rockefeller's top competitor had been George H. W. Bush.
Other helicopters, having nowhere to land, were deliberately crash landed into the sea after dropping off their passengers, close to the ships, their pilots bailing out at the last moment to be picked up by rescue boats.
*John Gardner, known as Jack, born in 1951
The program for the Return of Vietnam Era Draft Evaders and Military Deserters established a Clemency Board to review the records and make recommendations for receiving a Presidential Pardon and a change in Military discharge status.
In an editorial at the time, ''The New York Times'' stated that the Nixon pardon was a "profoundly unwise, divisive and unjust act" that in a stroke had destroyed the new president's "credibility as a man of judgment, candor and competence".
Ford received the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award in May 1970, as well as the Silver Buffalo Award, from the Boy Scouts of America.
According to Bob Woodward, Nixon Chief of Staff Alexander Haig proposed a pardon deal to Ford.
During Kissinger's shuttle to Israel in early March 1975, a last minute reversal to consider further withdrawal, prompted a cable from Ford to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, which included:
Ford played center, linebacker and long snapper for the school's football team, and helped the Wolverines to undefeated seasons and national titles in 1932 and 1933.
The previous day, Ford had entered the Eisenhower Medical Center for undisclosed tests; he was released on October 16.
Many of the Vietnamese evacuees were allowed to enter the United States under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act.
In all, 130,000 Vietnamese refugees came to the United States in 1975.
The changes included removal of an entire 86-page section on CIA assassination plots and numerous edits to the report by then-deputy White House Chief of Staff Richard Cheney.
The thawing relationship brought about by Nixon's visit to China was reinforced by Ford's December 1975 visit to that communist country.
In that operation, military and Air America helicopters took evacuees to U.S. Navy ships off-shore during an approximately 24-hour period on April 29 to 30, 1975, immediately preceding the fall of Saigon.
And he said, 'I'm just warning you that you've got to be prepared, that things might change dramatically and you could become President.'
In 1977, Ford established the Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy at Albion College in Albion, Michigan, to give undergraduates training in public policy.
Ford later recalled, "During 25 years in the rough-and-tumble world of politics, I often thought of the experiences before, during, and after that game in 1934.
* Gerald R. Ford International Airport in Grand Rapids, Michigan
As such, Ford became the first incumbent president to participate in one.
In 1975, the Administration entered into the Helsinki Accords with the Soviet Union, creating the framework of the Helsinki Watch, an independent non-governmental organization created to monitor compliance that later evolved into Human Rights Watch.
A portion of the speech would later be memorialized with a plaque at the entrance to his presidential museum.
On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to Lieutenant Commander.
American offensive operations against North Vietnam had ended with the Paris Peace Accords, signed on January 27, 1973.
After an overhaul, from September to November 1944, aircraft from the ''Monterey'' launched strikes against Wake Island, participated in strikes in the Philippines and Ryukyus, and supported the landings at Leyte and Mindoro.
When New York City faced bankruptcy in 1975, Mayor Abraham Beame was unsuccessful in obtaining Ford's support for a federal bailout.
Bush as Chief of the US Liaison Office to the People's Republic of China in 1974, and then Director of the Central Intelligence Agency in late 1975.
On August 25, he underwent an angioplasty procedure at the Mayo Clinic.
In 1934, Ford was selected for the Eastern Team on the Shriner's East West Crippled Children game at San Francisco (a benefit for crippled children), played on January 1, 1935.
An incident in 1975, when he tripped while exiting the presidential jet in Austria, was famously and repeatedly parodied by Chevy Chase, cementing Ford's image as a klutz.
On the proper left side are words from Ford's swearing-in address: "Our constitution works.
Nevertheless, in 2005 Ford praised Stevens.
Like her husband, she was 93 years old when she died.
On October 15, 1948, at Grace Episcopal Church in Grand Rapids, Ford married Elizabeth Bloomer Warren (1918–2011), a department store fashion consultant.
Two days later, on April 23, Ford gave a speech at Tulane University.
During the eight years (1965–1973) that Ford served as Minority Leader, he won many friends in the House because of his fair leadership and inoffensive personality.
Remembering them has helped me many times to face a tough situation, take action, and make every effort possible despite adverse odds."
Immediately after taking the oath of office in the East Room of the White House, he spoke to the assembled audience in a speech broadcast live to the nation.
*'''Press Secretary'''
As part of the 1935 Collegiate All-Star football team, Ford played against the Chicago Bears in the Chicago College All-Star Game at Soldier Field.
Moore was later sentenced to life in prison.
Ford attacked Carter's conduct of the SALT II negotiations and foreign policy in the Middle East and Africa.
Ford also visited with players and coaches during practices, at one point asking to join the players in the huddle.
Ford was assigned to prepare a biography of Lee Harvey Oswald, the accused assassin.
After rejecting these terms, Reagan offered the vice-presidential nomination instead to George H.W.
Following his graduation in 1935 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics, Ford turned down contract offers from the Detroit Lions and Green Bay Packers of the National Football League.
In 1987, Ford testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee in favor of District of Columbia Circuit Court judge and former Solicitor General Robert Bork after Bork was nominated by President Reagan to be an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.
Ford attended the inaugural meeting of the Group of Seven (G7) industrialized nations (initially the G5) in 1975 and secured membership for Canada.
In the months following the pardon, Ford often declined to mention President Nixon by name, referring to him in public as "my predecessor" or "the former president."
Serves 25 counties in Western and Northern Michigan with its headquarters located in Grand Rapids, Michigan.
Televised presidential debates were reintroduced for the first time since the 1960 election.
Military service had changed his view of the world.
Ford appointed 11 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 50 judges to the United States district courts.
On November 12, 2006, upon surpassing Ronald Reagan's lifespan, Ford released his last public statement:Ford's age at the time of his death was 93 years and 165 days, making him the longest-lived U.S. President, his lifespan being 45 days longer than Ronald Reagan's.
Ford hoped to attend Yale's law school beginning in 1935.
Upon assuming office, Ford inherited Nixon's Cabinet.
He never attempted to shade a statement, and I never heard him utter an unkind word," said Martha Griffiths.
Ford reportedly threatened to quit the team in response to the university's decision, but eventually agreed to play against Georgia Tech when Ward personally asked him to play.
After Ford left the White House in January 1977, the former President privately justified his pardon of Nixon by carrying in his wallet a portion of the text of ''Burdick v. United States'', a 1915 U.S. Supreme Court decision which stated that a pardon indicated a presumption of guilt, and that acceptance of a pardon was tantamount to a confession of that guilt.
Prior to this he was the 40th Vice President of the United States, serving from 1973 until President Richard Nixon's resignation in 1974.
On May 21, Ford "experienced a real shock" when seventy-six U.S. senators wrote him a letter urging him to be "responsive" to Israel's request for $2.59&nbsp;billion in military and economic aid.
The accords had been negotiated by United States National Security Advisor Kissinger and North Vietnamese politburo member Lê Đức Thọ.
On August 15 he was admitted to St. Mary's Hospital of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, for testing and evaluation.
* Gerald Ford Drive, Coachella Valley, California (Cathedral City, Rancho Mirage, Palm Desert)
In May 1941, he opened a Grand Rapids law practice with a friend, Philip W. Buchen, who would later serve as Ford's White House counsel.
The ship's crew was able to contain the fire, and the ship got underway again.
The vaccine was blamed for twenty-five deaths; more people died from the shots than from the swine flu.
The Democratic Party turned voter dissatisfaction into large gains in the House elections, taking 49 seats from the Republican Party, increasing their majority to 291 of the 435 seats.
The 1975 Act appropriated $455&nbsp;million toward the costs of assisting the settlement of Indochinese refugees.
On November 29, 1963, Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Ford to the Warren Commission, a special task force set up to investigate the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
Carter was also hurt by Ford's charges that he lacked the necessary experience to be an effective national leader, and that Carter was vague on many issues.
Ford remained relatively active in the years after his presidency.
Ford remained interested in football and his school throughout life, occasionally attending games.
In multiple letters to the South Vietnamese president, Nixon had promised that the United States would defend Thieu's government, should the North Vietnamese violate the accords.
In a pre-recorded embargoed interview with Bob Woodward of ''The Washington Post'' in July 2004, Ford stated that he disagreed "very strongly" with the Bush administration's choice of Iraq's alleged weapons of mass destruction as justification for its decision to invade Iraq, calling it a "big mistake" unrelated to the national security of the United States and indicating that he would not have gone to war had he been President.
Rockefeller underwent extended hearings before Congress, which caused embarrassment when it was revealed he made large gifts to senior aides, such as Henry Kissinger.
Ford considered a run for the Republican nomination in 1980, foregoing numerous opportunities to serve on corporate boards to keep his options open for a rematch with Carter.
*Steven Meigs, born in 1956
Instead, in September 1935 he took job as the boxing coach and assistant varsity football coach at Yale University, and applied to its law school.
*Michael Gerald, born in 1949
Ford and Carter served as honorary co-chairs of the National Commission on Federal Election Reform in 2001 and of the Continuity of Government Commission in 2002.
On October 13, he was scheduled to attend the dedication of a building of his namesake, the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at the University of Michigan, but due to poor health and on the advice of his doctors he did not attend.
It was, since the September 1974 ban on arms to Turkey, the second major congressional intrusion upon the President's foreign policy prerogatives.
After two and a half years with her parents, on February 1, 1916, Dorothy married Gerald Rudolff Ford, a salesman in a family-owned paint and varnish company.
He is also the most recent former president and vice president to die.
In the GOP presidential primary campaign of 1976, Ford defeated then-former California Governor Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination.
Chevy Chase often did pratfalls on ''Saturday Night Live'', imitating Ford, who had been seen stumbling on two occasions during his term.
That year his biological father,  whom Ford described as a "carefree, well-to-do man who didn't really give a damn about the hopes and dreams of his firstborn son", approached Ford while he was waiting tables in a Grand Rapids restaurant.
* Gerald R. Ford Freeway (Nebraska)
The State of Michigan commissioned and submitted a statue of Ford to the National Statuary Hall Collection, replacing Zachariah Chandler.
In hindsight, this was viewed as simply a public relations gimmick which had no way of solving the underlying problems.
The following were named after Ford:
So I couldn't have written a better prescription for a superb family upbringing."
* Gerald R. Ford Elementary School, Indian Wells, California
Ford was Ward's best friend on the team and they roomed together while on road trips.
1,373 U.S. citizens and 5,595 Vietnamese and third country nationals were evacuated from the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon during Operation Frequent Wind.
It was unveiled on May 3, 2011 in the Capitol Rotunda.
Ford's leadership was instrumental in shepherding revenue sharing through Congress, and resulted in a bipartisan coalition that supported the bill with 223 votes in favor (compared with 185 against).
The advice was unanimous.
Ford felt truly annoyed and thought the chance for peace was jeopardized.
Nonetheless, many grant in hindsight that he had respectably discharged with considerable dignity a great responsibility that he had not sought.
During his tenure as House Republican leader, Ford had led efforts to have Douglas impeached.
**Henry Kissinger (1974–1975)
Ford lived longer than any other U.S. president, 93 years and 165 days, while his 895-day presidency remains the shortest term of all presidents who did not die in office.
Ford was nominated to take Agnew's position on October 12, the first time the vice-presidential vacancy provision of the 25th Amendment had been implemented.
Ford noted the peculiarity of his position: "I am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your president by your ballots, and so I ask you to confirm me as your president with your prayers."
**Ron Nessen (1974–1977)
Another high-profile victory for the Republican minority was the State and Local Fiscal Assistance act.
During the spring of 1944, the ''Monterey'' supported landings at Kwajalein and Eniwetok and participated in carrier strikes in the Marianas, Western Carolines, and northern New Guinea, as well as in the Battle of the Philippine Sea.
"In all the years I sat in the House, I never knew Mr. Ford to make a dishonest statement nor a statement part-true and part-false.
Ford, concerned with both the effect of this on Turkish-American relations and the deterioration of security on NATO's eastern front, vetoed the bill.
In the preface to his book, ''A Presidential Legacy and The Warren Commission'', Ford defended the work of the commission and reiterated his support of its conclusions.
This resulted in a federal deficit of around $53&nbsp;billion for the 1975 fiscal year and $73.7&nbsp;billion for 1976.
Ford was a member of several civic organizations, including the Junior Chamber of Commerce (Jaycees), American Legion, AMVETS, Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks, Sons of the Revolution, and Veterans of Foreign Wars.
It was the first act signed by Carter, on January 20, 1977.
But work by Andrew Gawthorpe, published in 2009, based on an analysis of the administration's internal discussions, shows that Ford's national security team understood that the seizure of the vessel was a local, and perhaps even accidental, provocation by an immature Khmer government.
* Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy, Albion College
It could go on and on and on, or someone must write the end to it.
At the time, inflation was believed to be the primary threat to the economy, more so than growing unemployment; there was a belief that controlling inflation would help reduce unemployment.
He spent the summer of 1937 as a student at the University of Michigan Law School and was eventually admitted in the spring of 1938 to Yale Law School.
At administration meetings, Kissinger voiced the concern that the North would see the U.S. as "the paper tigers of Saigon" if they did not respond, and Ford agreed with that assessment.
The wedding was delayed until shortly before the elections because, as ''The New York Times'' reported in a 1974 profile of Betty Ford, "Jerry was running for Congress and wasn't sure how voters might feel about his marrying a divorced ex-dancer."
In mid-August, the Greek government withdrew Greece from the NATO military structure; in mid-September 1974, the Senate and House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted to halt military aid to Turkey.
