Rumold avowed that a second volume would attend to these deficiencies but it was not forthcoming and the whole project lost momentum; Rumold, who was 55 years old in 1595, was  in decline and he died in 1599.
Over the years Mercator's definition of ''atlas'' has become simply ''A collection of maps in a volume.''
His heirs  added 5 introductory maps before publication: world map  and Europe by Rumold, Africa and Asia by  grandson Gerard  and America by grandson Michael.
In addition the time available he had available for cartography was reduced by a burst of writing on philosophy and theology: a substantial written work on the Harmonisation of the Gospels as well as commentaries on the epistle of St. Paul and the book of Ezekiel.
Every place mentioned in the text is given its geographic coordinates to the nearest minute.
The map  was a slightly modified copy of a   1531 world map (and its text) by Oronce Fine.
The reasons for such reticence become obvious when the political nature of the map is appreciated: the map is distinctly pro-catholic.
File:Mercator Hondius Atlas Minor of 1607 frontispiece.png|alt2=The title page of the Atlas Minor of Hondius|The Atlas Minor of Hondius
Despite the death of Ortelius in 1598 the Theatrum flourished: in 1602 it was in its thirteenth Latin edition as well as editions in Dutch, Italian, French German and Spanish.
View online version 1 and  version 2.
They also described and set in a wider context in the article by Dekker in the History of Cartography, also available online.
This period of persecution is probably the major factor in his move from catholic Leuven (Louvain)  to a more tolerant Duisburg where  he lived for the last thirty years of his life.
Their locations could be a hundred miles out after a long voyage because a course of constant direction at sea (a rhumb line) did not correspond to  a straight line on their chart.
"''The journey through Lorraine gravely imperilled his life and so weakened him that he came very near to a serious breakdown and mental derangement as a result of his terrifying experiences.''"
As an accurate guide for a future catholic invasion of England by Phillip II of Spain it would have been invaluable.
Much to Mercator's sadness Bartholemew  died young, in 1568 (aged 28).
The normal progress for an able Magister was to go on to further study in one of the four faculties at Louvain: Theology, Medicine, Canon Law and Roman Law.
The single copy of the map was never published  but two detailed maps of Lorraine (north and south) appear in the Atlas of 1585.
::The second part of the Atlas contains the maps but each section has its own title page, dedication and preface, and every country is succinctly supplemented by text describing a mixture of history, royal genealogy, ecclesiastical hierarchies, list of universities and occasionally facets of contemporary economy.
Many of the pages were assembled from dissected Mercator maps and in addition there are thirty maps from the  Theatrum Orbis Terrarum of Abraham Ortelius.
Eventually the atlas become out-of-date and by the middle of the seventeenth century the publications of map-makers such as Joan Blaeu and Frederik de Wit took over.
This work entailed supplementing the maps of the 1585 and 1589 with  28 unpublished maps of Mercator covering the northern countries, creating four  maps of the continents and a world map, the printing of Mercator's account of the creation and finally the addition of eulogies and Walter Ghim's biography of Mercator.
This King Atlas was a son of the Titan Atlas but the two myths very quickly coalesced.
Mercator never accepted the privileges and voting rights of a burgher which came with military responsibilities conflicting with his pacifist and neutral stance.
It was much favoured by humanist scholars who enjoyed its elegance and clarity as well as the rapid fluency that could be attained with practice, but it was not employed for formal purposes such as globes, maps and scientific instruments (which typically used Roman capitals or gothic script).
At the same time his well placed friends petitioned on his behalf, but whether his friend Antoine Perronet was helpful is unknown:  Perronet, as a bishop, would have to support the activities of the Inquisition.
In between these works he found time to write ''Literarum latinarum'', a small instruction manual on the italic script.
File:Mercator map of Flanders 1539.tiff|alt2=|Flanders, 1540
It "''attracted  more praise from scholars everywhere than any similar geographical work which has ever been brought out.''"
There are also a number of freely available digital volumes such as those at the  Library of Congress and  Darlington Library (University of Pittsburg).
Moreover, for the only time in his career, there is no dedicatee for the map.
There is no precise definition of this term other than that it certainly  comprehends the disciplines of geography and astronomy but at that time it would also include astrology and chronology (as a history of the world from the creation).
::The atlas includes  further 28 maps: 16 of Britain, 4 of Denmark and one each of the polar regions, Iceland, Norway with Sweden, Prussia, Livonia, Russia, Lithuania, Transylvania and Crimea.
In addition high resolution facsimiles  are available on a CD published by  Octavo ().
The three sections, each with a title page, dedication and supporting text, were sold together and separately.
Ironically it was this same Duke to whom Mercator would turn ten years hence.
The contents of the library provide an insight into Mercator's intellectual studies but the mathematics books are the only ones to have been subjected to scholarly analysis: they cover arithmetic, geometry, trigonometry, surveying, architecture, fortification, astronomy, astrology, time measurement, calendar calculation, scientific instruments, cartography and applications.
The map used a cordiform projection.
Such doubt was heresy at the University and it is quite possible that he had already said enough in classroom disputations to come to the notice of the authorities: fortunately he did not put his sentiments into print.
This collection of maps is dedicated to Queen Elizabeth of England and in the preface Mercator acknowledges the information he received from English mariners through Rumold who had spent much of his working life in London.
::A unique collection of maps assembled in the early 1570s, many of which are assembled from portions of Mercator's earlier maps:  9 constructed from Europe (1554), 6 from British Isles (1564) and 2 from the world map (1569).
This last work, which he did succeed in finishing, was the climax of his life's activities, the work which, in his own opinion, surpassed all his other endeavours and provided a framework and rationale for the complete atlas.
The dedications of three of these works witness Mercator's access to influential patrons: the Holy Land was dedicated to  Franciscus van Cranevelt  who sat on the Great Council of Mechelen, the map of Flanders was dedicated to the Emperor himself and the globe was dedicated to Nicholas Perronet, the emperor's chief advisor.
*'''1564 Lorraine''' (Lotharingia)   From 1585 atlas.
A year later, in 1538, he produced his first map of the world, usually referred to as ''Orbis Imago''.
This volume has a noteworthy preface for it includes the first mention of  Atlas as a mythical king of Mauretania,  a ''son'' of the globe-bearing Titan of the same name.
The map is remarkably accurate and it is presumed to be based on a triangulation of Flanders by Jacob van Deventer.
Mercator was buried in the church of St. Salvatore  in Duisburg where there is a fine memorial which was erected about fifty years after his death.
His connection with this world of privilege was through his fellow student Antoine Perrenot, soon to be appointed Bishop of Arras, and Antoine's  father, Nicholas Perrenot, the Chancellor of Charles&nbsp;V.
Mercator returned home to convalesce leaving Bartholemew to complete the survey.
( archived version)
Original,  copy by Ortelius,  1595 atlas,  1613 atlas.
From that date they were sold as a pair.
He also returned to his work on a large up-to-date and highly detailed wall map of Europe which was, he had already claimed on his 1538 world map, very well advanced.
The second interruption was potentially deadly: the Inquisition called.
Around this time  the marshall of Jülich  approached Mercator and asked him to prepare a set of European regional maps which would serve for grand tour by his patron's son, the crown prince Johannes.
After seven months Mercator was released for lack of evidence against him but others on the list suffered torture and execution: two men were burnt at the stake, another was beheaded and two women were entombed alive.
Dedicated to Franciscus van Cranevelt.
For the rest of his time in Louvain his religious thoughts were kept to himself and he turned back to his work.
Only one of his own copies has been found—a first edition of Copernicus's ''De revolutionibus orbium coelestium'' annotated in Mercator's hand: this is held by Glasgow University.
We propose with regard to the different parts of the world to treat, successively, particular regions more broadly, as we are already doing with Europe, and you may soon expect a universal map, which will not be inferior to that of Ptolemy.
His construction of a chart on which  the courses of constant bearing favoured by mariners appeared as  straight lines ultimately revolutionised the art of navigation, making it simpler and therefore safer.
*''' 1589 Atlas'''  Italiae, Sclavoniae, Grecia.
The peaceful town of Duisberg, untroubled by political and religious unrest, was the perfect place for the flowering of his talent.
It was accepted by scholars as the "last word", literally and metaphorically, in a chapter of geography which was closed for good.
As an adult he had family connections to Molanus, a religious reformer who would later have to flee Louvain, and a close friend and correspondent, Philip Melanchthon, one of the principal Lutheran reformers.
Wright's solution was a numerical approximation and it was another 70 years before the projection formula was derived analytically.
Of these the chronology had already accomplished, the account of the creation and the modern maps would appear in the atlas of 1595, his edition of Ptolemy appeared in 1578 but the ancient geography and the description of the heavens  never appeared.
The large size of what was a wall map meant that it did not find favour for use on board ship but, within a hundred years of its creation, the  Mercator Projection became the standard for marine charts throughout the world and continues to be so used to the present day.
A large part of Mercator's income came from the sales of his terrestrial and celestial globes.
Mercator's solution was to make the scale of his chart increase with latitude in a very special way such that the rhumb lines became straight lines on his new world map.
In addition they published the atlas in a compact form, the Atlas Minor, which meant that it was readily available to a wide market.
::The terrestrial globe is significant in conjecturing that North America is separated from Asia, unlike the globe of Monachus.
It was revised by Mercator in 1572 and again by Rumold for the 1595 atlas.
:: A map commissioned by Duke René of Lorraine.
The sale catalogue doesn't mention any maps but it is known that the family sold the copper plates to Jodocus Hondius in 1604.
''Geographiae Libri Octo : recogniti iam et diligenter emendati.''
No known copy of the whole map has been discovered but several copies of the map were cut and re-assembled (by Mercator) for inclusion in the unique Atlas of Europe from 1570–72, for example the map of Spain on pages 7 and 8 but not the map of Europe on pages 1 and 2 which is taken from the 1569 world map.
There are also 2 manuscript maps of Mercator and 30 maps are from the Theatrum Orbis Terrarum of Abraham Ortelius.)
Around this time Mercator also received and executed a very special order for the Emperor:  a pair of small globes, the  inner ("fist-size") Earth was made of wood and the outer celestial sphere was made of blown crystal glass engraved with diamond and inlaid with gold.
He left Louvain for Antwerp, there to devote his time to contemplation of philosophy.
The family was clearly in some financial difficulty for, in1604,  Mercator's library of some 1000 books was  sold at a public auction in Leyden  (Netherlands).
He (Wright) published a new world map based on the Mercator projection, also in 1599.
The double cordiform projection, may well have been chosen  because of its relationship to aspects of Lutheran beliefs.
A notice to the reader (Latin text) at the top of the map says: "Let America, Sarmatia and India bear witness, Dear Reader, that the image of the world you see here is newer and more correct than those that have been circulated hitherto.
The Mercator atlas seemed destined for oblivion.
Two copies are extant: one at the library of Perugia and another at the Bibliotheque Nationale de France (link above).
Mercator was the first to link historical dates of solar and lunar eclipses to Julian dates calculated mathematically from his knowledge of the motions of the sun, moon and Earth.
A single original  is extant and may be inspected in the Plantin-Moretus Museum: it also  appeared in the atlas of 1585 and in the Theatrum Orbis Terrarum of Abraham Ortelius.
Exactly how he arrived at the required solution is not recorded in any of his own written works but modern scholarship  suggests that he used the  tables of rhumbs devised by Pedro Nunes.
Gerardus Mercator, (pronounced  ), was born  Geert (or Gerhard) De Kremer (or Cremer), the seventh child of Hubert De Kremer and his wife Emerance.
Mercator was completely out of his depth but, with the help and friendship of Gemma, who was only four years older, he succeeded in mastering the elements of mathematics within two years and the university granted him permission to tutor private students.
Dedicated to Antoine Perrenot.
A second edition including  the revised text of  ''Geographia'' was published in 1584.
One year later disaster struck: Mercator had  a stroke which left him greatly incapacitated.
The clock was provided with eight dials which showed the positions of the moon, stars and planets.
He took a new wife, Gertrude Vierlings, the wealthy widow of a former mayor of Duisburg, (and at the same time he arranged the marriage of Rumold to her daughter).
The 1595 Atlas has about 120 pages of maps and illustrated title pages but a greater number of pages are devoted to his account of the creation of the universe and descriptions of all the countries portrayed.
Note that Mercator did not term this collection of maps an atlas.
On this globe Mercator's name appears on equal footing with that of  Frisius.
Mercator's map shows the route of the Israelites from Egypt to the Promised Land.
It was also his last work in a literal sense for he died after two further strokes in 1594.
Slowly, but steadily, charts using the projection appeared throughout the first half of the seventeenth century and by the end of that century chart makers all over the world were using nothing but the Mercator projection, their aim to show the oceans and the coastlines in detail without concern for the continental interiors.
All of these were among Mercator's accomplishments but his patron's first call on his services was as a mundane surveyor of the disputed boundary between the Duke's territory of  the County of Mark and the  Duchy of Westphalia.
As the Chronologia was going to press in 1569, Mercator  also published what was to become his most famous map: ''Nova et Aucta Orbis Terrae Descriptio ad Usum Navigantium Emendate Accommodata'', (A new and more complete representation of the terrestrial globe properly adapted for use in navigation).
The words of the latter on the death of heretics convey the atmosphere of that time:
Hubert was a  poor artisan, a shoemaker by trade, but Gisbert, a priest, was a man of some importance in the community.
After Hubert's death in 1526, Gisbert became Mercator's guardian.
This was a new venture for him in the sense that never before had he collected the raw data for a new regional map.
Mercator first applied the italic script to the globe of Gemma Frisius and thereafter to all his works, with ever increasing elegance.
In 1554 Mercator published the long-awaited wall map of Europe, dedicating it to his friend, now Cardinal, Antoine Perronet.
(To view see 1595 Atlas).
The siege was lifted but the financial losses to the town and its traders, including Mercator, were great.
He certainly read widely but only succeeded in uncovering more contradictions between the world of the Bible and the world of geography, a hiatus which would occupy him for the rest of his life.
In the text engraved on the map he pointedly denies responsibility for the map's authorship and claims that he is merely engraving and printing it for a "''very good friend''".
It appears to have been smuggled out of England, it shows all the catholic religious foundations and omits those created by Protestant Henry VIII, it's text demeans the history of England and lauds that of Ireland and Scotland.
But something happened: he never committed anything to paper but he must have talked to his friend Ghim who would later write:.
The rhumb lines correspond to constant sailing directions but on the spherical globe they appear as spirals.
Six years later, in 1518, the Kremers moved back to Rupelmonde, possibly motivated by the deteriorating conditions in Gangelt—famine, plague and lawlessness.
The globes are lost but Mercator describes them in a letter to Philip Melanchthon in which he declares that the globes were rotated on the top of an astronomical clock made for Charles&nbsp;V by Juanelo Turriano (Janellus).
Example map:  Britain
The first map identifying North American and South America.
File:Erdglobus Mercator 1541 stitched.jpg|alt1=|Globe, 1541
Sadly they were soon destroyed in the course of the Emperor's military ventures and Mercator had to construct a second set.
Nevertheless the atlas was incomplete: Spain was omitted and there were no detailed maps outside Europe.
The map of Europe on pages 1 and 2 is taken from the 1569 world map.
He was a controversial figure who, from time to time, was in conflict with the church authorities because of his humanist outlook and his break from Aristotelian views of the world: his own views of geography were based on investigation and observation.
He struggled on with the assistance of his family trying to complete the remaining maps, the ongoing theological publications and a new treatise on the Creation of the World.
Wall map 165 by 135 cm.
Mercator was apprehended in Rupelmonde and imprisoned in the castle.
Of the titles identified there are 193 on theology (both Catholic and Lutheran),  217 on history and geography,  202 on mathematics (in its widest sense), 32 on medicine and  over 100 simply classified (by Basson) as rare books.
Arnold, the eldest, had produced his first map (of Iceland) in 1558 and would later take over the day-to-day running of Mercator's enterprises.
Their home town was Gangelt in the  Duchy of Jülich (present day Germany) but, at the time of the birth, they were visiting Hubert's brother (or uncle) Gisbert De Kremer in the small town of Rupelmonde in the county of Flanders (present day Belgium).
All four works were received with acclaim and they sold in large numbers.
::Less than half the pages in the atlas are maps.
Mercator's editions of Ptolemy and his  theological writings were in print for many years after the demise of the atlas but they too eventually disappeared into oblivion and it was the Mercator projection which emerged as his sole and greatest legacy.
As soon as the map of Britain was published Mercator was invited to undertake the surveying and mapping of Lorraine (Lotharingia).
He certainly could not effect a reconciliation between his studies and the world of Aristotle.
The general first degree (for Magister) centred on the teaching of philosophy, theology and Greek under the conservative Scholasticism which gave prime place to the authority of Aristotle.
In addition,  on the base of the memorial there is an epigram:
(A description of the Holy Land for understanding both testaments).
Unlike other great scholars of the age he travelled little and his knowledge of geography came from his  library of over one thousand books and maps, from his visitors and from his vast correspondence (in six languages) with other scholars, statesmen, travellers, merchants and seamen.
He chose the word as a commemoration of a King Atlas of Mauretania whom he considered to be the first great geographer.
Countries from Italy at the beginning of the sixteenth century and it is recorded as a form of typescript in Louvain in 1522.
Many library copies are   available worldwide.
Mercator would have attended the local school in Rupelmonde from the age of seven, when he arrived from Gangelt,  and there he would have been taught the basics of reading, writing, arithmetic and Latin.
It proved to be a vast task and he, perfectionist that he was, seemed unable to cut short his ever expanding researches and publish: as a result it was to be another ten years before the map appeared.
(Once again Mercator did not term this collection of maps as an atlas but in the preface he introduces Atlas as a mythical King of Mauretania—a learned philosopher, mathematician and astronomer, credited with the making of the first globe.)
There are two museums dedicated primarily to Mercator:
The main text of the epitaph is a  summary of his life lauding him as  ''the foremost mathematician of his time who crafted artistic and accurate globes showing the heaven from the inside and the Earth from the outside&nbsp;... greatly respected for his wide erudition, particularly in theology, and famous on account of his piety and respectability in life.''
Had he published such a work in Louvain he would again be laying himself open to charges of heresy.
Study of the bible was something that would be central to Mercator's life and it was the cause of the early philosophical doubts that caused him so much trouble during his student days, doubts which some of his teachers would have considered to be tantamount to heresy.
His brush with the Inquisition did not affect his relationship with the court and Nicholas Perrenot recommended him to the emperor as a maker of superb instruments.
Hondius was an accomplished business man and under his guidance the Atlas was an enormous success; he (followed by his son Henricus, and son-in-law Johannes Janssonius) produced 29 editions between 1609 and 1641, including one in English.
:: ''Tabulae geographicae Cl.
Mercator never committed any of his prison experiences to paper; all he would say was that he had suffered an "unjust persecution".
His visits to the free thinking Franciscans in Mechelen may  have attracted the attention of the theologians at the university, amongst whom were  two senior figures of the Inquisition, Jacobus Latomus and Ruard Tapper.
In 1539/40 he made a map of Flanders and in 1541 a terrestrial globe.
His family did produce another edition in 1602 but only the text was reset, there were no new maps.
A second collection of 22 maps was published covering Italy, Greece and the Balkans.
Several copies of this map were cut and re-assembled for the atlas of Europe.
It also sold in large quantities for much of the rest of the century with a second edition appearing in 1572.
Both of the globes and their un-pasted gores may be examined  in high resolution.
At no time in his life did Mercator claim to be a Lutheran but there are many hints that he had sympathies in that direction.
In 1537, aged only 25, he established his reputation with a map of the Holy Land which was researched, engraved, printed and partly published by himself.
Mercator graduated Magister in 1532.
It may well have been these Inquisitors who, in 1543, decided that Mercator was eminent enough to be sacrificed.
Mercator quickly established himself as a man of standing in the town: an intellectual of note, a publisher of maps, and a maker of instruments and globes.
The illustration shows a similar clock made by the German craftsman Baldewein at roughly the same time.
It was another 90 years before Duisburg had its university.
Usage other than for marine charts is now deprecated and more suitable  projections are available.
Based on a  map  by the lutheran Jacob Ziegler.
During his time at the school the headmaster was Georgius Macropedius and under his guidance Geert would study the bible, the trivium (Latin, logic and rhetoric) and classics such as the philosophy of Aristotle, the natural history of Pliny and the geography of Ptolemy.
All of the wall maps were engraved with copious text on the region concerned.
*'''1541/1551 Terrestrial and celestial globes'''
One reason may have been that it was incomplete: Spain was omitted and there were no detailed maps outside Europe.
First, in 1542, Louvain was besieged by the troops of the Duke of Cleves, a Lutheran sympethiser who, with French support, was set on exploiting unrest in the Low Countries to his own ends.
At some stage the projection made the unfortunate leap to portrayal of the continents and it eventually became the canonical description of the world, despite its manifest distortions at high latitudes.
He transformed the atlas.
This collection has a dedication to Prince Ferdinando de' Medici to whom Mercator attributes ancestry from King Atlas.
The commissions and patronage of such wealthy individuals would provide another source of income throughout his life.
In 1564 Mercator published his map of Britain, a map of greatly improved accuracy  which far surpassed any of his previous representations.
::Over twenty pairs of globes are still in existence.
Mercator's outline was (1) the creation of the world; (2) the description of the  heavens (astronomy and astrology); (3) the description of the  earth comprising modern geography, the geography of Ptolemy and the geography of the ancients; (4) genealogy and history of the states; and (5) chronology.
His uncle Gisbert might have hoped that Mercator would go further in theology and train for the priesthood but Mercator did not: like many twenty year old young men he was having his first serious doubts.
The celestial globe was up to date in using the information provided by Copernicus.
As mariners had started to explore the oceans in the Age of Discovery the problem of accurate navigation had become more pressing.
The title page of this work is an illustration of the decorative style he developed.
Walter Ghim, Mercator's friend and first biographer, describes him as sober in his behaviour, yet cheerful and witty in company, and never more happy than in debate with other scholars, but above all he was pious and studious until his dying days.
In 1542 the thirty year old must have been feeling confident about his future prospects when he suffered two major interruptions to his life.
That he should wish to do so may seem strange given that,  at the same time, he was planning very different modern maps and  other mapmakers, such as  his friend Abraham Ortelius, had forsaken Ptolemy completely.
File:Antinous Delphinus Sagitta et Aquila - Mercator.jpeg|alt3=Celestial globe detail: Sagitta et Aquila
All teaching at the school was in Latin and he would read, write and converse in Latin—and give himself a new Latin name, Gerardus Mercator Rupelmundanus, Mercator being the Latin translation of Kremer which means merchant.
The proposed university in Duisburg  failed to materialize because the papal licence to found the University was delayed twelve years and by then Duke Wilhelm had lost interest.
His table of chronology ran to some 400 pages fixing the dates (from the time of creation) of earthly dynasties, major political and military events,  volcanic eruptions, earthquakes and eclipses.
As an example the famous world map of 1569 is inscribed with over 5000 words in fifteen legends.
The italic script (or chancery cursive) reached the Low
:: ''Anglia & Scotiae & Hibernie nova descriptio.''
File:Mercator Globe 1541 SA.jpg|alt2=|Globe with rhumb lines
*'''1595 Atlas''' (published posthumously by Rumold Mercator)  View online.
