German movies such as ''Das Boot'' (1981), ''The Never Ending Story'' (1984), ''Good Bye, Lenin!''
Notable sub-styles that evolved since the 18th century are the  German spa and seaside resort architecture.
Such German inventors, engineers and industrialists as Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin, Otto Lilienthal, Gottlieb Daimler, Rudolf Diesel, Hugo Junkers and Karl Benz helped shape modern automotive and air transportation technology.
Other notable artists who work with traditional media or figurative imagery include Martin Kippenberger, Gerhard Richter, Sigmar Polke, and Neo Rauch.
Especially notable neo-expressionists include Georg Baselitz, Anselm Kiefer, Jörg Immendorff, A. R. Penck, Markus Lüpertz, Peter Robert Keil and Rainer Fetting.
The English word ''Germany'' derives from the Latin Germania, which came into use after Julius Caesar adopted it for the peoples east of the Rhine.
Wilhelm Röntgen discovered X-rays.
The Berlin International Film Festival, known as "Berlinale", awarding the "Golden Bear" and held annually since 1951, is one of the world's leading film festivals.
According to Eurostat, the government gross debt of Germany amounts to €2,152.0 billion or 71.9% of its GDP in 2015.
A Soviet-style command economy was set up and the GDR later became a Comecon state.
Cultural ties and economic interests have crafted a  bond between the two countries resulting in Atlanticism.
It has played an influential role in the European Union since its inception and has maintained a strong alliance with France and all neighbouring countries since 1990.
A system of apprenticeship called ''Duale Ausbildung'' leads to a skilled qualification which is almost comparable to an academic degree.
But after a ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court in 1994 the term "defence" has been defined to not only include protection of the borders of Germany, but also crisis reaction and conflict prevention, or more broadly as guarding the security of Germany anywhere in the world.
The establishment of the national socialist dictatorship in 1933 led to World War II and systematic genocide.
King Frederick William IV of Prussia was offered the title of Emperor, but with a loss of power; he rejected the crown and the proposed constitution, leading to a temporary setback for the movement.
With about 82.0&nbsp;million inhabitants, Germany is the most populous member state of the European Union.
According to the 2011 German Census, Christianity is the largest religion in Germany, claiming 66.8% of the total population.
Germany is one of the leading motor sports countries in the world.
He is one of the highest paid sportsmen in history.
After the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, the German princes proclaimed the founding of the German Empire in 1871 at Versailles, uniting all scattered parts of Germany except Austria.
The German government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community.
Strategic bombing and land warfare destroyed many cities and cultural heritage sites.
Following the break up of the Frankish Realm, for 900 years, the history of Germany was intertwined with the history of the Holy Roman Empire, which subsequently emerged from the eastern portion of Charlemagne's original empire.
German classical music includes works by some of the world's most well-known composers.
Germany sent a peacekeeping force to secure stability in the Balkans and sent a force of German troops to Afghanistan as part of a NATO effort to provide security in that country after the ousting of the Taliban.
The agreement at Augsburg failed to address other religious creed: for example, the Reformed faith was still considered a heresy and the principle did not address the possible conversion of an ecclesiastic ruler, such as happened in Electorate of Cologne in 1583.
Germany's capital and largest city is Berlin.
Other capital construction projects included hydroelectric facilities such as the Rur Dam, water supplies such as Zillierbach Dam, and transportation hubs such as Zwickau Hauptbahnhof.
Most German vocabulary is derived from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family.
The Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film ("Oscar") went to the German production ''Die Blechtrommel (The Tin Drum)'' in 1979, to ''Nirgendwo in Afrika (Nowhere in Africa)'' in 2002, and to ''Das Leben der Anderen (The Lives of Others)'' in 2007.
In the contemporary era Germany has developed eleven Universities of Excellence: Humboldt University Berlin, the University of Bremen, the University of Cologne, TU Dresden, the University of Tübingen, RWTH Aachen, FU Berlin, Heidelberg University, the University of Konstanz, LMU Munich, and the Technical University of Munich.
Expressionist architecture developed in the 1910s in Germany and influenced Art Deco and other modern styles, with e.g.
Following Hitler's suicide during the Battle of Berlin, German armed forces surrendered on 8 May 1945, ending World War II in Europe.
The driver Michael Schumacher has set many motor sport records during his career, having won more Formula One World Drivers' Championships with seven titles, than any other.
The largest conurbation is the Rhine-Ruhr region (11.7&nbsp;million ), including Düsseldorf (the capital of North Rhine-Westphalia), Cologne, Bonn, Dortmund, Essen, Duisburg, and Bochum.
Later, Germany further expanded its colonial empire to include German New Guinea, German Micronesia and German Samoa in the Pacific, and Kiautschou Bay in China.
The fertility rate of 1.41 children born per woman (2011 estimates), or 8.33 births per 1000 inhabitants, is one of the lowest in the world.
Germany's television market is the largest in Europe, with some 38&nbsp;million TV households.
Germany's new political leadership signed the Treaty of Versailles in 1919.
In 1930 Josef von Sternberg directed ''The Blue Angel'', the first major German sound film, with Marlene Dietrich.
Germany almost lost its Jewish minority during the Holocaust and the country's religious makeup changed gradually in the decades following 1945, with West Germany becoming more religiously diversified through immigration and East Germany becoming overwhelmingly irreligious through state policies.
The western sectors, controlled by France, the United Kingdom, and the United States, were merged on 23 May 1949 to form the Federal Republic of Germany (''Bundesrepublik Deutschland''); on 7 October 1949, the Soviet Zone became the German Democratic Republic (''Deutsche Demokratische Republik'').
Germany's national radio network is the Deutschlandradio while ARD stations are covering local services.
In addition to the maritime and continental climates that predominate over most of the country, the Alpine regions in the extreme south and, to a lesser degree, some areas of the Central German Uplands have a mountain climate, with lower temperatures and more precipitation.
It is part of the Schengen Area, and became a co-founder of the Eurozone in 1999.
The Upper Swabian Baroque Route offers a baroque-themed tourist route that highlights the contributions of such artists and craftsmen as the sculptor and plasterer Johann Michael Feuchtmayer, one of the foremost members of the Feuchtmayer family and the brothers Johann Baptist Zimmermann and Dominikus Zimmermann.
In 1935, the regime withdrew from the Treaty of Versailles and introduced the Nuremberg Laws which targeted Jews and other minorities.
It is formulated by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and carried out by the implementing organisations.
However, the smaller liberal Free Democratic Party (in parliament from 1949 to 2013) and the Alliance '90/The Greens (in parliament since 1983) have also played important roles.
This warmer water affects the areas bordering the North Sea; consequently in the northwest and the north the climate is oceanic.
It is a member of the Eurozone which represents around 338 million citizens.
The members of the ''Bundesrat'' represent the governments of the sixteen federated states and are members of the state cabinets.
In 2012, organic foods accounted for 3.9% of total food sales.
Germany also reacquired control of the Saar in 1935, annexed Austria in 1938, and despite the Munich Agreement, occupied Czechoslovakia in early 1939.
With its central position in Europe, Germany is a transport hub for the continent.
Germany ranked 20th in the world in life expectancy with 77 years for men and 82 years for women, and it had a very low infant mortality rate (4 per 1,000 live births).
The united Germany is considered to be the enlarged continuation of the Federal Republic of Germany and not a successor state.
Germany has a number of large cities.
Konrad Adenauer was elected the first Federal Chancellor (''Bundeskanzler'') of Germany in 1949 and remained in office until 1963.
the Bundeswehr employed roughly 178,000 service members, including 9,500 volunteers.
Since 1949, the party system has been dominated by the Christian Democratic Union and the Social Democratic Party of Germany.
it is the largest contributor to the budget of the European Union (providing 20%) and the third largest contributor to the UN (providing 8%).
Architectural contributions from Germany include the Carolingian and Ottonian styles, which were precursors of Romanesque.
The overall life expectancy in Germany at birth is 80.19 years (77.93 years for males and 82.58 years for females).
German cinema has made major technical and artistic contributions to film.
Germany is a leading country in the fashion industry.
Germany is a developed country with a very high standard of living sustained by a skilled and productive society.
With a population of 80.2&nbsp;million according to the 2011 census, rising to 81.5&nbsp;million as at 30 June 2015 and to at least 81.9&nbsp;million as at 31 December 2015, Germany is the most populous country in the European Union, the second most populous country in Europe after Russia, and ranks as the 16th most populous country in the world.
Films of Leni Riefenstahl set new artistic standards, in particular Triumph of the Will.
The papers (and internet portals) with the highest circulation are ''Bild'' (a tabloid), ''Die Zeit'', ''Süddeutsche Zeitung'', ''Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung'' and ''Die Welt'', the largest magazines include ''Der Spiegel'', ''Stern'' and ''Focus''.
belonging to the ''diot'' or ''diota'' "people"), originally used to distinguish the language of the common people from Latin and its Romance descendants.
Field listing&nbsp;– GDP (PPP exchange rate)
The House of Habsburg held the imperial crown from 1438 until  the death of Charles VI in 1740.
West Germany was established as a federal parliamentary republic with a "social market economy".
The German men's national football team won the FIFA World Cup in 1954, 1974, 1990, and 2014, and the UEFA European Championship in 1972, 1980 and 1996.
The Berlin Wall, built in 1961 to stop East Germans from escaping to West Germany, became a symbol of the Cold War.
The largest German airports are Frankfurt Airport and Munich Airport, both hubs of Lufthansa, while Air Berlin has hubs at Berlin Tegel and Düsseldorf.
The Holy Roman Empire absorbed northern Italy and Burgundy under the reign of the Salian emperors (1024–1125), although the emperors lost power through the Investiture Controversy.
Germany is the seventh most visited country in the world, with a total of 407 million overnights during 2012.
Until 1815, France, Russia, Prussia and the Habsburgs competed for hegemony in the German states during the Napoleonic Wars.
It is followed by the Leipzig University (1409), the Rostock University (1419) and the Greifswald University (1456).
Similarly, Britain, France and Russia also concluded alliances that would protect them against Habsburg interference with Russian interests in the Balkans or German interference against France.
Over the next five years, unemployment plummeted and average wages both per hour and per week rose.
Almost 44 per cent of the products are exported.
Other religions accounted for 2.7%.
German dialects, traditional local varieties traced back to the Germanic tribes, are distinguished from varieties of standard German by their lexicon, phonology, and syntax.
Areas of what is today the eastern part of Germany were inhabited by Western Slavic tribes of Sorbs, Veleti and the Obotritic confederation.
Tuition free academic education is open to international students and is increasingly common.
Recognised native minority languages in Germany are Danish, Low German, Sorbian, Romany, and Frisian; they are officially protected by the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
UNESCO inscribed 40 properties in Germany on the World Heritage List.
The Port of Hamburg is one of the top twenty largest container ports in the world.
The role of the ''Bundeswehr'' is described in the Constitution of Germany as defensive only.
Following the agreement, on 1 September 1939  Germany invaded Poland, marking the beginning of World War II.
Otto Hahn was a pioneer in the fields of radiochemistry and discovered nuclear fission, while Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch were founders of microbiology.
In 2014, the Catholic Church accounted for 23.9 million members (29.5% of the population) and the Evangelical Church for 22.6 million (27.9% of the population).
Until 2011, military service was compulsory for men at age 18, and conscripts served six-month tours of duty; conscientious objectors could instead opt for an equal length of ''Zivildienst'' (civilian service), or a six-year commitment to (voluntary) emergency services like a fire department or the Red Cross.
At the Berlin Conference in 1884, Germany claimed several colonies including German East Africa, German South-West Africa, Togoland, and Kamerun.
The German railways are subsidised by the government, receiving €17.0 billion in 2014.
Relative to the whole population, 31.7% declared themselves as Protestants, including members of the Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD) (30.8%) and the free churches  () (0.9%), and 31.2% declared themselves as Roman Catholics.
Germany is well known for its diverse tourist routes, such as the Romantic Road, the Wine Route, the Castle Road, and the Avenue Road.
Germany was affected by the European migrant crisis in 2015 as it became the final destination of choice for most migrants entering the EU.
After Germany surrendered, the Allies partitioned Berlin and Germany's remaining territory into four military occupation zones.
Underneath it all, though, lay a current of animosity and frustration over the Treaty of Versailles, widely perceived as a stab in the back, which provided the basis of much of the anti-Semitism rife in the next two decades.
Nazi policies in the  German occupied countries resulted in the deaths of 2.7 million Poles, 1.3 million Ukrainians, and an estimated 2.8 million Soviet war prisoners.
Other religions comprising less than one per cent of Germany's population are Buddhism with 250,000 adherents (roughly 0.3%) and Hinduism with some 100,000 adherents (0.1%).
The German term ''Deutschland'', originally ''diutisciu land'' ("the German lands") is derived from ''deutsch'' (cf.
It is one of 24 official and working languages of the European Union, and one of the three working languages of the European Commission.
Today it is Europe's largest studio.
Among the major German political projects of the early 21st century are the advancement of European integration, the energy transition (''Energiewende'') for a sustainable energy supply, the "Debt Brake"  for balanced budgets, measures to increase the fertility rate significantly (pronatalism), and high-tech strategies for the future transition of the German economy, summarised as Industry 4.0.
After the defeat in the First World War, Germany lost around thirteen per cent of its European territory (areas predominantly inhabited by ethnic Polish, French and Danish populations, which were lost following the Greater Poland Uprising, the return of Alsace-Lorraine and the Schleswig plebiscites), and all of its colonial possessions in Africa and the South Sea.
Spruce and fir trees predominate in the upper mountains, while pine and larch are found in sandy soil.
With 7.1% Germany also has the lowest youth unemployment rate of all EU member states.
Having no male heirs, he had convinced the Electors to retain Habsburg hegemony in the office of the emperor by agreeing to the Pragmatic Sanction.
In the 18th century, the Holy Roman Empire consisted of approximately 1,800 territories.
The subsequent (and decisive) Prussian victory in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 enabled him to create the North German Confederation (''Norddeutscher Bund'') which excluded Austria from the federation's affairs.
Obesity in Germany has been increasingly cited as a major health issue.
Currently the population is covered by a health insurance plan provided by statute, with criteria allowing some groups to opt for a private health insurance contract.
The Nobel Prize has been awarded to 104 German laureates.
Together with its European partners Germany signed the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, established the Eurozone in 1999, and signed the Lisbon Treaty in 2007.
The East German authorities eased the border restrictions, allowing East German citizens to travel to the West; originally intended to help retain East Germany as a state, the opening of the border actually led to an acceleration of the ''Wende'' reform process.
The University of Berlin, founded in 1810 by the liberal educational reformer Wilhelm von Humboldt, became the academic model for many European and Western universities.
By late 1944, the Western allies had entered Germany despite one final German counter offensive in the Ardennes Forest.
Most of Germany has a temperate seasonal climate dominated by humid westerly winds.
Richard Strauss was a leading composer of the late Romantic and early modern eras.
In June 1944, the Western allies landed in France and the Soviets pushed into Eastern Europe.
Winters are cool and summers tend to be warm: temperatures can exceed .
Germany's achievements in the sciences have been significant, and research and development efforts form an integral part of the economy.
After a period of Allied occupation, two German states were founded: the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic.
Since its foundation in 1871, Germany has been about two-thirds Protestant and one-third Roman Catholic, with a notable Jewish minority.
Director Fritz Lang's ''Metropolis'' (1927) is referred to as the first major science-fiction film.
Under Augustus, Rome began to invade Germania (an area extending roughly from the Rhine to the Ural Mountains).
In 800, the Frankish king Charlemagne was crowned emperor and founded the Carolingian Empire, which was later divided in 843 among his heirs.
However, the annexed territories though incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia and the Habsburg Realm, were not legally considered as a part of the Holy Roman Empire.
Such German sculptors as Otto Schmidt-Hofer, Franz Iffland, and Julius Schmidt-Felling made important contributions to German art history in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Water sports like sailing, rowing, and swimming are popular in Germany as well.
It is the seventh largest country by area in Europe and the 62nd largest in the world.
The 2015 Michelin Guide awarded eleven restaurants in Germany three stars, the highest designation, while 38 more received two stars and 233 one star.
According to the World Health Organization, Germany's health care system was 77% government-funded and 23% privately funded .
Criminal and private laws are codified on the national level in the ''Strafgesetzbuch'' and the ''Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch'' respectively.
In the light of a series of revolutionary movements in Europe, which established a republic in France, intellectuals and commoners started the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states.
In 2009 the German government approved a €50&nbsp;billion economic stimulus plan to protect several sectors from a downturn.
The country's household recycling rate is among the highest in the world — at around 65%.
In the beginning of the 20th century, German laureates had more awards than those of any other nation, especially in the sciences (physics, chemistry, and physiology or medicine).
A 2007 study shows Germany has the highest number of overweight people in Europe.
In the German Revolution (November 1918), Emperor Wilhelm II and all German ruling princes abdicated their positions and responsibilities.
Optional kindergarten education is provided for all children between three and six years old, after which school attendance is compulsory for at least nine years.
The Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize is granted to ten scientists and academics every year.
In the 3rd century a number of large West Germanic tribes emerged: Alemanni, Franks, Chatti, Saxons, Frisii, Sicambri, and Thuringii.
According to the OECD Germany has one of the highest labour productivity levels in the world.
Using deficit spending, a government-sponsored programme for economic renewal focused on public works projects.
The Hambach Festival in May 1832 was a main event in support of German unity, freedom and democracy.
There are 11 officially recognised metropolitan regions in Germany.
He is elected by the ''Bundesversammlung'' (federal convention), an institution consisting of the members of the ''Bundestag'' and an equal number of state delegates.
The German supermodels Claudia Schiffer, Heidi Klum, Tatjana Patitz and Nadja Auermann have come to international fame.
In 1555, the Peace of Augsburg established Lutheranism as an acceptable alternative to Catholicism, but also decreed that the faith of the prince was to be the faith of his subjects, a principle called Cuius regio, eius religio.
In 1806 the ''Imperium'' was dissolved; German states, particularly the Rhineland states, fell under the influence of France.
The service sector contributes approximately 71% of the total GDP (including information technology), industry 28%, and agriculture 1%.
Its population density stands at 227 inhabitants per square kilometre (588 per square mile).
In 2015, the Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs listed Germany as host to the second-highest number of international migrants worldwide, about 5% or 12&nbsp;million of all 244&nbsp;million migrants.
Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G8, the G20, and the OECD.
It is the world's third largest exporter of goods, and has the largest national economy in Europe which is also the world's fourth largest by nominal GDP Field listing&nbsp;– GDP (official exchange rate) and the fifth one by PPP.
However, there are a number of exceptions, depending on the state, the college and the subject.
Germany has a civil law system based on Roman law with some references to Germanic law.
DJs and artists of the techno and house music scenes of Germany have become well known (e.g.
Germany's system of hospices, called ''spitals'', dates from medieval times, and today, Germany has the world's oldest universal health care system, dating from Bismarck's social legislation of the 1880s, Since the 1880s, reforms and provisions have ensured a balanced health care system.
The Federal Statistical Office classifies the citizens by immigrant background.
It allows students in vocational training to learn in a company as well as in a state-run trade school.
The most used immigrant languages are Turkish, Kurdish, Polish, the Balkan languages, and Russian.
According to a 2005 survey, 27% of German adults are smokers.
In 9&nbsp;AD, three Roman legions led by Varus were defeated by the Cheruscan leader Arminius.
Although wine is becoming more popular in many parts of Germany, especially in German wine regions, the national alcoholic drink is beer.
After the United States, it is the second most popular immigration destination.
In the 2011 census, 1.9% of Germans declared themselves to be Muslims.
Germany was declared a republic at the beginning of the German Revolution in November 1918.
German artists, writers and gallerists like Siegfried Bing, Georg Hirth and Bruno Möhring also contributed to the development of Art Nouveau at the turn of the 20th century, known as ''Jugendstil'' in German.
Bread is a significant part of German cuisine and German bakeries produce about 600 main types of bread and 1,200 different types of pastries and rolls (''Brötchen'').
Association football is the most popular sport.
Four sizable groups of people are referred to as "national minorities" because their ancestors have lived in their respective regions for centuries.
The discovery of the Mauer 1 mandible shows that ancient humans were present in Germany at least 600,000 years ago.
The Roma and Sinti live throughout the whole federal territory and the Frisians live on Schleswig-Holstein's western coast, and in the north-western part of Lower Saxony.
It lies mostly between latitudes 47° and 55° N and longitudes 5° and 16° E. Germany is also bordered by the North Sea and, at the north-northeast, by the Baltic Sea.
The first works of the Skladanowsky Brothers were shown to an audience in 1895.
This model is well regarded and reproduced all around the world.
Numerous mathematicians were born in Germany, including Carl Friedrich Gauss, David Hilbert, Bernhard Riemann, Gottfried Leibniz, Karl Weierstrass, Hermann Weyl and Felix Klein.
It was supported by parts of the ''Reichswehr'' (military) and other conservative, nationalistic and monarchist factions.
Germany has been the home of many famous inventors and engineers, including Hans Geiger, the creator of the Geiger counter; and Konrad Zuse, who built the first fully automatic digital computer.
The east has a more continental climate: winters can be very cold and summers very warm, and longer dry periods can occur.
German institutions like the German Aerospace Center (DLR) are the largest contributor to ESA.
The national military expenditure is the 9th highest in the world.
Tensions between East and West Germany were reduced in the early 1970s by Chancellor Willy Brandt's .
Research institutions in Germany include the Max Planck Society, the Helmholtz Association and the Fraunhofer Society.
Post-World War II art trends in Germany can broadly be divided into Neo-expressionism, performance art and Conceptualism.
Being home to the modern car, the automotive industry in Germany is regarded as one of the most competitive and innovative in the world, and is the fourth largest by production.
Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank, which is headquartered in Frankfurt, the financial centre of continental Europe.
This permitted German reunification on 3 October 1990, with the accession of the five re-established states of the former GDR.
The German penal system seeks the rehabilitation of the criminal and the protection of the public.
More than 400 registered zoos and animal parks operate in Germany, which is believed to be the largest number in any country.
There are many species of ferns, flowers, fungi, and mosses.
The chancellor, Angela Merkel (22 November 2005–present), is the head of government and exercises executive power, similar to the role of a Prime Minister in other parliamentary democracies.
