During the last decade of the 20th century, Germany changed its attitude towards immigrants.
Linguists distinguish low Saxon, Franconian, Bavarian, Thuringian and Alemannic varieties in modern German.
She is the recipient of the 2009 Nobel Prize in Literature for her novel ''Atemschaukel''.
File:Kdom.jpg|Cologne Cathedral
The German ethnicity is linked to Germanic tribes of antiquity in central Europe.
File:Konfessionen Deutschland Zensus 2011.png|Predominant religious group according to 2011 nationwide census.
Until the mid-1990s the opinion was widespread that Germany is not a country of immigration, even though about 20% of the population were of non-German origin.
The work of David Hilbert, Max Planck and Albert Einstein was crucial to the foundation of modern physics, which Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schrödinger developed further.
In 1990, the number increased to 79%.
The English term ''Germans'' is only attested from the mid-16th century, based on the classical Latin term ''Germani'' used by Julius Caesar and later Tacitus.
By 55 BC, the Germans had reached the Danube river and had either assimilated or otherwise driven out the Celts who had lived there, and had spread west into what is now Belgium and France.
United States is home to approximately 50 million German Americans or one third of the German diaspora, making it the largest centre of German-descended people outside Germany.
After World War II, eastern European countries such as the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania and Yugoslavia expelled the Germans from their territories.
The fear of nationalistic misuse of Pan-Germanism nevertheless remains strong.
Historically, Germany had a substantial Jewish minority.
German cinema dates back to the very early years of the medium with the work of Max Skladanowsky.
By the 9th century, the large tribes which lived on the territory of modern Germany had been united under the rule of the Frankish king Charlemagne, known in German as Karl der Große.
File:Benedikt.Messe.Freiburg.PaterNoster.JPG|Pope Benedict XVI and clergy of the Catholic Church at mass in Freiburg, Germany
In the final battle of the German war (''Battle of Königgrätz'') the Prussians successfully defeated the Austrians and succeeded in creating the North German Confederation.
German philosophers have helped shape western philosophy from as early as the Middle Ages (Albertus Magnus).
The Napoleonic Wars were the cause of the final dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire, and ultimately the cause for the quest for a German nation state in 19th-century German nationalism.
File:Günter Grass, 2004.jpg|Günter Grass was a recipient of the 1999 Nobel Prize in Literature.
The dissolution of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire after World War I led to a strong desire of the population of the new Republic of German Austria to be integrated into Germany or Switzerland.
The ''Limes Germanicus'' was breached in AD 260.
(2003), ''Gegen die Wand (Head-on)'' (2004) and ''Der Untergang (Downfall)'' (2004) have enjoyed international success.
Both sought to expand their influence and territory.
German musicians and, particularly, the pioneering bands Tangerine Dream and Kraftwerk have also contributed to the development of electronic music.
However, German reunification in 1990 revived the old debates.
By the 2nd century BC, the number of Germans was significantly increasing and they began expanding into eastern Europe and southward into Celtic territory.
Recent polls show that no more than 6% of the German-speaking Austrians consider themselves as "''Germans''".
While in most Romance languages the Germans have been named from the Alamanni (in what became Swabia) (some, like standard Italian ''tedeschi'', retain an older borrowing of the endonym), the Old Norse, Finnish and Estonian names for the Germans were taken from that of the Saxons.
With an expenditure of €67&nbsp;billion on international travel in 2008, Germans spent more money on travel than any other country.
File:Berlinale 2011.jpg|A sign advertising the Berlin International Film Festival
While the exact number of German-descended people is difficult to calculate, the available data makes it safe to claim the number is exceeding 100 million people.
The wars launched a new movement that was born in France itself during the French Revolution.
Heilbrunn believes that the adage, "what was good for Germany was bad for the European Union" has been supplanted by a new mentality—what is in the interest of Germany is also in the interest of its neighbors.
The Old French term ''alemans'' is taken from the name of the Alamanni.
They were preceded by such key physicists as Hermann von Helmholtz, Joseph von Fraunhofer, and Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit, among others.
Germans were also forced to leave the former eastern territories of Germany, which were annexed by Poland (Silesia, Pomerania, parts of Brandenburg and southern part of East Prussia) and the Soviet Union (northern part of East Prussia).
The scale of the Germans' defeat was unprecedented.
Germany hosts some of the largest Goth scenes and festivals in the entire world, with events like Wave-Gothic-Treffen and M'era Luna Festival easily attracting up to 30,000 people.
File:Herta Müller 2007.JPG|Herta Müller was born into a German minority in Romania.
The process was gradual and lacked any clear definition, and the use of exonyms designating "the Germans" develops only during the High Middle Ages.
As German nationalism grew strongly inside the German Confederation and neither could decide on how Germany was going to be unified into a nation-state.
According to Jacob Heilbrunn, a senior editor at The National Interest, such a statement is unprecedented when taking into consideration Germany's history.
Germans, for the most part, had been a loose and disunited people since the Reformation when the Holy Roman Empire was shattered into a patchwork of states.
The former German state of Prussia took its name from the Baltic Prussians, although it was led by Germans who had assimilated the Old Prussians; the old Prussian language was extinct by the 17th or early 18th century.
The Old Prussians were an ethnic group related to the Latvian and Lithuanian Baltic peoples.
You have become Europe's indispensable nation."
The Germans are a Germanic people, who as an ethnicity emerged during the Middle Ages.
Catholics are dominant in the south and west, the Non-religious (incl.
A major part of Attila's army were Germans, during the Huns' campaign against the Roman Empire.
Later, Leibniz (17th century) and most importantly Kant played central roles in the history of philosophy.
Kantianism inspired the work of Schopenhauer and Nietzsche as well as German idealism defended by Fichte and Hegel.
Among "others" are Protestants not included in Evangelical Church of Germany, and other Christians such as the Restorationist New Apostolic Church.
The Austrian Empire – like the Holy Roman Empire – was a multi-ethnic state, but German-speaking people there did not have an absolute numerical majority; the creation of the Austro-Hungarian Empire was one result of the growing nationalism of other ethnicities especially the Hungarians.
He is the co-author of ''The Communist Manifesto''.
These five tribes, sometimes with inclusion of the Frisians, are considered as the major groups to take part in the formation of the Germans.
There was also a rejection of Roman Catholicism with the Away from Rome!
File:First medical X-ray by Wilhelm Röntgen of his wife Anna Bertha Ludwig's hand - 18951222.gif|A print of one of the first X-rays by Wilhelm Röntgen (1845–1923) of the left hand of his wife Anna Bertha Ludwig.
A poster for ''Pandora's Box'' directed by Georg Wilhelm Pabst
Brazil is the second largest with 5 million people claiming German ancestry.
Sport forms an integral part of German life, as demonstrated by the fact that 27&nbsp;million Germans are members of a sports club and an additional twelve million pursue such an activity individually.
The English term ''Germans''  has historically referred to the German-speaking population of the Holy Roman Empire since the Late Middle Ages.
Of approximately 100 million native speakers of German in the world, roughly 80&nbsp;million consider themselves Germans.
This shift in thinking is boosted by a newer generation of Germans who see World War II as a distant memory.
Nationalism and Pan-Germanism became almost taboo because they had been used so destructively by the Nazis.
German theologians include Luther,  Melanchthon, Schleiermacher, Feuerbach, and Rudolf Otto.
File:Engels.jpg|Friedrich Engels was a social scientist, author, political theorist, philosopher, and father of Marxist theory, alongside Karl Marx.
A poster for ''The Blue Angel'', a 1930 film starring Marlene Dietrich
The word ''Dutch'' is attested in English from the 14th century, denoting continental West Germanic ("Dutch" and "German") dialects and their speakers.
Ever since the outbreak of the Protestant Reformation within the Holy Roman Empire, German society has been characterized by a Catholic-Protestant divide.
Today the government and a majority of the German society are acknowledging that immigrants from diverse ethnocultural backgrounds are part of the German society and that controlled immigration should be initiated based on qualification standards.
File:Kärwe Biedermeier.JPG|German females in the German tracht national costumes of the time of Biedermeier
It created the German Empire in 1871 as a German nation-state, effectively excluding the multi-ethnic Austrian Habsburg monarchy and Liechtenstein.
Germanic peoples in Roman territory were culturally Romanized, and although much of Germania remained free of direct Roman rule, Rome deeply influenced the development of German society, especially the adoption of Christianity by the Germans who obtained it from the Romans.
File:Statue de Jean Gutenberg à Strasbourg.jpg|A statue commemorating Johannes Gutenberg for his invention of the first movable type; printing press.
And it reflects a profound shift taking place throughout Germany and Europe about Berlin's position at the center of the Continent."
The adoption of Christianity would later become a major influence in the development of a common German identity.
Theologian Luther, who translated the Bible into German, is widely credited for having set the basis for the modern "High German" language.
Engels helped develop communist theory in the second half of the 19th century while Heidegger and Gadamer pursued the tradition of German philosophy in the 20th century.
Early German national culture was developed through literary and religious figures including Martin Luther, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich Schiller.
Along the trade routes, Hanseatic trade stations became centers of the German culture.
There are an additional 80&nbsp;million people of German ancestry mainly in the United States, Brazil (mainly in the South Region of the country), Argentina, Canada, South Africa, the post-Soviet states (mainly in Russia and Kazakhstan), and France, each accounting for at least 1 million.
File:Max Weber 1894.jpg|Max Weber was a sociologist, philosopher, and political economist who profoundly influenced social theory, social research, and the discipline of sociology itself.
At the same time, naval innovations led to a German domination of trade in the Baltic Sea and parts of Eastern Europe through the Hanseatic League.
In Slavic languages, the Germans were given the name of   '' '' (singular ''''), originally with a meaning "foreigner, one who does not speak Slavic".
It had a multi-ethnic and multi-lingual structure, some of the smaller ethnicities and languages used at different times were Dutch, Italian, French, Czech and Polish.
The Swiss resisted the idea.
The war was fought largely as a religious conflict between Protestants and Catholics in the Holy Roman Empire.
In the European Iron Age the area that is now Germany was divided into the (Celtic) La Tène horizon in Southern Germany and the (Germanic) Jastorf culture in Northern Germany.
These terms came to a sudden halt following the Revolutions of 1848 and the Crimean War in 1856, paving the way for German unification in the 1860s.
Historically, German sportsmen have been successful contenders in the Olympic Games, ranking third in an all-time Olympic Games medal count, combining East and West German medals.
After the Congress of Vienna, Austria and Prussia emerged as two competitors.
However an actual united German identity and ethnicity did not exist then, and it would take centuries of development of German culture until the concept of a German ethnicity began to become a popular identity.
File:HolyRomanEmpire 1618.png|Religion in the Holy Roman Empire on the eve of the Thirty Years' War
File:Moderntalking.jpg|Modern Talking, a synthpop duo consisting of Thomas Anders and Dieter Bohlen, became one of the most successful German acts in the 1980s.
Natively, the term ''ein diutscher'' ("a German") is used for the people of Germany from the 12th century.
Conflict between the Germanic tribes and the forces of Rome under Julius Caesar forced major Germanic tribes to retreat to the east bank of the Rhine.
Today, roughly 17% of the United States' population (23% of the white population) is of mainly German ancestry.
File:MichaelSchumacherHO2005.jpg|Michael Schumacher has claimed 91 race victories and 7 championships in his F1 career.
German artists also make up a large percentage of Industrial music acts, which is called Neue Deutsche Härte.
During antiquity these Germanic tribes remained separate from each other and did not have writing systems at that time.
The Slavic people of the Teutonic-controlled Baltic were assimilated into German culture and eventually there were many intermarriages of Slavic and German families, including amongst the Prussia's aristocracy known as the Junkers.
Today, people from countries with German-speaking majorities (such as Austria, Switzerland, Liechtenstein and other historically-tied countries like Luxembourg) most often subscribe to their own national identities and may or may not also self-identify as ethnically German.
Much of what is now Eastern Germany became Slavonic-speaking (Sorbs and Veleti), after these areas were vacated by Germanic tribes (Vandals, Lombards, Burgundians and Suebi amongst others) which had migrated into the former areas of the Roman Empire.
More recently, films such as ''Das Boot'' (1981), ''The Never Ending Story'' (1984) ''Run Lola Run'' (1998), ''Das Experiment'' (2001), ''Good Bye Lenin!''
After Christianization, the Roman Catholic Church and local rulers led German expansion and settlement in areas inhabited by Slavs and Balts, known as Ostsiedlung.
German town law ''(Stadtrecht)'' was promoted by the presence of large, relatively wealthy German populations, their influence and political power.
In the 2012 Summer Olympics, Germany finished sixth overall, whereas in the 2010 Winter Olympics Germany finished second.
- Porträt des Philip Melanchton.jpg|Philip Melanchthon
The Hanseatic League was not exclusively German in any ethnic sense: many towns who joined the league were outside the Holy Roman Empire and a number of them may only loosely be characterized as ''German''.
Artists such as Herbert Grönemeyer, Scorpions, Rammstein, Nena, Dieter Bohlen, Tokio Hotel and Modern Talking have enjoyed international fame.
Another global opinion poll, for the BBC, revealed that Germany is recognised for the most positive influence in the world in 2010.
Before the collapse of communism and the reunification of Germany in 1990, Germans constituted the largest ''divided'' nation in Europe by far.
File:Werkstatt von Lucas Cranach d.Ä.
The North and East Germany is predominantly Protestant, the South and West rather Catholic.
File:Karl Marx 001.jpg|Karl Marx's ideas played a significant role in the establishment of the social sciences and the development of the socialist movement.
The ''Heim ins Reich'' initiative (German: literally ''Home into the Reich'', meaning ''Back to Reich'', see Reich) was a policy pursued by Nazi Germany which attempted to convince people of German descent living outside of Germany (such as Sudetenland) that they should strive to bring these regions "home" into a greater Germany.
People in 20 different states assessed the country's reputation in terms of culture, politics, exports, its people and its attractiveness to tourists, immigrants and investments.
People of German origin are found in various places around the globe.
It was particularly influential during the years of the Weimar Republic with German expressionists such as Robert Wiene and Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau.
File:Schopenhauer.jpg|Arthur Schopenhauer, a German philosopher best known for his book, ''The World as Will and Representation''.
After World War II, Austrians increasingly saw themselves as a separate nation from the German nation.
Spoken by approximately 100 million native speakers, German is one of the world's major languages and the most widely spoken first language in the European Union.
In its ''State of World Population 2006'' report, the United Nations Population Fund lists Germany with hosting the third-highest percentage of the main international migrants worldwide, about 5% or 10 million of all 191 million migrants.
File:ReichsluftfahrtministeriumLeipzigerStraße.JPG|Detlev-Rohwedder-Haus, the former Reichsluftfahrtministerium (now a Federal Ministry of Finance building)
Today over 80 percent of the Austrians see themselves as an independent nation.
Other Christian denominations, other religions, atheists or not specified constituted 42.6% of the population at the time.
However tolerance and assimilation of Jews in German society suddenly ended during the Crusades with many Jews being forcefully expelled from Germany and Western Yiddish disappeared as a language in Germany over the centuries, with German Jewish people fully adopting the German language.
A majority of 59% have a positive view of the country, while 14% have a negative view.
He is also considered one of the greatest economists of all time.
At the treaty of Versailles Germany was substantially reduced in size.
And 78%, if free to choose their nation, would opt for German nationality with "near or absolute certainty".
File:Rutenfest 2011 Festzug Sieben Schwaben 1.jpg|Rutenfest in Ravensburg, Baden-Württemberg, Germany, celebrating the folklore story of "The Seven Swabians" by the Brothers Grimm
File:Berlin_marathon_das_gruppenbild.JPG|Berlin Marathon
For decades after the Second World War, any national symbol or expression was a taboo.
File:CABINETOFDRCALIGARI-poster.jpg|A poster for ''The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari'' directed by Robert Wiene
The Huns living in Germanic territories in Eastern Europe adopted an East Germanic language as their ''lingua franca''.
A German ethnicity emerged in the course of the Middle Ages, ultimately as a result of the formation of the kingdom of Germany within East Francia and later the Holy Roman Empire, beginning in the 9th century.
movement calling for German speakers to identify with Lutheran or Old Catholic churches.
It gradually replaced ''Dutch'' and ''Almains'', the latter becoming mostly obsolete by the early 18th century.
The Empire itself was not entirely German either.
File:Bauhaus.JPG|Bauhaus
File:Gerhart Hauptmann nobel.jpg|Gerhart Hauptmann, a German dramatist and novelist who received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1912.
Although it had been expected that such workers would return home, many settled in Germany, with their descendants becoming German citizens.
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 146-1988-106-29, Leni Riefenstahl bei Dreharbeiten.jpg|Leni Riefenstahl was widely noted for her aesthetics and innovations as a filmmaker
In 2011, Dirk Nowitzki won his first NBA Championship with the Dallas Mavericks by upsetting the Miami Heat.
The native language of Germans is German, a West Germanic language, related to and classified alongside English and Dutch, and sharing many similarities with the North Germanic and Scandinavian languages.
The early Germans originated on the North German Plain as well as southern Scandinavia.
The war was fought primarily in what is now Germany, and at various points involved most of the countries of Europe.
The German Empire ("Second Reich") was created in 1871 following the proclamation of Wilhelm I as head of a union of German-speaking states, while disregarding millions of its non-German subjects who desired self-determination from German rule.
This idea was initially welcomed by many ethnic Germans in Sudetenland, Austria, Poland, Danzig and western Lithuania, particularly the Germans from Klaipeda (Memel).
Massive German settlement led to the assimilation of Baltic (Old Prussians) and Slavic (Wends) populations, who were exhausted by previous warfare.
Following the defeat in World War I, influence of German-speaking elites over Central and Eastern Europe was greatly limited.
Other significant centres are Canada, Argentina, South Africa and France each accounting for at least 1 million.
The Walhalla temple for "laudable and distinguished Germans", features a number of scientists, and is located east of Regensburg, in Bavaria.
Thus, the total number of Germans lies somewhere between 100 and more than 150 million, depending on the criteria applied (native speakers, single-ancestry ethnic Germans, partial German ancestry, etc.
Germany hosts many large rock music festivals annually.
The varieties of the German language are still divided up into these groups.
various Dutch entertainers, such as Johannes Heesters.
However, the Germans are becoming increasingly patriotic.
File:HRR 1400.png|A map of Holy Roman Empire in 1400, reflecting the German society's regional diversity
Through this, he altered the course of European and world history and established Protestantism.
Austria-Hungary was split up.
The first major public figure to speak of a German people in general, was the Roman figure Tacitus in his work ''Germania'' around 100 AD.
The most visited destinations were Spain, Italy and Austria.
Austria, trying to remain the dominant power in Central Europe, led the way in the terms of the Congress of Vienna.
The migration-period peoples who later coalesced into a "German" ethnicity were the Germanic tribes of the Saxons, Franci, Thuringii, Alamanni and Bavarii.
The evolution in Germany's national identity stems from focusing less on its Nazi past and more on its Prussian history, which many Germans believe was betrayed—and not represented—by Nazism.
The Nazis closed these movements and favoured a type of neo-classicism.
But the overwhelming majority of Germans today are not chauvinistic in nationalism, but in 2006 and again in 2010, the German National Football Team won third place in the 2006 and 2010 FIFA World Cups, ignited a positive scene of German pride, enhanced by success in sport.
Originally part of the Holy Roman Empire, around 300 independent German states emerged during its decline after the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 ending the Thirty Years War.
The University of Berlin founded in 1810 by linguist and philosopher Wilhelm von Humboldt served as an influential model for a number of modern western universities.
According to the latest nationwide census, Roman Catholics constituted 29.5% of the total population of Germany, followed by the Evangelical Protestants at 27.9%.
Nine Germans have won the Nobel Prize in literature: Theodor Mommsen, Paul von Heyse, Gerhart Hauptmann, Thomas Mann, Nelly Sachs, Hermann Hesse, Heinrich Böll, Günter Grass, and Herta Müller.
The arrival of the Huns in Europe resulted in Hun conquest of large parts of Eastern Europe, the Huns initially were allies of the Roman Empire who fought against Germanic tribes, but later the Huns cooperated with the Germanic tribe of the Ostrogoths, and large numbers of Germans lived within the lands of the Hunnic Empire of Attila.
From the 1960s, Germany also saw increasing immigration, especially from Turkey, under an official programme aimed at encouraging "Gastarbeiter" or guestworkers to the country to provide labour during the post-war economic boom years.
Roman emperor Augustus in 12 BC ordered the conquest of the Germans, but the catastrophic Roman defeat at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest resulted in the Roman Empire abandoning its plans to completely conquer Germania.
Among the most admired German poets and authors are Lessing, Goethe, Schiller, Kleist, Hoffmann, Brecht, Heine and Schmidt.
An Austrian identity was vastly emphasized along with the "''first-victim of Nazism theory''."
The event of the Protestant Reformation and the politics that ensued has been cited as the origins of German identity that arose in response to the spread of a common German language and literature.
File:RichardWagner.jpg|Richard Wagner greatly influenced the development of classical music; his Tristan und Isolde is sometimes described as marking the start of modern music.
Many of those had inhabited these lands for centuries, developing a unique culture.
During the wars waged in the Baltic by the Catholic German Teutonic Knights; the lands inhabited by the ethnic group of the Old Prussians (the current reference to the people known then simply as the "Prussians"), were conquered by the Germans.
Attila had both Hunnic and Germanic families and prominent Germanic chiefs amongst his close entourage in Europe.
The Germanic peoples during the Migrations Period came into contact with other peoples; in the case of the populations settling in the territory of modern Germany, they encountered Celts to the south, and Balts and Slavs towards the east.
By the 1860s the Kingdom of Prussia and the Austrian Empire were the two most powerful nations dominated by German-speaking elites.
File:Gotthold Ephraim Lessing.PNG|Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, one of the most outstanding representatives of the Enlightenment era.
Indeed, this German sphere of influence has been welcomed by the countries that border it, as demonstrated by Polish foreign minister Radek Sikorski's effusive praise for his country's western neighbor.
File:Deutsche Fußballnationalmannschaft 2011-06-03 (01).jpg|German national football team in 2011
The evolution is further precipitated by Germany's conspicuous position as Europe's strongest economy.
The nation was particularly important in the early modern movement through the Deutscher Werkbund and the Bauhaus movement identified with Walter Gropius.
The popularity of German identity arose in the aftermath of the French Revolution.
He published numerous books during his lifetime, the most notable being ''The Communist Manifesto'' and ''Capital''.
Nationalism during the 19th century threatened the old aristocratic regimes.
Nowadays there is a non-religious majority in Hamburg and the East German states.
Many ethnic groups of Central and Eastern Europe had been divided for centuries, ruled over by the old Monarchies of the Romanovs and the Habsburgs.
Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen discovered X-rays, an accomplishment that made him the first winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1901.
In the 21st century, Germany has been an important country for the development of contemporary analytic philosophy in continental Europe, along with France, Austria, Switzerland and the Scandinavian countries.
