Anne, Queen of Great Britain, helped them get to her colonies in America.
Indianapolis, Cincinnati, Cleveland and other cities "had what we now call two-way immersion programs: school taught half in German, half in English".
By 1711, seven villages had been established in New York on the Robert Livingston manor.
About 250,000 German Jews had arrived by the 1870s, and they sponsored reform synagogues in many small cities across the country.
Six of the eight anarchist defendants in the Haymarket Affair of 1886 in Chicago were German.
Beginning in 1741, the German-speaking Moravian Church Settlements of Bethlehem, Nazareth and Lititz, Pennsylvania, and Wachovia in North Carolina had highly developed musical cultures.
According to Kamphoefner, German "was in a similar position as the Spanish language is in the 20th and 21st century"; it "was by far the most widespread foreign language, and whoever was the largest group was at a definite advantage in getting its language into the public sphere."
President Franklin D. Roosevelt sought out Americans of German ancestry for top war jobs, including General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, and USAAF General Carl Andrew Spaatz.
After World War II, Wernher von Braun, and most of the leading engineers from the former German V-2 rocket base at Peenemünde, were brought to the U.S.
In most major cities, Germans took the lead in creating a musical culture, with popular bands, singing societies, operas and symphonic orchestras.
The war evoked strong pro-American patriotic sentiments among German Americans, few of whom by then had contacts with distant relatives in the old country.
Many became prisoners on American farms, some of whom permanently settled in America.
As did Hoboken, New Jersey.
The first began in 1855; the last folded in 1961.
The German Catholics and Lutherans each operated large networks of parochial schools in the state.
Pennsylvania fielded five German regiments, New York eleven, and Ohio six.
They also founded the transitional settlement of Bethabara, North Carolina, translated as House of Passage, the first planned Moravian community in North Carolina, in 1759.
The three Amish dialects as well as Hutterite German are still learned by all children of the group, whereas Plautdietsch-speakers tend much more to assimilate.
German Americans established the first kindergartens in the United States, introduced the Christmas tree tradition, and originated popular American foods such as hot dogs and hamburgers.
They supported the Liberal Republican party led by Benjamin Gratz Brown for governor in 1870 and Horace Greeley for president in 1872.
After Germany's unification in 1871, German cultural diplomacy aimed increasingly to convince Anglo-American elites of the superiority of German culture to win political allies in the United States.
Today, most German Americans have assimilated to the point that they no longer have readily identifiable ethnic communities, though there are still many metropolitan areas where German is the most reported ethnicity, such as Cincinnati, Northern Kentucky, Cleveland, Columbus, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Minneapolis – Saint Paul, Pittsburgh, and St. Louis.
Today, German is preserved mainly through singing groups and recipes, with the Germans from Russia in the northern Great Plains states speaking predominantly English.
The Germans formed a coalition between Catholics and Lutherans, under the leadership of the Democratic Party, and the language issue produced a landslide for the Democrats, as Republicans dropped the issue until World War I.
The Studebaker brothers, forefathers of the wagon and automobile makers, arrived in Pennsylvania in 1736 from the famous blade town of Solingen.
The largest group came from the country of Hesse, and the soldiers are often referred to as Hessians.
Hundreds of thousands of German Americans volunteered to fight for the Union in the American Civil War (1861–1865).
Because the language used in the classroom was German, the law meant the teachers would have to be replaced with bilingual teachers, and in most cases shut down.
They were pulled by the attractions of land and religious freedom, and pushed out of Europe by shortages of land and religious or political oppression.
A thriving population of Germans lived upriver from New Orleans, Louisiana, known as the German Coast.
The first permanent German settlement in what became the United States was Germantown, Pennsylvania, founded near Philadelphia on October 6, 1683.
''The Economist'' magazine in 2015 interviewed Petra Schürmann, the director of the German-American Heritage Museum in Washington for a major article on German-Americans.
They migrated to America for a variety of reasons.
The great majority of people with some German ancestry have become Americanized and hardly can be distinguished; fewer than 5% speak German.
These courses were permanently dropped.
By the mid-1850s the Germans formed one-third of Louisville's population and faced nativist hostility organized in the Know-Nothing movement.
The editor enlisted a network of local correspondents.
The Moravian Church in America is one of the results of this effort, as are the many "Union" churches in rural Pennsylvania.
Texas attracted many Germans who entered through Galveston and Indianola, both those who came to farm, and later immigrants who more rapidly took industrial jobs in cities such as Houston.
There is a false myth, called the Muhlenberg legend, that German was almost the official language of the U.S.
One hundred homesteads were allocated in the Burnetsfield Patent.
The Imperial government in Berlin promoted German culture in the U.S., especially music.
In 1709, Protestant Germans from the Pfalz or Palatine region of Germany escaped conditions of hardship, traveling first to Rotterdam and then to London.
There were fierce battles in Wisconsin and Illinois around 1890 regarding proposals to stop the use of German as the primary language in public and parochial schools.
Within Deutschtown and since 1854, The Teutonia Männerchor has been promoting and furthering German cultural traditions.
By 1850 there were 5,000 Germans, mostly Schwabians living in, and around, and Ann Arbor, Michigan.
The allegations included spying for Germany, or endorsing the German war effort.
In Iowa, in the 1918 Babel Proclamation, the governor prohibited all foreign languages in schools and public places.
The state of Pennsylvania has 3.5 million people of German ancestry.
Arthur Preuss (1871–1934) was a leading journalist, and theologian.
While they needed profits to stay in operation, they used profits as a tool "to maintain continuity of the family."
The Germans left Arkansas en masse.
A majority had been farmers in Germany, and most arrived seeking economic opportunities.
In 1900, however, many German Democrats returned to their party and voted for Bryan, perhaps because of President William McKinley's foreign policy.
The area is now known as 'the German Coast'."
All Hutterites speak Hutterite German and many "Russian" Mennonites speak Plautdietsch, a German dialect coming originally from the area around Danzig.
In 1917–18, after the US entry into World War I on the side of the British, nearly all German language instruction ended, as did most German-language church services.
Catholic Germans started immigrating in large numbers in the mid to latter 19th century, spurred in particular by the ''Kulturkampf''.
In the aftermath of World War II, millions of ethnic Germans were forcibly expelled from their homes within the redrawn borders of Central and Eastern Europe, including the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Hungary and Yugoslavia.
The Palatine immigration of about 2100 people who survived was the largest single immigration to America in the colonial period.
In Cincinnati, the public library was asked to withdraw all German books from its shelves.
The largest flow of German immigration to America occurred between 1820 and World War I, during which time nearly six million Germans immigrated to the United States.
By 1914, the older members attended German-language church services, while younger ones attended English services (in Lutheran, Evangelical and Catholic churches).
It affected the state's many German-language private schools (and some Norwegian schools), and was bitterly resented by German American communities.
The Bennett Law was a highly controversial state law passed in Wisconsin in 1889 that required the use of English to teach major subjects in all public and private elementary and high schools.
The port cities of New York, and Baltimore had large populations.
He was followed in 1608 by five glassmakers and three carpenters or house builders.
Frankfurters (or "wieners", originating from Frankfurt am Main and Vienna, respectively), hamburgers, bratwurst, sauerkraut, and strudel are common dishes.
So many German speakers arrived, the area became known as "Deutschtown" and has been revived as such.
From Ohio to the Plains states, a heavy presence persists in rural areas into the 21st century.
He provided lengthy commentary regarding the National Catholic Welfare Conference, the anti-Catholic factor in the presidential campaign of 1928, the hardships of the Great Depression, and the liberalism of the New Deal.
A steady influx of German-born conductors, including Arthur Nikisch and Karl Muck, spurred the reception of German music in the United States, while German musicians seized on Victorian Americans' growing concern with 'emotion'.
During World War I, their identity was challenged by anti-German sentiment.
'Deutschtum' in the United States disintegrated after 1918.
The periodicals that managed to survive in immigrant communities faced an additional challenge with anti-German sentiment during World War I and with the Espionage and Sedition Acts, which authorized censorship of foreign language newspapers.
Large numbers of Germans migrated from the 1680s to 1760s, with Pennsylvania the favored destination.
The Germans, comprising Lutherans, Reformed, Mennonites, Amish, and other sects, developed a rich religious life with a strong musical culture.
About 2 million Central and Eastern European Jews arrived from the 1880s to 1924, bringing more traditional religious practices.
On the other hand, there were Protestant groups that emerged from European pietism such as the German Methodist and United Brethren; they more closely resembled the Yankee Methodists in their moralism.
They raised large families, built German-style churches, buried their dead in distinctive cemeteries using cast iron grave markers, and created choir groups that sang German church hymns.
Negatively influenced by the violation of their rights and cultural persecution by the Tsar, the Germans from Russia who settled in the northern Midwest saw themselves a downtrodden ethnic group separate from Russian Americans and having an entirely different experience from the German Americans who had immigrated from German lands; they settled in tight-knit communities that retained their German language and culture.
In the Georgia Colony, Germans mainly from the Swabia region settled in Savannah, St. Simon's Island and Fort Frederica in the 1730s and 1740s.
They were actively recruited by James Oglethorpe and quickly distinguished themselves through improved farming, advanced tabby (cement)-construction, and leading joint Lutheran-Anglican-Reformed religious services for the colonists.
By 2010, their population grew to 49.8 million citizens, reflecting a jump of 6 million people since 2000.
Also, the Northern Kentucky area along the Ohio River was a favored destination.
Religious freedom was perhaps the most pressing cause for Amish immigration to Pennsylvania, which became known as a haven for persecuted religious groups.
According to historian Walter Kamphoefner, a "number of big cities introduced German into their public school programs".
A later immigrant, John Jacob Astor, who came from Baden after the Revolutionary War, became the richest man in America from his fur trading empire  and real estate investments in New York.
By 1910 German Americans had created their own distinctive, vibrant, prosperous German-language communities, called "Germania".
An audience of 8,000 that attended a performance in 1877 demonstrated that the Germans were an accepted part of Louisville life.
The scattered German ethnic islands were also diverse.
Alsace was sold to France within the greater context of the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648).
A. Pabst, Eberhard Anheuser, and Adolphus Busch, who founded Anheuser-Busch in St. Louis in 1860.
The Jesuit Charlevoix traveled New France (Canada and Louisiana) in the early 1700s.
Throughout the 19th century, pressure increased from the Russian government to culturally assimilate.
Beginning in the mid-19th century, the Turner movement offered exercise and sports programs, while also providing a social haven for the thousands of new German immigrants arriving in the United States each year.
When the American Revolutionary War broke out, Britain made arrangements with German princes to hire some 30,000 "Hessian" soldiers to fight against the American army.
Many of the immigrants from Germany and other German-speaking countries came to Pennsylvania to what was then "Allegheny City" (now part of the North Side of the City of Pittsburgh).
The name "Germanna", selected by Governor Alexander Spotswood, reflected both the German immigrants who sailed across the Atlantic to Virginia and the British Queen, Anne, who was in power at the time of the first settlement at Germanna.
Despite the loss of their language, the ethnic group remains distinct, and has left a lasting impression on the American West.
They are mostly professionals and academics who have come for professional reasons.
Many immigrants, particularly children, died before reaching America in June 1710.
The influence of German cuisine is seen in the cuisine of the United States throughout the country, especially regarding pastries, meats and sausages, and above all, beer.
To this day, relatively unassimilated people of German-speaking heritage can be found in the United States among different Anabaptist grous - the Old Order Amish and most Old Order Mennonites speak Pennsylvania Dutch (or Bernese German or Alsatian by a minority of Amish) along with High German to various degrees (though they are generally fluent in English).
Sentiment among German Americans was largely anti-slavery, especially among Forty-Eighters.
The Alien Registration Act of 1940 required 300,000 German-born resident aliens who had German citizenship to register with the Federal government and restricted their travel and property ownership rights.
In the 1990 U.S. Census, 58 million Americans claimed to be solely or partially of German descent.
"Germania" was the common term for German American neighborhoods and their organizations.
The Midwestern cities of Milwaukee, Cincinnati, St. Louis, Chicago were favored destinations of German immigrants.
The U.S. has no official language, but use of German was strongly discouraged during World War I and fell out of daily use in many places.
The requirement of a special loyalty oath for priests and ministers was troublesome.
From 1840 to 1880, they were the largest group of immigrants.
Some mastered English to become conversant with local legal and business opportunities.
Almost half of all current beer sales in the United States can be attributed to German immigrants, Capt.
The transition to the English language was abrupt, forced by the federal government during World War One.
By the end of the 19th century, there were over 800 German-language publications in the United States.
German bakers introduced the pretzel, which is popular across the United States.
By 1900, the populations of the cities of Cleveland, Milwaukee,  and Cincinnati were all more than 40% German American.
The tensions split off a large German element in 1872, led by Carl Schurz.
A few dissident intellectuals fleeing the 1848 revolutions sought political freedom, but few, save perhaps the Wends, went for religious freedom.
In 1723 Germans became the first Europeans allowed to buy land in the Mohawk Valley west of Little Falls.
Each group followed a somewhat distinctive path toward assimilation.
They included professionals, journalists, and politicians.
Most are able to speak Standard German in addition to their dialect.
Many Germans from Russia found it necessary to emigrate to avoid conscription and preserve their culture.
Despite their strong opposition the constitution was ratified in 1865.
Choral music, Brass and String Music and Congregational singing were highly cultivated.
German was used in local schools and churches, while numerous ''Vereine'', associations dedicated to literature, humor, gymnastics, and singing, sprang up in German American communities.
Few Germans settled in the Deep South, apart from some in New Orleans.
''Deutschtum'' was the term for transplanted German nationalism, both culturally and politically.
His  ''Fortnightly Review'' (in English) was a major conservative voice read closely by church leaders and intellectuals from 1894 until 1934.
By mixing local American and local German news, letters, poetry, fiction, and dialogue, the German-language newspaper allowed immigrants to honor their origins and celebrate their new life as highly prosperous farmers with much larger farms than were possible back in impoverished Ostfriesland.
In general during the Third party System (1850s–1890s), the Protestants and Jews leaned toward the Republican party and the Catholics were strongly Democratic.
Preuss upheld the German Catholic community, denounced the "Americanism" heresy, promoted the Catholic University of America, and anguished over the anti-German America hysteria during World War I.
By 1920, there were only 278 German language publications remaining in the country.
Less than 150 of those first indentured German farmers made it to Louisiana and settled along what became known as the German Coast.
Germania was nervous about black suffrage in 1868, fearing that blacks would support puritanical laws Especially regarding the prohibition of beer gardens on Sundays.
Carl Schurz, a refugee from the unsuccessful first German democratic revolution of 1848 became an influential politician first in the Republican then in the Democratic party, and served as U.S. Secretary of the Interior.
Despite this assimilation, it is worth noting that a distinct German American ethnicity survived well into the mid-20th century in some places.
A prominent representative of this generation of immigrants was Gustav Koerner who lived most of the time until his death in Belleville, Illinois.
Texas had about 20,000 German Americans in the 1850s.
As in Milwaukee, Germans in Houston built the brewing industry.
A favorite destination was Milwaukee, known as "the German Athens".
The Steinway & Sons piano manufacturing firm was founded by immigrant Henry E. Steinway in 1853.
According to the 2005 American Community Survey, 50 million Americans have German ancestry.
By 1750, the Germans occupied a strip some  long along both sides of the Mohawk River.
Raster published anti-slavery pamphlets and was the editor of the most influential German language newspaper in America at the time.
Lutherans and Catholics typically opposed Yankee moralizing programs such as the prohibition of beer, and favored paternalistic families with the husband deciding the family position on public affairs.
''Push factors'' involved worsening opportunities for farm ownership in central Europe, persecution of some religious groups, and military conscription; ''pull factors'' were better economic conditions, especially the opportunity to own land, and religious freedom.
Of the over 5,000 Germans initially immigrating primarily from the Alsace Region as few as 500 made up the first wave of immigrants to leave France en route to the Americas.
The National Turnerbund, the head organization of the Turnvereine, started drilling members as in militia units in 1854.
The spiritual beliefs of Johann Conrad Beissel (1690–1768) and the Ephrata Cloister—such as the asceticism and mysticism of this Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, group - are reflected in Beissel's treatises on music and hymns, which have been considered the beginning of America's musical heritage.
They used sport both to promote ethnic identity and pride and to facilitate integration into American society.
The Germans who settled Texas were diverse in many ways.
Still others, such as Bruce Willis, George Eyser, Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Jack Nicklaus, Doris Mary Ann Kappelhoff (Doris Day), Grace Kelly, Clark Gable, Marlene Dietrich, Johnny Weissmuller, Ernst Lubitsch, Walter Damrosch, Henry John Deutschendorf (John Denver), John Kay, Heidi Klum, Meryl Streep, Kim Basinger, Sandra Bullock, David Hasselhoff, Leonardo DiCaprio, Kirsten Dunst, Kevin George Knipfing (Kevin James) and Steven Spielberg became prominent athletes, actors, film directors or artists.
The response of German Americans to these tactics was often to "Americanize" names (e.g., Schmidt to Smith, Müller to Miller) and limit the use of the German language in public places, especially churches.
They included peasant farmers and intellectuals; Protestants, Catholics, Jews, and atheists; Prussians, Saxons, and Hessians; abolitionists and slave owners; farmers and townsfolk; frugal, honest folk and ax murderers.
About 25,000 people became paying members of the pro-Nazi German American Bund during the years before the war.
Germany was a large country with many diverse subregions which contributed immigrants.
Hutterites continue to speak German.
Youth increasingly attended high schools, where they mingled, in English, and dated (and later married) people of other ethnicities.
A layman in St Louis.
An unknown number of "voluntary internees" joined their spouses and parents in the camps and were not permitted to leave.
German Americans tended to support the German government's actions, and, even after the United States entered World War I, they often voted for antidraft and antiwar candidates.
The 1920s and 1930s brought English language popular culture via movies and radio that drowned out the few surviving German language venues.
Only later did the word come to refer to the people who spoke the language.
Immigrants from Germany in the mid-to-late-19th century brought many different religions with them.
The performance of pieces such as Beethoven's ''Ninth Symphony'' established German serious music as the superior language of feeling, filling audiences with awe for the superiority not just of German art, but also of Germany in general—precisely the respect for German greatness and emotionalism that William II wanted to convey.
Germans introduced America to lager, the most-produced beer style in the United States, and have been the dominant ethnic group in the beer industry since 1850.
German Americans who had fluent German language skills were an important asset to wartime intelligence, and they served as translators and as spies for the United States.
At the local level, historians have explored the changing voting behavior of the German-American community and one of its major strongholds, St. Louis, Missouri.
Prohibition also had a destabilizing impact on the German immigrant communities upon which the German-language publications relied.
An important aspect of Wheeling social life, these societies reflected various social classes and enjoyed great popularity until anti-German sentiments during World War I and changing social values dealt them a death blow.
By the 1920s, the first generation of college-educated German Americans were moving into the chemical and oil industries.
These small enclaves included Lindsay in Cooke County, largely Westphalian Catholic; Waka in Ochiltree County, Midwestern Mennonite; Hurnville in Clay County, Russian German Baptist; and Lockett in Wilbarger County, Wendish Lutheran.
In many other cities of the Midwest, such as Fort Wayne, Indiana, German Americans were at least 30% of the population.
The trip was long and difficult to survive because of the poor quality of food and water aboard ships and the infectious disease typhus.
Most were first settled along the Hudson River in work camps, to pay off their passage.
# Herman, Dodge County, Wisconsin 69.8%
After 1945, only a few publications have been started.
German Americans in many cities, such as Milwaukee, brought their strong support of education, establishing German-language schools and teacher training seminaries (''Töchter-Institut'') to prepare students and teachers in German language training.
By the 1890s, Turners numbered nearly 65,000.
In the middle half of the nineteenth century (between 1820 and 1870) over seven and a half million immigrants came to the United States — more than doubling the entire population of the country.
They generally opposed women's suffrage but this was used as argument in favor of suffrage when German American became pariahs during World War I.
The Catholic high schools were deliberately structured to commingle ethnic groups so as to promote intermarriage.
It connected the 20,000 immigrants from East Friesland (Ostfriesland), Germany, to each other across the Midwest, and to their old homeland.
He was intensely loyal to the Vatican.
The Justice Department prepared a list of all German aliens, counting approximately 480,000 of them, more than 4,000 of whom were imprisoned in 1917–18.
Whereas half of German immigrants settled in cities, the other half established farms in the Midwest.
A small city, Wheeling, West Virginia could boast of 11 singing societies—Maennerchor, Harmonie, Liedertafel, Beethoven, Concordia, Liederkranz, Germania, Teutonia, Harmonie-Maennerchor, Arion, and Mozart.
They had been promised by the manifesto of their settlement the ability to practice their respective Christian denominations, retain their culture and language, and retain immunity from conscription for them and their descendants.
A small minority came out for Germany, or ridiculed the British (as did H. L. Mencken).
With their skills, they made wagons that carried the frontiersmen westward; their cannons provided the Union Army with artillery in the American Civil War, and their automobile company became one of the largest in America, although never eclipsing the "Big Three", and was a factor in the war effort and in the industrial foundations of the Army.
The Llano valley had stern, teetotaling German Methodists, who renounced dancing and fraternal organizations; the Pedernales valley had fun-loving, hardworking Lutherans and Catholics who enjoyed drinking and dancing; and the Guadalupe valley had freethinking Germans descended from intellectual political refugees.
Bethany Lutheran Church in Hustisford offered German-language services into the 1970s.
They did not form a uniform bloc, but were highly diverse and drew from geographic areas and all sectors of European society, except that very few aristocrats or upper middle class businessmen arrived.
The group accounts for about  of the German diaspora in the world.
Before the Civil War many went to the South, where they formed small German-Jewish communities in many parts of the South, especially in cities and towns, where they most often worked as local and regional merchants, cattle/livestock dealers, agricultural commodity traders, bankers, and business owners.
Their communities showed smaller average farm size, greater equality, less absentee ownership and greater geographic persistence.
They were a bastion of the Republican Party in St. Louis and nearby immigrant strongholds in Missouri and southern Illinois.
