He provided information about Lawrence for American viewers who were not familiar with her.
The author embarked on a cross-country tour of the United States to publicise her book, the first person ever to engage in such a promotion.
"During a ''Lady in the Dark'' rehearsal," Davis wrote, "Gertrude Lawrence suddenly stopped singing midline and called out to Gershwin, who was monitoring from the orchestra, 'Why does she say 'I could wait ''four'' years' – why not five or six?'
Three years after Lawrence's death, her daughter Pamela gave birth to Benn Clatworthy, by her second husband, the sculptor Robert Clatworthy.
"I shall be teaching an advanced, not an elementary course," Aldrich quoted her as saying in 1951.
An exception in this regard was Daphne du Maurier.
Decades later, Ira Gershwin told American songwriting historian Sheila Davis about a contribution Lawrence made to honing the lyrics of the song "My Ship" in ''Lady in the Dark''.
''Charlot's Revue of 1926'', starring Lawrence, Lillie, and Buchanan, opened on Broadway in late 1925.
In 1948, Lawrence returned to Britain to star in ''September Tide'', a play written specifically for her by Daphne du Maurier.
Daphne later returned the visit by being Gertrude's guest in New York.
Her particular post was to conduct Class 107 in the Study of Roles and Scenes.
When Lawrence became romantically involved with Wall Street banker Bert Taylor in 1927, Astley proposed marriage, an offer Lawrence refused because she knew Astley would expect her to leave the stage and settle in rural England.
In 1908, to augment the family's meagre income, Alice accepted a job in the chorus of the Christmas pantomime at Brixton Theatre.
'''Gertrude Lawrence''' (4 July 1898 – 6 September 1952) was an English actress, singer, dancer and musical comedy performer known for her stage appearances in the West End of London and on Broadway in New York.
In 1938, Lawrence took a night off from ''Susan and God'' to perform the play for NBC's emerging television audience, which then consisted mostly of customers at bars, hotels, pedestrians in other public places in New York City and NBC employees.
Writing about her performance in ''Saturday Review'', Richard Griffith was generous in his praise, saying "Not since Garbo has there been anything like the naked eloquence of her face, with its amazing play of thought and emotion."
Aldrich wrote in his 1954 biography of his recently deceased wife: She went over with the first E.N.S.A.
Following ''Hannele'', Lawrence reconnected with her father, who was living with a chorus girl.
The director was an Englishman whose entire career was in American cinema.
Philip Astley had persuaded her to place £1,000 in a trust fund for her daughter, but aside from that she had no savings of her own.
At last I had permission to do what I had been wanting desperately to do for four years—go to England and do my bit on a tour for E.N.S.A."
The show's success led its producer to create ''André Charlot's London Revue of 1924'', which he took to Broadway with Lawrence, Lillie, Buchanan and Constance Carpenter.
Noël Coward was portrayed by Daniel Massey.
Holtzmann agreed, but proposed a musical version would be better.
In 1918, Lawrence contracted lumbago and was given a fortnight to recuperate by Charlot, who then saw her at an opening night party at Ivor Novello's invitation two days before she was cleared to return to work by her doctor, and immediately sacked her.
In 1945, Lawrence starred as Eliza Doolittle opposite Raymond Massey as Henry Higgins in a revival of ''Pygmalion'' by George Bernard Shaw, who initially resisted the idea of Lawrence playing the role.
On 8 November 1935, accused of "gross extravagance," she was ordered "to pay £50 weekly from the proceeds of her present nightclub engagement, and 25 per cent of anything earned any other way should the engagement end," according to the same Associated Press report.
"Dr. Smith and I have screened all the students.
In his eulogy, Oscar Hammerstein II quoted from an essay on death written by poet and novelist Rabindranath Tagore.
The class met on Thursday afternoons in the Brander Matthews Theatre on Morningside Heights."
Dean then cast her in his next production, Gerhart Hauptmann's ''Hannele'', where she first met Noël Coward.
Their meeting was the start of a close and sometimes tempestuous friendship and the most important professional relationship in both their lives.
It was later discovered that Lawrence had never paid American taxes, either.
Many of them are already working professionally in radio and television.
Her instincts about the musical were wrong; audiences had difficulty accepting her as an avaricious woman who double-crosses her lover, and it ran for only 68 performances.
During that year, American Movie Classics revived it with an introduction and postscript from the channel's host, Bob Dorian.
They agreed to let her tour with them in two successive revues, after which Arthur announced he had signed a year-long contract with a variety show in South Africa, leaving the two young women to fend for themselves.
Although he was twenty years her senior, the two wed and soon after had a daughter Pamela, Lawrence's only child.
While performing there she met Captain Philip Astley, a member of the Household Cavalry.
In November 1926, she became the first British performer to star in an American musical on Broadway when she opened in ''Oh, Kay!
'', with music by George Gershwin, lyrics by Ira Gershwin, and a book by Guy Bolton and P.G.
To promote ''The King and I'', she appeared on various television programmes, including the Ed Sullivan-hosted ''Toast of the Town'', with Rodgers and Hammerstein joining her to perform selections from the show.
Throughout her adult life, except during World War II, Lawrence spent far more than she earned.
Lawrence's best-known American film role was that of Amanda Wingfield, the overbearing mother in ''The Glass Menagerie'' (1950), which both Bette Davis and Tallulah Bankhead had sought.
When her agent questioned the wisdom of such a move, she reportedly asked him to investigate the cost of a swimming pool installation on the property.
But he realised the story had strong potential, and the two men agreed to write what ultimately became ''The King and I''.
Lawrence wanted Cole Porter to write the score, but when he proved to be unenthused by the suggestion, Holtzmann sent the book to Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II.
She starred opposite Leslie Howard in ''Candle Light'', an Austrian play adapted by Wodehouse, in 1929, and in 1931 she and Noël Coward triumphed in his play ''Private Lives'', first in the UK, and later on Broadway.
Her attorney Fanny Holtzmann worked out an agreement whereby $150 would be deducted from her salary each week she worked in the United States until her American tax debt was settled.
Du Maurier was quoted as saying she called Lawrence by the nickname "Cinders," short for Cinderella.
unit to go into France, making the crossing in an LST (Landing Ship, Tank).
On 26 February 1935, the ''Daily Mirror'' reported her assets were valued at £1,879 but her liabilities were nearly £35,000, with an additional £10,000 owed to the Inland Revenue on her earnings in the United States.
Rodgers initially demurred because he felt Lawrence's vocal range was limited and she had a tendency to sing flat.
It was her first public performance.
In it the two introduced the song "Limehouse Blues," which went on to become one of Lawrence's signature tunes.
In 1945, Lawrence published the autobiography ''A Star Danced''.
number in the second act of ''The King and I'', and she was interred in the Aldrich family plot in Lakeview Cemetery in Upton, Massachusetts.
When it closed, she assumed Lillie's role on tour, then returned to London once again to understudy the star in another Charlot production, where she met dance director Francis Gordon-Howley.
Lawrence's attorney booked the actress on a British Airways charter flight from Washington, D.C. to an airfield near London that lasted 36 hours, including two refuelling stops.
I found her surrounded by interns frantically pumping intravenous fluids and stimulants into her.
Its failure damaged the movie career of Julie Andrews, who three years earlier had been the most visible movie actress worldwide.
It was loosely based on the period of her life from her days as an unknown aspiring performer until her wedding to Richard Aldrich.
'', released to cinemas in 1968.
Her chief obstacle was getting from her home in Massachusetts to Britain.
''The Glass Menagerie'' was Gertrude Lawrence's only film that was a box-office success and in which she worked with an American studio and an entirely American cast: Jane Wyman (Laura), Arthur Kennedy (Tom), Kirk Douglas (The Gentleman Caller).
Nothing about a personal connection between Gertrude Lawrence and Daphne du Maurier was published during Lawrence's lifetime.
was a box office flop.
In 1935, she appeared in ''Mimi'', based on ''La Vie de Bohème''.
Her doctors were puzzled by what was described in the press as "a liver problem," and suspected that she might have cancer.
Always dependent upon getting frequent letters from those she loved, she chafed and worried because no mail reached her.
While there, they attended a concert where audience members were invited to entertain.
The playwright had intended her to open the play on Broadway, but Lawrence's husband thought it was too British for the American market.
Much to the distress of her agent, she purchased a country house and farm in Buckinghamshire, then left it vacant while she remained in the United States for a lengthy stay.
The role required her to wear padding and affect a Southern American accent and friends and critics questioned her decision to accept it.
Lawrence was cast as Georgie, an artist living in pre-World War I Paris, who becomes a cabaret singer and falls in love with an American soldier.
In October 1921, Charlot asked her to replace an ailing Beatrice Lillie as star of his latest production, ''A to Z'', opposite Jack Buchanan.
Soon after this, Hart met Lawrence at a rehearsal for a revue designed to raise funds for British War Relief, and he offered her the role of Liza Elliott, a magazine editor undergoing psychoanalysis to better understand why both her professional and personal lives are filled with indecision.
Later in 1935, Lawrence's flat, cars, clothing, and jewellery were seized by the "London bankruptcy court" (words used by the Associated Press), and Lawrence, her maid and her dog were forced to move into a flat owned by her agent.
In 1937, she appeared in the Rachel Crothers drama ''Susan and God'', and in 1939 starred in ''Skylark'', a comedy by Samson Raphaelson.
At her mother's urging, young Gertrude sang a song and was rewarded with a gold sovereign for her effort.
In June 1941, Lawrence's daughter Pamela married a New York doctor named William G. Cahan.
To other English friends, Gertrude talked wistfully of wanting to remain in England, "where I belong."
I cannot remember how Cinders looked, what she wore, far less what she said."
He became her friend, escort, and ultimately lover, and taught her how to dress and behave in high society.
Possessed, as she was, of an intuitive rather than an analytical intelligence, I doubt that she really understood herself clearly, any more than did most of those who thought they knew her intimately.
Like its predecessor, it toured following the Broadway run.
The show was very ambitious and stretched the star's talents for singing, dancing and acting.
Lawrence returned to the musical stage in ''Lady in the Dark'' in 1941.
When the apparent reason for her dismissal became common knowledge among other West End producers, she was unable to find work, and in early 1919 she accepted a job singing in the show at Murray's, a popular London nightclub, where she remained for the better part of the next two years.
It opened on Broadway in March 1951, and Lawrence won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical for her performance.
In 1923, Noël Coward developed his first musical revue, ''London Calling!
Lawrence's second husband Richard Aldrich became a lieutenant in the United States Navy during World War II, during which time Lawrence had a standing invitation to perform for British troops from the head of the UK's Entertainments National Service Association.
Lawrence felt the play needed work prior to opening on Broadway, and a run at the Cape Playhouse in Dennis, Massachusetts was arranged.
His heavy drinking led her mother Alice to leave him soon after Gertrude's birth.
The ceremony was held at the Dennis, Massachusetts home of Lawrence and Aldrich.
Her former son-in-law, Dr. William G. Cahan, recalled in his 1992 memoir (by then he was a globally recognised medical expert on cancer) what happened next in 1952:She was admitted to New York Hospital located across the street from the hospital where Cahan worked on the staff.
'':All her ingenuous traits, which could be annoying as well as endearing, would be swept away by her courage, her clear perception of truth, and the divine compassion which could flood her heart and lift her to the heights of nobility.
Boiling water in her tea kettle for a visitor was stressful for Lawrence.
In 1943, Lawrence hosted a weekly series of American radio shows, some of them featuring discussions with guests and others adaptations of Hollywood hit films.
In 1947, she returned to NBC for a production of the 1913 Shaw play ''The Great Catherine''.
The theatre was run by Harvard University graduate Richard Aldrich, and he and the actress became involved in a romantic relationship.
Refusing to lower her standard of living, she decided to take film work during the day, appear on stage at night, and perform in late-night cabarets to support her spending habits.
After "a few days at home," wrote Aldrich, she was admitted to New York-Presbyterian Hospital for tests.
Of course, the line was 'I could wait ''for'' years.'
In his review, Alexander Woollcott singled out Lawrence, calling her "the personification of style and sophistication" and "the ideal star."
The couple remained separated but did not divorce until ten years later.
Over the course of twenty-one years, Lawrence appeared in only nine films.
It was chiefly from comments made later by Daphne that I was able to reconstruct the full picture of Gertrude's inner conflict during her stay in London.
Forster quotes du Maurier as saying the following about Lawrence c. 1949, "To be blatantly vulgar, anyone with a spice of imagination would prefer a divan with Gertrude to a double-bed with her."
In 1932, she appeared in three features: an adaptation of the Frederick Lonsdale play ''Aren't We All?''
The first of Lawrence's three grandchildren, he is now a tenor saxophonist based in Los Angeles.
Her performance prompted Richard Watts of the ''New York Herald Tribune'' to call her "the greatest feminine performer in the American theatre," and Brooks Atkinson described her as "a goddess" in his review in the ''New York Times''.
At some point during this period, the child decided to adopt her father's professional surname as her own.
Du Maurier also told the biographer that she had forgotten all the dialogue she had written for ''September Tide'' and that shortly before her interview with Morley she had "been searching my shelves for a copy of the play.
Her training led to appearances in Max Reinhardt's ''The Miracle'' in London and ''Fifinella'', directed by Basil Dean, for the Liverpool Repertory Theatre.
They, too, were puzzled, and ordered an exploratory laparotomy (abdominal operation).
for British and American troops who, it turned out, had been deployed for the imminent D-Day landings in Normandy.
The real Aldrich, who in the 1960s no longer worked in the entertainment business, was a consultant on the film.
In her autobiography, ''A Star Danced'', she has given a graphic account of their landing on a Normandy beach and of the progress of her unit through the wrecked towns, where there was still no water or electricity.
Anticipating a long run, she arrived in New York with her daughter Pamela, a personal maid and two cars, and settled into a flat on Park Avenue.
He thought a stage adaptation of the book would be an ideal vehicle for the actress.
directed by Harry Lachman; ''Lord Camber's Ladies'', produced by Alfred Hitchcock, directed by Benn W. Levy, and co-starring Gerald du Maurier; and ''No Funny Business'' with Laurence Olivier.
Either while negotiating to appear in ''September Tide'' or rehearsing it, Lawrence stayed in "a flat in London somewhere," according to what du Maurier told Morley decades later.
This showed that she had widespread liver and abdominal cancer, the source of which was never clarified.
Concerned and curious about what had caused her death, I was present at her autopsy.
Du Maurier's contribution to the Morley biography of Lawrence consists of little more than that.
Following a run of 256 performances, the musical opened in the West End, where it ran for 213 performances.
As Allied forces scored more victories in the South Pacific later that year, Lawrence endured long plane rides and dangerous conditions to perform for troops there.
One of Coward's surviving songs was "Parisian Pierrot", a tune that would be identified closely with Lawrence throughout her career.
Charlot agreed to produce it, but brought in more experienced writers and composers to work on the book and score.
Hearing this, and without Gertrude's knowledge, her husband consulted me.
Not wanting to alarm her by appearing in person (she knew, of course, that by now I was a cancer specialist), I sent some of my colleagues as consultants.
In her 1945 memoir ''A Star Danced'', she recalled, "After weeks of more or less patient waiting, repeated timid, pleading, urgent and finally importunate requests to the authorities who rule such matters in Washington and London, and a rapid-fire barrage of telegrams, cables and telephone calls, it had happened.
I am sure that she was frequently bewildered by the rapidity and mutability of her own impulses.
During those months in England when ''September Tide'' was in production, Gertrude and Daphne formed a warm friendship, which continued unbroken after Gertrude's return to America.
"Early in September 1951", wrote Lawrence's widower, "she calmly announced that she had accepted an appointment to the Faculty of Columbia University, in the School of Dramatic Arts, of which Dr. Milton Smith was Director.
Lawrence biographer Sheridan Morley interviewed du Maurier for his 1981 book ''Gertrude Lawrence''.
Her father was a basso profundo who performed under the name Arthur Lawrence.
Hours after landing near London, she performed with E.N.S.A.
Lawrence, now aged sixteen, opted to live at the Theatrical Girls' Club in Soho rather than return to her mother and stepfather.
Her long-term friend Noël Coward later suggested it was a romanticised and less than wholly factual account of her life.
Gertrude auditioned for Conti, who thought the child was talented enough to warrant free lessons.
Aldrich was overseas at the time.
It originally had been planned as a play with recurrent musical themes for Katharine Cornell by Moss Hart, Kurt Weill and Ira Gershwin, but by the time the first act was completed it was clear it was very much a musical that Cornell agreed was beyond her capability as a performer.
'', specifically for Lawrence.
The painstaking lyricist immediately substituted ''the'' to clarify the aural ambiguity."
Although Lawrence claimed the work was solely hers, many suspected her business manager and attorney Fanny Holtzmann had written much of it.
Probably less than 100–200 receivers could pick up the telecast.
The two remained close until he married actress Madeleine Carroll in 1931.
She remained with the play until July 1949, then returned to the United States, where she performed her role for one week at her husband's theatre in Dennis, Massachusetts.
Others in the party included Ivor Novello, Margaret Rutherford, Diana Wynyard and Bobbie Andrews.
Doctors said she was suffering from hepatitis, and she was admitted to a room on the 16th floor.
Finally, two London laundry owners, whose bills totalled just under £50, filed a writ demanding she declare bankruptcy if she was unable to settle her accounts, and Lawrence's financial affairs came under the scrutiny of the Official Receiver.
The movie was rarely shown on American television until 1992, however.
Shows were given in shell-torn cinemas and hastily lighted casinos.
Two years after Lawrence's death, her widower Richard Aldrich had this to say in a best-selling biography of his late wife, ''Gertrude Lawrence as Mrs.
Bosley Crowther of the ''New York Times'' called her Amanda "a farcically exaggerated shrew with the zeal of a burlesque comedienne" and "a perfect imitation of a nervous Mama in domestic comedy".
Daphne's subsequent best-selling novel ''Mary Anne'' was originally planned as a possible starring vehicle for Gertrude.
Lawrence was buried in the champagne-coloured gown worn for the "Shall We Dance?"
She made her screen debut in 1929 in ''The Battle of Paris'', which featured two songs by Cole Porter.
Janet McTeer portrayed Lawrence opposite Geraldine Somerville as Daphne du Maurier and Malcolm Sinclair as Noël Coward in ''Daphne'', a 2007 television movie broadcast by the BBC.
In 1904, her stepfather took the family to Bognor on the Sussex coast for the August bank holiday.
The physical discomforts – the sleeping in attics, the total lack of sanitation, the scanty and poor food – Gertrude could and did take as fortunes of war.
While on the road, she underwent erratic mood swings and frequently clashed with her fellow cast members, including actors Michael Gough and Bryan Forbes, and the crew.
Daphne spoke of Gertrude's moodiness, her variability, her sense of vague self-dissatisfaction.
According to the ''New York Times'', 5,000 people crowded the intersection of East 55th Street and Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, while 1,800 others, including Yul Brynner, Connecticut Governor John Davis Lodge, Marlene Dietrich, Phil Silvers, Luise Rainer, Moss Hart and his wife Kitty Carlisle filled Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church for Lawrence's funeral.
What bothered her more was the breakdown in communications with me.
When Lawrence divorced Gordon-Howley, she and Taylor became engaged and remained so for two years, with each free to enjoy a social life separate from the other.
According to an authorised 1993 biography of the author and playwright by Margaret Forster, Lawrence and du Maurier became close friends during the London production of ''September Tide''.
As I bent over her, she opened her eyes for a second or two, looked up at me, and made a face as if to say, "What are ''you'' doing here?"
The London press paid little attention to her return to the stage, and she was distressed to discover that in a country struggling to recover from the effects of World War II, the public no longer was as interested in the private lives of stage stars as it once had been.
Lawrence was friendly with her son-in-law but lost contact with him after his 1950 divorce from Pamela, according to Cahan's memoir that was published in 1992.
On 16 August 1952, Lawrence fainted backstage immediately after finishing a Saturday matinee of ''The King and I''.
Prior to opening in the West End, the play toured Blackpool, Leeds, Liverpool and Manchester, where the frequently sparse audiences consisted primarily of elderly people who remembered Lawrence from her heyday.
Her role was that of a middle-aged Cornish woman whose son-in-law, a bohemian artist, falls in love with her.
During her engagement to Bert Taylor he managed her finances and encouraged her to invest in the productions in which she starred, but although she earned a considerable amount of money from ''Private Lives'', she still was deeply in debt, at one point owing fashion entrepreneur Hattie Carnegie more than $10,000.
Photos of the 1938 live broadcast are featured in a major article in Life (magazine) published a week later, as it was one of the first full-length plays done on live television.
She taught the class again in the spring 1952 semester at Columbia, this time allowing a ''New York Times'' reporter and photographer to attend and take pictures.
The following year she was cast opposite Charles Laughton and Elsa Lanchester in ''Rembrandt'' and co-starred with Rex Harrison in ''Men are Not Gods'', both produced by Alexander Korda.
At the end of 1920, Lawrence left Murray's and began to ease her way back into legitimate theatre while touring in a music hall act as the partner of popular singer Walter Williams.
It was so successful it moved to a larger theatre to accommodate the demand for tickets and extended its run.
Lawrence's other two grandchildren, Sarah Hunt and Tom Clatworthy, are both residents of the United Kingdom.
''The New York Times'' reported on 28 September 1951 that Lawrence "suffered an attack of stage fright yesterday and refused to let reporters observe her in her new role of teacher at Columbia University."
A few minutes later, she died.
Lawrence was born '''Gertrude Alice Dagmar Klasen''',  '''Alexandre Dagmar Lawrence-Klasen''', '''Gertrude Alexandra Dagmar Klasen''' or  some variant (sources differ), of English and Danish extraction, in the Newington area of London Borough of Southwark.
Tennessee Williams, who had written the play, thought casting Lawrence was "a dismal error" and, after the film's release, called it the worst adaptation of his work he had seen thus far.
They had homes in Dennis and in Turtle Bay, Manhattan.
At dawn of the day the operation was to take place Saturday, September 6, Dick Aldrich called Cahan on the telephone: Gertrude had become comatose; would I please come to the hospital at once?
Publicity for the film emphasised Lawrence's songs and costumes rather than the story, which was so weak that director Robert Florey had threatened to resign midway through filming.
She worked steadily with various touring companies until 1916, when she was hired by famed impresario André Charlot to understudy Beatrice Lillie and appear in the chorus of his latest production in London's West End.
A child who could sing and dance was needed to round out the troupe, and Alice volunteered her daughter.
She opened accounts with dozens of shop owners but assumed she had unlimited credit and paid little attention to the invoices they sent.
Following the Broadway run, she toured the United States (including a stint in Washington, D.C.) and Canada in the play until May 1947.
Her triumph was short-lived; her health deteriorated rapidly, forcing her to miss numerous performances until she finally was hospitalised.
Additionally, she appeared on several BBC Radio interview and variety shows before and after World War II.
In 1928, Lawrence returned to Broadway opposite Clifton Webb in ''Treasure Girl'', a Gershwin work she was confident would be a huge hit.
Lawrence and Lillie were the only female passengers.
Lawrence joined Italia Conti's production of ''Where the Rainbow Ends''.
After it closed, the show toured the US and Canada, although Lawrence was forced to leave the cast when she contracted double pneumonia and pleurisy and was forced to spend fourteen weeks in a Toronto hospital recuperating.
Julie Andrews portrayed Lawrence in the musical biographical film ''Star!
