And in America our democracy has been based on community of will and effort....
Evans wrote Gertrude:
The effectiveness of Stein as a lecture speaker provoked varying evaluations.
Disembarking from the ocean liner in New York, she encountered a throng of reporters.
She was outspoken in her hostility to some liberal reforms of progressive politics.
Gertrude attributed the beginnings of the Saturday evening salons to Matisse, as people began visiting to see his paintings and those of Cézanne: "Matisse brought people, everybody brought somebody, and they came at any time and it began to be a nuisance, and it was in this way that Saturday evenings began."
Mellow asserts that ''Fernhurst'' "is a decidedly minor and awkward piece of writing".
Initially illuminated by gaslight, the artwork was later lit by electric light shortly prior to World War I.
Stein's descriptive essays apparently began with her essay of Alice B. Toklas, "a little prose vignette, a kind of happy inspiration that had detached itself from the torrential prose of ''The Making of Americans''".
Gertrude Stein's personality has dominated the provenance of the Stein art legacy.
Hemingway frequented Stein's salon, but the two had an uneven relationship.
They began as close friends, with Hemingway admiring Stein as a mentor, but they later grew apart, especially after Stein called Hemingway "yellow" in ''The Autobiography of Alice B.
The only one who wanted to insist on this problem, was Juan Gris.
Dodge was also involved in the publicity and planning of the 69th Armory Show in 1913, "the first avant-garde art exhibition in America".
Gertrude and Alice, who were both Jewish, escaped persecution probably because of their friendship to Bernard Faÿ who was a collaborator with the Vichy regime and had connections to the Gestapo, or possibly because Gertrude was an American and a famous author.
Stein ignored Mabel's exhortations, and eventually Mabel, and published 1,000 copies of the book, in 1914.
The gallery space was furnished with imposing, Renaissance era furniture manufactured in Florence, Italy.
Witnessing the relationship between the two women served for Stein as her "erotic awakening".
Several of Stein's writings have been set to music by composers, including Virgil Thomson's operas ''Four Saints in Three Acts'' and ''The Mother of Us All'', and James Tenney's setting of ''Rose is a rose is a rose is a rose'' as a canon dedicated to Philip Corner, beginning with "a" on an upbeat and continuing so that each repetition shuffles the words, e.g.
The ''Chicago Daily Tribune'' wrote after Stein's return to Paris: "No writer in years has been so widely discussed, so much caricatured, so passionately championed."
Stein and Alice B. Toklas are both characters in the eight person show.
'''Gertrude Stein''' (February 3, 1874 – July 27, 1946) was an American novelist, poet, playwright and art collector.
In 1904 Stein began ''Fernhurst'', a fictional account of a scandalous three-person romantic affair involving a dean (M. Carey Thomas) and a faculty member (Mary Gwinn) from Bryn Mawr College and a Harvard graduate (Alfred Hodder).
Toklas and Stein returned to Paris in June 1916, and acquired a Ford automobile with the help of associates in the United States; Gertrude learned to drive it with the help of her friend William Edwards Cook.
Organization comes from community of will as well as community of action.
With the outbreak of World War II, Stein and Toklas relocated to a country home that they had rented for many years previously in Bilignin, Ain, in the Rhône-Alpes region.
(Quod Erat Demonstrandum)'' on October 24, 1903.
It was natural to do so, even inevitable: that soon became an art, in peace and in war, and Matisse concealed and insisted at the same time on that Cézanne could not realize, and Picasso concealed, played and tormented all these things.
Her companion Toklas, however, has given two other versions of the encounter—neither of which agrees with the "canonical" version above.
An antiquarian copy was valued at over $1,200 in 2007.
Stein attended First Hebrew Congregation of Oakland's Sabbath school.
They can only obey.
The two women doted on their beloved poodle named "Basket" whose successor, "Basket II", comforted Alice in the years after Gertrude's death.
The art historian and collector Bernard Berenson hosted Gertrude and Leo in his English country house in 1902, facilitating their introduction to Paul Cézanne and the dealer Ambroise Vollard.
Stein found formal schooling in Oakland unstimulating, but she read often: Shakespeare, Wordsworth, Scott, Burns, Smollett, Fielding, and more.
Stein compared her work to James Joyce's ''Ulysses'' and to Marcel Proust's ''In Search of Lost Time''.
Her father was a wealthy businessman with real estate holdings.
She received her A.B.
The more affirming essay "Miss Furr and Miss Skeene" is one of the first homosexual revelation stories to be published.
Gris, who before the war had entered a binding contract with Kahnweiler for his output, was left without income.
Stein and Toklas had plans to visit England to sign a contract for the publication of ''Three Lives'', to spend a few weeks there, and then journey to Spain.
Saturday evenings had been set as the fixed day and time for formal congregation so Stein could work at her writing uninterrupted by impromptu visitors.
Mabel wrote at length about what she viewed as the bad choice of publishing it with the press Gertrude selected.
The story, written during travels after leaving college, is based on a three-person romantic affair she joined while studying at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore.
With money acquired from the sale of Stein's last Matisse ''Woman with a Hat'' to her brother Michael, she and Toklas vacationed in Spain from May 1915 through the spring of 1916.
During the early summer of 1914, Gertrude bought three paintings by Juan Gris: ''Roses'', ''Glass and Bottle'', and ''Book and Glasses''.
The lectures Stein prepared for each stop over conformed to a formal structure, and the audience was limited to five hundred attendees for each venue.
Writing of this period in her life (in ''Things As They Are'', 1903) Stein often revealed herself as a depressed young woman dealing with a paternalistic culture, struggling to find her own identity, which she realized could not conform to the conventional female role.
Sometime in 1899 or 1900, she became infatuated with Mary Bookstaver who was involved in a relationship with a medical student, Mabel Haynes.
How much of Stein's wartime activities were motivated by the real exigencies of self-preservation in a dangerous environment, can only be speculated upon.
In 1925, the Paris-based Contact Press published a limited run of the novel consisting of 500 copies.
The paintings lined the walls in tiers trailing many feet to the ceiling.
When he could not make a thing, he hijacked it and left it.
It is currently in print, and was re-released as ''Tender Buttons: The Corrected Centennial Edition'' by City Lights Publishers in March 2014.
''Loving Repeating'' is a musical by Stephen Flaherty based on the writings of Gertrude Stein.
Weininger, though Jewish by birth, considered Jewish men effeminate and women as incapable of selfhood and genius, except for female homosexuals who may approximate masculinity.
William James, who had become a committed mentor to Stein at Radcliffe, recognizing her intellectual potential, and declaring her his "most brilliant woman student", encouraged Stein to enroll in medical school.
In a 1934 interview published in ''The New York Times'' she stated: That is the reason why I do not approve of the stringent immigration laws in America today.
Accustomed to a life of entitlement since birth, Stein may have been convinced her wealth and notoriety would exempt her from what had befallen other European Jews.
In 1945, in a preface for the first exhibition of Spanish painter Francisco Riba Rovira (who painted a portrait of her), Stein wrote:I explained that for me, all modern painting is based on what Cézanne nearly made, instead of basing itself on what he almost managed to make.
Stein was able to condemn the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor while simultaneously maintaining the dissonant acceptance of Hitler as conqueror of Europe.
She and Alice had an extended lecture tour in the United States during this decade.
Her works include novels, plays, stories, libretti and poems written in a highly idiosyncratic, playful, repetitive, and humorous style.
Mellow observes that, in 1904, 30-year-old Gertrude "had evidently determined that the 'small hard reality' of her life would be writing".
Author Djuna Barnes provided a caustic assessment of Stein's book, "Wars I Have Seen":
An elevated observer, perched high above everything below, he likened Stein to a self-conceived "Buddha...registering impressions like some august seismograph".
In "Harriet", Stein considers Levy's nonexistent plans for the summer, following her nonexistent plans for the winter:
Others have argued that some of the accounts of Stein's wartime activities have amounted to a "witch hunt".
Anxiety, fear and anger are also absent, and her work is harmonic and integrative.
In Beverly Hills, California, she visited actor and filmmaker Charlie Chaplin who reportedly discussed the future of cinema with her.
As Wilson wrote, unlike the plastic arts, literature deals with
As a Jew living in Nazi-occupied France, Stein may have been able to save her life and sustain her lifestyle as an art collector through the protection of powerful Vichy government official Bernard Faÿ.
Others have argued that some of the accounts of Stein's war time activities have amounted to a "witch hunt".
The relationships of Stein's acquaintances Mabel Haynes and Grace Lounsbury ended as Haynes started one with Mary Bookstaver (also known as May Bookstaver).
In a letter Stein wrote during the 1930s, she explained that she never accepted the theory of automatic writing: "There can be automatic movements, but not automatic writing.
In Baltimore, Stein met Claribel and Etta Cone, who held Saturday evening salons that she would later emulate in Paris.The Cones shared an appreciation for art and conversation about it and modeled a domestic division of labor that Stein would replicate in her relationship with Alice B. Toklas.
1'' at Princeton University.
She began ''Three Lives'' during the spring of 1905 and finished it the following year.
Among Picasso's acquaintances who frequented the Saturday evenings were: Fernande Olivier (Picasso's mistress), Georges Braque (artist), André Derain (artist), Max Jacob (poet), Guillaume Apollinaire (poet), Marie Laurencin (artist, and Apollinaire's mistress), Henri Rousseau (painter), and Joseph Stella.
They also spent several summers in the town of Bilignin, in the Ain district of eastern France situated in the picturesque region of the Rhône-Alpes.
He insisted on showing his incapacity: he spread his lack of success: showing what he could not do, became an obsession for him.
She had been urged to leave France by American embassy officials, friends and family when that possibility still existed, but declined to do so.
After the war, Stein was visited by many young American soldiers.
It is best to favor healthy competition.
In 1934, behavioral psychologist B.F. Skinner interpreted Stein's difficult poem ''Tender Buttons'' as an example of ''normal motor automatism''.
In the 1980s, a cabinet in the Yale University Beinecke Library, which had been locked for an indeterminate number of years, was opened and found to contain some 300 love letters written by Stein and Toklas.
In April 1914 Leo relocated to Settignano, Italy, near Florence, and the art collection was divided.
Gertrude completed ''Q.E.D.
Stein's tenure at Johns Hopkins was marked by challenge and stress.
Some of those in the psychiatric community weighed in, judging that Stein suffered from a speech disorder, palilalia, which caused her "to stutter over words and phrases".
:"The Saxon element is always destined to be dominated.
Though Gertrude collected cubist paintings, especially those of Picasso, the largest visual arts influence on her literary work is that of Cézanne.
In an essay written at the time, Stein humorously discussed the complex efforts, involving much letter writing and Victorian niceties, to extricate Levy from Toklas's living arrangements.
While identified with the modernist movements in art and literature, Stein's political affiliations were a mix of reactionary and progressive ideas.
These works were well received by avant-garde critics but did not initially achieve mainstream success.
Soon after she purchased them from Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler's gallery, the Great War began, Kahnweiler's stock was confiscated and he was not allowed to return to Paris.
The affair was complicated, as Stein was less experienced with the social dynamics of romantic friendship as well as her own sexuality and any moral dilemmas regarding it.
The romance involved Stein and her friends Mabel Haynes, Grace Lounsbury and Mary Bookstaver.
Where Renoir, Cézanne, Matisse, and Picasso's works dominated Leo and Gertrude's collection, the collection of Michael and Sarah Stein emphasized Matisse.
In an essay written for the ''Atlantic Monthly'' in November 1940, Stein had written about her decision not to leave France: "it would be awfully uncomfortable and I am fussy about my food."
Stein and Toklas merit their own line each in the song "Bosom Buddies" from the 1966 Broadway musical ''MAME'', based on the stage play ''Auntie Mame'', by composer-lyricist Jerry Herman.
Journalist Lanning Warren interviewed Stein in her Paris apartment in a piece published in ''The New York Times Magazine'' on May 6, 1934.
I say Hitler ought to have the peace prize...because he is removing all elements of contest and struggle from Germany.
These experiments yielded examples of writing that appeared to represent "stream of consciousness", a psychological theory often attributed to James and the style of modernist authors Virginia Woolf and James Joyce.
In 1888, Stein's mother died, and her father died in 1891.
This was Stein's contention in the year when the town of Culoz, where she and Toklas resided, saw the removal of its Jewish children to Auschwitz.
''Tender Buttons'' is the best known of Stein's "hermetic" works.
From Rand's working notes for her novel ''The Fountainhead'', it is clear that the character Lois Cook in that book was intended as a caricature of Stein.
At her death, Gertrude's remaining collection emphasized the artwork of Picasso and Juan Gris, most of her other pictures having been sold.
Shortly after the opening of the Salon d'Automne of 1905 (on October 18, 1905), the Steins acquired Matisse's ''Woman with a Hat'' and Picasso's ''Young Girl with Basket of Flowers''.
Gertrude and Alice's summer of 1908 is memorialized in images of the two of them in Venice, at the piazza in front of Saint Mark's.
Michael Stein, the eldest brother, took over the family business holdings, and arranged for Gertrude and another sister, Bertha, to live with their mother's family in Baltimore in 1892, where she lived with her uncle David Bachrach.
Stein is a central character in Nick Bertozzi's 2007 graphic novel ''The Salon''.
It was, however, her brother Leo who was the astute art appraiser.
First publication in Alfred Stieglitz's ''Camera Work'' (August 1912).
Many of the experimental works such as ''Tender Buttons'' have since been interpreted by critics as a feminist reworking of patriarchal language.
The division of the Steins' art collection was described in a letter by Leo:
Front-page articles on Stein appeared in almost every New York City newspaper.
Writing for ''Vanity Fair'' magazine in 1923, eminent literary critic Edmund Wilson presciently came to an evaluation similar to the one made by Katharine Ann Porter some twenty years later, after Stein's death.
In 1944, Stein wrote that Petain's policies were "really wonderful so simple so natural so extraordinary".
The Steins' holdings were dispersed eventually by various methods and for various reasons.
It is difficult to say, however, how aware Stein was of these events.
During the 1930s, Stein and Toklas became famous with the 1933 mass market publication of ''The Autobiography of Alice B.
Her activities during World War II have been the subject of analysis and commentary.
Faÿ had been the primary translator of Stein's work into French and subsequently masterminded her 1933–34 American book tour, which gave Stein celebrity status and proved to be a highly successful promotion of her memoir, ''The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas''.
Several years later, Toklas would contribute money to Faÿ's escape from prison.
And you can imagine what that meant to me or to any one."
Gertrude Stein stated the date for her writing of ''The Making of Americans'' was 1906–8.
To Stein, the industrial revolution had acted as a negative societal force, disrupting stability, degrading values, and subsequently affecting cultural decline.
Despite Stein's work on "automatic writing" with William James, she did not see her work as automatic, but as an 'excess of consciousness'.
She spoke, reading from notes, and provided for an audience question and answer period at the end of her presentation.
'', novelist Giannina Braschi pays homage to Stein as an imaginary mentor.
Lastly Grahn argues that one must "''inster''stand... engage with the work, to mix with it in an active engagement, rather than 'figuring it out.'
In 1902 Stein's brother Leo Stein left for London, and Stein followed.
In her fourth year, Stein failed an important course, lost interest, and left.
According to the famous version of her last moments, before having been taken into surgery, Stein asked her partner Toklas: "What is the answer?"
In ''Tender Buttons'' Stein comments on lesbian sexuality and the work abounds with "highly condensed layers of public and private meanings" created by wordplay including puns on the words "box", "cow", and in titles such as "tender buttons".
Typical quotes are: "Rose is a rose is a rose is a rose"; "Out of kindness comes redness and out of rudeness comes rapid same question, out of an eye comes research, out of selection comes painful cattle"; about her childhood home in Oakland, "There is no there there"; and "The change of color is likely and a difference a very little difference is prepared.
Stein and Carl Van Vechten, the noted critic and photographer, became acquainted in Paris in 1913.
It includes some commentary that Gertrude mentioned in her autobiography when she discussed the "fateful twenty-ninth year" during which:
(Bachelor of Arts) magna cum laude from Radcliffe in 1898.
She would often go on excursions with her brother, Leo, with whom she developed a close relationship.
After the artworks were divided between the two siblings, it was Gertrude Stein that moved on to champion the works of what proved to be lesser talents in the 1930s.
It appears in ''Gertrude Stein, Everybody's Autobiography'' (Random House 1937, p 289) and is often applied to the city of her childhood, Oakland, California.
In 2006, theatre director/actor Luiz Päetow created his solo, ''Plays'', portraying Stein's 1934 homonymous lecture, and toured Brazil for several years.
Two quotes from her works have become widely known: "Rose is a rose is a rose is a rose" and "there is no there there", with the latter often taken to be a reference to her childhood home of Oakland, California.
In 1897, Stein spent the summer in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, studying embryology at the Marine Biological Laboratory.
We need the stimulation of new blood.
While a student at Johns Hopkins and purportedly still naïve about sexual matters, Stein experienced an awakening of her latent sexuality.
Stein's writing can be placed in three categories: "hermetic" works best illustrated by ''The Making of Americans: The Hersland Family''; popularized writing such as ''The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas''; and speech writing and more accessible autobiographical writing of later years, of which ''Brewsie and Willie'' is a good example.
Her six-month tour of the country encompassed 191 days of travel, criss-crossing 23 states and visiting 37 cities.
German and English were spoken in their home.
Stein continued to praise Pétain after the war ended, this at a time when Pétain had been sentenced to death by a French court for treason.
In addition Stein's work is funny, and multilayered, allowing a variety of interpretations and engagements.
Of this publication, Gertrude said, "he was the first one that ever printed anything that I had done.
Her last major work was the libretto of the feminist opera ''The Mother of Us All'' (1947) about the socially progressive suffragette movement and another work from this time, ''Brewsie and Willie'' (1946), expressed strong support for American G.I.s.
Ultimately, medical school had bored her, and she had spent many of her evenings not applying herself to her studies, but taking long walks and attending the opera.
Stein's endearment for Toklas was "Baby Precious", in turn Stein was for Toklas, "Mr. Cuddle-Wuddle".
They left Paris on July 6, 1914 and returned on October 17.
In an interview with Robert Bartlett Haas in "A Transatlantic Interview - 1946", Stein insisted that this work was completely "realistic" in the tradition of Gustave Flaubert, stating the following: "I used to take objects on a table, like a tumbler or any kind of object and try to get the picture of it clear and separate in my mind and create a word relationship between the word and the things seen."
During their residence in Oakland, they lived for four years on a ten-acre lot, and Stein built many memories of California there.
Stein did not see Leo Stein again until after World War I, and then through only a brief greeting on the street in Paris.
In October 1934, Stein arrived in America after a 30-year absence.
But if we shut down on immigration completely we shall become stagnant.
Her use of repetition is ascribed to her search for descriptions of the "bottom nature" of her characters, such as in ''The Making of Americans'' where the narrator is described through the repetition of narrative phrases such as "As I was saying" and "There will be now a history of her."
The Steins' elder brother, Michael, and sister-in-law Sarah (Sally) acquired a large number of Henri Matisse paintings; Gertrude's friends from Baltimore, Claribel and Etta Cone, collected similarly, eventually donating their art collection, virtually intact, to the Baltimore Museum of Art.
Along with Stein's widely known "A rose is a rose is a rose is a rose" quotation, "there is no there there" is also one of her most famous.
She publicly endorsed General Francisco Franco during the Spanish Civil War and admired Vichy leader Marshal Philippe Pétain.
Although Jewish, Stein collaborated with Vichy France, a regime that deported more than 75,000 Jews to Nazi concentration camps, of whom only 3 percent survived the Holocaust.
He persisted by deepening the things which Cézanne wanted to do, but it was too hard a task for him: it killed him.
Sugar is not a vegetable."
In 1995, a new, definitive edition was published by Dalkey Archive Press with a foreword by William Gass.
In ''MAME'', Vera Charles, Mame Dennis' actress-confidante pal, sings: "...I'll always be Alice Toklas, if you'll be Gertrude Stein."
In 1932, Stein asserted: "painting now after its great period has come back to be a minor art."
It is a small book separated into three sections—"Food, Objects and Rooms", each containing prose under subtitles.
At Radcliffe, she began a lifelong friendship with Mabel Foote Weeks, whose correspondence traces much of the progression of Stein's life.
Stein had stopped translating Petain's speeches three years previously, in 1941.
Social judgement is absent in her writing, so the reader is given the power to decide how to think and feel about the writing.
She writes of the high esteem in which Pétain is held by his countrymen; France respected and admired the man who had struck an armistice with Hitler.
After Stein's and Leo's households separated in 1914, she continued to collect examples of Picasso's art, which had turned to Cubism, a style Leo did not appreciate.
Of the art collection at 27 Rue de Fleurus, McBride commented: "In proportion to its size and quality... it is just about the most potent of any that I have ever heard of in history."
The work, like ''Q.E.D.
Particularly, he influenced her idea of equality, distinguished from universality: "the whole field of the canvas is important" (p.&nbsp;8).
Stein idealized the 18th century as the golden age of civilization, epitomized in America as the era of its founding fathers and what was in France, the glory of its pre-revolutionary Ancien Régime.
It is a subjective relationship that includes multiple viewpoints.
While living in Paris, Stein began submitting her writing for publication.
Henry McBride (art critic for the ''New York Sun'') did much for Stein's reputation in the United States, publicizing her art acquisitions and her importance as a cultural figure.
Her critics were less enthusiastic about it.
Leo departed with sixteen Renoirs, and relinquishing the Picassos and most of Matisse to his sister, took only a portrait sketch Picasso had done of him.
She did publish an article in a psychological journal on "spontaneous automatic writing" while at Radcliffe, but "the unconscious and the intuition (even when James himself wrote about them) never concerned her."
Born in the Allegheny West neighborhood of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and raised in Oakland, California, Stein moved to Paris in 1903, and made France her home for the remainder of her life.
The art collection increased and the walls at Rue de Fleurus were rearranged continually to make way for new acquisitions.
(Bea Arthur, who played the original Vera Charles on Broadway, recreated the same role for the 1974 film version of the musical.)
The following year the two relocated to Paris, where Leo hoped to pursue an art career.
Stein maintained at the time that she detested "passion in its many disguised forms".
In Washington, D.C. Stein was invited to have tea with the President's wife, Eleanor Roosevelt.
In 1908, they summered in Fiesole, Italy, Toklas staying with Harriet Lane Levy, the companion of her trip from the United States, and her housemate until Alice moved in with Stein and Leo in 1910.
She hosted a Paris salon, where the leading figures in modernism in literature and art would meet, such as Pablo Picasso, Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Sinclair Lewis, Ezra Pound, and Henri Matisse.
The joint collection of Gertrude and Leo Stein began in late 1904 when Michael Stein announced that their trust account had accumulated a balance of 8,000 francs.
Mabel was enthusiastic about Stein's sprawling publication ''The Makings of Americans'' and, at a time when Stein had much difficulty selling her writing to publishers, privately published 300 copies of ''Portrait of Mabel Dodge at Villa Curonia'', a copy of which was valued at $25,000 in 2007.
