Stauffenberg and his group were shot on 21 July 1944; meanwhile, his fellow conspirators were rounded up by the Gestapo and sent to a concentration camp.
However, certain Polish information about the movement of German police and SS units to the East during the German invasion of the Soviet Union in the autumn of 1941 was similar to information British intelligence secretly got through intercepting and decoding German police and SS messages sent by radio telegraphy.
Roehm's position was menacing as upwards of over 4.5 million men fell under his command once the militias and veterans organizations were absorbed by the SA, a fact which fueled Roehm's aspirations; his dream of fusing the SA and ''Reichswehr'' together was undermining Hitler's relationships with the leadership of Germany's armed forces.
Concerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to effectively counteract the power of the ''Sturmabteilung'' (SA), Göring handed over control of the Gestapo to Himmler on 20 April 1934.
He was Müller's direct subordinate.
On 27 September 1939, the security and police agencies of Nazi Germany—with the exception of the Orpo—were consolidated into the Reich Main Security Office (RSHA), headed by Heydrich.
While the total numbers of Gestapo officials were limited when contrasted against the represented populations, the average ''Volksgenosse'' (Nazi term for the "member of the German people") was typically not under observation, so the statistical ratios between Gestapo officials and inhabitants is "largely worthless and of little significance" according to some recent scholars.
The popular picture of the Gestapo with its spies everywhere terrorizing German society has been rejected by many historians as a myth invented after the war as a cover for German society's widespread complicity in allowing the Gestapo to work.
At that time, the Gestapo was condemned as a criminal organisation, along with the SS.
After Heydrich's death in June 1942, and as the war progressed, Müller's power and the independence grew substantially.
As late as 6 June 1944, Heinrich Müller—concerned about the leakage of information to the Allies—set up a special unit called ''Sonderkommando Jerzy'' that was meant to root out the Polish intelligence network in western and southwestern Europe.
From the mid-1930s into the early 1940s – various groups made up of communists, idealists, working-class people, and even far-right conservative opposition organizations covertly fought against Hitler’s government, and several of them fomented plots that included Hitler’s assassination.
Both the Gestapo and Kripo became distinct departments within the RSHA.
Lastly, the Gestapo's effectiveness, while aided by denunciations and the watchful eye of ordinary Germans, was more the result of the coordination and cooperation amid the various police organs within Germany, the assistance of the SS, and the support provided by the various Nazi Party organisations; all of them together forming an organised persecution network.
However, these internal departments remained and the Gestapo continued to be a department under the RSHA umbrella.
When asked for identification, an operative was only required to present his warrant disc.
This gave Göring command of the largest police force in Germany.
There SD and Gestapo agents, posing as anti-Nazis in the Netherlands, kidnapped two British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) officers after having lured them to a meeting to discuss peace terms.
In the occupied territories, the formal relationship between local units of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD was slightly closer.
The Gestapo became known as RSHA ''Amt IV'' ("Department or Office IV") with Heinrich Müller as its chief.
Between 14 November 1945 and 3 October 1946, the Allies established an International Military Tribunal (IMT) to try 22 of 24 major Nazi war criminals and six groups for crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
With Frick's support, Himmler (pushed on by his right-hand man, Reinhard Heydrich) took over the political police of state after state.
Most of the political investigations took place between 1933–35 with the all-time high of 57 cases in 1935.
In 1936, Himmler made it a suboffice of the ''Sicherheitspolizei'' (SiPo) ("Security Police").
The Canadian historian Robert Gellately wrote that most Gestapo men were not Nazis, but at the same time were not opposed to the Nazi regime, which they were willing to serve, in whatever task they were called upon to perform.
By the spring of 1934 Himmler's SS controlled the SD and the Gestapo, but for him, there was still a problem, as technically the SS (and the Gestapo by proxy) was subordinated to the SA which was under the command of Ernst Roehm.
Himmler also gained authority over all of Germany's uniformed law enforcement agencies, which were amalgamated into the new ''Ordnungspolizei'' (Orpo: Order Police), which became a national agency under SS general Kurt Daluege.
Frick did not have the muscle to take on Göring by himself so he allied with Himmler.
In 1942, the Gestapo discovered a cache of Polish intelligence documents in Prague and were surprised to see that Polish agents and informants had been gathering detailed military information and smuggling it out to London, via Budapest and Istanbul.
Heydrich thought along similar lines and advocated both defensive and offensive measures on the part of the Gestapo, so as to prevent any subversion or destruction of the National Socialist body.
The majority of Gestapo informers were not full-term informers working undercover, but were rather ordinary citizens who chose to denounce other people to the Gestapo.
Median annual wage for an industrial worker was 1,495 RM in 1939.
Early in the regime’s existence, harsh measures were meted out to political opponents and those who resisted Nazi doctrine (e.g., the Communists), a role the SA performed until the SD and Gestapo undermined their influence and took control of security in the Reich.
"V-men", as undercover Gestapo agents were known, were used to infiltrate Social Democratic and Communist opposition groups, but this was more the exception, not the rule.
By March 1937, the Gestapo employed an estimated 6,500 persons in fifty-four regional offices across the Reich.
Beyond that, sleep deprivation and various forms of harassment were used as investigative methods.
Gestapo and Kripo had many experienced, professional policemen and investigators, who considered the SD to be a less competent agency.
These groups—the Nazi party and government leadership, the German General staff and High Command (OKW); the ''Sturmabteilung'' (SA); the ''Schutzstaffel'' (SS), including the ''Sicherheitsdienst'' (SD); and the Gestapo—had an aggregate membership exceeding two million, making a large number of their members liable to trial when the organisations were convicted.
From June 1936, a concerted effort was made to recruit policemen of the SiPo into the SS, and SS members into the Kripo and especially the Gestapo, but with limited success; by 1939 only a small percentage of Gestapo agents were SS members.
Müller remained the Gestapo Chief.
In 1941 ''Referat N'', the central command office of the Gestapo was formed.
For the most part, members of the church did not offer political resistance but simply wanted to ensure that organizational doctrine remained intact.
However, in practise, the SiPo and the SD came into jurisdictional and operational conflict.
Less than two weeks later in early May 1933, the Gestapo moved into their Berlin headquarters at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 8.
80% of all Gestapo investigations were started in response to information provided by denunciations by ordinary Germans; while 10% were started in response to information provided by other branches of the German government and another 10% started in response to information that the Gestapo itself unearthed.
Himmler wanted to free himself entirely from Roehm, who he viewed as an obstacle.
As historian Eric Johnson remarked, "The Nazi terror was selective terror," with its focus upon political opponents, ideological dissenters (clergy and religious organisations), career criminals, the Sinti and Roma population, handicapped persons, homosexuals and above all, upon the Jews.
When Church leaders (clergy) voiced their misgiving about the euthanasia program and Nazi racial policies, Hitler intimated that he considered them "traitors to the people" and went so far as to call them "the destroyers of Germany."
Himmler by his appointment to ''Chef der Deutschen Polizei'' (Chief of German Police), along with serving as ''Reichsführer-SS'' made him independent of Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick's nominal control.
At the trial of any individual member of any group or organisation, the IMT was authorised to declare (in connection with any act of which the individual was convicted) that the group or organisation to which he belonged was a criminal organisation.
Many of the local offices were understaffed and overworked, struggling with the paper load caused by so many denunciations.
For information about what was happening in German society, the Gestapo continued to be mostly dependent upon denunciations.
The force was created by Hermann Göring in 1933 by combining the executive and the judicial branches into one power.
However, resistance groups and those who were in moral or political opposition to the Nazis were stalled by the fear of reprisals from the Gestapo.
As part of the deal in which Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of Germany, Hermann Göring—future commander of the Luftwaffe and the number two man in the Nazi Party—was named Interior Minister of Prussia.
The basic Gestapo law passed by the government in 1936 gave the Gestapo ''carte blanche'' to operate without judicial review—in effect, putting it above the law.
In September 1939, the SiPo together with the SD were merged into the newly created ''Reichssicherheitshauptamt'' (RSHA: Reich Main Security Office).
This led to corresponding arrests, being sent to concentration camps and execution.
In an attempt to assassinate Hitler, Stauffenberg planted a bomb underneath a conference table inside the Wolf's Lair field headquarters.
Work done by social historians such as Detlev Peukert, Robert Gellately, Reinhard Mann, Inge Marssolek, René Otto, Klaus-Michael Mallamann and Paul Gerhard, which by focusing on what the local offices were doing has shown the Gestapos almost total dependence on denunciations from ordinary Germans, and very much discredited the older "Big Brother" picture with the Gestapo having its eyes and ears everywhere.
Heydrich, named chief of the Gestapo by Himmler on 22 April 1934, also continued as head of the SS Security Service (''Sicherheitsdienst,'' SD).
On one hand, it was next to impossible for them to overthrow Hitler and the party; on the other, the Allied demand for an unconditional surrender meant no opportunity for a compromise peace, which left the military and conservative aristocrats who opposed the regime no option (in their eyes) other than continuing the military struggle.
Also on that date, Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia.
The extreme anti-Semitism and neo-Pagan heresies of the Nazis caused some Christians to outright resist, and Pope Pius XI to issue the encyclical Mit Brennender Sorge denouncing Nazism and warning Catholics against joining or supporting the Party.
The involvement of ordinary Germans in denunciations also needs to be put into perspective so as not to exonerate the Gestapo.
Thereafter, there was a show trial overseen by Roland Freisler, followed by their execution.
During May 1935, the Gestapo broke up and arrested members of the "Markwitz Circle," a group of former socialists in contact with Otto Strasser, who sought Hitler's downfall.
The Gestapo had the authority to investigate cases of treason, espionage, sabotage and criminal attacks on the Nazi Party and Germany.
'Selective terror' by the Gestapo, as mentioned by Johnson, is also supported by historian Richard Evans who states that, "Violence and intimidation rarely touched the lives of most ordinary Germans.
Arrests, torture, and executions were common.
Gellately has also suggested that the Gestapo was "a reactive organisation" "...which was constructed within German society and whose functioning was structurally dependent on the continuing co-operation of German citizens".
The information supplied by denunciations, often led the Gestapo in determining whom was arrested.
After that year, political investigations declined with only 18 investigations in 1938, 13 in 1939, two in 1941, seven in 1942, four in 1943 and one in 1944.
On 1 October 1946, the IMT rendered its judgement on 21 top Nazi figures: 18 were sentenced to death or to long prison terms, and three acquitted.
Soon afterward, Göring detached the political and intelligence sections from the police and filled their ranks with Nazis.
Most people quickly learned that open opposition was dangerous since Gestapo informants and agents were widespread.
With the formation of RSHA in September 1939, Gestapo officers who also held SS rank began to wear the wartime grey SS uniform when on duty in the ''Hauptamt'' or regional headquarters (''Abschnitte'').
The first five months of 1943 witnessed thousands of arrests and executions as the Gestapo exercised their powers over the German public.
The local offices of the Gestapo, known as Gestapo ''Leitstellen'' and ''Stellen'', answered to a local commander known as the ''Inspekteur der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD'' ("Inspector of the Security Police and Security Service") who, in turn, was under the dual command of ''Referat N'' of the Gestapo and also his local SS and Police Leader.
Then from 27 September 1939 forward, it was administered by the ''Reichssicherheitshauptamt'' (RSHA) ("Reich Main Security Office") and was considered a sister organization of the ''Sicherheitsdienst'' (SD) ("Security Service").
Beginning in 1940, the grey SS uniform was worn by Gestapo in occupied countries, even those who were not actually SS members, because agents in civilian clothes had been shot by members of the ''Wehrmacht'' thinking that they were partisans.
Additional staff were added in March 1938 consequent the annexation of Austria and again in October 1938 with the acquisition of the Sudetenland.
The "conventional criminality" category concerned economic crimes such as money laundering, smuggling and homosexuality.
He answered to Heydrich; Heydrich answered only to Himmler and Himmler answered only to Hitler.
However, Gestapo leader Heinrich Müller was never tried, as he disappeared at the end of the war.
Browder also describes a sandwich effect, where from above; Gestapo agents were subjected to ideologically oriented racism and criminal biological theories; and from below, the Gestapo was transformed by SS personnel who did not have the proper police training, which showed in their propensity for unrestrained violence.
In Germany proper, many towns and cities had fewer than 50 official Gestapo personnel.
On 26 April 1933, Göring merged the two units as the ''Geheime Staatspolizei'', which was abbreviated for a franking stamp and became known as the Gestapo.
One of the more famous schemes, Operation Valkyrie, involved a number of senior German officers and was carried out by Colonel Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg.
The Polish government in exile in London during World War II received sensitive military information about Nazi Germany from agents and informants throughout Europe.
Yet a significant number of them still worked against the National Socialist government.
Nineteen of the 22 were convicted, and twelve of them (Bormann in absentia, Frank, Frick, Göring, Jodl, Kaltenbrunner, Keitel, Ribbentrop, Rosenberg, Sauckel, Seyss-Inquart, Streicher), were each given the death penalty; the remaining three (Funk, Hess, Raeder) received life terms.
The Gestapo cracked down ruthlessly on dissidents in Germany, just as they did everywhere else.
On 17 June 1936, Hitler decreed the unification of all police forces in the Reich and named Himmler as Chief of German Police.
Terror against "state enemies" had become a way of life to such a degree that the Gestapo’s presence and methods were eventually normalized in the minds of people living in Nazi Germany.
Deans were to be targeted as the "eyes and ears of the bishops" and a "vast network" established to monitor the activities of ordinary clergy: "The importance of this enemy is such that inspectors of security police and of the security service will make this group of people and the questions discussed by them their special concern".
These included the non-violent resistance of Hans and Sophie Scholl, two leaders of the White Rose student group.
Shortly thereafter, Himmler created the ''Kriminalpolizei'' (Kripo: Criminal Police), merging it with the Gestapo into the ''Sicherheitspolizei'' (SiPo: Security Police), under Heydrich's command.
Polish agents also gathered detailed information about the morale of German soldiers in the East.
Brutality on the part of interrogators — often prompted by denunciations and followed with roundups — enabled the Gestapo to uncover numerous resistance networks; it also made them seem like the knew everything and could do anything they wanted.
In Würzburg, which is one of the few places in Germany where most of the Gestapo records survived, every member of the Gestapo was a career policeman or had a police background.
A diamond-shaped black patch with "SD" in white was worn on the lower left sleeve even by SiPo men who were not actually in the SD.
Historian George C. Browder contends that there was a four-part process (authorization, bolstering, routinization, and dehumanization) in effect which legitimized the psycho-social atmosphere conditioning members of the Gestapo to radicalized violence.
Diels was best known as the primary interrogator of Marinus van der Lubbe after the ''Reichstag'' fire.
They were subject to coordination by inspectors of the security police and SD on the staffs of the local higher SS and police leaders, however, and one of the principal functions of the local SD units was to serve as the intelligence agency for the local Gestapo units.
Fearful of an internal overthrow, the forces of the Gestapo were unleashed on the opposition.
This prompted Winston Churchill to ban any further contact with the German opposition.
One of the methods employed by the Gestapo to contend with these resistance factions was ‘protective detention’ which facilitated the process in expediting dissenters to concentration camps and against which there was no legal defense.
Leaders, organisers, investigators and accomplices participating in the formulation or execution of a common plan or conspiracy to commit the crimes specified were declared responsible for all acts performed by any persons in execution of such plan.
Of the political cases, 61 people were investigated for suspicion of belonging to the KPD, 44 for the SPD and 69 for other political parties.
This identified the operative as Gestapo without revealing personal identity and agents, except when ordered to do so by an authorized official, were not required to show picture identification, something all non-Gestapo people were expected to do.
He originally wanted to name it the Secret Police Office (), but discovered the German initials "GPA" looked and sounded too much like those of the Russian GPU.
Both the SD and Gestapo released information concerning an imminent putsch by the SA.
Describing the activities of the organization, Göring boasted about the utter ruthlessness required for Germany's recovery, the establishment of concentration camps for that purpose, and even went on to claim that excesses were committed in the beginning, recounting how beatings took place here and there.
Student opposition leaders were executed in late February, and a major opposition organization, the Oster Circle, was destroyed in April 1943.
This was partly because of the Venlo incident of 1939.
After uncovering a sample of the information the Poles had reported, Gestapo officials concluded that Polish intelligence activity represented a very serious danger to Germany.
Efforts to resist the Nazi regime amounted to very little and had only minor chances of success, particularly since the broad percentage of the German people did not support oppositional movements.
Within Germany and areas which were incorporated within the Reich for the purpose of civil administration, local offices of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD were formally separate.
As early as 1935, a Prussian administrative court had ruled that the Gestapo's actions were not subject to judicial review.
A year after the organizations inception, Göring wrote in a British publication about having created the organization on his own initiative and how he was "chiefly responsible" for the elimination of the Marxist and Communist threat to Germany and Prussia.
Increasing religious objections to Nazi policies led the Gestapo to carefully monitor church organizations.
Beginning on 20 April 1934, it was under the administration of SS national leader Heinrich Himmler, who in 1936 was appointed Chief of German Police (''Chef der Deutschen Polizei'') by Hitler.
Several Nazi chieftains, among them Goering, Joseph Goebbels, Rudolf Hess, and Himmler, began a concerted campaign to convince Hitler to take action against Roehm.
With its 1936 merging with the Kripo (National criminal police) to form sub-units of the ''Sicherheitspolizei'' (SiPo; Security Police), the Gestapo was classified as a government agency.
The trials began in November 1945.
In the same year the median salary for a privately employed white-collar worker was 2,772 RM.
For the Gestapo, the next two years following the Night of the Long Knives, a term describing the putsch against Roehm and the SA, were characterized by "behind-the-scenes political wrangling over policing."
On 26 April 1933, he reorganized the force's ''Amt III'' as the ''Gestapa'' (better-known by the "sobriquet" Gestapo), a secret state police intended to serve the Nazi cause.
Himmler and Heydrich both immediately began installing their own personnel in select positions, several of whom were directly from the Bavarian Political Police like Heinrich Müller, Franz Josef Huber, and Josef Meisinger.
Some Germans were convinced that it was their duty to apply all possible expedients to end the war as quickly as possible.
The vast majority of Gestapo officers came from the police forces of the Weimar Republic, members of the SS, the SA, and the NSDAP also joined the Gestapo.
The "administrative control" category concerned whose were breaking the law concerning residency in the city.
This trickled down the chain of his subordinates.
The specific internal departments of ''Amt IV'' were as follows:
Denunciation was the exception, not the rule, as far as the behaviour of the vast majority of Germans was concerned."
Gestapo members Hermann Göring, Ernst Kaltenbrunner and Arthur Seyss-Inquart were individually convicted.
Known as the 20 July plot, this assassination attempt failed and Hitler was only slightly injured.
This move also gave Himmler operational control over Germany's entire detective force.
The SS officer Werner Best, onetime head of legal affairs in the Gestapo, summed up this policy by saying, "As long as the police carries out the will of the leadership, it is acting legally."
In this, he ran into conflict with Heinrich Himmler, who was police chief of the second most powerful German state, Bavaria.
Gestapo agents in uniform did not wear SS shoulderboards, but rather police-pattern shoulderboards piped or underlaid in "poison green" (''giftgrün'').
Sabotage efforts were undertaken by members of the ''Abwehr'' (military intelligence) leadership, as they recruited people known to oppose the Nazi regime.
The District Office in Nuremberg, which had the responsibility for all of northern Bavaria, employed a total of 80–100 full-term informers between 1943 and 1945.
Because the Gestapo seemed omniscient and omnipotent, the atmosphere of fear they created led to an overestimation of their reach and strength; a faulty assessment which hampered the operational effectiveness of underground resistance organizations.
Members of the three convicted groups were subject to apprehension by Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union and France.
An examination of 213 denunciations in Düsseldorf showed that 37% were motivated by personal conflicts, no motive could be established in 39%, and 24% were motivated by support for the Nazi regime.
Over time, membership in the Gestapo included ideological training, particularly once Werner Best assumed a leading role for training in April 1936.
Göring himself took over the Gestapo in 1934 and urged Hitler to extend the agency's authority throughout Germany.
This action effectively merged the police into the SS and removed it from Frick's control.
The Gestapo also maintained offices at all Nazi concentration camps, held an office on the staff of the SS and Police Leaders, and supplied personnel as needed to formations such as the ''Einsatzgruppen''.
For example, in 1939 Stettin and Frankfurt am Main only had a total of 41 Gestapo men combined.
Hollywood notwithstanding, after 1939 the black SS uniform was only worn by ''Allgemeine-SS'' reservists.
The Poles identified and tracked German military trains to the Eastern front and identified four ''Ordnungspolizei'' ("Order Police") battalions sent to conquered areas of the Soviet Union in October 1941 that engaged in war crimes and mass murder.
Soon only Prussia was left.
The Gestapo became a national state agency rather than a Prussian state agency.
After Germany conquered Poland in the autumn of 1939, Gestapo officials believed that they had neutralized Polish intelligence activities.
In an effort to counter the strength and influence of spiritual resistance, Nazi records reveal that the Gestapo's Referat B1 monitored the activities of bishops very closely – instructing that agents be set up in every diocese, that the bishops' reports to the Vatican should be obtained and that the bishops' areas of activity must be found out.
Between 1934 and 1938, opponents of the Nazi regime and their fellow travelers began to emerge.
The Gestapo office in Saarbrücken had 50 full-term informers in 1939.
Three groups were acquitted of collective war crimes charges, but this did not relieve individual members of those groups from conviction and punishment under the denazification programme.
Its first commander was Rudolf Diels, a protégé of Göring.
While members of the Gestapo did not participate in the killing, they supplied the information which implicated the SA and ultimately enabled Himmler and Heydrich to emancipate themselves entirely from the organization.
Jews and Catholicism and homosexuality.
Employing biological metaphors, Best emphasized a doctrine which encouraged members of the Gestapo to view themselves as 'doctors' to the national body in the struggle against "pathogens" and "diseases"; among the implied sicknesses were "communists, Freemasons, and the churches—and above and behind all these stood the Jews."
Whether trained as police originally or not, Gestapo agents themselves were shaped by their socio-political environment.
As time went by, anonymous denunciations to the Gestapo caused trouble to various NSDAP officials, who often found themselves being investigated by the Gestapo.
The Gestapo always showed a special interest in denunciations concerning sexual matters, especially cases concerning ''Rassenschande'' with Jews or between Germans and foreigners, in particular Polish slave workers; the Gestapo applied even harsher methods to the foreign workers in the country, especially those from Poland.
Although the ''Sicherheitspolizei'' was officially disbanded, the term SiPo was figuratively used to describe any RSHA personnel throughout the remainder of the war.
The German opposition was in an unenviable position by the late spring and early summer of 1943.
Contrary to popular belief, the Gestapo was not the all-pervasive, omnipotent agency in German society.
After Heydrich's 1942 assassination, Himmler assumed the leadership of the RSHA, but in January 1943 Ernst Kaltenbrunner was appointed Chief of the RSHA.
The Gestapo—at times—was overwhelmed with denunciations and most of its time was spent sorting out the credible from the less credible denunciations.
Adolf Eichmann headed the Gestapo's Office of Resettlement and then its Office of Jewish Affairs (''Referat IV B4'' or Sub-Department IV, Section B4).
After Heydrich (who was staunchly anti-Catholic and anti-Christian) was assassinated in Prague, his successor, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, relaxed some of the policies and then disbanded Department IVB (religious opponents) of the Gestapo.
Over 2700 Catholic, Protestant and Orthodox clergy were imprisoned at Dachau alone.
Nearly all of them, including: the Römer Group, Robby Group, Solf Circle, ''Schwarze Reichswehr'', the Party of the Radical Middle Class, ''Jungdeutscher Orden'', ''Schwarze Front'' and ''Stahlhelm'' were either discovered or infiltrated by the Gestapo.
During World War II, the Gestapo was expanded to around 46,000 members.
Failing that, torture and planting evidence were common methods of resolving a case, especially if the case concerned someone Jewish.
As Evans makes clear, "...it was not the ordinary German people who engaged in surveillance, it was the Gestapo; nothing happened until the Gestapo received a denunciation, and it was the Gestapo's active pursuit of deviance and dissent that was the only thing that gave denunciations meaning."
The power of the Gestapo included the use of what was called, ''Schutzhaft''—"protective custody", a euphemism for the power to imprison people without judicial proceedings.
Diels was appointed with the title of chief of ''Abteilung Ia'' (Department 1a) of the Political Police of the Prussian Interior Ministry.
Unlike the rest of the SS, the right-side collar patch of the RSHA was plain black without insignia, as was the uniform cuffband.
Once persuaded, Hitler acted by setting Himmler's SS into action, who then proceeded to murder over 100 of Hitler's identified antagonists.
The Gestapo was specifically exempted from responsibility to administrative courts, where citizens normally could sue the state to conform to laws.
In Düsseldorf, the local Gestapo office of only 281 men were responsible for the entire Lower Rhine region, which comprised 4 million people.
SiPo members were encouraged to become members of the SS.
After 1939, when many Gestapo personnel were called up for war-related work such as service with the ''Einsatzgruppen'', the level of overwork and understaffing at the local offices increased.
Some pastors, like the Protestant clergyman Dietrich Bonhoeffer, paid for their opposition with their lives.
The Gestapo became ''Amt IV'' (Department IV) of RSHA and Müller became the Gestapo Chief, with Heydrich as his immediate superior.
Sometimes this ''Raute'' was piped in white; there is some debate over whether this may or may not have indicated Gestapo personnel.
Opposition became more difficult.
In January 1943, Himmler appointed Ernst Kaltenbrunner RSHA chief; almost seven months after Heydrich had been assassinated.
A similar coordination existed in the local offices.
Heinrich Müller was at that time the Gestapo operations chief.
Later, the British and Americans did not want to deal with anti-Nazis because they were fearful that the Soviet Union would believe they were attempting to make deals behind their back.
One man who served in the Prussian Gestapo in 1933 recalled that most of his co-workers "were by no means Nazis.
This admixture certainly shaped the Gestapo's public image which they sought to maintain in lieu of their increasing workload; an image which helped them identify and eliminate enemies of the Nazi state.
The idea was to fully combine the party agency, the SD, with the SiPo, the state agency.
In addition, thousands of political prisoners throughout Germany—and from 1941, throughout the occupied territories under the Night and Fog Decree—simply disappeared while in Gestapo custody.
