Coastal town with a quite harrowing fort Elmina Castle.
Five percent of the population practices traditional faiths, 71.2% adhere to Christianity and 17.6% are Muslim.
In 1957, it became the first sub-saharan African nation to declare independence from European colonisation.
Aburi Botanical Gardens location.
It had 29,754 students in 2008.
The Government of Ghana has drawn up plans to nationalise Ghana's entire mining industry to increase government revenues.
Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah and his government was subsequently overthrown by a GAF military operation codenamed "Operation Cold Chop" coup while Nkrumah was abroad with Zhou Enlai in the People's Republic of China for a fruitless mission to Hanoi in Vietnam to help end the Vietnam War on 24 February 1966 by GAF led by Col. Emmanuel K. Kotoka.
In recent times there has been some collaboration between Ghanaian and Nigerian crew and cast with a number of productions being turned out.
The Takoradi harbour and Tema harbour are operated by the state-owned Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority.
Ghana ranked as the 64th least corrupt and politically corrupt country in the world out of all 174 countries ranked and Ghana ranked as the 5th least corrupt and politically corrupt country in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 Transparency International Corruption Perception Index.
In 1617, the Dutch captured the Olnini Castle from the Portuguese, and Axim in 1642 (Fort St Anthony).
The flag of Ghana consists of three horizontal bands (strips) of red (top), gold (middle) and green (bottom); the three bands are the same height and width; the middle band bears a five-pointed black star in the centre of the gold band, the colour red band stands for the blood spilled to achieve the nation's independence: gold stands for Ghana's industrial mineral wealth, and the color green symbolises the rich tropical rainforests and natural resources of Ghana.
The real estate market investment perspective and attraction comes from Ghana's tropical location and robust political stability.
Underdeveloped institutions, porous open borders, and the existence of established smuggling organisations contribute to Ghana's position in the narcotics industry.
"Basic Education" lasts 11 years (ages 4‒15).
Ghana was ranked 7th in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 Ibrahim Index of African Governance.
The state-owned Volta River Authority and Ghana National Petroleum Corporation are the two major electricity producers.
These changes resulted in the suspension of the Constitution of Ghana in 1981, and the banning of political parties in Ghana.
Hope City is a technology park to be built and based in Ghana.
Tourism Landmarks, National Border, Region and Terrestrial plain of the 4th Republic of Ghana
China reciprocated with an official visit in November 2011, by the Vice-Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of China, Zhou Tienong who visited Ghana and met with Ghana's President John Dramani Mahama.
The most prominent Ghanaian authors are novelists; J. E. Casely Hayford, Ayi Kwei Armah and Nii Ayikwei Parkes, who gained international acclaim with the books, ''Ethiopia Unbound'' (1911), ''The Beautyful Ones Are Not Yet Born'' (1968) and ''Tail of the Blue Bird'' (2009), respectively.
Junior High School (JHS) ends with the Basic Education Certificate Examination (BECE).
The media of Ghana are amongst the most free in Africa.
Many European and American designers are now using African prints and it has gained a Global interest.
According to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index of 2013, out of 177 countries, Ghana ranked 63rd with Cuba and Saudi Arabia.
In his book ''Shake Hands with the Devil'', Canadian Forces commander Roméo Dallaire highly rated the GAF soldiers and military personnel.
The Museum of Science and Technology provides its visitors with a look into the domain of Ghanaian scientific development, through exhibits of objects of scientific and technological interest.
Local reports have claimed that Ghana loses US$4.5 billion every year (annually) from nominal gross domestic product (Nominal GDP) growth as a result of economic corruption and economic crime by the incumbent National Democratic Congress (NDC) government of Ghana led by John Dramani Mahama.
The Earth's 9th largest gold mine location; and Mining town.
As of the year 2014, there are 375,000 registered legal skilled workers (permanent residents) or foreign workers/students (i.e.
The oldest university in Ghana, the University of Ghana, was founded in 1948.
Ghana's labour force in 2008 totalled 11.5 million Ghanaian citizens.
The most well known is the Kente cloth.
Many top universities — including Harvard University, Cornell University, and Oxford University — have special study abroad programmes with Ghanaian schools and provide their students the opportunity to study abroad at Ghanaian universities.
The private press often carries criticism of government policy.
Each of the motifs that make up the corpus of adinkra symbolism has a name and meaning derived from a proverb, a historical event, human attitude, ethology, plant life-form, or shapes of inanimate and man-made objects.
In 1969, under the "Ghana Aliens Compliance Order" (GACO) enacted by the Prime Minister of Ghana Kofi Abrefa Busia; Government of Ghana with BGU (Border Guard Unit) deported over 3 million aliens and illegal immigrants in 3 months as they made up 20% of the inhabiting population at the time.
The Kingdom of Ashanti government operated first as a loose network, and eventually as a centralised kingdom with an advanced, highly specialised bureaucracy centred in the capital city of Kumasi.
In 2010, there were relatively more females (53.0%) than males (40.5%) with Primary school and JSS (Junior Secondary School) / JHS (Junior High School) as their highest level of education.
Ghana ranked 112th out of 177 countries on the index.
Ghana has a universal health care system strictly designated for Ghanaian nationals, National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS).
As part of the Free Compulsory Universal Basic Education, Fcube, the government supplies all basic education schools with all their textbooks and other educational supplies like exercise books.
the real estate direction.
The Ghanaian national literature radio programme and accompanying publication ''Voices of Ghana'' was one of the earliest on the African continent.
Its diverse geography and ecology ranges from coastal savannahs to tropical jungles.
Ghanaian Prime Minister and President Kwame Nkrumah aimed at rapidly expanding the GAF to support the United States of Africa ambitions.
Archaeological evidence suggests that humans have lived in present-day Ghana since the Bronze Age.
Tourism is the fourth highest earner of foreign exchange for the country.
Acting on that goal, in 2008 Ghana passed the ''Electronic Communications Act'' and the ''Electronic Transactions Act'', which established the legal framework for governing information technology.
Many Ghanaian diplomats and politicians hold positions in international organisations.
The Government of Ghana states that the official language of Ghana is English, and is spoken by 67.1% of the inhabiting population of Ghana.
Beginning in the 15th century, numerous European powers contested the area for trading rights, with the British ultimately establishing control of the coast by the late 19th century.
The government largely funds basic education comprising public primary schools and public junior high schools.
Health care is very variable throughout Ghana and in 2012, over 12 million Ghanaian nationals were covered by the National Health Insurance Scheme (Ghana) (NHIS).
In September 2010, Ghana's former President John Atta Mills visited China on an official visit.
The Mole-Dagombas came on horse-backs from present day Burkina Faso under a single leader, Naa Gbewaa.
In the words of Anthony Appiah, they were one of the means in a pre-literate society for "supporting the transmission of a complex and nuanced body of practice and belief".
Wa, Bolgatanga, Mole National Park
Ghana is classified as a middle income country.
The Ghana economy is an emerging digital-based mixed economy hybrid similarly to that of Taiwan with an increasing primary manufacturing and exportation of digital technology goods along with assembling and exporting automobiles and ships, diverse resource rich exportation of industrial minerals, agricultural products primarily cocoa, petroleum and natural gas, and industries such as information and communications technology primarily via Ghana's state digital technology corporation Rlg Communications which manufactures tablet computers with smart phones and various consumer electronics.
Ghana finished 47th out of 102 participating nations, of whom 54 finished in the Alpine skiing slalom.
It also has a secondary role as an educational resource for foreign students in health, biotechnology and related fields.
By the 19th century; the territory of the southern part of Ghana was included in the Kingdom of Ashanti, one of the most influential states in sub-saharan Africa prior to the onset of colonialism.
Until the 11th century, the majority of modern Ghana's territorial area was largely unoccupied and uninhabited by humans.
All teaching is done in English, mostly by qualified Ghanaian educators.
It was also one of the first countries in Africa to be connected to the internet and to introduce ADSL broadband services.
Although the area of present-day Ghana in West Africa has experienced many population movements, the Akans were firmly settled by the 5th century BC.
(Akans) had established Bonoman (Brong Ahafo region) and were joined by the current settlers and inhabitants in the 16th century.
The territory of present-day Ghana has been inhabited for millennia, with the first permanent state dating back to the 11th century.
Since Ghana's independence, the country has been one of the most educational in sub-Saharan Africa.
Ghana is also the birth country of anti-FGM campaigner Efua Dorkenoo.
As its next step in advancing space science and satellite technology in the sub-region, an amateur ground station has been designed and built by the university.
Some internationally recognised films have come from Ghana.
Ghana plans to become a major regional exporter of electrical power using oil from the Jubilee oil field.
Ghana competed in the Winter Olympics in 2010 for the first time, Ghana qualified for the 2010 Winter Olympics, scoring 137.5 International Ski Federation points, within the qualifying range of 120–140 points.
Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, as he became known, played an instrumental part in the founding of the Non-Aligned Movement, and in establishing the Kwame Nkrumah Ideological Institute to teach his ideologies of communism and socialism.
Other European traders had joined in gold trading by the mid-17th century, most notably the Swedish people, establishing the Swedish Gold Coast (Svenska Guldkusten), and Denmark-Norway, establishing the Danish Gold Coast (Danske Guldkyst ''or'' Dansk Guinea).
Accra, Apam, Cape Coast, Elmina, Kakum National Park, Kokrobite, Nzulezo, Sekondi-Takoradi, Ada Foah
Kwame Nkrumah, first Prime Minister of Ghana, and then President of Ghana, was the first African head of state to promote Pan-Africanism, an idea he came into contact with during his studies at Lincoln University, Pennsylvania in the United States, at the time when Marcus Garvey was becoming famous for his "Back to Africa Movement".
English is the language of the state and is widely used as a lingua franca.
The meanings of the motifs may be categorised into aesthetics, ethics, human relations, and concepts.
Ghana currently has a prototype nuclear power plant and is opened to nuclear investors for the development of high tech nuclear power plants for a West Africa Electric Power Pool project.
The Ghanaian education system from Kindergarten up to an undergraduate degree level takes 20 years.
Kwame Nkrumah-Acheampong broke on the international skiing circuit, being the second black African skier to do so.
The incumbent president is however seen to be fighting corruption by some government members, and a fellow politician of an opposition party, after ordering investigations into scandals.
Urban centres are well served, and contain most of the hospitals, clinics, and pharmacies in Ghana.
The high school students also choose 4 elective subjects from 5 available programmes: agriculture programme, general programme (arts or science option), business programme, vocational programme and technical programme.
Ghana is located on the Gulf of Guinea, only a few degrees north of the Equator, therefore giving it a warm climate.
In 2011, ''Forbes'' magazine, published that Ghana was ranked the eleventh most friendly country in the world.
The military operations and military doctrine of the GAF are conceptualised on the Constitution of Ghana, Ghana's Law on Armed Force Military Strategy, and Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre (KAIPTC) agreements to which GAF is attestator.
The Hope City project is expected to be completed in 2016 and is estimated to cost $US 10&nbsp;billion in construction; and one of its towers will become Africa's tallest building.
This excludes fellow Group of 24 member and Sub-Saharan African country South Africa, which is a newly industrialised country.
In 2010, the Ghana Immigration Service reported that there was a large number of economic migrants and Illegal immigrants inhabiting Ghana 14.6% (or 3.1 million) of Ghana's 2010 population (predominantly Nigerians, Burkinabe citizens, Togolese citizens, and Malian citizens).
There are over 200 hospitals in Ghana and Ghana is a destination for medical tourism.
In 2013, the Bank of Ghana began circulating the renminbi throughout Ghanaian state-owned banks and to the Ghana public as hard currency along with the national Ghana cedi for second national trade currency.
During the 13th century, Ghanaians developed their unique art of ''adinkra'' printing.
Cloths come in various colours, sizes and designs and are worn during very important social and religious occasions.
The University of Ghana has seen a shift of its traditionally best students to the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology.
The country has also produced quite a few quality boxers, including Azumah Nelson a three-time world champion and considered as Africa's greatest boxer, Nana Yaw Konadu also a three-time world champion, Ike Quartey, and Joshua Clottey.
Spanning a land mass of 238,535&nbsp;km, Ghana is bordered by the Ivory Coast in the west, Burkina Faso in the north, Togo in the east and the Gulf of Guinea and Atlantic Ocean in the south.
It has an economic plan target known as the "Ghana Vision 2020".
The Military Museum and the National Museum organise temporary exhibitions.
Of all the African countries that were included in the survey, Ghana ranked highest.
The northernmost part of Ghana is Pulmakong and the southernmost part of Ghana is Cape Three Points.
5.2% of Ghana's GDP was spent on health in 2010, and all Ghanaian citizens have the right to access primary health care.
Ghana's spending on education has varied between 28–40% of its annual budget in the past decade.
Seat of Government and Capital City.
The country had moved two places up from the 2009 rankings.
Kwame Nkrumah is the first Prime Minister of Ghana and President of Ghana and formed the Convention People's Party (CPP) with the motto "self-government now".
A series of alternating military and civilian governments from 1966 to 1981 ended with the ascension to power of Flight Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings of the Provisional National Defense Council (PNDC) in 1981.
The original Akan name of the cloth was ''nsaduaso'' or ''nwontoma'', meaning "a cloth hand-woven on a loom"; however, "kente" is the most frequently used term today.
Largest settlement in the Kingdom of Dagbon and gateway to Mole National Park.
Majority of secondary, and some basic schools of Ghana have computer laboratories.
With over 95% of its children in school, Ghana currently has one of the highest school enrollment rates in all of Africa.
With their advanced weapons and the presence of a central authority they easily invaded and occupied the lands of the local people ruled by the ''Tendamba'' (land god priests), established themselves as rulers over them and made Gambaga their capital.
Chapter 12 of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana guarantees freedom of the press and independence of the media, while Chapter 2 prohibits censorship.
File:Map of diplomatic missions of Ghana (3).PNG|Diplomatic missions of Ghana.
The courses taught at the primary or basic school level include English, Ghanaian language and culture, mathematics, environmental studies, social studies, Mandarin and French as an OIF associated-member; as further languages are added, integrated or general science, pre-vocational skills and pre-technical skills, religious and moral education, and physical activities such as Ghanaian music and dance, and physical education.
Ghana retains and exercises the death penalty for treason, corruption, robbery, piracy, drug trafficking, rape, and homicide.
Portuguese merchants, impressed with the gold resources in the area, named it ''Costa do Ouro'' or ''Gold Coast''.
Senior high schools are also provided with all their textbook requirement by the government.
At the higher education level, the government funds more than 80% of resources provided to public universities, polytechnics and teacher training colleges.
Hope City is being undertaken by Ghanaian information and communications technology company Rlg Communications.
The Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE) was the 2nd best performing stock exchange in sub-saharan Africa in 2013.
Today outside of Africa it is being called "''Ankara''" and it has a client base well beyond Ghana and Africa as a whole.
Ghanaian postmodern architecture and high-tech architecture buildings are predominant in the Ghanaian southern regions, while the Ghanaian heritage sites are most evident by the more than thirty forts and castles built in Ghana.
The miniaturized earth observational satellite is to be launched into orbit in 2017.
Ghana Card holders) inhabitants with an annually 1.5 million transited airport layovers.
Known for its industrial minerals, Ghana is the world's 7th largest producer of gold; producing over 102 metric tons of gold and the 10th largest producer of gold in the world in 2012; producing 89 metric tons of gold and Ghana is the designated 2nd largest producer of gold on the Africa continent behind the designated first South Africa.
In 2015, Ghana ranks as the 54th–most peaceful country in the world.
Ghana encompasses plains, waterfalls, low hills, rivers, Lake Volta, the world's largest artificial lake, Dodi Island and Bobowasi Island on the south Atlantic Ocean coast of Ghana.
The earliest known kingdoms to emerge in modern Ghana were the Mole-Dagbani states.
Shortages of electricity have led to dumsor, increasing the interest in renewables.
In 1957, the Ghana Armed Forces (GAF) consisted of its headquarters, support services, three battalions of infantry and a reconnaissance squadron with armoured vehicles.
File:Obama family departure from Ghana.jpg|Barack Obama and Michelle Obama, along with Malia Obama and Sasha Obama, participate in State Arrival Ceremony at Kotoka International Airport.
The Portuguese built a trading lodge at a coastal settlement called Anomansah (the perpetual drink) which they renamed ''Elmina''.
It is an emerging designated digital economy with mixed economy hybridisation and an emerging market with 8.7% GDP growth in 2012.
The Ghanaian education system from nursery school up to an undergraduate degree level takes 20 years.
27 convicts (all men) were sentenced to death in Ghana in 2012 and the Ghana Prisons Service statistics of the total number of convicts sentenced to death in Ghana as at December 2012 was 162 men and 4 women, with a total prison inmate population of 13,983 convicts as at 22 July 2013.
The use of computer technology for teaching and learning began to receive government of Ghana's attention from the late 1990s.
The Government of Ghana is elected by universal suffrage after every four years.
Once the BECE achieved, the pupil can pursue into secondary cycle.
Ghana's territorial area within West Africa was unoccupied and uninhabited by humans until the 10th century BC.
In addition, the Government of Ghana has sought to build the second nuclear power plant in Africa.
His life achievements were recognised by Ghanaians during his centenary birthday celebration, and the day was instituted as a public holiday in Ghana (Founder's Day).
Mills and China's former President Hu Jintao, marked the 50th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the two nations, at the Great Hall of the People on 20 September 2010.
The Guans were the first settlers in Ghana long before the other tribes came.
It is also said Ghana has lost an additional US$2.5 billion from nominal gross domestic product (Nominal GDP) growth between the months of January 2013 to October 2013 through economic corrupt practices under the Mahama administration.
Ghana also produces high quality cocoa, is the 2nd largest producer of cocoa globally, and is projected to become the largest producer of cocoa in the world in 2015.
Drug cartels are using new methods in narcotics production and narcotics exportation, to avoid Ghanaian security agencies.
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, the second university to be established in the country, is the premier university of science and technology in Ghana and West Africa.
These dances include the Adowa, Kpanlogo, Azonto, Klama, and Bamaya.
There are several club football teams in Ghana that play in the Ghana Premier League and Division One League, both administered by the Ghana Football Association.
Ghana is a largely Christian country, although a sizable Muslim minority exists.
This plan envisions Ghana as the first African country to become a developed country between 2020 and 2029 and a newly industrialised country between 2030 and 2039.
The Gulf of Guinea coastal plain with the seat of government and capital city, several castles and forts and the best preserved rainforest in Ghana
Ghana's intention of becoming the information technology hub of West Africa has led the government of Ghana to enact cyber crime legislation and enhance cyber security practices.
The climate of Ghana is tropical and there are two main seasons: the wet season and the dry season.
Nadia Buari, Yvonne Nelson, Lydia Forson and Jackie Appiah all popular Ghanaian actresses and Van Vicker and Majid Michel both popular Ghanaian actors, have starred in many Nigerian movies.
Recent developments in the Ghanaian economy has given birth to a boom in the construction sector, including the housing and public housing sector generating and injecting billions of dollars annually into the Ghanaian economy.
The Ghana atomic agency currently holds no intent for the production of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
Approximately 17.6% of the inhabiting population of Ghana were Muslims, (51% Sunni, 16% Ahmadiyya, and 8% Shia).
Early European contact by the Portuguese people, who came to the Gold Coast region in the 15th century to trade then established the Portuguese Gold Coast (Costa do Ouro), focused on the extensive availability of gold.
The first practical step in its endeavor was a CanSat launched on 15 May 2013, a space programme spearheaded by the All Nations University College (ANUC) in Koforidua.
By 1598, the Dutch people had joined the Portuguese people in gold trading, establishing the Dutch Gold Coast (Nederlandse Bezittingen ter Kuste van Guinea) and building forts at Komenda and Kormantsi.
In July 2013, International Enterprise Singapore opened its 38th global office in Accra, Ghana to develop trade and investment on logistics, oil and gas, aviation, transportation and consumer sectors.
Following alternating military and civilian governments in January 1993, the Ghana military government gave way to the Fourth Republic of Ghana after presidential elections and parliamentary elections in late 1992.
Ghanaian music incorporates several distinct types of musical instruments such as the talking drum ensembles, Akan Drum, goje fiddle and koloko lute, court music, including the Akan Seperewa, the Akan atumpan, the Ga kpanlogo styles, and log xylophones used in asonko music.
Association soccer (or Football) is the most spectated sport in Ghana and the national men's football team is known as the Black Stars, with the under-20 team known as the Black Satellites.
This includes both herbal medicine and work on more advanced applications.
It has successfully tracked and communicated with several amateur radio satellites in orbit including the International Space Station, receiving slow-scan TV images on 18 and 20 December 2014.
Ghana also possesses numerous colleges of education.
and its earliest form of secular music is called highlife.
Ghana is geographically closer to the "centre" of the Earth than any other country in the World; even though the notional centre, (0°, 0°) is located in the Atlantic Ocean approximately  off the south-east coast of Ghana on the Gulf of Guinea.
The Islamic Republic of Iran and the 6th President of Iran, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad met with the 12th President of Ghana, John Dramani Mahama on 16 April 2013 to hold discussions with President John Dramani Mahama on strengthening the Non-Aligned Movement and also co–chair a bilateral meeting between the two countries Ghana and Iran at the Ghanaian presidential palace Flagstaff House.
Ghana has a free education 6-year primary school education system beginning at age six, and, under the educational reforms implemented in 1987 and reformed in 2007, they pass on to a 3-year junior high school system.
The music of Ghana is diverse and varies between different ethnic groups and regions.
Internationally acclaimed Ghanaian-British designer Ozwald Boateng introduced African print suits in his 2012 collection.
Also, Nigerian filmmakers usually feature Ghanaian actors and actresses in their movies and Ghanaian filmmakers feature Nigerian actors and actresses in theirs.
There was an estimation of 15 physicians and 93 nurses per 100,000 persons in 2010.
Ghana is a democratic country led by a president who is both head of state and head of the government.
Savanna plains and north Ghana trade route and border crossing
The Gold Coast region declared independence from the United Kingdom on 6 March 1957 and established the nation of Ghana.
Ghanaian Education system is divided in three parts: "Basic Education", secondary cycle and tertiary education.
The Ministry of Education (MOE) supports institutions in teaching of information and communications technology literacy.
The WASSCE is needed to join a university bachelor's degree programme.
The academic year usually goes from August to May inclusive.
Highlife originated in the late 19th century and early 20th century and spread throughout West Africa.
The economy of Ghana also has ties to the Chinese yuan renminbi along with Ghana's vast gold reserves.
The death of Naa Gbewaa caused civil war among his children, some of whom broke off and founded separate states including Dagbon, Mamprugu, Mossi, Nanumba and Wala.
At the end of the third year of junior high, there is a mandatory "Basic Education Certificate Examination".
Nonetheless others believe his actions aren't satisfactory in some cases.
Ghana has museums that are situated inside castles, and two are situated inside a fort.
In 2009, Unesco described Nollywood as being the second-biggest film industry in the world after Bollywood.
Services account for 50% of GDP, followed by manufacturing (24.1%), extractive industries (5%), and taxes (20.9%).
The real estate and housing market of Ghana has become an important and strategic economic sector, particularly in the urban centres of south Ghana such as Accra, Kumasi, Sekondi-Takoradi and Tema.
From the 13th century, Akans emerged from what is believed to have been the Bonoman area, to create several Akan states of Ghana, mainly based on gold trading.
Many Ghanaian films are co-produced with Nollywood, the Nigerian film industry and some are distributed by Nigerian marketers.
In November 2011, the Deputy Minister for Communications and Technology announced the development of a national cyber security strategy, aimed at combating cyber crime and securing critical infrastructure.
