Some ghosts are actually said to be demons in disguise, who the Church teaches, in accordance with I Timothy 4:1, that they "come to deceive people and draw them away from God and into bondage."
In a study of two experiments into alleged hauntings (Wiseman ''et al''.
They are often associated with an individual family line or regarded as a harbinger of death similar to a banshee.
The ghost's loud and frightful groans caused the people of the town to seal up the doors of the building.
Often they were described as paler and sadder versions of the person they had been while alive, and dressed in tattered gray rags.
Carbon monoxide poisoning, which can cause changes in perception of the visual and auditory systems, was speculated upon as a possible explanation for haunted houses as early as 1921.
The Egyptian Book of the Dead compiles some of the beliefs from different periods of ancient Egyptian history.
It is also believed that if someone calls one from behind, never turn back and see because the spirit may catch the human to make it a spirit.
The Swiss Reformed pastor Ludwig Lavater supplied one of the most frequently reprinted books of the period with his ''Of Ghosts and Spirits Walking By Night.''
Later beliefs were influenced by Buddhism, and in turn influenced and created uniquely Chinese Buddhist beliefs.
It could also denote any good or evil spirit, i.e.
While deceased ancestors are universally regarded as venerable, and often believed to have a continued presence in some form of afterlife, the spirit of a deceased person which remains present in the material world (viz.
Certain religious practices—funeral rites, exorcisms, and some practices of spiritualism and ritual magic—are specifically designed to rest the spirits of the dead.
Relatives of the dead were expected to make offerings of food and drink to the dead to ease their conditions.
This word has an alternative meaning: 'past' in Bengali.
Belief in ghosts in European folklore is characterized by the recurring fear of "returning" or ''revenant'' deceased who may harm the living.
In fact, in many stories they are first mistaken for the living.
This reflects a popular British belief that the dead haunted their lovers if they took up with a new love without some formal release.
Joe Nickell of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry wrote that there was no credible scientific evidence that any location was inhabited by spirits of the dead.
2003) came to the conclusion "that people consistently report unusual experiences in ‘haunted' areas because of environmental factors, which may differ across locations."
In modern times, the fanciful concept of a mummy coming back to life and wreaking vengeance when disturbed has spawned a whole genre of horror stories and films.
Pliny describes the haunting of a house in Athens of the Stoic philosopher Athenodorus, who lived about 100 years before Pliny.
In English Renaissance theater, ghosts were often depicted in the garb of the living and even in armor, as with the ghost of Hamlet's father.
Ghosts may also be exorcised, and an annual festival is held throughout Tibet for this purpose.
Medieval European ghosts were more substantial than ghosts described in the Victorian age, and there are accounts of ghosts being wrestled with and physically restrained until a priest could arrive to hear its confession.
On this day, ghosts and spirits, including those of the deceased ancestors, come out from the lower realm.
The dead were to be ritually mourned through public ceremony, sacrifice, and libations, or else they might return to haunt their families.
One of the key early appearances by ghosts was ''The Castle of Otranto'' by Horace Walpole in 1764, considered to be the first gothic novel.
By the 5th century BC, classical Greek ghosts had become haunting, frightening creatures who could work to either good or evil purposes.
This could be a violent death, unsettled matters in their lives, or simply the failure of their survivors to perform proper funerals.
The appearance of a ghost has often been regarded as an omen or portent of death.
Furthermore, they teach that in accordance with (Genesis 2:7, Ecclesiastes 12:7), there are only two components to a "soul", neither of which survives death - with each returning to its respective source.
Ghosts appeared in Homer's ''Odyssey'' and ''Iliad'', in which they were described as vanishing "as a vapor, gibbering and whining into the earth".
Spiritism, or French spiritualism, is based on the five books of the Spiritist Codification written by French educator Hypolite Léon Denizard Rivail under the pseudonym Allan Kardec reporting séances in which he observed a series of phenomena that he attributed to incorporeal intelligence (spirits).
It is believed that the spirits of those who cannot find peace in the afterlife or die unnatural deaths remain on Earth.
Similarly, Jesus' followers at first believe him to be a ghost (spirit) when they see him walking on water.
Ghosts are explicitly recognized in the Tibetan Buddhist religion as they were in Indian Buddhism, occupying a distinct but overlapping world to the human one, and feature in many traditional legends.
In many Polynesian legends, ghosts were often actively involved in the affairs of the living.
Belief in the soul and an afterlife remained near universal until the emergence of atheism in the 18th century.
While ghost stories are often explicitly meant to be scary, they have been written to serve all sorts of purposes, from comedy to morality tales.
Periodically they were called upon to provide advice or prophecy, but they do not appear to be particularly feared.
Lucian relates how he persisted in his disbelief despite practical jokes perpetrated by "some young men of Abdera" who dressed up in black robes with skull masks to frighten him.
This theme has been used in literature in ''The Rime of the Ancient Mariner'' by Coleridge.
In Scandinavian and Finnish tradition, ghosts appear in corporeal form, and their supernatural nature is given away by behavior rather than appearance.
Magical banishment of the dead is present in many of the world's burial customs.
Ritual feeding of the dead is performed in traditions like the Chinese Ghost Festival or the Western All Souls' Day.
In Buddhism, there are a number of planes of existence into which a person can be reborn, one of which is the realm of hungry ghosts.
In many folktales from around the world, the hero arranges for the burial of a dead man.
He followed the ghost outside where it indicated a spot on the ground.
The ghosts take many forms, depending on how the person died, and are often harmful.
Their penance was generally related to their sin.
According to Nickell, peripheral vision can easily mislead, especially late at night when the brain is tired and more likely to misinterpret sights and sounds.
In Central and Northern India, ''Aojha'' spirit guides play a central role.
The word has no commonly accepted etymology; the ''OED'' notes "of obscure origin" only.
The religion flourished for a half century without canonical texts or formal organization, attaining cohesion by periodicals, tours by trance lecturers, camp meetings, and the missionary activities of accomplished mediums.
As a result, attempts to contact the dead may lead to unwanted contact with a demon or an unclean spirit, as was said to occur in the case of Robbie Mannheim, a fourteen-year-old Maryland youth.
The souls of the dead returned for a specific purpose.
There were some reported cases of ghostly armies, fighting battles at night in the forest, or in the remains of an Iron Age hillfort, as at Wandlebury, near Cambridge, England.
Limitations of human perception and ordinary physical explanations can account for ghost sightings; for example, air pressure changes in a home causing doors to slam, or lights from a passing car reflected through a window at night.
The idea of ghosts can also be considered a tradition for certain cultures.
When Athenodorus later excavated the area, a shackled skeleton was unearthed.
His assumption of spirit communication was validated by many contemporaries, among them many scientists and philosophers who attended séances and studied the phenomena.
Many Chinese today believe it possible to contact the spirits of their ancestors through a medium, and that ancestors can help descendants if properly respected and rewarded.
Plutarch, in the 1st century AD, described the haunting of the baths at Chaeronea by the ghost of a murdered man.
"The Unquiet Grave" expresses a belief even more widespread, found in various locations over Europe: ghosts can stem from the excessive grief of the living, whose mourning interferes with the dead's peaceful rest.
Renaissance magic took a revived interest in the occult, including necromancy.
In his tale "The Doubter" (circa 150 AD), he relates how Democritus "the learned man from Abdera in Thrace" lived in a tomb outside the city gates to prove that cemeteries were not haunted by the spirits of the departed.
Traditional healing practices ascribed a variety of illnesses to the action of ghosts, while others were caused by gods or demons.
Another celebrated account of a haunted house from the ancient classical world is given by Pliny the Younger (c. 50 AD).
The belief in the existence of an afterlife, as well as manifestations of the spirits of the dead is widespread, dating back to animism or ancestor worship in pre-literate cultures.
Asian cinema has also produced horror films about ghosts, such as the 1998 Japanese film ''Ringu'' (remade in the US as ''The Ring'' in 2002), and the Pang brothers' 2002 film ''The Eye''.
Most of the Christian Church  considers ghosts as beings who while tied to earth, no longer live on the material plane.
The living could tell them apart by demanding their purpose in the name of Jesus Christ.
Like their Chinese and Western counterparts, they are thought to be spirits kept from a peaceful afterlife.
His work was later extended by writers like Leon Denis, Arthur Conan Doyle, Camille Flammarion, Ernesto Bozzano, Chico Xavier, Divaldo Pereira Franco, Waldo Vieira, Johannes Greber, and others.
Many of these beliefs were recorded in inscriptions, papyrus scrolls and tomb paintings.
Richard Lord and Richard Wiseman have concluded that infrasound can cause humans to experience bizarre feelings in a room, such as anxiety, extreme sorrow, a feeling of being watched, or even the chills.
Classic ghost stories were influenced by the gothic fiction tradition, and contain elements of folklore and psychology.
A place where ghosts are reported is described as haunted, and often seen as being inhabited by spirits of deceased who may have been former residents or were familiar with the property.
Umm Nyolokh often contains DMT and other psychoactive substances from plants the giraffes eat such as Acacia, and is known to cause hallucinations of giraffes, believed to be the giraffes ghosts by the Humr.
Interpretations of how ''bhoot''s come into existence vary by region and community, but they are usually considered to be perturbed and restless due to some factor that prevents them from moving on (to transmigration, non-being, nirvana, or heaven or hell, depending on tradition).
This is universally the case in pre-modern folk cultures, but fear of ghosts also remains an integral aspect of the modern ghost story, Gothic horror, and other horror fiction dealing with the supernatural.
The vast majority of reported sightings were male.
The spirit of the dead was believed to hover near the resting place of the corpse, and cemeteries were places the living avoided.
A ghost is a term used to describe the artificial intelligence of a machine in the anime title Ghost in the Shell and likewise in the episode Ghost in the Machine (The X-Files).
An association with the verb ''writhe'' was the etymology favored by J. R. R. Tolkien.
Many cultures and religions believe the essence of a being, such as the 'soul', continues to exist.
Some Christian denominations teach that ghosts are beings who linger in an interim state before continuing their journey to heaven.
Bogey or ''bogy/bogie'' is a term for a ghost, and appears in Scottish poet John Mayne's ''Hallowe'en'' in 1780.
The Child Ballad "Sweet William's Ghost" (1868) recounts the story of a ghost returning to his fiancée begging her to free him from his promise to marry her.
In Bengal, ghosts are believed to be the spirit after death of an unsatisfied human being or a soul of a person who dies in unnatural or abnormal circumstances (like murder, suicide or accident).
Also related is the concept of a fetch, the visible ghost or spirit of a person yet alive.
Ghosts often appear in the narrative as sentinels or prophets of things to come.
Many Chinese ghost beliefs have been accepted by neighboring cultures, notably Japan and southeast Asia.
In the 19th century, spiritism resurrected "belief in ghosts" as the object of systematic inquiry, and popular opinion in Western culture remains divided.
The Germanic word is recorded as masculine only, but likely continues a neuter ''s''-stem.
The synonym ''spook'' is a Dutch loanword, akin to Low German ''spôk'' (of uncertain etymology); it entered the English language via the United States in the 19th century.
The Seventh-Day Adventist view is that a "soul" is not equivalent to "spirit" or "ghost" (depending on the Bible version), and that save for the Holy Spirit, all spirits or ghosts are demons in disguise.
From the medieval period an apparition of a ghost is recorded from 1211, at the time of the Albigensian Crusade.
Tolkien's use of the word in the naming of the creatures known as the Ringwraiths has influenced later usage in fantasy literature.
The common word for ghosts in Bengali is ''bhoot'' or ''bhut'' (Bengali:ভূত).
Another widespread belief concerning ghosts is that they are composed of a misty, airy, or subtle material.
In pre-literate folk religions, these beliefs are often summarized under animism and ancestor worship.
Spiritualism is currently practiced primarily through various denominational Spiritualist Churches in the United States and United Kingdom.
Ghosts are prominent in the popular cultures of various nations.
Nineteenth-century anthropologist James Frazer stated in his classic work, ''The Golden Bough'', that souls were seen as the creature within that animated the body.
The term ''shade'' in classical mythology translates Greek σκιά, or Latin ''umbra'', in reference to the notion of spirits in the Greek underworld.
In 18th- to 19th-century Scottish literature, it was also applied to aquatic spirits.
The time of the Albigensian Crusade in southern France was marked by intense and prolonged warfare, this constant bloodshed and dislocation of populations being the context for these reported visits by the murdered boy.
Ghosts are generally described as solitary, human-like essences that haunt particular locations, objects, or people they were associated with in life, though stories of ghostly armies and the ghosts of animals rather than humans have also been recounted.
Ancestor worship typically involves rites intended to prevent revenants, vengeful spirits of the dead, imagined as starving and envious of the living.
Christadelphians reject the view of a living, conscious soul after death.
Ghosts may be killed with a ritual dagger or caught in a spirit trap and burnt, thus releasing them to be reborn.
A ''bhoot'' or ''bhut'' (भूत, ભૂત, or بهوت) is a supernatural creature, usually the ghost of a deceased person, in the popular culture, literature and some ancient texts of the Indian subcontinent.
The modern state of Mexico before the Spanish conquest was inhabited by diverse peoples such as the Maya and Aztec, and their beliefs have survived and evolved, combined with the beliefs of the Spanish colonists.
Examples of films from this period include 1999's ''The Sixth Sense'' and ''The Others''.
It is also represented in children's television by such programs as ''The Ghost Hunter'' and ''Ghost Trackers''.
Spiritism has adherents in many countries throughout the world, including Spain, United States, Canada, Japan, Germany, France, England, Argentina, Portugal, and especially Brazil, which has the largest proportion and greatest number of followers.
But the sheeted ghost began to gain ground on stage in the 19th century because an armored ghost could not satisfactorily convey the requisite spookiness: it clanked and creaked, and had to be moved about by complicated pulley systems or elevators.
The Hebrew Torah and the Bible contain a few references to ghosts, associating spiritism with forbidden occult activities.
In the horror genre, 1980's ''The Fog'', and the ''A Nightmare on Elm Street'' series of films from the 1980s and 1990s are notable examples of the trend for the merging of ghost stories with scenes of physical violence.
A common theme in the romantic genre from this period is the ghost as a benign guide or messenger, often with unfinished business, such as 1989's ''Field of Dreams'', the 1990 film ''Ghost'', and the 1993 comedy ''Heart and Souls''.
In many traditional accounts, ghosts were often thought to be deceased people looking for vengeance (vengeful ghosts), or imprisoned on earth for bad things they did during life.
A ''revenant'' is a deceased person returning from the dead to haunt the living, either as a disembodied ghost or alternatively as an animated ("undead") corpse.
Famous literary apparitions from this period are the ghosts of ''A Christmas Carol'', in which Ebenezer Scrooge is helped to see the error of his ways by the ghost of his former colleague Jacob Marley, and the ghosts of Christmas Past, Christmas Present, and Christmas Yet to Come.
Some Indian ghost movies such as the comedy / horror film ''Chandramukhi'' have been commercial successes, dubbed into several languages.
Supernatural activity inside homes is said to be mainly associated with violent or tragic events in the building's past such as murder, accidental death, or suicide — sometimes in the recent or ancient past.
If they did not, the ghosts could inflict misfortune and illness on the living.
In fictional television programming, ghosts have been explored in series such as ''Supernatural'', ''Ghost Whisperer'', and ''Medium''.
Some were less solid, and could move through walls.
Therefore, most of the contemporary iconography of ghosts such as Nang Tani, Nang Takian, Krasue, Krahang, Phi Hua Kat, Phi Pop, Phi Phong, Phi Phraya, and Mae Nak has its origins in Thai films that have now become classics.
Ghosts are described in classical Chinese texts as well as modern literature and films.
Other dead souls returned to urge the living to confess their sins before their own deaths.
These ghosts appeared to the living to ask for prayers to end their suffering.
The annual ghost festival is celebrated by Chinese around the world.
The original meaning of the Germanic word would thus have been an animating principle of the mind, in particular capable of excitation and fury (compare ''óðr'').
There is extensive and varied belief in ghosts in Mexican culture.
The haunting ceased when this was given a proper reburial.
Similarly, Jesus' followers at first believe him to be a ghost (spirit) when they see him walking on water.
When a human dies, after a period of uncertainty they may enter the ghost world.
A hungry ghost (Tibetan: ''yidag'', ''yi-dvags''; Sanskrit: ''preta'', प्रेत) has a tiny throat and huge stomach, and so can never be satisfied.
The most feared spirit in Thailand is Phi Tai Hong, the ghost of a person who has died suddenly of a violent death.
Muslims believe that ghosts are in fact jinn.
The bodies found in many tumuli (kurgan) had been ritually bound before burial, and the custom of binding the dead persists, for example, in rural Anatolia.
Armor, being out-of-date by the time of the Renaissance, gave the stage ghost a sense of antiquity.
On occasion, God would allow the souls in this state to return to earth to warn the living of the need for repentance.
The most notable reference is in the First Book of Samuel, in which a disguised King Saul has the Witch of Endor summon the spirit or ghost of Samuel.
It duly happens when in the night someone sleeps and decorates something on the wall, and they say that if one sees the spirit the next thing in the morning he will become a spirit too, and that to a skondho kata which means a spirit without a head and the soul of the body will remain the dark with the dark lord from the spirits who reside in the body of every human in Central and Northern India.
angels and demons; the Anglo-Saxon gospel refers to the demonic possession of Matthew 12:43 as ''se unclæna gast''.
Belief in ghosts is found in all cultures around the world, and thus ghost stories may be passed down orally or in written form.
Also from the Old English period, the word could denote the spirit of God, viz.
Besides denoting the human spirit or soul, both of the living and the deceased, the Old English word is used as a synonym of Latin ''spiritus'' also in the meaning of "breath" or "blast" from the earliest attestations (9th century).
The most notable reference is in the First Book of Samuel (I Samuel 28:3–19 KJV), in which a disguised King Saul has the Witch of Endor summon the spirit or ghost of Samuel.
The ghost hunting theme has been featured in reality television series, such as ''Ghost Adventures'', ''Ghost Hunters'', ''Ghost Hunters International'', ''Ghost Lab'', ''Most Haunted'', and ''A Haunting''.
Alternative names include 亡霊 (Bōrei) meaning ruined or departed spirit, 死霊 (Shiryō) meaning dead spirit, or the more encompassing 妖怪 (Yōkai) or お化け (Obake).
White Lady legends are found around the world.
Indian ghost movies are popular not just in India, but in the Middle East, Africa, South East Asia, and other parts of the world.
The term ''poltergeist'' is a German word, literally a "noisy ghost", for a spirit said to manifest itself by invisibly moving and influencing objects.
A recent article in the China Post stated that nearly eighty-seven percent of Chinese office workers believe in ghosts, and some fifty-two percent of workers will wear hand art, necklaces, crosses, or even place a crystal ball on their desks to keep ghosts at bay, according to the poll.
Although the human soul was sometimes symbolically or literally depicted in ancient cultures as a bird or other animal, it appears to have been widely held that the soul was an exact reproduction of the body in every feature, even down to clothing the person wore.
Alternative words in modern usage include ''spectre'' (from Latin ''spectrum''), the Scottish ''wraith'' (of obscure origin), ''phantom'' (via French ultimately from Greek ''phantasma'', compare ''fantasy'') and ''apparition''.
In the New Testament, Jesus has to persuade the Disciples that he is not a ghost following the resurrection, Luke 24:37–39 (some versions of the Bible, such as the KJV and NKJV, use the term "spirit").
Ghost beliefs are closely associated with traditional Chinese religion based on ancestor worship, many of which were incorporated in Taoism.
But not all hauntings are at a place of a violent death, or even on violent grounds.
These clanking ghosts being hoisted about the stage became objects of ridicule as they became clichéd stage elements.
'''Bengal and East India'''
Genuine psychological horror films from this period include 1944's ''The Uninvited'', and 1945's ''Dead of Night''.
In the New Testament, Jesus has to persuade the Disciples that he is not a ghost following the resurrection, Luke 24:37–39 (some versions of the Bible, such as the KJV and NKJV, use the term "spirit").
In many cultures malignant, restless ghosts are distinguished from the more benign spirits involved in ancestor worship.
In the Bible, God is depicted as synthesising Adam, as a living soul, from the dust of the Earth and the breath of God.
The deliberate attempt to contact the spirit of a deceased person is known as necromancy, or in spiritism as a ''séance''.
are figures in Japanese folklore, analogous to Western legends of ghosts.
Sentimental depictions during this period were more popular in cinema than horror, and include the 1947 film ''The Ghost and Mrs. Muir'', which was later adapted to television with a successful 1968–70 TV series.
The now-prevailing sense of "the soul of a deceased person, spoken of as appearing in a visible form" only emerges in Middle English (14th century).
Many believe in the spirit world and often try to stay in contact with their loved ones.
Phraya Anuman Rajadhon was the first Thai scholar who seriously studied Thai folk beliefs and took notes on the nocturnal village spirits of Thailand.
In folklore and mythology, a '''ghost''' (sometimes known as a '''spectre''' British English, '''specter''' American English, '''phantom''', '''apparition''', '''spirit''', '''spook''', or '''haunt''') is the soul or spirit of a dead person or animal that can appear to the living.
Soon after, he gains a companion who aids him and, in the end, the hero's companion reveals that he is in fact the dead man.
Mexican literature and films include many stories of ghosts interacting with the living.
Ann Jones and Peter Stallybrass, in ''Renaissance Clothing and the Materials of Memory'', point out, "In fact, it is as laughter increasingly threatens the Ghost that he starts to be staged not in armor but in some form of 'spirit drapery'."
Ghosts reported in medieval Europe tended to fall into two categories: the souls of the dead, or demons.
Some researchers, such as Michael Persinger of Laurentian University, Canada, have speculated that changes in geomagnetic fields (created, e.g., by tectonic stresses in the Earth's crust or solar activity) could stimulate the brain's temporal lobes and produce many of the experiences associated with hauntings.
Legends of ghost ships have existed since the 18th century; most notable of these is the ''Flying Dutchman''.
Some of these factors included "the variance of local magnetic fields, size of location and lighting level stimuli of which witnesses may not be consciously aware".
The ghost story is ubiquitous across all cultures from oral folktales to works of literature.
Also the word ''Pret'' (Sanskrit) is used in Bengali to mean ghost.
This account by Lucian notes something about the popular classical expectation of how a ghost should look.
This series of "visits" lasted all of the summer.
It came to be used in Scottish Romanticist literature, and acquired the more general or figurative sense of "portent" or "omen".
In animated fictional television programming, ghosts have served as the central element in series such as ''Casper the Friendly Ghost'', ''Danny Phantom'', and ''Scooby-Doo''.
Gervase of Tilbury, Marshal of Arles, wrote that the image of Guilhem, a boy recently murdered in the forest, appeared in his cousin's home in Beaucaire, near Avignon.
The 1990s saw a return to classic "gothic" ghosts, whose dangers were more psychological than physical.
Haunted houses are featured in the 9th-century ''Arabian Nights'' (such as the tale of ''Ali the Cairene and the Haunted House in Baghdad'').
Jews and Christians are taught that it is sinful to attempt to conjure or control spirits in accordance with Deuteronomy XVIII: 9–12.
There are many kinds of ghosts and similar supernatural entities that frequently come up in Bengali culture, its folklores and form an important part in Bengali peoples' socio-cultural beliefs and superstitions.
A 2005 Gallup poll found that about 32 percent of Americans believe in ghosts.
They may be mute, appear and disappear suddenly, or leave no footprints or other traces.
There is widespread belief in ghosts in Tibetan culture.
According to the Gallup Poll News Service, belief in haunted houses, ghosts, communication with the dead, and witches had an especially steep increase over the 1990s.
In Germanic paganism, "Germanic Mercury", and the later Odin, was at the same time the conductor of the dead and the "lord of fury" leading the Wild Hunt.
