Due to their sheer size, pandas do not need to fear predators like other herbivores.
Similarly, the giant panda's round face is the result of powerful jaw muscles, which attach from the top of the head to the jaw.
Furthermore, in response to this reclassification, the State Forestry Administration of China announced that they would not accordingly lower the conservation level for panda, and would instead reinforce the conservation efforts.
The interval between births in the wild is generally two years.
*Zoo Negara, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia – home to Feng Yi (known as Xing Xing) (M), and Fu Wa (known as Liang Liang) (F) since 21 May 2014.
Two of the panda's most distinctive features, its large size and round face, are adaptations to its bamboo diet.
The giant panda is a terrestrial animal and primarily spends its life roaming and feeding in the bamboo forests of the Qinling Mountains and in the hilly Sichuan Province.
The mother is thought to be unable to produce enough milk for two cubs, since she does not store fat.
Despite its taxonomic classification as a carnivoran, the giant panda's diet is primarily herbivorous, consisting almost exclusively of bamboo.
They took note of their foraging and mating habits, and analysed samples of their food and feces.
*Mei Lan, born 6 September 2006 at Zoo Atlanta, was sent to China in 2010.
''Zouyu'' is a legendary "righteous" animal, which, similarly to a ''qilin'', only appears during the rule of a benevolent and sincere monarch.
Instead, the PRC began to offer pandas to other nations only on 10-year loans, under terms including a fee of up to US$1,000,000 per year and a provision that any cubs born during the loan are the property of the PRC.
Giant pandas are generally solitary, and each adult has a defined territory, and a female is not tolerant of other females in her range.
A 2007 report shows 239 pandas living in captivity inside China and another 27 outside the country.
'''North American-born pandas'''
The current reproductive rate is considered one young every two years.
The dictionary ''Shuowen Jiezi'' (Eastern Han Dynasty) says that the ''mo'', from Shu (Sichuan), is bear-like, but yellow-and-black, although the older ''Erya'' describes ''mo'' simply as a "white leopard".
Although scientists do not know why these unusual bears are black and white, speculation suggests that the bold coloring provides effective camouflage in their shade-dappled snowy and rocky habitat.
This has resulted in panda foetuses, but no live births.
Pandas will travel between different habitats if they need to, so they can get the nutrients that they need and to balance their diet for reproduction.
It is expected that zoos in destinations such as San Diego in the United States and Mexico City will now be able to provide their own semen to inseminate more giant pandas.
Starting in the 1930s, foreigners were unable to poach giant pandas in China because of the Second Sino-Japanese War and the Chinese Civil War, but pandas remained a source of soft furs for the locals.
A seven-year-old female named Jin Yi died in 2014 in a zoo in Zhengzhou, China, after showing symptoms of gastroenteritis and respiratory disease.
It is also noted, however, that such rapid passage of digesta limits the potential of microbial digestion in the gastrointestinal tract, limiting alternative forms of digestion.
* Pairi Daiza, Cambron-Casteau, Belgium - home to Hao Hao (F) and Xing Hui (M) since February 2014; New born baby on 1 June 2016.
Her parents were Ying Ying and Pe Pe.
The few known uses include the Sichuan tribal peoples' use of panda urine to melt accidentally swallowed needles, and the use of panda pelts to control menses as described in the Qin Dynasty encyclopedia ''Erya''.
*Xiao Liwu, born 29 July 2012 at the San Diego Zoo
For this reason, pandas do not hibernate, which is similar to other subtropical mammals, and will instead move to elevations with warmer temperatures.
Fu Long, who has been relocated to China, was the first to be born in Europe in 25 years.
(The longest belongs to the sloth bear.)
*Ocean Park, Hong Kong – home to Jia Jia (F) (Oldest breeding panda in the world),  An (M), Le Le (M), and Ying Ying (F)
The creature named ''mo'' (貘) mentioned in some ancient books has been interpreted as giant panda.
*China Conservation and Research Center for the Giant Panda at the Wolong National Nature Reserve, Sichuan – Seventeen cubs were born here in 2006.
Pandas communicate through vocalization and scent marking such as clawing trees or spraying urine.
Some reports also show that the number of giant pandas in the wild is on the rise.
Singapore received two pandas (Kai Kai and Jia Jia) in 2012.
It is also home to the Austrian-born Fu Long.
He never reproduced.
* The Edinburgh Zoo, Scotland – home to Tian Tian (F) and Yang Guang (M) since 4 December 2011.
That giant panda cub was named Chu-lin.
While primarily herbivorous, the giant panda still retains decidedly ursine teeth, and will eat meat, fish, and eggs when available.
Since 1998, because of a WWF lawsuit, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service allows a US zoo to import a panda only if the zoo can ensure the PRC will channel more than half of its loan fee into conservation efforts for the giant panda and its habitat.
The giant panda's closest extant relative is the spectacled bear of South America.
* Berlin Zoological Garden, Germany&nbsp;is the former home of Bao Bao, which died in 2012 at the age of 34.
*Twins Jia Panpan and Jia Yueyue, born 13 October 2015 to Er Shun at the Toronto Zoo.
In 1938, five giant pandas were sent to London.
Though it belongs to the order Carnivora, the giant panda's diet is over 99% bamboo.
*Bifengxia Panda Base, Ya'an, Sichuan, is home to US-born giant pandas Mei Sheng (M), Hua Mei (F), Tai Shan (M), Su Lin (F), and Zhen Zhen (F).
Mei Mei, a mother of ten cubs, died on 15 October 2008.
The cubs can eat small quantities of bamboo after six months, though mother's milk remains the primary food source for most of the first year.
*Macau Giant Panda Pavilion – home to Kai Kai (M) and Xin Xin (M) of Chengdu origin
For six years, scientists studied six pandas tagged with GPS collars at the Foping Reserve in the Qinling Mountains.
*Mei Lun and Mei Huan
Even in 2010, the ''Encyclopædia Britannica'' still used "giant panda" or "panda bear" for the bear, and simply "panda" for the Ailuridae, despite the popular usage of the word "panda".
The most popular names in China today is ''dàxióngmāo'' ( literally "giant bear cat"), or simply ''xióngmāo'' ( "bear cat").
The father is to be determined, but likely Da Mao.
During the summer months bamboo shoots rich in protein are only available at higher altitudes which causes low calcium rates in the pandas and during breeding season the pandas would trek back down to eat bamboo leaves rich in calcium.
Giant panda cubs weigh 45&nbsp;kg (100&nbsp;pounds) at one year, and live with their mothers until they are 18 months to two years old.
The father has no part in helping raise the cub.
The giant panda's tail, measuring , is the second-longest in the bear family.
In August 2014, a rare birth of panda triplets was announced in China; it was the fourth of such births ever reported.
Despite the shared name, habitat type, and diet, as well as a unique enlarged bone called the ''pseudo thumb'' (which helps them grip the bamboo shoots they eat) the giant panda and red panda are only distantly related.
*Hua Mei, was born 1999 in the San Diego Zoo and sent to China in 2004.
Adults measure around  long, including a tail of about , and  tall at the shoulder.
Large molars crush and grind fibrous plant material.
A contest in 2006 to name the pandas was held in the mainland, resulting in the politically charged names Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan (from ''tuanyuan'', meaning "reunion", i.e.
Giant pandas give birth to twins in about half of pregnancies.
In captivity, zoos typically maintain the giant panda's bamboo diet, though some will provide specially formulated biscuits or other dietary supplements.
Two cubs, Eiihin (M) and Meihin (F), were born to Rau Hin on 13 September 2008.
*Mei Sheng, born 2003 at the San Diego Zoo, sent to China 2007.
The Western world originally applied this name to the red panda.
* The Toronto Zoo and Calgary Zoo are hosting a pair of pandas named Er Shun (F) and Da Mao (M).
*Dalian Forest Zoo – home to Fei Yun (F), Cai Zhen (F) and Jin Hu (M) of Wolong origin
The giant panda is among the world's most adored and protected rare animals, and is one of the few in the world whose natural inhabitant status was able to gain a UNESCO World Heritage Site designation.
Social encounters occur primarily during the brief breeding season in which pandas in proximity to one another will gather.
This led some scientists to try extreme methods, such as showing them videos of giant pandas mating and giving the males sildenafil (commonly known as "Viagra").
In 2006, scientists reported that the number of pandas living in the wild may have been underestimated at about 1,000.
In captivity, they may receive honey, eggs, fish, yams, shrub leaves, oranges, or bananas along with specially prepared food.
The zoo was also the site of the first giant panda birth in Europe, in 1982.
As a result of farming, deforestation, and other development, the giant panda has been driven out of the lowland areas where it once lived.
Panda semen, which can be frozen for decades, could be shared between different zoos to save the species.
Females (generally 10–20% smaller than males) can weigh as little as , but can also weigh up to .
Its ability to digest cellulose is ascribed to the microbes in its gut.
Until 1901, when it was erroneously stated to be related to the red panda, the giant panda was known as "black and white cat-footed animal" (''Ailuropus melanoleucus'').
It has black fur on its ears, eye patches, muzzle, legs, arms and shoulders.
However, when Ma Ying-jeou assumed the presidency in 2008, the offer was accepted, and the pandas arrived in December of that year.
The morphological characteristics of extinct relatives of the giant panda suggest that while the ancient giant panda was omnivorous 7 million years ago (mya), it only became herbivorous some 2-2.4 mya with the emergence of ''A.
A month after birth, the color pattern of the cub's fur is fully developed.
Stephen Jay Gould discusses this feature in his book of essays on evolution and biology, ''The Panda's Thumb''.
* San Diego Zoo, San Diego – home of Bai Yun (F), Gao Gao (M), Yun Zi (M), and Xiao Liwu (M)
This program, based in the Wolong National Nature Reserve, allows volunteers to work up close with pandas cared for in captivity, and help them adapt to life in the wild, so that they may breed, and live longer and healthier lives.
As such, it is becoming widely used within China in international contexts, for example as one of the five Fuwa mascots of the Beijing Olympics.
* Tiergarten Schönbrunn, Vienna, Austria&nbsp;– home to Yang Yang (F) and Long Hui (M), born in Wolong, China in 2000 They gave birth to Fu Long (M) in 2007, and Fu Hu (M) in 2010.
The smaller of the two cubs died on 26 August 2015.
Though the Wolong National Nature Reserve was set up by the PRC government in 1958 to save the declining panda population, few advances in the conservation of pandas were made, owing to inexperience and insufficient knowledge of ecology.
When the cub is first born, it is pink, blind, and toothless, weighing only 90 to 130&nbsp;grams (3.2 to 4.6&nbsp;ounces), or about 1/800th of the mother's weight, proportionally the smallest baby of any placental mammal.
In the past, pandas were thought to be rare and noble creatures – the Empress Dowager Bo was buried with a panda skull in her vault.
The mother will select the stronger of the cubs, and the weaker will die.
They arrived on 28 November 2009, and went on display on 14 December.
Copulation time is short, ranging from 30 seconds to five minutes, but the male may mount her repeatedly to ensure successful fertilization.
They are expected to stay for a minimum of 10 years, and are the only giant pandas living in the Southern Hemisphere.
The giant panda's paw has a "thumb" and five fingers; the "thumb" – actually a modified sesamoid bone – helps it to hold bamboo while eating.
For three to four hours, the mother may leave the den to feed, which leaves the cub defenseless.
It nurses from its mother's breast six to 14 times a day for up to 30 minutes at a time.
*Bao Bao, born 23 August 2013 at the National Zoo in Washington, DC.
PRC's offer was initially rejected by Chen Shui-bian, then President of Taiwan.
A female named Jia Jia is the oldest giant panda ever in captivity and the oldest giant panda still living in captivity at an age of 38, as of July 2016.
*Taipei Zoo, Taipei, Taiwan – home to Tuan Tuan (M) and Yuan Yuan (F), and their offspring Yuan Zai (F).
* Zoo Aquarium, Madrid, Spain&nbsp;is the home of Bing Xing (M) and Hua Zuiba (F) since 2007.
Since the earliest collection of Chinese writings, the Chinese language has given the bear 20 different names, such as ''huāxióng'' ( "spotted bear") and ''zhúxióng'' ( "bamboo bear").
Activities such as these were halted because of wars; for the next half of the century, the West knew little of giant pandas.
*Chengdu Research Base of Giant Panda Breeding, Chengdu, Sichuan – Twelve cubs were born here in 2006.
It is easily recognized by the large, distinctive black patches around its eyes, over the ears, and across its round body.
By 1984, however, pandas were no longer given as gifts.
*Chime-Long Paradise Amusement Park, in Guangzhou, where three very rare panda triplets were born (all three have thus far survived) in July 2014
Genome sequencing of the giant panda suggests that the dietary switch could have initiated from the loss of the sole T1R1/T1R3 umami taste receptor, resulting from two frameshift mutations within the T1R1 exons.
In 2016, the IUCN reclassified the species from "endangered" to "vulnerable" (it did not believe there was enough certainty yet to do so in 2008).
* National Zoo in Washington, DC – home of Mei Xiang (F) and Tian Tian (M), and a female cub, now named Bao Bao, born to Mei Xiang on 23 August 2013.
The issue became embroiled in cross-Strait relations – both over the underlying symbolism, and over technical issues such as whether the transfer would be considered "domestic" or "international", or whether any true conservation purpose would be served by the exchange.
In Taiwan, another popular name for panda is the inverted ''dàmāoxióng'' ( "giant cat bear"), though many encyclopediae and dictionaries in Taiwan still use the "bear cat" form as the correct name.
The giant panda has a body shape typical of bears.
The last contract, with the Memphis Zoo in Memphis, Tennessee, ended in 2013.
*Yun Zi, born 5 August 2009 at the San Diego Zoo
However, a 2015 paper found that the giant panda can serve as an umbrella species as the preservation of their habitat also helps other endemic species in China, including 70% of the country's forest birds, 70% of mammals and 31% of amphibians.
Many zoos and breeding centers in China house giant pandas.
The name ''xióngmāo'' ( "bear cat") was originally used to describe the red panda (''Ailurus fulgens''), but since giant panda was thought to be closely related to red panda, ''dàxióngmāo'' () was named relatively.
The population boom in China after 1949 created stress on the pandas' habitat, and the subsequent famines led to the increased hunting of wildlife, including pandas.
The closest candidate is the Nepali word ''ponya,'' possibly referring to the adapted wrist bone of the red panda, which is native to Nepal.
Males can weigh up to .
*Adventure World, Shirahama, Wakayama, Japan – Until recently, it was home to Ei Mei (M), Mei Mei (F), Rau Hin (F), Ryu Hin and Syu Hin (M twins), and Kou Hin (M).
In 2006, there were 40 panda reserves in China, compared to just 13 reserves two decades ago.
The comparative obscurity of the giant panda throughout most of China's history is illustrated by the fact that, despite there being a number of depictions of bears in Chinese art starting from its most ancient times, and the bamboo being one of the favorite subjects for Chinese painters, there are no known pre-20th-century artistic representations of giant pandas.
For Toronto this will be the second set of pandas, in 1985 Quan Quan (Female, died 2010 at Jinan Zoo at age 21) and Qing Qing (Female born Sept 9, 1984 and later at Wuhan Zoo and now at Chengdu Panda Base) were sent to the zoo for 100 days beginning in July.
Duyvendak exclaims, "Can it possibly have been a Pandah?"
Anthropologist Russell Ciochon observed: "much like the vegetarian gorilla, the low body surface area to body volume of the giant panda is indicative of a lower metabolic rate.
The Sichuan Giant Panda Sanctuaries, located in the southwest Sichuan province and covering seven natural reserves, were inscribed onto the World Heritage List in 2006.
As the species has been reclassified to "vulnerable" since 2016, the conservation efforts are thought to be working.
A 2006 ''New York Times'' article outlined the economics of keeping pandas, which costs five times more than that of the next most expensive animal, an elephant.
Pandas eat any of 25 bamboo species in the wild, such as ''Fargesia dracocephala'' and ''Fargesia rufa''.
The grandson of Emperor Taizong of Tang is said to have given Japan two pandas and a sheet of panda skin as a sign of goodwill.
The name "giant panda" is sometimes used to distinguish it from the unrelated red panda.
The technique for freezing the sperm in liquid nitrogen was first developed in 1980 and the first birth was hailed as a solution to the problem of lessening giant panda semen availability, which had led to inbreeding.
Because of pollution and destruction of their natural habitat, along with segregation caused by caging, reproduction of wild pandas was severely limited.
Not all conservationists agree that the money spent on conserving pandas is well spent.
The pandas would move from the valleys in to the Qinling Mountains and would only return to the valleys in autumn.
;Other places in Asia
*Beijing Zoo – Home of the internationally notorious Gu Gu.
The Face of the Giant Panda Sign is an MRI sign in patients with Wilson's disease, named for how the midbrain appears similar to a giant panda's face.
San Diego's contract with China was to expire in 2008, but got a five-year extension at about half of the previous yearly cost.
The average giant panda eats as much as 9 to 14&nbsp;kg (20 to 30&nbsp;lb) of bamboo shoots a day to compensate for its low level of energy digestibility.
It is also home to Japanese-born Xiong Bang (M) and US-born Mei Lan (M).
In most encyclopedic sources, the name "panda" or "common panda" originally referred to the lesser-known red panda, thus necessitating the inclusion of "giant" and "lesser/red" prefixes in front of the names.
They are able to climb and take shelter in hollow trees or rock crevices, but do not establish permanent dens.
The giant panda is a conservation reliant vulnerable species.
It was found that the cause of death was toxoplasmosis, a disease caused by ''Toxoplasma gondii'' and infecting most warm-blooded animals, including humans.
*Tai Shan, born 9 July 2005 at the National Zoo in Washington, DC, was sent to China in 2010.
Chris Packham has argued that the breeding of pandas in captivity is "pointless" because "there is not enough habitat left to sustain them".
While the dragon has often served as China's national symbol, internationally the giant panda appears at least as commonly.
The panda's skull shape is typical of durophagous carnivorans.
* Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta – home of Lun Lun (F), Yang Yang (M), Xi Lan (M), and Po (F), born 3 November 2010 and twin female cubs Mei Huan and Mei Lun, born 15 July 2013
*Tohui (Tarahumara word for child), born 21 July 1981, died 16 November 1993, a female at Chapultepec Zoo, Mexico City, was the first giant panda to be born and survive in captivity outside China.
Although the pseudegenization of the umami taste receptor in ''Ailuropoda'' coincides with the dietary switch to herbivory, it is likely a result of, and not the reason for, the dietary change.
A female cub was born on 18 August 2015.
Ingestion of such a large quantity of material is possible because of the rapid passage of large amounts of indigestible plant material through the short, straight digestive tract.
*Xi Lan, born 30 August 2008 at Zoo Atlanta
Its fur is very soft and coarsens with age.
If twins are born, usually only one survives in the wild.
The giant panda genome was sequenced in 2009 using Illumina dye sequencing.
Giant pandas reach sexual maturity between the ages of four and eight, and may be reproductive until age 20.
The West first learned of the giant panda on 11 March 1869, when the French missionary Armand David received a skin from a hunter.
*River Safari, a new park under Wildlife Reserves Singapore.
It is said to be fierce as a tiger, but gentle and strictly vegetarian, and described in some books as a white tiger with black spots.
After mating, the male leaves the female alone to raise the cub.
Though the panda is often assumed to be docile, it has been known to attack humans, presumably out of irritation rather than aggression.
Its genome contains 20 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes.
*Su Lin was born 2 August 2005 at the San Diego Zoo and moved to China in 2010.
Pandas rely primarily on spatial memory rather than visual memory.
The cub begins to crawl at 75 to 80 days; mothers play with their cubs by rolling and wrestling with them.
* ZooParc de Beauval, Saint-Aignan, Loir-et-Cher, France – home to Huan Huan (F) and Yuan Zi (M) since 15 January 2012.
Unlike many other animals in Ancient China, pandas were rarely thought to have medical uses.
The giant panda tends to limit its social interactions and avoids steeply sloping terrain to limit its energy expenditures.
*Bei Bei and an unnamed twin were born 22 August 2015 to Mei Xiang at the National Zoo in Washington, DC.
The mating season is between March and May, when a female goes into estrus, which lasts for two or three days and only occurs once a year.
Average adult weight is .
Mei Xiang gave birth to a set of twins on 22 August 2015, Bei Bei and a smaller cub which died four days after birth.
Giant pandas in the wild will occasionally eat other grasses, wild tubers, or even meat in the form of birds, rodents or carrion.
A 110.45&nbsp;kg (243.5&nbsp;lb) giant panda has a 3D canine teeth bite force of 2603.47 newtons and bite force quotient of 292.
During the Cultural Revolution, all studies and conservation activities on the pandas were stopped.
The two pandas arrived in Canada at the Toronto Zoo in March 2013 (two months before the exhibit opened in May), and will spend 10 years in Canada, evenly split between Toronto and Calgary.
He points out, "The panda is possibly one of the grossest wastes of conservation money in the last half century."
In December 2006, twin cubs were born to Ei Mei and Mei Mei.
Umami taste corresponds to high levels of glutamate as found in meat, and may have thus altered the food choice of the giant panda.
Some linguists argue, in this construction, "bear" instead of "cat" is the base noun, making this name more grammatically and logically correct, which may have led to the popular choice despite official writings.
*Zhen Zhen, born 3 August 2007 at the San Diego Zoo, was moved to China in 2010.
*Oji Zoo, Kobe, Hyōgo, Japan – home of Kou Kou (M), Tan Tan (F)
The giant panda has been referred to as a living fossil.
Pandas are born with sterile intestines, and require bacteria obtained from their mother's feces to digest vegetation.
Bamboo leaves contain the highest protein levels; stems have less.
