In 1997, the Department of Trade and Industry established its Gibraltar Finance Centre (GFC) Division to facilitate the development the financial sector development.
This, however, has diminished over the last 20 years, and is estimated to account for only 7 percent of the local economy, compared to over 60 percent in 1984.
The naval air base was named HMS ''Cormorant.''
Gibraltar has been on the list since December 1946.
In the late 19th century, a Sanitary Commission instigated major improvements which saw the introduction of large-scale desalination and the use of giant water catchments covering over 2.5 million square feet (nearly 250,000 m2).
Passenger and cargo ships anchor in the Gibraltar Harbour.
The 16th century Saint Mary the Crowned is the cathedral church of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Gibraltar, and also the oldest Catholic church in the territory.
The government supports the many sporting associations financially.
Restrictions on transport introduced by Spanish dictator Francisco Franco closed the land frontier in 1969 and also prohibited any air or ferry connections.
Having negligible natural resources and few natural freshwater resources, limited to natural wells in the north, until recently Gibraltar used large concrete and/or natural rock water catchments to collect rainwater.
Gibraltar has no administrative divisions but is divided into seven Major Residential Areas.
On 2 May 2016 the CAS upheld the appeal filed by the Gibraltar Football Association regarding its request to become a full-time member of FIFA.
The 300th anniversary of Gibraltar's capture was celebrated in 2004 on Tercentenary Day (4 August), when in recognition of and with thanks for its long association with Gibraltar, the Royal Navy was given the Freedom of the City of Gibraltar and a human chain of Gibraltarians dressed in red, white and blue, linked hands to encircle the Rock.
The most popular alternative airport for Gibraltar is Málaga Airport in Spain, some  to the east, which offers a wide range of destinations, second to Jerez Airport which is closer to Gibraltar.
The Government of Gibraltar operates a scholarship/grant system to provide funding for students studying in the United Kingdom.
Subsequently, Gibraltar became known as one of the Pillars of Hercules, after the Greek legend of the creation of the Strait of Gibraltar by Heracles.
At its foot is a densely populated city area, home to over 30,000 Gibraltarians and other nationalities.In 2009, this broke down into 23,907 native-born citizens, 3,129 UK British citizens and 2,395 others, making a total population of 29,431.
In 1160, the Almohad Sultan Abd al-Mu'min ordered that a permanent settlement, including a castle, be built.
The Rock of Gibraltar is the major landmark of the region.
GB Airways operated a service between Gibraltar and London and other cities for many years.
Tourism is also a significant industry.
The announcement resulted in the affected trade unions striking.
Many of the large British high street chains have branches or franchises in Gibraltar including Morrisons, Marks & Spencer and Mothercare.
Musicians from Gibraltar include Charles Ramirez, the first guitarist invited to play with the Royal College of Music Orchestra, successful rock bands like Breed 77, Melon Diesel and Taxi, while Gibraltarian bassist Glen Diani played for Irish/British nu metal group One Minute Silence.
There is also an established Hindu population (2%), members of the Bahá'í Faith and a long-established Jewish community, which, at 763 persons, accounts for 2.4% of the population.
Special events and the daily news bulletin are streamed in video.
* The Royal Navy maintains a squadron at the Rock.
Gibraltar's top-level domain code is .gi.
The Gibraltar Football Association applied for full membership of UEFA, but their bid was turned down in 2007 in a contentious decision.
The vehicles also appear virtually identical to typical UK police vehicles, but are left hand drive.
Within recorded history, the first inhabitants were the Phoenicians, around 950 BC.
CAS ordered FIFA to stop blocking Gibraltar's application for membership and allow it "without delay".
All other British citizens are also entitled to free-of-charge treatment on the Rock on presentation of a valid British passport during stays of up to 30 days.
Profiteroles, a French choux pastry ball with a sweet filling of whipped cream, is considered to be Gibraltar's national dish.
The other local radio service is operated by the British Forces Broadcasting Service which also provides a limited cable television network to HM Forces.
Education in Gibraltar generally follows the English model, operating within a three tier system.
Gibraltar's strategic position provides an important facility for the Royal Navy and Britain's allies.
The Tower of Homage of the Moorish Castle remains standing today.
Gibraltar maintains regular flight connections to London, Birmingham and Manchester.
Today Gibraltar's supply of drinking water comes entirely from desalination, with a separate supply of saltwater for sanitary purposes – both supplies are delivered from huge underground reservoirs excavated under the Rock of Gibraltar.
The Spanish hinterland forms the comarca of Campo de Gibraltar (literally "Countryside of Gibraltar").
In the 1990s, the Gibraltarian man-of-letters Mario Arroyo published ''Profiles'' (1994), a series of bilingual meditations on love, loneliness and death.
Under its current constitution, Gibraltar has almost complete internal democratic self-government through an elected parliament, elected for a term of up to four years.
The border control is the only road border control between two EU members that is expected to remain indefinitely (Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania have border controls which are expected to be removed around 2020).
The ferry between Gibraltar and Algeciras, which had been halted in 1969 when Franco severed communications with Gibraltar, was finally reopened on 16 December 2009, served by the Spanish company Transcoma.
After the collapse of the Roman Empire, Gibraltar came briefly under the control of the Vandals.
The PDP is a new party, formed in 2006 and fielded candidates in the 2007 election, but none was elected.
In 1989, and in anticipation of service to cities outside the UK, Gibraltar Airways changed its name to GB Airways with the belief that a new name would incur fewer political problems.
Although aircraft are no longer permanently stationed at RAF Gibraltar, a variety of RAF aircraft make regular visits and the airfield also houses a section from the Met Office.
A Z berth provides the facility for nuclear submarines to visit for operational or recreational purposes and for non-nuclear repairs.
The naval base also played a part in supporting the task force sent by Britain to recover the Falklands.
Its location is unusual not only because of its proximity to the city centre resulting in the airport terminal being within walking distance of much of Gibraltar but also because the runway intersects Winston Churchill Avenue, the main north-south street, requiring movable barricades to close when aircraft land or depart.
Recent genetic studies and historical documents point to their presence on the Rock before its capture by the British.
Gibraltar is believed to be the birthplace of the rugby variant Tag Rugby.
7.1% advised that they have no religion.
Native Gibraltarians have produced some literature of note.
British and US nuclear submarines frequently visit the ''Z berths'' at Gibraltar.
Gibraltarians often call themselves ''Llanitos''.
Until this year, the tradition had been to also release 30,000 similarly coloured balloons, which represented the people of Gibraltar.
, Gibraltar has 0.103 Big Four accounting firm offices per 1,000 population, the second highest in the world after the British Virgin Islands, and 0.6 banks per 1,000 people, the fifth most banks per capita in the world.
The head of government is the Chief Minister (as of December 2011, Fabian Picardo).
It is a public holiday, during which most Gibraltarians dress in their national colours of red and white.
In 1967, Gibraltar enacted the Companies (Taxation and Concessions) Ordinance (now an Act), which provided for special tax treatment for international business.
A number of British and international banks have operations based in Gibraltar.
It received the name of Medinat al-Fath (City of the Victory).
Gibraltar has 15 state schools, a private school and a college of further education.
The culinary influences include those from Malta, Genoa, Portugal and Andalusia.
This became increasingly inadequate as Gibraltar's population grew in the 18th and 19th centuries and lethal diseases such as cholera and yellow fever began to spread.
These are often served after a meal including Calentita, a baked bread-like dish made with chickpea flour, water, olive oil, salt and pepper.
The Gibraltar Secular Humanist Society also holds regular meetings.
The regiment was originally a part-time reserve force until the British Army placed it on a permanent footing in 1990.
It contains many tunnelled roads, most of which are still operated by the military and closed to the general public.
The first in fiction was probably Héctor Licudi's 1929 novel ''Barbarita'', written in Spanish, chronicling the largely autobiographical adventures of a young Gibraltarian man.
Previously, there were no facilities in Gibraltar for full-time higher education, and consequently, all Gibraltarian students studied elsewhere at degree level or its equivalent and also for certain non-degree courses.
According to the 2012 census, approximately 72.1% of Gibraltarians are Roman Catholics.
It employs around 900 people, handling  37,000 A&E attendances, 40,000 outpatient appointments, and 90,000 GP visits a year.
Berber and Arabic are spoken by the Moroccan community, as are Hindi and Sindhi by the Indian and the Pakistani communities of Gibraltar respectively.
On 23 June 2016 Gibraltar voted with the rest of the United Kingdom on whether the UK should remain in, or leave the European Union.
Its strategic value increased with the opening of the Suez Canal, as it lay on the sea route between the UK and the British Empire east of Suez.
The force, whose name received the prefix "Royal" in 1992, currently numbers over 220 officers divided into a number of units.
Portuguese is also widely spoken.
Also, a ferry links Gibraltar with Tangier in Morocco.
In the coldest month, January, the temperature ranges from  during the day and  at night, the average sea temperature is .
Of late there have been works by the essayist Mary Chiappe, such as her volume of essays ''Cabbages and Kings'' (2006) and by M. G. Sanchez, author of the books ''Rock Black: Ten Gibraltarian Stories'' (2008) and ''Diary of a Victorian Colonial'' (2009).
In 2007, there were 18 Gibraltar sports associations with official recognition from their respective international governing bodies.
In the later 19th century, there were major investments in improving the fortifications and the port.
Gibraltar is part of the European Union, having joined through the European Communities Act 1972 (UK), which gave effect to the Treaty of Accession 1972, as a dependent territory of the United Kingdom under what was then article 227(4) of the Treaty Establishing the European Community covering special member state territories, with exemption from some areas such as the Customs union and Common Agricultural Policy.
Spain has occasionally closed the border during disputes or incidents involving the Gibraltar authorities, such as the ''Aurora'' cruise ship incident and when fishermen from the Spanish fishing vessel ''Piraña'' were arrested for illegal fishing in Gibraltar waters.
The third religion in size is Islam (3.6% of the population).
Ferries by ''FRS'' running twice a week from Gibraltar to Tanger-Med port provide access to the Moroccan railway system.
Monarch Airlines operates a daily scheduled service between Gibraltar and Luton, London Gatwick Airport, Birmingham  and Manchester.
It is based on Andalusian Spanish with a strong mixture of British English and elements from languages such as Maltese, Portuguese, Genoese Italian and Haketia (a Judeo-Spanish dialect).
Gibraltar's defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom tri-services British Forces Gibraltar.
However, this corporate tax regime for non-resident controlled companies was phased out by January 2011 and replaced by a fixed corporate tax rate of 10 percent.
Branches and franchises of international retailers such as Tommy Hilfiger and Sunglass Hut are also present in Gibraltar, as is the Spanish clothing company Mango.
The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, who is represented by the Governor of Gibraltar.
Albert Hammond had top 10 hits in the UK and US and has written many songs for international artists such as Whitney Houston, Tina Turner and Julio Iglesias.
The report concentrated on PM10 and PM2.5 pollutants in the air.
There is a Gibraltar Cable Car which runs from ground level to the top of the Rock, with an intermediate station at Apes' Den.
* The Royal Air Force station at Gibraltar forms part of Headquarters British Forces Gibraltar.
Rain occurs mainly in winter, with summer being generally dry.
In 1462, Gibraltar was finally captured by Juan Alonso de Guzmán, 1st Duke of Medina Sidonia.
In the early 2000s, many bookmakers and online gaming operators moved to Gibraltar to benefit from operating in a regulated jurisdiction with a favourable corporate tax regime.
It refers to the Rock of Gibraltar, which was named after the Umayyad general Tariq ibn-Ziyad who led the initial incursion into Iberia in advance of the main Umayyad force in 711 under the command of Umayyad Caliph Al-Walid I.
Gibraltar was confirmed as UEFA's 54th member on 24 May 2013 as a result of Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) arbitration and played in EURO-2016 qualifications.
Jyske Bank claims to be the oldest bank in the country, based on Jyske's acquisition in 1987 of Banco Galliano, which began operations in Gibraltar in 1855.
The Gibraltar Rifle Association (GRA) was Gibraltar's most successful team at the 2009 Island Games, earning four gold medals.
On 4 June 2012, the Gibraltar Diamond Jubilee Flotilla, inspired by the Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant, celebrated sixty years of the Queen's reign.
The Carthaginians and Romans also established semi-permanent settlements.
Several of these congregations are represented by the Gibraltar Evangelical Alliance.
The sovereignty of Gibraltar is a major point of contention in Anglo-Spanish relations as Spain asserts a claim to the territory.
* The Royal Gibraltar Regiment provides the army garrison with a detachment of the British Army, based at ''Devils Tower Camp''.
Dolphins and whales are frequently seen in the Bay of Gibraltar.
In 1704, during the War of the Spanish Succession, a combined Anglo-Dutch fleet, representing the Grand Alliance, captured the town of Gibraltar on behalf of the Archduke Charles of Austria in his campaign to become King of Spain.
Under the Gibraltar constitution of 2006, Gibraltar governs its own affairs, though some powers, such as defence and foreign relations, remain the responsibility of the Government of the United Kingdom.
The regiment includes full-time and part-time soldiers recruited from Gibraltar as well as British Army regulars posted from other regiments.
A process of tripartite negotiations started in 2006 between Spain, Gibraltar and the UK, ending some restrictions and dealing with disputes in some specific areas such as air movements, customs procedures, telecommunications, pensions and cultural exchange.
Scheduled flights to Morocco and Madrid proved unsustainable due to insufficient demand.
All Gibraltarians are entitled to health care in public wards and clinics at the St Bernard hospital and primary health care centre.
It has an area of  and shares its northern border with Spain.
After a 10-year campaign for the right to vote in European elections, since 2004 the people of Gibraltar have participated in elections for the European Parliament as part of the South West England constituency.
This species, known scientifically as ''Macaca sylvanus'', is listed as endangered by the IUCN Red List and is declining.
In 1991, Graham Watson, Gibraltar's MEP, highlighted conservationists' fears that urban development, tourism and invasive plant species were threatening Gibraltar's own plants as well as birds and bat species.
During World War II it was an important base for the Royal Navy as it controlled the entrance and exit to the Mediterranean Sea, which is only eight miles (13&nbsp;km) wide at this point.
It is exposed to strong cross winds around the rock and across the Bay of Algeciras, making landings in winter particularly uncomfortable.
In May 2009, Ándalus Líneas Aéreas opened a Spanish service, which also ceased operations in March 2010.
Internet connectivity is available across the fixed network.
The Spanish national airline, Iberia, operated a daily service to Madrid which ceased due to lack of demand.
There are no rivers, streams, or large bodies of water on the peninsula.
The United Nations Committee on Decolonization includes Gibraltar on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Gibraltar became a key base for the Royal Navy and played an important role prior to the Battle of Trafalgar (21 October 1805) and during the Crimean War of 1854–56, due to its strategic location.
The helmet is traditionally made of cork covered outside by felt or serge-like material that matches the tunic.
Gibraltar's terrain consists of the  Rock of Gibraltar made of Jurassic limestone, and the narrow coastal lowland surrounding it.
Mary Chiappe and Sam Benady have also published a series of detective books centred on the character of the nineteenth-century Gibraltarian sleuth Bresciano.
All local political parties oppose any transfer of sovereignty to Spain, instead supporting self-determination.
The Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation operates a television and radio station on UHF, VHF and medium-wave.
Gibraltar's territory covers  and shares a  land border with Spain.
Although the final decision saw the UK decide to leave, Gibraltar overwhelmingly voted to remain in the Union.
The shoreline measures  in length.
The name ''Gibraltar'' is the Spanish derivation of the Arabic name ''Jabal Ṭāriq'' (), meaning "Mountain of Tariq".
Schools in Gibraltar use the Key Stage modular approach to teach the National Curriculum.
Gibraltar is the only place in Europe where the ''Gibraltar candytuft'' (''Iberis gibraltarica'') is found growing in the wild; the plant is otherwise native to North Africa.
This has been universally valid since 10 February 2007, when the telecom dispute was resolved.
Today Gibraltar's economy is based largely on tourism, online gambling, financial services, and shipping.
Unlike in the UK and other British territories, traffic drives on the right, as the territory shares a land border with Spain.
Football is a popular sport in Gibraltar.
The squadron is responsible for the security and integrity of British Gibraltar Territorial Waters (BGTW).
New roads and a tunnel, which will end the need to stop road traffic when aircraft use the runway, were planned to coincide with the building of a new airport terminal building with an originally estimated completion date of 2009, although due to delays, it has not been completed.
An ancestor of Barclays, the Anglo-Egyptian Bank, entered in 1888, and Credit Foncier (now Crédit Agricole) entered in 1920.
Others have submitted applications for recognition which are being considered.
The overwhelming majority of Gibraltarians continue their studies at university level.
Gibraltar Cruise Terminal receives a large number of visits from cruise ships.
The day after the result of the Brexit vote, Spain's acting Foreign Minister José Manuel García-Margallo, as promised, renewed calls for joint Spanish–British control of the peninsula.
Olive and pine trees are among the most common of those growing around the Rock.
The cuisine of Gibraltar is the result of the rich diversity of civilisations who held the Rock during its history; from the Berbers of North Africa to the Andalusians and British.
As a share of the total population, this is the second-largest Jewish population in the world, trailing only Israel.
''Panorama'' is published on weekdays, and ''7 Days'', ''The New People'', and ''Gibsport'' are weekly.
All Gibraltarian students used to follow the UK student loans procedure, applying for a loan from the Student Loans Company which was then reimbursed in full by the Government of Gibraltar.
Gibraltar also competes in the bi-annual Island Games, which it hosted in 1995.
In the warmest month, August, the typical temperature ranges from  during the day, above  at night, the average sea temperature is .
Most locals are bilingual, also speaking Spanish, due to Gibraltar's proximity to Spain.
The territory was subsequently ceded to Britain "in perpetuity" under the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713.
It has the largest number of flights between the United Kingdom and Gibraltar.
In January 2007, the Ministry of Defence announced that the private company Serco would provide services to the base.
While there are Spanish (mostly from nearby Andalusia) and British influences, the ethnic origins of most Gibraltarians are not confined to these ethnicities.
Bmibaby started flights from East Midlands Airport to the Rock in March 2012, but the airline closed in September 2012.
Most of the Rock's upper area is covered by a nature reserve which is home to around 230 Barbary macaques, the famous apes of Gibraltar, albeit that biologists insist that technically the apes are wild monkeys.
Gibraltarians overwhelmingly rejected proposals for Spanish sovereignty in a 1967 referendum and again in 2002.
International Direct Dialling (IDD) is provided, and Gibraltar was allocated the access code +350 by the International Telecommunication Union.
Rugby union is fairly popular and one of the fastest growing team sports, Gibraltar Rugby Union Football Union applied for membership of Europe's governing body for rugby.
:(*) Includes all nationalities different from Gibraltarian, UK and other British and Moroccan.
There are two coasts ("Sides") of Gibraltar: the East Side, which contains the settlements of Sandy Bay and Catalan Bay; and the Westside, where the vast majority of the population lives.
An annual return charter flight to Malta is operated by Maltese national airline, Air Malta.
Earlier, it was known as ''Mons Calpe'', a name of Phoenician origin and one of the Pillars of Hercules.
The growing demand for space is being increasingly met by land reclamation; reclaimed land currently comprises approximately one tenth of the territory's total area.
Gibraltarians often converse in ''Llanito'' (), a vernacular unique to Gibraltar.
The main UK opposition parties also support this policy and it is UK government policy not to engage in talks about the sovereignty of Gibraltar without the consent of the people of Gibraltar.
Maltese is spoken by some families of Maltese descent.
In general, the Gibraltar force follows British police models in its dress and its mostly male constables and sergeants on foot patrol wear the traditional custodian helmet, the headgear of the British "bobby on the beat".
It is also a popular shopping destination, and all goods and services are VAT free, but may be subject to Gibraltar taxes.
Subsequently, Gibraltar applied for FIFA membership but this bid was also turned down.
These are the only wild apes or monkeys found in Europe.
A superstition analogous to that of the ravens at the Tower of London states that if the apes ever leave, so will the British.
Their first match was a 0-0 draw against Slovakia.
The 1960s were largely dominated by the theatrical works of Elio Cruz and his two highly acclaimed Spanish language plays ''La Lola se va pá Londre'' and ''Connie con cama camera en el comedor''.
Unofficially, most retail outlets in Gibraltar accept the euro, though some payphones and the Royal Gibraltar Post Office, along with all other government offices, do not.
Gibraltar has an important role in UKSIGINT and provides a vital strategic part of the United Kingdom communications gathering and monitoring network in the Mediterranean and North Africa.
Fresh water from the boreholes is supplemented by two desalination plants: a reverse osmosis plant, constructed in a tunnel within the rock, and a multi-stage flash distillation plant at North Mole.
The area later formed part of the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania from 414 AD until the Islamic conquest of Iberia in 711 AD.
The largest and most frequently published newspaper is the ''Gibraltar Chronicle'', Gibraltar's oldest established daily newspaper and the world's second oldest English language newspaper to have been in print continuously with daily editions six days a week.
The British government has committed itself to respecting the Gibraltarians' wishes.
Six years later, Gibraltar was restored to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who sold it in 1474 to a group of 4350 ''conversos'' (Christian converts from Judaism) from Cordova Seville and in exchange for maintaining the garrison of the town for two years, after which time they were expelled, returning to their home towns or moving on to other parts of Spain.
In 2010, Gibraltar hosted and won the Mediterranean Cup, competing against France, Italy, Turkey, Malta and Cyprus.
This was one of the factors leading to the growth of professional services such as private banking and captive insurance management.
Unsuccessful attempts by Spanish monarchs to regain Gibraltar were made with the siege of 1727 and again with the Great Siege of Gibraltar (1779 to 1783), during the American War of Independence.
The Financial Services Commission (FSC), which was established by an ordinance in 1989 (now an Act) that took effect in 1991, regulates the finance sector.
It is the symbol of the Upper Rock nature reserve.
First-line medical and nursing services are provided at the Primary Care Centre, which has 16 GPs, with more specialised services available at St Bernard's Hospital, a 210-bed civilian hospital opened in 2005.
In 1944, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, was so concerned about the dwindling population of apes that he sent a message to the Colonial Secretary requesting that something be done about the situation.
On completion of the works in the town, the Sultan crossed the Strait to look at the works and stayed in Gibraltar for two months.
