His father was a military bandmaster, and by the time Arthur had reached the age of eight, he was proficient with all the instruments in the band.
After the success of ''Trial by Jury'', Gilbert and Sullivan were suddenly in demand to write more operas together.
''The Pirates of Penzance'' (New Year's Eve, 1879) also poked fun at grand opera conventions, sense of duty, family obligation, the "respectability" of civilisation and the peerage, and the relevance of a liberal education.
Gilbert's lyrics served as a model for such 20th-century Broadway lyricists as Cole Porter, Ira Gershwin, and Lorenz Hart.
But both poets are in love with Patience, the village milkmaid, who detests one of them and feels that it is her duty to avoid the other despite her love for him.
Pinafore'' ran in London for 571 performances, the second longest run of any musical theatre piece in history up to that time (after the operetta ''Les cloches de Corneville'').
Other comedians have used Gilbert and Sullivan songs as a key part of their routines, including Hinge and Bracket, Anna Russell, and the ''HMS Yakko'' episode of the animated TV series ''Animaniacs''.
In 1980, a Broadway and West End production of ''Pirates'' produced by Joseph Papp brought new audiences to Gilbert and Sullivan, and between 1988 and 2003, the revived D'Oyly Carte Opera Company revived the operas on tour and on the West End, also recording seven of the operas.
Pinafore'' to ''The Gondoliers'', Sullivan asked to leave the partnership, saying that he found Gilbert's plots repetitive and that the operas were not artistically satisfying to him.
* ''The Ratepayers' Iolanthe'' (1984; Olivier Award-winning musical) adapted by Ned Sherrin and Alistair Beaton
It was the first theatre (indeed the world's first public building) to be lit entirely by electric lighting.
Building on the team he had assembled for ''The Sorcerer'', Gilbert no longer hired stars; he created them.
Gilbert was born in London on 18 November 1836.
He and Sullivan selected the performers, writing their operas for ensemble casts rather than individual stars.
Sullivan, by this time in exceedingly poor health, died in 1900, although to the end he continued to write new comic operas for the Savoy with other librettists, most successfully with Basil Hood in ''The Rose of Persia'' (1899).
Professor Carolyn Williams has noted, however: "The influence of Gilbert and Sullivan – their wit and sense of irony, the send ups of politics and contemporary culture – goes beyond musical theater to comedy in general.
Other early pieces that were praised were his ''Symphony in E'', ''Concerto for Cello and Orchestra'', and ''Overture in C (In Memoriam)'' (all three of which premiered in 1866).
Gilbert next wrote ''The Mountebanks'' with Alfred Cellier and the flop ''Haste to the Wedding'' with George Grossmith, and Sullivan wrote ''Haddon Hall'' with Sydney Grundy.
Setting the opera in Japan, an exotic locale far away from Britain, allowed Gilbert and Sullivan to satirise British politics and institutions more freely by clothing them in superficial Japanese trappings.
The original title, ''Ruddygore'', together with some of the plot devices, including the revivification of ghosts, drew negative comments from critics.
Gilbert was knighted during the first repertory season.
Fred Sullivan was the prototype for the "patter" (comic) baritone roles in the later operas.
Noël Coward wrote: "I was born into a generation that still took light music seriously.
There was a command performance of ''The Gondoliers'' for Queen Victoria and the royal family at Windsor Castle in 1891, the first Gilbert and Sullivan opera to be so honoured.
''Patience'' moved into the Savoy after six months at the Opera Comique and ran for a total of 578 performances, surpassing the run of ''H.M.S.
* ''Pinafore Swing'', Watermill Theatre (2004. another Doyle adaptation in which the actors double as the orchestra)
It reported, in 1914, that nearly 200 British troupes were performing Gilbert and Sullivan that year, constituting most of the amateur companies in the country (this figure included only the societies that were members of NODA).
It outran five of its nine competitors for the 1871 holiday season, and its run was extended beyond the length of a normal run at the Gaiety, but no one at the time anticipated that this was the beginning of a great collaboration.
The two men collaborated on fourteen comic operas between 1871 and 1896, of which ''H.M.S.
Sullivan completed his ''Festival Te Deum'' (1872); another oratorio, ''The Light of the World'' (1873); his only song cycle, ''The Window; or, The Song of the Wrens'' (1871); incidental music to ''The Merry Wives of Windsor'' (1874); and more songs, parlour ballads, and hymns, including "Onward, Christian Soldiers" (1872).
He continued to write humorous verse, stories and plays, including the comic operas ''Our Island Home'' (1870) and ''A Sensation Novel'' (1871), and the blank verse comedies ''The Princess'' (1870), ''The Palace of Truth'' (1870), and ''Pygmalion and Galatea'' (1871).
Well known examples of this include Tom Lehrer's ''The Elements'' and ''Clementine''; Allan Sherman's ''I'm Called Little Butterball'', ''When I Was a Lad'', ''You Need an Analyst'' and ''The Bronx Bird-Watcher''; and The Two Ronnies' 1973 Christmas Special.
When news arrives that the Mikado will be visiting the town, Ko-Ko assumes that he is coming to ascertain whether Ko-Ko has carried out the executions.
Lillian Russell had been engaged to create the title role, but Gilbert did not believe that she was dedicated enough, and when she missed a rehearsal, he dismissed her.
Revised and expanded, it was performed at the Crystal Palace in 1862 and was an immediate sensation.
Gilbert said, "I cannot give you a good reason for our... piece being laid in Japan.
Indeed, Gilbert, Sullivan and Carte had an important influence on amateur theatre.
They did not speak to each other.
Gilbert and Sullivan comic operas are commonly referenced in literature, film and television in various ways that include extensive use of Sullivan's music or where action occurs during a performance of a Gilbert and Sullivan opera, such as in the film ''The Girl Said No''.
It has been translated into numerous languages and is one of the most frequently played musical theatre pieces in history.
The operas have influenced political style and discourse, literature, film and television, have been widely parodied by humorists, and have been quoted in legal rulings.
''The Daily Telegraph'' wrote, "The composer has risen to his opportunity, and we are disposed to account ''Iolanthe'' his best effort in all the Gilbertian series."
These recordings were supervised by Rupert D'Oyly Carte.
''The Mikado'' remains the most frequently performed Savoy Opera.
Gilbert did not feel that he could write a grand opera libretto, but he offered a compromise that Sullivan ultimately accepted.
Over the next two years, Richard D'Oyly Carte and Carl Rosa were two of several theatrical managers who negotiated with the team but were unable to come to terms.
It concerns a breach of promise of marriage suit.
These commissions, however, were not sufficient to keep Sullivan afloat.
The composer later denied that this was true.
The libretto of ''H.M.S.
After much argument, the judge resolves the case by marrying the lovely plaintiff himself.
Pinafore'' (1878), satirising the rise of unqualified people to positions of authority and poking good-natured fun at the Royal Navy and the English obsession with social status (building on a theme introduced in ''The Sorcerer'', love between members of different social classes).
* ''The Pirate Movie'' (1982 film)
Ko-Ko loves his ward, Yum-Yum, but she loves a musician, who is really the son of the emperor of Japan (the Mikado), and who is in disguise to escape the attentions of the elderly and amorous Katisha.
Gilbert found a subject in one of his own short stories, "The Elixir of Love," which concerned the complications arising when a love potion is distributed to all the residents of a small village.
During the run of ''Iolanthe'', in 1883, Sullivan was knighted by Queen Victoria.
I remember all that he has done for me in allowing his genius to shed some of its lustre upon my humble name."
Gilbert recapitulates a number of his earlier themes, including the satire of class distinctions figuring in many of his earlier librettos.
Pinafore'', ''The Pirates of Penzance'' and ''The Mikado'' are among the best known.
Gilbert died in 1911, and Richard's son, Rupert D'Oyly Carte, took over the opera company upon his step-mother's death in 1913.
Gilbert, who wrote the words, created fanciful "topsy-turvy" worlds for these operas where each absurdity is taken to its logical conclusion—fairies rub elbows with British lords, flirting is a capital offence, gondoliers ascend to the monarchy, and pirates emerge as noblemen who have gone astray.
Songs from Gilbert and Sullivan are often pastiched in advertising, and elaborate advertising parodies have been published, as have the likenesses of various Gilbert and Sullivan performers throughout the decades.
The result was a new crispness and polish in the English musical theatre.
''Ruddigore'' (1887), a topsy-turvy take on Victorian melodrama, was less successful than most of the earlier collaborations with a run of 288 performances.
The quality throughout is more even, and maintained at a higher standard, than in any of his earlier works..."
In 1856, he received the first Mendelssohn Scholarship and studied at the Royal Academy of Music and then at Leipzig, where he also took up conducting.
These plays, influenced by the fairy work of James Planché, are founded upon the idea of self-revelation by characters under the influence of some magic or some supernatural interference.
During the run of ''Patience'', Carte built the large, modern Savoy Theatre, which became the partnership's permanent home.
During the run of ''Pinafore'', Richard D'Oyly Carte split up with his former investors.
Sullivan, six years Gilbert's junior, composed the music, contributing memorable melodies that could convey both humour and pathos.
Nevertheless, ''Pirates'' was a hit both in New York, again spawning numerous imitators, and then in London, and it became one of the most frequently performed, translated and parodied Gilbert and Sullivan works, also enjoying successful 1981 Broadway and 1982 West End revivals by Joseph Papp that continue to influence productions of the opera.
Gilbert, Sullivan and Carte tried for many years to control the American performance copyrights over their operas, without success.
The opera is based on Tennyson's poem ''The Princess: A Medley''.
They are now accepted as useful training schools for the legitimate stage, and from the volunteer ranks have sprung many present-day favourites."
The opera poked fun at English law and the House of Lords and made much of the war between the sexes.
Gilbert confronted Carte, who refused to reconsider the accounts.
His graduation piece, completed in 1861, was a suite of incidental music to Shakespeare's ''The Tempest''.
Nevertheless, Carte and his syndicate were sufficiently encouraged to commission another full-length opera from the team.
The piece was an extravaganza in which the classical Greek gods, grown elderly, are temporarily replaced by a troupe of 19th-century actors and actresses, one of whom is the eponymous Thespis, the Greek father of the drama.
* ''The Hot Mikado'' (1939) and ''Hot Mikado'' (1986)
Gilbert and Sullivan sometimes had a strained working relationship, partly caused by the fact that each man saw himself as allowing his work to be subjugated to the other's, and partly caused by the opposing personalities of the two—Gilbert was often confrontational and notoriously thin-skinned (though prone to acts of extraordinary kindness), while Sullivan eschewed conflict.
Sullivan became the conductor of the Leeds festival beginning in 1880 and conducted the performance.
He composed a ballet, ''L'Île Enchantée'' (1864) and incidental music for a number of Shakespeare plays.
At a rehearsal for one of these entertainments, ''Ages Ago'' (1869), the composer Frederic Clay introduced Gilbert to his friend, the young composer Arthur Sullivan.
British politicians, beyond quoting some of the more famous lines, have delivered speeches in the form of Gilbert and Sullivan pastiches.
Meanwhile, the Savoy Theatre continued to revive the Gilbert and Sullivan operas, in between new pieces, and D'Oyly Carte touring companies also played them in repertory.
Gilbert believed that this was a maintenance expense that should be charged to Carte alone.
The pirates learn of the deception and re-capture the Major-General, but when it is revealed that the pirates are all peers, the Major-General bids them: "resume your ranks and legislative duties, and take my daughters, all of whom are beauties!"
* ''Parson's Pirates'' by Opera della Luna (2002)
* ''The Swing Mikado'' (1938; Chicago – all-black cast)
Toye's ''Ruddigore'' overture entered the general repertory, and today is more often heard than the original overture by Clarke.
''The Gondoliers'' (1889) takes place partly in Venice and partly in a kingdom ruled by a pair of gondoliers who attempt to remodel the monarchy in a spirit of "republican equality."
The "patter" baritone (or "principal comedian", as these roles later were called) would often assume the leading role in Gilbert and Sullivan's comic operas, and was usually allotted the speedy patter songs.
His father, William, was a naval surgeon who later wrote novels and short stories, some of which included illustrations by his son.
Those two intervening years continued to shape Gilbert's theatrical style.
The Savoy operas, from the beginning, were produced extensively in North America and Australasia, and soon afterwards in Germany, Russia, and elsewhere in Europe and around the world.
F. C. Burnand wrote that he "was one of the most naturally ''comic little men'' I ever came across.
The work also lampoons male vanity and chauvinism in the military.
The leading character was a Cockney businessman who happened to be a sorcerer, a purveyor of blessings (not much called for) and curses (very popular).
Provincial tours and productions at other theatres quickly followed.
* ''The Black Mikado'' (1975)
The story concerns two rival "aesthetic" poets, who attract the attention of the young ladies of the village, who had been engaged to the members of a cavalry regiment.
Gilbert adapted the stories of ''H.M.S.
Sullivan and Burnand's second opera, ''The Contrabandista'' (1867) was not as successful.
He began building a reputation as England's most promising young composer, composing a symphony, a concerto, and several overtures, among them the ''Overture di Ballo'', in 1870.
As ''Princess Ida'' showed signs of flagging, Carte realised that, for the first time in the partnership's history, no new opera would be ready when the old one closed.
After a time, these subjects were often at odds with Sullivan's desire for realism and emotional content.
Pinafore'' relied on stock character types, many of which were familiar from European opera (and some of which grew out of Gilbert's earlier association with the German Reeds): the heroic protagonist (tenor) and his love-interest (soprano); the older woman with a secret or a sharp tongue (contralto); the baffled lyric baritone—the girl's father; and a classic villain (bass-baritone).
Sullivan, despite the financial security of writing for the Savoy, increasingly viewed his work with Gilbert as unimportant, beneath his skills, and repetitious.
In the 19th century, the most popular Gilbert and Sullivan songs and music were adapted as dance pieces.
Many of these recordings have been reissued on CD.
Gilbert oversaw the designs of sets and costumes, and he directed the performers on stage.
The piece premiered first in New York rather than London, in an (unsuccessful) attempt to secure the American copyright, and was another big success with both critics and audiences.
With the opening of trade between England and Japan, Japanese imports, art and styles became fashionable in London, making the time ripe for an opera set in Japan.
On 22 March 1884, he gave Gilbert and Sullivan contractual notice that a new opera would be required in six months' time.
He worked as a church organist and composed numerous hymns, popular songs, and parlour ballads.
(A Saucy, Sexy, Ship-Shape New Musical)'' (adapted by Mark Savage, first performed at the Celebration Theater in Los Angeles, California in 2001; only one character is female, and all but one of the male characters are gay.
Gilbert felt it was a moral issue, and could not look past it.
Grossmith, who created the role of Bunthorne, based his makeup, wig and costume on Swinburne and especially Whistler, as seen in the adjacent photo.
* ''Hollywood Pinafore'' (1945)
Pinafore'', ''Patience'' and ''The Mikado''.
* ''The Ghosts of Ruddigore'' by Opera della Luna (2003)
being able to place a piece like this on the stage in so complete a fashion."
Sullivan felt that Gilbert was questioning his good faith, and in any event, Sullivan had other reasons to stay in Carte's good graces: Carte was building a new theatre, the Royal English Opera House, to produce Sullivan's only grand opera, ''Ivanhoe''.
The overtures from the Gilbert and Sullivan operas remain popular, and there are many recordings of them.
The association further reported that almost 1,000 performances of the Savoy operas had been given in Britain that year, many of them to benefit charities.
Most of the overtures are in three sections: a lively introduction, a slow middle section, and a concluding allegro in sonata form, with two subjects, a brief development, a recapitulation and a coda.
At the premiere of Sullivan’s opera ''The Beauty Stone'' on 28 May, Gilbert arrived at the Savoy Theatre with friends, assuming that Sullivan had reserved some seats for him.
Richard D'Oyly Carte died in 1901, and his widow, Helen, continued to direct the activities of the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company at the Savoy and on tour.
Its mixture of political satire and grand opera parody mimicked Offenbach's ''Orpheus in the Underworld'' and ''La belle Hélène'', which (in translation) then dominated the English musical stage.
Gilbert and Sullivan added the element of the comic patter-singing character.
Pinafore'', then join the army as Major-General Stanley in ''The Pirates of Penzance'', and so on.
Allusions to their work have made their way into our own popular culture".
Electrical recordings of the complete musical scores of most of the operas were then issued by the Gramophone Company and Victor Talking Machine Company beginning in the late 1920s.
When ''Ruddigore'' closed, no new opera was ready.
My father sang them, my mother played them, my nurse, Emma, breathed them through her teeth.... My aunts and uncles... sang them singly and in unison at the slightest provocation...."
The most popular G&S works also continue to be performed from time to time by major opera companies, and professional recordings of the operas, and albums of songs from the operas, continue to be released.
Gilbert worked with Frederic Clay on ''Happy Arcadia'' (1872) and with Alfred Cellier on ''Topsyturveydom'' (1874), and wrote ''The Wicked World'' (1873) ''Sweethearts'' (1874) and several other libretti, farces, extravaganzas, fairy comedies, dramas and adaptations.
Because of the unusual success of the operas, the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company were able, from the start, to license the works to other professional companies, such as the J. C. Williamson Gilbert and Sullivan Opera Company, and to amateur troupes.
The ''Illustrated London News'' reported:
After both ''Princess Ida'' and ''Ruddigore'', which were less successful than the seven other operas from ''H.M.S.
There are also a number of Gilbert and Sullivan biographical films, such as Mike Leigh's ''Topsy-Turvy'' (2000) and ''The Story of Gilbert and Sullivan'' (1953), as well as shows about the partnership, including a 1938 Broadway show, ''Knights of Song'' and a 1975 West End show called ''Tarantara!
'''Gilbert and Sullivan''' refers to the Victorian-era theatrical partnership of the librettist W. S. Gilbert (1836–1911) and the composer Arthur Sullivan (1842–1900) and to the works they jointly created.
Gilbert and Sullivan disagreed several times over the choice of a subject.
The piece ran for a comparatively short 246 performances and was not revived in London until 1919.
Things soon degraded, a legal hearing was held, and Sullivan supported Carte by making an affidavit erroneously stating that there were minor legal expenses outstanding from a battle Gilbert had with Lillian Russell.
''Utopia, Limited'' (1893), their penultimate opera, was a very modest success, and their last, ''The Grand Duke'' (1896) was an outright failure.
The overture to ''Princess Ida'', for instance, has only an opening fast section and a concluding slow section.
Too timid to execute anyone, Ko-Ko cooks up a conspiracy to misdirect the Mikado, which goes awry.
Gilbert developed his innovative theories on the art of stage direction, following theatrical reformer Tom Robertson.
Gilbert went into semi-retirement, although he continued to direct revivals of the Savoy Operas and wrote new plays occasionally.
The Savoy Company, an amateur group formed in 1901 in Philadelphia, continues to perform today.
This event cleared the way for Carte, Gilbert and Sullivan to form the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company, which then produced all of their succeeding operas.
On each occasion, after a few months' pause, Gilbert responded with a libretto that met Sullivan's objections, and the partnership was able to continue successfully.
After a brief impasse over the choice of subject, Sullivan accepted an idea connected with Venice and Venetian life, as "this seemed to me to hold out great chances of bright colour and taking music."
Gilbert and Sullivan were tireless taskmasters, seeing to it that ''The Sorcerer'' opened as a fully polished production, in marked contrast to the under-rehearsed ''Thespis''.
His daughter, Bridget, inherited the company upon his death in 1948.
By the time of Sullivan's death in 1900, Gilbert wrote that any memory of their rift had been "completely bridged over," and "the most cordial relations existed between us."
On 5 May 1890, Gilbert had written to Sullivan: "The time for putting an end to our collaboration has at last arrived."
In 1871, producer John Hollingshead brought Gilbert and Sullivan together to produce a Christmas entertainment, ''Thespis'', at his Gaiety Theatre, a large West End house.
", "let the punishment fit the crime", and "A policeman's lot is not a happy one".
The words' precise degree of levity and distance from reality ... seemed to be expressed ... in the very notes of the music; almost ... in the note of the laughter that followed it."
The number of pianos manufactured in England doubled between 1870 and 1890 as more people began to play parlour music at home and more theatres and concert halls opened.
Also, Gilbert's political satire often poked fun at the wealthy and powerful whom Sullivan sought out for friendship and patronage.
The piece is one of Gilbert's humorous spoofs of the law and the legal profession, based on his short experience as a barrister.
There continue to be hundreds of amateur companies performing the Gilbert and Sullivan works worldwide.
Sullivan's authorship of the overture to ''Utopia, Limited'' cannot be verified with certainty, as his autograph score is now lost, but it is likely attributable to him, as it consists of only a few bars of introduction, followed by a straight copy of music heard elsewhere in the opera (the Drawing Room scene).
During the 20th century, the company gave well over 35,000 performances.
Their operas have enjoyed broad and enduring international success and are still performed frequently throughout the English-speaking world.
Nevertheless, the piece was profitable, and the reviews were not all bad.
There is even a German version of ''The Grand Duke''.
* ''The Cool Mikado'' (1962 film)
Gilbert and Sullivan respelled the title and made a number of changes and cuts.
Not long afterwards, Richard D'Oyly Carte was managing the Royalty Theatre and needed a short opera to be played as an afterpiece to Offenbach's ''La Périchole''.
The opera enjoyed a run longer than any of their other joint works except for ''H.M.S.
''Iolanthe'' (1882) was the first of the operas to open at the Savoy.
The two would write a light opera for the Savoy, and at the same time, Sullivan a grand opera (''Ivanhoe'') for a new theatre that Carte was constructing to present British grand opera.
The most successful of the Savoy Operas was ''The Mikado'' (1885), which made fun of English bureaucracy, thinly disguised by a Japanese setting.
* ''The Jazz Mikado'' (1927, Berlin)
Many other children's books have since been written retelling the stories of the operas or adapting characters or events from them.
The Mikado has decreed that executions must resume without delay in Titipu.
The fully electric Savoy made possible numerous special effects, such as sparkling magic wands for the female chorus of fairies.
The libretto also reflects Gilbert's fascination with the "Stock Company Act", highlighting the absurd convergence of natural persons and legal entities, which plays an even larger part in the next opera, ''Utopia Limited''.
''Princess Ida'' (1884) spoofed women's education and male chauvinism and continued the theme from ''Iolanthe'' of the war between the sexes.
A particularly hot summer in London did not help ticket sales.
*''Gondoliers'': A Mafia-themed adaptation of the opera, broadly rewritten by John Doyle and orchestrated and arranged Sarah Travis, was given at the Watermill Theatre and transferred to the Apollo Theatre in the West End in 2001.
Several of the later operas are similarly set in foreign or fictional locales, including ''The Gondoliers'', ''Utopia Limited'', and ''The Grand Duke''.
However, Sullivan himself did not always follow this pattern.
Gilbert had created several "fairy comedies" at the Haymarket Theatre in the early 1870s.
Political humour based on Gilbert and Sullivan's style and characters continues to be written.
As with many of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas, a surprise twist changes everything dramatically near the end of the story.
Gilbert and Sullivan scored their first international hit with ''H.M.S.
Very early performances of ''The Sorcerer'' used a section of Sullivan's incidental music to Shakespeare's ''Henry the VIII'', as he did not have time to write a new overture, but this was replaced in 1884 by one executed by Hamilton Clarke.
The operas have also influenced political discourse, literature, film and television and have been widely parodied and pastiched by humorists.
''Ida'' is the only Gilbert and Sullivan work with dialogue entirely in blank verse and is also the only one of their works in three acts.
Further changes were made, including a new overture, when Rupert D'Oyly Carte revived ''Ruddigore'' after the First World War, and the piece was regularly performed by the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company thereafter.
In 1874, Gilbert wrote a short libretto on commission from producer-conductor Carl Rosa, whose wife would have played the leading role, but her death in childbirth cancelled the project.
Many performing companies arose to produce the works, such as Gilbert and Sullivan for All in Britain and the Light Opera of Manhattan and Light Opera Works in the U.S., and existing companies, such as English National Opera and Australian Opera added Gilbert and Sullivan to their repertories.
The disgruntled former partners, who had invested in the production with no return, staged a public fracas, sending a group of thugs to seize the scenery during a performance.
Gilbert read the piece to Sullivan in February 1875, and the composer was delighted with it; ''Trial by Jury'' was composed and staged in a matter of weeks.
