These factors increase the resistance to airflow.
The West African giraffe is endemic to south-western Niger.
The name "giraffe" has its earliest known origins in the Arabic word ''zarāfah'' (زرافة), perhaps borrowed from the animal's Somali name ''geri''.
It is common for a giraffe to salivate while feeding.
The Angolan giraffe can be found in desert environments.
'''Reticulated giraffe''' (''G.
Mothers with calves will gather in nursery herds, moving or browsing together.
It has distinctive, irregular, jagged, star-like blotches which extend to the hooves.
Both sexes have prominent horn-like structures called ossicones, which are formed from ossified cartilage, covered in skin and fused to the skull at the parietal bones.
This behaviour occurs at low or high intensity.
The giraffe requires less food than many other herbivores because the foliage it eats has more concentrated nutrients and it has a more efficient digestive system.
The ossicones are more erect than in other subspecies and males have well-developed median lumps.
This theory was eventually rejected, and scientists now believe the giraffe's neck arose through Darwinian natural selection—that ancestral giraffes with long necks thereby had a competitive advantage that better enabled them to reproduce and pass on their genes.
The two species are equally distantly related to cattle, suggesting the giraffe's unique characteristics are not because of faster of evolution.
Giraffes are preyed on by lions; their young are also targeted by leopards, spotted hyenas, and African wild dogs.
Another famous fictional giraffe is the Toys "R" Us mascot Geoffrey the Giraffe.
Giraffes browse on the twigs of trees, preferring trees of the subfamily Acacieae and the genera ''Commiphora'' and ''Terminalia'', which are important sources of calcium and protein to sustain the giraffe's growth rate.
c. peralta'') for northern giraffe.
The ossicones, which have lain flat while it was in the womb, become erect within a few days.
Nevertheless, the animal can still supply enough oxygen to its tissues and it can increase its respiratory rate and oxygen diffusion when running.
Only one percent of same-sex mounting incidents occurred between females.
When it has access to water, a giraffe drinks at intervals no longer than three days.
c. antiquorum''), Nubian giraffe (''G.
Nile crocodiles can also be a threat to giraffes when they bend down to drink.
The modern English form developed around 1600 from the French ''girafe''.
Calves are at risk of predation, and a mother giraffe will stand over her calf and kick at an approaching predator.
attica'', also extinct, was formerly considered part of ''Giraffa'' but was reclassified as ''Bohlinia attica'' in 1929.Northern Giraffe#cite note-Mitchell20003-5|5
The power of a blow depends on the weight of the skull and the arc of the swing.
Despite its long neck and legs, the giraffe's body is relatively short.
The giraffe's head and neck are held up by large muscles and a strengthened nuchal ligament, which are anchored by long dorsal spines on the anterior thoracic vertebrae, giving the animal a hump.
Giraffes live in herds of related females and their offspring, or bachelor herds of unrelated adult males, but are gregarious and may gather in large aggregations.
The ecological conditions during this period may have helped them to disperse fast.
Individual captive giraffes were given celebrity status throughout history.
Females call their young by bellowing.
The Rhodesian giraffe is an ecotype of the Masai giraffe (''G.
It has sharply defined chestnut-coloured spots surrounded by mostly white lines, while undersides lack spotting.
The proportion of same-sex activities varied from 30–75 percent.
The male that can hold itself more erect wins the bout.
Many ruminants have been described from the mid-Eocene in Central Asia, Southeast Asia, and North America.
Giraffes would probably not be competent swimmers as their long legs would be highly cumbersome in the water, although they could possibly float.
In one study, up to 94 percent of observed mounting incidents took place between males.
reticulata''), also known as '''Somali giraffe'''
A giraffe eats around  of foliage daily.
The genus consists of eleven species including ''Giraffa camelopardalis'', the type species.
At least 11 main aromatic chemicals are in the fur, although indole and 3-methylindole are responsible for most of the smell.
Compared to the Nubian giraffe, this subspecies has smaller and more irregular spotting patterns.
They, together with the family Antilocapridae (whose only extant species is the pronghorn), belong to the superfamily Giraffoidea.
* †''Giraffa sivalensis''
The giraffe can reach a sprint speed of up to , and can sustain  for several kilometres.
The elongation of the neck appears to have started early in the giraffe lineage.
Its heart, which can weigh more than  and measures about  long, must generate approximately double the blood pressure required for a human to maintain blood flow to the brain.
The neck and rump patches tend to be fairly small.
Giraffes have oesophageal muscles that are unusually strong to allow regurgitation of food from the stomach up the neck and into the mouth for rumination.
The giraffe was also known to the Greeks and Romans, who believed that it was an unnatural hybrid of a camel and a leopard and called it ''camelopardalis''.
To get back up, it first gets on its knees and spreads its hind legs to raise its hindquarters.
Mothers tend to feed in open areas, presumably to make it easier to detect predators, although this may reduce their feeding efficiency.
Along the animal's neck is a mane made of short, erect hairs.
The giraffe was among the many animals collected and displayed by the Romans.
Shields, sandals and drums were made using the skin, and the strings of musical instruments were from the tendons.
The contestants will try to dodge each other's blows and then get ready to counter.
To solve this problem, the skin of the lower legs is thick and tight; preventing too much blood from pouring into them.
Within a few hours of birth, the calf can run around and is almost indistinguishable from a one-week-old.
The radius and ulna of the front legs are articulated by the carpus, which, while structurally equivalent to the human wrist, functions as a knee.
This animal has a lighter pelage than other subspecies, with red lobe-shaped blotches that reach below the hocks.
Mothers in such a group may sometimes leave their calves with one female while they forage and drink elsewhere.
They also feed on shrubs, grass and fruit.
The giraffe is one of only two living genera of the family Giraffidae, the other being the okapi.
Giraffes also snore, hiss, moan, grunt and make flute-like sounds, and possibly communicate over long distances using infrasound—though this is disputed.
The formerly recognised subspecies ''G.
Giraffes are not territorial, but they have home ranges.
However, for the first 1–3 weeks, it spends most of its time hiding; its coat pattern providing camouflage.
''Giraffokeryx'' may have shared a clade with more massively built giraffids like ''Sivatherium'' and ''Bramatherium''.
These groups may regularly associate with one another in larger communities or sub-communities within a fission–fusion society.
The giraffe belongs to the suborder Ruminantia.
A 2016 study confirmed that living giraffes consist of multiple species.
Necking is used to establish dominance and males that win necking bouts have greater reproductive success.
The animal was a source of fascination for the Chinese people, who associated it with the mythical Qilin.
Male giraffes occasionally wander far from areas that they normally frequent.
The '''giraffe''' (''Giraffa'') is a genus of African even-toed ungulate mammals, the tallest living terrestrial animals and the largest ruminants.
The giraffe was one of the many species first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.
The circulatory system of the giraffe has several adaptations for its great height.
Intermittent short "deep sleep" phases while lying are characterised by the giraffe bending its neck backwards and resting its head on the hip or thigh, a position believed to indicate paradoxical sleep.
There is also research suggesting that browsing competition is intense at lower levels, and giraffes feed more efficiently (gaining more leaf biomass with each mouthful) high in the canopy.
Computer scientists have modeled the coat patterns of several subspecies using reaction–diffusion mechanisms.
c. peralta''), also known as '''Niger giraffe''' or '''Nigerian giraffe'''
Their meat was used for food.
An estimated 13,000 animals are estimated to remain in the wild; and about 20 are kept in zoos.
This is known as a "calving pool".
The skin of a giraffe is mostly gray.
Its spots may be found below the hocks and the insides of the legs.
The jugular veins contain several (most commonly seven) valves to prevent blood flowing back into the head from the inferior vena cava and right atrium while the head is lowered.
Once an oestrous female is detected, the male will attempt to court her.
There are also seven extinct species of giraffe, listed as the following-
Although herbivorous, the giraffe has been known to visit carcasses and lick dried meat off bones.
It is the national animal of Tanzania, and is protected by law.
The implications of these findings for the conservation of giraffes were summarised by David Brown, lead author of the study, who told BBC News: "Lumping all giraffes into one species obscures the reality that some kinds of giraffe are on the brink.
The Masai giraffe can be found in central and southern Kenya and in Tanzania.
Thus, these nerve cells have a length of nearly  in the largest giraffes.
The giraffe's pelvis, though relatively short, has an ilium that is outspread at the upper ends.
As such, the wall of the heart can be as thick as .
In the early 19th century, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck believed the giraffe's long neck was an "acquired characteristic", developed as generations of ancestral giraffes strove to reach the leaves of tall trees.
When it raises again, the blood vessels constrict and direct the blood into the brain so the animal doesn't faint.
This ecotype may also develop five "horns".
The giraffe is a protected species in most of its range.
The same 2007 study found that The West African giraffe was more closely related to the Rothchild's giraffe than the Kordofan and its ancestor may have migrated from eastern to northern Africa and then to its current range with the development of the Sahara Desert.
Reproduction in giraffes is broadly polygamous: a few older males mate with the fertile females.
Being vascularized, the ossicones may have a role in thermoregulation, and are also used in combat between males.
The long neck results from a disproportionate lengthening of the cervical vertebrae, not from the addition of more vertebrae.
Likewise, calves may suckle for only a month or as long as a year.
This animal was medium-sized, slender and antelope-like.
* †''Giraffa jumae''
Both southern and northern giraffe have two and three distinct subspecies respectively; Angolan giraffe (''G.
Its thickness allows the animal to run through thorn bush without being punctured.
Males prefer young adult females over juveniles and older adults.
A sensation, the giraffe was the subject of numerous memorabilia or "giraffanalia".
''Giraffokeryx'' appeared 15 mya in the Indian subcontinent and resembled an okapi or a small giraffe, and had a longer neck and similar ossicones.
It is the most endangered subspecies within ''Giraffa'', with 400 individuals remaining in the wild.
Giraffes were probably common targets for hunters throughout Africa.
The four-species taxonomic classification has the genus ''Giraffa'' composed of the species ''Giraffa giraffa'' (southern giraffe), ''Giraffa tippelskirchi'' (Masai giraffe), ''Giraffa reticulata'' (reticulated giraffe) and ''Giraffa camelopardalis'' (northern giraffe).
In 2003, this group numbered 14.
Dominant males gain mating access to females, which bear the sole responsibility for raising the young.
There are an estimated 89,710 individuals of ''Giraffa'' in the wild, with 1,144 currently in captivity.
In 1999, it was estimated that over 140,000 giraffes existed in the wild, but estimates in 2016 indicate that fewer than 90,000 remain.
Unauthorised killing can result in imprisonment.
It is classified under the family Giraffidae, along with its closest extant relative, the okapi.
gracilis'' was smaller and more lightly built.
Giraffes host numerous species of internal parasite and are susceptible to various diseases.
Giraffes were thought to have few social bonds and for research purposes, a "group" has been defined as "a collection of individuals that are less than a kilometre apart and moving in the same general direction."
In particular, the atlas&ndash;axis joint (C1 and C2) allows the animal to tilt its head vertically and reach more branches with the tongue.
A necking duel can last more than half an hour, depending on how well matched the combatants are.
'''South African giraffe''' (''G.
After a duel, it is common for two male giraffes to caress and court each other.
In 1997, Jonathan Kingdon suggested that the Nubian giraffe was the most threatened of all giraffes; , it may number fewer than 250, although this estimate is uncertain.
However, this proposition is not generally accepted, as T1 has other morphological features, such as an articulating rib, deemed diagnostic of thoracic vertebrae, and because exceptions to the mammalian limit of seven cervical vertebrae are generally characterised by increased neurological anomalies and maladies.
Normally, giraffes can coexist with livestock, since they do not directly compete with them.
Asian giraffes are hypothesised to have had more okapi-like colourations.
c. camelopardalis'').
The structure of a giraffe's brain resembles that of domestic cattle.
c. camelopardalis'') and West African giraffe (''G.
'''Masai giraffe ''' (''G.
The calf emerges head and front legs first, having broken through the fetal membranes, and falls to the ground, severing the umbilical cord.
c. rothschildi''", after Walter Rothschild), also known as '''Baringo giraffe''' or '''Ugandan giraffe'''
However, they can fall prey to lions and are regular prey for them in Ruaha National Park and Kruger National Park.
* †''Giraffa pygmaea''
Their closest known relatives are the extinct deer-like climacocerids.
Giraffes have a great effect on the trees that they feed on, delaying the growth of young trees for some years and giving "waistlines" to trees that are too tall.
The Masai giraffe was also suggested to consist of possibly two species separated by the Rift Valley.
It is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as Least Concern, but has been extirpated from many parts of its former range, and three subspecies are classified as Endangered.
While adult giraffes standing among trees and bushes are hard to see at even a few metres' distance, when moving about to gain the best view of an approaching predator, they rely on their size and ability to defend themselves rather than on camouflage, which appears to be more important for calves.
According to the 2016 genetic analysis, it is synonymous with the Masai giraffe (''G.
The smoke from burning giraffe skins was used by the medicine men of Buganda to treat nose bleeds.
Male giraffes become darker as they age.
The upper jaw has a grooved palate and lacks front teeth.
The family was once much more extensive, with over 10 fossil genera described.
Its presence in South Sudan is uncertain.
The liver of the giraffe is small and compact.
A median lump is present in males.
The animal's faeces come in the form of small pellets.
The first one in Rome was brought in by Julius Caesar in 46 BC and exhibited to the public.
They were victims of the (now eradicated) viral illness rinderpest.
However, one objection is that it fails to explain why female giraffes also have long necks.
Morten Thrane Brünnich classified the genus ''Giraffa'' in 1772.
Humans have interacted with giraffes for millennia.
'''Rothschild's giraffe''' ("''G.
Appearance is a reliable guide to the sex or age of a giraffe: the ossicones of females and young are thin and display tufts of hair on top, whereas those of adult males end in knobs and tend to be bald on top.
Two former subspecies (Rothschild's giraffe and Rhodesian giraffe) are also included.
Adult males play almost no role in raising the young, although they appear to have friendly interactions.
Also, a median lump, which is more prominent in males, emerges at the front of the skull.
"Camelopard" is an archaic English name for the giraffe deriving from the Ancient Greek for camel and leopard, referring to its camel-like shape and its leopard-like colouring.
* †''Giraffa punjabiensis''
During nighttime, giraffes appear to hum to each other above the infrasound range for purposes which are unclear.
The median lump of males is less developed.
The Tswana people of Botswana saw the constellation Crux as two giraffes – Acrux and Mimosa forming a male, and Gacrux and Delta Crucis forming the female.
This study suggests that maintaining a longer neck requires more nutrients, which puts longer-necked giraffes at risk during a food shortage.
Giraffes usually inhabit savannahs and open woodlands.
Estimations as of 2016 indicate that there are approximately 90,000 members of ''Giraffa'' in the wild, with around 1,144 in captivity.
Around 2,150 are thought to remain in the wild, with 1,500 individuals belonging to the Rothschild ecotype.
The main driver for the evolution of the giraffes is believed to have been the changes from extensive forests to more open habitats, which began 8 mya.
Social cohesion in these groups is maintained by the bonds formed between calves.
With this correction, about 65 are kept in zoos.
''Paleotragus'' resembled the okapi and may been its ancestor.
Its distinctive coat pattern consists of sharp-edged, reddish brown polygonal patches divided by a network of thin white lines.
As a ruminant, the giraffe first chews its food, then swallows it for processing and then visibly passes the half-digested cud up the neck and back into the mouth to chew again.
The giraffe's chief distinguishing characteristics are its extremely long neck and legs, its horn-like ossicones, and its distinctive coat patterns.
Giraffids like ''Palaeotragus'', ''Shansitherium'' and ''Samotherium'' appeared 14 mya and lived throughout Africa and Eurasia.
During courtship, males emit loud coughs.
Giraffes appear to select mates of the same coat type, which are imprinted on them as calves.
Some researchers have hypothesised that this new habitat coupled with a different diet, including acacia species, may have exposed giraffe ancestors to toxins that caused higher mutation rates and a higher rate of evolution.
The giraffe has an extremely elongated neck, which can be up to  in length, accounting for much of the animal's vertical height.
Some parasites feed on giraffes.
However, males must wait until they are at least seven years old to gain the opportunity to mate.
With the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the housing of giraffes in Europe declined.
The species name ''camelopardalis'' is from Latin.
They prefer Acacieae, ''Commiphora'', ''Combretum'' and open ''Terminalia'' woodlands over denser environments like ''Brachystegia'' woodlands.
The Egyptians gave the giraffe its own hieroglyph, named 'sr' in Old Egyptian and 'mmy' in later periods.
Giraffes were depicted in art throughout the African continent, including that of the Kiffians, Egyptians and Meroë Nubians.
The dark spots may also have paler radiating lines or streaks within them.
Male giraffes assess female fertility by tasting the female's urine to detect oestrus, in a multi-step process known as the flehmen response.
Each individual giraffe has a unique coat pattern.
There are several hypotheses regarding the evolutionary origin and maintenance of elongation in giraffe necks.
