"the listener is bombarded by a stunning diversity of rhythms, orchestral textures, melodic motifs and harmonic devices.
From this period onwards Verdi also develops his instinct for "tinta" (literally 'colour'), a term which he used for characterising elements of an individual opera score – Parker gives as an example "the rising 6th that begins so many lyric pieces in ''Ernani''".
But when, in December 1860, an approach was made from Saint Petersburg's Imperial Theatre, the offer of 60,000 francs plus all expenses was doubtless a strong incentive.
Kerman, like the psychologist Gerald Mendelssohn, sees this choice of subjects as being influenced by Verdi's uneasy passion for Strepponi.
For several months Verdi was preoccupied with family matters.
That is not to say his operas did not come as great innovations.
Verdi would not compromise: What does the sack matter to the police?
Instead, Verdi experiments with a variety of means – e.g.
This he left until the opera was in rehearsal, since he wanted to hear "la Jenny Lind|Jenny Lind and modify her role to suit her more exactly."
Although Verdi's operas brought him a popular following, not all contemporary critics approved of his work.
Verdi set his sights on Milan, then the cultural capital of northern Italy, where he applied unsuccessfully to study at the Conservatory.
Verdi now had sufficient earnings to retire, should he have wished to do so.
A couple of months later, writing in the same vein to Countess Maffei he stated: "I'm not doing anything.
We are always together at dinner, in the cafes, when we play cards...; all in all, he doesn't go anywhere without me at his side; in the house we have a big table and we both write there together, and so I always have his advice."
In 1869, Verdi had been asked to compose a section for a requiem mass in memory of Gioachino Rossini.
Budden comments "In no other opera of his does Verdi appear to have taken so little interest ''before'' it was staged."
I don't even know what colour my last opera is, and I almost don't remember it."
By the time of his death, ''verismo'' was the accepted style of young Italian composers.
In 1959 the Instituto di Studi Verdiani (from 1989 the Istituto Nazionale di Studi Verdiani) was founded in Parma and became a leading centre for research and publication of Verdi studies, and in the 1970s the American Institute for Verdi Studies was founded at New York University.
Nothing will prevent the good Verdi from soon reaching one of the most honourable positions in the cohort of composers."
The young Verdi did not immediately become involved with the Philharmonic.
Strepponi wrote in 1871 "I won't say Verdi is an atheist, but he is not much of a believer."
Queen Victoria and Prince Albert attended the first performance, and for the most part, the press was generous in its praise.
''Il trovatore'' was in fact the first opera he wrote without a specific commission (apart from ''Oberto'').
The last two operas, ''Otello'' and ''Falstaff'', together with the Requiem and the ''Four Sacred Pieces,'' then represent a 'final' period.
There, the censors demanded further changes; at this point, the opera took the title ''Un ballo in maschera''.
Sixteen years in the galleys."
He surprised the musical world by returning, after his success with the opera ''Aida'' (1871), with three late masterpieces: his Requiem (1874), and the operas ''Otello'' (1887) and ''Falstaff'' (1893).
Finally, six years later, appeared ''Falstaff'', Verdi's only comedy apart from the early, ill-fated ''Un giorno di regno''.
Verdi began work on ''Il trovatore'' after the death of his mother in June 1851.
Well received at its first performance on 9 March 1842, ''Nabucco'' underpinned Verdi's success until his retirement from the theatre, twenty-nine operas (including some revised and updated versions) later.
Icilio Romano followed on 11 July 1838.
Verdi's increasing command of musical highlighting of changing moods and relationships is exemplified in Act III of ''Rigoletto'', where Duke's flippant song "La donna è mobile" is followed immediately by the quartet "Bella figlia dell'amore", contrasting the rapacious Duke and his inamorata with the (concealed) indignant Rigoletto and his grieving daughter.
One example of Verdi's wish to move away from "standard forms" appears in his feelings about the structure of ''Il trovatore''.
''Macbeth'', even in its original 1847 version, shows many original touches; characterization by key (the Macbeths themselves generally singing in sharp keys, the witches in flat keys), a preponderance of minor key music, and highly original orchestration.
Nevertheless, he was to become Verdi's close collaborator in his final operas.
In the 'dagger scene' and the duet following the murder of Duncan, the  forms transcend the 'Code Rossini' and propel the drama in a compelling fashion.
These two operas are generally agreed today by critics to mark the division between Verdi's 'early' and 'middle' periods.
Another factor was the changed political situation; the failure of the 1848 revolutions led both to some diminution of the Risorgimento ethos (at least initially) and a significant increase in theatre censorship.
By 1829–30, Verdi had established himself as a leader of the Philharmonic: "none of us could rival him" reported the secretary of the organisation, Giuseppe Demaldè.
Verdi conducted his Requiem in Paris, London and Vienna in 1875 and in Cologne in 1876.
In January 1851, Verdi broke off relations with his parents, and in April they were  ordered to leave Sant'Agata; Verdi found new premises for them and helped them financially to settle into their new home.
In February 1852, the couple attended a performance of Alexander Dumas ''fils'''s  play, ''The Lady of the Camellias''; Verdi immediately began to compose music for what would later become ''La traviata''.
Verdi later stated: "From the ages of 13 to 18 I wrote a motley assortment of pieces: marches for band by the hundred, perhaps as many little ''sinfonie'' that were used in church, in the theatre and at concerts, five or six concertos and sets of variations for pianoforte, which I played myself at concerts, many serenades, cantatas (arias, duets, very many trios) and various pieces of church music, of which I remember only a ''Stabat Mater''."
Whilst the critic Théophile Gautier praised the work, the composer Georges Bizet was disappointed at Verdi's changing style: "Verdi is no longer Italian.
''Aida'' marks a return to earlier days in many ways.
But by the time of Verdi's death, 55 years later, his reputation was assured, and the 1910 edition of Grove's Dictionary  pronounced him "one of the greatest and most popular opera composers of the nineteenth century."
In Nabucco, this is abolished; he uses the chorus as character, to show the suffering and consensus of the people.
Attending the ''Società'' frequently in 1834, Verdi soon found himself functioning as rehearsal director (for Rossini's ''La cenerentola'') and continuo player.
He had considered a variety of comic subjects but had found none of them wholly suitable and confided his ambition to Boito.
Verdi will continue to draw on certain of its forms for the next few operas, but in a totally new spirit."
He discovered that Piave was now "Citizen Piave" of the newly proclaimed Republic of San Marco.
All of his operas are available in recordings in a number of versions, and on DVD – Naxos Records offers a complete boxed set.
Verdi "never forgave the Milanese for their reception of ''Un giorno di regno''."
He witnessed the performance from the Royal Box at the side of King Umberto and the Queen.
In this work Roger Parker writes that:
The premiere in March 1853 was indeed a failure: Verdi wrote: "Was the fault mine or the singers'?
But in fact the piece encored was not "Va, pensiero" but the hymn "Immenso Jehova".
Verdi spent much of 1872 and 1873 supervising the Italian productions of ''Aida'' at Milan, Parma and Naples, effectively acting as producer and demanding high standards and adequate rehearsal time.
He reported to Barezzi that Verdi "has a breadth of spirit, of generosity, a wisdom."
A singing hunchback...why not?...I think it splendid to show this character as outwardly deformed and ridiculous, and inwardly passionate and full of love.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin ranked Verdi in the 'naïve' category&nbsp;– "They are not...self-conscious.
Budden points out that there is little in the music of ''Otello'' that relates either to the ''verismo'' opera of the younger Italian composers, and little if anything which can be construed as a homage to the New German School.
For now, let's not think of obstacles, of age, of illnesses!"
Before she left Verdi gave her a letter that pledged his love.
The performance was a huge success; numbers were encored, and at the end the applause for Verdi and the cast lasted an hour.
Verdi had a younger sister, Giuseppa, who died aged 17 in 1833.
In 1859, Verdi was elected as a member of the new provincial council, and was appointed to head a group of five who would meet with King Vittorio Emanuele II in Turin.
Later he wrote to Boito (capitals and exclamation marks are Verdi's own): "What joy to be able to say to the public: HERE WE ARE AGAIN
Verdi came up with the idea of adapting the 1835 Spanish play ''Don Alvaro o la fuerza del sino'' by Angel Saavedra, which became ''La forza del destino'', with Piave writing the libretto.
It was Massini who encouraged him to write his first opera, originally titled ''Rocester'', to a libretto by the journalist Antonio Piazza.
Verdi had completed ''I masnadieri'' for London by May 1847 except for the orchestration.
The La Scala impresario, Bartolomeo Merelli,  agreed to put on ''Oberto'' (as the reworked opera was now called, with a libretto rewritten by Temistocle Solera) in November 1839.
Arriving in Sant'Agata in March 1859 Verdi and Strepponi found the nearby city of Piacenza occupied by about 6,000 Austrian troops who had made it their base, to combat the rise of Italian interest in unification in the Piedmont region.
The failure of ''Stiffelio'' (attributable not least to the censors of the time taking offence at the taboo subject of the supposed adultery of a clergyman's wife and interfering with the text and roles) incited Verdi to take pains to rework it, although even in the completely recycled version of ''Aroldo'' (1857) it still failed to please.
He gets up almost with the dawn, to go and examine the wheat, the maize, the vines, etc....Fortunately our tastes for this sort of life coincide, except in the matter of sunrise, which he likes to see up and dressed, and I from my bed."
To his librettist, Cammarano, Verdi plainly states in a letter of April 1851 that if there were no standard forms – "cavatinas, duets, trios, choruses, finales, etc.
In the eleven years up to and including ''Traviata'', Verdi had written sixteen operas.
A growing estrangement between Verdi and his parents was perhaps also attributable to Strepponi (The suggestion that this situation was sparked by the birth of a child to Verdi and Strepponi which was given away as a foundling lacks any firm evidence).
Verdi himself, following his mother, always celebrated his birthday on 9 October.
In the spirit of the time were the tenor hero's final words, "Whoever dies for the fatherland cannot be evil-minded".
Although Verdi's works belong, as Rosselli admits "to the most artificial of genres...they ring emotionally true: truth and directness make them exciting, often hugely so."
Verdi’s hometown of Busseto displays Luigi Secchi's statue of a seated Verdi in 1913, next to the Teatro Verdi built in his honour in the 1850s.
His enormous popularity among the most sophisticated as well as the most ordinary listeners today is due to the fact that he expressed permanent states of consciousness in the most direct terms: as Homer, Shakespeare, Ibsen, and Tolstoy have done... After Verdi this is not heard in music again.
on 21 January 1901.
One is that with increasing reputation and financial security he no longer needed to commit himself to the productive treadmill, had more freedom to choose his own subjects, and had more time to develop them according to his own ideas.
Budden suggests that "With Verdi...the man and the artist on many ways developed side by side."
Verdi received the draft libretto probably in early July 1889 after he had just read Shakespeare's play: "Benissimo!
Rigoletto is one of, if not the earliest operas to abandon the traditional distinction between the sung aria, and the more speech-like recitative.
It was a flop and only given the one performance.
Verdi, the first child of Carlo Giuseppe Verdi (1785–1867) and Luigia Uttini (1787–1851), was born at their home in Le Roncole, a village near Busseto, then in the Département Taro and within the borders of  the First French Empire following the annexation of the Duchy of Parma and Piacenza in 1808.
Verdi adored his wife and children and was devastated by their deaths.
by Italian composer Lorenzo Ferrero, written to commemorate the 150th anniversary of Italian unification of 1861.
He attended the ''Salotto Maffei'', Countess Clara Maffei's salons in Milan, becoming her lifelong friend and correspondent.
Excerpts from the Requiem were featured at the memorial service for Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997.
This information comes from the ''Autobiographical Sketch'' which Verdi dictated to the publisher Giulio Ricordi late in life, in 1879, and remains the leading source for his early life and career.
A month later, his body was moved to the crypt of the Casa di Riposo.
It was acclaimed by both Demaldè and Barezzi, who commented: "He shows a vivid imagination, a philosophical outlook, and sound judgment in the arrangement of instrumental parts."
On hearing the news of the "Cinque Giornate", the "Five Days" of street fighting that took place between 18 and 22 March 1848 and temporarily drove the Austrians out of Milan, Verdi travelled there, arriving on 5 April.
He compiled and completed the requiem, but its performance was abandoned (and its premiere did not take place until 1988).
Verdi began making connections in the Milanese world of music that were to stand him in good stead.
They were enthusiastically greeted along the way and in Turin Verdi himself received much of the publicity.
Following its failure, it is claimed Verdi vowed never to compose again, but in his ''Sketch'' he recounts how Merelli persuaded him to write a new opera.
That was followed by a tumultuous welcome when the composer, his wife and Boito arrived at the Grand Hotel de Milan.
The fact that this is "the one opera of Verdi's which focuses on a mother rather than a father" is perhaps related to her death.
He also learnt to keep himself to himself, never discussing his private life and maintaining when it suited his convenience legends about his supposed 'peasant' origins, his materialism and his indifference to criticism.
In mid-1834, Verdi sought to acquire Provesi's former post in Busseto but without success.
Verdi and Giuseppina decided to adopt Carlo's great-niece Filomena Maria Verdi, then seven years old, as their own child.
Meanwhile, the music of Verdi can still evoke a range of cultural and political resonances.
During the rehearsals for the Naples production he wrote his string quartet, the only chamber music by him to survive, and the only major work in the form by an Italian of the 19th century.
In his early operas Verdi demonstrated a sympathy with the Risorgimento movement which sought the unification of Italy.
This fuelled speculation that the delay was due to Verdi's interest in Giuseppina Strepponi (who stated that their relationship began in 1843).
These include the 1938 film directed by Carmine Gallone, ''Giuseppe Verdi'', starring Fosco Giachetti; the 1982 miniseries, ''The Life of Verdi'', directed by Renato Castellani, where Verdi was played by Ronald Pickup, with narration by Burt Lancaster in the English version; and the 1985 play ''After Aida'', by Julian Mitchell (1985).
In 2014, the pop singer Katy Perry appeared at the Grammy Award wearing a dress designed by  Valentino, embroidered with the music of "Dell'invito trascorsa e gia l'ora" from the start of ''La traviata''.
''Ernani'' was successfully premiered in 1844, and within six months had been performed at twenty other theatres in Italy, and also in Vienna.
... and if you could avoid beginning with an opening chorus....", he would be quite happy.
Imagine that there are no more Germans here
He had reached a stage where he could develop his operas as he wished, rather than be dependent on commissions from third parties.
The baptismal register, prepared on 11 October 1813, lists his parents Carlo and Luigia as "innkeeper" and  "spinner" respectively.
During the rehearsals for the Naples production of ''Aida'' Verdi amused himself by writing his only string quartet, a sprightly work which shows in its last movement that he had not lost the skill for fugue-writing that he had learned with Lavigna.
I have to write six operas, then ''addio'' to everything."
For Verdi the performances were a personal triumph in his native region, especially as his father, Carlo, attended the first performance.
She was shunned in the town and at church, and while Verdi appeared indifferent, she was certainly not.
Finally on 10 July 1889 he wrote again: "So be it!
No fellow composer...came near him in popularity or reputation".
From the 1930s onward there began to appear scholarly biographies and publications of documentation and correspondence.
At the end of 1859, Verdi wrote to his friend Cesare De Sanctis "Since completing ''Ballo'' I have not made any more music, I have not seen any more music, I have not thought anymore about music.
Now, I send you ''Macbeth'', which I prize above all my other operas, and therefore deem worthier to present to you."
He had known him since about 1828 as another of Barezzi's protégés.
The writer Friedrich Schiller (four of whose plays were adapted as operas by Verdi) distinguished two types of artist in his 1795 essay ''On Naïve and Sentimental Poetry''.
Other Verdi operas in the top 20 are ''Rigoletto'' (8th place, 445 performances), ''Aida'' (12th place, 304 performances),  ''Nabucco'' (16th place, 304 performances) and ''Il trovatore'' (18th place, 232 performances).
In the words of his biographer John Rosselli, it "confirmed him as the unique presiding genius of Italian music.
But the same company's staging in 2002 of ''Un ballo in maschera'' as ''A Masked Ball'', directed by Calixto Bieito, including "satanic sex rituals, homosexual rape, and a demonic dwarf", got a general critical thumbs down.
Verdi and Strepponi moved into Sant'Agata on 1 May 1851.
Cammarano suggested adapting Joseph Méry's 1828 play ''La Bataille de Toulouse'', which he described as a story "that should stir every man with an Italian soul in his breast".
Over the next eighteen years (up to ''Aida''), he wrote only six new works for the stage.
For ''I Lombardi'' and ''Ernani'' (1844) in Venice he was paid 12,000 lire (including supervision of the productions); ''Attila'' and ''Macbeth'' (1847), each brought him 18,000 lire.
Verdi was disgusted at this outcome: "Where then is the independence of Italy, so long hoped for and promised?...Venice is not Italian?
Even more hectic scenes ensued when he went to Rome in May for the opera's premiere at the Teatro Costanzi, when crowds of well-wishers at the railway station initially forced Verdi to take refuge in a tool-shed.
He taught, gave lessons, and conducted the Philharmonic for several months before returning to Milan in early 1835.
The writer Andrew Porter notes that for the next ten years, Verdi's life "reads like a travel diary – a timetable of visits...to bring new operas to the stage or to supervise local premieres."
The opera's premiere in 1867 drew mixed comments.
No one could have done better than you", he wrote back to Boito.
Both the children died young, Virginia on 12 August 1838, Ilicio on 22 October 1839.
The musicologist Richard Taruskin suggests "the most striking effect in the early Verdi operas, and the one most obviously allied to the mood of the Risorgimento, was the big choral number sung – crudely or sublimely, according to the ear of the beholder – in unison.
During the 1860s and 1870s Verdi paid great attention to his estate around Busseto, purchasing additional land, dealing with unsatisfactory (in one case, embezzling), stewards, installing irrigation, coping with variable harvests and economic slumps.
After Baistrocchi's death, Verdi, at the age of eight, became the official paid organist.
From the age of four, Verdi was given private lessons in Latin and Italian by the village schoolmaster, Baistrocchi, and at six he attended the local school.
Aside from this, his use of the chorus was entirely new.
He dedicated the opera to Barezzi: "I have long intended to dedicate an opera to you, as you have been a father, a benefactor and a friend for me.
Julian Budden expresses the impact of ''Rigoletto'' and its place in Verdi's output as follows: "Just after 1850 at the age of 38, Verdi closed the door on a period of Italian opera with ''Rigoletto''.
In April 1845, in connection with ''I due Foscari'', he wrote: "I am happy, no matter what reception it gets, and I am utterly indifferent to everything.
Later that year, he also bought the Palazzo Cavalli (now known as the Palazzo Orlandi) on the via Roma, Busseto's main street.
Verdi had been invited to write a piece of music for the 1862 International Exhibition in London,  and charged Boito with writing a text, which became the ''Inno delle nazioni''.
Parker comments that ''La traviata'', the last opera of the 'middle' period,  is "again a new adventure.
Subsequent productions (following some rewriting) throughout Europe over the following two years fully vindicated the composer; Roger Parker has written "''Il trovatore'' consistently remains one of the three or four most popular operas in the Verdian repertoire: but it has never pleased the critics".
The St. Petersburg premiere of ''La forza'' finally took place in September 1862, and Verdi received the Order of St. Stanislaus.
– ''Isaiah Berlin (1979)''
Porter notes that ''Un ballo'' marks an almost complete synthesis of Verdi's style with the grand opera hallmarks, such that "huge spectacle is not mere decoration but essential to the drama...musical and theatrical lines remain taut and the characters still sing as warmly, passionately and personally as in ''Il trovatore''."
By the time he was 12, he began lessons with Ferdinando Provesi, ''maestro di cappella'' at San Bartolomeo, director of the municipal music school and co-director of the local ''Società Filarmonica'' (Philharmonic Society).
Mendelsohn describes the composer as "an intensely private man who deeply resented efforts to inquire into his personal affairs.
That was followed by an agreement with the Rome Opera company to present ''Il trovatore'' for January 1853.
Modern productions may differ substantially from those originally envisaged by the composer.
Later, in 1874, Verdi was appointed a member of the Italian Senate, but did not participate in its activities.
, the favorite librettist of Meyerbeer, telling him: "I want – in fact, I must have – a grandiose, impassioned and original subject."
It is one of many statues to the composer in Italy.
Interest in the operas reawakened in mid-1920s Germany and this sparked a revival in England and elsewhere.
Rosselli comments that in the Requiem "The prospect of Hell appears to rule...the Requiem is troubled to the end," and offers little consolation.
Lavigna encouraged Verdi to take out a subscription to La Scala, where he heard Maria Malibran in operas by Gioachino Rossini and Vincenzo Bellini.
I cannot wait for these next three years to pass.
After his visit to Rome for ''Il trovatore'' in January 1853, Verdi worked on completing ''La traviata'', but with little hope of its success, due to his lack of confidence in any of the singers engaged for the season.
For the first night, official ticket prices were thirty times higher than usual.
Ungainly and awkward in society in his early years, "as he became a man of property and underwent the civilizing influence of Giuseppina,...he acquired assurance and authority."
The opera historian Charles Osborne describes the 1849 La battaglia di Legnano as "an opera with a purpose" and maintains that  "while parts of Verdi's earlier operas had frequently been taken up by the fighters of the Risorgimento...this time the composer had given the movement its own opera" It was not until 1859 in Naples, and only then spreading throughout Italy, that the slogan "Viva Verdi" was used as an acronym for '''''Viva V'''ittorio '''E'''manuele '''R'''e '''''D''''''I'''talia'' (Viva Victor Emmanuel King of Italy)'', (who was then king of Sardinia).
Verdi returned to Busseto regularly to play the organ on Sundays, covering the distance of several kilometres on foot.
In 1844 he purchased Il Pulgaro, 62 acres (23 hectares) of farmland with a farmhouse and outbuildings, providing a home for his parents from May 1844.
Hard to tell, even for me."
Having achieved some fame and prosperity, Verdi began in 1859 to take an active interest in Italian politics.
Verdi has been the subject of a number of film and stage works.
Nonetheless there is still much originality, building on the strengths which Verdi had already demonstrated; the powerful storm which opens the opera ''in medias res'', the recollection of the love duet of Act I in Otello's dying words (more an aspect of ''tinta'' than ''leitmotif''), imaginative touches of harmony in Iago's "Era la notte" (Act II).
The premiere was set for late January 1849.
He relied on Piave again for ''I due Foscari'', performed in Rome in November 1844, then on Solera once more for ''Giovanna d'Arco'', at La Scala in February 1845, while in August that year he was able to work with Salvadore Cammarano on ''Alzira'' for the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples.
While Verdi was working on his second opera ''Un giorno di regno'', Margherita died of encephalitis at the age of 26.
Boito wrote to a friend, in words which recall the mysterious final scene of ''Don Carlos'', "Verdi sleeps like a King of Spain in his Escurial, under a bronze slab that completely covers him."
Strepponi was in fact known for her amorous relationships (and many illegitimate children) and her history was an awkward factor in their relationship until they eventually agreed on marriage.
The so-called ''ottocento'' in music is finished.
''Oberto'' is poorly structured, and the orchestration of the first operas is generally simple, sometimes even basic.
If the project failed, it would have been a waste of Boito's time, and have distracted him from completing his own new opera.
In 1837, the young composer asked for Massini's assistance to stage his opera in Milan.
Verdi, now in his sixties, initially seemed to withdraw into retirement.
His early commitment to the Risorgimento movement is difficult to estimate accurately; in the words of the music historian Philip Gossett "myths intensifying and exaggerating such sentiment began circulating" during the nineteenth century.
It may not be coincidental that all six Verdi operas written in the period 1849–53 (''La battaglia, Luisa Miller, Stiffelio, Rigoletto, Il trovatore'' and ''La traviata''), have, uniquely in his oeuvre, heroines who are, in the opera critic Joseph Kerman's words, "women who come to grief because of sexual transgression, actual or perceived".
Cavour however was anxious to convince a man of Verdi's stature that running for political office was essential to strengthening and securing Italy's future.
As news leaked out, Verdi was pressed by opera houses across Europe with enquiries; eventually the opera was triumphantly premiered at La Scala in February 1887.
The success of "Va, pensiero" in ''Nabucco'' (which Rossini approvingly denoted as "a grand aria sung by sopranos, contraltos, tenors and basses"), was replicated in the similar "O Signor, dal tetto natio" in ''I lombardi'' and in 1844 in the chorus "Si ridesti il Leon di Castiglia" in ''Ernani'', the battle hymn of the conspirators seeking freedom In ''I due Foscari'' Verdi first uses recurring themes identified with main characters; here and in future operas the accent moves away from the 'oratorio' characteristics of the first operas towards individual action and intrigue.
In the winter of 1851–52 Verdi decided to go to Paris with Strepponi where he concluded an agreement with the Opéra to write what became ''Les vêpres siciliennes'', his first original work in the style of grand opera.
On 12 March 2011 during a performance of ''Nabucco'' at the Opera di Roma celebrating 150 years of Italian unification, the conductor Riccardo Muti paused after "Va pensiero" and turned to address the audience (which included the then Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi) to complain about cuts in state funding of culture; the audience then joined in a repeat of the chorus.
The 'middle' period is felt to end with ''La traviata'' (1853) and ''Les vêpres siciliennes'' (1855), with a 'late' period commencing with ''Simon Boccanegra'' (1857) running through to ''Aida'' (1871).
Verdi and Strepponi now decided on marriage; they travelled to Collonges-sous-Salève, a village then part of Piedmont.
Shall I have it performed?
