Armatures could be very costly&nbsp;– some were flamboyantly decorated with exotic feathers, jewels and precious metals.
Those judged less harshly might be condemned ''ad ludum venatorium'' or ''ad gladiatorium''&nbsp;– combat with animals or gladiators&nbsp;– and armed as thought appropriate.
Those who were condemned to become gladiators for their crimes are to work from now on in the mines.
Even for those whose death had brought honourable release, the taint of ''infamia'' was perpetual.
Successful training required intense commitment.
''Cyclops'' is a 2008 television monster film about the mythological cyclops, the last survivor of his species.
Probably as a result, he banned the use of female gladiators in 200 AD.
The best&nbsp;– the most robust&nbsp;– were sent to Rome.
Gladiators were typically accommodated in cells, arranged in barrack formation around a central practice arena.
Claudius, characterised by his historians as morbidly cruel and boorish, fought a whale trapped in the harbor in front of a group of spectators.
Gladiator remains from Ephesus confirm this.
Another, dressed as Mercury, tests for life-signs with a heated "wand"; once confirmed as dead, the body is dragged from the arena.
An outstanding fighter might receive a laurel crown and money from an appreciative crowd but for anyone originally condemned ''ad ludum'' the greatest reward was manumission (i.e., emancipation), symbolised by the gift of a wooden training sword or staff (''rudis'') from the ''editor''.
Those sentenced to the ''ludi'' should not be discharged before five years or three years if awarded manumission.
Ten years later, Scipio Africanus gave a commemorative ''munus'' in Iberia for his father and uncle, casualties in the Punic Wars.
Such assignations were a source for gossip and satire but some became unforgivably public:
''The Fighting Gladiator''
Discipline could be extreme, even lethal.
This preference informed most standard histories of the Roman games in the early modern era.
A rescript of Hadrian reminded magistrates that "those sentenced to the sword" should be despatched immediately "or at least within the year".
Honorius (r. 395–423) legally ended ''munera'' in 399, and again in 404, at least in the Western half of the Empire according to Theodoret, because of the martyrdom of Saint Telemachus by spectators at a ''munus.''
He was said to have restyled Nero's colossal statue in his own image as "Hercules Reborn" and re-dedicated it to himself with the inscription; "Champion of ''secutores''; only left-handed fighter to conquer twelve times one thousand men."
Nero seems to have enjoyed the brawls between rowdy, enthusiastic and sometimes violent factions, but called in the troops if they went too far.
Such finer distinctions aside, "gladiator" could be (and was) used as an insult throughout the Roman period.
The Punic Wars of the late 3rd century BC&nbsp;– in particular the near-catastrophic defeat of Roman arms at Cannae&nbsp;– had long-lasting effects on the Republic, its citizen armies, and the development of the gladiatorial ''munera''.
...weapons training was given to soldiers by P. Rutilius, consul with C. Mallis.
Legislation of 177 AD by Marcus Aurelius did little to stop it, and was completely ignored by his son, Commodus.
At the opposite extreme, the ''noxii'' (and possibly other ''damnati'') could be thrown into rivers or dumped unburied.
For example, in the aftermath of the Jewish Revolt, the gladiator schools received an influx of Jews&nbsp;– those rejected for training would have been sent straight to the arenas as ''noxii'' (lit.
Two wall ''graffiti'' in Pompeii describe Celadus the Thraex as "the sigh of the girls" and "the glory of the girls"&nbsp;– which may or may not have been Celadus' own wishful thinking.
In the early 3rd century AD, the Christian writer Tertullian had acknowledged their power over the Christian flock, and was compelled to be blunt: the combats were murder, their witnessing spiritually and morally harmful and the gladiator an instrument of pagan human sacrifice.
Earlier periods provide only occasional, perhaps exceptional examples.
Games were advertised beforehand on conspicuously placed billboards, giving the reason for the game, its editor, venue, date and the number of paired gladiators (''ordinarii'') to be used.
Delicatus made this for his deserving comrade-in-arms."
All others&nbsp;– citizens, slaves or free&nbsp;– were usually buried beyond the town or city limits to avoid the ritual and physical pollution of their community.
''Devotio'' (willingness to sacrifice one’s life to the greater good) was central to the Roman military ideal, and was the core of the Roman military oath.
The dearth of freemen necessitated a new kind of enlistment; 8,000 sturdy youths from amongst the slaves were armed at the public cost, after they had each been asked whether they were willing to serve or no.
Left-handed gladiators were advertised as an interesting rarity; they were trained to fight right-handers, which gave them advantage over most opponents and produced an interestingly unorthodox combination.
Whether the corpse of such a gladiator could be redeemed from further ignominy by friends or ''familia'' is not known.
The heavily armoured and armed Thracian types (''Thraex'') and Murmillo, who fought with smaller shields called a ''parma'', were ''parmularii'' (small shield), as were their supporters.
They can be immediately differentiated from the competing Hollywood product by their use of dubbing.
There were also local rivalries.
This would have broken with the traditional positioning of the major gladiator games at the year's end: as Wiedemann points out, December was the month for Saturnalia, the festival in which the lowest became the highest, and in which death was linked to renewal.
Walls in the 2nd century BC "Italian Agora" at Delos were decorated with paintings of gladiators.
Their training as gladiators would give them opportunity to redeem their honour in the ''munus''.
The trade in gladiators was Empire-wide, and subjected to official supervision.
Thus demoralised was Capua."
Doom killed me, not the liar Pinnas.
Images of gladiators could be found throughout the Republic and Empire, among all classes.
It was inaugurated by Titus in 80 AD the personal gift of the Emperor to the people of Rome, paid for by the Imperial share of booty after the Jewish Revolt.
The Zliten mosaic in Libya (circa 80–100 AD) shows musicians playing an accompaniment to provincial games (with gladiators, ''bestiarii'', or ''venatores'' and prisoners attacked by beasts).
Most gladiators fought at two or three munera annually.
"Generous" Imperial ''ludi'' might cost no less than 180,000 denarii ($3.6 million).
* ''Invincible Gladiator, The'' (1961) Richard Harrison
Its popularity led to its use in ever more lavish and costly games.
Nero and Commodus ignored them.
In the late Republican era, a fear of similar uprisings, the usefulness of gladiator schools in creating private armies, and the exploitation of ''munera'' for political gain led to increased restrictions on gladiator school ownership, siting and organisation.
Under Roman law, a former gladiator could not "offer such services as those of a gladiator after manumission, because they cannot be performed without endangering his life."
All ''arenarii'' (those who appeared in the arena) were "''infames'' by reputation", a form of social dishonour which excluded them from most of the advantages and rights of citizenship.
Remains of a Pompeian ''ludus'' site attest to developments in supply, demand and discipline; in its earliest phase, the building could accommodate 15–20 gladiators.
Some gladiators were volunteers who risked their lives and their legal and social standing by appearing in the arena.
Many were killed or wounded.
Martial wrote that "Hermes a gladiator who always drew the crowds means riches for the ticket scalpers".
Gladiatorial games, usually linked with beast shows, spread throughout the Republic and beyond.
While the Senate mustered their willing slaves, Hannibal offered his dishonoured Roman captives a chance for honourable death, in what Livy describes as something very like the Roman ''munus''.
One single late primary source, the ''Calendar of Furius Dionysius Philocalus'' for 354, survives to suggest how the gladiator featured among a multitude of official festivals in the Late Empire period.
Amphitheatres also provided a means of social control.
The Christian author Tertullian, commenting on ''ludi meridiani'' in Roman Carthage during the peak era of the games, describes a more humiliating method of removal.
One arena official, dressed as the "brother of Jove", Dis Pater (god of the underworld) strikes the corpse with a mallet.
Thereafter, Caligula flouted them and Claudius strengthened them.
In 167 AD, troop depletions by plague and desertion may have prompted Marcus Aurelius to draft gladiators at his own expense.
Sometimes beasts were unharmed and simply exhibited.
An outline of these later games can be conjectured, using written histories, contemporary accounts, statuary, ephemera, memorabilia and stylised pictographic evidence.
Mark Antony promoted gladiators to his personal guard.
File:villa-borg-2011-gladiatoren1.ogg|Video of a show fight at the Roman Villa Borg, Germany, in 2011 (Retarius vs. Secutor, Thraex vs. Murmillo).
A generation later, Livy wrote that they were first held in 310 BC by the Campanians in celebration of their victory over the Samnites.
At Pompeii's amphitheatre, trading of insults between Pompeians and Nucerian spectators during public ''ludi'' led to stone throwing and riot.
These official games usually began with ''venationes'' (beast hunts) and ''bestiarii'' (beast fighting) gladiators.
In the Year of the Four Emperors, Otho's troops at Bedriacum included 2000 gladiators.
''Rebel Gladiators'',  Dan Vadis
Paitraeites with his cell-mates set this up in memory".
Seneca's "vital spot" seems to have meant the neck.
There were also comedy fights; some may have been lethal.
Before the listed contests were fought, the gladiators may have held informal warm-up matches, using blunted or dummy weapons&nbsp;– some ''munera'', however, may have used blunted weapons throughout.
The story is told in graffiti and high quality wall painting, with much boasting of Pompeii's "victory" over Nuceria.
In 65 BC, newly elected curule aedile Julius Caesar topped Sulla's display with games he justified as ''munus'' to his father, who had died twenty years before.
Pliny the Elder gives vivid examples of the popularity of gladiator portraiture in Antium and an artistic treat laid on by an adoptive aristocrat for the solidly plebeian citizens of the Roman Aventine:
Many schools and amphitheatres were sited at or near military barracks, and some provincial army units owned gladiator troupes.
Death might be rightly meted out as punishment, or met with equanimity in peace or war as a gift of fate, but if it was inflicted as a form of secular entertainment, with no underlying moral or religious purpose, it could only pollute and demean those who witnessed it.
Payment for such appearances compounded their ''infamia''.
This is a genre of largely Italian-made historical epics (costume dramas) that dominated the Italian film industry from 1958 to 1965.
* ''Ursus, the Rebel Gladiator'' (1963) a.k.a.
Early literary sources seldom agree on the origins of gladiators and the gladiator games.
A crude Pompeian graffito suggests a burlesque of musicians, dressed as animals named ''Ursus tibicen'' (flute-playing bear) and ''Pullus cornicen'' (horn-blowing chicken), perhaps as accompaniment to clowning by ''paegniarii'' during a "mock" contest of the ''ludi meridiani''.
By this time, the popularity of ''munera'' had waned, unlike the theatrical shows, and the chariot races which, at least in the Eastern Empire, continued to attract the crowds, and a generous Imperial subsidy.
A "good death" redeemed a defeated gladiator from the dishonourable weakness and passivity of defeat, and provided a noble example to those who watched:
By Domitian's time, many had been more or less absorbed by the State, including those at Pergamum, Alexandria, Praeneste and Capua.
At a Pompeian match between chariot-fighters, Publius Ostorius, with previous 51 wins to his credit, was granted missio after losing to Scylax, with 26 victories.
Martial describes a match between Priscus and Verus, who fought so evenly and bravely for so long that when both acknowledged defeat at the same instant, Titus awarded victory and a ''rudis'' to each.
Legislation by Claudius required that quaestors, the lowest rank of Roman magistrate, personally subsidise two-thirds of the costs of games for their small-town communities&nbsp;– in effect, both an advertisement of their personal generosity and a part-purchase of their office.
Marcus Junkelmann disputes Ville's calculation for average age at death; the majority would have received no headstone, and would have died early in their careers, at 18–25 years of age.
By common custom, the spectators decided whether or not a losing gladiator should be spared, and chose the winner in the rare event of a "standing tie".
The earliest known Roman amphitheatre was built at Pompeii by Sullan colonists, around 70 BC.
On the one and the same account they glorify them and they degrade and diminish them; yes, further, they openly condemn them to disgrace and civil degradation; they keep them religiously excluded from council chamber, rostrum, senate, knighthood, and every other kind of office and a good many distinctions.
As the Republic wore on, the term of military service increased from ten to the sixteen years formalised by Augustus in the Principate.
The crisis of the 3rd century imposed increasing military demands on the imperial purse, from which the Roman Empire never quite recovered, and lesser magistrates found the obligatory ''munera'' an increasingly unrewarding tax on the doubtful privileges of office.
They were celebrated in high and low art, and their value as entertainers was commemorated in precious and commonplace objects throughout the Roman world.
Next came the ''ludi meridiani'', of variable content but usually involving executions of ''noxii'' (sometimes as "mythological" re-enactments) or others condemned ''(damnati)'' to the arena.
* ''Seven Slaves Against the World'' (1965) a.k.a.
The largest and most lavish of all were paid for by the emperor himself.
As time passed, these titles and meanings may have merged.
''The Strongest Slaves in the World'', starring Roger
From the early Imperial era, some were forced to participate in humiliating and novel forms of mythological or historical enactment, culminating in their execution.
During the Imperial era, matches were sometimes advertised ''sine missione'' (without remission from the sentence of death), which suggests that ''missio'' (the sparing of a defeated gladiator's life) had become a common practice at the games.
Arena punishment could be meted for banditry, theft and arson, or treasonous acts such as rebellion, census evasion to avoid paying due taxes and refusal to swear lawful oaths.
Food, drink, sweets and occasionally "door prizes" could be offered.
In the Imperial era, volunteers required a magistrate's permission to join a school as ''auctorati''.
Commentators invariably disapproved of such performances.
His revision of sumptuary law capped private and public expenditure on ''munera'', claiming to save the Roman elite from the bankruptcies they would otherwise suffer, and restricted their performance to the festivals of Saturnalia and Quinquatria.
For the crowd, amphitheatres afforded unique opportunities for free expression and free speech (''theatralis licentia'').
The practical differences between ''ludi'' and ''munera'' were beginning to blur.
The cost of gladiators and ''munera'' continued to spiral out of control.
''Gladiator'' is a 2000 British-American epic historical drama film directed by Ridley Scott, and starring Russell Crowe and Joaquin Phoenix.
Thus they pay for their crimes without having to pour their blood.
One very notable social renegade was an aristocratic descendant of the Gracchi, infamous for his marriage (as a bride) to a male horn player.
In the late 1st century BC, Nicolaus of Damascus believed they were Etruscan.
Historians Keith Hopkins and Mary Beard tentatively estimate a total of 400 arenas throughout the Roman Empire at its greatest extent, with a combined total of 8,000 deaths per annum from all causes, including execution, combat and accident.
He fought as a ''secutor'', styling himself "Hercules Reborn".
''Epistles'', 30.8)
Their popularity made their co-option by the state inevitable; Cicero acknowledged their sponsorship as a political imperative.
The perversity of it!
Silius Italicus wrote, as the games approached their peak, that the degenerate Campanians had devised the very worst of precedents, which now threatened the moral fabric of Rome: "It was their custom to enliven their banquets with bloodshed and to combine with their feasting the horrid sight of armed men fighting; often the combatants fell dead above the very cups of the revelers, and the tables were stained with streams of blood.
In the same century, an epigraph praises one of Ostia's local elite as the first to "arm women" in the history of its games.
In Rome's military ethos, enemy soldiers who had surrendered or allowed their own capture and enslavement had been granted an unmerited gift of life.
During the Civil Wars that led to the Principate, Octavian (later Augustus) acquired the personal gladiator troop of his erstwhile opponent, Mark Antony.
Memorials were a major expense, and testify only to those who prospered.
Kyle (1998) proposes that gladiators who disgraced themselves might have been subjected to the same indignities as ''noxii'', denied the relative mercies of a quick death and dragged from the arena as carrion.
Refusals by Caligula and Claudius to spare popular but defeated fighters did nothing to boost their own popularity.
As a soldier committed his life (voluntarily, at least in theory) to the greater cause of Rome's victory, he was not expected to survive defeat.
Other highlighted features could include details of ''venationes'', executions, music and any luxuries to be provided for the spectators, including a decorated awning against the sun, and water sprinklers.
The Spartacus revolt had originated in a gladiator school privately owned by Lentulus Batiatus, and had been suppressed only after a protracted series of costly, sometimes disastrous campaigns by regular Roman troops.
If this was granted, the school's physician assessed their suitability.
Petitions could be submitted to the ''editor'' (as magistrate) in full view of the community.
The Senate refused to ransom Hannibal's Roman captives: instead, they consulted the Sibylline books, then made drastic preparations:
Titus Flavius Satyrus set up this monument in his memory from his own money."
Caesar's ''munus'' of 46 BC included at least one equestrian, son of a Praetor, and possibly two senatorial volunteers.
The earliest ''munera'' took place at or near the tomb of the deceased and these were organised by their ''munerator'' (who made the offering).
Some regarded female gladiators as a symptom of corrupted Roman sensibilities, morals and womanhood, regardless of class.
Similar representations (musicians, gladiators and ''bestiari'') are found on a tomb relief in Pompeii.
Modern customs and institutions offer few useful parallels to the legal and social context of the ''gladiatoria munera'' In Roman law, anyone condemned to the arena or the gladiator schools (''damnati ad ludum'') was a ''servus poenae'' (slave of the penalty), and was considered to be under sentence of death unless manumitted.
Caligula bewailed this in a public proclamation as a most cruel murder.
For death, when it stands near us, gives even to inexperienced men the courage not to seek to avoid the inevitable.
In late Republican ''munera'', between 10 and 13 pairs could have fought on one day; this assumes one match at a time in the course of an afternoon.
Ticket scalpers (''Locarii'') sometimes sold or let out seats at inflated prices.
Increasingly the ''munus'' was the ''editor'''s gift to spectators who had come to expect the best as their due.
Almost all the evidence comes from the Late Republic and Empire, and much of it from Pompeii.
In 107 BC, the Marian Reforms established the Roman army as a professional body.
One gladiator's tomb dedication clearly states that her decisions are not to be trusted.
Death and disposal therefore perpetuated the divisions and judgements of society.
A politically ambitious ''privatus'' (private citizen) might postpone his deceased father's ''munus'' to the election season, when a generous show might drum up votes; those in power and those seeking it needed the support of the plebeians and their tribunes, whose votes might be won with an exceptionally spectacular show, sometimes even the mere promise of one.
Two years later, following its defeat at Arausio:
* ''Spartacus and the Ten Gladiators'' (1964) a.k.a.
A ''munus'' of 89 AD, during Domitian's reign, featured a battle between female gladiators and dwarfs.
On the one hand, only slaves found guilty of specific offences could be sentenced to the arena, and citizens were legally exempt from this sentence.
In 66 AD, Nero had Ethiopian women, men and children fight at a ''munus'' to impress King Tiridates I of Armenia.
Victors received the palm branch and an award from the ''editor''.
Ten years later, he banned the gladiator ''munera'':
In Halicarnassus, a 2nd-century AD relief depicts two female combatants named "Amazon" and "Achillia"; their match ended in a draw.
Decimus Iunius Brutus Scaeva had three gladiator pairs fight to the death in Rome's "cattle market" Forum (''Forum Boarium'') to honor his dead father, Brutus Pera.
In that year, 176 days were reserved for spectacles of various kinds.
As a ''bestiarius'', he was said to have killed 100 lions in one day, almost certainly from a platform set up around the arena perimeter which allowed him to safely demonstrate his marksmanship.
Valentinian III (r. 425–455) repeated the ban in 438, perhaps effectively, though ''venationes'' continued beyond 536.
The hand of Nemesis in a gladiator's death absolved him from ignominy.
Gladiator fights have been depicted in a number of peplum films (also known as "sword-and-sandal" movies).
Nero banned gladiator ''munera'' (though not the games) at Pompeii for ten years as punishment.
For the poor, and for non-citizens, enrollment in a gladiator school offered a trade, regular food, housing of sorts and a fighting chance of fame and fortune.
On the other hand, citizens found guilty of particular offenses could be stripped of citizenship, formally enslaved and sentenced as slaves; and freedmen or freedwomen offenders could be legally reverted to slavery.
The ''ludi'' (state games), sponsored by the ruling elite and dedicated to a deity such as Jupiter, a divine or heroic ancestor (and later, during the Imperium, the well-being and numen of the emperor), began to include the gladiator contests formerly restricted to private ''munera''.
The origin of gladiatorial combat is open to debate.
In the early Imperial era, the attested munera given by local politicians in Pompeii and neighbouring towns were dispersed from March to November.
Gladiators customarily kept their prize money and any gifts they received, and these could be substantial.
They love whom they lower; they despise whom they approve; the art they glorify, the artist they disgrace.
There were two corps: the shields of the one were inlaid with gold, of the other with silver&nbsp;...
After fighting the Roman Army, he ends up captured and enslaved as a gladiator/beast in Emperor Tiberius' Circus Maximus, and used for gladiator combats.
Steel is what they fall in love with.
Long after the games had ceased, the 7th century AD writer Isidore of Seville derived Latin ''lanista'' (manager of gladiators) from the Etruscan word for "executioner," and the title of Charon (an official who accompanied the dead from the Roman gladiatorial arena) from Charun, psychopomp of the Etruscan underworld.
The emperor Titus's dignified yet confident ease in his management of an amphitheatre crowd and its factions were taken as a measure of his enormous popularity and the rightness of his imperium.
Some of these groups are part of larger Roman reenactment groups, and others are wholly independent, though they might participate in larger demonstrations of Roman reenacting or historical reenacting in general.
This is described as a ''munus'' (plural: ''munera''), a commemorative duty owed the manes of a dead ancestor by his descendants.
It is not known how many ''gladiatoria munera'' were given throughout the Roman period.
The proximity of death defined the ''munus'' for all concerned.
Tiberius offered several retired gladiators 100,000 ''sesterces'' ($500,000) each to return to the arena.
* ''Seven Rebel Gladiators'' (1965) a.k.a.
Their contract (''auctoramentum'') stipulated how often they were to perform, their fighting style and earnings.
The ''munus'' became a morally instructive form of historic enactment in which the only honourable option for the gladiator was to fight well, or else die well.
His ''virtus'' could thus be remembered in perpetuity, and he could be memorialised as a skilled fighter, one worth avenging:
The ''munus'' thus represented an essentially military, self-sacrificial ideal, taken to extreme fulfillment in the gladiator's oath.
Gladiators were segregated in separate cemeteries.
Later games were held by an ''editor'', either identical with the ''munerator'' or an official employed by him.
Novices (''novicii'') trained under teachers of particular fighting styles, probably retired gladiators.
