The massive demand outstripped new building and many, originally fine, tenements often became overcrowded and unsanitary.
Despite the merger, the second division teams of Glasgow Academicals and Glasgow High Kelvinside re-entered the Scottish rugby league in 1998.
It was for many years polluted and largely unused after the decline of heavy industry, but recent efforts to regenerate and re-open the canal to navigation have seen it rejuvenated.
Despite Glasgow's economic renaissance, the East End of the city remains the focus of social deprivation.
Two of Glasgow's rowing clubs separately claim that it was their members who were among the founders of Rangers Football Club.
It is home to the famous Glasgow Barrowland market, popularly known as "The Barras", Barrowland Ballroom, Glasgow Green, and Celtic Park, home of Celtic FC.
The Glasgow Necropolis Cemetery was created by the Merchants House on a hill above the cathedral in 1831.
There are two distinct definitions for the population of Glasgow: the '''Glasgow City Council Area''' (which lost the districts of Rutherglen and Cambuslang to South Lanarkshire in 1996) and the '''Greater Glasgow Urban Area''' (which includes the conurbation around the city).
Historically, rowing races on the River Clyde here attracted huge crowds of spectators to watch regattas in the late 19th century and early 20th century; before football caught the public imagination.
Following the referendum the SNP won every constituency in the city at the 2015 General Election, including a record-breaking 39.3% swing in the seat of Glasgow North East.
On 9 November 2007, Glasgow was selected to be the host city of the 2014 Commonwealth Games.
In recent years many of these buildings have been cleaned and restored to their original appearance.
This growth and its high use of recruitment agencies to hire graduates as temporary workers has led to accusations of exploitative practices such as long hours, poor pay and lack of job security by the TUC and other union bodies.
Historically part of Lanarkshire, it is now one of the 32 Council Areas of Scotland.
The M74 runs directly south towards Carlisle; the M74 completion scheme has extended the motorway from Tollcross into the Tradeston area to join the M8.
These were built to replace the decaying inner-city tenement buildings originally built for workers who migrated from the surrounding countryside, the Highlands, and the rest of the United Kingdom, particularly Ireland, to feed local demands for labour.
The city's main manufacturing industries include companies involved in; shipbuilding, engineering, construction, brewing and distilling, printing and publishing, chemicals and textiles as well as newer growth sectors such as optoelectronics, software development and biotechnology.
"away" can mean "leaving" as in ''A'm away'', an instruction to stop being a nuisance as in ''away wi ye'', or "drunk" or "demented" as in ''he's away wi it''.
In 1931 the population density was , highlighting the "clearances" into the suburbs and new towns that were built to reduce the size of one of Europe's most densely populated cities.
Glasgow's impressive historical and modern architectural traditions were celebrated in 1999 when the city was designated UK City of Architecture and Design, winning the accolade over Liverpool and Edinburgh.
Glasgow became one of the first cities in Europe to reach a population of one million.
The latter continues to be bolstered by the legacy of the city's Glasgow Garden Festival in 1988, its status as European City of Culture in 1990, and concerted attempts to diversify the city's economy.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries Glasgow grew in population, reaching a peak of 1,128,473 in 1939.
Glasgow's population influx in the 18th and 19th centuries was related to economic expansion as well as internally generated growth.
Since 2000 Glasgow has experienced few very cold, snowy and harsh winters where temperatures have fallen much below freezing.
Glasgow has three professional football clubs: Celtic, Rangers, and Partick Thistle.
Following the Reformation and with the encouragement of the Convention of Royal Burghs, the 14 incorporated trade crafts federated as the Trades House in 1605 to match the power and influence in the town council of the earlier Merchants' Guilds who established their Merchants House in the same year.
Comprehensive urban renewal projects in the 1960s, resulting in large-scale relocation of people to new towns and peripheral suburbs, followed by successive boundary changes, reduced the population of the City of Glasgow council area to 599,650 with 1,209,143 people living in the Greater Glasgow urban area.
The present site of Glasgow has been settled since prehistoric times; it is for settlement, being the furthest downstream fording point of the River Clyde, at its confluence with the Molendinar Burn.
There are over 1,800 listed buildings in the city, of architectural and historical importance, and 23 Conservation Areas extending over 1,471 hectares.
Once a school, it has been converted into offices.
'''Glasgow City Council'''
They have also won more domestic top tier league titles than any other football club in the world.
''Ginger'' is a term for any carbonated soft drink, historically referring to ginger beer (''A bottle o ginger'', ).
The Sikh community is served by 4 Gurdwaras.
Both rail and subway stations have a number of park and ride facilities.
Festivals include the Glasgow International Comedy Festival, Glasgow International Festival of Visual Art, Glasgow International Jazz Festival, Celtic Connections, Glasgow Fair, Glasgow Film Festival, West End Festival, Merchant City Festival, Glasgay, and the World Pipe Band Championships.
Efforts to improve this housing situation, most successfully with the City Improvement Trust in the late 19th century, cleared the slums of the old town areas such as the Trongate, High Street and Glasgow Cross.
The extensive Tollcross Park was originally developed from the estate of James Dunlop, the owner of a local steelworks.
All services to and from England use this station.
Govan is a district and former burgh in the south-western part of the city.
In the 1950s the population of the City of Glasgow area peaked at 1,089,000.
The West End is bisected by the River Kelvin, which flows from the Campsie Fells in the north and confluences with the River Clyde at Yorkhill Quay.
Glasgow's South Side sprawls out south of the Clyde, covering areas including:
Although historically a working class area, its borders with the upmarket West End of the city mean that it is relatively wealthy compared to the rest of the north of the city, containing affluent areas such as Maryhill Park and North Kelvinside.
Glasgow generated immense wealth from trade and the industries that developed from the Industrial Revolution.
Between 1998 and 2004, the Scottish Claymores American football team played some or all of their home games each season at Hampden Park and the venue also hosted World Bowl XI.
are also located in this part of north Glasgow.
In addition to the suburban rail network, SPT operates the Glasgow Subway.
Motorcycle speedway racing was first introduced to Glasgow in 1928 and is currently staged at Saracen Park in the North of the city.
On 9 November 2014, Glasgow hosted the 2014 MTV Europe Music Awards at The SSE Hydro, it was the second time Scotland hosted the show since 2003 in Edinburgh and overall the fifth time that the United Kingdom has hosted the show since 2011 in Belfast, Northern Ireland.
Celtic Park (60,355 seats) is located in the east end of Glasgow, and Ibrox Stadium (50,947 seats) on the south side.
Outdoor Education facilities are provided by the city council at the Blairvadach Centre, near Helensburgh.
Previously based in Renfrewshire's Braehead Arena and the 1,200 seater Kelvin Hall, the team has been based at the Emirates Arena since the 2012/13 season.
In the 2011 Scottish Parliament election, the boundaries of the Glasgow region were redrawn.
Since the late 1980s the construction of many modern office blocks and high rise developments have paved the way for the IFSD to become one of the UK's largest financial quarters.
* Glasgow Maryhill and Springburn
The city is also home to some 8,406 (1.42%) Polish people.
The city also held a series of International Exhibitions at Kelvingrove Park, in 1888, 1901 and 1911, with Britain's last major International Exhibition, the Empire Exhibition, being subsequently held in 1938 at Bellahouston Park, which drew 13 million visitors.
In recent years some call centres have taken steps to rectify this criticism.
The Subway is the United Kingdom's only completely underground metro system, and is generally recognised as the world's third underground railway after the London Underground and the Budapest Metro.
The city centre is based on a grid system of streets on the north bank of the River Clyde.
Glasgow hosted the 2014 Commonwealth Games.
In 1993, the St Mungo Museum of Religious Life and Art opened in Glasgow.
Much of the wealth of the south side is in the towns of Whitecraigs, Giffnock and Thorntonhall.
During the 1930s, Glasgow was the main base of the Independent Labour Party.
In Holyrood, Glasgow is represented by sixteen MSPs, of whom nine are elected to represent individual constituencies once every four years using first-past-the-post, and seven are elected as additional regional members, by proportional representation.
There are also several smaller, domestic and private airports around the city.
Winters are cool and overcast, with a January mean of , though lows sometimes fall below freezing.
Due to growing industrial pollution levels in the mid-to-late 19th century, the area fell out of favour with residents.
There are private clinics and hospitals at the Nuffield in the West end and Ross Hall in the South Side of the city.
Glasgow is also known for Glasgow patter, a distinct dialect that is noted for being difficult to understand by those from outside the city.
The city has a strong community radio sector, including Celtic Music Radio, Subcity Radio, Radio Magnetic, Sunny Govan Radio, AWAZ FM and Insight Radio.
The ''PS Waverley'', the world's last operational seagoing paddle-steamer, provides services from Glasgow city Centre, mainly catering to the pleasure cruise market.
The population of the city council area was 593,245 in 2011 and around 2,300,000 people live in the Glasgow travel to work area.
Dating from 1771 and 1780, both have been well restored.
Even then, the December high was above freezing at  with the low of .
On older maps Glasgow is shown within the area of the pre-1975 county of Lanarkshire; from 1975 to 1996 it appears within Strathclyde Region; more recent maps will generally show Glasgow as one of 32 Council Areas in Scotland.
Various radio stations are also located in Glasgow.
In 2013, PETA declared Glasgow to be the most vegan-friendly city in the UK.
In addition, unlike the older and larger Edinburgh Festival (where all Edinburgh's main festivals occur in the last three weeks of August), Glasgow's festivals fill the calendar.
In 2008, a World Health Organization report about health inequalities, revealing that male life expectancy varied from 54 in Calton to 82 in nearby Lenzie, East Dunbartonshire.
Glasgow's retail portfolio forms the UK's second largest and most economically important retail sector after Central London.
It is common to derive the name ''Glasgow'' from the older Cumbric ''glas cau'' or a Middle Gaelic cognate, which would have meant ''green basin'' or ''green valley''.
A notable local employer continues to be the Wellpark Brewery, home of Tennent's Lager.
However, this results in less distinct seasons as compared to much of Western Europe.
Most other services within Scotland&nbsp;— the main line to Edinburgh, plus services to Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness and the Western Highlands&nbsp;— operate from Queen Street station.
The buildings reflect the wealth and self-confidence of the residents of the ''"Second City of the Empire"''.
One up Gaming also has their headquarters in Govan.
From the late 1980s onwards, the Merchant City has been rejuvenated with luxury city centre flats and warehouse conversions.
The MOBO Awards were held at the SECC on 30 September 2009, making Glasgow the first out-of-London city to host the event since its launch in 1995.
Hampden Park, which is Scotland's national football stadium, holds the European record for attendance at a football match: 149,547 saw Scotland beat England 3-1 in 1937, in the days before leading British stadia became all-seated.
Long dry spells of warm weather are generally very scarce.
Whilst manufacturing has declined, Glasgow's economy has seen significant relative growth of tertiary sector industries such as financial and business services, communications, biosciences, creative industries, healthcare, higher education, retail and tourism.
Modern buildings in Glasgow include the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall, and along the banks of the Clyde are the Glasgow Science Centre, The Hydro and the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre, whose Clyde Auditorium was designed by Sir Norman Foster, and is colloquially known as the "Armadillo".
GHA was formed in 2002 with the merger of two of Glasgow's leading clubs at the time, Glasgow Southern RFC and Hutchesons' Aloysians RFC.
Many of Glasgow's worst tenements were refurbished into desirable accommodation in the 1970s and 1980s and the policy of demolition is considered to have destroyed many fine examples of a "universally admired architectural" style.
This form of coronet, resembling an embattled city wall, was allowed to the four area councils with city status.
Such areas include the Central Area, Dennistoun, the West End, Pollokshields – the first major planned garden suburb in Britain – Newlands and Carmunnock Village.
Glasgow is also well known in the sporting world for the football rivalry of the Old Firm between Celtic and Rangers.
Industrial action at the shipyards gave rise to the "Red Clydeside" epithet.
All six of these suburbs are in the East Renfrewshire council area.
In 2003, Glasgow was also given the title of European Capital of Sport.
The 20th century witnessed both decline and renewal in the city.
The area has supported a huge growth in art galleries, the origins of which can be found in the late 1980s when it attracted artist-led organisations that could afford the cheap rents required to operate in vacant manufacturing or retail spaces.
Since 2000, the UK government has pursued a policy of dispersal of asylum seekers to ease pressure on social housing in the London area.
The world's tallest cinema, the eighteen-screen Cineworld is situated on Renfrew Street.
Now called the Glasgow Club Crownpoint Sports Complex, the centre provides service such as sports facilities, health advice, stress management, leisure and vocational classes.
Other Glasgow teams include Celtic L.F.C., Rangers L.F.C., Partick Thistle Ladies and Queens Park L.F.C.
The new Scottish National Indoor Sports Arena, a modern replacement for the Kelvin Hall, is planned for Dalmarnock.
Celtic also went on to reach another European Cup Final in 1970, losing to Feyenoord Rotterdam, and also the final of the UEFA Cup in 2003, where they lost an enthralling match which finished 3-2 to Portuguese club Porto.
The home club, Glasgow Tigers, compete in the British Premier League, the second tier of motorcycle speedway in Britain.
The Merchant City was formerly the residential district of the wealthy city merchants in the 18th and early 19th centuries, particularly the Tobacco Lords from whom many of the streets take their name.
His large baronial mansion was built in 1848 by David Bryce, which later housed the city's Children's Museum until the 1980s.
This area is defined as consisting of over 10 per cent of residents travelling into Glasgow to work and is without fixed boundaries.
The Hyndland area of Glasgow is the only tenement conservation area in the UK and includes some tenement houses with as many as six bedrooms.
Both BBC Scotland and STV have their headquarters in Glasgow.
The South Side is also home to Pollok Country Park, which was awarded the accolade of Europe's Best Park 2008.
Overcast and humid conditions without rain are frequent.
This was abbreviated to "Let Glasgow Flourish" and adopted as the city's motto.
The official Met Office data series goes back to 1959 and shows that there only have been a few warm and no hot summers in Glasgow, in stark contrast to areas further south in Great Britain and eastwards in Europe.
In 2003 the National Academy for Badminton was completed in Scotstoun.
In 2006 Zaha Hadid won a competition to design the new Museum of Transport.
The Gaelic name Baile Glas Chu, town of the grey dog, is mere folk-etymology.
Its early trade was in agriculture, brewing and fishing, with cured salmon and herring being exported to Europe and the Mediterranean.
* Glasgow Shettleston
The South Side also includes many great parks, including Linn Park, Queen's Park, Bellahouston Park and Rouken Glen Park, and several golf clubs, including the championship course at Haggs Castle.
Major international sporting arenas include the Kelvin Hall and Scotstoun Sports Centre.
The long-running TV drama ''Taggart'' and the comedies ''Empty'', ''Chewin' the Fat'', ''Rab C. Nesbitt'', ''Still Game'' and ''Dear Green Place'' depict the Glaswegian ''patois'', while Kevin Bridges, Frankie Boyle, Craig Ferguson and Billy Connolly have made Glaswegian humour known to the rest of the world.
At that time the city's population was about 12,000, and the city was yet to undergo the massive expansionary changes to its economy and urban fabric, brought about by the Scottish Enlightenment and Industrial Revolution.
There is also an emergency telephone service provided by NHS 24 and 24-hour access to General Practitioners through Out of hours centres.
Much was made of this during the 2008 Glasgow East by-election.
The hospital is built on the site of the former Southern General Hospital and opened at the end of April 2015.
By the late 18th century more than half of the British tobacco trade was concentrated on Glasgow's River Clyde, with over  of tobacco being imported each year at its peak.
A service by Loch Lomond Seaplanes, connecting the city with destinations in Argyll and Bute started in 2007.
In addition to its pre-eminence in shipbuilding, engineering, industrial machinery, bridge building, chemicals, explosives, coal and oil industries it developed as a major centre in textiles, garment-making, carpet manufacturing, leather processing, furniture-making, pottery, food, drink and cigarette making; printing and publishing.
The name was taken from one of the early spellings of the area, to differentiate it from Pollok F.C.
The city is linked to Edinburgh by four direct railway links.
The main M8 motorway passes through the city centre and connects to the M77, M73, and M80 motorways.
Smaller sporting facilities include an abundance of outdoor playing fields, as well as golf clubs such as Haggs Castle and artificial ski slopes.
The area is also home to a number of high end boutique style shops and some of Glasgow's most upmarket stores.
Tenements are commonly bought by a wide range of social types and are favoured for their large rooms, high ceilings and original period features.
He wears a bishop's mitre and liturgical vestments and has his hand raised in "the act of benediction".
This is the busiest bridge in Europe.
Glasgow Central is also the terminus for suburban services on the south side of Glasgow, Ayrshire and Inverclyde, as well as being served by the cross city link from Dalmuir to Motherwell.
Two are dedicated to Glasgow while the third is Edinburgh International which, as it is situated on the west side of Edinburgh, is relatively close to Glasgow.
Population growth 2001–2011
Glasgow is also one of five places in Scotland that hosts the final of the Scottish Cup of Shinty, better known as the Camanachd Cup.
At the 2011 census, Glasgow had a population density of , the highest of any Scottish city.
Like many cities in the UK, Glasgow witnessed the construction of high-rise housing in tower blocks in the 1960s, along with large overspill estates on the periphery of the city, in areas like Pollok, Nitshill, Castlemilk, Easterhouse, Milton and Drumchapel.
The history of football in the city, as well as the status of the Old Firm, attracts many visitors to football matches in the city throughout the season.
The London-based department store Selfridges purchased a site in the city some years ago as part of its plans to expand stores—plans now shelved, according to the company.
In 2005, the number of Westminster Members of Parliament (MPs) representing Scotland was cut to 59, with new constituencies being formed, while the existing number of MSPs was retained at Holyrood.
In the 1881 Census, 83% of the population was born in Scotland, 13% in Ireland, in England 3% and 1% elsewhere.
The city council was controlled by the Labour Party for over 30 years, since the decline of the Progressives.
The supporters are two salmon bearing rings, and the crest is a half length figure of Saint Mungo.
The population was static for a time; but due to immigration from other parts of Scotland as well as from overseas, the population has begun to grow.
Despite the crisis caused by the City of Glasgow Bank's collapse in 1878, growth continued and by the end of the 19th century it was one of the cities known as the ''"Second City of the Empire"'' and was producing more than half Britain's tonnage of shipping and a quarter of all locomotives in the world.
Glasgow was then one of the most densely populated cities in the world.
The West End Festival, one of Glasgow's largest festivals, is held annually in June.
The city had recovered by the outbreak of World War II and grew through the post-war boom that lasted through the 1950s.
Both the Gaelic language television station BBC Alba and the Gaelic language radio station BBC Radio nan Gàidheal have studios in Glasgow, their only locations outside the Highlands and Islands.
Also close by is the more modest Episcopalian St Andrew's-by-the-Green, the oldest Episcopal church in Scotland.
It is also home to Poloc Cricket Club.
The opening ceremony was held at Celtic Park.
Some of the poorest areas contain many benefit claimants.
Glasgow is the home of the SECC, Great Britain's largest exhibition and conference centre.
Routes curve through the landscape uphill to the  high statue of John Knox at the summit.
Examples of these are Castlemilk and Arden.
Glasgow is one of only four cities (along with Liverpool in 1985, Madrid in 1986, 2014 and 2016 and Milan in 1994) to have had two football teams in European finals in the same season: in 1967 Celtic F.C.
The Arlington inspired other Swimming Clubs and the Western Baths, which opened in 1876, is also still in existence in nearby Hillhead.
Indeed, Glasgow dominated this type of manufacturing, with 25% of all the world's locomotives being built in the area at one stage.
Very little of medieval Glasgow remains; the two main landmarks from this period being the 15th century Provand's Lordship and 13th century St. Mungo's Cathedral, although the original medieval street plan (along with many of the street names) on the eastern side of the city centre has largely survived intact.
The Club in Arlington Street, in the Woodlands area of the city is still thriving today.
The Mercer report was specifically looking at Quality of Living, yet by 2011 within Glasgow, certain areas were (still) ''"failing to meet the Scottish Air Quality Objective levels for nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and particulate matter (PM10)."''
By 1911 the city was no longer gaining population by migration.
To the east is the commercial and residential district of Merchant City.
A hidden gem of Glasgow, also designed by Mackintosh, is the Queen's Cross Church, the only church by the renowned artist to be built.
The most extreme instances have however seen temperatures around  in the area.
In the South Glasgow suburb of Giffnock is based another of Glasgow's most prominent clubs Glasgow Hutchesons Aloysians RFC (GHA).
As a result, Glasgow has an impressive heritage of Victorian architecture: the Glasgow City Chambers; the main building of the University of Glasgow, designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott; and the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum, designed by Sir John W. Simpson, are notable examples.
The event was hosted by Nicki Minaj and featured performances from Ariana Grande, Enrique Iglesias, Ed Sheeran, U2 and Slash
The city invested heavily in roads infrastructure, with an extensive system of arterial roads and motorways that bisected the central area.
The city centre is bounded by the High Street to the east, the River Clyde to the south and the M8 motorway to the west and north, which was built through the Townhead, Charing Cross, Cowcaddens and Anderston areas in the 1960s.
The Italian Centre also specialises in designer labels.
In recent years, the success of bands such as The Blue Nile, Gun, Simple Minds, Del Amitri, Texas, Hipsway, Love & Money, Idlewild, Deacon Blue, Orange Juice, Lloyd Cole and the Commotions, Teenage Fanclub, Belle and Sebastian, Camera Obscura, Franz Ferdinand, Mogwai, Travis, and Primal Scream has significantly boosted the profile of the Glasgow music scene, prompting ''Time Magazine'' to liken Glasgow to Detroit during its 1960s Motown heyday.
It incorporates a number of symbols and emblems associated with the life of Glasgow's patron saint, Mungo, which had been used on official seals prior to that date.
Often used for displaying large city advertising slogans, the towers have become an unofficial portal into the city for road users arriving from the north and east.
This has led to large scale redevelopment of much of the poorer housing stock in north Glasgow, and the wider regeneration of many areas, such as Ruchill, which have been transformed; many run-down tenements have now been refurbished or replaced by modern housing estates.
Currently, the nine Scottish Parliament constituencies in the Glasgow electoral region are:
The development of civic institutions included the City of Glasgow Police in 1800, one of the first municipal police forces in the world.
This club also acted as a neutral venue for a One Day International match between India and Pakistan in 2007, but due to bad weather it was called off.
All Pharmacies provide a wide range of services including minor ailment advice, emergency hormonal contraception, public health advice, some provide oxygen and needle exchange.
Scottish Premiership
The original 1866 grant placed the crest atop a helm, but this was removed in subsequent grants.
The warmest month is usually July, with average highs above .
Glasgow Cross, situated at the junction of High Street, Gallowgate, Trongate and Saltmarket was the original centre of the city, symbolised by its Mercat cross.
For some thirteen years Kentigern laboured in the region, building his church at the Molendinar Burn, and making many converts.
More recent successes include The Fratellis, Chvrches, Rustie, Glasvegas and Twin Atlantic.
Since 2007, when local government elections in Scotland began to use the single transferable vote rather than the first-past-the-post system, the dominance of the Labour Party within the city has declined, but it remains one of only two local authorities, along with North Lanarkshire, where Labour maintains an outright majority over the other parties.
