Because of fluctuating demands on the electrical grid, the dam release into the Colorado River rises and falls dramatically on a daily basis.
The coal-fired Navajo Generating Station was built near Page, to make up for the electric power that was lost with the cancellation of the dam project.
Nevertheless, Lake Powell rapidly approached the top of the spillway gates and construction efforts were subsequently focused on the left spillway in order to get it in operation in time.
Much of the land acquired for the dam was through an exchange with the Navajo, in which the tribe ceded Manson Mesa south of the dam site for a similar-sized chunk of land near Aneth, Utah, which the Navajo had long coveted.
The Upper Basin has released 107% of its obligation from Lake Powell since 2000; therefore, falling levels in Lake Mead are a result of water overuse and waste in the Lower Basin states – a "structural deficit".
Other than a brief test in 1980, this was the only time the spillways had ever been used.
In December 1959, wages were raised by $4 a day, quelling the strikers.
In 1962 the workforce topped out at nearly 2,500 employees laboring on the dam.
Because of the isolated location, acquiring the land at the dam and reservoir sites was not particularly difficult, but there were a few disputes with ranchers and miners in the area (many of the Navajo Nation).
An unusual feature of the Glen Canyon power plant is the  Kentucky bluegrass lawn occupying the crescent between the dam and hydroelectric plant.
In the early stages of construction, the only way to cross Glen Canyon was a suspension footbridge made of chicken wire and metal grates.
Conversely, some of this "bank storage" flows back into the reservoir as springs and seeps when Lake Powell is low.
Prior to the completion of Glen Canyon Dam, about 4 to 6 million acre feet (4.9 to 7.4&nbsp;km3) reached the delta each year, despite heavy water use in California and Arizona.
Between 1980 and 2013, Glen Canyon Dam generated an average of 4,717 gigawatt hours (GWh) per year, enough for about 400,000 homes.
The proposal was fought over and litigated for years until it was permanently shelved in 1973.
The lake covers  at its full pool elevation of .
A common misconception is that the environmentalists were given a choice between damming Echo Park and damming Glen Canyon, but the USBR "had always planned to build a dam at Glen Canyon, regardless of the outcome of the Echo Park debate".
The concrete was poured into modular  high wooden blocks or "forms", the largest measuring up to  by ; more than 3,000 of these blocks made up the main structure of the dam.
After his groundbreaking 1869 expedition, John Wesley Powell had named Glen Canyon for its characteristics: "So we have a curious ensemble of wonderful features – carved walls, royal arches, glens, alcove gulches, mounds and monuments.
The outlet works consist of four  diameter pipes, each controlled by a ring gate and hollow-jet valve.
Being located in a high desert climate amid porous geology, Lake Powell causes huge evaporation and seepage losses.
On February 11, 1959, the right diversion tunnel was completed and began to carry the flow of the Colorado.
The actual loss was 13.4 million acre feet (16.5&nbsp;km3), twice the initial prediction, but river flow data indicates that further leakage after 1980 has been negligible.
However, it was not able to weather the worst floods or droughts, and was filling with sediment at a rate that would render it useless in a few hundred years.
Today, water released by Glen Canyon is a consistent  throughout the year due to a thermal mass effect in Lake Powell.
This time, the USBR had drawn down the reservoir enough that it absorbed most of the early high flows.
Material dug out of the tunnels and the dam abutments on the canyon walls was used to build the two cofferdams to divert the Colorado River, which were complete in February 1960.
The high-flow experiments do not change the total amount of water outflow from Lake Powell on an annual basis, but as a consequence hydro-electric power releases during the rest of the year must be reduced.
The power plant has a total capacity of 1,320 megawatts from eight 165,000 kilowatt generators.
The upper ends of the diversion tunnels were then sealed with solid concrete.
Trout are not native to the Colorado River system; they were stocked in the river below Glen Canyon Dam after the dam was built.
The Bureau of Reclamation also states that Lake Mead has a much lower elevation and hotter climate, and has a greater evaporation rate than Lake Powell.
Before damming, the Colorado commonly reached flows of more than  during the spring; this has been limited to less than  most years with few exceptions.
The Sierra Club lost its IRS tax-exempt status a day after the advertisement was released; ostensibly, this was due to its disruptive political activities.
The minimum dam release was set at a meager  (increased to  during the summer whitewater rafting season), with a maximum of  during peak times; to respond to changing power demands, river flows could double or even triple in the space of an hour.
'''Glen Canyon Dam''' is a concrete arch-gravity dam on the Colorado River in northern Arizona, United States, near the town of Page.
If some Senator was causing him trouble, money for his project could disappear mighty fast."
Power sales have been managed by the Western Area Power Administration since 1977.
The crest of the dam is  long and  wide, while the maximum thickness of the base is .
Twin radial gates, each  wide and  high, control the flow of water into the spillways.
Although the snowpack typically reaches its peak and begins to melt in April, the picture can occasionally change unexpectedly and dramatically – either due to a hot and dry spring that evaporates snow before it can melt, or an extremely wet spring as occurred in May 1983.
As it turned out, the early 20th century was one of the wettest periods in the last 800 years.
Flood control releases are allowed to go higher, but must remain constant for the entire month.
After this catastrophe, California and Arizona began to call for a dam to control the tempestuous river.
However, even as construction began on the other the dams, the USBR was faced with more controversy; the "David and Goliath" drama of the Echo Park debate had shifted the American public's perception on big government projects and their environmental consequences.
The hydroelectric power station and river outlet works are located at the foot of the dam.
Two other marinas at Halls Crossing and Bullfrog are located further upstream in Utah.
Because of the hundreds of bays and sinuous side canyons, including those formed by the San Juan, Escalante and Dirty Devil Rivers, Lake Powell has an exceptionally long shoreline for a lake of its size – about  at full pool, longer than the entire west coast of the continental United States.
The novel gained a cult following after its publication and established Glen Canyon Dam as a poster child of environmental destruction caused by dams.
The Sierra Club launched an extensive publicity campaign to sway public opinion against the plan; in response to the USBR's argument that new reservoirs would open up the Grand Canyon to recreational boaters as Lake Powell had, a full-page advertisement in the ''New York Times'' ran the slogan: "Should we also flood the Sistine Chapel so tourists can float nearer the ceiling?"
Since then, the reservoir has slowly regained water storage, but has not filled due to fluctuating runoff levels and its obligated release to Lake Mead.
Transporting workers and equipment to the bottom of the canyon was extremely difficult.
Vehicles had to make a  journey in order to get from one side of the canyon to the other.
This caused severe erosion of the Colorado River banks downstream, damaging habitat for native fish and causing danger for boaters, who could get stuck whenever the river flow dropped too quickly.
However, the foundation rock at Glen Canyon consists of porous sandstone prone to spalling, in contrast to the stronger granite at the Hoover Dam site, forcing the Glen Canyon design to follow more conservative lines by greatly thickening the abutments, thus increasing the surface area through which the weight of dam and reservoir would be transmitted to the rock and relieving the pressure per square inch on the highly breakable cliffs.
Upon inspection, it was found that cavitation had caused massive gouging damage to both spillways, carrying away thousands of tons of concrete, steel rebar and huge chunks of rock.
Construction would ultimately claim eighteen lives and injure numerous other workers, but contrary to popular myth, no workers were buried alive in the concrete.
The state of California opposed the project, as it would eliminate the "surplus" water in the Colorado (really the Upper Basin's yet unused supplies) it had gotten accustomed to using.
The elevation at the crest is , and the elevation of the Colorado River below the dam is .
This amounts to 6&nbsp;percent of the Colorado River's flow, an increasingly valuable amount of water in an arid land for both humans and the animals and plants that live along the river.
Lake users are required by law to clean, drain and dry their vessels, both before and after taking a trip to Lake Powell.
With a capacity equal to almost two years' annual flow of the Colorado River, engineers were aware that Lake Powell would be difficult to fill, but more problems were encountered than expected.
The spillway tunnels were excavated around both abutments of the dam, dropping steeply from their control gates on Lake Powell to merge with the lower ends of the diversion tunnels.
During excavation, the rock frequently broke apart or "slabbed" and collapsed into the tunnels, and metal bolts had to be drilled into the rock to secure it.
With the Glen Canyon site out of the question, the initial need for a reservoir was realized in 1936 with the completion of Hoover Dam in Black Canyon, storing 32 million acre feet (39&nbsp;km3) in the mammoth reservoir of Lake Mead.
Abbey's book is discussed in ''Ecospeak: Rhetoric and Environmental Politics in America'' (1992) by Jimmie Killingsworth and Jacqueline Palmer, who write that Glen Canyon Dam became "the big symbol of all that blocked freedom in the interests of civilized progress."
Even this additional capacity was exhausted; discharges through the left spillway reached , and the right spillway was opened to .
Meanwhile, snow continued melting in the Rockies and Lake Powell continued to rise rapidly.
The upper cofferdam was  high, and it alone could store several million acre-feet of water to protect the dam site from flooding in the event that inflows exceeded the capacity of the diversion tunnels.
Exactly how much of this water has potential to return to the reservoir, and how much "disappears" into the ground, is subject to debate.
Glen Canyon Dam would remain in place (as total removal of the structure would be prohibitively expensive), but would only store water in wet seasons when runoff exceeds the capacity of Lake Mead to hold it.
The contract was given to the Merritt-Chapman & Scott Corporation for an "astoundingly low" $107,955,552, about $30 million less than USBR's own estimate.
This was rapidly being destroyed by the cavitation and it was feared that a connection would be made to the bottom of Lake Powell, allowing the entire contents of the reservoir to drain into the river downstream and likely causing the dam to burst.
Dominy shrewdly realized that the USBR had considerable political clout in Western states due to the economic contributions of its water projects.
Glen Canyon Dam would regulate river flow between Lee's Ferry and Lake Mead, where the Colorado drops some , allowing the future construction of two additional hydroelectric dams, at Marble Canyon and Bridge Canyon.
During the construction of the Glen Canyon Bridge, the USBR also began planning a company town to house the workers.
This measure saved cost, but introduced a weak point where the two tunnels intersected.
From which of these features shall we select a name?
The EIS completed March 21, 1995 cemented some restrictions on dam operations, limiting the maximum power release to , the maximum hourly "ramp-up" (increase in river flow) to , and the maximum "ramp-down" to .
The river water temperature in 1983 was significantly higher than normal, due to a large portion of the water having come from overflows of warmer surface water over the spillways of Glen Canyon Dam, rather than the colder lower levels which feed the penstocks.
The dam is named for Glen Canyon, a series of deep sandstone gorges now flooded by the reservoir; Lake Powell is named for John Wesley Powell, who in 1869 led the first expedition to traverse the Colorado's Grand Canyon by boat.
Glen Canyon Dam must supply at least 8.23 million acre feet (10.2&nbsp;km3) of this water; the remaining  comes from other tributaries of the Colorado River.
In March, Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall ordered the filling halted and extra releases made to Lake Mead, to the consternation of the Upper Basin states.
With the Colorado River safely diverted around the canyon, construction could begin on the actual concrete arch dam.
In the face of public scrutiny of its expertise, and wishing to avoid more questions about the Colorado River Storage Project as a whole, the Bureau of Reclamation dropped the Echo Park proposal in 1954.
Floyd Dominy, commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation, was a vital figure in pushing the project through Congress and convincing politicians to take a pro-dam stance, even in the face of rising public concerns.
The spillway was undamaged, proving the worth of the re-engineering and suggesting that Glen Canyon Dam will also be able to hold against future floods with the magnitude of 1983.
Then, right before construction began, about 750 workers organized a strike because of a wage reduction due to the completion of public facilities at Page.
More than 500,000 people tour the Carl Hayden Visitor Center at Glen Canyon Dam each year.
Faced with a tremendous outcry, the Bureau abandoned its Grand Canyon dams, effectively terminating most of the Pacific Southwest Water Plan, in 1968.
Like many U.S. lakes and reservoirs, Lake Powell has an active problem with zebra and quagga mussels,  invasive bivalve species originating in eastern Europe.
It took more than 17 years for Lake Powell to finally reach its full elevation of  above sea level, which it crossed on June 22, 1980.
In addition to the proposed diversion of the Trinity River in Northern California, Marc Reisner wrote in ''Cadillac Desert'' that "in the Pacific Northwest there was a lot of suspicion that the Pacific Southwest Water Plan was merely a smokescreen for a much larger plan, long a gleam in the Colorado Basin's eye, to tap the Columbia River."
Engineers decided to bury them in soil to act as a buffer against the potentially damaging vibrations.
Although it is unclear whether the discrepancy was due to a careless error or intentional manipulation, Brower used it to paint the USBR as incompetent, pointing out "it would be a great mistake to rely on the Bureau's figures when they cannot add, subtract, multiply and divide."
If drought intervened in the same period, the reduced storage in the reservoir would have less capacity to maintain the required release of 8.23 million acre feet (10.2&nbsp;km3) below the dam.
The gross hydraulic head is .
Construction of the Storage Project, and allowing the Upper Basin to develop its water supplies, would tip the whole Colorado River system toward a structural water deficit, due to the fact that the Colorado River's average flow is less than what was apportioned in the 1922 Compact.
In 1904, the Colorado River was accidentally redirected after it damaged a canal gate in Mexico, causing the river to flood part of California's Imperial Valley and create the Salton Sea.
Because of its tremendous ecological effect on the Colorado River, the Glen Canyon Dam has been the focus of heavy criticism from the environmental movement.
The Bureau of Reclamation, meanwhile, had recognized a more serious problem.
Each of the tunnels was  in diameter, with a combined capacity of ; the right-side tunnel was  long and the left .
On August 12, the left spillway gates were opened, releasing water at a rate of .
However, the group's membership more than doubled in the next three years, many of them citizens unhappy with the IRS' apparent overreach.
A plan called "Fill Mead First", which would drain Lake Powell in order to refill Lake Mead, has gained traction in recent years.
A road link was urgently needed, in order to safely accommodate workers and heavy construction equipment.
If no action is taken such as dredging or sediment sluicing, in a few hundred years, sediment deposits will begin to build up at the foot of the dam and will gradually block the different outlets used to release water.
As said to Brower by writer Wallace Stegner, who had been to the canyon in 1947, "Echo doesn't hold a candle to Glen."
The first electricity was generated on September 4, 1964, with the power sent into the regional electric grid through a pair of long-distance transmission lines as far as Phoenix, Arizona and Farmington, New Mexico.
While studying the figures, Brower discovered that – according to USBR's own formulas – the difference should be no more than .
When the gates of Glen Canyon Dam were closed in 1963, the resulting reductions in river flow effectively dried up the Colorado River Delta, the large estuary formed by the Colorado River at the Gulf of California (Sea of Cortez) in Mexico.
The site originally favored by the USBR was just  upstream, but the final decision was to build the dam  upstream because of stronger foundation rock and easier access to gravel deposits on Wahweap Creek.
Because of the dam, sediment deposited by the Colorado and its tributaries is slowly filling up the canyon, and projections put the useful life of the reservoir at 300 to 700 years.
About 85,000 people per year travel via boat to Rainbow Bridge in Utah, a large natural arch once very hard to access, but now easily reachable because one of the arms of the reservoir extends near it.
The minimum water level required for power generation is , corresponding to storage of 4.0 million acre feet (5&nbsp;km3), and the "dead pool", the lowest point at which water can be released through the dam, is  with storage of 1.9 million acre feet (2.3&nbsp;km3).
The highest was 8,703 GWh in 1984, and the lowest was 3,299 GWh in 2005.
Glen Canyon's springs, side canyons, and intricately sculpted rock formations were home to such features as Music Temple and Cathedral in the Desert, a giant cave-like natural amphitheater with a waterfall at its center.
The years 2000–2004 were particularly dry, causing Lake Powell to fall to just , holding 33&nbsp;percent of capacity, on April 8, 2005 – a water level not seen since 1969.
As more efficient methods of concrete pouring were installed, including conveyors and remotely controlled buckets, the workforce gradually decreased.
A huge reservoir, absolutely not needed in this century, almost certainly not needed in the next, and conceivably never to be needed at all, began to fill."
Despite its remote location, the  Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, which surrounds the reservoir, receives more than three million visitors annually.
Between 1963 and 1976, as much as  leaked into the reservoir banks each year.
However, according to a 2013 study by hydrologist Thomas Myers for the Glen Canyon Institute, the reservoir continues to lose about  each year due to leakage.
The Hite Marina, located at the upper end of the reservoir near the Hite Crossing Bridge, is now disused since the water level is usually too low for boats to launch there.
About 100 million US tons (90,700,000 metric tons) of sediment are trapped behind the dam annually, equal to about 30,000 dump truck loads per day.
However, drought conditions in the 21st century have reduced the amount of hydropower available from Glen Canyon Dam.
Revenues derived from power sales was integral in paying off the bonds used to build the dam and has also been used to fund other Bureau of Reclamation projects, including environmental restoration programs in the Grand Canyon and elsewhere along the Colorado River.
Work on the power plant and spillways began directly after the dam wall was complete.
For this reason, it has long been known as a "cash register" dam.
In 1963, when construction on the dam was well underway, the Sierra Club published a book on Glen Canyon, ''The Place No One Knew'', featuring photographs by Eliot Porter, and lamenting the loss of the canyon before most of the American public had a chance to visit, or were even aware of its existence.
Prepared campgrounds can be found at each marina, but many visitors choose to rent a houseboat or bring their own camping equipment, find a private spot somewhere in the canyons, and make their own camp (there are no restrictions on where visitors can stay).
Each generator is driven by a 254,000 horsepower vertical-axis Francis turbine.
The original plan was to fill Lake Powell to  above sea level, the minimum level necessary to generate hydroelectric power by late 1964, after which water would be released down to Lake Mead, with only the excess stored in Lake Powell.
During years of drought, Glen Canyon guarantees a water delivery to the Lower Basin states, without the need for rationing in the Upper Basin.
Echo Park was hailed as a victory for the American environmental movement, but it was only accomplished in exchange for a dam upstream at Flaming Gorge, and increasing the size of the proposed dam at Glen Canyon to replace the storage that would have been provided by Echo Park.
By the beginning of 1964, Lake Powell had barely reached half the target level, and Lake Mead had seen a sharp decline.
This was done as a cost-saving measure, but resulted in the destruction of both spillways during the 1983 flood releases.
Other facilities at Dangling Rope and Rainbow Bridge are accessible only by boat.
The 1922 Colorado River Compact requires annual delivery of 7.5 million acre feet (9.3&nbsp;km3) to the Lower Basin states of Arizona, California and Nevada; the 1944 treaty with Mexico obligates the U.S. to allow at least 1.5 million acre feet (1.9&nbsp;km3) for use in the Mexican states of Baja California and Sonora.
An accurate forecast is vital to prevent uncontrolled spilling, which would waste water that could have been used for power generation.
Hydropower generated at Glen Canyon serves about 5 million people in Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming, and is sold to utilities in these states as 20-year contracts.
Climate projections by the Bureau of Reclamation suggest that the drying trend will continue, although it is uncertain to what degree.
By late 1962, concrete was being poured into the dam at a rate of  per day even as the workforce was scaled down to about 1,500.
In his comprehensive history of western water development, ''Cadillac Desert'' (1986), Marc Reisner criticized the political forces that resulted in Glen Canyon and hundreds of other dams being built in the 1960s and 1970s.
In wetter years, the Bureau of Reclamation may decide to release extra water from Glen Canyon Dam if the level of Lake Powell exceeds the "equalization tier", an elevation determined by the difference in storage between Lake Powell and Lake Mead.
The flow appeared to have scoured clean numerous pockets of encroaching vegetation, carried away rockslides that had become dangerous to boaters, and rearranged sand and gravel bars along the river, and was initially believed to be an environmental success.
The general consensus among inhabitants of the Colorado River basin and government officials was that a high dam had to be built on the Colorado to control floods and provide carry-over water storage for times of drought.
Though little known to most Americans before Porter's book, Glen Canyon had been visited by a handful of hikers and boaters (such as Powell's expedition), and some had even been interviewed by Brower.
Flood control has also caused an inability of the river to carry away the rockslides that are common along the canyons, leading to the creation of incrementally dangerous rapids that pose a hazard to fish and boaters alike.
The circular, concrete-lined spillway tunnels plunge at a 55-degree angle, reducing in diameter from , until they intersect with the old river diversion tunnels at sharp elbow joints before returning to the Colorado River.
Emboldened by Echo Park and desperate to protect the Grand Canyon from a similar fate as Glen, Brower and the Sierra Club directed attention towards the proposed Bridge and Marble dams.
Before the dam was built, Colorado River temperatures ranged from over  in the heat of summer to just above freezing in winter.
The Glen Canyon site, furthermore, was so remote that delivering supplies and transporting workers there would be infeasible at the time.
Construction continued and on September 13, 1963, the dam was topped out.
Releases are made over a water year of October 1–September 30, due to the fact that the annual snowpack begins to accumulate in late autumn.
Together, the spillways can pass up to .
At Lee's Ferry, the Colorado River peaked at , which was and still is the highest water flow recorded there since the dam was built.
Because Glen Canyon Dam made possible an increased utilization of water from the Colorado River system, not enough water is left to flow to the delta in a normal year, and about  of ecologically productive wetlands have disappeared.
staged an anti-dam protest by unfurling a  tapered black sheet of plastic down the face of the dam, making it appear as if a gigantic crack had appeared in the structure – a direct re-enactment of a scene from Abbey's book.
In 1956, work began on the two diversion tunnels that would carry the Colorado River around the dam site during construction.
Some organizations, such as Living Rivers, continue to believe that the dam has too large and severe of an effect on the river's ecology to make restoration efforts worthwhile.
This resulted in the town of Page, Arizona, named for former Reclamation Commissioner John C. Page.
At the beginning of June, dam operators opened the gates on the left spillway, sending , less than one-tenth of capacity, down the tunnel into the river below.
Reisner wrote that "Dominy cultivated Congress as if he were tending prize-winning orchids&nbsp;...
Reisner writes that "in the West, it is said, water flows uphill towards money."
The Bureau of Reclamation proposed to build a barrier dam and pump system in order to keep water out of the monument.
After a barge capsized, spilling tons of machinery into the river, a much safer cable-car system was installed.
With a capacity of 27 million acre feet (33&nbsp;km3), Lake Powell is the second largest man-made lake in the United States by total water capacity (after only Lake Mead), extending  upstream through the canyons of Arizona and Utah.
The March 1959 issue of ''LIFE'' reported that "motorists were driving miles out of their way just to be thrilled by its dizzying height."
Because of the cold, clear water released from Lake Powell, the stretch of the Colorado River between Glen Canyon Dam and Lee's Ferry has become an excellent rainbow trout fishery.
In 1984, the Colorado River basin produced even more runoff than 1983, peaking at  in early June.
He further described that during the record post-dam high-flow season of 1983 (mentioned above), there was only one boating fatality in the canyon, providing a strong challenge to views that the dam, by reducing and mediating river flows, increases the safety of canyon river users.
The engineer in charge of the project would be Lem F. Wylie, who had worked on Hoover Dam and had previously designed six other USBR dams.
The Glen Canyon Institute estimates that  is lost from the reservoir each year.
Air slots were installed at the bottom of each spillway to break up and absorb the shock of the bubbles formed by cavitation.
The Colorado River flowed gently across the bottom of the canyon, in sharp contrast to the roaring rapids upstream in Cataract Canyon and downstream in the Grand Canyon.
After the dam was completed in 1964, there were few restrictions on hydro-power generation.
The right tunnel would be used for carrying the Colorado's normal flow around the dam site, while the left tunnel,  above the water, would only be used during floods.
In 1963, Arizona's congressional delegation proposed these dams as part of the Central Arizona Project to accomplish these goals.
The grass was later planted to prevent the dirt from getting blown away – but also provides a mild cooling effect through evapotranspiration, reducing temperatures inside the power plant.
Authorities were unable to find the individuals responsible.
The heavily used Wahweap and Antelope Point Marinas are located in Arizona, close to Page.
The two spillway tunnels are excavated through the canyon walls on each side of the dam.
The Friends of Lake Powell have called this an attempt to steal water from the Upper Basin, to avoid a shortage in the Lower Basin.
Power generation is affected not only by the volume of water passing through the dam, but also the depth of water in the reservoir, as a higher water level means more pressure (head) on the turbines.
In total, the dam contains  of concrete and  of reinforcing steel.
The Bureau of Reclamation provides guided tours of the dam; stringent security measures have been in place since the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in New York City.
During the 2000–2004 Colorado River drought, when the basin experienced its lowest five-year runoff on record, Lake Mead would likely have gone dry and the Lower Basin experienced massive cuts, were it not for releases from Lake Powell.
It said that building Echo Park Dam and a "low" Glen Canyon Dam would save  of water per year over a "high" Glen Canyon Dam (which was ultimately the version to be built).
We decide to call it Glen Canyon."
It took two more years to complete all remaining aspects of the project.
It reached a level of , 77&nbsp;percent full, on July 30, 2011.
In May, Udall changed his mind yet again to lower releases, gambling that the spring runoff would be enough to raise Powell to minimum power pool by autumn, by which time power releases could begin, to prevent Lake Mead from falling below ''its'' minimum power pool.
In addition to its variegated rock formations, Glen Canyon supported a rich riparian zone habitat on the numerous low river terraces formed by the Colorado River, with as many as 316 bird species, 79 plant species and 34 kinds of mammals.
Many of these projects had dubious economic justifications and hidden environmental costs, but the government agencies that built them – namely the Bureau of Reclamation and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers – were more interested in maintaining their size and influence.
Concrete placement started on June 16, 1960, and started at a sluggish but growing pace.
After a long fight, the USBR agreed not to build the dam in Dinosaur, but only if the environmentalists did not oppose the proposed dam in Glen Canyon.
However, with the potential damage that would be caused to the remote environment, "the cure would be far worse than the disease."
Activities include boating, fishing, waterskiing, jet-skiing, swimming and hiking.
The dam also serves as a primary peaking power plant and black start power source for the Southwest electrical grid.
