Currently, about half of the carbon dioxide released from the burning of fossil fuels remains in the atmosphere.
It has been estimated that we are already committed to a sea-level rise of approximately 2.3 metres for each degree of temperature rise within the next 2,000 years.
The rest has melted ice and warmed the continents and atmosphere.
This phrase next appeared in a November 1957 report in ''The Hammond Times'' which described Roger Revelle's research into the effects of increasing human-caused  emissions on the greenhouse effect, "a large scale global warming, with radical climate changes may result".
Latin America had the biggest rise in concern: 73% said global warming is a serious threat to their families.
The lower end of the "likely" range appears to be better constrained than the upper end.
These findings have been recognized by the national science academies of the major industrialized nations and are not disputed by any scientific body of national or international standing.
The models do not assume the climate will warm due to increasing levels of greenhouse gases.
According to professor Brian Hoskins, this is likely the first time CO2 levels have been this high for about 4.5 million years.
Attributions of emissions due to land-use change are subject to considerable uncertainty.
Among those who knew about global warming, there was a wide variation between nations in belief that the warming was a result of human activities.
The phrase began to come into common use, and in 1976 Mikhail Budyko's statement that "a global warming up has started" was widely reported.
whose ultimate objective is to prevent dangerous anthropogenic climate change.
This could lead to landslides and increased seismic and volcanic activities.
Environmental organizations and public figures have emphasized changes in the climate and the risks they entail, while promoting adaptation to changes in infrastructural needs and emissions reductions.
This mandate was sustained in the Kyoto Protocol to the Framework Convention, which entered into legal effect in 2005.
Melting of the Greenland ice sheet could contribute an additional 4 to 7.5&nbsp;m over many thousands of years.
Variations in orbital cycles may initiate a new glacial period in the future, though the timing of this depends on greenhouse gas concentrations as well as the orbital forcing.
* ''Health'': Generally impacts will be more negative than positive.
Clouds also affect the radiation balance through cloud forcings similar to greenhouse gases.
Estimates of global CO2 emissions in 2011 from fossil fuel combustion, including cement production and gas flaring, was 34.8 billion tonnes (9.5 ± 0.5 PgC), an increase of 54% above emissions in 1990.
For example, sustained global warming of more than 2&nbsp;°C (relative to pre-industrial levels) could lead to eventual sea level rise of around 1 to 4 m due to thermal expansion of sea water and the melting of glaciers and small ice caps.
Other studies, such as a 1971 MIT report, referred to the human impact as "inadvertent climate modification", but an influential 1979 National Academy of Sciences study headed by Jule Charney followed Broecker in using ''global warming'' for rising surface temperatures, while describing the wider effects of increased  as ''climate change''.
Models are, however, able to simulate the observed 20th century changes in temperature when they include all of the most important external forcings, including human influences and natural forcings.
Although researchers attempt to include as many processes as possible, simplifications of the actual climate system are inevitable because of the constraints of available computer power and limitations in knowledge of the climate system.
Examples of abrupt climate change are the rapid release of methane and carbon dioxide from permafrost, which would lead to amplified global warming, or the shutdown of thermohaline circulation.
Unmitigated climate change (i.e., future climate change without efforts to limit greenhouse gas emissions) would, in the long term, be likely to exceed the capacity of natural, managed and human systems to adapt.
Many of the observed changes since the 1950s are unprecedented over tens to thousands of years.
It produced an agreement, not a binding treaty, that the Parties should take urgent action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to meet a goal of limiting global warming to  above pre-industrial temperatures.
Ocean oscillations like El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) can affect global average temperatures, for example, 1998 temperatures were significantly enhanced by strong El Niño conditions.
One climate commitment study concluded that if greenhouse gases were stabilized at year 2000 levels, surface temperatures would still increase by about one-half degree Celsius, and another found that if they were stabilized at 2005 levels surface warming could exceed a whole degree Celsius.
Public reactions to global warming and concern about its effects are also increasing.
Adaptation to climate change may be planned, either in reaction to or anticipation of climate change, or spontaneous, i.e., without government intervention.
CO2 emissions are continuing to rise due to the burning of fossil fuels and land-use change.
Indirect effects of aerosols represent the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing.
Not all effects of global warming are accurately predicted by the climate models used by the IPCC.
Examples include sea level rise, widespread melting of snow and land ice,  increased heat content of the oceans, increased humidity,  and the earlier timing of spring events, e.g., the flowering of plants.
Fossil fuel reserves are abundant, and will not limit carbon emissions in the 21st century.
Additionally, sea level rise has accelerated from 1995 to 2015.
Sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and thus lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets.
15 of the top 16 warmest years have occurred since 2000.
In small islands and mega deltas, inundation as a result of sea level rise is expected to threaten vital infrastructure and human settlements.
Tsunamis could be generated by submarine landslides caused by warmer ocean water thawing ocean-floor permafrost or releasing gas hydrates.
In the advanced countries of North America, Europe and Japan, 90% or more knew about it (97% in the U.S., 99% in Japan); in less developed countries, especially in Africa, fewer than a quarter knew about it, although many had noticed local weather changes.
The probability that these changes could have occurred by chance is virtually zero.
Emissions of CO2 would need to be reduced by more than 80% relative to their peak level.
Average arctic temperatures have been increasing at almost twice the rate of the rest of the world in the past 100 years; however arctic temperatures are also highly variable.
Climate models produce a good match to observations of global temperature changes over the last century, but do not simulate all aspects of climate.
Climate proxies show the temperature to have been relatively stable over the one or two thousand years before 1850, with regionally varying fluctuations such as the Medieval Warm Period and the Little Ice Age.
Polling groups began to track opinions on the subject, at first mainly in the United States.
In 2005 the Royal Society stated that while the overwhelming majority of scientists were in agreement on the main points, some individuals and organizations opposed to the consensus on urgent action needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions have tried to undermine the science and work of the IPCC.
By 2010, with 111 countries surveyed, Gallup determined that there was a substantial decrease since 2007–08 in the number of Americans and Europeans who viewed global warming as a serious threat.
* ''Food'': Crop production will probably be negatively affected in low latitude countries, while effects at northern latitudes may be positive or negative.
According to NOAA and NASA, 2015 had the warmest respective months on record for 10 out of the 12 months.
Other likely changes include more frequent extreme weather events including heat waves, droughts, heavy rainfall with floods and heavy snowfall; ocean acidification; and species extinctions due to shifting temperature regimes.
Such models are based on scientific disciplines such as fluid dynamics and thermodynamics as well as physical processes such as radiative transfer.
This could lead to issues of homelessness in countries with low-lying areas such as Bangladesh, as well as statelessness for populations in countries such as the Maldives and Tuvalu.
For example, the uncertainty in IPCC's 2007 projections is caused by (1) the use of multiple models with differing sensitivity to greenhouse gas concentrations, (2) the use of differing estimates of humanity's future greenhouse gas emissions, (3) any additional emissions from climate feedbacks that were not included in the models IPCC used to prepare its report, i.e., greenhouse gas releases from permafrost.
Precipitation increased proportionally to atmospheric humidity, and hence significantly faster than global climate models predict.
In isolated areas with high soot production, such as rural India, as much as 50% of surface warming due to greenhouse gases may be masked by atmospheric brown clouds.
Both phrases were only used occasionally until 1975, when Wallace Smith Broecker published a scientific paper on the topic; "Climatic Change: Are We on the Brink of a Pronounced Global Warming?"
During the 21st century, glaciers and snow cover are projected to continue their widespread retreat.
Although the increase of near-surface atmospheric temperature is the measure of global warming often reported in the popular press, most of the additional energy stored in the climate system since 1970 has gone into the oceans.
While crop production has increased in some mid-latitude regions such as the UK and Northeast China, economic losses due to extreme weather events have increased globally.
In ratifying the Kyoto Protocol, most developed countries accepted legally binding commitments to limit their emissions.
Without the Earth's atmosphere, the Earth's average temperature would be well below the freezing temperature of water.
As effects such as changing patterns of rainfall and rising sea levels would probably have more impact than temperatures alone, he considered ''global climate change'' a more scientifically accurate term, and like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the NASA website would emphasize this wider context.
Projections of declines in Arctic sea ice vary.
In limiting warming at below 2&nbsp;°C, more stringent emission reductions in the near-term would allow for less rapid reductions after 2030.
The disputed issues include the causes of increased global average air temperature, especially since the mid-20th century, whether this warming trend is unprecedented or within normal climatic variations, whether humankind has contributed significantly to it, and whether the increase is completely or partially an artefact of poor measurements.
Techniques under research fall generally into the categories solar radiation management and carbon dioxide removal, although various other schemes have been suggested.
"Detection" is the process of demonstrating that climate has changed in some defined statistical sense, without providing a reason for that change.
On Earth, naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases cause air temperature near the surface to be about  warmer than it would be in their absence.
National science academies have called on world leaders for policies to cut global emissions.
Public attention increased over the summer, and ''global warming'' became the dominant popular term, commonly used both by the press and in public discourse.
In the 1950s, research suggested increasing temperatures, and a 1952 newspaper reported "climate change".
Examples of external forcings include changes in atmospheric composition (e.g., increased concentrations of greenhouse gases), solar luminosity, volcanic eruptions, and variations in Earth's orbit around the Sun.
The effects of climate change on human systems, mostly due to warming or shifts in precipitation patterns, or both, have been detected worldwide.
In a January 2013 survey, Pew found that 69% of Americans say there is solid evidence that the Earth's average temperature has got warmer over the past few decades, up six points since November 2011 and 12 points since 2009.
Since the beginning of industrialisation the temperature difference between the hemispheres has increased due to melting of sea ice and snow in the North.
The rest of this increase is caused mostly by changes in land-use, particularly deforestation.
Other estimates suggest that for the same period, global mean sea level could rise by 0.2 to 2.0 m (0.7–6.6&nbsp;ft), relative to mean sea level in 1992.
Temperature changes vary over the globe.
A concept related to adaptation is ''adaptive capacity'', which is the ability of a system (human, natural or managed) to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and extremes) to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with consequences.
Parties associated with the Accord (140 countries, as of November 2010)
According to 54% of those questioned, global warming featured top of the perceived global threats.
Since 1990, sea level has also risen considerably faster than models predicted it would.
A March–May 2013 survey by Pew Research Center for the People & the Press polled 39 countries about global threats.
aim to limit the future increase in global mean temperature to below .
Carbon dioxide has a lifetime of a century or more, and as such, changes in aerosols will only delay climate changes due to carbon dioxide.
Projections suggest that surface-ocean pH could decrease by an additional 0.3–0.4 units by 2100.
In the scientific literature, there is a strong consensus that global surface temperatures have increased in recent decades and that the trend is caused mainly by human-induced emissions of greenhouse gases.
Future climate change is expected to affect particular ecosystems, including tundra, mangroves, and coral reefs.
A 2008 report by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences stated that most scientists by then agreed that observed warming in recent decades was primarily caused by human activities increasing the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
The popular media and the public often confuse global warming with ozone depletion, i.e., the destruction of stratospheric ozone (e.g., the ozone layer) by chlorofluorocarbons.
Parties to the UNFCCC have agreed that deep cuts in emissions are required and that global warming should be limited to well below  relative to pre-industrial levels, with efforts made to limit warming to .
Estimates based on the IPCC A1B emission scenario from additional CO2 and CH4 greenhouse gases released from permafrost, estimate associated impact damages by US$43 trillion.
Recent projections suggest that Arctic summers could be ice-free (defined as ice extent less than 1 million square km) as early as 2025-2030.
A climate model is a representation of the physical, chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system.
Data analysis of extreme events from 1960 till 2010 suggests that droughts and heat waves appear simultaneously with increased frequency.
The global average (land and ocean) surface temperature shows a warming of 0.85 0.65 to 1.06 °C in the period 1880 to 2012, based on multiple independently produced datasets.
Clouds and their effects are especially difficult to predict.
These first-round commitments expired in 2012.
In most scenarios, emissions continue to rise over the century, while in a few, emissions are reduced.
Projections of global mean sea level rise by Parris and others.
Future ocean acidification could threaten coral reefs, fisheries, protected species, and other natural resources of value to society.
Less direct geological evidence indicates that CO2 values higher than this were last seen about 20 million years ago.
The major greenhouse gases are water vapour, which causes about 36–70% of the greenhouse effect; carbon dioxide (CO2), which causes 9–26%; methane (CH4), which causes 4–9%; and ozone (O3), which causes 3–7%.
Anticipated effects include warming global temperature, rising sea levels, changing precipitation, and expansion of deserts in the subtropics.
Climate models have been used to examine the role of the Sun in recent climate change.
The relative stability in surface temperature from 2002 to 2009, which has been dubbed the global warming hiatus by the media and some scientists, is consistent with such an episode.
United States President George W. Bush rejected the treaty on the basis that "it exempts 80% of the world, including major population centres such as China and India, from compliance, and would cause serious harm to the US economy."
On the other hand, some fossil fuel companies have scaled back their efforts in recent years, or even called for policies to reduce global warming.
In addition, NOAA reported that July of 2016 was the hottest month on record.
The 16th Conference of the Parties (COP16) was held at Cancún in 2010.
A study from 2015 concluded that economic growth (gross domestic product) of poorer countries is much more impaired with projected future climate warming, than previously thought.
The probability of abrupt change for some climate related feedbacks may be low.
Human-made carbon dioxide continues to increase above levels not seen in hundreds of thousands of years.
The world public, or at least people in economically advanced regions, became broadly aware of the global warming problem in the late 1980s.
Although more greenhouse gases are emitted in the Northern than Southern Hemisphere this does not contribute to the difference in warming because the major greenhouse gases persist long enough to mix between hemispheres.
All regions are at risk of experiencing negative impacts.
This global poll also found that people are more likely to attribute global warming to human activities than to natural causes, except in the US where nearly half (47%) of the population attributed global warming to natural causes.
Stabilizing the global average temperature would require large reductions in CO2 emissions, as well as reductions in emissions of other greenhouse gases such as methane and nitrous oxide.
The warming that is evident in the instrumental temperature record is consistent with a wide range of observations, as documented by many independent scientific groups.
Indirect effects are most noticeable in marine stratiform clouds, and have very little radiative effect on convective clouds.
Most countries are parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
Feedbacks are an important factor in determining the sensitivity of the climate system to increased atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations.
The IPCC's projections are conservative, and may underestimate future sea level rise.
The main negative feedback is the energy the Earth's surface radiates into space as infrared radiation.
Models and observations show that greenhouse warming results in warming of the lower atmosphere (the troposphere) but cooling of the upper atmosphere (the stratosphere).
A 2010 survey of 14 industrialized countries found that skepticism about the danger of global warming was highest in Australia, Norway, New Zealand and the United States, in that order, correlating positively with per capita emissions of carbon dioxide.
This marks the longest such streak in NOAA's 137 years of record keeping.
Fossil fuel burning has produced about three-quarters of the increase in CO2 from human activity over the past 20 years.
Monthly global CO2 concentrations exceeded 400 ppm in March 2015, probably for the first time in several million years.
More research is needed to understand the role of clouds and carbon cycle feedbacks in climate projections.
Other factors being equal, a higher ''climate sensitivity'' means that more warming will occur for a given increase in greenhouse gas forcing.
Ocean deoxygenation is projected to increase hypoxia by 10%, and triple suboxic waters (oxygen concentrations 98% less than the mean surface concentrations), for each 1&nbsp;°C of upper ocean warming.
Over the 21st century, the IPCC projects for a high emissions scenario, that global mean sea level could rise by 52–98&nbsp;cm.
Warming is expected to be greater over land than over the oceans and greatest in the Arctic, with the continuing retreat of glaciers, permafrost and sea ice.
While record-breaking years can attract considerable public interest, individual years are less significant than the overall trend.
Organizations such as the libertarian Competitive Enterprise Institute, conservative commentators, and some companies such as ExxonMobil have challenged IPCC climate change scenarios, funded scientists who disagree with the scientific consensus, and provided their own projections of the economic cost of stricter controls.
It is very likely that human activities substantially contributed to this increase in ocean heat content.
Radiative forcing due to aerosols is temporally limited due to the processes that remove aerosols from the atmosphere.
The models may be used to predict a range of variables such as local air movement, temperature, clouds, and other atmospheric properties; ocean temperature, salt content, and circulation; ice cover on land and sea; the transfer of heat and moisture from soil and vegetation to the atmosphere; and chemical and biological processes, among others.
Regional impacts of climate change are now observable at more locations than before, on all continents and across ocean regions.
The average temperature of the lower troposphere has increased between &nbsp;per&nbsp;decade since 1979, according to satellite temperature measurements.
Global dimming, a gradual reduction in the amount of global direct irradiance at the Earth's surface, was observed from 1961 until at least 1990.
The large margin by which 2015 is the warmest year is also attributed to another strong El Niño.
Therefore, none of these projections should be interpreted as a "best estimate" of future sea level rise.
Low-latitude, less developed areas face the greatest risk.
Warming beyond the 2&nbsp;°C target would potentially lead to rates of sea-level rise dominated by ice loss from Antarctica.
Factors that may increase the probability of abrupt climate change include higher magnitudes of global warming, warming that occurs more rapidly, and warming that is sustained over longer time periods.
Scientific understanding of global warming is increasing.
Detection does not imply attribution of the detected change to a particular cause.
Emissions can be attributed to different regions.
Probabilities have not been assigned to these projections.
Surface-ocean pH has probably not been below ≈8.1 during the past 2 million years.
2015 updates to account for differing methods of measuring ocean surface temperature measurements show a positive trend over the recent decade.
However, 2014 was ENSO neutral.
However, the IPCC's projections do not reflect the full range of uncertainty.
Improving the models' representation of clouds is therefore an important topic in current research.
Results from models can also vary due to different greenhouse gas inputs and the model's climate sensitivity.
Global oil companies have begun to acknowledge climate change exists and is caused by human activities and the burning of fossil fuels.
As of July 2016, for the 15th consecutive month, the global land and ocean temperature departure from average was the highest since global temperature records began in 1880.
Most of this extra energy has been absorbed by the oceans.
Continued permafrost degradation will likely result in unstable infrastructure in Arctic regions, or Alaska before 2100.
Widespread coastal flooding would be expected if several degrees of warming is sustained for millennia.
So some climatologists have criticized the attention that the popular press gives to "warmest year" statistics; for example, Gavin Schmidt stated "the long-term trends or the expected sequence of records are far more important than whether any single year is a record or not."
Some large-scale changes could occur abruptly, i.e., over a short time period, and might also be irreversible.
The influences of atmospheric particles, including black carbon, are most pronounced in the tropics and sub-tropics, particularly in Asia, while the effects of greenhouse gases are dominant in the extratropics and southern hemisphere.
Climate model projections summarized in the report indicated that during the 21st century the global surface temperature is likely to rise a further  for their lowest emissions scenario and  for the highest emissions scenario.
Global temperature is subject to short-term fluctuations that overlay long-term trends and can temporarily mask them.
Solid and liquid particles known as ''aerosols'', produced by volcanoes and human-made pollutants, are thought to be the main cause of this dimming.
At the 15th UNFCCC Conference of the Parties, held in 2009 at Copenhagen, several UNFCCC Parties produced the Copenhagen Accord.
There are significant regional differences, with Americans and Chinese (whose economies are responsible for the greatest annual CO2 emissions) among the least concerned.
Ocean temperatures increase more slowly than land temperatures because of the larger effective heat capacity of the oceans and because the ocean loses more heat by evaporation.
They exert a cooling effect by increasing the reflection of incoming sunlight.
Possible societal responses to global warming include mitigation by emissions reduction, adaptation to its effects, building systems resilient to its effects, and possible future climate engineering.
This effect also causes droplets to be of more uniform size, which reduces growth of raindrops and makes the cloud more reflective to incoming sunlight, known as the Albrecht effect.
There were increasing heatwaves and drought problems in the summer of 1988, and when Hansen testified in the Senate on 23 June he sparked worldwide interest.
Effects significant to humans include the threat to food security from decreasing crop yields and the abandonment of populated areas due to rising sea levels.
The contribution of solar irradiance to radiative forcing is 5% the value of the combined radiative forcing due to increases in the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide.
In May 2013, it was reported that readings for CO2 taken at the world's primary benchmark site in Mauna Loa surpassed 400 ppm.
A study from 2014 investigated the most common climate engineering methods and concluded they are either ineffective or have potentially severe side effects and cannot be stopped without causing rapid climate change.
Since 1979, land temperatures have increased about twice as fast as ocean temperatures ( against ).
1998 remained the warmest year until 2005 and 2010 and the temperature of both of these years was enhanced by El Niño periods.
These clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets, a phenomenon known as the Twomey effect.
The barriers, limits, and costs of future adaptation are not fully understood.
There has been a shift from cold- to heat-related mortality in some regions as a result of warming.
A global 2015 Pew Research Center report showed a median of 54% consider it "a very serious problem".
Thus, impacting roads, pipelines and buildings, as well as water distribution, and cause slope failures.
Dissolved CO2 increases ocean acidity, measured by lower pH values.
When deposited, especially on glaciers or on ice in arctic regions, the lower surface albedo can also directly heat the surface.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported in 2014 that scientists were more than 95% certain that global warming is mostly being caused by human (anthropogenic) activities, mainly increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2).
2015 was not only the warmest year on record, it broke the record by the largest margin by which the record has been broken.
On 12 November 2015, NASA scientists reported that human-made carbon dioxide continues to increase above levels not seen in hundreds of thousands of years: currently, about half of the carbon dioxide released from the burning of fossil fuels is not absorbed by vegetation and the oceans and remains in the atmosphere.
Removal by clouds and precipitation gives tropospheric aerosols an atmospheric lifetime of only about a week, while stratospheric aerosols can remain for a few years.
Atmospheric soot directly absorbs solar radiation, which heats the atmosphere and cools the surface.
This is 90–250% above the concentration in the year 1750.
Emissions scenarios, estimates of changes in future emission levels of greenhouse gases, have been projected that depend upon uncertain economic, sociological, technological, and natural developments.
