In 2008 Greg Ip claimed this rise in opposition to globalization can be explained, at least in part, by economic self-interest.
Levitt can be credited with popularizing the term and bringing it into the mainstream business audience in the later half of the 1980s.
'''Democratic globalization''' is a movement towards an institutional system of global democracy that would give world citizens a say in political organizations.
Because it predated the Great Divergence of the nineteenth century, in which Western Europe pulled ahead of the rest of the world in terms of industrial production and economic output, archaic globalization was a phenomenon that was driven not only by Europe but also by other economically developed Old World centers such as Gujarat, Bengal, coastal China, and Japan.
Increasingly, non-governmental organizations influence public policy across national boundaries, including humanitarian aid and developmental efforts.
This included accounting, software development, and engineering design.
Citizens cannot freely leave the country.
In the 1990s, the growth of low-cost communication networks cut the cost of communicating between different countries.
Actors of the movement participate in things such as disruptive tactics.
A related term, ''corporate giants'', was coined by Charles Taze Russell (of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society) in 1897 to refer to the largely national trusts and other large enterprises of the time.
The differences between the foods eaten in different countries were reduced by 68% between 1961 and 2009.
They also cite an increase in the exploitation of child labor: countries with weak protections for children are vulnerable to infestation by rogue companies and criminal gangs who exploit them.
They often create partnerships where they work towards improving the lives of those who live in developing countries by building schools, fixing infrastructure, cleaning water supplies, purchasing equipment and supplies for hospitals, and other aid efforts.
China's experience supports the assertion that globalization greatly increases wealth for poor countries.
Women often participate in the workforce in precarious work, including export-oriented employment.
In the late 19th and early 20th century, the connectedness of the world's economies and cultures grew very quickly.
Such globalization of food supplies is associated with mixed effects on food security, improving under-nutrition in some regions but contributing to the diet-related diseases caused by over-consumption of macronutrients.
The developed countries produce 90 percent of the hazardous wastes produced around the world every year.
The term describes the phase of increasing trade links and cultural exchange that characterized the period immediately preceding the advent of high "modern globalization" in the late 19th century.
One of the earliest known usages of the term as a noun was in a 1930 publication entitled ''Towards New Education'', where it denoted a holistic view of human experience in education.
Whereas the globalization of business is centered around the diminution of international trade regulations as well as tariffs, taxes, and other impediments that suppresses global trade, economic globalization is the process of increasing economic integration between countries, leading to the emergence of a global marketplace or a single world market.
Whereas nations used to consume greater proportions of locally or regionally important crops, wheat has become a staple in over 97% of countries, with the other global staples showing similar dominance worldwide.
The flow of migrants to advanced economic countries has been claimed to provide a means through which global wages converge.
He proposes a process of “universalization” or universalisation as alternative.
Baha’i-inspired author Gregory Paul Meyjes embraces the single world community and emergent global consciousness but warns of globalization   as a cloak for an expeditious economic, social, and cultural Anglo-dominance that may be insufficiently fertile to sustain the emergence of a world civilization.
The creation and expansion of such social relations is not merely observed on a material level.
Cultural practices including traditional music can be lost or turned into a fusion of traditions.
Exports nearly doubled from 8.5% of total gross world product in 1970 to 16.2% in 2001.
Also, globalization has increased the interdependency of political, personal, cultural, and economic factors.
For example, sushi is available in Germany as well as Japan, but Euro-Disney outdraws the city of Paris, potentially reducing demand for "authentic" French pastry.
In 2002, China was the third largest exporter of cultural goods, after the UK and US.
In 2004, Philip Gordon stated that "a clear majority of Europeans believe that globalization can enrich their lives, while believing the European Union can help them take advantage of globalization's benefits while shielding them from its negative effects."
Globalization is restructuring control over resources in such a way that the natural resources of the poor are systematically taken over by the rich and the pollution promulgated by the rich is systematically dumped on the poor.
Scholarly opinion typically states that globalization and Americanization are different phenomena.
contend that the anti-globalization movement is an example of a new social movement, which uses tactics that are unique and use different resources than previously used before in other social movements.
Also, adult literacy in developing countries rose from 53% in 1970 to 74% in 1998 and much lower illiteracy rate among the young guarantees that rates will continue to fall as time passes.
During 2005–2007, and again from 2010 to 2013, the Port of Shanghai held the title as the world's busiest port.
Object-extended globalization, a third form, is the movement of commodities and other objects of exchange.
Americanization is related to a period of high political American clout and of significant growth of America's shops, markets and objects being brought into other countries.
Globalization can trigger a state of emergency for the preservation of musical heritage.
With early globalization, it was difficult for states to interact with others that were not within close proximity.
One of its most prolific proponents is the British political thinker David Held.
Dr. Francesco Stipo, Director of the United States Association of the Club of Rome, advocates unifying nations under a world government, suggesting that it "should reflect the political and economic balances of world nations.
This led to a global power shift towards Asian states, particularly China, which unleashed market forces and achieved tremendous growth rates.
As an example, Chinese economic reform began to open China to globalization in the 1980's.
World citizen has a variety of similar meanings, often referring to a person who disapproves of traditional geopolitical divisions derived from national citizenship.
According to a 1997 poll 58% of college graduates said globalization had been good for the US.
A person who adheres to the idea of cosmopolitanism in any of its forms is called a cosmopolitan or cosmopolite.
Social spending was much higher than in the US.
They also claim that the increasing autonomy and strength of corporate entities shapes the political policy of countries.
However, this is at the expense of these impoverished people and the community or country as a whole.
Those opposed to capital market integration on the basis of human rights issues  are especially disturbed by the various abuses which they think are perpetuated by global and international institutions that, they say, promote neoliberalism without regard to ethical standards.
Economist Theodore Levitt is widely credited with coining the term in an article entitled "Globalization of Markets", which appeared in the May–June 1983 issue of ''Harvard Business Review''.
He argues that many of them lack a basic understanding of comparative advantage and its importance in today's world.
In her book ''Ancient Futures'', Norberg-Hodge claims that "centuries of ecological balance and social harmony are under threat from the pressures of development and globalization."
The approach of using global agreements to advance trade stumbled with the failure of the Doha Development Round of trade negotiation.
Open skies policies and low-cost carriers have helped to bring competition to the market.
There is also the spreading of information about the social movement through social media and word of mouth about NGOs, organizations and movement groups working to help alleviate the effects of globalization.
Large-scale globalization began in the 19th century.
The invention of shipping containers in 1956 helped advance the globalization of commerce.
Eventually, technological advances allowed states to learn of others' existence and another phase of globalization was able to occur.
This often comes at the cost of environmentally sound practices.
In the 17th century, world trade developed further when chartered companies like the British East India Company (founded in 1600) and the Dutch East India Company (founded in 1602, often described as the first multinational corporation in which stock was offered) were established.
The movement is also commonly referred to as the alter-globalization movement, anti-globalist movement, anti-corporate globalization movement, or movement against neoliberal globalization.
The movement of people, such as refugees, artists, craftsmen, missionaries, robbers, and envoys, resulted in the exchange of religions, art, languages, and new technologies.
The movement is often labeled an anti-globalization movement by the mainstream media.
The cosmopolitan community is one in which individuals from different places (e.g.
"Early modern-" or "proto-globalization" covers a period of the history of globalization roughly spanning the years between 1600 and 1800.
Opponents consider governments as agents of neo-colonialism that are subservient to multinational corporations.
If we look at the Gini coefficient for world income, since the late 1980s, the gap between some regions has markedly narrowed— between Asia and the advanced economies of the West, for example—but huge gaps remain globally.
The two most successful global food and beverage outlets, McDonald's and Starbucks, are American companies often cited as examples of globalization, with over 32,000 and 18,000 locations operating worldwide, respectively, as of 2008.
The report also found a shift of economic activity to emerging economies.
enter relationships of mutual respect despite their differing beliefs (religious, political, etc.
Anti-globalization, or counter-globalization, consists of a number of criticisms of globalization but, in general, is critical of the globalization of corporate capitalism.
For example, 90 percent of historic carbon dioxide emissions have been by the industrialized countries.
During the 19th century, globalization approached its modern form as a direct result of the Industrial Revolution.
Larger countries often subsidize their farmers (e.g., the EU's Common Agricultural Policy), which lowers the market price for foreign crops.
One influential event was the late 2000s recession, which was associated with lower growth (in areas such as cross-border phone calls and Skype usage) or even temporarily negative growth (in areas such as trade) of global interconnectedness.
While it is true that free trade encourages globalization among countries, some countries try to protect their domestic suppliers.
This is one of the arguments surrounding the idea of early globalization.
In 1998, negative articles outpaced positive articles by two to one.
Globalization can lead performers to discard traditional instruments.
In the pre-Rio conference period, it was the North that contributed most to the destruction of the environment.
A number of international polls have shown that residents of Africa and Asia tend to view globalization more favorably than residents of Europe or North America.
The period is marked by such trade arrangements as the East India Company, the shift of hegemony to Western Europe, the rise of larger-scale conflicts between powerful nations such as the Thirty Years' War, and a rise of new commodities – most particularly slave trade.
Economic liberals and neoliberals generally argue that higher degrees of political and economic freedom in the form of free trade in the developed world are ends in themselves,  producing higher levels of overall material wealth.
This archaic globalization existed during the Hellenistic Age, when commercialized urban centers enveloped the axis of Greek culture that reached from India to Spain, including Alexandria and the other Alexandrine cities.
Many countries then shifted to bilateral or smaller multilateral agreements, such as the 2011 South Korea–United States Free Trade Agreement.
Since 1961, human diets across the world have become more diverse in the consumption of major commodity staple crops, with a corollary decline in consumption of local or regionally important crops, and thus have become more homogeneous globally.
Initially, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) led to a series of agreements to remove trade restrictions.
Respondents with high school education also became more opposed.
The interactions amongst states were not on a global scale and most often were confined to Asia, North Africa, the Middle East, and certain parts of Europe.
A few very popular and well known non-governmental organizations (NGOs) include: War Child, Red Cross, Free The Children and CARE International.
The DHL Global Connectedness Index studies four main types of cross-border flow: trade (in both goods and services), information, people (including tourists, students, and migrants), and capital.
In recent years, there have been an increasing number of books (Naomi Klein's 2000 ''No Logo'', for example) and films (''e.g.
As a response to globalization, some countries have embraced isolationist policies.
At the same time, discourse on globalization, which began in the financial community before shifting to a heated debate between proponents and disenchanted students and workers.
While the international economic order envisioned by the conference gave way to the neo-liberal economic order prevalent today, the conference established many of the organizations essential to advancement towards a close-knit global economy and global financial system, such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the International Trade Organization.
Philosophical differences regarding the costs and benefits of such processes give rise to a broad-range of ideologies and social movements.
However, Japanese tradition was to be as self-sufficient as possible, particularly in agriculture.
Within the Seattle demonstrations the protesters that participated used both creative and violent tactics to gain the attention towards the issue of globalization.
By the 1960s, both terms began to be used as synonyms by economists and other social scientists.
Other of his usages included "ideological globalization", "technological globalization", and "social globalization".
Arms control and disarmament agreements, including the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (see START I, START II, START III, and New START) and the establishment of NATO’s Partnership for Peace, the Russia NATO Council, and the G8 Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, constitute concrete initiatives of arms control and de-nuclearization.
In the 19th century, steamships reduced the cost of international transport significantly and railroads made inland transport cheaper.
The first is the idea of Eastern Origins, which shows how Western states have adapted and implemented learned principles from the East.
It can be explained as encompassing the ideologies present in the following other "movements", which will be discussed below: opposition to capital market integration, social justice and inequality, anti-consumerism, anti-global governance and environmentalist opposition.
Polarization increased dramatically after the establishment of the WTO in 1995; this event and subsequent protests led to a large-scale anti-globalization movement.
A 2005 UNESCO report showed that cultural exchange is becoming more frequent from Eastern Asia, but that Western countries are still the main exporters of cultural goods.
They have also argued that four different forms of globalization can be distinguished that complement and cut across the solely empirical dimensions.
In ''Global Transformations'', David Held and his co-writers state:
Reactions to processes contributing to globalization have varied widely with a history as long as extraterritorial contact and trade.
Sociologists Martin Albrow and Elizabeth King define globalization as "all those processes by which the peoples of the world are incorporated into a single world society."
This slowed down from the 1910s onward due to the World Wars and the Cold War, but picked up again in the 1980s and 1990s.
As a dominating country's culture is introduced into a receiving country through globalization, it can become a threat to the diversity of local culture.
It is argued that archaic globalization did not function in a similar manner to modern globalization because states were not as interdependent on others as they are today.
More nations embraced international trade.
In general, these opponents are wary of the concentration of power or wealth that such governance might represent.
Developing countries with cheap resources and labor tend to have less stringent environmental regulations, and conversely, nations with stricter environmental regulations become more expensive for companies as a result of the costs associated with meeting these standards.
His view suggested that globalization would lead to a world where people from all countries will become more integrated and aware of common interests and shared humanity.
In this schema, three main prerequisites are posited for globalization to occur.
Daniele Conversi says that the two have similarities and often overlap, but differentiates them in several ways.
Residents of the EU did not appear to feel threatened by globalization in 2004.
For example, the North Korean government makes it very difficult for foreigners to enter the country and strictly monitors their activities when they do.
Though many scholars place the origins of globalization in modern times, others trace its history long before the European Age of Discovery and voyages to the New World.
Globalized society offers a complex web of forces and factors that bring people, cultures, markets, beliefs, and practices into increasingly greater proximity to one another.
This has added to processes of commodity exchange and colonization which have a longer history of carrying cultural meaning around the globe.
Like this, the British economic journalist Martin Wolf says that incomes of poor developing countries, with more than half the world’s population, grew substantially faster than those of the world’s richest countries that remained relatively stable in its growth, leading to reduced international inequality and the incidence of poverty.
In general, corporate businesses, particularly in the area of finance, see globalization as a positive force in the world.
Musically, this translates into each individual having their own musical identity based on likes and tastes.
'''Environmental cooperation'''&nbsp;– One of the biggest successes of environmental cooperation has been the agreement to reduce chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions, as specified in the Montreal Protocol, in order to stop ozone depletion.
He calls the transmission of ideas, images, knowledge, and information across world-space disembodied globalization, maintaining that it is currently the dominant form of globalization.
Globalization is the extension of social relations across world-space, defining that world-space in terms of the historically variable ways that it has been practiced and socially understood through changing world-time.
In Africa, a Gallup poll found that 70% of the population views globalization favorably.
Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, and more recently sects such as Mormonism are among those religions which have taken root and influenced endemic cultures in places far from their origins.
Globalization allows corporations to outsource manufacturing and service jobs from high cost locations, creating economic opportunities with the most competitive wages and worker benefits.
The Big Mac Index is an informal measure of purchasing power parity among world currencies.
Some of the powerful Northern corporations have implemented policies like privatizing public industry and reducing tariffs.
In light of the economic gap between rich and poor countries, movement adherents claim "free trade" without measures in place to protect the under-capitalized will contribute only to the strengthening the power of industrialized nations (often termed the "North" in opposition to the developing world's "South").
The global justice movement is the loose collection of individuals and groups—often referred to as a "movement of movements"—who advocate fair trade rules and perceive current institutions of global economic integration as problems.
Scholars find that China has attained a degree of openness that is unprecedented among large and populous nations, with competition from foreign goods in almost every sector of the economy.
In 1992, Roland Robertson, professor of sociology at University of Aberdeen, an early writer in the field, defined globalization as "the compression of the world and the intensification of the consciousness of the world as a whole."
Unions become less effective and workers their enthusiasm for unions when membership begins to decline.
Critics of globalization argue that globalization results in weak labor unions: the surplus in cheap labor coupled with an ever growing number of companies in transition weakened labor unions in high-cost areas.
Concern over the treatment of consumers by large corporations has spawned substantial activism, and the incorporation of consumer education into school curricula.
Jagdish Bhagwati, a former adviser to the U.N. on globalization, holds that, although there are obvious problems with overly rapid development, globalization is a very positive force that lifts countries out of poverty by causing a virtuous economic cycle associated with faster economic growth.
The transfer of animal stocks, plant crops, and epidemic diseases associated with Alfred W. Crosby's concept of the Columbian Exchange also played a central role in this process.
Thus, the excluded majority never gets a chance to access to resources necessary for well-being and survival.
The revolutions of 1989 and subsequent liberalization in many parts of the world resulted in a significant expansion of global interconnectedness.
Early modern globalization is distinguished from modern globalization on the basis of expansionism, the method of managing global trade, and the level of information exchange.
Anti-consumerism is a social movement against equating personal happiness with consumption and the purchase of material possessions.
According to James, the oldest dominant form of globalization is embodied globalization, the movement of people.
Overall equality across humanity, considered as individuals, has improved very little.
In India, business process outsourcing has been described as the "primary engine of the country's development over the next few decades, contributing broadly to GDP growth, employment growth, and poverty alleviation".
Music has an important role in economic and cultural development during globalization.
Globalization's contribution to the alienation of individuals from their traditions may be modest compared to the impact of modernity itself, as alleged by existentialists such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus.
He asserted that the pace of globalization was quickening and that its impact on business organization and practice would continue to grow.
Cosmopolitanism is the proposal that all human ethnic groups belong to a single community based on a shared morality.
Canadian philosopher Marshall McLuhan popularized the term ''Global Village'' beginning in 1962.
The term ''globalization'' is very recent, only establishing its current meaning in the 1970s.
Foreign investment helped to greatly increase product quality and knowledge and standards, especially in heavy industry.
The most recent debate around nuclear energy and the non-alternative coal-burning power plants constitutes one more consensus on what not to do.
Aid workers are subject to considerable scrutiny and excluded from places and regions the government does not wish them to enter.
The US–Russian cooperation was further strengthened by anti-terrorism agreements enacted in the wake of 9/11.
Paul James defines globalization with a more direct and historically contextualized emphasis:
Bourdieu claimed that the perception of consumption can be seen as self-identification and the formation of identity.
The global North can benefit from this by getting goods for a cheaper monetary amount.
Globalization is thus leading to a type of environmental apartheid.
This is one of the driving forces behind global connections and trade; without either, globalization would not have emerged the way it did and states would still be dependent on their own production and resources to function.
Depending on the paradigm, economic globalization can be viewed as either a positive or a negative phenomenon.
'''Military cooperation'''&nbsp;– Past examples of international cooperation exist.
Corporatist ideology, which privileges the rights of corporations (artificial or juridical persons) over those of natural persons, is an underlying factor in the recent rapid expansion of global commerce.
It reflects the degree of freedom that journalists, news organizations, and netizens enjoy in each country, and the efforts made by the authorities to respect and ensure respect for this freedom.
The nonprofit Reporters Without Borders publishes a Press Freedom Index, an annual ranking of countries based upon the organization's assessment of the countries' press freedom records in the previous year.
The Corporation'' & ''Surplus'') popularizing an anti-corporate ideology to the public.
Without the traditional ideas from the East, Western globalization would not have emerged the way it did.
The term ''globalization'' is derived from the word ''globalize'', which refers to the emergence of an international network of economic systems.
Economic globalization is the increasing economic interdependence of national economies across the world through a rapid increase in cross-border movement of goods, services, technology, and capital.
Antagonists view one or more globalizing processes as detrimental to social well-being on a global or local scale; this includes those who question either the social or natural sustainability of long-term and continuous economic expansion, the social structural inequality caused by these processes, and the colonial, imperialistic, or hegemonic ethnocentrism, cultural assimilation and cultural appropriation that underlie such processes.
Cultural globalization involves the formation of shared norms and knowledge with which people associate their individual and collective cultural identities.
This idea had been very powerful during the globalization of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and was a central doctrine of classical liberals of that era, such as the young John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946).
A related area of concern is the pollution haven hypothesis, which posits that, when large industrialized nations seek to set up factories or offices abroad, they will often look for the cheapest option in terms of resources and labor that offers the land and material access they require (see Race to the bottom).
However, the events that occurred which fuels the movement can be traced back through the lineage of the movement of a 500-year-old history of resistance against European colonialism and US imperialism.
By doing this it has created a growth in sweatshops in the developing world, where wages are minimal and unfair, and conditions are unsafe to the workers’ health and psychological state.
For instance, Kwame Anthony Appiah suggests the possibility of a cosmopolitan community in which individuals from varying locations (physical, economic, etc.)
However, the term 'globalization' was in use well before this (at least as early as 1944) and had been used by other scholars as early as 1981.
James and Steger assert that the concept of globalization "emerged from the intersection of four interrelated sets of 'communities of practice' (Wenger, 1998): academics, journalists, publishers/editors, and librarians."
An early incarnation of this sentiment can be found in Socrates, who Plutarch quoted as saying: "I am not an Athenian, or a Greek, but a citizen of the world."
They advocate global institutions and policies that they believe better address the moral claims of poor and working classes as well as environmental concerns.
Academic literature commonly subdivides globalization into three major areas: economic globalization, cultural globalization, and political globalization.
In a Danish poll in 2007, 76% responded that globalization is a good thing.
In 2000, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) identified four basic aspects of globalization: trade and transactions, capital and investment movements, migration and movement of people, and the dissemination of knowledge.
Fusion genres can become interesting fields of analysis.
Many in developing countries see globalization as a positive force that lifts them out of poverty.
These include flash mobs for example, which work extremely well in catching the attention of others and spreading awareness about the issue of globalization.
The term globalization implies transformation.
Globalization is seen as the beneficial spread of liberty and capitalism.
These likes and tastes are greatly influenced by culture, as this is the most basic cause for a person's wants and behavior.
Cultural globalization refers to the transmission of ideas, meanings, and values around the world in such a way as to extend and intensify social relations.
The EU job market was more stable and workers were less likely to accept wage/benefit cuts.
