The fellows then agreed to the Bishop of Oxford as their president but James required that they admit they had been in the wrong and ask for his pardon.
However, he was captured on 11&nbsp;December by fishermen in Faversham opposite Sheerness, the town on the Isle of Sheppey.
James refused a French offer to send an expeditionary force, fearing that it would cost him domestic support.
Zuylestein was sent in part to see how successful, or amenable, James's packed Parliament would be, and have discussions with English statesmen, with Zuylestein sending back to William letters from them.
In the previous years the French navy had enormously grown in strength and the Dutch Republic would no longer be able to resist a combined Anglo-French attack.
In the numerous pamphlets distributed, William was presented in the best possible light; as a true Stuart yet blessedly free from the usual Stuart vices of cryptocatholicism, absolutism, and debauchery.
Consequently, as a Calvinist and Presbyterian he was now in the unenviable position of being the head of the Church of England, while technically being a Nonconformist.
On 28&nbsp;January a committee of the whole House of Commons promptly decided by acclamation that James had broken "the original contract"; had "abdicated the government"; and had left the throne "vacant".
* it is the right of the subject to petition the king and prosecutions for petitioning are illegal;
James offered free elections and a general amnesty for the rebels.
By early September, William was on the brink of cancelling the entire expedition when French policy played into his hand.
In diplomacy and economics William III transformed the English state's ideology and policies.
When they refused most of the fellows were ejected and replaced by Catholics.
In the end it was decided that he should exploit James's fears; the three original commissioners were sent back to James with the message that William felt he could no longer guarantee the king's well-being and that James for his own safety had better leave London for Ham.
* the commission for ecclesiastical causes is illegal;
The Lords on 6&nbsp;February now accepted the words "abdication" and "vacancy" and Lord Winchester's motion to appoint William and Mary monarchs.
* Protestant subjects "may have arms for their defence suitable to their conditions, and allowed by law";
William's cavalry and dragoons amounted to 3,660.
Also, couriers for the purpose were sometimes used and all Dutch diplomats travelling to and from either country carried the correspondence.
The next concern was to assemble a powerful invasion force – contrary to the wishes of the English conspirators, who predicted that a token force would be sufficient.
James's attempt to relax the Penal Laws alienated his natural supporters, however, because the Tories viewed this as tantamount to disestablishment of the Church of England.
Both were serious losses.
At that moment however the wind changed and the fog lifted, enabling the fleet to sail into Torbay, near Brixham, Devon.
By fleeing, James ultimately helped resolve the awkward question of whether he was still the legal king or not, having created according to many a situation of interregnum.
William did not intervene in the election that followed.
The Irish Jacobites surrendered under the conditions of the Treaty of Limerick on 3&nbsp;October 1691.
The East India Company was thus an ideal tool to create a vast new English imperial dominion by warring with the Dutch and the Mogul Empire in India.
On 7&nbsp;January they asked William to take over the responsibilities of government.
His Catholicism was of concern to many, but the fact that he had no son, and his daughters were Protestants, was a "saving grace".
* by making "several grants and promises made of fines and forfeitures before any conviction or judgment against the person, upon whom the same were to be levied".
In the second they were advised not to interfere with the French policy in Germany.
William went on to condemn James's advisers for overturning the religion, laws, and liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland by the use of the suspending and dispensing power; the establishment of the "manifestly illegal" commission for ecclesiastical causes and its use to suspend the Bishop of London and to remove the Fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford.
The events of 1688 are known as the "Glorious Revolution" but since an intensified historical interest due to the third centennial of the event, some academics have portrayed the "revolution" as a Dutch invasion of Britain.
He dismissed judges who disagreed with him on this matter as well as the Solicitor General Heneage Finch.
King James's policies of religious tolerance after 1685 met with increasing opposition by members of leading political circles, who were troubled by the king's Catholicism and his close ties with France.
(This is, however, a complex issue, as the Crown remains the source of all executive authority in the British army, with legal implications for unlawful orders etc.).
* by imposing excessive fines and "illegal and cruel punishments inflicted";
Despite suffering from sea-sickness William refused to go ashore and the fleet reassembled, having lost only one ship that grounded, though about a thousand crippled horses had been thrown into the sea.
The Navigation Acts were not repealed.
Gilbert Burnet recorded a conversation at the end of April between William and Admiral Edward Russell:
James returned to London that same day.
Between 1688 and 1720, world trade dominance shifted from the Republic to Britain.
In response to the threat James had raised five new regiments of foot and five of horse, as well as bringing in Scottish and Irish soldiers.
Although James had fled the country, he still had many followers, and William feared that the king might return, relegating William to the role of a mere regent, an outcome which was unacceptable to him.
Nevertheless, only after secret and difficult negotiations by Bentinck with the hesitant Amsterdam burgomasters during June could 260 transports be hired.
The Dutch call their fleet action the ''Glorieuze Overtocht'', the "Glorious Crossing".
They were also to maintain the laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed faith established by law.
Though he had promised legal toleration for Catholics in his ''Declaration'' of October, 1688, he was ultimately unsuccessful in this respect, due to opposition by the Tories in the new Parliament.
Fearing a surprise attack, he declined to position this fleet at The Downs, for striking into the southern North Sea or the Channel the most convenient location, but also a very vulnerable one.
Press reports were released that deliberately exaggerated the damage and claimed the expedition would be postponed till the spring.
Bentinck, who had already been sent in May to Brandenburg to recruit, but without much result, therefore negotiated contracts from 20&nbsp;July (Gregorian calendar) for 13,616 German mercenaries from Brandenburg, Württemberg, Hesse-Cassel, and Celle to man Dutch border fortresses in order to free an equal number of Dutch elite mercenary troops for use against England.
In earlier years Amsterdam had been strongly pro-French, often forcing William to moderate his policies, but a tariff war waged by Louis from 1687 against the Republic and French import limitations on herring, a major Dutch export, had outraged the wealthy merchants.
James also created a large standing army and employed Catholics in positions of power within it.
The first Jacobite rebellion, an uprising in support of James in Scotland, took place in 1689.
On 4&nbsp;February the Lords reaffirmed their amendments to the Commons's resolution by 55 to 51 and 54 to 53.
William also condemned James's attempt to repeal the Test Acts and the penal laws through pressuring individuals and waging an assault on parliamentary boroughs, as well as his purging of the judiciary.
When Admiral George Legge, 1st Baron Dartmouth decided to place his fleet at the Gunfleet near the Medway, in a rather withdrawn location, James therefore merely suggested to bring the fleet farther out, though he well understood it otherwise risked becoming locked up in the Thames estuary by the same easterly wind that would allow the Dutch to cross.
The revolution of 1688–89 cannot be fathomed in isolation.
In England's distant American colonies, the revolution led to the collapse of the Dominion of New England and the overthrow of the Province of Maryland's government.
James then left for France on 23&nbsp;December after having received a request from his wife to join her, even though his followers urged him to stay.
On 3/13&nbsp;November the invasion fleet entered the English Channel through the Strait of Dover in an enormous square formation, 25&nbsp;ships deep, the right and left of the fleet saluting Dover and Calais simultaneously, to show off its size.
This year they came early however.
William intended to land at Torbay but due to fog the fleet sailed past it by mistake.
On 9&nbsp;September (Gregorian calendar) the French envoy Jean Antoine de Mesmes, the Comte d'Avaux, handed two letters from the French king, who had known of the invasion plans since May, to the States General of the Netherlands.
James hurriedly distanced himself from the first message, trying to convince the States General that there was no secret Anglo-French alliance against them.
Pincus says it was not a placid turn of events.
* the election of MPs ought to be free; that freedom of speech and debates in Parliament "ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament";
Among these were 49&nbsp;warships of more than twenty cannon (eight could count as third rates of 60–68&nbsp;cannon, nine were frigates), 28&nbsp;galliots, nine&nbsp;fireships, 76&nbsp;fluyts to carry the soldiers, 120 small transports to carry five&nbsp;thousand horses, about seventy supply vessels and sixty fishing vessels serving as landing craft.
In 1687, James prepared to pack Parliament with his supporters so that it would repeal the Test Act and the penal laws.
When James inherited the English throne in 1685, he had much support in the 'Loyal Parliament', which was composed mostly of Tories.
In Ireland, Richard Talbot, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell led local Catholics, who had been discriminated against by previous English monarchs, in the conquest of all the fortified places in the kingdom except Derry, and so held the Kingdom for James.
The Dutch army was composed mostly of foreign mercenaries; there were Dutch, Scots, English, German, Swiss, and Swedish regiments, even Laplanders as well as "200&nbsp;Blacks brought from the Plantations of the Netherlands in America", thus from the colony of Surinam.
This was, however, not his main motive for promoting religious toleration.
Total costs were seven million guilders, four million of which would ultimately be paid for by a state loan.
Also, he personally feared that the French might attack the Republic through Flanders when its army was tied up in England.
In October James gave orders for the lords lieutenants in the provinces to provide three standard questions to all members of the Commission of the peace: would they consent to the repeal of the Test Act and the penal laws; would they assist candidates who would do so; and they were requested to accept the Declaration of Indulgence.
Most of the warships had been provided by the Admiralty of Amsterdam.
Many historians have endorsed Burke's view, including Macaulay (1848) and more recently John Morrill, who captured the consensus of contemporary historiography well when he declared that "the Sensible Revolution of 1688—89 was a conservative Revolution".
There was nevertheless a Jacobite faction, but a letter by James received on 16&nbsp;March, in which he threatened to punish all who rebelled against him, resulted in his followers leaving the Convention, which then on 4&nbsp;April decided that the throne of Scotland was vacant.
), instructed to persuade James to help contain French aggression.
It would have been inconceivable without the changes resulting from the events of the 1640s and 1650s.
But he let it be known that he was happy for Mary to be queen in name and preference in the succession given to Princess Anne's children over any of William's.
In Scotland there had been no serious support for the rebellion; but, when James fled for France, most members of the Scottish Privy Council went to London to offer their services to William.
One of the "Seven", Lord Danby, suggested postponing the invasion until the following year.
Despite all the preparations, William had great trouble convincing the Dutch class of city and provincial rulers, the regents, that such an expensive expedition was really necessary.
Meanwhile, William's confidante Willem Bentinck launched a propaganda campaign in England.
William's envoy Everhard van Weede Dijkvelt visited England between February and May 1687 (N.S.
In January 1688 he had forbidden any of his subjects to serve the Dutch and had demanded that the Republic dissolve its six mercenary Scottish and English regiments.
This elected body consisted of 513&nbsp;members, 341 of whom had been elected before, 238 having been members of at least one Exclusion Bill Parliament, but only 193 having been elected in 1685.
* by disarming Protestants and arming Catholics contrary to law;
In August 1687 Count William Nassau de Zuylestein was sent to England, ostensibly to send condolences due to the death of the queen's mother.
James was convinced by addresses from Dissenters that he had their support and so could dispense with relying on Tories and Anglicans.
The Lords voted against proclaiming William and Mary monarchs by 52 to 47.
The proponents of this view, most famously Adam Smith in 1776, argued that wealth was created by human endeavour and was thus potentially infinite.
In total 104&nbsp;officers and 44&nbsp;soldiers returned.
English naval command now considered to try blockading Hellevoetsluis but decided against it because it was feared that the English fleet would founder on the Dutch coast, a dangerous lee shore for a blocking force, by the stormy weather.
Shortly before the invasion, when fast delivery and secrecy was essential, fast yachts and small vessels were used for special courier services.
Despite the Jacobite victory at the Battle of Killiecrankie, the uprising in the Scottish Highlands was quelled due to death of its leader, Dundee, and Williamite victories at Dunkeld and Cromdale, as well as the Glencoe massacre in early 1692.
It has been argued, mainly by Whig historians, that James's overthrow began modern English parliamentary democracy: the Bill of Rights 1689 has become one of the most important documents in the political history of Britain and never since has the monarch held absolute power.
Thus they passed twice in sight of the English fleet, which was unable to intercept because of the adverse wind and an unfavourable tide.
They were crowned on 11&nbsp;April, swearing an oath to uphold the laws made by Parliament.
This however, had precisely the opposite effect: many members became extremely suspicious.
Convinced that his army was unreliable, he sent orders to disband it.
Though he had carefully avoided making it public, William's main motive in organising the expedition had been the opportunity to bring England into an alliance against France.
In Salisbury, after hearing that some officers had deserted, among them Lord Cornbury, a worried James was overcome by a serious nose-bleed that he interpreted as an evil omen indicating that he should order his army to retreat, which the supreme army commander, the Earl of Feversham, also advised on 23&nbsp;November.
James himself landed in Ireland with 6,000&nbsp;French troops to try to regain the throne in the Williamite War in Ireland.
* by raising and maintaining a standing army in peacetime without the consent of Parliament;
After having been assured by James that all rumours about a French alliance were malevolent fabrications, Dijkvelt returned to the Republic, with letters of varying importance from leading English statesmen.
His standard was hoisted, displaying the arms of Nassau quartered with those of England.
As the Dutch would typically double or triple their total army strength in wartime, the numbers were low enough to be explained as a limited precaution against French aggression.
William came ashore on 5/15&nbsp;November.
* levying money without the consent of Parliament is illegal;
His artillery train contained 21&nbsp;24-pounder cannon.
It listed twelve of James's policies by which James designed to "endeavour to subvert and extirpate the protestant religion, and the laws and liberties of this kingdom".
Further financial support was obtained from the most disparate sources: the Jewish banker Francisco Lopes Suasso lent two million guilders; when asked what security he desired, Suasso answered: "If you are victorious, you will surely repay me; if not, the loss is mine".
The Dutch preparations, though carried out with great speed, could not remain secret.
The fellows believed Farmer ineligible under the college's statutes and so elected John Hough instead.
To his opponents in Parliament this seemed like a prelude to arbitrary rule, so James prorogued Parliament without gaining Parliament's consent.
It has been suggested that the crisis caused by the prospect of a new Catholic heir made William decide to invade the next summer as early as November 1687, but this is disputed.
In April 1687, James ordered the fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford to elect a Catholic, Anthony Farmer, as their president.
On 9 November (Julian calendar) William took Exeter after the magistrates had fled the city, entering on a white palfrey, with the two hundred black men forming a guard of honour, dressed in white, with turbans and feathers.
In December it was announced that all the offices of deputy lieutenants and Justices of the Peace would be revised.
It is difficult to classify the entire proceedings of 1687–89 but it can be seen that the events occurred in three phases: conspiracy, invasion by Dutch forces and "Glorious Revolution".
The Seven consisted of Lord Shrewsbury, Lord Devonshire, Lord Danby, Lord Lumley, Henry Compton, Edward Russell, and Henry Sidney.
Corporations were purged by agents given wide discretionary powers in an attempt to create a permanent royal electoral machine.
On 9&nbsp;September 1689 (Gregorian calendar), William as King of England joined the League of Augsburg against France.
On the contrary, Steven Pincus (2009) argues that it was momentous especially when looking at the alternative that James was trying to enact – a powerful centralised autocratic state, using French-style "state-building".
The Williamite victory in Ireland is still commemorated by the Orange Order for preserving British and Protestant dominance in the country.
In May 1686, James decided to obtain from the English courts of the common law a ruling that affirmed his power to dispense with Acts of Parliament.
acting supreme commander, of the Dutch navy.
A slow advance, apart from being necessitated by heavy rainfall anyway, had the added benefit of not over-extending the supply lines; the Dutch troops were under strict orders not even to forage, for fear that this would degenerate into plundering which would alienate the population.
On 5&nbsp;February the Commons voted 282 to 151 for maintaining the original wording of the resolution.
* that promises of fines and forfeitures before conviction are illegal;
Louis also hoped to keep his Turkish ally in the war this way.
Taking advantage of a wind again turned to the east, resupplied and re-equipped with new horses, the invasion fleet departed again on 1/11&nbsp;November and sailed north in the direction of Harwich where Bentinck had a landing site prepared.
Additionally, the burghers were uneasy about the prospect of denuding their homeland of its defences by sending the field army – roughly half of the total peace-time strength of the Dutch States Army of about 30,000 – overseas.
In reality, by that point James was simply playing for time, having already decided to flee the country.
Thus, the 17th&nbsp;century was a century of revolution in England, deserving of the same scholarly attention that 'modern' revolutions attract.
William feared that if he did not now head the conspiracy the English would set up a republic, even more inimical to the Dutch state.
which meant spaces were actually written in white or invisible ink.
The correspondence between William and the English politicians was, at first, sent by ordinary post to genuine addresses in either country and then distributed.
The standard summer equipment of twenty warships was secretly doubled.
With the passage of the Bill of Rights, it stamped out once and for all any possibility of a Catholic monarchy, and ended moves towards absolute monarchy in the British kingdoms by circumscribing the monarch's powers.
The expression "Glorious Revolution" was first used by John Hampden in late 1689, and is an expression that is still used by the British Parliament.
By threatening to withdraw his troops, William in February 1689 (New Style Julian calendar) convinced a newly chosen Convention Parliament to make him and his wife joint monarchs.
The troops were lined up on deck, firing musket volleys, with full colours flying and the military bands playing.
James's attempt to pack Parliament was in danger of removing "the last and great remedy for all those evils".
Indeed, the ideas accompanying the Glorious Revolution were rooted in the mid-century upheavals.
On 13&nbsp;July 1688 (Gregorian calendar) it was decided to build 21 new warships.
Unlike in the English civil war of the mid-seventeenth century, the "Glorious Revolution" did not involve the masses of ordinary people in England (the majority of the bloodshed occurred in Ireland).
William in private conversation (with Halifax, Danby, Shrewsbury, Lord Winchester and Lord Mordaunt) made it clear that they could either accept him as king or deal with the Whigs without his military presence, for then he would leave for the Republic.
The pope had refused to confirm Louis's favourite candidate for the bishopric of Cologne, William Egon of Fürstenberg.
Although their succession to the English throne was relatively peaceful, much blood would be shed before William's authority was accepted in Ireland and Scotland.
The English squadron under Lord Dartmouth was forced by the same change in wind to shelter in Portsmouth harbour.
William's fleet, which with about 40,000&nbsp;men aboard was roughly twice the size of the Spanish Armada – and assembled in a tenth of the time – consisted of 463&nbsp;ships.
He sailed on the ''Leyden'', accompanied by Lieutenant-Admiral Willem Bastiaensz Schepers, the Rotterdam shipping magnate who had organised the transport fleet.
In Scotland, his supporters in the Parliament of Scotland increased attempts to force the Covenanters to renounce their faith and accept episcopalian rule of the church by the monarch.
William denied any intention "to remove the King from the throne or become master of England".
On 8&nbsp;December William met at last with James's representatives; he agreed to James's proposals but also demanded that all Catholics be immediately dismissed from state functions and that England pay for the Dutch military expenses.
The Duke of Hanover, Ernest Augustus and the Elector of Saxony, John George III, assured William that they would remain neutral, though it had been feared they would take the French side.
Many of the mercenaries were Catholic.
The officers were enlisted within the British armies and so favoured that the established officer corps began to fear for its position.
The Revolution led to limited toleration for Nonconformist Protestants, although it would be some time before they had full political rights.
On 9&nbsp;December, the two sides fought a second engagement with the Battle of Reading, a defeat for the King's men.
However, on 14/24&nbsp;October it became the famous "Protestant Wind" by turning to the east.
Catholic emancipation would be delayed for 140 years.
On 26&nbsp;September the powerful city council of Amsterdam decided to officially support the invasion.
The same day a second attempt by Legge to attack the landing site again failed by an adverse southwestern gale.
By 24&nbsp;November, William's forces were at Sherborne and on 1 December at Hindon.
The Lords rejected the proposal for a regency in James's name by 51 to 48 on 2&nbsp;February.
Embarkations, started on 22&nbsp;September (Gregorian calendar), had been completed on 8&nbsp;October, and the expedition was that day openly approved by the States of Holland; the same day James issued a proclamation to the English nation that it should prepare for a Dutch invasion to ward off conquest.
William replied for his wife and himself: "We thankfully accept what you have offered us".
Having England as an ally meant that the military situation of the Republic was strongly improved, but this very fact induced William to be uncompromising in his position towards France.
The Coronation Oath Act 1688 had provided a new coronation oath, whereby the monarchs were to "solemnly promise and swear to govern the people of this kingdom of England, and the dominions thereunto belonging, according to the statutes in parliament agreed on, and the laws and customs of the same".
The words ''Pro Religione et Libertate'' ("For Liberty and the Protestant Religion"), the slogan of William's ancestor William the Silent while leading the Dutch Revolt against Catholic Spain, were shown next to the House of Orange's motto, ''Je&nbsp;maintiendrai'' ("I will maintain").
William would not invade England without assurances of English support, and so in April, he asked for a formal invitation to be issued by a group of leading English statesmen.
It ended all attempts by England in the Anglo-Dutch Wars of the 17th&nbsp;century to subdue the Dutch Republic by military force.
In the South support from the local gentry was disappointingly limited, but from 12&nbsp;November, in the North, many nobles began to declare for William, as they had promised, often by a public reading of the ''Declaration''.
The Seven also promised to rally to William upon his landing in England and would "do all that lies in our power to prepare others to be in as much readiness as such an action is capable of".
James, by his own choice, went under Dutch protective guard to Rochester in Kent on 18&nbsp;December, just as William entered London, cheered by crowds dressed in orange ribbons or waving, lavishly distributed, oranges.
The swiftness of the embarkations surprised all foreign observers.
It was led by John Graham, 1st Viscount Dundee, also known as Graham of Claverhouse or Bonnie Dundee, who raised an army from Highland clans.
On 9&nbsp;March (Gregorian calendar) the States General responded to Louis's earlier declaration of war by declaring war on France in return.
On 4/14 October William responded to the allegations by James in a second declaration, denying any intention to become king or conquer England.
The Glorious Revolution of 1688 is considered by some as being one of the most important events in the long evolution of the respective powers of Parliament and the Crown in England.
However, as conspiracy neared completion in 1688, the English government sometimes used to disrupt this correspondence by holding up the whole mail delivery system.
The invitation declared:
Supporters of James, known as ''Jacobites'', were prepared to resist what they saw as an illegal coup by force of arms.
The first blood was shed at about this time in a skirmish at Wincanton, Somerset, where Royalist troops retreated after defeating a small party of scouts; the total body count on both sides came to about fifteen.
Upon returning to London on 16 December, James was welcomed by cheering crowds.
In August, it became clear that William had surprisingly strong support within the English army, a situation brought about by James himself.
On 11&nbsp;May William and Mary accepted the Crown of Scotland; after their acceptance, the ''Claim'' and the '' Articles '' were read aloud, leading to an immediate debate over whether or not an endorsement of these documents was implicit in that acceptance.
It passed the Commons without division.
James refused to view Hough's election as valid and told the fellows to elect the Bishop of Oxford.
* by prosecuting in the King's Bench for matters cognisable only in Parliament and "divers other arbitrary and illegal courses";
Soon however, James's policy of religious tolerance caused tensions to rise between them.
The fleet changed course to the south however when the wind turned more to the north; it has been suggested that the initial move to the north was a feint and indeed James diverted some of his forces in that direction.
However, in the first weeks most people carefully avoided taking sides; as a whole the nation neither rallied behind its king, nor welcomed William, but passively awaited the outcome of events.
In Ireland there was no equivalent of the English or Scottish Convention and William had to conquer Ireland by force.
For this William needed funding by the city of Amsterdam, then the world's main financial centre.
