In the cellular environment, all three hydroxyl groups of ADP dissociate into −O− and H+, giving ADP3−, and this ion tends to exist in an ionic bond with Mg2+, giving ADPMg−.
The rate limiting enzymes catalyzing these reactions perform these functions when they have been dephosphorylated through the action of insulin on the liver cells.
NADPH is also formed by the pentose phosphate pathway which converts glucose into ribose, which can be used in synthesis of nucleotides and nucleic acids, or it can be catabolized to pyruvate.
The cytosolic acetyl-CoA can be carboxylated by acetyl-CoA carboxylase into malonyl CoA, the first committed step  in the  synthesis of fatty acids, or it can be combined with acetoacetyl-CoA to form 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) which is the rate limiting step controlling the synthesis of cholesterol.
During fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis the reducing agent is NADPH.
This has the same action as glucagon on glucose metabolism, but its effect is more pronounced.
The reverse reaction, breaking down, e.g., glycogen, produces mainly glucose-6-phosphate; very little free glucose is formed in the reaction.
His experiments showed that fermentation occurs by the action of living microorganisms; and that yeast's glucose consumption decreased under aerobic conditions of fermentation, in comparison to anaerobic conditions (the Pasteur Effect).
The intermediates provide entry points to glycolysis.
When these differences along with the true charges on the two phosphate groups are considered together, the net charges of −4 on each side are balanced.
ADP actually exists as ADPMg−, and ATP as ATPMg2−, balancing the charges at -5 both sides.
3-Phosphoglycerate3− → 2-Phosphoglycerate3−
Hexokinase responds to the glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) level in the cell, or, in the case of glucokinase, to the blood sugar level in the blood to impart entirely intracellular controls of the glycolytic pathway in different tissues (see below).
Insulin has the opposite effect on these enzymes.
When molecular oxygen is used in the disposal of the products of glycolysis the process is usually referred to as aerobic, whereas if the disposal uses no oxygen the process is said to be anaerobic.
The liver is also capable of releasing glucose into the blood between meals, during fasting, and exercise thus preventing hypoglycemia by means of glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.
All cells contain the enzyme hexokinase, which catalyzes the conversion of glucose that has entered the cell into glucose-6-phosphate (G6P).
G6P is then rearranged into fructose 6-phosphate (F6P) by glucose phosphate isomerase.
This difference exemplifies a general principle that NADPH is consumed during biosynthetic reactions, whereas NADH is generated in energy-yielding reactions.
This yields 2 NADH molecules and 4 ATP molecules, leading to a net gain of 2 NADH molecules and 2 ATP molecules from the glycolytic pathway per glucose.
# The Pay Off Phase &ndash; in which ATP is produced.
To obtain cytosolic acetyl-CoA, citrate (produced by the condensation of acetyl CoA with oxaloacetate) is removed from the citric acid cycle and carried across the inner mitochondrial membrane into the cytosol.
There are two regulatory steps in both pathways which, when active in the one pathway, are automatically inactive in the other.
The second half of glycolysis is known as the pay-off phase, characterised by a net gain of the energy-rich molecules ATP and NADH.
(At lower exercise intensities it can sustain muscle activity in diving animals, such as seals, whales and other aquatic vertebrates, for very much longer periods of time.)
In the above two examples of fermentation, NADH is oxidized by transferring two electrons to pyruvate.
+Change in free energy for each step of glycolysis
If the fall in the blood glucose level is particularly rapid or severe, other glucose sensors cause the release of epinephrine from the adrenal glands into the blood.
Boiling the yeast extract renders all proteins inactive (as it denatures them).
Thus the rate of entry of glucose into cells partially depends on how fast G6P can be disposed of by glycolysis, and by glycogen synthesis (in the cells which store glycogen, namely liver and muscles).
Indeed, if both sets of reactions were highly active at the same time the net result would be the hydrolysis of four high energy phosphate bonds (two ATP and two GTP) per reaction cycle.
This is consistent with the role of the liver in such situations, since the response of the liver to these hormones is to release glucose to the blood.
Although gluconeogenesis and glycolysis share many intermediates the one is not functionally a branch or tributary of the other.
Step 5 in the figure is shown behind the other steps, because that step is a side-reaction that can decrease or increase the concentration of the intermediate glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
Citrate inhibits phosphofructokinase when tested ''in vitro'' by enhancing the inhibitory effect of ATP.
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate4− + ADP3− → 3-Phosphoglycerate3− + ATP4−
atmospheric oxygen) for any of its reactions.
A number of theories have been advanced to explain the Warburg effect.
When malate is oxidatively decarboxylated by “NADP+-linked malic enzyme" pyruvate, CO2 and NADPH are formed.
Glucose may alternatively be formed from the phosphorolysis or hydrolysis of intracellular starch or glycogen.
in heart and skeletal muscle) are suddenly increased by activity.
In this process, the pyruvate is converted first to acetaldehyde and carbon dioxide, and then to ethanol.
Both glucagon and epinephrine cause high levels of cAMP in the liver.
There are two classes of aldolases: class I aldolases, present in animals and plants, and class II aldolases, present in fungi and bacteria; the two classes use different mechanisms in cleaving the ketose ring.
The resulting carbanion is stabilized by the structure of the carbanion itself via resonance charge distribution and by the presence of a charged ion prosthetic group.
This phenomenon can be explained through Le Chatelier's Principle.
Because ATP decays relatively quickly when it is not metabolized, this is an important regulatory point in the glycolytic pathway.
Many bacteria use inorganic compounds as hydrogen acceptors to regenerate the NAD+.
The change in free energy, Δ''G'', for each step in the glycolysis pathway can be calculated using Δ''G'' = Δ''G''°' + ''RT''ln ''Q'', where ''Q'' is the reaction quotient.
This cannot occur directly.
The phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of these enzymes (ultimately in response to the glucose level in the blood) is the dominant manner by which these pathways are controlled in the liver, fat, and muscle cells.
By the 1940s, Meyerhof, Embden and many other biochemists had finally completed the puzzle of glycolysis.
This high glycolysis rate has important medical applications, as high aerobic glycolysis by malignant tumors is utilized clinically to diagnose and monitor treatment responses of cancers by imaging uptake of 2-18F-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) (a radioactive modified hexokinase substrate) with positron emission tomography (PET).
Isomerization to a keto sugar is necessary for carbanion stabilization in the fourth reaction step (below).
Fructose-6-phosphate2− + ATP4− → Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate4− + ADP3− + H+
Glucagon and epinephrine also stimulate gluconeogenesis, which coverts non-carbohydrate substrates into G6P, which joins the G6P derived from glycogen, or substitutes for it when the liver glycogen store have been depleted.
In animals, regulation of blood glucose levels by the pancreas in conjunction with the liver is a vital part of homeostasis.
2 Mg2+: one "conformational" ion to coordinate with the carboxylate group of the substrate, and one "catalytic" ion that participates in the dehydration.
That compound is converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate by the enzyme triose phosphate isomerase, which is a catalytically perfect enzyme; its rate is so fast that the reaction can be assumed to be in equilibrium.
From measuring the physiological concentrations of metabolites in an erythrocyte it seems that about seven of the steps in glycolysis are in equilibrium for that cell type.
Excess citrate is exported from the mitochondrion back into to the cytosol, where ATP citrate lyase regenerates acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate (OAA).
The body falls back on this less efficient but faster method of producing ATP under low oxygen conditions.
Lactic acid fermentation and ethanol fermentation can occur in the absence of oxygen.
For example, in the first regulated step, hexokinase converts glucose into glucose-6-phosphate.
The energy expenditure of another ATP in this step is justified in 2 ways: The glycolytic process (up to this step) is now irreversible, and the energy supplied destabilizes the molecule.
This is also the rate-limiting step.
Buchner demonstrated that the conversion of glucose to ethanol was possible using a non-living extract of yeast (due to the action of enzymes in the extract).
When the blood sugar falls the pancreatic beta cells cease insulin production, but, instead, stimulate the neighboring pancreatic alpha cells to release glucagon into the blood.
The entire glycolysis pathway can be separated into two phases:
This step, one of the two substrate-level phosphorylation steps, requires ADP; thus, when the cell has plenty of ATP (and little ADP), this reaction does not occur.
The biggest difficulties in determining the intricacies of the pathway were due to the very short lifetime and low steady-state concentrations of the intermediates of the fast glycolytic reactions.
In addition, it blocks the glucose from leaking out &ndash; the cell lacks transporters for G6P, and free diffusion out of the cell is prevented due to the charged nature of G6P.
In the second regulated step (the third step of glycolysis), phosphofructokinase converts fructose-6-phosphate into fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, which then is converted into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate.
For example, most monosaccharides, such as fructose and galactose, can be converted to one of these intermediates.
In a series of experiments (1905-1911), scientists Arthur Harden and William Young discovered more pieces of glycolysis.
(Neglecting this is very common - the delta G of ATP hydrolysis in cells is not the standard free energy change of ATP hydrolysis quoted in textbooks).
There is ongoing research to affect mitochondrial metabolism and treat cancer by reducing glycolysis and thus starving cancerous cells in various new ways, including a ketogenic diet.
Under these conditions NAD+ is replenished by NADH donating its electrons to pyruvate to form lactate.
The elucidation of Fructose 1,6-diphosphate was accomplished by measuring CO2 levels when yeast juice was incubated with glucose.
Meyerhof and his team was able to extract different glycolytic enzymes from muscle tissue, and combine them to artificially create the pathway from glycogen to lactic acid.
Δ''G''°' / (kJ/mol)
Harden and Young deduced that this process produced organic phosphate esters, and further experiments allowed them to extract fructose diphosphate (F-1,6-DP).
This being the first step in the glycolytic pathway in the liver, it therefore imparts an additional layer of control of the glycolytic pathway in this organ.
Under conditions of high F6P concentration, this reaction readily runs in reverse.
At this step, glycolysis has reached the break-even point: 2 molecules of ATP were consumed, and 2 new molecules have now been synthesized.
Muscle pyruvate kinase is not inhibited by epinephrine activation of protein kinase A. Glucagon signals fasting (no glucose available).
All of these values are available for erythrocytes, with the exception of the concentrations of NAD+ and NADH.
With all of these pieces available by the 1930s, Gustav Embden proposed a detailed, step-by-step outline of that pathway we now know as glycolysis.
In liver, when blood sugar is low and glucagon elevates cAMP, PFK2 is phosphorylated by protein kinase A.
The source of the NADPH is two-fold.
Adding more of any of these intermediates to the mitochondrion therefore means that that additional amount is retained within the cycle, increasing all the other intermediates as one is converted into the other.
This latter reaction "fills up" the amount of oxaloacetate in the citric acid cycle, and is therefore an anaplerotic reaction (from the Greek meaning to "fill up"), increasing the cycle’s capacity to metabolize acetyl-CoA when the tissue's energy needs (e.g.
Instead of continuing through the glycolysis pathway, this intermediate can be converted into glucose storage molecules, such as glycogen or starch.
Charges are balanced by the difference between ADP and ATP.
The reaction requires an enzyme, phosphohexose isomerase, to proceed.
In many tissues, this is a cellular last resort for energy; most animal tissue cannot tolerate anaerobic conditions for an extended period of time.
Pyruvate molecules produced by glycolysis are actively transported across the inner mitochondrial membrane, and into the matrix where they can either be oxidized and combined with coenzyme A to form CO2, acetyl-CoA, and NADH, or they can be carboxylated (by pyruvate carboxylase) to form oxaloacetate.
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate2− → Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate2−
This step is the enzymatic transfer of a phosphate group from 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to ADP by phosphoglycerate kinase, forming ATP and 3-phosphoglycerate.
These hydrogen ions form a part of lactic acid.
Glycolysis could thus have originated from chemical constraints of the prebiotic world.
The flux through the glycolytic pathway is adjusted in response to conditions both inside and outside the cell.
This serves as an additional regulatory step, similar to the phosphoglycerate kinase step.
But the speed at which ATP is produced in this manner is about 100 times that of oxidative phosphorylation.
This requires knowing the concentrations of the metabolites.
However, it is doubtful that this is a meaningful effect ''in vivo'', because citrate in the cytosol is utilized mainly for conversion to acetyl-CoA for fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis.
However the products of glycolysis (pyruvate and NADH + H+) are sometimes disposed of using atmospheric oxygen.
The glucose-6-phosphate so produced can enter glycolysis ''after'' the first control point.
These further aerobic reactions use pyruvate and NADH '''+''' H+ from glycolysis.
They further removed diphosphoglyceraldehyde as a possible intermediate in glycolysis.
If a step is not at equilibrium, but spontaneous (ΔG is negative), the enzyme catalyzing the reaction is not balancing the products and reactants and is considered to be regulated.
However, this acetyl CoA  needs to be transported into cytosol where the synthesis of fatty acids and cholesterol occurs.
To cataplerotically remove oxaloacetate from the citric cycle, malate can be transported from the mitochondrion into the cytoplasm, decreasing the amount of oxaloacetate that can be regenerated.
The different substrate affinity and alternate regulation of this enzyme are a reflection of the role of the liver in maintaining blood sugar levels.
This makes the reaction a key regulatory point (see below).
ATP behaves identically except that it has four hydroxyl groups, giving ATPMg2−.
A rise in the blood glucose concentration causes them to release insulin into the blood, which has an effect particularly on the liver, but also on fat and muscle cells, causing these tissues to remove glucose from the blood.
This is advantageous, as it directs dihydroxyacetone phosphate down the same pathway as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, simplifying regulation.
Thus, the relevance of ATP as an allosteric effector is questionable.
The lower-energy production, per glucose, of anaerobic respiration relative to aerobic respiration, results in greater flux through the pathway under hypoxic (low-oxygen) conditions, unless alternative sources of anaerobically oxidizable substrates, such as fatty acids, are found.
The two processes can therefore not be simultaneously active.
Glycolysis occurs in most organisms in the cytosol of the cell.
Thus, glycolysis occurs, with variations, in nearly all organisms, both aerobic and anaerobic.
Indeed, the reactions that constitute glycolysis and its parallel pathway, the pentose phosphate pathway, occur metal-catalyzed under the oxygen-free conditions of the Archean oceans, also in the absence of enzymes.
This mixture was rescued with the addition of undialyzed yeast extract that had been boiled.
It occurs in liver cells, and will only phosphorylate the glucose entering the cell to form glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), when the sugar in the  blood is abundant.
ATP concentrations in cells are much higher than those of AMP, typically 100-fold higher, but the concentration of ATP does not change more than about 10% under physiological conditions, whereas a 10% drop in ATP results in a 6-fold increase in AMP.
Phosphoglycerate mutase isomerises 3-phosphoglycerate into 2-phosphoglycerate.
It is a reversible reaction, increasing the flexibility of glycolytic metabolism.
The simultaneously phosphorylation of, particularly, phosphofructokinase, but also, to a certain extent pyruvate kinase, prevents glycolysis occurring at the same time as gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis.
In the liver glucagon and epinephrine cause the phosphorylation of the key, rate limiting enzymes of glycolysis, fatty acid synthesis, cholesterol synthesis, gluconeogenesis, and glycogenolysis.
Cells performing aerobic respiration synthesize much more ATP, but not as part of glycolysis.
Glycolysis is a determined sequence of ten enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
The Warburg hypothesis claims that cancer is primarily caused by dysfunctionality in mitochondrial metabolism, rather than because of uncontrolled growth of cells.
How this is performed depends on which external electron acceptor is available.
In addition hexokinase and glucokinase act independently of the hormonal effects as controls at the entry points of glucose into the cells of different tissues.
This produces 2 ATP molecules per glucose molecule, or about 5% of glucose's energy potential (38 ATP molecules in bacteria).
This experiment not only revolutionized biochemistry, but also allowed later scientists to analyze this pathway in a more controlled lab setting.
A rarer ADP-dependent PFK enzyme variant has been identified in archaean species.
If glycolysis were to continue indefinitely, all of the NAD+ would be used up, and glycolysis would stop.
Most cells will then carry out further reactions to 'repay' the used NAD+ and produce a final product of ethanol or lactic acid.
The pyruvate produced by glycolysis is an important intermediary in the conversion of carbohydrates into fatty acids and cholesterol.
This phenomenon was first described in 1930 by Otto Warburg and is referred to as the Warburg effect.
The acetyl-CoA is then used for fatty acid synthesis and cholesterol synthesis, two important ways of utilizing excess glucose when its concentration is high in blood.
This is critical for brain function, since the brain utilizes glucose as an energy source under most conditions.
The same reaction can also be catalyzed by pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase ('''PFP''' or '''PPi-PFK'''), which is found in most plants, some bacteria, archea, and protists, but not in animals.
Thus, glycolysis is inhibited in the liver but unaffected in muscle when fasting.
This causes liver glycogen to be converted back to G6P, and then converted to glucose by the liver-specific enzyme glucose 6-phosphatase and released into the blood.
However, the discussion here will be limited to the Embden&ndash;Meyerhof&ndash;Parnas pathway.
If a step is at equilibrium (ΔG is zero), the enzyme catalyzing the reaction will balance the products and reactants and cannot confer directionality to the pathway.
Since the cell wall is impervious to G6P, hexokinase essentially acts to transport glucose into the cells from which it can then no longer escape.
Using the measured concentrations of each step, and the standard free energy changes, the actual free energy change can be calculated.
The intermediates may also be directly useful.
NAD+ is the oxidizing agent in glycolysis, as it is in most other energy yielding metabolic reactions (e.g.
Triosephosphate isomerase rapidly interconverts dihydroxyacetone phosphate with glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate ('''GADP''') that proceeds further into glycolysis.
In the 1920s Otto Meyerhof was able to link together some of the many individual pieces of glycolysis discovered by Buchner, Harden, and Young.
An increase in AMP is a consequence of a decrease in energy charge in the cell.
The hydrogen is used to reduce two molecules of NAD+, a hydrogen carrier, to give NADH '''+''' H+ for each triose.
The wide occurrence of glycolysis indicates that it is one of the most ancient metabolic pathways.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate2− + Pi2− + NAD+ → 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate4− + NADH + H+
These controls prevent pyruvate kinase from being active at the same time as the enzymes that catalyze the reverse reaction (pyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase), preventing a futile cycle.
A common mechanism of regulating enzymes is allosteric control.
CO2 production increased rapidly then slowed down.
The internal factors that  regulate glycolysis do so primarily to provide ATP in adequate quantities for the cell’s needs.
beta-oxidation of fatty acids, and during the citric acid cycle).
Between meals, during fasting, exercise or hypoglycemia, glucagon and epinephrine are released into the blood.
A final substrate-level phosphorylation now forms a molecule of pyruvate and a molecule of ATP by means of the enzyme pyruvate kinase.
Fermenation of pyruvate to lactate is sometimes also called "anaerobic glycolysis", however, glycolysis ends with the production of pyruvate regardless of the presence or absence of oxygen.
Liver pyruvate kinase is indirectly regulated by epinephrine and glucagon, through protein kinase A.
The aldehyde groups of the triose sugars are oxidised, and inorganic phosphate is added to them, forming 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.
The most common type of glycolysis is the ''Embden&ndash;Meyerhof&ndash;Parnas (EMP pathway)'', which was discovered by Gustav Embden, Otto Meyerhof, and Jakub Karol Parnas.
Hydrogen atom balance and charge balance are both maintained because the phosphate (Pi) group actually exists in the form of a hydrogen phosphate anion (HPO42−), which dissociates to contribute the extra H+ ion and gives a net charge of -3 on both sides.
This protein kinase phosphorylates liver pyruvate kinase to deactivate it.
This enzyme uses pyrophosphate (PPi) as a phosphate donor instead of ATP.
Glycolysis is an oxygen independent metabolic pathway, meaning that it does not use molecular oxygen (i.e.
The burning sensation in muscles during hard exercise can be attributed to the production of hydrogen ions during the shift to glucose fermentation from glucose oxidation to carbon dioxide and water, when aerobic metabolism can no longer keep pace with the energy demands of the muscles.
Hence the addition of oxaloacetate greatly increases the amounts of all the citric acid intermediates, thereby increasing the cycle's capacity to metabolize acetyl CoA, converting its acetate component into CO2 and water, with the release of enough energy to form 11 ATP and 1 GTP molecule for each additional molecule of acetyl CoA that combines with oxaloacetate in the cycle.
This process also occurs in animals under hypoxic (or partially anaerobic) conditions, found, for example, in overworked muscles that are starved of oxygen.
Glucose + ATP4− → Glucose-6-phosphate2− + ADP3− + H+
This process occurs in the bacteria involved in making yogurt (the lactic acid causes the milk to curdle).
The ability of boiled extract plus dialyzed juice to complete fermentation suggests that the cofactors were non-protein in character.
The NADH thus produced is primarily used to ultimately transfer electrons to O2 to produce water, or, when O2 is not available, to produced compounds such as lactate or ethanol (see ''Anoxic regeneration of NAD+'' above).
ATP competes with AMP for the allosteric effector site on the PFK enzyme.
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (F2,6BP) is a very potent activator of phosphofructokinase (PFK-1) that is synthesized when F6P is phosphorylated by a second phosphofructokinase (PFK2).
To allow glycolysis to continue, organisms must be able to oxidize NADH back to NAD+.
In the citric acid cycle all the intermediates (e.g.
This reaction consumes ATP, but it acts to keep the glucose concentration low, promoting continuous transport of glucose into the cell through the plasma membrane transporters.
One such theory suggests that the increased glycolysis is a normal protective process of the body and that malignant change could be primarily caused by energy metabolism.
For economic reasons, the French wine industry sought to investigate why wine sometime turned distasteful, instead of fermenting into alcohol.
Some organisms, such as yeast, convert NADH back to NAD+ in a process called ethanol fermentation.
This reaction is freely reversible under normal cell conditions.
They also shed light on the role of one compound as a glycolysis intermediate: fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.
The change in structure is an isomerization, in which the G6P has been converted to F6P.
Because the reaction catalyzed by Phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK-1) is coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP (an energetically favorable step) it is, in essence, irreversible, and a different pathway must be used to do the reverse conversion during gluconeogenesis.
Fructose can also enter the glycolytic pathway by phosphorylation at this point.
This is thought to have been the primary means of energy production in earlier organisms before oxygen reached high concentrations in the atmosphere between 2000 and 2500 million years ago (see diagram above right), and thus would represent a more ancient form of energy production than the aerobic replenishment of NAD+ in cells.
Furthermore, citric acid intermediates are constantly used to form a variety of substances such as the purines, pyrimidines and porphyrins.
This, in turn, causes the liver to release glucose into the blood by breaking down stored glycogen, and by means of gluconeogenesis.
Glucose-6-phosphate2− → Fructose-6-phosphate2−
NADH is rarely used for synthetic processes, the notable exception being gluconeogenesis.
