According to the 2011 census, Goa has a literacy rate of 87%, with 90% of males and 84% of females being literate.
After India gained independence from the British in 1947, India requested that Portuguese territories on the Indian subcontinent be ceded to India.
Additionally, they may join three-year diploma courses.
A student may also opt for a course in vocational studies.
The new NH-566 (ex NH-17B) is a four-lane highway connecting Mormugao Port to NH-66 at Verna via Dabolim Airport, primarily built to ease pressure on the NH-366 for traffic to Dabolim Airport and Vasco da Gama.
Medium scale industries include the manufacturing of pesticides, fertilisers, tyres, tubes, footwear, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, wheat products, steel rolling, fruits and fish canning, cashew nuts, textiles, brewery products.
The Catholics in Goa state and Daman and Diu union territory are served by the Metropolitan Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Goa and Daman, the primatial see of India, in which the titular Patriarchate of the East Indies is vested.
In the interior regions, channels are received via satellite dishes.
The total navigable length of Goa's rivers is .
Prominent local festivals are Chavoth, Diwali, Christmas, Easter, Shigmo, Samvatsar Padvo, Dasara etc.
Goa also is the state with lowest proportion of Scheduled Tribes at 0.04%.
Rampant mining has been depleting the forest cover as well as posing a health hazard to the local population.
Western royal attire of kings and regional dances being performed depict the unique blend of different religions and cultures of the State.
The Congress party and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) are the two largest parties in the state.
In 1312, Goa came under the governance of the Delhi Sultanate.
The line run by the South Western Railway was built during the colonial era linking the port town of Vasco da Gama, Goa with Belgaum, Hubli, Karnataka via Margao.
The Basilica holds the mortal remains of St. Francis Xavier, regarded by many Catholics as the patron saint of Goa (the patron of the Archdiocese of Goa is actually Saint Joseph Vaz).
As is the case in most of India, enrolment for vernacular media has seen a fall in numbers in favour of English medium education.
Many famous Indian classical singers hail from Goa, including Mogubai Kurdikar, Kishori Amonkar, Kesarbai Kerkar, Jitendra Abhisheki and Pandit Prabhakar Karekar.
While Goa trance has achieved widespread popularity itself, it also heavily influenced later forms of music such as psytrance.
In March 2005 the assembly was dissolved by the Governor and President's Rule was declared, which suspended the legislature.
The seat of the Goa assembly is in Porvorim&nbsp;, across the Mandovi from Panaji.
Goa's history goes back 20,000–30,000 years.
Coconut trees are ubiquitous and are present in almost all areas of Goa barring the elevated regions.
In 2006, St Xavier's College, Mapusa, became the first college in the state to launch a campus community radio station 'Voice of Xavier's'.
The Indian Olympic Association (IOA) has won the right to host the Asian Beach Games in 2018.
Goan Hindus are very fond of Natak, Bhajan and Kirtan.
Pilar monastery which holds novenas of Venerable Padre Agnelo Gustavo de Souza from 10 November to 20 November yearly.
Another source of cash inflow into the state is remittance from many of its citizens who work abroad to their families.
Difficulty in carbon dating the laterite rock compounds poses a problem for determining the exact time period.
Tourism is generally focused on the coastal areas of Goa, with decreased tourist activity inland.
The Mormugao harbour on the mouth of the River Zuari is one of the best natural harbours in South Asia.
(see:Goa:Hindu temples and deities by Rui Gomes Periera).
In addition to these, ''The Times of India'' and ''The Indian Express'' are also received from Mumbai and Bangalore in the urban areas.
Goa is also known as the origin of Goa trance.
A rich egg-based, multi-layered sweet dish known as bebinca is a favourite at Christmas.
Two AM channels are broadcast, the primary channel at 1287&nbsp;kHz and the Vividh Bharati channel at 1539&nbsp;kHz.
Hired forms of transport include unmetered taxis and, in urban areas, auto rickshaws.
It has rich flora and fauna, owing to its location on the Western Ghats range, a biodiversity hotspot.
In some places, Jagor performances are held with participation of both Hindus and Christian community, whereby, characters are played by Hindus and musical support is provided by Christian artistes.
Among the list of officially accredited newspapers are ''O Heraldo'', ''The Navhind Times'' and ''The Gomantak Times'' in English; ''Sunaparant'' in Konkani (Devanagari script); and ''Tarun Bharat'', ''Gomantak'', ''Navprabha'', ''Goa Times'', ''Sanatan Prabhat'', ''Govadoot'' and ''Lokmat'' (all in Marathi).
Literal meaning of Jagor is “jagran” or wakeful nights.
On 19 December 1961, the Indian Army began military operations with Operation Vijay resulting in the annexation of Goa, Daman, and Diu into the Indian union.
The original Goan temple architecture fell into disuse as the temples were demolished by the Portuguese and the ''Sthapati'' known as ''Thavayi'' in Konkani were converted to Christianity though the wooden work and the ''
A number of Goans have represented India in football and six of them, namely Samir Naik, Climax Lawrence, Brahmanand Sankhwalkar, Bruno Coutinho, Mauricio Afonso and Roberto Fernandes have all captained the national team.
The Government also has a policy of replying in Marathi to correspondence received in Marathi.
The Corporation owns 15 bus stands, 4 depots and one Central workshop at Porvorim and a Head Office at Porvorim.
Goa is served by almost all television channels available in India.
Goa has its own state football team and league, the Goa Professional League.
The Governor, the head of the state, is appointed by the President of India.
Further inland and along the riverbanks, the soil is mostly alluvial and loamy.
The Indian epic ''Mahabharata'' refers to the area now known as Goa as ''Goparashtra'' or ''Govarashtra,'' which means "a nation of cowherds".
Goa's public transport largely consists of privately operated buses linking the major towns to rural areas.
Whilst there have been demands for according Konkani in the Roman script official status in the state, there is widespread support for keeping Konkani as the sole official language of Goa.
The architecture of Goa is a combination of Indian, Islamic and Portuguese styles.
Dilip Sardesai remains the only Goan to date to play international cricket for India.
A number of independent FM radio channels are available,  Big FM at 92.7&nbsp;MHz, Radio Mirchi at 98.3&nbsp;MHz, and Radio Indigo at 91.9&nbsp;MHz.
The Marmagao port handled 31.69 million tonnes of cargo last year, which was 39% of India's total iron ore exports.
The Goa government has recently decided to not allow any more special economic zones (SEZs) in Goa after strong opposition to them by political parties and the Goa Catholic Church.
The Goa, Daman and Diu Official Language Act, 1987 makes Konkani in the Devanagari script the sole official language of Goa, but provides that Marathi may also be used "for all or any of the official purposes".
The Vijayanagara monarchs held on to the territory until 1469, when it was appropriated by the Bahmani sultans of Gulbarga.
Currently there are 16 planned SEZs in Goa.
Goa has more than 33% of its geographic area under government forests (1224.38&nbsp;km²) of which about 62% has been brought under Protected Areas (PA) of Wildlife Sanctuaries and National Park.
Built in 1842 as the Escola Médico-Cirúrgica de (Nova) Goa (Medical-Surgical School of Goa), Goa Medical College is one of Asia's oldest medical colleges and has one of the oldest medical libraries (since 1845).
A specimen of the rock is exhibited in the Goa University.
Tourism is Goa's primary industry: it gets 12% of foreign tourist arrivals in India.
Perni Jagor is the ancient mask dance – drama of Goa, performed by Perni families, using well crafted and painted wooden masks, depicting various animals, birds, super natural power, deities, demons and social characters.
In 1843 the Portuguese moved the capital to Panjim from Velha Goa.
Konkani is spoken as a native language by about 61% of the people in the state but almost all Goans can speak and understand Konkani.
Agriculture, while of shrinking importance to the economy over the past four decades, offers part-time employment to a sizeable portion of the populace.
Equatorial forest cover in Goa stands at , most of which is owned by the government.
Much of the shipments consist of minerals and ores from Goa's hinterland.
Goa has a short winter season between mid-December and February.
DTH (Direct To Home) TV services are available from Dish TV, Videocon D2H, Tata Sky & DD Direct Plus.
Gauda Jagor, is an impression of social life, that displays all the existing moods and modes of human characters.
Coconut and coconut oil are widely used in Goan cooking along with chili peppers, spices, and vinegar is used in the Catholic cuisine, giving the food a unique flavour.
The tableau of Goa showcases religious harmony by focusing on the Deepastambha, the Cross, Ghode Modni followed by a chariot.
Some influences from the Portuguese era are visible in some of Goa's temples, notably the Shanta Durga Temple, the Mangueshi Temple and the Mahalasa Temple, although after 1961, many of these were demolished and reconstructed in the indigenous Indian style.
‘Jagor’, the traditional folk dance-drama, is performed by the Hindu Kunbi and Christian Gauda community of Goa, to seek the Devine Grace for protection and prosperity of the crop.
There are 394 people for each square kilometre of land which is higher than national average 382 per km2.. Goa is the state with highest proportion of urban population with 62.17% of the population living in urban areas.
A by-election in June 2005 saw the Indian National Congress coming back to power after winning three of the five seats that went to polls.
Goa has two main tourist seasons: winter and summer.
The state of Goa is famous for its excellent beaches, churches, and temples.
A large number of deciduous trees, such as teak, Sal tree, cashew and mango trees are present.
The relics are taken down for veneration and for public viewing, as per the prerogative of the Church in Goa, not every ten or twelve years as popularly thought and propagated.
There are some places in Goa which are famous for Goa's traditional & special cousines.
Goa University, the sole university in Goa, is located in Taleigão and most Goan colleges are affiliated to it.
Rice is the main agricultural crop, followed by areca, cashew and coconut.
Goa is also notable for its low priced beer, wine and spirits prices due to its very low excise duty on alcohol.
Goan food may be divided into Goan Catholic and Goan Hindu cuisine with each showing very distinct tastes, characteristics, and cooking styles.
The coconut tree has been reclassified by the government as a palm (like a grass), enabling farmers and real estate developers to clear land with fewer restrictions.
The historic city of Margao still exhibits the cultural influence of the Portuguese, who first landed in the early 16th century as merchants and conquered it soon thereafter.
There was also a short-lived catamaran service linking Mumbai and Panaji operated by Damania Shipping in the 1990s.
The Portuguese set up seminaries for religious education and parish schools for elementary education.
Goa has a population of 1.459 million residents, making it India's fourth smallest (after Sikkim, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh).
Stories from the Ramayana and the Mahabharata along with more modern social subjects are narrated with song and dance.
The Velhas Conquistas regions are also known for its Goa-Portuguese style architecture.
Portuguese was the sole official language during Portuguese colonial rule.
Pork dishes such as Vindaloo, Xacuti, chouriço, and Sorpotel are cooked for major occasions among the Goan Catholics.
Panaji is the state's capital, while Vasco da Gama is the largest city.
Tiatrs are regularly held especially on weekends mainly at Kala Academy, Panjim, Pai Tiatrist Hall at Ravindra Bhavan,  Margao and most recent shows have also started at the new Ravindra Bhavan, Baina, Vasco.
Goa's administrative capital is Panaji, (earlier Panjim) in English, as Pangim in Portuguese, and as Ponnje in the local language.
Goa's main rivers are Mandovi, Zuari, Terekhol, Chapora kushavati river and the Sal.
Each taluka is made up of villages, each having a school run by the government.
The rule later passed to the Chalukyas of Badami, who controlled it between 578 and 753, and later the Rashtrakutas of Malkhed from 753 to 963.
Goa also has a rich wine culture.
The proposed greenfield Mopa Airport will be built at Mopa in Pernem taluka.
Goa Engineering College and National Institute of Technology Goa are government funded colleges whereas the private engineering colleges include Don Bosco College of Engineering at Fatorda, Shree Rayeshwar Institute of Engineering and Information Technology at Shiroda, Agnel Institute of Technology and Design (AITD),Assagao, Bardez and Padre Conceicao College of Engineering at Verna.
'''Goa'''   is a state in southwest India, bounded by Maharashtra to the north and Karnataka to the east and south, while the Arabian Sea forms its western coast.
In the 3rd century BC, Goa was part of the Maurya Empire, ruled by the Buddhist emperor, Ashoka of Magadha.
Goa has more than forty estuarine, eight marine and about ninety riverine islands.
Upper Paleolithic or Mesolithic rock art engravings have been found on the bank of the river Kushavati at Usgalimal.
These vehicles transport a single pillion rider, at fares that are usually negotiated.
In ancient literature, Goa was known by many names, such as ''Gomanta'', ''Gomanchala'', ''Gopakapattam'', ''Gopakapuri'', ''Govapuri'', ''Govem'', and ''Gomantak''.
Goa also has the Sanctuary of Saint Joseph Vaz in Sancoale.
Fontainhas in Panaji has been declared a cultural quarter, showcasing the life, architecture and culture of Goa.
In 1510, the Portuguese defeated the ruling Bijapur sultan Yousuf Adil Shah with the help of a local ally, Timayya.
Founded circa 1542 by saint Francis Xavier, Saint Paul's College, Goa was a Jesuit school in Old Goa, which later became a college.
Goan Hindu houses do not show any Portuguese influence, though the modern temple architecture is an amalgam of original Goan temple style with Dravidian, Hemadpanthi, Islamic, and Portuguese architecture.
Goa also has a few museums, the two important ones being Goa State Museum and the Naval Aviation Museum.
The All India Radio is the only radio channel in the state that broadcasts on both FM and AM bands.
Sesa Goa (now owned by Vedanta Resources) and Dempo are the lead miners.
The birth rate is 15.70 per 1,000 people in 2007.
It lies on the left bank of the Mandovi.
It housed the first printing press in India and published the first books in 1556.
The population has a growth rate of 8.23% per decade.
The Gomant Vibhushan Award, the highest civilian honour of the State of Goa, is given annually by Government of Goa since 2010.
The important forests products are bamboo canes, Maratha barks, chillar barks and the bhirand.
In 2010, there were more than two million tourists reported to have visited Goa, about 1.2 million of whom were from abroad.Goa also stands 6th in Top 10 Nightlife cities in the world in a National Geographic Book.
National Highways in Goa are among the narrowest in the country and will remain so for the foreseeable future, as the state government has received an exemption that allows narrow national highways.
All schools come under the Goa Board of Secondary & Higher Secondary Education, whose syllabus is prescribed by the state education department.
Most of the forests in the state are located in the interior eastern regions of the state.
Goa is also known for its coconut cultivation.
However, public transport in Goa is less developed, and residents depend heavily on their own transportation, usually motorised two-wheelers and small family cars.
There is also a claimed Marian Apparition at the Church of Saints Simon and Jude at Batim Ganxim, near Pilar, where a number of Goans and non resident Goans visit.
It was ranked the best placed state by the Eleventh Finance Commission for its infrastructure and ranked on top for the best quality of life in India by the National Commission on Population based on the 12 Indicators.
The most popular alcoholic beverage in Goa is feni; cashew feni is made from the fermentation of the fruit of the cashew tree, while coconut feni is made from the sap of toddy palms.
Goa features a tropical monsoon climate under the Köppen climate classification.
Evidence of Palaeolithic life is seen at Dabolim, Adkon, Shigao, Fatorpa, Arli, Maulinguinim, Diwar, Sanguem, Pilerne, and Aquem-Margaon etc.
Goan cuisine is famous for its rich variety of fish dishes cooked with elaborate recipes.
Goa encompasses an area of .
In many parts of Goa, mansions constructed in the Indo-Portuguese style architecture still stand, though in some villages, most of them are in a dilapidated condition.
The rocks are classified as Trondjemeitic Gneiss estimated to be 3,600 million years old, dated by rubidium isotope dating.
In Kerala, highways are 45 meters wide.
River crossings in Goa are serviced by flat-bottomed ferry boats, operated by the river navigation department.
Buddhist monks laid the foundation of Buddhism in Goa.
As per a report published in ''The Times of India'', 84% of Goan primary schools run without an administrative head.
Goa's state animal is the Gaur, the state bird is the Ruby Throated Yellow Bulbul, which is a variation of Black-crested Bulbul, and the state tree is the Asan.
Goa also has its own cricket team.
Goa had India's earliest educational institutions built with European support.
The land away from the coast is rich in minerals and ores, and mining forms the second largest industry.
The soil is rich in minerals and humus, thus conducive to agriculture.
Other than buses, "pilots" tend to be the cheapest mode of transport.
plantations, the total forest and tree cover constitutes 56.6% of the geographic area.
Simultaneously the Portuguese lost other possessions in India until their borders stabilised and formed the Estado da Índia Portuguesa or ''State of Portuguese India'', of which Goa was the largest territory.
and churches and convents of Old Goa.
Other parties include the United Goans Democratic Party, the Nationalist Congress Party.
The Konkan Railway line, which was built during the 1990s, runs parallel to the coast connecting major cities on the western coast.
''Gopakapuri'' or ''Gopakapattanam'' were used in some ancient Sanskrit texts, and these names were also mentioned in other sacred Hindu texts such as the ''Harivansa'' and the ''Skanda Purana''.
The month of May is the hottest, seeing day temperatures of over  coupled with high humidity.
There are a number of churches (''Igorzo''), like the Baroque styled ''Nixkollounk Gorb-Sombhov Saibinnich Igorz'' (Church of the Our Lady of Immaculate Conception) in Panjim, the Gothic styled ''Mater Dei'' (''Dêv Matechi Igorz''/ Mother of God) church in Saligao and each church having its own style and heritage, besides ''Kopelam/ Irmidi'' (Chapels).
Goa has four National Highways passing through it.
Ujwadu is a 2011 Konkani film directed by Kasargod Chinna and produced by KJ Dhananjaya and Anuradha Padiyar.
After having stable governance for nearly thirty years up to 1990, Goa is now notorious for its political instability having seen fourteen governments in the span of the fifteen years between 1990 and 2005.
Goa has more than three hundred ancient water-tanks built during the rule of the Kadamba dynasty and over a hundred medicinal springs.
After that dynasty crumbled, the area fell into the hands of the Adil Shahis of Bijapur, who established as their auxiliary capital the city known under the Portuguese as Velha Goa (or Old Goa).
Doordarshan, the national television broadcaster, has two free terrestrial channels on air.
Other colleges in Goa include Shri Damodar College of Commerce and Economics, V.V.M's R.M.
Lourdes Convent High School in Saligao.
Main cash crops are coconut, cashewnut, arecanut, sugarcane and fruits like pineapple, mango and banana.
The Zuari and the Mandovi are the lifelines of Goa, with their tributaries draining 69% of its geographic area.
St Paul's was once the main Jesuit institution in the whole of Asia.
Most students in Goa complete their high school with English as the medium of instruction.
Goa's wildlife sanctuaries boast of more than 1512 documented species of plants, over 275 species of birds, over 48 kinds of animals and over 60 genera of reptiles.
The state's main football stadium, Fatorda Stadium, is located at Margao and also hosts cricket matches.
Goa has scheduled international connections to Doha, Dubai, Muscat, Sharjah and Kuwait in the Middle East by airlines like Air Arabia, Air India, GoAir, Indigo, Oman Air, SpiceJet, Jet Airways, JetKonnect and Qatar Airways.
The Goan Carnival and new year celebration is known to attract a large number of tourists.
The rock art engravings exhibit the earliest traces of human life in India.
Western Musical Instruments such as Drums, bass, Keyboards, Trumpets etc.
In the 3rd century BC, Goa was known as ''Aparantha'' and is mentioned by the Greek geographer Ptolemy.
It is India's smallest state by area and the fourth smallest by population.
The aviation museum is one among three of its kind in the India, the other two being in Delhi and Bengaluru.
The Bom Jesus Cathedral, Fort Aguada and a new wax museum on Indian history, culture and heritage in Old Goa are other tourism destinations.
The monsoon rains arrive by early June and provide respite from the heat.
There are also a few schools that subscribe to the all-India ICSE syllabus or the NIOS syllabus.
Goa is visited by large numbers of international and domestic tourists each year for its beaches, places of worship and world heritage architecture.
By the mid-18th century, Portuguese Goa had expanded to most of the present-day state limits.
Chutus of Karwar also ruled some parts as feudatories of the Satavahanas of Kolhapur (2nd century BC to the 2nd century AD), Western Kshatrapas (around 150 AD), the Abhiras of Western Maharashtra, Bhojas of the Yadav clans of Gujarat, and the Konkan Mauryas as feudatories of the Kalachuris.
Other publications in the state include ''Planet Goa'' (English, monthly), ''Goa Today'' (English, monthly), ''Goan Observer'' (English, weekly), ''Vauraddeancho Ixtt'' (Roman-script Konkani, weekly) ''Goa Messenger'', ''Vasco Watch'', ''Gulab'' (Konkani, monthly), ''Bimb'' (Devanagari-script Konkani).
One of the biggest tourist attractions in Goa is water sports.
Kavi'' murals can still be seen.
Goa International Airport, is a civil enclave at INS Hansa, a Naval airfield located at Dabolim near Vasco da Gama.
AIR's FM channel is called FM Rainbow and is broadcast at 105.4&nbsp;MHz.
''The Times of India'' has recently started publication from Goa itself, serving the local population news directly from the state capital.
Beaches like Baga and Calangute offer jetskiing, parasailing, banana boat rides, water scooter rides and more.
Between the 2nd century BC and the 6th century AD, Goa was ruled by the Bhojas of Goa.
NH-768 (ex NH-4A) links Panjim and Ponda to Belgaum and NH-4.
are part of the show and most of them are played acoustically.
Goa has a unicameral legislature of 40 members, headed by a Speaker.
A native of Goa is called a Goan in English, ''Goenkar'' in Konkani, ''goês'' or ''goesa'' in Portuguese and ''Govekar'' in Marathi.
