The taste of goat kid meat is similar to that of spring lamb meat; in fact, in the English-speaking islands of the Caribbean, and in some parts of Asia, particularly Bangladesh, Pakistan and India, the word “mutton” is used to describe both goat and lamb meat.
Rut is characterized by a decrease in appetite and obsessive interest in the does.
Latin ''haedus'' "kid"), itself perhaps from a root meaning "jump" (assuming that Old Church Slavonic ''zajęcǐ'' "hare", Sanskrit ''jihīte'' "he moves" are related).
In a showmanship class, conformation is irrelevant since this is not what is being judged.
A study by Queen Mary University reports that goats try to communicate with people in the same manner as domesticated animals such as dogs and horses.
Does of any breed or region come into estrus (heat) every 21 days for two to 48 hours.
Goats are one of the oldest domesticated species, and have been used for their milk, meat, hair, and skins over much of the world.
Range-kept and pastured goats may be supplemented with hay or concentrates, most frequently during the winter or dry seasons.
Just before kidding, the doe will have a sunken area around the tail and hip, as well as heavy breathing.
Goats are reputed to be willing to eat almost anything, including tin cans and cardboard boxes.
Twins are the usual result, with single and triplet births also common.
A doe in heat typically flags (vigorously wags) her tail often, stays near the buck if one is present, becomes more vocal, and may also show a decrease in appetite and milk production for the duration of the heat.
Meat, fiber, and pet breeds are not usually milked and simply produce enough for the kids until weaning.
From this comes the word "scapegoat".
The Salem Black goat is herded to pasture in fields and along roads during the day, but is kept penned at night for safe-keeping.
Since these shawls were produced in the upper Kashmir and Ladakh region, the wool came to be known as "cashmere".
Large-framed goats, with a greater skeletal size, reach mature weight at a later age (36 to 42 months) than small-framed goats (18 to 24 months) if both are fed to their full potential.
Goats have horns unless they are "polled" (meaning, genetically hornless) or the horns have been removed, typically soon after birth.
Registered goats, in general, are usually higher-priced if for no other reason than that records have been kept proving their ancestry and the production and other data of their sires, dams, and other ancestors.
Dairy goats in their prime (generally around the third or fourth lactation cycle) average——of milk production daily—roughly —during a ten-month lactation, producing more just after freshening and gradually dropping in production toward the end of their lactation.
Female goats are referred to as "does" or "nannies;" intact males are called "bucks" or "billies;" and juveniles of both sexes are called "kids".
Excess male kids of dairy breeds are typically slaughtered for meat.
Research conducted to test communication skills found that the goats will look to a human for assistance when faced with a challenge that had previously been mastered, but was then modified.
In 2011, there were more than 924 million live goats around the globe, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization.
In the US system, does are generally rebred annually.
The "Baphomet of Mendes" refers to a satanic goat-like figure from 19th-century occultism.
In Africa and the Mideast, goats are typically run in flocks with sheep.
Goatee refers to a style of facial hair incorporating hair on a man’s chin, so named because of some similarity to a goat's facial feature.
The milk generally averages 3.5% butterfat.
Goats are naturally curious.
The horns are most typically removed in commercial dairy goat herds, to reduce the injuries to humans and other goats.
If the strong-smelling buck is not separated from the does, his scent will affect the milk.
Among the conditions affecting goats are respiratory diseases including pneumonia, foot rot, internal parasites, pregnancy toxosis and feed toxicity.
Some does will not mate with a buck which has been descented.
To refer to the male, Old English used ''bucca'' (giving modern ''buck'') until ousted by ''hegote'', ''hegoote'' in the late 12th century.
The miniature dairy goats may be judged by either of the two scorecards.
Goat milk naturally has small, well-emulsified fat globules, which means the cream remains suspended in the milk, instead of rising to the top, as in raw cow milk; therefore, it does not need to be homogenized.
The Capricorn sign in the Western zodiac is usually depicted as a goat with a fish's tail.
The intestine of goats is used to make "catgut", which is still in use as a material for internal human surgical sutures and strings for musical instruments.
The Black Mass, a probably mythological "Satanic mass", was said to involve a black goat, the form in which Satan supposedly manifested himself for worship.
Goats produce about 2% of the world's total annual milk supply.
As a goat's anatomy and physiology is not too dissimilar from that of human, some countries' militaries use goats to train combat medics.
Birthing, known as kidding, generally occurs uneventfully.
Pet goats may be found in many parts of the world when a family keeps one or more animals for emotional reasons rather than as production animals.
Goats prefer to browse on vines, such as kudzu, on shrubbery and on weeds, more like deer than sheep, preferring them to grasses.
Goat breeds fall into overlapping, general categories.
The cashmere goat fiber is harvested once a year, yielding around  of down.
Alfalfa, a high-protein plant, is widely fed as hay; fescue is the least palatable and least nutritious hay.
Most goats have softer insulating hairs nearer the skin, and longer guard hairs on the surface.
Historically, domestic goats were generally kept in herds that wandered on hills or other grazing areas, often tended by goatherds who were frequently children or adolescents, similar to the more widely known shepherd.
Stabled goats may be kept in stalls similar to horses, or in larger group pens.
It is becoming more common for goats to be kept exclusively as pets in North America and Europe.
Their grazing is typically supplemented with hay and concentrates.
The goat has had a lingering connection with Satanism and pagan religions, even into modern times.
The American Dairy Goat Association (ADGA) scorecard for an adult doe includes a point system of a hundred total with major categories that include general appearance, the dairy character of a doe (physical traits that aid and increase milk production), body capacity, and specifically for the mammary system.
Breeding together two genetically polled goats results in a high number of intersex individuals among the offspring, which are typically sterile.
Specifically, when presented with a box, the goat was able to remove the lid and retrieve a treat inside, but when the box was turned so the lid could not be removed, the goat would turn and gaze at the person and move toward them, before looking back toward the box.
The origin of this belief was probably the behavior of the buck in rut, the very epitome of lust.
When a farmer's son who is invited to share the meal breaks one of the goats' leg bones to suck the marrow, the animal's leg remains broken in the morning, and the boy is forced to serve Thor as a servant to compensate for the damage.
Many breeders prefer to postpone breeding until the doe has reached 70% of the adult weight.
It was also acceptable for some kinds of sacrifices.
The wool is shorn twice a year, with an average yield of about .
Angora and other fiber breeds are also kept on pasture or range.
Goat breeders' clubs frequently hold shows, where goats are judged on traits relating to conformation, udder quality, evidence of high production, longevity, build and muscling (meat goats and pet goats) and fiber production and the fiber itself (fiber goats).
Feral goats are common in Australia.
Freshening (coming into milk production) occurs at kidding.
Popular Christian folk tradition in Europe associated Satan with imagery of goats.
Occasionally, goats that have not been bred and are continuously milked will continue lactation beyond the typical 305 days.
While goats are generally considered hardy animals and in many situations receive little medical care, they are subject to a number of diseases.
After the lactation, the doe will "dry off", typically after she has been bred.
Dairy goats are generally pastured in summer and may be stabled during the winter.
There have been incidents of polycerate goats (having as many as eight horns), although this is a genetic rarity thought to be inherited.
Children's clubs such as 4-H also allow goats to be shown.
Their horns are made of living bone surrounded by keratin and other  proteins, and are used for defense, dominance, and territoriality.
While goats will not actually eat inedible material, they are browsing animals, not grazers like cattle and sheep, and (coupled with their highly curious nature) will chew on and taste just about anything remotely resembling plant matter to decide whether it is good to eat, including cardboard, clothing and paper (such as labels from tin cans).
Meat goats are more frequently pastured year-round, and may be kept many miles from barns.
A registered doe is usually less of a gamble than buying a doe at random (as at an auction or sale barn) because of these records and the reputation of the breeder.
Some varieties include Rocamadour and Montrachet.
An exception to this is the Boer goat, which sometimes may have up to eight teats.
Both male and female goats have beards, and many types of goat (most commonly dairy goats, dairy-cross Boers, and pygmy goats) may have wattles, one dangling from each side of the neck.
In the 18th and early 19th centuries, Kashmir (then called Cashmere by the British), had a thriving industry producing shawls from goat-hair imported from Tibet and Tartary through Ladakh.
This practice has become popular in the Pacific Northwest, where they are used to remove invasive species not easily removed by humans, including (thorned) blackberry vines and poison oak.
The entire body of the goat is covered with mohair and there are no guard hairs.
Gestation length is approximately 150 days.
Several mythological hybrid creatures are believed to consist of parts of the goat, including the Chimera.
One was sacrificed and the other allowed to escape into the wilderness, symbolically carrying with it the sins of the community.
Mold in a goat's feed can make it sick and possibly kill it.
The mineral bromine is named from the Greek word "brόmos", which means "stench of he-goats".
They will generally turn and face an intruder and bucks are more likely to charge or butt at humans than are rams.
Angora crossbreeds, such as the pygora and the nigora, have been created to produce mohair and/or cashgora on a smaller, easier-to-manage animal.
Unlike cattle, goats have not been successfully bred to be reliably polled, as the genes determining sex and those determining horns are closely linked.
One of the most popular goats grown for meat is the South African Boer, introduced into the United States in the early 1990s.
When grazing undisturbed, they tend to spread across the field or range, rather than feed side-by-side as do sheep.
A leader or king was sometimes compared to a male goat leading the flock.
A goat is considered a "clean" animal by Jewish dietary laws and was slaughtered for an honored guest.
This is the same type of complex communication observed by animals bred as domestic pets, such as dogs.
Castration at a young age prevents the development of typical buck odor.
People who show their goats usually keep registered stock and the offspring of award-winning animals command a higher price.
Goats are mentioned many times in the Bible.
Due to their agility and inquisitiveness, they are notorious for escaping their pens by testing fences and enclosures, either intentionally or simply because they are used to climb on.
The Angora breed of goats produces long, curling, lustrous locks of mohair.
Some charities provide goats to impoverished people in poor countries, because goats are easier and cheaper to manage than cattle, and have multiple uses.
Researchers believe that better understanding of human-goat interaction could offer overall improvement in the animals' welfare.
The coarse guard hairs are of little value as they are too coarse, difficult to spin and difficult to dye.
Within each breed, different strains or bloodlines may have different recognized sizes.
Several factors can reduce this average expectancy; problems during kidding can lower a doe's expected life span to ten or eleven, and stresses of going into rut can lower a buck's expected life span to eight to ten years.
Fauns and satyrs are mythological creatures that are part goat and part human.
Pan was a very lustful god, nearly all of the myths involving him had to do with him chasing nymphs.
, since stall-fed goat-rearing involves extensive upkeep and is seldom commercially viable.
The American Goat Society (AGS) has a similar, but not identical scorecard that is used in their shows.
It is also used about the custom of going door-to-door singing carols and getting food and drinks in return, often fruit, cakes and sweets.
While many goats are allowed to wander the homestead or village, others are kept penned and fed in what is called a 'cut-and-carry' system.
In some parts of the world, especially Europe and North America, distinct breeds of goats are kept for dairy (milk) and for meat production.
Successful breeding in these regions depends more on available forage than on day length.
The unusual smells of leftover food in discarded cans or boxes may further stimulate their curiosity.
Goats have been used by humans to clear unwanted vegetation for centuries.
While modern mannequins used in medical training are quite efficient in simulating the behavior of a human body, trainees feel that "the goat exercise provides a sense of urgency that only real life trauma can provide".
The earliest remnants of domesticated goats dating 10,000 years before present are found in Ganj Dareh in Iran.
Indeed, if the milk is to be used to make cheese, homogenization is not recommended, as this changes the structure of the milk, affecting the culture's ability to coagulate the milk and the final quality and yield of cheese.
The mother often eats the placenta, which gives her much-needed nutrients, helps stanch her bleeding, and parallels the behavior of wild herbivores, such as deer, to reduce the lure of the birth scent for predators.
This makes them the only ruminant to regularly climb trees.
However, in other circumstances where predator pressure is maintained, they may be accommodated into some balance in the local food web.
Feed toxicity can vary based on breed and location.
A first-time milker may produce less, or as much as , or more of milk in exceptional cases.
Due to its low fat content, the meat can toughen at high temperatures if cooked without additional moisture.
The cashmere goat produces a commercial quantity of cashmere wool, which is one of the most expensive natural fibers commercially produced; cashmere is very fine and soft.
Various "Dairy Goat Scorecards" (milking does) are systems used for judging shows in the US.
At birth, the rumen is undeveloped, but as the kid begins to consume solid feed, the rumen soon increases in size and in its capacity to absorb nutrients.
Bucks of equatorial breeds may show seasonal reduced fertility, but as with the does, are capable of breeding at all times.
In the United States, goats have become the main animal species used for this purpose after Pentagon phased out using dogs for medical training in the 1980s.
The Greek god Pan is said to have the upper body of a man and the horns and lower body of a goat.
In temperate climates and among the Swiss breeds, the breeding season commences as the day length shortens, and ends in early spring or before.
The goat is one of the twelve-year cycle of animals which appear in the Chinese zodiac related to the Chinese calendar.
The Gävle Goat is a giant version of the Yule Goat, erected every year in the Swedish city of Gävle.
The particular housing used for goats depends not only on the intended use of the goat, but also on the region of the world where they are raised.
These methods of herding are still used today.
They are generally distributed in those used for dairy, fiber, meat, skins, and as companion animals.
He is also credited with creating the pan flute.
Yule Goat originally denoted the goat that was slaughtered around Yule, but it may also indicate a goat figure made out of straw.
In addition, goats are used for driving and packing purposes.
Sebaceous scent glands at the base of the horns add to the male goat's odor, which is important to make him attractive to the female.
Some breeds of sheep and goats look similar, but they can usually be told apart because goat tails are short and usually point up, whereas sheep tails hang down and are usually longer and bigger – though some (like those of Northern European short-tailed sheep) are short, and longer ones are often docked.
The common  Russian surname ''Kozlov'' (), means "goat".
Goats reach puberty between three and 15 months of age, depending on breed and nutritional status.
Goats were first domesticated as livestock more than 10,000 years ago.
They can transmit a number of zoonotic diseases to people, such as tuberculosis, brucellosis, Q-fever, and rabies.
The adult size of a particular goat is a product of its breed (genetic potential) and its diet while growing (nutritional potential).
Male lactation is also known to occur in goats.
The desirable fiber for the textile industry is the former, and it goes by several names (down, cashmere and pashmina).
Disqualifications include: a deformed mouth, broken down pasterns, deformed feet, crooked legs, abnormalities of testicles, missing testicles, more than 3&nbsp;inch split in scrotum, and close-set or distorted horns.
In the New Testament, Jesus told a parable of the Sheep and the Goats (Gospel of Matthew 25).
As with other mammal ruminants, they are even-toed ungulates.
Some goats are bred specifically for milk.
The field of Anthrozoology has established that domesticated animals have the capacity for complex communication with humans when in 2015 a Japanese scientist determined that levels of oxytocin did increase in human subjects when dogs were exposed to a dose of the "love hormone", proving that the Human Animal Bond does exist.
The meat of older bucks (more than one year old) is generally considered not desirable for meat for human consumption.
At the bottom of the size range are miniature breeds such as the African Pygmy, which stand  at the shoulder as adults.
Dutch/Icelandic ''geit'', German ''Geiß'', and Gothic ''gaits''), ultimately from Proto-Indo-European ''*ǵʰaidos'' meaning "young goat" (cf.
However, some compare the taste of goat meat to veal or venison, depending on the age and condition of the goat.
The Modern English word ''goat'' comes from Old English ''gāt'' "she-goat, goat in general", which in turn derives from Proto-Germanic *''gaitaz'' (cf.
In all four systems, however, goats were typically kept in extensive systems, with few purchased inputs.
On Yom Kippur, the festival of the Day of Atonement, two goats were chosen and lots were drawn for them.
A common superstition in the Middle Ages was that goats whispered lewd sentences in the ears of the saints.
Husbandry, or animal care and use, varies by region and culture.
Each animal is associated with certain personality traits; those born in a year of the goat are predicted to be shy, introverted, creative, and perfectionist.
Most goats naturally have two horns, of various shapes and sizes depending on the breed.
Its flavor is said to be primarily linked to the presence of 4-methyloctanoic and 4-methylnonanoic acid.
It has also been used to produce parchment.
The digestive physiology of a very young kid (like the young of other ruminants) is essentially the same as that of a monogastric animal.
It can be prepared in a variety of ways, including stewing, baking, grilling, barbecuing, canning, and frying; it can be minced, curried, or made into sausage.
Multiple types of goat-raising are found in Ethiopia, where four main types have been identified: pastured in annual crop systems, in perennial crop systems, with cattle, and in arid areas, under pastoral (nomadic) herding systems.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the top producers of goat milk in 2008 were India (4 million metric tons), Bangladesh (2.16 million metric tons) and the Sudan (1.47 million metric tons).
Goats can become infected with various viral and bacterial diseases, such as foot-and-mouth disease, caprine arthritis encephalitis, caseous lymphadenitis, pinkeye, mastitis, and pseudorabies.
At night when he sets up camp, Thor eats the meat of the goats, but takes care that all bones remain whole.
Bucks (intact males) of Swiss and northern breeds come into rut in the fall as with the does' heat cycles.
Certain foreign fruits and vegetables can be toxic to different breeds of goats.
Cut-and-carry, which refers to the practice of cutting down grasses, corn or cane for feed rather than allowing the animal access to the field, is particularly suited for types of feed, such as corn or cane, that are easily destroyed by trampling.
According to Norse mythology, the god of thunder, Thor, has a chariot that is pulled by the goats Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr.
Some breeds are also particularly noted as pack goats.
Feral goats have established themselves in many areas: they occur in Australia, New Zealand, Great Britain, the Galapagos and in many other places.
The horn of the goat, which signifies plenty and wellbeing (the cornucopia), is also used to make spoons.
Possibly related, the Yule Goat is one of the oldest Scandinavian and Northern European Yule and Christmas symbols and traditions.
Goat meat from younger animals is called "kid" or ''cabrito'' (Spanish), while meat from older animals is known simply as "goat" or sometimes called ''chevon'', or in some areas "mutton" (which more often refers to adult sheep meat).
In equatorial regions, goats are able to breed at any time of the year.
This maximizes the production per acre, as goats and sheep prefer different food plants.
Its horns can be used instead of sheep's horn to make a shofar.
In South Asia, cashmere is called "pashmina" (from Persian ''pashmina'', "fine wool").
Children's shows often include a showmanship class, where the cleanliness and presentation of both the animal and the exhibitor as well as the handler's ability and skill in handling the goat are scored.
The New Zealand Kiko is also considered a meat breed, as is the myotonic or "fainting goat", a breed originating in Tennessee.
As dairy does are milked daily, they are generally kept close to the milking shed.
Since then, numerous public and private agencies have hired private herds to perform similar tasks.
Studies of DNA evidence suggests 10,000 years BP as the domestication date.
She may have a worried look, become restless and display great affection for her keeper.
In India, Nepal, and much of Asia, goats are kept largely for milk production, both in commercial and household settings.
Then he wraps the remains up, and in the morning, the goats always come back to life to pull the chariot.
This type of husbandry is also used in parts of Latin America.
Because goats' irises are usually pale, their contrasting pupils are much more noticeable than in animals such as cattle, deer, most horses and many sheep, whose similarly horizontal pupils blend into a dark iris and sclera.
Neolithic farmers began to herd wild goats primarily for easy access to milk and meat, as well as to their dung, which was used as fuel, and their bones, hair and sinew for clothing, building and tools.
Milk digestion begins in the abomasum, the milk having bypassed the rumen via closure of the reticuloesophageal groove during suckling.
They have a four-chambered stomach consisting of the rumen, the reticulum, the omasum, and the abomasum.
"Going Yule Goat" is similar to the British custom wassailing, both with  roots.
