That said, the atrocities of the Syrian Civil War and the rise of the so-called Islamic State group, which at times has controlled what was the Syrian-administered Golan have added a new twist to the issue.
The territory, known as the Shebaa Farms, measures  and lies on the border between Lebanon and the Golan Heights.
American diplomat Martin Indyk said that the 1999–2000 round of negotiations began during Netanyahu's first term (1996–1999), and he was not as hardline as he made out.
The Greek name for the region is ''Gaulanitis'' ().
The Golan Heights supply 15% of Israel's water.
Israel was the only nation to vote against the resolution.
The archaeological site includes excavations of the city's forum, the small imperial cult temple, a large Hellenistic temple compound, the Roman city gates, and two Byzantine churches.
Internationally recognized as Syrian territory, the Golan Heights has been occupied and administered by Israel since 1967.
The 1923 boundary between British Mandatory Palestine and the French Mandate of Syria was drawn with water in mind.
Some Druze communities were established in the Golan during the 17th and 18th centuries.
in July 1966, Fatah began raids into Israeli territory in early 1965, with active support from Syria.
Israel has not allowed former residents to return, citing security reasons.
King Ahab of Israel (reigned 874–852 BC) defeated Ben-Hadad I in Afek of the southern Golan.
The city of Golan was a city of refuge.
Currently there are more than 1,000 UN peacekeepers there trying to sustain a lasting peace.
According to a travel handbook of the time, only 11 of 127 ancient towns and villages in the Golan were inhabited.
Following the death of Herod the Great in 4 BC, Augustus Caesar adjudicated that the Golan fell within the Tetrarchy of Herod's son, Herod Philip I.
While negotiating the 1949 Armistice Agreements, Israel called for the removal of all Syrian forces from the former Palestine territory.
The Sea of Galilee, also known as Lake Kinneret or Lake Tiberias, at the southwest corner of the plateau is  below sea level.
The U.N. representative for the United Kingdom who was responsible for negotiating and drafting the Security Council resolution said that the actions of the Israeli Government in establishing settlements and colonizing the Golan are in clear defiance of Resolution 242.
In April 1967, after Syria heavily shelled Israeli villages from the Golan Heights, Israel shot down six Syrian MiG fighter planes and warned Syria against future attacks.
Mines deployed by the Syrian army remain active.
They lived in over 100 locations in the Mount Hermon and Golan region.
The United States considers the application of Israeli law to the Golan Heights to be a violation of international law, both the Fourth Geneva Convention's prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force and United Nations Security Council Resolution 242.
After the 1948–49 Arab-Israeli War, the Golan Heights were partly demilitarised by the Israel-Syria Armistice Agreement.
Israel maintains that it may retain the area as the text of Resolution 242 calls for "safe and recognised boundaries free from threats or acts of force".
The Jews also built a road stretching from Lake Hula to Muzayrib.
The plateau that Israel controls is part of a larger area of volcanic basalt fields stretching north and east that were created in the series of volcanic eruptions that began recently in geological terms, almost 4 million years ago, and continue to this day.
Hermon range, with a surface of .
The area is administered as part of Israel's North District.
Clinton also laid blame on Israel.
The provocation was sending a tractor to plow in the demilitarized areas.
In March 2009, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad claimed that indirect talks had failed after Israel did not commit to full withdrawal from the Golan Heights.
Israel's response was a series of retaliatory raids, of which the largest were an attack on the Jordanian village of Samu in November 1966.
This resulted in an evolving tactical situation, one "snapshot" of which was the disposition of forces immediately prior to the Six-Day War, the “line of June 4, 1967”.
Two open air strip malls, one which holds the ''Kesem ha-Golan'' (Golan Magic), a three-dimensional movie and model of the geography and history of the Golan Heights.
During the negotiations regarding the text of United Nations Security Council resolution 242, U.S. Secretary of State Rusk explained that U.S. support for secure permanent frontiers did not mean the US supported territorial changes.
According to Israel, it has captured .
During the Roman and Byzantine periods the area was administered as part of Phoenicia Prima and Syria Palaestina, and finally Golan/Gaulanitis was included together with Peraea in Palaestina Secunda, after 218 AD.
In 1996, Benjamin Netanyahu granted preliminary approval to INOC to proceed with oil exploration drilling in the Golan.
In 2012, there were 20,000 Druze with Syrian citizenship living in the Israeli-occupied portion Golan Heights.
In the 16th century, the Golan was conquered by the Ottoman Empire and was part of the Vilayet of Damascus until it was transferred to French control in 1918.
In the battle, Israel lost 115 men, with another 306 wounded.
A later attempt to resettle the site with Syrian Jews who were Ottoman citizens also failed.
Though the cease fire in the UNDOF zone has been largely uninterrupted since the seventies, in 2012 there have been repeated violations from the Syrian side, including tanks and live fire, though these incidents are attributed to the ongoing Syrian civil war rather than intentionally directed towards Israel.
He said after the 1973 war that any agreement between the two sides "must clearly put a stop the that kind of offensive action."
A 3D model of the site exists in the Museum of Golan Antiquities in Katzrin.
In June 2007, it was reported that Prime Minister Ehud Olmert had sent a secret message to Syrian President, Bashar Assad saying that Israel would concede the land in exchange for a comprehensive peace agreement and the severing of Syria's ties with Iran and militant groups in the region.
During the Yom Kippur War in 1973, Syrian forces overran much of the southern Golan, before being pushed back by an Israeli counterattack.
Israel and Syria signed a ceasefire agreement in 1974 that left almost all the Heights in Israeli hands.
An estimated 2,500 Syrians were killed, with another 5,000 wounded.
By 2010 the Jewish settler population had expanded to 20,000 living in 32 settlements.
In accordance with the same process, a nearby parcel of land that included the ancient site of Tel Dan and the Dan spring were transferred from Syria to Palestine early in 1924.
Throughout the Old Testament period, the Golan was "the focus of a power struggle between the Kings of Israel and the Aramaeans who were based near modern-day Damascus."
In 1975, following the 1974 ceasefire agreement, Israel returned a narrow demilitarised zone to Syrian control.
In the Mishna the name is ''Gablān'' similar to Aramaic language names for the region: ''Gawlāna'', ''Guwlana'' and ''Gublānā''.
Later, in 2010, Israeli foreign minister Avigdor Lieberman told Syria to abandon its dreams of recovering the Golan Heights.
They hold laissez-passers issued by the Israeli government, and enjoy the country's social welfare benefits.
In May 2009, Prime Minister Netanyahu said that returning the Golan Heights would turn it into "Iran's front lines which will threaten the whole state of Israel."
During the Arab-Israeli War, Syria captured various areas of the formerly British controlled Mandatory Palestine, including the 10-meter strip of beach, the east bank of the upper Jordan, as well as areas along the Yarmouk.
Jan Mühren, a former UN observer in the area at the time, told a Dutch current affairs programme that Israel "provoked most border incidents as part of its strategy to annex more land".
During that time, it was decided that INOC's drilling permits would be returned to the state.
Gamla was captured in 67; according to Josephus, its inhabitants committed mass suicide, preferring it to crucifixion and slavery.
In response, Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Muallem demanded that Israel unconditionally cede the Golan Heights "on a silver platter" without any preconditions, adding that "it is our land," and blamed Israel for failing to commit to peace.
Syria continued to demand a full Israeli withdrawal to the 1967 borders, including a strip of land on the east shore of the Sea of Galilee that Syria captured during the 1948–49 Arab-Israeli War and occupied from 1949–67.
In 1880, Laurence Oliphant published ''Eretz ha-Gilad'' (The Land of Gilead), which described a plan for large-scale Jewish settlement in the Golan.
The first vines were planted in 1976, and the first wine was released by the winery in 1983.
The mountains are characterised by lighter-colored, Jurassic-age limestone of sedimentary origin.
Following a brief restoration under the Emperor Heraclius, the Golan again fell, this time to the invading Arabs after the Battle of Yarmouk in 636.
Gamla Nature Reserve is an open park with the archaeological remains of the ancient Jewish city of Gamla&nbsp;— including a tower, wall and synagogue.
It is also the site of a large waterfall, an ancient Byzantine church, and a panoramic spot to observe the nearly 100 vultures that dwell in the cliffs.
The continued Israeli control of the Golan Heights remains highly contested and is still regarded as belligerent occupation by most countries.
The village they established, Bnei Yehuda, existed until 1920.
It was captured during the 1967 Six-Day War, establishing the Purple Line.
The area which came under Israeli control as a result of the war consists of two geologically distinct areas: the Golan Heights proper, with a surface of  and the slopes of the Mt.
The steeper, more rugged topography is generally limited to the northern half, including the foothills of Mount Hermon; on the south the plateau is more level.
In 1989, the settler population was 10,000.
Syria refused, insisting on an armistice line based not on the 1923 international border but on the military status quo.
As of 2003, there had been at least 216 landmine casualties in the Syrian-controlled Golan since 1973, of which 108 were fatalities.
A ski resort on the slopes of Mount Hermon features a wide range of ski trails and activities.
During the following years, the area along the border witnessed thousands of violent incidents; the armistice agreement was being violated by both sides.
During the 1950s, Syria registered two principal territorial accomplishments: it took over Al-Hammah enclosure south of Lake Tiberias and established a ''de facto'' presence on and control of eastern shore of the lake.
Accordingly, major parts of the armistice lines departed from the 1923 boundary and protruded into Israel.
The southern border is lined by the Yarmuk River, which separates the plateau from the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
The resulting armed clashes are called the War over Water.
In the 8th century BC the Assyrians gained control of the area, followed by the Babylonian and the Persian Empire.
In the aftermath of the 1973 Yom Kippur War, in which Syria tried but failed to recapture the Golan, Israel agreed to return about 5% of the territory to Syrian civilian control.
East of the 1973 ceasefire line, in the Syrian controlled part of the Golan Heights, an area of , are more than 40 Syrian towns and villages, including Quneitra, Khan Arnabah, al-Hamidiyah, al-Rafid, al-Samdaniyah, al-Mudariyah, Beer Ajam, Bariqa, Ghadir al-Bustan, Hadar Juba, Kodana, Ufaniyah, Ruwayhinah, Nabe’ al-Sakhar, Trinjah, Umm al-A’zam, and Umm Batna.
Merom Golan was founded in July 1967 and by 1970 there were 12 settlements.
In Israel, the Golan plateau is divided into three regions: northern (between the Sa'ar and Jilabun valleys), central (between the Jilabun and Daliyot valleys), and southern (between the Daliyot and Yarmouk valleys).
In 2015, it was reported that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu asked US President Barack Obama to recognize Israeli claims to the territory because of these recent ISIS actions and the fact that modern Syria has likely "disintegrated" beyond the point of reunification.
The international community rejects the validity of the Golan Heights Law as an attempted annexation by force, illegal under the UN Charter and the Geneva Conventions.
A consortium of four kibbutzim and four moshavim took up the challenge, clearing 250 burnt-out tanks in the Golan's Valley of Tears to plant vineyards for what would eventually become the Golan Heights Winery.
After the Assyrian period, about four centuries provide limited archaeological finds in the Golan.
A large synagogue was built in the 5th century CE.
The Golan Heights features numerous archeological sites, mountains, streams and waterfalls.
The difference between the lines is less than 100&nbsp;m for the most part, but the 1967 line would give Syria access to the Sea of Galilee, and Israel wished to retain control of the Sea of Galilee, its only freshwater lake and a major water resource.
But the Israelis had destroyed Quneitra with dynamite and bulldozers before they withdrew from the city.
A plant nursery was established and work began on farm buildings in Djillin.
Several restaurants are located in the area.
As a result of the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78, there was a huge influx of refugees from the Caucasus into the empire.
King Solomon appointed ministers in the region.
Since 1967, Druze brides have been allowed to cross into Syria, although they do so in the knowledge that they may not be able to return.
Members of the UN Disengagement force are usually the only individuals who cross the Israeli-Syrian de facto border (cease fire "Alpha Line"), but since 1988 Israel has allowed Druze pilgrims to cross into Syria to visit the shrine of Abel on Mount Qasioun.
For many centuries nomadic tribes lived together with the sedentary population in the region.
The Israeli-occupied territory is administered by the Golan Regional Council, based in Katzrin, which has a population of 6,400.
According to Egypt's ''Daily Star'', their standard of living vastly surpasses that of their counterparts on the Syrian side of the border.
In return for his loyalty, Rome allowed him to retain his kingdom, but finally absorbed the Golan for good after his death in 100.
A village called Tiferet Binyamin was established on lands purchased from Saham al-Jawlan by the Shavei Zion Association based in New York, but the project was abandoned after a year when the Turks issued an edict in 1896 evicting the 17 non-Turkish families.
Israel's action was not recognised internationally and United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 which declared the Golan Heights Israeli-occupied territory continues to apply.
Soon afterwards, the society regrouped and purchased 2,000 dunams of land from the village of Bir e-Shagum on the western slopes of the Golan.
Between 1904 and 1908, a group of Crimean Jews settled in the Bethsaida Valley, initially as tenants of a Kurdish proprietor with the prospects of purchasing the land, but the arrangement faltered.
In the 5th century BC, the Persian Empire allowed the region to be resettled by returning Jewish exiles from Babylonian Captivity.
This strip is under the military control of UNDOF.
Israeli forces were to refrain from entering the evacuated areas, which would become a demilitarised zone, "from which the armed forces of both Parties shall be totally excluded, and in which no activities by military or paramilitary forces shall be permitted."
In the Bible, ''Golan'' is mentioned as a city of refuge located in Bashan: , , .
However, the international community reject Israeli claims to title to the territory and regards it as sovereign Syrian territory.
Maps used by the UN in demarcating the Blue Line were not able to conclusively show the border between Lebanon and Syria in the area.
Under the terms of an armistice signed on 20 July 1949, Syrian forces were to withdraw east of the old Palestine-Syria boundary.
The Agudat Ahim society, whose headquarters were in Yekatrinoslav, Russia, acquired 100,000 dunams of land in several locations in the districts of Fiq and Daraa.
In about 250, the Ghassanids, Arab Christians from Yemen, established a kingdom which encompassed southern Syria and the Transjordan, building their capital at Jabiyah on the Golan.
It has distinct geographic boundaries.
Hence their fear of a return to Syria, though most of them identify themselves as Syrian, but feel alienated from the "autocratic" government in Damascus.
In 1976, Israeli defense minister Moshe Dayan said that Israel provoked more than 80% of the clashes with Syria, although historians say the remark was part of an informal conversation.
Like the later Herodians, the Ghassanids ruled as clients of Byzantine Rome; unlike the Herodians, the Ghassanids were able to hold on to the Golan until the Sassanid invasion of 614.
The plateau has an average altitude of  and an area totaling , and straddles the boundary between Syria and Israeli-held territory.
Sir Alec Douglas-Home, former Prime Minister of the UK, stated that when he was visiting the Galilee a few months before the 1967 war "at regular intervals the Russian-built forts on the Golan Heights used to lob shells into the villages, often claiming civilian casualties."
Arab cartographers of the Byzantine period referred to the area as ''jabal'' (mountain), though the region is a plateau.
The United States considers the Golan Heights to be Syrian territory held under Israeli occupation subject to negotiation and Israeli withdrawal.
The area is hilly and elevated, overlooking the Jordan Rift Valley which contains the Sea of Galilee and the Jordan River, and is itself dominated by the  tall Mount Hermon.
Over the next few centuries, while remaining in Muslim hands, the Golan passed through many dynastic changes, falling first to the Abbasids, then to the Shi'ite Fatimids, then to the Seljuk Turks, then to the Kurdish Ayyubids.
The Syrians responded by firing at the tractors and shelling Israeli settlements.
The Druze are also reportedly well-educated and relatively prosperous, and have made use of Israel's universities.
According to the Bible, an Amorite Kingdom in Bashan was conquered by Israelites during the reign of King Og.
East of the 1974 ceasefire line lies the Syrian controlled part of the Heights, an area that was not captured by Israel (500 square kilometres or 190 sq mi) or withdrawn from (100 square kilometres or 39 sq mi).
The population of the Quneitra Governorate numbers 79,000.
The Muslims took over in 7th century CE.
The occupied sector of the Golan Heights provides or controls a substantial portion of the water in the Jordan River watershed, which in turn provides a portion of Israel's water supply.
Human rights groups have said the drilling violates international law as Golan Heights is an occupied territory.
The broader Golan plateau exhibits a more subdued topography, generally ranging between  and  in elevation.
Residents of both parts hold Israeli citizenship, and in the northern part often a Lebanese passport as well.
This part was incorporated into a demilitarised zone that runs along the ceasefire line and extends eastward.
INOC began undergoing a process of privatization in 1997, overseen by then-Director of the Government Companies Authority (GCA), Tzipi Livni.
In 2010, Israeli foreign minister Avigdor Lieberman said: "We must make Syria recognise that just as it relinquished its dream of a greater Syria that controls Lebanon ... it will have to relinquish its ultimate demand regarding the Golan Heights"
In 1981, Israel passed the Golan Heights Law, which applied Israeli "laws, jurisdiction and administration" to the Golan Heights.
Al Ghajar village is another complex border issue west of Shebaa farms.
Following the armistice, both Israel and Syria sought to take advantage of the territorial ambiguities left in place by the 1949 agreement.
The Golan Heights is bordered on the west by a rock escarpment that drops  to the Jordan River valley and the Sea of Galilee.
Archaeologists believe the site may have been a ritual center linked to a cult of the dead.
Due to financial hardships and the long wait for a ''kushan'' (Ottoman land deed) the village, Golan be-Bashan, was abandoned after a year.
On the same day, former Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced that the former Syrian President, Hafez Assad, had promised to let Israel retain Mount Hermon in any future agreement.
Syria claimed that neither party had sovereignty over the DMZ.
The boundary between the forthcoming British and French mandates was defined in broad terms by the Franco-British Boundary Agreement of December 1920.
Syrians counter that the region was placed in the Vilayet of Damascus as part of Syria under the Ottoman boundaries and that the 1920 British-Franco agreement which had placed part of the Golan under the control of Britain was only temporary and that the final border line drawn up in 1923, which excluded the Golan triangle, had superseded it, although Syria has never recognised the 1923 border as legally binding.
Since 2005, Israel has allowed Druze farmers to export some 11,000 tons of apples to the rest of Syria each year, constituting the first commercial relations between Syria and Israel.
Construction of Israeli settlements began in the remainder of the territory held by Israel, which was under military administration until Israel passed the Golan Heights Law extending Israeli law and administration throughout the territory in 1981.
On the north, the Sa'ar valley (Banias) generally divides the lighter-colored limestone bedrock of the mountains from the dark-colored volcanic rocks of the Golan plateau.
In the middle of the 2nd century BCE, Itureans started living in the Golan.
The result was a compromise.
It is divided by an international boundary, with the northern part of the village on the Lebanese side since 2000.
Although nominally under Agrippa's control and not part of the province of Judea, the Jewish communities of the Golan joined their coreligionists in the First Jewish-Roman War, only to fall to the Roman armies in its early stages.
Between 1891 and 1894, Baron Edmond James de Rothschild purchased around 150,000 dunams of land in the Golan and the Hawran for Jewish settlement.
President Nasser too, assured the U.S.A, that the Arabs would not exceed the plan's water quotas.
This move was condemned by the United Nations Security Council in UN Resolution 497, although Israel states it has a right to retain the area, citing the text of UN Resolution 242, adopted after the Six-Day War, which calls for "safe and recognised boundaries free from threats or acts of force".
Nineteenth-century authors interpreted the word "Golan" () as meaning "something ''surrounded'', hence a ''district''".
Israeli settlements and human rights policy in the occupied territory have also drawn criticism from the UN.
Israeli scientists study the vultures and tourists can watch them fly and nest.
The rock forming the mountainous area in the northern Golan Heights, descending from Mount Hermon, differs geologically from the volcanic rocks of the plateau and has a different physiography.
In June 2009, Israeli President Shimon Peres said that Syrian President Assad would have to negotiate without preconditions, and that Syria would not win territorial concessions from Israel on a "silver platter" while it maintained ties with Iran and Hezbollah.
Israeli settlement in the Golan began soon after the war.
In the 1970s, Israeli politician Yigal Allon proposed as part of the Allon Plan that a Druze state be established in Syria's Quneitra Governorate, including the Israeli-held Golan Heights.
Although the law in effect annexed the territory to Israel, it did not explicitly spell out the formal annexation.
The 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia refers to the region as ''Gaulonitis''.
The Itureans, an Arab or Aramaic people, settled there in the 2nd century BCE and remained until the end of the Byzantine period.
Successive Israeli governments have considered an Israeli withdrawal from the Golan in return for normalization of relations with Syria, provided certain security concerns are met.
Five nations sponsored a resolution criticizing Syria for its actions but it failed to pass due to a Soviet veto.
By the end of 2007, the population of the Quneitra Governorate was estimated at 79,000.
The last families left in the wake of the Passover riots of 1920.
At times, the central government attempted to settle the nomads which would result in the establishment of permanent communities.
From the Sea of Galilee north to Lake Hula the boundary was drawn between 50 and 400 meters east of the upper Jordan River, keeping that stream entirely within Mandatory Palestine.
Agrippa II contributed soldiers to the Roman war effort and attempted to negotiate an end to the revolt.
Since 1988, Druze clerics have been permitted to make annual religious pilgrimages to Syria.
Syria broke off the talks to protest Israeli military operations.
After the split of the United Monarchy, the area was contested between the northern Kingdom of Israel and the Aramean kingdom from the 9th century BC.
The Ottomans encouraged them to settle in southern Syria, particularly the Golan Heights, by granting them land with a 12-year tax exemption.
Reluctance to accept citizenship also reflects fear of ill treatment or displacement by Syrian authorities should the Golan Heights eventually be returned to Syria.
Dennis Ross, Clinton's chief Middle East negotiator, blamed "cold feet" on the part of Barak for the breakdown.
In 1921–1930, during the French Mandate, the Palestine Jewish Colonization Association (PICA) obtained the deeds to the Rothschild estate and continued to manage it, collecting rents from the Arab peasants living there.
In 1944 the JNF bought the Bnei Yehuda lands from their Jewish owners, but a later attempt to establish Jewish ownership of the property in Bir e-Shagum through the courts was not successful.
Indirect talks broke down after the Gaza War began.
Throughout the region 62 ancient synagogues have been found dating back to the Roman and Byzantine periods.
Following Alexander's death, the Golan came under the domination of the Macedonian noble Seleucus and remained part of the Seleucid Empire for most of the next two centuries.
Today it contains more than 40 Syrian towns and villages.
Quneitra was the largest town in the Golan Heights until 1967, with a population of 27,000.
When the mandate terminated in 1946, it became part of the newly independent Syrian Arab Republic.
Rujm el-Hiri is a large circular stone monument similar to Stonehenge.
The Maccabean revolt saw much action in the regions around the Golan and it is possible that the Jewish communities of the Golan were among those rescued by Judas Maccabeus during his campaign in the Galilee and Gilead (Transjordan) mentioned in Chapter 5 of 1 Maccabees.
The Druze living in the Golan Heights are permanent residents of Israel.
Organized Jewish settlement in the region came to an end in 636 CE when it was conquered by Arabs under Umar ibn al-Khattāb.
However, Lebanon continues to claim a small portion of the area occupied by Israel and administered as part of the Golan Heights.
