The Horde developed as a sedentary rather than nomadic culture, with Sarai evolving into a large, prosperous metropolis.
Finally, he sent his brothers to the kurultai, and the new Emperor of the Mongols was elected in 1246.
Talabuga challenged Nogai, who organized a coup and replaced him with Toqta in 1291.
The Germans and the Danes were so cowed that they sent gifts to the Mongols and abandoned the region of Narva.
After Batu died in 1256, his son Sartaq was appointed by Möngke.
On a campaign a few years later, the Lithuanians under Fedor included the Khan's basqaq in their entourage.
The existence of Arabic-Mongol and Persian-Mongol dictionaries dating from the middle of the 14th century and prepared for the use of the Mamluks in Egypt suggests that there was a practical need for such works in the chancelleries handling correspondence with the Golden Horde.
While Michael was asserting his authority, his rival Yury of Moscow ingratiated himself into the favor of Uzbeg so that he appointed him chief of the Rus' princes and gave him his sister, Konchak, in marriage.
Berke sought a joint attack with Baybars and forged an alliance with the Mamluks against Hulagu.
The Polish King, Casimir III the Great, submitted to the Horde and undertook to pay tribute in order to avoid more conflicts.
On hearing about this, Andrey renounced his claims to Vladimir and Novgorod and returned to Gorodets.
The descendants of Batu ruled the Golden Horde from Sarai Batu and later Sarai Berke, controlling an area ranging from the Volga River and the Carpathian mountains to the mouth of the Danube River.
Rumors spread that Shevkal wanted to occupy the throne for himself and introduce Islam to the city.
Aleksander was shown mercy in 1335, however, when Moscow requested that he and his son Feoder be quartered in Sarai by orders of the Khan on October 29, 1339.
Western scholars have tended to follow the Timurid sources' nomenclature and call the left wing the White Horde.
Genghis Khan assigned four Mongol mingghans: the Sanchi'ud (or Salji'ud), Keniges, Uushin, and Je'ured clans to Jochi.
In 1256 Andrey traveled to Sarai to ask pardon for his former infidelity and was shown mercy.
Möngke ordered the Jochid and Chagatayid families to join Hulagu's expedition to Iran.
Although some modern historians believe that he died of natural causes because of deteriorating health, he may have succumbed to the combined effects of alcoholism and gout, or he may have been poisoned.
After 1419, Olug Moxammat became Khan of the Golden Horde.
Hulagu harshly punished the rest of the Golden Horde army in Iran.
When the Great Khatun Töregene invited Batu to elect the next Emperor of the Mongol Empire in 1242, he declined to attend a kurultai, thus delaying the succession for several years.
Toqta made his man ruler in Ghazna, but he was expelled by its people.
The ministers were called ''viziers''.
After that two more Jochid princes died suspiciously.
He besieged Moscow on August 23, but Muscovites beat off his attack, using firearms for the first time in Russian history.
After the defeat of Baraq (Chagatai Khan), a peace treaty was made among Mengu-Timur, Kaidu and him in c.1267.
His army was defeated by the Grand prince Dmitri Donskoy at the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380, Donskoy's second consecutive victory over the Tatars.
In the summer of 1470 (other sources give 1469), the last prominent Khan, Ahmed, organized an attack against Moldavia, the Kingdom of Poland, and Lithuania.
The Lithuanians were probably tributary in the 1260s, when reports reached the Curia that they were in league with the Mongols.
The Crimean Khanate and the Kazakh Khanate, the last remnants of the Golden Horde, survived until 1783 and 1847 respectively.
Pope John XXII requested Uzbeg to restore Roman Catholic churches destroyed in the region.
While he was absent, Jalal al-Din returned from Lithuania and briefly took the throne.
#Khanate of Crimea (1441)
He proscribed Buddhism and Shamanism among the Mongols in Russia, thus reversing the spread of the Yuan culture.
Nogai compelled Stefan Uroš II Milutin of Serbia to accept the Mongol supremacy and received his son, Stefan Dečanski, as hostage in 1287.
This indicates that he might have had an interest in Azerbaijan and Georgia, which were both ruled by the Ilkhans.
At his death in 1227, Genghis Khan divided the Mongol Empire amongst his four sons as appanages, but the Empire remained united under the supreme khan.
The slave trade flourished due to strengthening ties with the Mamluk Sultanate.
Nogai's independent actions related to Rus' princes and foreign merchants had already annoyed the Khan.
Accordingly, the reign of Smilec has been considered the height of Mongol over-lordship in Bulgaria.
The Golden Horde's elites were descended from four Mongol clans, Qiyat, Manghut, Sicivut and Qonqirat.
File:Grand Duke Mikhail Yaroslavich Being Murdered at Golden Horde.jpeg|A Rus' prince being punished by the Golden Horde
Whereas most members of this group identified themselves by their ethnic or tribal names, most also considered themselves to be Muslims.
The Khan also sent Ivan at the head of an army of 50,000 soldiers to punish Tver.
There was an uprising in Novgorod against the Mongol census, but Alexander Nevsky forced the city to submit to the census and taxation.
In the early 14th century, the capital was moved considerably upstream to Sarai Berqe, which became one of the largest cities of the medieval world, with 600,000 inhabitants.
These internal struggles allowed the northern vassal state of Muscovy to rid itself of the "Tatar Yoke" at the Great stand on the Ugra river in 1480.
Some of Mengu-Timur's relatives converted to Christianity at the same time and settled among the Rus' people.
Most of the population, both agricultural and nomadic, adopted the Kypchak language, which developed into the regional languages of Kypchak groups after the Horde disintegrated.
After accepting the surrender of the Jalayirids, Janibeg boasted that three uluses of the Mongol Empire were under his control.
In 1241, however, Ögedei Khan died in the Mongolia homeland.
Eight months later, Dmitry was also executed by the Horde for his crime.
After he ravaged the villages of Tver, Yury was defeated by Mikhail in December 1318, and his new wife and the Mongol general, Kawgady, were captured.
Under Ottoman protection, the Khanate of Crimea continued its precarious existence until Catherine the Great annexed it on April 8, 1783.
It is also known as the '''Kipchak Khanate''' or as the '''Ulus of Jochi'''.
When the legitimate Khan Toqta tried a second time, Nogai was killed in battle in 1299 at the Kagamlik, near the Dnieper.
The Horde was gradually Turkified and lost its Mongol identity, while the descendants of Batu's original Mongol warriors constituted the upper class.
An Egyptian envoy was also detained there.
In 1242, after retreating through Hungary, destroying Pest in the process, and subjugating Bulgaria, Batu established his capital at Sarai, commanding the lower stretch of the Volga River, on the site of the Khazar capital of Atil.
Vasili II of Russia also supported Sayid Ahmad in order to weaken Olugh Moxammat who established the Khanate of Kazan and made Moscow a tributary.
This act put an end to the relationship of vassalage between the Galicia–Volhynia Rus' and the Golden Horde.
The Livonian Knights stopped their advance to Novgorod and Pskov.
Berke, the Khan of Kipchak had drawn up an alliance with the Mamluk Sultan Baibars against the Ilkhanate in 1261.
According to some Muslim sources, Hulagu refused to share his war booty with Berke in accordance with Genghis Khan's wish.
However, his authority was limited to the lower banks of the Volga where Tokhtamysh's other son Kepek reigned.
Uzbeg, whose total army exceeded 300,000, repeatedly raided Thrace, partly in service of Bulgaria's war against Byzantium and Serbia beginning in 1319.
After seeking refuge in Lithuania, Sheikh Ahmed, last Khan of the Horde, died in prison in Kaunas some time after 1504.
In 1326 Uzbeg reopened friendly relations with the Empire of the Great Khan and began to send tributes thereafter.
He took control of Samarkand and Bukhara.
The territories of Christian subjects were regarded as peripheral areas of little interest as long as they continued to pay taxes.
In 1395-1396, Timur annihilated Tokhtamysh's army, destroyed his capital, looted the Crimean trade centers, and deported the most skillful craftsmen to his own capital in Samarkand.
When, on 15 August 1327, the Mongols tried to take a horse from a deacon named Dyudko, he cried for help and a mob of furious people fell on the Tatars and killed them all.
Toqta had his son stationed in Saqchi and along the Danube as far as the Iron Gate.
These vassal states were never fully incorporated into the Horde, and Russian rulers early obtained the privilege of collecting the Tatar tax themselves.
Nogai vowed to support Dmitry in his struggle for the grand ducal throne.
While Hulagu supported Kublai, Berke threw his allegiance to Ariq Böke.
At first Uzbeg did not want to empower Moscow.
The Khan arrested the Italian residents of Sarai and besieged Caffa in 1307.
After spending three years at Uzbeg's court, Yury returned with an army of Mongols and Mordvins.
The Ilkhanids then crossed the Terek River, capturing an empty Jochid encampment, only to be routed in a surprise attack by Nogai's forces.
Temür Qutlugh's chief emir Edigu was the real rulers of the Golden Horde.
This allowed Tokhtamysh's troops to burst in and destroy Moscow, killing 24,000 people.
The Khan thus refused and declared war on Nogai.
The increasing tension between Berke and Hulagu was a warning to the Golden Horde contingents in Hulagu's army that they had better escape.
The Golden Horde majorly was divided into Blue Horde (Kok Horde) and White Horde (Ak Horde).
Smilec became emperor of Bulgaria according to the wishes of Nogai Khan, who helped his allies the Byzantines.
The latter sacked fourteen major cities, finally forcing Dmitry to abdicate.
#Khanate of Astrakhan (1466)
He was allowed to take his share in Persia.
Güyük's widow Oghul Qaimish took over as regent, but she would be unable to keep the succession within her branch of the family.
Then he sought assistance from Egypt against the Ilkhanate.
Russians preserved this common name for this group down to the 20th century.
Under his rule, the Vlachs, Slavs, Alans, and Turco-Mongols lived in modern-day Moldavia.
Mengu Timur honored his vow: when the Danes and the Livonian Knights attacked the north-western lands of the Rus in 1269, the Khan's great basqaq (darughachi), Amraghan, and many Mongols assisted the Russian army assembled by the Grand duke Yaroslav.
Blue Horde consisted of Pontic-Caspian steppe, Khazaria, Volga Bulgaria, while White Horde encompassed the lands of the princes of the left hand: Taibugin Yurt, Ulus Shiban, Ulus Tok-timur, Ulus Ezhen Horde.
Despite Russian efforts at proselytizing in Sarai, the Mongols clung to their traditional animist or shamanist beliefs until Uzbeg Khan (1312–41) adopted Islam as a state religion.
In compliance with the order, Batu approached, bringing a large army.
His assault on Prussia in 1259/60 inflicted heavy losses on the Teutonic Order.
Thus Uzbeg Khan began backing Moscow as the leading Russian state.
For another century, Russia was forced back under the Tatar yoke.
#Nogai Horde (1440s)
In 1285 Andrey again led a Mongol army under the Borjigin prince to Russia, but Dmitry expelled them.
One-third of Transoxiana was granted to Kaidu and Mengu-Timur according to this peace treaty.
He ordered the Grand prince of Rus to allow German merchants free travel through his lands.
Batu's grandson Mengu-Timur was nominated by Kublai and succeeded his uncle Berke.
His son Jalal al-Din fled to Lithuania.
They were commonly named ''the Tatars'' by the Russians and Europeans.
Relations between the Italians and the Golden Horde remained tense until Toqta's death.
During the reign of Batu or his first two successors, the Golden Horde dispatched a large Jochid delegation to participate in Hulagu's expedition in the Middle East in 1256/57.
Some sources report that Uzbeg also married Andronikos III's illegitimate daughter, who had taken the name ''Bayalun'', and who later, after relations between the Horde and the Byzantines deteriorated, fled back to the Byzantine Empire, apparently fearing her forced conversion to Islam.
Janibeg sponsored joint Mongol-Rus' military expeditions against Lithuania and Poland.
One of the Jochid princes who joined Hulagu's army was accused of witchcraft and sorcery against Hulagu.
Urus Khan of the White Horde took Sarai and reunited most of the Horde from Khorazm to Desht-i-Kipchak in 1375.
The cause was apparently Toqta's displeasure at the Genoese slave trade of his subjects, who were mostly sold as soldiers to Egypt.
However, the designations Golden Horde, Blue Horde, and White Horde have not been encountered in the sources of the Mongol period.
Following the subsequent assassination of Janibeg, the Golden Horde quickly lost Azerbaijan to the Jalayir king Shaikh Uvais in 1357.
After Uzbeg (Öz-Beg) assumed the throne in 1313, he adopted Islam as the state religion.
Thanks to his friendship with Sartaq, Alexander was installed as the Grand Prince of Vladimir (i.e., the supreme Russian ruler) by Batu in 1252.
Batu, Möngke, and other princely lines shared rule over the area from Afghanistan to Turkey.
A decree, issued probably by Mengu-Timur, allowing the Franciscans to proselytize, was renewed by Uzbeg in 1314.
There existed four mingghans (4,000) of the Jalayir in the left wing of the Ulus of Jochi (Golden Horde).
Kaidu tried to restore his influence in the Golden Horde by sponsoring his own candidate Kobeleg against Bayan (r. 1299–1304), Khan of the White Horde.
In any event, it was not until the 16th century that Russian chroniclers begin explicitly using the term "Golden Horde" (Russian: Золотая Орда) to refer to this particular successor khanate of the Mongol Empire.
Mengu-Timur might have struggled with Hulagu's successor Abagha for a brief period of time, but the Great Khan Kublai forced them to sign a peace treaty.
The Mongols favored decimal organization, which was inherited from Genghis Khan.
Güyük appointed Andrey Grand prince of Vladimir-Suzdal and Alexander prince of Kiev.
When the Ilkhanate collapsed after Abu Sa'id's death, its senior-beys approached Uzbeg in their desperation to find a leader, but the latter declined after consulting with his senior emir, Qutluq Timür.
A report reached Western Europe that Toqta was highly favourable to the Christians.
The Golden Horde invaded the Ilkhanate under Abu Sa'id in 1318, 1324, and 1335.
By the beginning of the 14th century, noyans from the Sanchi'ud, Hongirat, Ongud (Arghun), Keniges, Jajirad, Besud, Oirat, and Je'ured clans held importants positions at the court or elsewehere.
Tokhtamysh also crushed the Lithuanian army at Poltava in the next year.
William of Rubruck and a Muslim chronicler state that Batu killed the imperial envoy, and one of his brothers murdered the Great Khan Güyük, but these claims are not completely corroborated by other major sources.
However, the Mongol court exterminated some anti-Mongol princes, such as Michael of Chernigov, who had killed a Mongol envoy in 1240.
The Mongol Khan's authority extended to all Russian principalities, and in 1274–75 the census took place in all Rus' cities, including Smolensk and Vitebsk.
In 1248, he demanded Batu come eastward to meet him, a move that some contemporaries regarded as a pretext for Batu's arrest.
Seeing Tatar commoners selling their children into slavery as damaging to both the manpower and the prestige of the Golden Horde's army, Edigu and his puppet Khan prohibited the slave trade at a kurultai.
The military campaign against the Kypchaks and Cumans had started under Jochi and Subedei in 1216–18 when the Merkits took shelter among them.
At the start of the 15th century the Horde began to fall apart.
Shevkal and his remaining guards were burnt alive.
But Ötemish Hajji (fl.1550), a historian of Khwarezm, called the left wing the Blue Horde, and since he was familiar with the oral traditions of the khanate empire, it seems likely that the Russian chroniclers were correct, and that the khanate itself called its left wing the Blue Horde.
While the Mongolian language was undoubtedly in general use at the court of Batu, few Mongol texts written in the territory of the Golden Horde have survived, perhaps because of the prevalent general illiteracy.
In 1293 Toqta sent a punitive expedition led by his brother, Tudaun (Dyeden in Russian chronicles), to Russia and Belarus to punish those stubborn subjects.
Its left wing (or "left hand" in official Mongolian-sponsored Persian sources) was referred to as the '''Blue Horde''' in Russian chronicles and as the '''White Horde''' in Timurid sources (e.g.
They took up residence at Aleksander's palace.
He then defeated Mamai and annexed the territory of the Blue Horde, briefly reestablishing the Golden Horde as a dominant regional power in 1381.
The Yuan influence seemed to have increased in the Golden Horde as some of Toqta's coins carried 'Phags-pa script in addition to Mongolian script and Persian characters.
His armies pillaged Thrace for forty days in 1324 and for fifteen days in 1337, taking 300,000 captives.
Backed by Uzbeg, Basarab I of Wallachia declared an independent state from the Hungarian crown in 1330.
In 1252–59, Möngke conducted a census of the Mongol Empire, including Iran, Afghanistan, Georgia, Armenia, Russia, Central Asia, and North China.
While the census in China was completed in 1252, Novgorod in the far northwest was not counted until winter 1258–59.
The Khan was married to Mary, illegitimate daughter of the Byzantine Emperor, securing the Byzantine-Mongol alliance after the defeat of Nogai.
White Horde descendants of Orda and Tuqa-Timur carried on generally free from trouble until the late 1370s.
Civil and military administration, as a rule, were not separate.
Toqta might have considered eliminating the special status of the Grand principality of Vladimir, placing all the Rus' princes on the same level.
Tokhtamysh escaped to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and asked Vytautas for assistance in regaining his power over the Horde.
The Genoese resisted for a year, but in 1308 they set fire to their city and abandoned it.
While she stayed in Tver, Konchak, who converted to Christianity and adopted the name Agatha, died.
Sarai attracted merchants from other countries.
Batu sent a punitive expedition under Nevruy.
Berke's persuasion might have forced his brother Batu to postpone Hulagu's operation, little suspecting that it would result in eliminating the Jochid predominance there for several years.
Uzbeg Khan continued the alliance with the Mamluks begun by Berke and his predecessors.
However, soon after the 1396 invasion of Timur, the founder of the Timurid Empire, the Golden Horde broke into smaller Tatar khanates which declined steadily in power.
Nogai's son Chaka, who had briefly made himself Emperor of Bulgaria, was murdered by Theodore Svetoslav on the orders of Toqta.
Nogai was angry with Kelmish's family because her Buddhist son despised his Muslim daughter.
During the late reign of Toqta, tensions between princes of Tver and Moscow became violent.
The remnants of the Crimean Cumans survived in the Crimean mountains, and they would, in time, mix with other groups in the Crimea (including Greeks, Goths, and Mongols) to form the Crimean Tatar population.
Growth of wealth and increasing demand for products typically produce population growth, and so it was with Sarai.
Sarai carried on a brisk trade with the Genoese trade emporiums on the coast of the Black Sea – Soldaia, Caffa, and Azak.
In 1267, Mengu-Timur issued a diploma – jarliq – to exempt Rus' clergy from any taxation and gave to the Genoese and Venice exclusive rights to hold Caffa and Azov.
After Mengu-Timur died, rulers of the Golden Horde withdrew their support from Kaidu, the head of the House of Ögedei.
Following the assassination of Berdibek by his brother in 1359, the Khanate sank into prolonged internecine war, in which sometimes as many as four Khans vied for recognition by the emirs and for possession of major cities like Sarai, Qirim, and Azaq.
The trade routes never recovered from Timur's destruction, and Tokhtamysh died in obscurity in 1405.
Several rulers of Kievan Rus' – Mikhail of Chernigov and Mikhail of Tver among them – were reportedly assassinated in Sarai, but the Khans were generally tolerant and even released the Russian Orthodox Church from paying taxes.
Despite initial successes, in 1259 a Mongol force under Boroldai entered Galicia and Volhynia and offered an ultimatum: Danylo was to destroy his fortifications or Boroldai would assault the towns.
From 1300 to 1303 a severe drought occurred in the areas surrounding the Black Sea.
When Güyük moved westwards, Tolui's widow and a sister of Batu's stepmother Sorghaghtani warned Batu that the Jochids might be his target.
Sayid supported Švitrigaila during the Lithuanian Civil War (1431–1435).
Censuses recorded Chinese living quarters in the Tatar parts of Novgorod, Tver and Moscow.
The Crimean Tatars wreaked havoc in southern Russia, Ukraine and even Poland in the course of the 16th and early 17th centuries, but they were not able to defeat Russia or take Moscow.
On their approach, Andrey fled to Pskov, and thence to Sweden.
The prime minister, also ethnically Mongol, was known as "prince of princes", or ''beklare-bek''.
Their supreme ruler was the Khan, chosen by the ''kurultai'' among Batu Khan's descendants.
In 1262 a rebellion erupted in Suzdal, killing Mongol darughachis and tax-collectors.
In 1474 and 1476, Ahmed insisted that Ivan III should recognize Russia's vassal dependence on the Horde.
Housing in the region increased, which transformed the capital into the center of a large Muslim Sultanate.
Berke gave Kaykaus Crimea as an appanage and had him marry a Mongol woman.
Mikhail was summoned to Sarai and executed on November 22, 1318.
File:Ордумелик Азак 762 г.х..jpg|Coin of Berdi Beg of the Golden Horde 762 Hijri (1359 AD).
The Genoese merchants in the other towns were not molested.
One section reached the Kipchak Steppe, another traversed Khorasan and a third body took refuge in Mamluk ruled Syria where they were well received by Sultan Baybars (1260–77).
Alghu insisted Hulagu attack the Golden Horde; he accused Berke of purging his family in 1252.
The Jochids believed that Hulagu's state eliminated their presence in the Transcaucasus.
In 1327, the Baskaki Shevkal, cousin of Uzbeg, arrived in Tver from the Horde, with a large retinue.
Despite some rebellions of Genghisid princes, he kept the Horde united until 1410 when he was expelled to Central Asia.
Toqta dispatched a peace mission to the Ilkhan Gaykhatu in 1294, and peace was maintained mostly uninterrupted until 1318.
Berke planned a severe punitive expedition.
During the punitive expedition against the Circassians, the Khan's suspicion of Nogai increased.
From there he conquered some of the southern steppes of present-day Ukraine in 1237, forcing many of the local Cumans to retreat westward.
In 1284 Saqchi came under the Mongol rule during the major invasion of Bulgaria, and coins were struck in the Khan's name.
