It is the subspecies with the largest breeding range and is probably the most numerous subspecies, especially if ''A.
This genus has recently been eliminated by many authorities and are now occasionally also included in ''Aquila'', although not all ornithological unions have followed this suit in this re-classification.
Rarely, the two eagles will lock talons and tumble through the air; sometimes fall several revolutions and in some cases even tumble to the ground before releasing their grip.
The sexes are similar in plumage but are considerably dimorphic in size.
The tail also follows a similar pattern of maturation.
Other than these characteristics, there is little variation across the range of the species.
No weights are known in this race.
Most competitive attacks resulting in death probably occur at the talons of other golden eagles.
In western and northern Alaska and northern Canada to the Ungava Peninsula in Quebec, the eagles occupy the Arctic fringe of North America (the species does not range into the true high Arctic tundra), where open canopy gives way to dwarf-shrub heathland with cottongrass and tussock tundra.
In Northeastern Africa, the habitat is often of a sparse, desert-like character and is quite similar to the habitat in Middle East and the Arabian peninsula.
Golden eagles are sometimes considered the most superlative fliers among eagles and perhaps among all raptorial birds.
Typical vegetation is stunted, fragmented larch woodland merging into low birch-willow scrub and various heathland.
No comprehensive range of weights are known for the largest subspecies (''A.
Although usually highly solitary outside of the bond between breeding pairs, exceptionally cold weather in winter may cause eagles to put their usual guard down and perch together.
Occasionally, juvenile eagles have white patches on the remiges at the bases of the inner primaries and the outer secondaries, forming a crescent marking on the wings which tend to be divided by darker feathers.
Although most flight in golden eagles has a purpose (e.g., territoriality, hunting, etc.
Elsewhere it is stated that home ranges are less strictly maintained during winter but hunting grounds are basically exclusive.
africanus'') is also probably closely related to the ''Hieraaetus'' group rather than the ''Spizaetus/Nisaetus'' “hawk-eagle” group (in which it was previously classified) which is not known to have radiated to Africa.
Adults are primarily dark brown in color, with a paler, typically golden color (the source of the species’ common name) on the back of the crown and nape, and some grey on the inner-wing and tail.
The first attempted flight departure after fledging can be abrupt, with the young jumping off and using a series of short, stiff wing-beats to glide downward or being blown out of nest while wing-flapping.
In desolate areas (e.g., the southern Yukon), they can occur regularly at roadkills and garbage dumps.
* ''Aquila chrysaetos daphanea'' Severtzov, 1888 – known variously as the '''Asian golden eagle''', '''Himalayan golden eagle''' or '''berkut'''.
When diving (or stooping) in the direction of prey or during territorial displays, the eagle holds its wings tight and partially closed against its body and the legs up against its tail.
Of 266 golden eagle deaths in Spain, only 6% were from unknown causes that could not directly attributed to human activities.
The bill is dark at the tip, fading to a lighter horn color, with a yellow cere.
Compared to adults, juveniles have a more unfaded color.
c. kamtschatica'' is included.
Although the wingspan of this race reportedly averages , some individuals apparently are much longer-winged.
spilogaster''), previously included in the ''Hieraaetus'' genus, have been revealed to be genetically much closer to the Verreaux's and golden eagle lineage than to other species traditionally included in the ''Aquila'' genus.
In the foothills of the Rocky Mountains in the United States are plains and prairies where golden eagles are widespread, especially where there's a low human presence.
This subspecies is often included in ''A.
When this extrapolated into an estimated lifespan this results in 39 and half years as the average for adult golden eagles in this area, which is probably far too high an estimate.
Golden eagles also occupy the desert-like Great Basin from southern Idaho to northern Arizona and New Mexico.
In San Diego County in California, the home ranges varied from , with an average of .
c. kamtschatica'').
Of 36 deaths of golden eagles in Idaho, 55% were possibly attributable to natural causes, specifically 8 (26%) from unknown trauma, 3 (10%) from disease and 6 (19%) from unknown causes.
The large Himalayan golden eagles females are about 37% heavier and nearly 9% longer in wing length than the males of the race compared with the small Japanese golden eagles where females are a relatively modest 26% heavier and around 6% longer in wing length than males.
The golden eagle occurs in mountains from the Adrar Plateau in Mauritania to northern Yemen and Oman where the desert habitat is largely bereft of vegetation but offers many rocky plateaus to support both the eagles and their prey.
In the smallest subspecies, ''A.
In Western Norway, most recorded undulating flight displays occur during the pre-laying period in late winter/early spring.
The nape patch is often gleaming golden in color and the feathers here are exceptionally long.
Rarely, juvenile birds may have only trace amounts of white on the tail.
Due to the amount of variability in different individuals, juvenile eagles cannot be reliably aged on sight alone.
Juveniles of less than 12 months of age tend to have the most extensive amount of white to the plumage.
These areas include upland grasslands, blanket bog and sub-Arctic heaths but also fragmented woodland and woodland edge, including boreal forests.
From the Alaska Range to Washington and Oregon, it is often found in high mountains above the tree line or on bluffs and cliffs along river valleys below the tree line.
The golden eagles who breed in eastern Canada winter on montane grass and heath fields in the Appalachian Plateau region, especially in Pennsylvania, New York, West Virginia, Maryland and Virginia.
''Haliaeetus'' eagles are often heavily streaked in their juvenile phase.
It also the darkest with even adults being a slaty-grayish black on the back and crown and juveniles being similar but with darker black plumage contrasting with brownish color and white scaling on the wings, flank and tail.
At Mount Lorette in Alberta, approximately 4,000 golden eagles may pass during the fall, the largest recorded migration of golden eagles on earth.
c. japonica'', males weigh  and females .
The feathers of the nape and top-neck are rich brown-red.
The culmen reportedly averages around , with a range of  and the bill length from the gape measures around .
On the Isle of Rùm in Scotland, there are few cases of red deer trampling golden eagles to death, probably the result of a hind having intercepted a bird that was trying to kill a fawn.
Captive birds have been measured up to a wingspan of  and a mass of  (the latter figure was for an eagle bred for the purposes of falconry which tend to be unnaturally heavy), respectively.
The invader often responds by rolling over and presenting talons to the aggressor.
No range of body weights are known but males will weigh approximately  and females .
This is by far the smallest bodied subspecies.
They are equipped with broad, long wings with somewhat finger-like indentations on the tips of the wing.
It is blackish to dark brown on the back.
However, golden eagles are typically absent in North America from true deserts, like the Sonora Desert, where annual precipitation is less than .
Other booted eagles in the golden eagle’s range are unlikely to be confused, due to the differences in size and form.
The genus ''Aquila'' is distributed across every continent but for South America and Antarctica.
Golden eagles may express their aggression via body language while perched, typically the adult female when confronted by an intruding eagle: the head and body are upright, feathers on head and neck are erect; the wings may be slightly spread and beak open; often accompanied by intense gaze.
Young birds are white for about two-thirds of their tail length ending with a broad, black terminal band.
Golden eagles maintain some of the largest known home ranges (or territories) of any bird species but there is much variation of home range size across the range, possibly dictated by food abundance and habitat preference.
In southwestern Canada, they leave their wintering grounds by April 6 to May 8 (the mean being April 21); in southwestern Idaho, wintering birds leave from March 20 to April 13 (mean of March 29); and in the Southwestern United States, wintering birds may depart by early March.
fasciatus'') and African hawk-eagle (''A.
In the Arctic fringe of the great continent, golden eagles occur along the edge of the tundra and the taiga from the Kola peninsula to Anadyr in eastern Siberia, nesting in forests and hunting over nearby arctic heathland.
In this habitat, trees are generally absent other than junipers with vegetation being dominated by sagebrush (''Artemisia'') and other low shrub species.
In the largest race (''A.
When approached by an intruder, the defending eagle turns away, partially spreads tail, lowers head, and remains still; adults on the nest may lower head and “freeze” when approached by a person or a helicopter.
nipalensis'') can also be nearly golden eagle-sized but are more compact and smaller headed than a golden eagle with little color variation to their dark earth-brown plumage but for juvenile birds which have distinctive cream-colored bands running through their coverts and secondaries.
Females in Israel displayed more than males and mostly against interspecific intruders; males apparently displayed primarily as part of courtship.
The golden eagle is part of a broad group of raptors called “booted eagles” which are defined by the feature that all species have feathering over their tarsus, unlike many other accipitrids which have bare legs.
Juvenile golden eagles can show large patches of white to the wings and tail that are quite different than the random, sometimes large and splotchy-looking distribution of white typical of juvenile ''Haliaeetus''.
The small-bodied Wahlberg's eagle (''H.
One golden eagle was recorded circling at  above sea-level in Khumbu in May 1975.
Golden eagles are fairly long-living birds in natural conditions.
This closely related species is known to co-occur with the golden eagle only in the Bale Mountains of Ethiopia.
Among Eurasian ''Aquila'', the adult eastern imperial (''A.
It was only after the Industrial Revolution, when sport-hunting became widespread and commercial stock farming became internationally common, that humans started to widely regard golden eagles as a threat to their livelihoods.
Golden eagles are unique among their genus in that they often fly in a slight dihedral, which means the wings are often held in a slight, upturned V. When they must engage in flapping flight, golden eagles appear at their most labored but this flight method is generally less common than soaring or gliding flights.
In the Eastern United States, the species once bred widely in the Appalachian Plateau near burns, open marshes, meadows, bogs and lakes.
The departure dates from wintering grounds are variable.
11 of 16 dead juvenile eagles which had hatched in Denali National Park had died of starvation.
In the first 10 days, chicks mainly lie down on the nest substrate.
There is at least one case in Scotland of a golden eagle dying after being “oiled” by a northern fulmar, a bird whose primary defense against predators is to disgorge an oily secretion which may inhibit the predator's ability to fly.
rapax'') is often paler than the golden eagle (overlap in range verified only in Bale Mountains, Ethiopia).
The turkey vulture (''Cathartes aura'') is a potential confusion species in North America from a great distance, as it is a large species that (like the golden eagle) often flies with a pronounced dihedral but is easily separated by its less controlled, forceful flying style and its smaller, thinner body, much smaller head and, at closer range, its slaty black-brown color and silvery wing secondaries.
18 to 20 days after first fledging, the young eagles will take their first circling flight, but they cannot gain height as efficiently as their parents until approximately 60 days after fledging.
In Scotland, among all recovered, banded golden eagles (36 out of 1000, the rest mostly died or disappeared) the average distance between ringing and recovery was , averaging  in juveniles and  in older birds.
In addition, some full-grown birds (especially in North America) have white "epaulettes" on the upper part of each scapular feather tract.
The smallest known home ranges on record for golden eagles are in the Bale Mountains of Ethiopia, where they range from .
Large races are the heaviest representatives of the ''Aquila'' genus and this species is on average the seventh-heaviest living eagle species.
Home ranges in most of the range can vary from .
The species is found breeding occasionally in all Canadian provinces but for Nova Scotia.
The protozoan ''Trichomonas'' sp.
The average wingspan in both sexes is about .
By the third summer, the upper-wing coverts are largely replaced by dark brown feathers, however not all feathers moult at once giving many juvenile birds a grizzled pattern.
''Buteos'' are also usually distinctly paler below, although some species occur in “dark morphs” which can be even darker than a golden eagle.
When hunting or displaying, the golden eagle is capable of very fast gliding, attaining speeds of up to .
The forehead and crown are dark with a blackish cap near the end of the crown.
The voice of the golden eagle is considered weak, high and shrill, even being emphatically described as “quite pathetic” and “puppy-like”, and as somewhat incongruous considering the formidable size and nature of the species.
However, a mid-sized ''Buteo'' is dwarfed by a golden eagle, as an adult female eagle has a wingspan of about twice the width and weighs around five times more.
Other ''Aquila'' eagles do not generally fly in a pronounced dihedral as do golden eagles.
Here, the species nests near the tree line and hunt subalpine and alpine pastures, grassland and heath above.
75 to 85 days after fledging, the young were largely independent of parents.
Survival rates are usually much lower in juvenile eagles than in adult eagles.
The type locality was given simply as "Europa"; it was later fixed to Sweden.
Such behavior may be accompanied by wing slap against the threatening intruder.
In the species overall, males may average around  and females around .
In central Europe, golden eagles today occur almost exclusively in the grand mountain ranges, such as Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians and the Caucasus.
The survival rate of raptorial birds tends to increase with larger body size, with a 30–50% annual loss of population rate in small falcons/accipiters, a 15–25% loss of population rate in medium-sized hawks (e.g., ''Buteo''s or kites) and a 5% or less rate of loss in eagles and vultures.
Size readily distinguishes this species from most other raptors when it is seen well.
In Western Europe, golden eagle habitat is dominated by open, rough grassland, heath and bogs, in places enlivened by rocky ridges, spurs, crags, scree, slopes and grand plateaux.
The eagles are capable of preening on their second day but are continually thermoregulated via brooding by their parents until around 20 days.
Eagles raised at latitudes greater than 60° N are usually migratory, though a short migration may be untaken by those who breed or hatch at about 50° N. During migration, they often use soaring-gliding flight, rather than powered flight.
They build large nests in high places (mainly cliffs) to which they may return for several breeding years.
Below are more detailed description of habitats occupied by golden eagles in both continents where they occur.
Male wing length is from , averaging , and female wing length is from , averaging .
This species was first described by Linnaeus in his 1758 ''Systema naturae'' as ''Falco chrysaetos''.
Near a wind turbine facility in west-central California, estimated survival rates, based on conventional telemetry of 257 individuals, were 84% for first-year eagles, 79% for 1- to 3-year-olds and adult floaters and 91% for breeders; with no difference in survival rates between sexes.
Generally, breeding success seems to be greatest where prey is available in abundance.
Females lay up to four eggs, and then incubate them for six weeks.
Immature eagles of this species typically have white on the tail and often have white markings on the wings.
Adult Japanese golden eagles often maintain extensive white mottling on the inner-webs of the tail that tend to be more typical of juvenile eagles in other races.
This places the golden eagle as the one of the two fastest moving living animals on earth.
Males weigh from , averaging , and females typically weigh from , averaging .
Most displays by mature golden eagles (67% for males and 76% for females) occur, rather than around the nest, at the edge of their home ranges.
In these mountain ranges, the species often lives at very high elevations, living above tree line at more than , often nesting in rocky scree and hunting in adjacent meadows.
The use of display flights has a clear benefit in that it lessens the need for physical confrontations, which can be fatal.
In the more wooded environments of Norway during autumn and winter, much less aerial activity is reported, since the eagles tend to avoid detection by actively contour-hunting rather than looking for carrion.
In Washington state, golden eagles can be found in clear-cut sections of otherwise dense coniferous forest zones with relatively little annual precipitation.
This race has bright rufous nape feathers that are quite loose and long.
As early as recorded history, mankind was fascinated by the eagle.
Natural sources of mortality are largely reported in anecdotes.
Mating seems to occur around 40–46 days before the initial egg-laying.
The ''Hieraaetus'' genus, including the booted eagle (''H.
The largest numbers of golden eagles are found in mountainous regions today, with many eagles doing a majority of their hunting and nesting on rock formations.
The golden eagle is one of the most extensively studied species of raptor in the world in some parts of its range, such as the Western United States and the Western Palearctic.
In Tibet, golden eagles inhabit high ridges and passes in the Lhasa River watershed, where it regularly joins groups of soaring Himalayan vultures (''Gyps himalayensis'').
The territorial flight of the adult golden eagle is sometimes preceded or followed by intense bouts of undulating displays.
Display flights seem to be triggered by the presence of other golden eagles.
This race is found in northern Japan (the islands of Honshu, Hokkaido and discontinuously in Kyushu) and undefined parts of Korea.
In the mountains of Japan and Korea, the golden eagle occupies deciduous scrub woodland and carpet-like stands of Siberian dwarf pine (''Pinus pumila'') that merge into grasslands and alpine heathland.
Usually, non-breeding birds are treated aggressively by the golden eagle maintaining their home range, normally being chased to the apparent limit of the range but with no actual physical contact.
c. chrysaetos'' is probable), across most of Russia, including the Altay (spilling over into Northern Mongolia), to the Kamchatka Peninsula and the Anadyrsky District.
When conditions are heavily anticyclonic, there is less soaring during the day.
Some recent studies have gone so far as to propose that only two subspecies be recognized based on genetic markers: ''Aquila chrysaetos chrysaetos'' (including ''A.
Genetically, the “spotted eagles” (''A.
Elsewhere in the species' breeding range, golden eagles (i.e., those who breed in the contiguous Western United States, all of Europe but for Northern Scandinavia, North Africa and all of Asia but for Northern Russia) are non-migratory and tend to remain within striking distance of their breeding territories throughout the year.
A completely isolated population of golden eagles is found in Ethiopia’s Bale Mountains, at the southern limit of this species range worldwide.
Golden eagles maintain home ranges or territories that may be as large as .
Occupies the species’ entire range in North America, which comprises the great majority of Alaska, western Canada and the Western United States.
verreauxii'') are most similar in size and body shape to the golden, with the Verreaux's being slightly longer overall but marginally less heavy and long-winged than the golden eagle.
Male wing length is from , averaging , and female wing length is from , averaging .
The main difference is that this race is much larger in size, being is nearly the equal of ''A.
Around this age, they also start sitting up more.
It is currently absent in the Eastern United States as breeding species east of a line from North Dakota down through westernmost Nebraska and Oklahoma to West Texas.
Confusion is most likely between juvenile ''Haliaeetus'' and golden eagles since the adult golden has a more solidly golden-brown coloration and all ''Haliaeetus'' eagles have obvious distinctive plumages as adults.
Some vocalization, however, has been recorded, and these normally are centering on the nesting period.
This is the nominate subspecies.
Golden eagles occupy the alpine ranges from the Altai Mountains and the Pamir Mountains to Tibet, in the great Himalayan massif, and northwestern China, where they occupy the Tien Shan range.
caused the deaths of 4 fledglings in a study of wild golden eagles in Idaho.
In Eastern North America, the species still breeds on the Gaspe Peninsula, Quebec.
During winter in Scotland, golden eagles soar frequently in order to scan the environment for carrion.
The ecozones occupied by golden eagles are roughly concurrent with those of Eurasia.
The larger Middle Pleistocene golden eagles of France (and possibly elsewhere) are referred to a paleosubspecies ''Aquila chrysaetos bonifacti'', and the huge specimens of the Late Pleistocene of Liko Cave (Crete) have been named ''Aquila chrysaetos simurgh'' (Weesie, 1988).
It is medium-sized, being generally intermediate in size between the nominate and ''A.
The male of this race has a wingspan of , with an average of , with the female’s typical wingspan range is , with an average of .
Native vegetation seems to be attractive to them and they typically avoid developed areas of any type from urban to agricultural as well as heavily forested regions.
As in many acciptrids, the bare portion of the feet is yellow.
Jeff Watson believed that common raven occasionally eats golden eagle eggs but only in situations where the parent eagles have abandoned their nesting attempt.
There are six extant subspecies of golden eagle that differ slightly in size and plumage.
The race does not appear to follow Bergmann’s rule (the rule that widely distributed organisms are larger-bodied further away from the Equator), as specimens of both sexes from Idaho had a mean weight of  and where slightly heavier than those from Alaska, with a mean weight of .
In Cumbria, young golden eagles were first seen hunting large prey 59 days after fledging.
Genetic research has recently indicated the golden eagle is included in a clade with Verreaux's eagle in Africa as well as the Gurney's eagle (''A.
Further east, conditions are too harsh for even wintering territorial adults.
The female takes a clump of earth and drops and catches it in the same fashion.
While many accipitrids are not known for their strong voices, golden eagles have a particular tendency for silence, even while breeding.
This period also brought about the firearm and industrialized poisons, which made it easy for humans to kill the evasive and powerful birds.
In Finland, most banded juveniles move between  due south, whereas adults stay locally through winter.
The long feathers of nape and top-neck are rusty-reddish and slightly narrower and darker than in the nominate race.
Compared to ''Haliaeetus'' eagles, the golden eagle has wings that are only somewhat more slender but are more hawk-like and lack the flat, plank-like wing positioning seen in the other genus.
These wetlands are attractive due to a dominance of open vegetation, large concentrations of prey, and the general absence of human disturbance.
It is the most widely distributed species of eagle.
Golden eagles are fairly adaptable in habitat but often reside in areas with a few shared ecological characteristics.
It has been suspected that golden eagle nests may be predated more frequently by other predators (especially birds, which are often the only other large animals that can access a golden eagle nest without the assistance of man-made climbing equipment) in areas where golden eagles are regularly disturbed at the nest by humans.
46% of undulating displays in Montana occurred shortly after the juvenile eagles left their parents range, suggesting that some residents defend and maintain territories year-round.
In the wintering population of Eastern United States, however, they are often associated with steep river valleys, reservoirs, and marshes in inland areas as well as estuarine marshlands, barrier islands, managed wetlands, sounds, and mouths of major river systems in coastal areas.
c. japonica'', ''A.
This species' wingspan is the fifth largest amongst extant eagle species.
c. canadensis'' (including the races ''A.
The '''golden eagle''' (''Aquila chrysaetos'') is one of the best-known birds of prey in the Northern Hemisphere.
Until 1999, a pair of golden eagles were still known to nest in Maine but they are now believed to be absent as a breeding bird from the Eastern United States.
c. homeyeri'') and ''A.
Once widespread across the Holarctic, it has disappeared from many areas which are now more heavily populated by humans.
The world’s most populous eagle may be the African fish eagle (''Haliaeetus vocifer''), which has a stable total population estimated at 300,000 individuals and is found solely in Africa.
The nape feathers are slightly shorter than in the nominate race and are similar in length to ''A.
