The legend of the golden fleece may refer to the use of fleeces to trap gold dust from placer deposits in the ancient world.
The European exploration of the Americas was fueled in no small part by reports of the gold ornaments displayed in great profusion by Native American peoples, especially in Mesoamerica, Peru, Ecuador and Colombia.
In medieval times, gold was often seen as beneficial for the health, in the belief that something so rare and beautiful could not be anything but healthy.
South Africa, which had dominated world gold production for most of the 20th Century, had declined to sixth place.
Other methods of assaying and purifying smaller amounts of gold include parting and inquartation as well as cupellation, or refining methods based on the dissolution of gold in aqua regia.
By 1961, it was becoming hard to maintain this price, and a pool of US and European banks agreed to manipulate the market to prevent further currency devaluation against increased gold demand.
These figures are three orders of magnitude less than reported in the literature prior to 1988, indicating contamination problems with the earlier data.
Further gold rushes occurred in California, Colorado, the Black Hills, Otago in New Zealand, Australia, Witwatersrand in South Africa, and the Klondike in Canada.
Gold's atomic number of 79 makes it one of the higher atomic number elements that occur naturally in the universe.
Although they never succeeded in this attempt, the alchemists did promote an interest in systematically finding out what can be done with substances, and this laid the foundation for today's chemistry.
These gold nucleogenesis theories hold that the resulting explosions scattered metal-containing dusts (including heavy elements such as gold) into the region of space in which they later condensed into our solar system and the Earth.
Like other precious metals, gold is measured by troy weight and by grams.
In the Book of Exodus, the Golden Calf is a symbol of idolatry, while in the Book of Genesis, Abraham was said to be rich in gold and silver, and Moses was instructed to cover the Mercy Seat of the Ark of the Covenant with pure gold.
Caesium auride is perhaps the most famous.
Bills (that mature into gold coin) and gold certificates (convertible into gold coin at the issuing bank) added to the circulating stock of gold standard money in most 19th century industrial economies.
Traditionally, gold is thought to have formed by the R-process in supernova nucleosynthesis, but a relatively recent paper suggests that gold and other elements heavier than iron may also be produced in quantity by the collision of neutron stars.
Some gold compounds exhibit ''aurophilic bonding'', which describes the tendency of gold ions to interact at distances that are too long to be a conventional Au–Au bond but shorter than van der Waals bonding.
Prescott Jernegan ran a gold-from-seawater swindle in the United States in the 1890s.
By comparison, the density of lead is 11.34&nbsp;g/cm3, and that of the densest element, osmium, is 22.588&nbsp;±&nbsp;0.015&nbsp;g/cm3.
The gold content of alloys is measured in carats (k).
Less commonly, it occurs in minerals as gold compounds, often with tellurium (gold tellurides).
At 10 parts per quadrillion the Earth's oceans would hold 15,000 tonnes of gold.
The binary gold halides, such as AuCl, form zigzag polymeric chains, again featuring linear coordination at Au.
A representative example is the octahedral species {Au(P(C6H5)3)}62+.
In addition, gold is very dense: it has a density of 19.3&nbsp;g/cm3.
Other award statues and prizes are depicted in gold or are gold plated (such as the Academy Awards, the Golden Globe Awards, the Emmy Awards, the Palme d'Or, and the British Academy Film Awards).
Historically gold coinage was widely used as currency; when paper money was introduced, it typically was a receipt redeemable for gold coin or bullion.
Mercury poisoning in humans causes incurable brain function damage and severe retardation.
The gold fields are confined to the northern and north-western edges of the Witwatersrand basin, which is a 5–7&nbsp;km thick layer of archean rocks located, in most places, deep under the Free State, Gauteng and surrounding provinces.
Some gold salts do have anti-inflammatory properties and at present two are still used as pharmaceuticals in the treatment of arthritis and other similar conditions in the US (sodium aurothiomalate and auranofin).
The Wohlwill process results in higher purity, but is more complex and is only applied in small-scale installations.
The average gold mining and extraction costs were about $317 per troy ounce in 2007, but these can vary widely depending on mining type and ore quality; global mine production amounted to 2,471.1 tonnes.
Gold artifacts in the Balkans also appear from the 4th millennium BC, such as those found in the Varna Necropolis near Lake Varna in Bulgaria, thought by one source (La Niece 2009) to be the earliest "well-dated" find of gold artifacts.
Egypt and especially Nubia had the resources to make them major gold-producing areas for much of history.
Gold artifacts found at the Nahal Kana cave cemetery dated during the 1980s, showed these to be from within the Chalcolithic, and considered the earliest find from the Levant (Gopher ''et al.''
Similar effects impart a golden hue to metallic caesium.
The interaction is estimated to be comparable in strength to that of a hydrogen bond.
The gold atom centers in Au(III) complexes, like other d8 compounds, are typically square planar, with chemical bonds that have both covalent and ionic character.
Gold is unaffected by most acids.
However, the price then began a slow decline towards $1200 per troy ounce in late 2014 and 2015.
Copper is the most commonly used base metal, yielding a redder color.
Post-war, the victorious countries, most notably Britain, gradually restored gold-convertibility, but international flows of gold via bills of exchange remained embargoed; international shipments were made exclusively for bilateral trades or to pay war reparations.
Nitric acid oxidizes the metal to +3 ions, but only in minute amounts, typically undetectable in the pure acid because of the chemical equilibrium of the reaction.
Gold dissolves in mercury, forming amalgam alloys, but this is not a chemical reaction.
A Greek burial crown made of gold was found in a grave circa 370 BC.
The gold is found only in six areas where archean rivers from the north and north-west formed extensive pebbly braided river deltas before draining into the "Witwatersrand sea" where the rest of the Witwatersrand sediments were deposited.
Gold as a sign of wealth and prestige was ridiculed by Thomas More in his treatise ''Utopia''.
Whereas most other pure metals are gray or silvery white, gold is slightly reddish yellow.
Gold artifacts such as the golden hats and the Nebra disk appeared in Central Europe from the 2nd millennium BC Bronze Age.
It is also possible to eject several neutrons with very high energy into the other mercury isotopes in order to form 197Hg.
The largest gold depository in the world is that of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank in New York, which holds about 3% of the gold known to exist and accounted for today, as does the similarly laden U.S. Bullion Depository at Fort Knox.
The various methods they used are well described by Pliny the Elder in his encyclopedia Naturalis Historia written towards the end of the first century AD.
White 18-karat gold containing 17.3% nickel, 5.5% zinc and 2.2% copper is silvery in appearance.
Gold toxicity can be ameliorated with chelation therapy with an agent such as dimercaprol.
Mercury can then enter into the human food chain in the form of methylmercury.
In the New Testament, it is included with the gifts of the magi in the first chapters of Matthew.
From April 2001 to August 2011, spot gold prices more than quintupled in value against the US dollar, hitting a new all-time high of $1,913.50 on 23 August 2011, prompting speculation that the long secular bear market had ended and a bull market had returned.
Gold chalcogenides, such as gold sulfide, feature equal amounts of Au(I) and Au(III).
Gold also occurs in rare alloys with copper, lead, and mercury: the minerals auricupride (Cu3Au), novodneprite (AuPb3) and weishanite ((Au, Ag)3Hg2).
Recent research suggests that microbes can sometimes play an important role in forming gold deposits, transporting and precipitating gold to form grains and nuggets that collect in alluvial deposits.
These drugs have been explored as a means to help to reduce the pain and swelling of rheumatoid arthritis, and also (historically) against tuberculosis and some parasites.
It's estimated that 16% of the world's gold and 22% of the world's silver is contained in electronic technology in Japan.
Gold ions in solution are readily reduced and precipitated as metal by adding any other metal as the reducing agent.
A gold(II) complex, the tetraxenonogold(II) cation, which contains xenon as a ligand, occurs in AuXe4(Sb2F11)2.
The primitive working methods are described by both Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, and included fire-setting.
Gold has only one stable isotope, , which is also its only naturally occurring isotope, so gold is both a mononuclidic and monoisotopic element.
Electrum's color runs from golden-silvery to silvery, dependent upon the silver content.
The exceptions are , which decays by electron capture, and , which decays most often by electron capture (93%) with a minor β− decay path (7%).
Other modern coins include the Austrian Vienna Philharmonic bullion coin and the Chinese Gold Panda.
Gold also produces a high output of secondary electrons when irradiated by an electron beam, and these low-energy electrons are the most commonly used signal source used in the scanning electron microscope.
With the sharp growth of economies in the 20th century, and increasing foreign exchange, the world's gold reserves and their trading market have become a small fraction of all markets and fixed exchange rates of currencies to gold have been replaced by floating prices for gold and gold future contract.
No other isomer or isotope of gold has three decay paths.
The first major gold strike in the United States occurred in a small north Georgia town called Dahlonega.
as a gold silver alloy).
The historical value of gold was rooted in its relative rarity, easy handling and minting, easy smelting and fabrication, resistance to corrosion and other chemical reactions (nobility), and distinctive color.
The Dome of the Rock on the Jerusalem temple site is covered with an ultra-thin golden glasure.
When an earthquake strikes, it moves along a fault.
A good example is Au(CN)2−, which is the soluble form of gold encountered in mining.
On 17 March 1968, economic circumstances caused the collapse of the gold pool, and a two-tiered pricing scheme was established whereby gold was still used to settle international accounts at the old $35.00 per troy ounce ($1.13/g) but the price of gold on the private market was allowed to fluctuate; this two-tiered pricing system was abandoned in 1975 when the price of gold was left to find its free-market level.
Water often lubricates faults, filling in fractures and jogs.
Gold standards and the direct convertibility of currencies to gold have been abandoned by world governments, led in 1971 by the United States' refusal to redeem its dollars in gold.
It occurs in a solid solution series with the native element silver (as electrum) and also naturally alloyed with copper and palladium.
White gold alloys can be made with palladium or nickel.
The symbol ''Au'' is from the , the Latin word for "gold".
File:Gold-37466.jpg|Gold leaf from Harvard Mine, Jamestown, California, USA.
Alloys with lower karat rating, typically 22k, 18k, 14k or 10k, contain higher percentages of copper or other base metals or silver or palladium in the alloy.
This can be represented by a cube with an edge length of about 21 meters.
The oxidation state of gold in its compounds ranges from −1 to +5, but Au(I) and Au(III) dominate its chemistry.
It remains a cultural symbol of wealth and through that, in many societies, success.
Ore grades as little as 0.5&nbsp;parts per million (ppm) can be economical.
Gold ore dumps are the source of many heavy elements such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, arsenic, selenium and mercury.
From these surface exposures the basin dips extensively, requiring some of the mining to occur at depths of nearly 4000&nbsp;m, making them, especially the Savuka and TauTona mines to the south-west of Johannesburg, the deepest mines on earth.
By 2014 the gold jewelry industry was escalating despite a dip in gold prices.
However, the ions are removed from the equilibrium by hydrochloric acid, forming AuCl4− ions, or chloroauric acid, thereby enabling further oxidation.
Because of the softness of pure (24k) gold, it is usually alloyed with base metals for use in jewelry, altering its hardness and ductility, melting point, color and other properties.
Nickel is toxic, however, and its release from nickel white gold is controlled by legislation in Europe.
The metal therefore occurs often in free elemental (native) form, as nuggets or grains, in rocks, in veins and in alluvial deposits.
However, the use of gold in other applications in electronic sliding contacts in highly humid or corrosive atmospheres, and in use for contacts with a very high failure cost (certain computers, communications equipment, spacecraft, jet aircraft engines) remains very common.
Our most valued or most successful latter years are sometimes considered "golden years".
The more silver, the lower the specific gravity.
Gold is further associated with the wisdom of aging and fruition.
Most of the gold that is present today in the Earth's crust and mantle is thought to have been delivered to Earth later, by asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment.
Common colored gold alloys such as rose gold can be created by the addition of various amounts of copper and silver, as indicated in the triangular diagram to the left.
Gold extraction is most economical in large, easily mined deposits.
Gold's high malleability, ductility, resistance to corrosion and most other chemical reactions, and conductivity of electricity have led to its continued use in corrosion resistant electrical connectors in all types of computerized devices (its chief industrial use).
Thirty tons of used ore is dumped as waste for producing one troy ounce of gold.
An ancient Talmudic text circa 100 AD describes Rachel, wife of Rabbi Akiva, receiving a "Jerusalem of Gold" (diadem).
The mines at Roşia Montană in Transylvania were also very large, and until very recently, still mined by opencast methods.
Minute quantities of mercury compounds can reach water bodies, causing heavy metal contamination.
During Mansa Musa's (ruler of the Mali Empire from 1312 to 1337) hajj to Mecca in 1324, he passed through Cairo in July 1324, and was reportedly accompanied by a camel train that included thousands of people and nearly a hundred camels where he gave away so much gold that it depressed the price in Egypt for over a decade.
The concentration of free electrons in gold metal is 5.90×1022 cm−3.
Gold is strongly attacked by fluorine at dull-red heat to form gold(III) fluoride.
Central banks still hold historical gold reserves as a store of value although the level has generally been declining.
Since the 1880s, South Africa has been the source for a large proportion of the world's gold supply, with about 50% of the presently accounted for gold having come from South Africa.
One of the earliest known maps, known as the Turin Papyrus Map, shows the plan of a gold mine in Nubia together with indications of the local geology.
About 6 miles (10 kilometers) below the surface, under incredible temperatures and pressures, the water carries high concentrations of carbon dioxide, silica, and gold.
Only salts and radioisotopes of gold are of pharmacological value, since elemental (metallic) gold is inert to all chemicals it encounters inside the body (i.e., ingested gold cannot be attacked by stomach acid).
The gold alloys' slight malleability facilitates the creation of a superior molar mating surface with other teeth and produces results that are generally more satisfactory than those produced by the creation of porcelain crowns.
Another recent study has claimed water in faults vaporizes during an earthquake, depositing gold.
During the 19th century, gold rushes occurred whenever large gold deposits were discovered.
Though gold is attacked by free chlorine, its good conductivity and general resistance to oxidation and corrosion in other environments (including resistance to non-chlorinated acids) has led to its widespread industrial use in the electronic era as a thin-layer coating on electrical connectors, thereby ensuring good connection.
The first known coins containing gold were struck in Lydia, Asia Minor, around 600 BC.
The benefit of using gold over other connector metals such as tin in these applications has been debated; gold connectors are often criticized by audio-visual experts as unnecessary for most consumers and seen as simply a marketing ploy.
Although the prices of some platinum group metals can be much higher, gold has long been considered the most desirable of precious metals, and its value has been used as the standard for many currencies.
In 2005 the World Gold Council estimated total global gold supply to be 3,859 tonnes and demand to be 3,754 tonnes, giving a surplus of 105 tonnes.
Caesium auride (CsAu), for example, crystallizes in the caesium chloride motif.
In late 2009, gold markets experienced renewed momentum upwards due to increased demand and a weakening US dollar.
The least stable is , which decays by proton emission with a half-life of 30 µs.
Many awards such as the Nobel Prize are made from gold as well.
It has been estimated that the currently known amount of gold internationally would form a single cube 20&nbsp;m (66&nbsp;ft) on a side (equivalent to 8,000 m3).
These alloys can be produced to modify the hardness and other metallurgical properties, to control melting point or to create exotic colors.
The most stable of these is  with a half-life of 186.1 days.
Most drugs based on gold are Au(I) derivatives.
Gold sometimes occurs combined with tellurium as the minerals calaverite, krennerite, nagyagite, petzite and sylvanite (see telluride minerals), and as the rare bismuthide maldonite (Au2Bi) and antimonide aurostibite (AuSb2).
Gold (usually as the metal) is perhaps the most anciently administered medicine (apparently by shamanic practitioners) and known to Dioscorides.
Inventory above ground would satisfy many decades of industrial and even artisan uses at current prices.
In the 19th century gold had a reputation as a "nervine," a therapy for nervous disorders.
Native gold occurs as very small to microscopic particles embedded in rock, often together with quartz or sulfide minerals such as "Fool's Gold", which is a pyrite.
Gold also dissolves in alkaline solutions of cyanide, which are used in mining and electroplating.
Although gold is the most noble of the noble metals, it still forms many diverse compounds.
Pure gold is designated as 24k.
The fungus also plays a role in the solubilization of heavy metal sulfides.
Aristotle in his ethics used gold symbolism when referring to what is now commonly known as the golden mean.
Production in 1970 accounted for 79% of the world supply, producing about 1,480 tonnes.
It is thought to have been produced in supernova nucleosynthesis and from the collision of neutron stars  and to have been present in the dust from which the Solar System formed.
The transmitted light appears greenish blue, because gold strongly reflects yellow and red.
Their symbol for gold was the circle with a point at its center (☉), which was also the astrological symbol and the ancient Chinese character for the Sun.
There are rare cases of lethal gold poisoning from potassium gold cyanide.
In a monetary system known as the gold standard, a certain weight of gold was given the name of a unit of currency.
For example, gold electrical wires were used during some of the Manhattan Project's atomic experiments, but large high-current silver wires were used in the calutron isotope separator magnets in the project.
Gold is the most malleable of all metals; a single gram can be beaten into a sheet of 1 square meter, and an avoirdupois ounce into 300 square feet.
Au(I) compounds are typically linear.
Some 22% of all the gold that is ascertained to exist today on Earth has been extracted from these Witwatersrand rocks.
Winners of athletic events and other graded competitions are usually awarded a gold medal.
Gold is a precious metal used for coinage, jewelry, and other arts throughout recorded history.
In 2006, the United States Mint began producing the American Buffalo gold bullion coin with a purity of 99.99%.
Colloidal gold preparations (suspensions of gold nanoparticles) in water are intensely red-colored, and can be made with tightly controlled particle sizes up to a few tens of nanometers across by reduction of gold chloride with citrate or ascorbate ions.
Gold is highly conductive to electricity, and has been used for electrical wiring in some high-energy applications (only silver and copper are more conductive per volume, but gold has the advantage of corrosion resistance).
These gold-bearing rocks had furthermore been covered by a thick layer of Ventersdorp lavas and the Transvaal Supergroup of rocks before the meteor struck.
Originally thought to be a mixed-valence compound, it has been shown to contain  cations, analogous to the better-known mercury(I) ion,  .
This improves definition of the position and topography of the specimen surface and increases the spatial resolution of the image.
Exploitation of gold in the south-east corner of the Black Sea is said to date from the time of Midas, and this gold was important in the establishment of what is probably the world's earliest coinage in Lydia around 610 BC.
Alloys containing palladium or nickel are also important in commercial jewelry as these produce white gold alloys.
Gold played a role in western culture, as a cause for desire and of corruption, as told in children's fables such as Rumpelstiltskin, where the peasant's daughter turns hay into gold, in return for giving up her child when she becomes a princess; and the stealing of the hen that lays golden eggs in Jack and the Beanstalk.
Gold chloride and gold oxide are used to make cranberry or red-colored glass, which, like colloidal gold suspensions, contains evenly sized spherical gold nanoparticles.
The acid mixture causes the formation of a soluble tetrachloroaurate anion.
In both cases, satellite spectrometers only indirectly detect the resulting gold: "we have no spectroscopic evidence that such elements have truly been produced."
The city of Johannesburg located in South Africa was founded as a result of the Witwatersrand Gold Rush which resulted in the discovery of some of the largest natural gold deposits in recorded history.
Other aurides include those of Rb+, K+, and tetramethylammonium (CH3)4N+.
The world consumption of new gold produced is about 50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in industry.
However, for the indigenous peoples of North America gold was considered useless and they saw much greater value in other minerals which were directly related to their utility, such as obsidian, flint, and slate.
After initial production, gold is often subsequently refined industrially by the Wohlwill process which is based on electrolysis or by the Miller process, that is chlorination in the melt.
Gold has the highest Pauling electronegativity of any metal, with a value of 2.54, making the auride anion relatively stable.
Prices increased rapidly from 2001, but the 1980 high was not exceeded until 3 January 2008 when a new maximum of $865.35 per troy ounce was set.
It is long lasting and unaffected by the passage of time and may aid in the ring symbolism of eternal vows before God and the perfection the marriage signifies.
Common oxidation states of gold include +1 (gold(I) or aurous compounds) and +3 (gold(III) or auric compounds).
When sulfide bearing minerals in these ore dumps are exposed to air and water, the sulfide transforms into sulfuric acid which in turn dissolves these heavy metals facilitating their passage into surface water and ground water.
Au(I), referred to as the aurous ion, is the most common oxidation state with soft ligands such as thioethers, thiolates, and tertiary phosphines.
When it is alloyed with other metals the term ''carat'' or ''karat'' is used to indicate the purity of gold present, with 24 carats being pure gold and lower ratings proportionally less.
In Byzantine iconography the halos of Christ, Mary and the Christian saints are often golden.
The −1 oxidation state occurs in compounds containing the Au− anion, called aurides.
Alternative white gold alloys are available based on palladium, silver and other white metals, but the palladium alloys are more expensive than those using nickel.
This is equivalent to 9513 m3 of gold.
A total of 183,600 tonnes of gold is in existence above ground, as of 2014.
Blue gold is more brittle and therefore more difficult to work with when making jewelry.
Pure metallic (elemental) gold is non-toxic and non-irritating when ingested and is sometimes used as a food decoration in the form of gold leaf.
", "golden moment", "then you're golden!"
Gold does not react with sulfur directly, but gold(III) sulfide can be made by passing hydrogen sulfide through a dilute solution of gold(III) chloride or chlorauric acid.
All of gold's radioisotopes with atomic masses above 197 decay by β− decay.
Therefore, most of the gold that is present today in the Earth's crust and mantle is thought to have been delivered to Earth later, by asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment, about 4 billion years ago.
However, the gold-bearing Witwatersrand rocks were laid down between 700 and 950&nbsp;million years before the Vredefort impact.
Gold, or alloys of gold and palladium, are applied as conductive coating to biological specimens and other non-conducting materials such as plastics and glass to be viewed in a scanning electron microscope.
On Earth, gold is found in ores in rock formed from the Precambrian time onward.
Gold's very high electrical conductivity drains electrical charge to earth, and its very high density provides stopping power for electrons in the electron beam, helping to limit the depth to which the electron beam penetrates the specimen.
Less commonly, addition of manganese, aluminium, iron, indium and other elements can produce more unusual colors of gold for various applications.
It most often occurs as a native metal, typically in a metal solid solution with silver (i.e.
High-karat white gold alloys are far more resistant to corrosion than are either pure silver or sterling silver.
It does react with aqua regia, a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids, and with selenic acid.
For a long period, the United States government set the value of the US dollar so that one troy ounce was equal to $20.67 ($0.665 per gram), but in 1934 the dollar was devalued to $35.00 per troy ounce ($0.889/g).
On 1 March 2011, gold hit a new all-time high of $1432.57, based on investor concerns regarding ongoing unrest in North Africa as well as in the Middle East.
