The amblycerous mite ''Ricinus frenatus'' has been found on the eastern goldcrest subspecies, ''R.
The height and nature of any undergrowth is irrelevant.
r. buturlini'', but slightly darker.
Shorter flights while feeding are a mix of dashing and fluttering with frequent hovering.
Breeds in Eastern Asia, including Japan, Korea, China and Siberia; it is greener and has darker upper-parts than the nominate form, and has broad white wingbars.
Adverse conditions may lead to disorientation, large numbers gathering on ships on overcast or wet nights.
Females migrated slightly earlier than males, but overall there were more males, with an average sex ratio of 1.6:1.
Breeds only in Iran; it is like ''R.
Unlike more specialised birds such as the Eurasian nuthatch and the Eurasian treecreeper, both of which forage on tree trunks, the kinglets do not need large woodlands, and their population density is independent of forest size.
Birds from the north and east of its breeding range migrate to winter further south.
In a Finnish study, only one-tenth of the wintering goldcrest population, which mainly fed on spiders, survived to spring.
r. sikkimensis'' and ''R.
The goldcrest has much the same range and habitat preference as the common chiffchaff, and there is some evidence that high breeding densities of the kinglet depress the population of the warbler, although the converse is not true.
The crown of the male is yellower than in other forms, and the underparts are much duller and greyer.
The firecrest's less forked tail may reflect its longer episodes of hovering while hunting.
The goldcrest was first described by Linnaeus in his '''' in 1758 as ''Motacilla regulus'' (characterised as '''').
It is paler above than the nominate subspecies, and greyish-green rather than olive.
This kinglet, like other species that prefer mixed-species foraging flocks in winter, hunts over a greater range of heights and vegetation types than when feeding alone.
Differences in songs, genetics and morphology suggests that the Azores were colonised in a single invasion in the late Pleistocene, about 100,000 years ago.
The travel speed of migrating goldcrests increased for those leaving later in the autumn, and was greater for the northernmost populations.
It superficially resembles the firecrest, which largely shares its European range, but the latter's bronze shoulders and strong face pattern are distinctive.
The goldcrest is the smallest European bird,  in length, with a  wingspan and a weight of .
Although dense conifer growth can provide shelter for roosting at night, losses in hard winters can be heavy.
This species has bred in Iceland since about 1999, and was widespread by 2004, although numbers are affected by hard winters.
Each group roamed within a defined winter territory, and their winter survival depended on the density of the food supply.
The entire song lasts 3–4 seconds and is repeated 5–7 times a minute.
Goldcrests will occasionally feed on the ground among leaf-litter with tits.
The clutch size in Europe is typically 9–11 eggs, but ranges from 6–13.
The Canary Islands were colonised in two waves.
Merlins, tawny and long-eared owls also hunt goldcrests.
Flying insects are taken in hovering flight but not normally pursued; there is a record of a goldcrest attacking a large dragonfly in flight, only to be dragged along by the insect before releasing it unharmed.
Female and juvenile ruby-crowned kinglets lack the ruby-red crown patch, but compared with the similarly crestless juvenile goldcrest, the American bird is larger in size, has an obvious whitish eyering, and yellowish wing bars.
r. hyrcanus'' (Zarudny, 1910).
It has a display involving bowing its head towards another bird and raising the coloured crest.
Birds on the Canary Islands are ancient colonists, whereas those on The Azores are of more recent origin.
When the atmospheric pressure variations in the North Atlantic are large, the springs in Europe are warmer.
A general climatic change resulting in more frequent positive North Atlantic oscillation events has led to earlier spring migration of these short-distance migrants since the 1980s.
The middle layer is moss, which is lined by an inner layer of feathers and hair.
Spring migration is complete by late March on the Mediterranean islands, but continues to late April or early May in northern Europe.
r. sikkimensis'', but darker overall with dark green upper-parts and darker buff underparts.
Those with a relatively large amount of fat, may make stops during migration of only 1–2 days; although they have lost weight since commencing their journey, they have enough energy reserves to reach the wintering areas.
It sometimes has a more clipped ending, or is delivered more rapidly.
The goldcrest has a large range, estimated at 13.2&nbsp;million&nbsp;km2 (5.1&nbsp;million&nbsp;mi2) and a total population estimated at 80–200&nbsp;million individuals, and it is therefore classed as least concern on the IUCN Red List.
This is in contrast to the common firecrest, which mainly exploits the upper surface of branches in coniferous habitat and of leaves in deciduous trees.
There are a few Pleistocene (2.6&nbsp;million to 12,000&nbsp;years BP) records from Europe of extant ''Regulus'' species, mostly goldcrests or unidentifiable to species.
This is a tame and inquisitive bird, and tired migrants will land near or on humans, sometimes searching for food on their clothing.
r. inermis'' (Murphy & Chapin, 1929).
Further east it occurs discontinuously through southern Siberia to Sakhalin and Japan, in the Tian Shan mountains, northern Iran, and from the Himalayas east to central China.
This song, often uttered while the male is foraging, can be heard in most months of the year.
The male sings during the breeding season, usually while foraging rather than from a perch.
It is distinctive, with the black edges to the crest largely absent.
There is also a subdued rambling subsong.
Several subspecies of the goldcrest have been described.
As they roam around their territory, they frequently join loose flocks of other wanderers such as tits and warblers.
* Western Azores goldcrest ''R.
The first step was the occupation of Tenerife and La Gomera 1.9–2.3 million years ago, followed by a separate invasion of El Hierro and La Palma 1.3–1.8 mya.
However, in very small areas of conifers it is rare for the goldcrest and the firecrest to share territories; either one or the other is present, but not both.
In sites where the numbers of willow and crested tits was artificially reduced, goldcrests and coal tits extended their foraging to include the inner canopy, but did not do so where the larger tits were retained.
r. tristis'' (Pleske, 1892).
r. buturlini'' (Loudon, 1911).
The goldcrest's nest is a well-insulated cup-shaped structure built in three layers.
A study in the Baltic region showed that northern goldcrests were more likely to migrate, and increased their body mass beforehand; non-migratory southern birds did not increase their fat reserves.
The call is higher and less rough than that of the firecrest.
The nest is larger, shallower and less compact than that of the firecrest, with an internal diameter of about , and is constructed by both sexes, although the female does most of the work.
One pair built their nest just  above that of a sparrowhawk.
r. teneriffae'' (Seebohm, 1883).
The yellow-browed warbler has a yellowish supercilium and pale crown stripe, so also shows a different head pattern.
For species that tend to feed in flocks, foraging success while in a flock was about twice that for solitary birds.
Once breeding is over, this species will readily move into deciduous trees and shrubs, heathland and similar more open habitats.
The songs of mainland goldcrests vary only slightly across their range and consist of a single song type, but much more divergence has occurred in the isolated Macaronesian populations.
The song variations have been used to investigate the colonisation pattern of the Macaronesian islands by goldcrests, and identified a previously unknown subspecies.
"&nbsp;... and for some years, even as a winter visitor, the Goldcrest remained rare, absent from most of its nesting haunts.
Several small passerine species survive freezing winter nights by inducing a lower metabolic rate and hypothermia, of a maximum of  below normal body temperature, in order to reduce energy consumption overnight.
Until the severe winter of 1916–17 the Goldcrest was abundant and widespread, nesting in all the wooded portions of our islands; in 1920 it could have little more than an obituary notice, for the nesting stock was practically "wiped out.
Firecrests will sometimes defend their territories against goldcrests, but the amount of actual competition between the species may not be very great.
Breeds in India and China.
The erratic movements and flights of small woodland birds, which are vulnerable to attack while away from cover, may help to confuse their predators.
Male goldcrests sometimes show a territorial response to recordings of the songs or calls of the common firecrest, but the reverse is apparently not true, since the songs of the common firecrest are simpler in construction than those of its relatives.
r. sikkimensis'' (Meinertzhagen R. & Meinertzhagen A., 1926).
Breeds in China and Central Asia, wintering in northeastern Afghanistan.
Sites such as parks and cemeteries are used only when they offer suitable conifers that are not otherwise locally available.
At the genetic level, the two Central Asian forms, ''R.
Aristotle (384–322 BC) and Pliny (23–79 AD) both wrote about the legend of a contest among the birds to see who should be their king, the title to be awarded to the one that could fly highest.
In 1930, the English ornithologist Thomas Coward wrote:
The flamecrest diverged from the goldcrest 3.0–3.1&nbsp;mya (million years ago).
It is similar in appearance to a warbler, with olive-green upper-parts, buff-white underparts, two white wing bars, and a plain face with conspicuous black irises.
r. ellenthalerae'', the western Canary Islands goldcrest, occurring on the smaller islands of La Palma and El Hierro.
Following from this legend, in much European folklore the wren has been described as the "king of the birds" or as a flame bearer.
The relationships of the flamecrest or Taiwan firecrest (''Regulus goodfellowi'') of Taiwan have also been a source of much debate.
r. himalayensis'' (Bonaparte, 1856).
It has a plain face contrasting black irises and a bright head crest, orange and yellow in the male and yellow in the female, which is displayed during breeding.
Breeding densities of up to 591 pairs per square km (1,530 pairs per square mile) have been recorded in Norway spruce in Ireland, and goldcrests constituted over 60% of all birds found in Welsh Douglas fir and Norway spruce plantations.
It is common in middle and northern temperate and boreal latitudes of Europe, between the  July isotherms, and thus predominantly in cooler climates than the firecrest.
The flight is distinctive; it consists of whirring wing-beats with occasional sudden changes of direction.
Found only on Santa Maria Island (Azores); it is paler than other Azores subspecies and whitish below.
There is competition within the species even during migration, and the larger and more aggressive males may get more food.
The ruby-crowned kinglet, an American ''Regulus'' species and a potential vagrant in Europe, could be more difficult to distinguish.
The differences in behaviour are facilitated by subtle morphological differences; firecrests have broader bills with longer rictal bristles (which protect a bird's eye from food items it is trying to capture), and these features reflect the larger prey taken by the species.
The small, thin bill is black, and the legs are dark flesh-brown.
Breeds in the Eastern Himalayas, Burma and China; it is like ''R.
They also feed on the cocoons and eggs of spiders and insects, and occasionally take pollen.
In Hungary, goldcrests stopping temporarily on migration were mostly found in scrub, including blackthorn, hawthorn and pear, which provided some protection from sparrowhawks.
The goldcrest has only very rarely been recorded as a host of the common cuckoo, a widespread European brood parasite.
The adult common firecrest has a distinguishing face pattern showing a bright white supercilium (eyebrow) and black eye-stripe, and the juvenile usually shows enough of this face pattern to be readily distinguished from the plain-faced goldcrest.
It uses spruce, larch, Scots pine, silver fir and mountain pine, and in man-made landscapes also introduced conifers such as douglas fir.
The male builds the second nest, then feeds the young in the first nest while the female is incubating in the second; when the first brood has fledged, he joins the female in feeding the second brood.
The goldcrest has occurred as a vagrant in Jordan and Morocco.
The nest's outer layer is made from moss, small twigs, cobwebs and lichen, the cobwebs also being used to attach the nest to the thin branches that support it.
In some areas, wintering birds have developed the habit of coming to feeding stations and bird tables to take fat, sometimes with warblers such as the common chiffchaff and blackcap.
It is darker than ''R.
The proportion of migrating males increases as they travel south through Europe.
Goldcrests prefer smaller prey than common firecrests.
Both birds occur in similar forests, but the chiffchaff is found within  of the forest edge, with the goldcrest breeding deeper in the woodland.
This species becomes sexually mature after one year, and has an annual adult mortality of over 80 percent giving a life expectancy of around eight months, which is the shortest for any bird apart from a few ''Coturnix'' species.
Although the tail and flight feathers may be retained into the first winter, by then the young birds are almost indistinguishable from adults in the field.
There is no evidence that the species compete for territories, and in any case the chiffchaff is 50% heavier than the goldcrest.
This species is partly migratory, northernmost populations deserting their breeding areas in winter.
The goldcrest breeds in coniferous woodland and gardens, building its compact, three-layered nest on a tree branch.
* Sao Miguel Goldcrest ''R.
Their death rate is therefore lower than that of the females both on the southward migration, and in resident populations.
There are no goldcrests on Madeira, where the Madeira firecrest is the only ''Regulus'' species.
Birds winter in Europe and Asia south of the breeding range.
Conversely, populations can expand rapidly after a series of mild winters.
This kinglet is constantly on the move as it searches for insects to eat, and in winter it is often found with flocks of tits.
The fungi found on the plumage may feed on the keratin of the outer feathers or on feather oil.
Regulus regulus teneriffae MHNT.ZOO.2010.11.jpg|'' Regulus regulus teneriffae '' - MHNT
Migrating birds rely largely on stored fat and they also metabolise protein as a supplementary source of energy.
The effect is greatest in western and central Europe.
Broad-leaved woods are used, only when some spruce or firs are also present.
A consequence of feeding in a flock is that foraging sites may be restricted to avoid competition with other species.
There was some northward range expansion in Scotland, Belgium, Norway, and Finland during the 20th century, assisted by the spread of conifer plantations.
There are nonetheless records of an individual surviving to 4&nbsp;years 10&nbsp;months, and even a report of a bird ringed in Winchester in 1989 and found dead in Morocco 7 years 7 months later.
However, these terms were also applied to the ''Regulus'' species, the fiery crowns of the goldcrest and firecrest making them more likely to be the original bearers of these titles, and, because of the legend's reference to the "smallest of birds" becoming king, the title was probably transferred to the equally tiny wren.
Suffolk fishermen called this bird "herring spink" or "tot o'er seas" because migrating goldcrests often landed on the rigging of herring boats out in the North Sea.
Breeds in Russia and Central Asia, and is paler above than the nominate subspecies.
Regulus regulus inermis MHNT.ZOO.2010.11.207.jpg|'' Regulus regulus inermis '' - MHNT
Within a clutch the size of eggs increases gradually and the last laid egg may be 20% larger than the first egg.
The North Atlantic oscillation is an atmospheric phenomenon affecting the weather in Western Europe.
r. ellenthalerae'' (Päckert ''et al'', 2006).
In continental Eurasia, there are nine generally accepted and very similar subspecies, differing only in details such as plumage shade.
The goldcrest is monogamous.
It is, however, now fully re-established.
Breeds in most of Europe; this is the nominate subspecies.
* Tenerife goldcrest ''R.
The song is a repetition of high thin notes, slightly higher-pitched than those of its relative.
Found only on Tenerife, Canary Islands; it is a distinctive, small subspecies with a black forehead and pink-buff underparts.
Nevertheless, there is no conclusive evidence that the decline of the chiffchaff subspecies ''Phylloscopus collybita abietinus'' in parts of Finland is due to competition with the willow warbler and goldcrest.
Several subspecies are recognised across the very large distribution range that includes much of Eurasia and the islands of Macaronesia.
A Spanish study suggested that territorial conflicts between species, and other phenomena like males singing mixed or alternating songs, were most frequent when one species locally far outnumbered the other; in other circumstances, the two species learned to ignore each other's songs.
Larger prey such as oak bush crickets and tortrix moths may sometimes be taken.
Goldcrests can fly  in one day, although they keep at a lower level in heavy headwinds.
The Tenerife subspecies occurs in the mountain region previously occupied by laurisilva, but now dominated by tree heaths.
An old English name for the goldcrest is the "woodcock pilot", since migrating birds preceded the arrival of Eurasian woodcocks by a couple of days.
For these northern birds there is a trade off between staying put and risking starvation, or facing the perils of migration.
Regulus regulus azoricus MHNT.ZOO.2010.11.207.jpg|'' Regulus regulus azoricus '' - MHNT
Found only on São Miguel, Azores; it is like ''R.
During an 18‑hour winter night, with temperatures as low as  in the north of its range, goldcrests huddled together can each burn off fat equivalent to 20% of body weight to keep warm.
Outside the breeding season, small groups of goldcrests maintain exclusive winter feeding territories, which they defend against neighbouring groups.
In lowland Britain, there was an increase of 48% following the 1970/71 winter, with many pairs spreading into deciduous woodlands where they would not normally breed.
Ten to twelve eggs are incubated by the female alone, and the chicks are fed by both parents; second broods are common.
Migration was faster on routes that crossed the Baltic Sea than on coastal routes, and the birds with the largest fat reserves travelled at the highest speeds.
The goldcrest breeds in mature lowland and mountain coniferous woodlands, mainly up to , and occasionally to .
Breeds occurs intermittently in the Faroes.
The goldcrest takes a wide variety of prey, especially spiders, caterpillars, bugs, springtails and flies.
Breeds in the Himalayas; it is similar to the nominate subspecies, but slightly paler above and with whiter underparts.
* Western Canary Islands goldcrest ''R.
Two birds roosting together reduce their heat loss by a quarter, and three birds by a third.
Records of this race from Ladakh claimed by Meinertzhagen are considered to be fraudulent.
The goldcrest may be out-competing the warbler for food, especially as the larger bird faces more competition from other insectivores, including other ''Phylloscopus'' warblers.
Even in aviary studies in which a female goldcrest was given an artificial eyestripe to facilitate mating with a male firecrest, the chicks were never raised by the mixed pair, and appeared to be poorly adapted compared to the parent species.
The song of the male goldcrest is a very high, thin double note ''cedar'', repeated 5–7 times and ending in a flourish, ''cedarcedar-cedar-cedar-cedar-stichi-see-pee''.
It was moved to the warbler genus ''Sylvia'' by English naturalist John Latham in 1790, and to its current genus by French zoologist Georges Cuvier in 1800.
Two groups of goldcrest taxa are found on the Atlantic islands of Macaronesia.
The goldcrest lineage diverged from this apparent ancestor of the common firecrest in the Middle Pleistocene.
The goldcrest feeds in trees, frequently foraging on the undersides of branches and leaves.
These lice move over the host's body, and have strong mouthparts that pierce the host's skin so that they can feed on blood, and sometimes feather material.
The female goldcrest is not normally fed by her mate while incubating.
The eggs are piled up in the nest and the female keeps the eggs warm with her brood patch and also by putting her warm legs into the middle of the pile between the eggs.
All species will catch flying insects while hovering.
All ''Regulus'' species are almost exclusively insectivorous, preying on small arthropods with soft cuticles, such as springtails, aphids and spiders.
The eggs are maintained at , the female regulating the temperature of the eggs by varying the time spent sitting.
Breeds in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia.
r. yunnanensis'' (Rippon, 1906).
The goldcrest has a huge range in Eurasia, breeding from Macaronesia to Japan.
r. himalayensis'', and greener than the nominate subspecies.
r. inermis'', except the underparts are more olive-buff.
This tiny woodland bird has had little other impact on literature, although it is the subject of Charles Tennyson Turner's short poem, "The Gold-crested Wren", first published in 1868.
She is a tight sitter, reluctant to leave the nest when disturbed, and has been recorded as continuing to attend the nest when it has been moved, or even when it is being held.
It is often suspended from a hanging branch, usually at no great height, although Eric Simms reported nests at heights from .
Not only are there variations between islands and within an island, but individual males on the Azores can have up to three song types.
The juvenile is similar to the adult, but has duller upper-parts and lacks the coloured crown.
This brings forward the northward migration of those bird species (including the goldcrest) that winter mainly within western or southern Europe.
Birds from the Canary Islands are particularly distinctive having a black forehead, pink-buff underparts and a darker closed wing, and have been sometimes treated either as a subspecies of the common firecrest or as a different ''Regulus'' species altogether.
The confusion was probably compounded by the similarity and consequent interchangeability of the Greek words for the wren (, "king") and the crests (, "kinglet").
Although both will take trapped insects from spider webs on autumn migration, firecrests will also eat the large orb-web spiders (on rare occasions kinglets have been found stuck in a spider web, either unable to move or dead).
Firecrests forage more often while on foot, and have a foot better adapted for perching, whereas the goldcrest's longer hind toe reflects its habit of moving vertically along branches while feeding.
Apart from the crest colour, the sexes are alike, although in fresh plumage, the female may have very slightly paler upper-parts and greyer underparts than the adult male.
Throughout the goldcrest's range, the main predator of small woodland birds is the Eurasian sparrowhawk, which has a diet consisting of up to 98% of birds.
It has a plain face like its Old World cousin, but the male has a red crest without any yellow or a black border.
r. teneriffae'' occurring on Tenerife and the newly described subspecies, ''R.
