The 1819 Act for the Resumption of Cash Payments set 1823 as the date for resumption of convertibility, which was reached by 1821.
They blamed the US major economic contraction in 1937 on tightening of monetary policy resulting in higher cost of capital, weaker securities markets, reduced net government contribution to income, the undistributed profits tax and higher labor costs.
The United States used the eagle as its unit, Germany introduced the new gold mark, while Canada adopted a dual system based on both the American gold eagle and the British gold sovereign.
In return the banks received gold certificates to be used as reserves against deposits and Federal Reserve notes.
The bill was initiated by newly elected Republican Party legislators associated with the Tea Party movement and was driven by anxiety over the policies of President Barack Obama.
In 1717, Sir Isaac Newton, the master of the Royal Mint, established a new mint ratio between silver and gold that had the effect of driving silver out of circulation and putting Britain on a gold standard.
The forced contraction of the money supply resulted in deflation.
Price levels doubled in the US and Britain, tripled in France and quadrupled in Italy.
In December 1971, the “Smithsonian Agreement” was reached.
In 1900 the gold dollar was declared the standard unit of account and a gold reserve for government issued paper notes was established.
It was only in 1925, when Britain returned to the gold standard in conjunction with Australia and South Africa that the gold specie standard was officially ended.
Starting in the 1959–1969 administration of President Charles de Gaulle and continuing until 1970, France reduced its dollar reserves, exchanging them for gold at the official exchange rate, reducing US economic influence.
The US had a gold stock of 1.9 million ounces (59 t) in 1862.
Therefore, most countries' currencies were still basically inconvertible.
Financial historian  Niall Ferguson wrote that what made the Great Depression truly 'great' was the European banking crisis of 1931.
The intention was to use gold for large denominations, and silver for smaller denominations.
Between August 1914 and spring of 1915, the dollar value of US exports tripled and its trade surplus exceeded $1 billion for the first time.
In addition, it is difficult to account for the gold output in illegal mining activities.
Net exports did not mirror that pattern.
(The specific question posed to the economists was: "If the US replaced its discretionary monetary policy regime with a gold standard, defining a 'dollar' as a specific number of ounces of gold, the price-stability and employment outcomes would be better for the average American.")
In October 1973, the price was raised to $42.22.
The dollar subsequently floated.
From 1750 to 1870, wars within Europe as well as an ongoing trade deficit with China (which sold to Europe but had little use for European goods) drained silver from the economies of Western Europe and the United States.
In financing the war and abandoning gold, many of the belligerents suffered drastic inflations.
This system would also apply to monies in the United States.
This began a long series of attempts by the United States to create a bi-metallic standard.
Revaluing currencies was the main purpose of this plan.
Similar legislation is under consideration in other US states.
This act "tore asunder" any remaining confidence in the banking system.
A problem with bimetallic standards was that the metals' absolute and relative market prices changed.
He sometimes summarizes his opposition by stating simply, "We don’t have the gold standard.
The need for a solid basis in monetary affairs produced a rapid acceptance of the gold standard in the period that followed.
With the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Bank of England began the massive recoinage programme that created standard gold sovereigns, circulating crowns, half-crowns and eventually copper farthings in 1821.
In 2001 Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir bin Mohamad proposed a new currency that would be used initially for international trade among Muslim nations, using the Islamic gold dinar, defined as 4.25&nbsp;grams of pure (24-carat) gold.
The United Kingdom struck nearly 40 million shillings between 1816 and 1820, 17 million half crowns and 1.3 million silver crowns.
The money supply peaked in March 1937, with a trough in May 1938.
The use of gold as money began thousands of years ago in Asia Minor.
Within two weeks of the second devaluation the dollar was left to float.
Most nations abandoned the gold standard as the basis of their monetary systems at some point in the 20th century, although many hold substantial gold reserves.
Higher interest rates intensified the deflationary pressure on the dollar and reduced investment in U.S. banks.
Gold and silver coins were legal tender, as was the Spanish real.
This speculative attack created a panic in the U.S. banking system.
A formal gold specie standard was first established in 1821, when Britain adopted it following the introduction of the gold sovereign by the new Royal Mint at Tower Hill in 1816.
Recovery in the United States was slower than in Britain, in part due to Congressional reluctance to abandon the gold standard and float the U.S. currency as Britain had done.
Royal Mint branches were established in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth for the purpose of minting gold sovereigns from Australia's rich gold deposits.
The gold standard limited the flexibility of the central banks' monetary policy by limiting their ability to expand the money supply.
It authorized the federal government's use of the Bank of the United States to hold its reserves, as well as establish a fixed ratio of gold to the U.S. dollar.
The International Monetary Fund was established to help with the exchange process and assist nations in maintaining fixed rates.
By 1879 the market price matched the mint price of gold ($20.67 per ounce).
Greenbacks were therefore perfect substitutes for gold coins.
This state of affairs lasted until the Great Depression (1929–1939) forced countries off the gold standard.
In 2013, the Arizona Legislature passed SB 1439, which would have made gold and silver coin a legal tender in payment of debt, but the bill was vetoed by the Governor.
However, as the Byzantine Empire's economic influence declined, so too did the use of the bezant.
By 1927 many countries had returned to the gold standard.
Under commodity standards currency itself has no intrinsic value, but is accepted by traders because it can be redeemed any time for the equivalent specie.
According to Lawrence Officer the main cause of the gold standard’s failure to resume its previous position after World War 1 was “the Bank of England's precarious liquidity position and the gold-exchange standard.” A run on sterling caused Britain to impose exchange controls that fatally weakened the standard; convertibility was not legally suspended, but gold prices no longer played the role that they did before.
In the US, the central bank was required by the Federal Reserve Act (1913) to have gold backing 40% of its demand notes.
In the final years of the greenback period (1862–1879), gold production increased while gold exports decreased.
After the Second World War, a system similar to a gold standard and sometimes described as a "gold exchange standard" was established by the Bretton Woods Agreements.
It is sometimes referred to as the gold specie standard to more easily distinguish it.
In 1862 paper money was made legal tender.
By the end of 1913, the classical gold standard was at its peak but World War I caused many countries to suspend or abandon it.
The recoinage of silver after a long drought produced a burst of coins.
Coins were struck in smaller and smaller numbers, and there was a proliferation of bank and stock notes used as money.
Some gold-standard advocates also call for a mandated end to fractional-reserve banking.
The gold specie standard ended in the United Kingdom and the rest of the British Empire at the outbreak of World War I, when Treasury notes replaced the circulation of gold sovereigns and gold half sovereigns.
The mint ratio (the rate at which the mint was obligated to pay/receive for gold relative to silver) remained fixed at 15 ounces of silver to 1 ounce of gold, whereas the market rate fluctuated from 15.5 to 1 to 16 to 1.
Similarly, economists like Robert Barro argued that whilst some form of "monetary constitution"  is essential for stable, depoliticized monetary policy, the form this constitution takes—for example, a gold standard, some other commodity-based standard, or a fiat currency with fixed rules for determining the quantity of money—is considerably less important.
Gold discoveries in California in 1848 and later in Australia lowered the gold price relative to silver; this drove silver money from circulation because it was worth more in the market than as money.
The question was what type of standard: gold, silver or both.
A US silver certificate, for example, could be redeemed for an actual piece of silver.
However, gold convertibility did not resume.
Others including former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and Nobel Prize-winner Milton Friedman place the blame for the severity and length of the Great Depression at the feet of the Federal Reserve, mostly due to the deliberate tightening of monetary policy even after the gold standard.
The end of the gold standard was successfully effected by the Bank of England through appeals to patriotism urging citizens not to redeem paper money for gold specie.
Around the same time Mexico and Japan pegged their currencies to the dollar.
The demands for gold during this period were as a speculative vehicle, and for its primary use in the foreign exchange markets financing international trade.
Economic historians did not agree with candidate's assertions that the gold standard would benefit the US economy.
It ceased to mint larger silver coins and instead issued "token" silver coins and overstruck foreign coins.
This creates a ''de facto'' gold standard, where the value of the means of exchange has a fixed external value in terms of gold that is independent of the inherent value of the means of exchange itself.
Deviation from these conditions produced monetary crises.
In any case, prices had not reached equilibrium by the time of the Great Depression, which served to kill off the system completely.
This was accomplished by growing the stock of money less rapidly than real output.
However, the mint ratio (the fixed exchange rate between gold and silver at the mint) continued to overvalue gold.
This was meant to be a temporary measure, with the gold price of the dollar and the official rate of exchanges remaining constant.
Subsequently silver was only used in coins worth less than $1 (fractional currency).
Exchange rates changed less, even though European inflations were more severe than America’s.
With the resumption of convertibility on June 30, 1879 the government again paid its debts in gold, accepted greenbacks for customs and redeemed greenbacks on demand in gold.
One reason for the variance is that gold has been mined for thousands of years.
These notes came to be called "greenbacks".
The concurrent massive drought resulted in the US Dust Bowl.
They could now use monetary policy to stimulate the economy.
Government accounts were legally separated from the banking system.
The new standard ended the circulation of gold specie coins.
Commercial banks converted Federal Reserve Notes to gold in 1931, reducing its gold reserves and forcing a corresponding reduction in the amount of currency in circulation.
When adopting the gold standard, many European nations changed the name of their currency, for instance from Daler (Sweden and Denmark) or Gulden (Austria-Hungary) to Crown, since the former names were traditionally associated with silver coins and the latter with gold coins.
Instead, the law compelled the authorities to sell gold bullion on demand at a fixed price, but "only in the form of bars containing approximately four hundred ounces troy 12&nbsp;kg of fine gold".
Greenspan once famously argued the case for returning to a 'pure' gold standard in his 1966 paper "Gold and Economic Freedom", in which he described supporters of fiat currencies as "welfare statists" intending to use monetary policy to finance deficit spending.
The interaction between central banking and currency basis formed the primary source of monetary instability during this period.
Loans from American and French Central Banks of £50,000,000 were insufficient and exhausted in a matter of weeks, due to large gold outflows across the Atlantic.
Many other countries followed Britain in returning to the gold standard, this was followed by a period of relative stability but also deflation.
Spanish explorers discovered silver deposits in Mexico in 1522 and at Potosí in Bolivia in 1545. International trade came to depend on coins such as the Spanish dollar, the Maria Theresa thaler, and later, the United States trade dollar.
Greenbacks, silver certificates, and silver dollars continued to be legal tender, all redeemable in gold.
Still they preferred to settle balances with other currencies, with the American dollar becoming the favorite.
In the United States, strict constitutionalists object to the government issuing fiat currency through central banks.
Within Bretton Woods adjustment was cushioned through credits that helped countries avoid deflation.
World production for 2011 was at 2,700 tonnes.
France was then attempting to make Paris a world class financial center, and it received large gold flows as well.
Silver pennies based on the Roman denarius became the staple coin of Mercia in Great Britain around the time of King Offa, circa CE 757–796.
Once off the gold standard, it became free to engage in such money creation.
The market price of gold in greenbacks was above the pre-War fixed price ($20.67 per ounce of gold) requiring deflation to achieve the pre-War price.
Under such a system, when exchange rates rise above or fall below the fixed mint rate by more than the cost of shipping gold, inflows or outflows occur until rates return to the official level.
While prices would necessarily adjust to the supply of gold, the process may involve considerable economic disruption, as was experienced during earlier attempts to maintain gold standards.
Opponents of a full standard consider it difficult to implement, saying that the quantity of gold in the world is too small to sustain worldwide economic activity at or near current gold prices; implementation would entail a many-fold increase in the price of gold.
Other countries' currencies appreciated.
This meant that the costs of American goods decreased relative to those in Europe.
A ''full or 100%-reserve'' gold standard exists when the monetary authority holds sufficient gold to convert all the circulating representative money into gold at the promised exchange rate.
There are varying estimates of the total volume of gold mined.
In the 1790s, the United Kingdom suffered a silver shortage.
For example, Germany had gone off the gold standard in 1914, and could not effectively return to it because War reparations had cost it much of its gold reserves.
Throughout the 1820s, small notes were issued by regional banks.
Mahathir claimed it would be a stable unit of account and a political symbol of unity between Islamic nations.
The US did not suspend the gold standard during the war.
This, along with the fiscal strain of federal expenditures for the Vietnam War and persistent balance of payments deficits, led U.S. President Richard Nixon to end international convertibility of the U.S. dollar to gold on August 15, 1971 (the "Nixon Shock").
Even as nominal interest rates dropped, inflation-adjusted real interest rates remained high, rewarding those who held onto money instead of spending it, further slowing the economy.
In 2015, some candidates for the 2016 presidential election advocated for a gold standard, based on concern that the Federal Reserve’s attempts to increase economic growth may create inflation.
Since the 1950s, annual gold output growth has approximately kept pace with world population growth of around 2x, although far less than world economic growth of some 8x, or some 4x since 1980.
Various commodities have been used as money; typically, the one that loses the least value over time becomes the accepted form.
It was a fiat money (not convertible on demand at a fixed rate into specie).
Legally, the gold specie standard was not repealed.
The run spread to Germany, where the central bank also collapsed.
In 1833 however, Bank of England notes were made legal tender and redemption by other banks was discouraged.
Furthermore, it does not allow a government to manipulate the flow of commerce with the same ease that a fiat currency does.
These classes went into debt, producing the credit explosion of the 1920s.
In 1806 President Jefferson suspended the minting of silver coins.
The gold standard is supported by many followers of the Austrian School of Economics, free-market libertarians and some supply-siders.
International gold standards often limit which entities have the right to redeem currency for gold.
According to Fed Chairman Marriner Eccles, the root cause was the concentration of wealth resulting in a stagnating or decreasing standard of living for the poor and middle class.
The main feature of the gold exchange standard is that the government guarantees a fixed exchange rate to the currency of another country that uses a gold standard (specie or bullion), regardless of what type of notes or coins are used as a means of exchange.
Silver was typically the main circulating medium, with gold as the monetary reserve.
This was restricted in 1826, while the Bank of England was allowed to set up regional branches.
Under this system, many countries fixed their exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar and central banks could exchange dollar holdings into gold at the official exchange rate of $35 per ounce; this option was not available to firms or individuals.
Governments, demanding specie as payment, could drain the money out of the economy.
An estimated total of 174,100 tonnes of gold have been mined in human history, according to GFMS as of 2012.
This move was assisted by the passage of the Philippines Coinage Act by the United States Congress on March 3, 1903.
Some economic historians, such as Barry Eichengreen, blame the gold standard of the 1920s for prolonging the economic depression which started in 1929 and lasted for about a decade.
In 1853, the US reduced the silver weight of coins to keep them in circulation and in 1857 removed legal tender status from foreign coinage.
Other factors in the prolongation of the Great Depression include trade wars and the reduction in international trade caused by barriers such as Smoot–Hawley Tariff in the US and the Imperial Preference policies of Great Britain, the failure of central banks to act responsibly, government policies designed to prevent wages from falling, such as the Davis–Bacon Act of 1931, during the deflationary period resulting in production costs dropping slower than sales prices, thereby injuring business profits and increases in taxes to reduce budget deficits and to support new programs such as Social Security.
As a result of World War 1 the United States, which had been a net debtor country, had become a net creditor by 1919.
The foreign loans became questionable once Britain, Germany, Austria and other European countries went off the gold standard in 1931 and weakened confidence in the dollar.
More recently he claimed that by focusing on targeting inflation "central bankers have behaved as though we were on the gold standard", rendering a return to the standard unnecessary.
This would purportedly reduce dependence on the US dollar and establish a non-debt-backed currency in accord with Sharia law that prohibited the charging of interest.
Devalued notes or leaving silver as a store of value caused economic problems.
As bank runs grew, a reverse multiplier effect caused a contraction in the money supply.
After the fall of South Vietnam, many refugees carried their wealth to the West in gold after the national currency became worthless.
Countries that left the gold standard earlier than other countries recovered from the Great Depression sooner.
Ultimately, the system could not deal quickly enough with the large balance of payments deficits and surpluses; this was previously attributed to downward wage rigidity brought about by the advent of unionized labor, but is now considered as an inherent fault of the system that arose under the pressures of war and rapid technological change.
The interwar partially backed gold standard was inherently unstable, because of the conflict between the expansion of liabilities to foreign central banks and the resulting deterioration in the Bank of England's reserve ratio.
The United States adopted a silver standard based on the Spanish milled dollar in 1785.
Alan Greenspan wrote that the bank failures of the 1930s were sparked by Great Britain dropping the gold standard in 1931.
Congress passed the Gold Reserve Act on 30 January 1934; the measure nationalized all gold by ordering Federal Reserve banks to turn over their supply to the U.S. Treasury.
In May 1931 a run on Austria's largest commercial bank caused it to fail.
The $42.22 par value was made official in September 1973, long after it had been abandoned in practice.
Former congressman Ron Paul is a long-term, high-profile advocate of a gold standard, but has also expressed support for using a standard based on a basket of commodities that better reflects the state of the economy.
In modern times, the British West Indies was one of the first regions to adopt a gold specie standard.
In October 1976, the government officially changed the definition of the dollar; references to gold were removed from statutes.
Stocks rose to 2.6 million ounces (81 t) in 1866, declined in 1875 to 1.6 million ounces (50 t) and rose to 2.5 million ounces (78 t) in 1878.
In 1792, Congress passed the Mint and Coinage Act.
Under the old standard, a country with an overvalued currency would lose gold and experience deflation until the currency was again valued correctly.
Commodity money conversely led to deflation and bank runs.
No official revaluation or redemption occurred.
Following Queen Anne's proclamation of 1704, the British West Indies gold standard was a ''de facto'' gold standard based on the Spanish gold doubloon.
In 2011 the Utah legislature passed a bill to accept federally issued gold and silver coins as legal tender to pay taxes.
This transfer contracted the US money supply.
Under this authority the president, on 31 January 1934, changed the value of the dollar from $20.67 to the troy ounce to $35 to the troy ounce, a devaluation of over 40%.
In the early 1930s, the Federal Reserve defended the dollar by raising interest rates, trying to increase the demand for dollars.
Under the Bretton Woods international monetary agreement of 1944, the gold standard was kept without domestic convertibility.
With the Coinage Act of 1834, Congress passed an act that changed the mint ratio to approximately 16 to 1.
This helped attract international investors who bought foreign assets with gold.
Commodity money is inconvenient to store and transport in large amounts.
This is roughly equivalent to 5.6 billion troy ounces or, in terms of volume, about , or a cube  on a side.
Australia and New Zealand adopted the British gold standard, as did the British West Indies, while Newfoundland was the only British Empire territory to introduce its own gold coin.
Commodity money retains its value despite what may happen to the monetary authority.
Australia and New Zealand had already left the standard and Canada quickly followed suit.
In 1857 the final crisis of the free banking era began as American banks suspended payment in silver, with ripples through the developing international financial system.
During the early and high Middle Ages, the Byzantine gold solidus, commonly known as the bezant, was used widely throughout Europe and the Mediterranean.
In the decade before the Civil War net exports were roughly constant; postwar they varied erratically around pre-war levels, but fell significantly in 1877 and became negative in 1878 and 1879.
During the Occupation of the Ruhr the German central bank (Reichsbank) issued enormous sums of non-convertible marks to support workers who were on strike against the French occupation and to buy foreign currency for reparations; this led to the German hyperinflation of the early 1920s and the decimation of the German middle class.
In the United States, adherence to the gold standard prevented the Federal Reserve from expanding the money supply to stimulate the economy, fund insolvent banks and fund government deficits that could "prime the pump" for an expansion.
The Austrian and German experiences, as well as British budgetary and political difficulties, were among the factors that destroyed confidence in sterling, which occurred in mid-July 1931.
The gold specie standard arose from the widespread acceptance of gold as currency.
The United Province of Canada in 1853, Newfoundland in 1865, and the United States and Germany (''de jure'') in 1873 adopted gold.
After the Civil War, Congress wanted to reestablish the metallic standard at pre-war rates.
A return to the gold standard was considered by the US Gold Commission back in 1982, but found only minority support.
Silver coins left circulation, exported to pay for the debts taken on to finance the American Revolutionary War.
Economic development expanded need for credit.
The British benefited from this departure.
Many countries kept reserves in gold and settled accounts in gold.
In the late 1950s, the exchange restrictions were dropped and gold became an important element in international financial settlements.
In September 19, 1931, speculative attacks on the pound forced Britain to abandon the gold standard.
Doing business with the American government required gold or silver coins.
