The game is played on a course with an arranged progression of either nine or 18 holes.
Stroke play is more popular.
The NGF reported that the number who played golf at all decreased from 30 to 26 million over the same period.
Some top instructors who work with professional golfers have become quite well known in their own right.
The reasons for this are inherent in the types of challenges presented by the same course to both golfers.
To many golfers, the Old Course at St Andrews, a links course dating to before 1574, is considered to be a site of pilgrimage.
Early Scottish golf courses were primarily laid out on links land, soil-covered sand dunes directly inland from beaches.
The two primary difficulty ratings in the U.S. are the Course Rating, which is effectively the expected score for a zero-handicap "scratch golfer" playing the course (and may differ from the course par), and the Slope Rating, which is a measure of how much worse a "bogey golfer" (with an 18 handicap) would be expected to play than a "scratch golfer".
However, the significance of this is limited, as the LPGA is far more dominant in women's golf than the PGA Tour is in mainstream men's golf.
The OneAsia Tour also offers ranking points.
In addition, kolven (a game involving a ball and curved bats) was played annually in Loenen, Netherlands, beginning in 1297, to commemorate the capture of the assassin of Floris V, a year earlier.
Golf clubs have traditionally been arranged into three basic types.
Touring professionals, being the best of the best, often have negative handicaps; they can be expected, on average, to score lower than the Course Rating on any course.
This grip and putting style is known as "conventional".
In the United States, the number of people who play golf twenty-five times or more per year decreased from 6.9&nbsp;million in 2000 to 4.6&nbsp;million in 2005, according to the National Golf Foundation.
One theory asserts that paganica spread throughout Europe as the Romans conquered most of the continent, during the first century BC, and eventually evolved into the modern game.
A tee is allowed only for the first stroke on each hole, unless the player must hit a provisional tee shot or replay his or her first shot from the tee.
He played one more amateur year in 1961, winning that year's U.S.
The Senior British Open was not recognised as a major by PGA Tour Champions until 2003.
For example, if one party already has a lead of six holes, and only five holes remain to be played on the course, the match is over and the winning party is deemed to have won "6 & 5".
The goal of getting the ball into the hole ("holing" the ball) in as few strokes as possible may be impeded by obstacles such as areas of longer grass called "rough" (usually found alongside fairways), which both slows any ball that contacts it and makes it harder to advance a ball that has stopped on it; "doglegs", which are changes in the direction of the fairway that often require shorter shots to play around them; bunkers (or sand traps); and water hazards such as ponds or streams.
In some countries, golf instruction is best performed by teachers certified by the Professional Golfers Association.
The next hole, the rotation moves forward (e.g.
Of particular importance is the ''driver'' or "1-wood", which is the lowest lofted wood club, and in modern times has become highly specialized for making extremely long-distance tee shots, up to , or more, in a professional golfer's hands.
The minimum par of any hole is 3 because par always includes a stroke for the tee shot and two putts.
These trolleys may or may not be battery assisted.
James IV lifted the ban in 1502 when he became a golfer himself, with golf clubs first recorded in 1503-1504: "For golf clubbes and balles to the King that he playit with".
The advantages of this system over stroke play are a more natural "higher is better" scoring, the ability to compare Stableford scores between plays on courses with different total par scores (scoring an "even" in stroke play will always give a Stableford score of 36), discouraging the tendency to abandon the entire game after playing a particularly bad hole (a novice playing by strict rules may score as high as an 8 or 10 on a single difficult hole; their Stableford score for the hole would be zero, which puts them only two points behind par no matter how badly they played), and the ability to simply pick up one's ball once it is impossible to score any points for the hole, which speeds play.
three strokes under par
Though a typical group playing will have 1, 2, 3 or 4 people playing the round.
Strategically, care must be taken not to let a low-handicap player run away with all the points by being constantly paired with the Wolf.,
Professional golfers typically make between 60% and 70% of greens in regulation.
Someone with a handicap of 0 or less is often called a ''scratch golfer'', and would typically score or beat the course par on a round of play (depending on course difficulty).
This style will be banned in 2016 on the profession circuits.
It can also be used from other places to accurately position the ball into a more advantageous lie.
The actual physical length of each club is longer or shorter, depending on the distance the club is intended to propel the ball.
(Clubs that meet these parameters are usually called "conforming".)
All 18 holes are still played, but a player or foursome may, for instance, start on hole 5, play through to the 18th hole, then continue with hole 1 and end on hole 4.
When the game originated, golfers would putt with their dominate hand on the bottom of the grip and their weak hand on top of the grip.
For this first shot on each hole, it is allowed but not required for the golfer to place the ball on a tee prior to striking it.
The Masters has been played at Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia, since its inception in 1934.
This year in Rio, golf will have forty-one different countries being represented and 120 athletes.
The Persian game chaugán is another possible ancient origin.
Each hole on the course must contain a tee box to start from, and a putting green containing the actual hole or cup.
If a golfer makes a stroke at the wrong ball (Rule 19–2) or hits a fellow golfer's ball with a putt (Rule 19–5), the player incurs a two-stroke penalty.
There are other standard forms of terrain in between, such as the fairway, rough, and hazards, but each hole on a course is unique in its specific layout and arrangement.
Traditionally these clubs had heads made of a hardwood, hence the name, but virtually all modern woods are now made of metal such as titanium, or of composite materials.
In match play, the lower handicap is subtracted from the higher handicap, and the resulting handicap strokes are awarded to the higher handicapper by distributing them among the holes according to each hole's difficulty; holes are ranked on the scorecard from 1 to 18 (or however many holes are available), and one stroke is applied to each hole from the most difficult to the least difficult.
There are six principal tours for women, each based in a different country or continent.
The course is still there today.
Irons of varying loft are used for a variety of shots from virtually anywhere on the course, but most often for shorter-distance shots approaching the green, or to get the ball out of tricky lies such as sand traps.
A hole in one (or an "ace") occurs when a golfer sinks his ball into the cup with his first stroke from the tee.
* '''Greensome''' (also known as '''Scotch Foursomes'''): also called modified alternate shot, this is played in pairs; both players tee off, and then pick the best shot as in a scramble.
Examples include the Web.com Tour, which feeds to the PGA Tour, and the Challenge Tour, which is the developmental tour of the European Tour.
However, a golfer with a drive that may go  but often doesn't fly straight will be less able to position their ball advantageously; the ball may "hook", "pull", "draw", "fade", "push" or "slice" off the intended line and land out of bounds or in the rough or hazards, and thus the player will require many more strokes to hole out.
Play then continues as a greensome.
Stronger muscles on wrist can prevent wrists from being twisted at swings, while stronger shoulders increase the turning force.
Each club is composed of a shaft with a lance (or "grip") on the top end and a club head on the bottom.
After a 112-year absence from the Olympics games, golf made its comeback for the 2016 Rio Games.
However, amateur golfers may receive expenses that comply with strict guidelines and they may accept non-cash prizes within the limits established by the Rules of Amateur Status.
These design considerations will affect how even a scratch golfer would play the hole, irrespective of total distance from tee to green, and must be included in a determination of par.
That in itself is a function of the player's "gross adjusted score" (adjustments can be made to mitigate various deviations either from strict rules or from a player's normal capabilities, for handicap purposes only) and two course-specific difficulty ratings: the Course Rating, a calculated expected score for a hypothetical "scratch golfer": and the Slope Rating, a number based on how much worse a hypothetical 20-handicap "bogey golfer" would score compared to the "scratch golfer".
A lost ball or a ball hit out of bounds result in a penalty of one stroke and distance (Rule 27–1).
Also in 2012, the Canadian Tour was renamed PGA Tour Canada after it agreed to be taken over by the PGA Tour.
The first golf course in China opened in 1984, but by the end of 2009 there were roughly 600 in the country.
A hole is classified by its par, meaning the number of strokes a skilled golfer should require to complete play of the hole.
With the popularity of golf and the participants around the world, golf being an Olympic sport couldn't come sooner.
Playing a hole on a golf course is initiated by putting a ball into play by striking it with a club on the teeing ground (also called the tee box, or simply the tee).
Strokes other than the tee shot and putts are expected to be made from the fairway; for example, a skilled golfer expects to reach the green on a par-4 hole in two strokes—one from the tee (the "drive") and another, second, stroke to the green (the "approach")—and then roll the ball into the hole in two putts for par.
* '''Wolf''' (also known as '''Ship, Captain & Crew''', '''Captain''', '''Pig'''): a version of match play; with a foursome an order of play for each player is established for the duration of the round.
The other events all date from the 1980s, when senior golf became a commercial success as the first golf stars of the television era, such as Arnold Palmer and Gary Player, reached the relevant age.
Albatross (Double Eagle)
Golf instruction involves the teaching and learning of the game of golf.
Woods are large-headed, long-shafted clubs meant to propel the ball a long distance from relatively "open" lies, such as the tee box and fairway.
Perhaps the most widely known tour is the PGA Tour, which tends to attract the strongest fields, outside the four Majors and the four World Golf Championships events.
one stroke under par
The general goal of a player making a full swing is to propel the clubhead as fast as possible while maintaining a single "plane" of motion of the club and clubhead, to send the clubhead into the ball along the desired path of travel and with the clubhead also pointing that direction.
Prior to the advent of the PGA Championship and The Masters, the four Majors were the U.S. Open, the U.S.
So, if one player has a 9 handicap and another has a 25 handicap, the 25-handicap player receives one handicap stroke on each of the most difficult 16 holes (25-9).
two strokes over par
The hole is called a "dogleg left" if the hole angles leftwards and "dogleg right" if it bends right.
The fields for these events include the top several dozen golfers from all over the world.
At many amateur tournaments including U.S. high school and college play, players are required to walk and to carry their own bags, but at the professional and top amateur level, as well as at high-level private clubs, players may be accompanied by caddies, who carry and manage the players' equipment and who are allowed by the rules to give advice on the play of the course.
Irons are shorter-shafted clubs with a metal head primarily consisting of a flat, angled striking face.
In 2011, the Tour de las Américas was effectively taken over by the PGA Tour, and in 2012 was folded into the new PGA Tour Latinoamérica.
Within the last century golf has gone global, and grown tremendously.
Stroke play is the most commonly seen format at all levels.
A golf stroke uses muscles on core (especially erector spinae muscles and latissimus dorsi muscle when turning), hamstring, shoulder, and wrist.
The play then alternates as in a foursome.
The game is thought to have been introduced into Europe during the Middle Ages.
Disqualification could be from cheating, signing for a lower score, or from rule infractions that lead to improper play.
A golf bag is used to transport golf clubs and the player's other or personal equipment.
The Japan, Australasian, Sunshine, PGA, and European Tours are the charter members of the trade body of the world's main tours, the International Federation of PGA Tours, founded in 1996.
At any given point, if the lead is equal to the number of holes remaining, the party leading the match is said to be "dormie", and the match is continued until the party increases the lead by one hole or ties any of the remaining holes, thereby winning the match, or until the match ends in a tie with the lead player's opponent winning all remaining holes.
All men's tours that are Federation members, except the India tour, offer points in the Official World Golf Ranking (OWGR) to players who place sufficiently high in their events.
Once the ball comes to rest, the golfer strikes it again as many times as necessary using shots that are variously known as a "lay-up", an "approach", a "pitch", or a "chip", until the ball reaches the green, where he or she then "putts" the ball into the hole (commonly called "sinking the putt" or "holing out").
A one-stroke penalty is assessed if a player's equipment causes the ball to move or the removal of a loose impediment causes the ball to move (Rule 18–2).
These two numbers are available for any USGA-sanctioned course, and are used in a weighted system to calculate handicaps (see below).
Golf bags have several pockets designed for carrying equipment and supplies such as tees, balls, and gloves.
However, PGA Tour Champions is arguably more dominant in global senior golf than the U.S. LPGA is in global women's golf.
Putting the ball on the green with two strokes remaining for putts is called making "green in regulation" or GIR.
Each hole is played once in the round on a standard course of 18 holes; on a nine-hole course, players may play a "short game" playing each hole once, or a "full round" by playing each hole twice.
* The "approach" or "3/4 swing" is used in medium- and long-distance situations where an exact distance and good accuracy is preferable to maximum possible distance, such as to place the ball on the green or "lay up" in front of a hazard.
Penalties are incurred in certain situations.
Common scores for a hole also have specific terms.
Cross handed putting is the idea that the dominant hand is on top of the grip where the weak hand is on the bottom.
The Web.com and Challenge Tours also offer OWGR points.
Two players (or two teams) play each hole as a separate contest against each other in what is called match play.
A one-stroke penalty is assessed if a player's ball results into a red or yellow staked hazard (Rule 26).
In a typical professional tournament or among "scratch" amateur players, "birdie-bogey" play is common; a player will "lose" a stroke by bogeying a hole, then "gain" one by scoring a birdie.
However, other considerations must be taken into account; the key question is "how many strokes would a scratch golfer take to make the green by playing along the fairway?".
Amateur, the Open Championship, and the British Amateur.
The weak hand placed normally on the putter.
Putting is considered to be the most important component of the game of golf.
Eighteen-hole courses typically total to an overall par score of 72 for a complete round; this is based on an average par of 4 for every hole, and so is often arrived at by designing a course with an equal number of par-5 and par-3 holes, the rest being par-4.
Most rule infractions lead to stroke penalties but also can lead to disqualification.
At some courses, electric golf carts are used to travel between shots, which can speed-up play and allows participation by individuals unable to walk a whole round.
So, a gross score of 96 with a handicap of 22 would produce a net score of 74.
This grip restricts the motion in your dominant hand and eliminates the possibility of wrist breakdowns through the putting stroke.
The player with the lowest score on a hole receives five points, the next-lowest score 3 and the next-lowest score 1.
Senior (aged fifty and over) men's golf does not have a globally agreed set of majors.
Women's golf does not have a globally agreed set of majors.
A nine-point game is another variant of match play typically played among threesomes, where each hole is worth a total of nine points.
The rare par-6s can stretch well over .
Having chosen a club and stroke to produce the desired distance, the player addresses the ball by taking their stance to the side of it and (except when the ball lies in a hazard) grounding the club behind the ball.
Ties are generally resolved by summing the points contested and dividing them among the tying players; a two-way tie for first is worth four points to both players, a two-way tie for second is worth two points to both players, and a three-way tie is worth three points to each player.
The player with the lowest score on the hole wins the skin for that hole; if two or more players tie for the lowest score, the skin carries over to the next hole.
Two Scotsmen from Dunfermline, John Reid and Robert Lockhart, first demonstrated golf in the US by setting up a hole in an orchard in 1888, with Reid setting up America's first golf club the same year, St. Andrews Golf Club in Yonkers, New York.
* '''Better ball''' or '''best-ball''': like fourball, each player plays the hole as normal, but the lowest score of all the players on the team counts as the team's score for the hole.
Violation of these rules can result in disqualification.
In the case that one team or player has taken a lead that cannot be overcome in the number of holes remaining to be played, the match is deemed to be won by the party in the lead, and the remainder of the holes are not played.
Handicap systems have potential for abuse by players who may intentionally play badly to increase their handicap ("throwing their 'cap") before playing to their potential at an important event with a valuable prize.
A fourth class, called hybrids, evolved as a cross between woods and irons, and are typically seen replacing the low-lofted irons with a club that provides similar distance, but a higher launch angle and a more forgiving nature.
By recording only this simple win-loss-halve score on the sheet, a player can shrug off a very poorly-played hole with a simple "-" mark and move on.
The choice of clubs is at the golfer's discretion, although every club must be constructed in accordance with parameters outlined in the rules.
Playoffs either are sudden death or employ a pre-determined number of holes, anywhere from three to a full 18.
Additional calculations can be used to place higher significance on a player's recent tournament scores.
There are two basic forms of golf play, match play and stroke play.
Golf is documented as being played on Musselburgh Links, East Lothian, Scotland as early as 2 March 1672, which is certified as the oldest golf course in the world by Guinness World Records.
This continues until a player wins a hole outright, which may (and often does) result in a player receiving money for a previous hole that they hadn't tied for.
Although golf makes its return to the games, some of golfs top athletes were not in attendances due to Zika virus concerns.
Golf bags have both a hand strap and shoulder strap for carrying, and sometimes have retractable legs that allow the bag to stand upright when at rest.
The number of course in other territories increases, an example of this being the expansion of golf in China.
In 1764, the standard 18-hole golf course was created at St Andrews when members modified the course from 22 to 18 holes.
Golf is unique in having lucrative competition for older players.
As the game of golf has evolved, there have been many different putting techniques and grips that have been devised to give golfers the best chance to make putts.
* '''Champagne scramble''': a combination of a scramble and best-ball, only the first shot of each hole is a scramble; all players tee off, decide on the best tee shot, then each player plays their own ball starting at that point until they hole out, without deciding any further "best shots".
It is the only major championship that is played at the same course each year.
Golf bags can be carried, pulled on a trolley or harnessed to a motorized golf cart during play.
Putters are virtually always used on the green or in the surrounding rough/fringe.
When the game is tied after the predetermined number of holes have been played, it may be continued until one side takes a one-hole lead.
The sport itself has been on a steady climb for a century.
The European Tour, which attracts a substantial number of top golfers from outside North America, ranks second to the PGA Tour in worldwide prestige.
two strokes under par
This format can be used to wager on the game systematically; players each contribute the same amount of money to the pot, and a dollar value is assigned to each point scored (or each point after 18) based on the amount of money in the pot, with any overage going to the overall winner.
The Asian Tour became a full member in 1999.
Typically a tour has "members" who are entitled to compete in most of its events, and also invites non-members to compete in some of them.
The golfer then takes their backswing, rotating the club, their arms and their upper body away from the ball, and then begins their swing, bringing the clubhead back down and around to hit the ball.
The goal is to play as few strokes per round as possible.
The backswing typically ends with the head of the club between hip and head height.
The USGA and R&A sanction a "Modified Stableford" system for scratch players, which makes par worth zero, a birdie worth 2, eagle 5 and double-eagle 8, while a bogey is a penalty of -1 and a double-bogey or worse -3.
Also, the Ladies' Golf Union, the governing body for women's golf in Great Britain and Ireland, stated on its official website that the Women's British Open was "the only Women's Major to be played outside the U.S." (this was before the elevation of The Evian Championship to major status).
Weak wrists can also deliver the impacts to elbows and even neck and lead to injury of them.
Others cite chuiwan ("chui" means striking and "wan" means small ball) as the progenitor, a Chinese game played between the eighth and 14th centuries.
While many holes are designed with a direct line-of-sight from the teeing area to the green, some holes may bend either to the left or to the right.
A player's Handicap Index is then multiplied by the Slope Rating of the course to be played, divided by the average Slope Rating of 113, then rounded to the nearest integer to produce the player's Course Handicap.
A proper golf swing is a complex combination of motions, and slight variations in posture or positioning can make a great deal of difference in how well the ball is hit and how straight it travels.
The golfer chooses a golf club, grip, and stroke appropriate to the distance:
The third class is the putter, which evolved from the irons to create a low-lofted, balanced club designed to roll the ball along the green and into the hole.
Finally, terrain features and fairway maintenance can affect golfers of all skill levels; narrowing the fairway by adding obstacles or widening the rough on each side will typically increase the percentage of shots made from disadvantageous lies, increasing the challenge for all players.
In 2013, Henrik Stenson won the FedEx Cup points race on the PGA Tour and the European Tour money title, but did not top the PGA Tour money list (that honour going to Tiger Woods).
The typical amount of time required for pace of play for a 9-hole round is two hours and four hours for an 18-hole round.
Once a partner is picked, each two-some (the Wolf and his or her partner vs the remaining two players) scores their total strokes and the winning two-some is awarded 1-point each for winning a hole and zero points for tying.
Though there are no penalties for breach of etiquette rules, players generally follow the rules of golf etiquette in an effort to improve everyone's playing experience.
For the first time since 1904, golf is considered an Olympic sport.
A tee is a small peg that can be used to elevate the ball slightly above the ground up to a few centimetres high.
Some top professionals from outside North America play enough tournaments to maintain membership on both the PGA Tour and European Tour.
A "round" typically consists of 18 holes that are played in the order determined by the course layout.
These programs include independent institutions and universities, and those that eventually lead to a Class A golf professional certification.
Traditionally, golfers used mounds of sand to elevate the ball, and containers of sand were provided for the purpose.
Golf balls are spherical, usually white (although other colours are allowed), and minutely pock-marked by dimples that decrease aerodynamic drag by increasing air turbulence around the ball in motion, which delays "boundary layer" separation and reduces the drag-inducing "wake" behind the ball,
Another early game that resembled modern golf was known as cambuca in England and chambot in France.
Many combinations exist that total to par-72, and other course pars exist from 68 up to 76, and are not less worthy than courses of par-72.
The grade of the land from the tee to the hole might increase or decrease the carry and rolling distance of shots as measured linearly along the ground.
This gave rise to the term "golf links", particularly applied to seaside courses and those built on naturally sandy soil inland.
In this variant, each of the groups playing starts their game on a different hole, allowing for all players to start and end their round at roughly the same time.
Tees help reduce the interference of the ground or grass on the movement of the club making the ball easier to hit, and also places the ball in the very centre of the striking face of the club (the "sweet spot") for better distance.
Other notable putting styles include "the claw", a style that has the grip directly in between the thumb and index finger of the dominant hand while the palm faces the target.
The Stableford system is a simplification of stroke play that awards players points based on their score relative to the hole's par; the score for a hole is calculated by taking the par score, adding 2, then subtracting the player's hole score, making the result zero if negative.
A player scoring even par on Course A might average four over par on course B, while a player averaging 20 over par on course A might average only 16 over on course B.
By USGA rules, handicap calculation first requires calculating a "Handicap Differential" for each round of play the player has completed by strict rules.
The U.S. Open and PGA Championship are played at courses around the United States, while the Open Championship is played at courses around the United Kingdom.
Golf clubs are used to hit the golf ball.
The ball is placed further "back" in the player's stance (toward the trailing foot) as the loft of the club to be used increases.
Pars of 4 and 5 strokes are ubiquitous on golf courses; more rarely, a few courses feature par-6 and even par-7 holes.
Distance is often a problem for amateur "bogey" golfers with slower swing speeds, who get less distance with each club, and so typically require more shots to get to the green, raising their score compared to a scratch golfer with a stronger swing.
* The "drive" or "full swing" is used on the teeing ground and fairway, typically with a wood or long iron, to produce the maximum distance capable with the club.
If alone, the Wolf is awarded 2-points for going alone after everyone has hit or 4 points for declaring Lone Wolf before anyone else hits.
The OneAsia Tour, founded in 2009, is not a member of the Federation, but was founded as a joint venture of the Australasia, China, Japan, and Korean tours.
This may be prize money at the professional level (the most famous event to use these rules was the "LG Skins Game", played at Indian Wells Golf Resort in California until 2008), or an amount wagered for each hole among amateur players.
