Lehman connects this depiction of the character to Disney's use of humor and animal characters to reinforce social conformity.
Max is one of the few Disney characters, aside from his best friend PJ and Huey, Dewey, and Louie child or otherwise, who has actually aged in subsequent appearances.
The wife's face was never seen, but her form was human.
His clothing changed from a casual style to wearing business suits.
He was an old man with a white beard, a puffy tail and no trousers, shorts, or undergarments.
A character called "Glory-Bee" was Goofy's girlfriend for some years.
Later in ''An Extremely Goofy Movie'', he gains a girlfriend named Sylvia Marpole.
The Goofy ''How to...'' cartoons worked so well they that they became a staple format, and are still used in current Goofy shorts, the most recent being the ''How to Hook Up Your Home Theatre'', released theatrically in 2007.
By 1951, Goofy was portrayed as being married and having a son of his own.
Three more ''Goofy'' shorts were produced in the 1960s after which Goofy was only seen in television and comics.
Goofy reverted to his traditional personality on Mickey Mouse Works and appeared as head waiter on House of Mouse (2001 to 2004).
Goofy's (unnamed) wife has appeared—but always with her face unseen—in 1950s-produced cartoon shorts depicting the character as a "family man".
Super Goof had his own comic book series from 1965 to 1984 with a 74-issue run from Gold Key Comics including a handful of stories scripted by Mark Evanier.
In the Silly Symphonies cartoon ''The Grasshopper and the Ants'' the Grasshopper had an aloof character similar to Goofy and shared the same voice (Pinto Colvig) as the Goofy character.
Goofy also had an act in the 1969 tour show, Disney On Parade.
Tina Fey used the term "Goofy Pluto" to refer to seemingly disparate roles for guest stars on ''30 Rock,'' namely the mismatch between Jennifer Aniston playing a character in the show in the same episode in which the cast of ''Night Court'' appears as themselves in the episode titled "The One with the Cast of ''Night Court''."
His powers mirror some of Superman's.
On  their web site, it stated that "Goofy was originally created as Dippy Dawg" and "was created as a human character, as opposed to Pluto, who was a pet, so Goofy walked upright and had a speaking voice".
He cites as an example ''Aquamania'' (1961), where everyman Goofy drives to the lake for a boat ride.
Farmer also inherited Colvig's other characters, like Pluto, Sleepy and Practical Pig.
Hal Smith began voicing Goofy in 1967 after Pinto Colvig's death, and voiced him until ''Mickey's Christmas Carol'' in 1983.
While raising his son, Max Goof, Goofy's family life contrasts with other major Disney characters such as Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck, who are always shown only as uncles rather than parental figures.
While every cartoon continued with the opening, "''Walt Disney presents Goofy''" before each cartoon's title, he was usually called "George Geef" in the cartoons' dialogue.
In later stories, Super Goof not only encountered the Phantom Blot, but also such adversaries as Black Pete, the Beagle Boys, Emil Eagle, and Mad Madam Mim as well as several characters created for the stories.
Goofy is a close friend of Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck and is one of Disney's most recognizable characters.
Stuart Buchanan voiced Goofy in ''The Mickey Mouse Theater of the Air''.
It was passed on to Western Publishing scripter Del Connell who refined it, including the eventual device of the goobers providing super powers.
A brief gag in an episode of ''House of Mouse'' also acknowledges this&nbsp;— Hades asks Goofy, "Are you a man, are you a dog, are you a man-dog.
His last theatrical appearance was ''How to Hook Up Your Home Theater'' in 2007.
#''How to Hook Up Your Home Theater'' (2007)
In his 50s persona, Goofy was called '''George Geef''', or '''G.
After that, he appeared in ''Sport Goofy in Soccermania'' which was originally intended to be released theatrically in 1984, but was aired as a 1987 TV special instead, his popularity then rose again.
Tickets were exclusively spent on everything there, instead of the usual jellybean currency.
Goofy is captain of the royal guard at Disney Castle in the ''Kingdom Hearts'' video game series.
G. Goof''', likely a reference to the 1950s name.
The '''Goofy holler''' is a stock sound effect that is used frequently in Walt Disney cartoons and films.
Neither the wife, nor the son were portrayed as dog-like.
Bill Farmer, the current voice of Goofy, demonstrated the "Goofy Holler" in the Disney Treasures DVD ''The Complete Goofy''.
head George Sherman and Disney United Kingdom merchandising representative Peter Woods.
Pinto Colvig voiced Goofy for most of his classic appearances from 1932 (''Mickey's Revue'') to 1965 (''Goofy's Freeway Troubles'').
In ''Goofy Gymnastics'' (1949) he fills out a coupon with the name '''James Boyd'''.
For example, he was the first to figure out why Organization XIII was after the Beast, and he was the first to see through Fa Mulan's disguise and discovery that Mulan was actually a woman dressed as a male soldier.
However many cartoons feature Goofy silent or have recycled dialogue from earlier shorts or have various different-sounding Goofys instead of the original.
And Lehman points that Disney received  social approval for it.
Aside from those occasions, Bill Farmer has been voicing Goofy since 1987.
Goofy also has a characteristic habit of holding his hand in front of his mouth, a trademark that was introduced by Paul Murry.
It is now generally considered the name for the sound effect.
But the short introduced Goofy's distinct laughter.
Goofy's facial stubble and his protruding teeth were removed to give him a more refined look.
Unfortunately, perhaps because of poor sales, ''Goofy Adventures'' was the first of the company's titles to be cancelled by the Disney Comics Implosion, ending at its 17th issue.
In the 1990s Goofy got his own TV series called ''Goof Troop''.
Interestingly, Goofy is never referred to as "Goofy" during this period.
Pinto Colvig, who was a man of primarily one voice, would incorporate the unique laugh and speech pattern into otherwise unrelated cartoon characters that he voiced.
He was depicted as eleven in ''Goof Troop'', then a sixteen-year-old high school student in ''A Goofy Movie'', then in ''An Extremely Goofy Movie'' he turns eighteen years old and attending college.
With Colvig dead, Goofy was then voiced with different voice actors until Bill Farmer became the official voice.
This is despite the fact that Super Goof does not wear a mask, his costume consisting solely of a red union suit and a cape (that appear out of seemingly nowhere whenever Goofy eats a goober and change back to his regular clothes when the powers wear off), a likely parody of Superman's poor yet effective means to conceal his identity.
# ''Crazy With the Heat'' (1947)
Goofy next starred at his first solo cartoon ''Goofy and Wilbur'' directed by Dick Huemer, first released on March 17, 1939.
This problem was humorously illustrated in the movie ''Stand By Me'' in which one of the boys ponders, "Mickey's a mouse, Donald's a duck, and Pluto's a dog.
Oddly enough, ''Goofy Adventures'' was the only one of the cancelled titles to declare its cancellation right there; the other unfortunate titles ended abruptly with no immediate announcement of their cancellation.
Animation historian Michael Barrier is skeptical of Gabler's claim, saying that his source did not correspond with what was written.
Disney has needed to deal with a certain amount of confusion concerning the fact that the anthropomorphic Goofy is treated as a human while Pluto (an ordinary dog) is treated as a household pet, despite being of the same species.
Accordingly, Goofy remained alone as Mickey's sidekick, replacing Horace Horsecollar as Mickey's fellow adventurer and companion.
As Riku was about to attack Sora, Goofy used his shield to protect Sora; thus disobeying the king.
''Clock Cleaners'', first released on October 15, 1937, and ''Lonesome Ghosts'', first released on December 24, 1937, are usually considered the highlights of this series and animated classics.
During a scene depicting a pile-up accident, every car involved has a boat hitched to its rear bumper.
He made his first appearance as an actual superhero in ''Donald Duck #102'' (July, 1965), in the story "All's Well that Ends Awful", also by Connell and Murry.
When the stories featured Goofy as multiple characters, then he had numerous other names as well.
'''Dippy Dawg''', as he was named by Disney artists (Frank Webb), was a member of the audience.
The Grand Prix only came on "Grand Prix Monday" and "Silly Saturday".
There is also an episode of the Disney Channel series ''Even Stevens'' called "Scrub Day" where in Louis' rallying-the-troops speech he wonders why Goofy got to walk and talk and Pluto has to eat from a dog bowl.
In the game series, Goofy still suffers from being the butt of comic relief, but also is the constant voice of optimism and, surprisingly, selectively perceptive, often noticing things others miss and keeping his cool when Sora and Donald lose it.
Goofy appeared in ''The Lion King 1½''.
Beginning with his third appearance, "The Thief of Zanzipar" from ''Super Goof #1'' (October, 1965), the origin of his powers is peanuts.
After the 1965 educational film ''Goofy's Freeway Troubles'', Goofy was mostly retired except for cameos, because of the fading popularity, and the death of the voice actor Pinto Colvig and he only made a brief appearance in Disney/Amblin's ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit''.
Starting in 1939, Goofy was given his own series of shorts that were popular in the 1940s and early 1950s.
Goofy's loyalty was also tested when Riku wielded the Keyblade thus, following the king's orders, he followed Riku instead.
Following a letter left by the missing king Mickey Mouse, Goofy and Donald, the court magician, meet Sora and embark on a quest with him to find the King and Sora's missing friends.
As such, he threatened constantly to terminate the series, but only continued it to provide make-work for his animators.
This confusion is also mentioned in the French movie ''La Cité de la peur''.
At many times in the'' Kingdom Hearts'' series, Goofy is shown to still be his clumsy self, however, in ''Kingdom Hearts II'', he is very keen to details and has very accurate assumptions of certain things.
On occasion, Gilbert uses the super goobers to become a superhero under the name Super Gilbert (although his uncle calls him Super Gilly).
'''Goofy''' is a funny-animal cartoon character created in 1932 at Walt Disney Productions.
In the European comic books, Goofy has an adventurer cousin called Arizona Goof (original Italian name: Indiana Pipps), who is a spoof of the fictional archaeologist Indiana Jones.
Super Goof first appeared in ''The Phantom Blot #2'' (February, 1965) by Connell (story) and Paul Murry (art), where he was just imagining that he was a super hero.
In other 2000s-era comics the character's full name has occasionally been given as '''Goofus D. Dawg'''.
Colvig returned to Disney in 1944 and resumed the voice of Goofy.
It is the cry Goofy makes when falling or being launched into the air, that can be transcribed as "Yaaaaaaa-hoo-hoo-hoo-hooey!"
He even lacked his droopy ears, the external pair of teeth and white gloves in some shorts.
''Aquamania'' was released in the 1960s, but largely maintained and prolonged the status quo of the 1950s.
G. Geef''', implying that "Goofy" was merely a nickname.
In ''Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two'', however, it is referenced as "Goofy Yell".
refers to Goofy as a "real artist".
Colvig also gave Goofy a normal voice for four George Geef shorts while in ''Goofy and Wilbur'' Goofy was voiced by George Johnson.
He is normally characterized as extremely clumsy and dimwitted, yet this interpretation is not always definitive; occasionally Goofy is shown as intuitive, and clever, albeit in his own unique, eccentric way.
He first appeared in the 1992 television series ''Goof Troop''.
Sources from the ''Goof Troop'' continuity give the character's full name as '''Goofy Goof''', or '''G.
In the cartoons Goofy would demonstrate, clumsily but always determined and never frustrated, how to do everything from snow ski, to sleeping, to football, to riding a horse.
(which is his usual exclamation of surprise and his way of pronouncing "gosh"), along with "ah-hyuck!"
He also does this in the ''Kingdom Hearts'' games.
''Goof Troop'' eventually led to Goofy and Max starring in their own movies: ''A Goofy Movie'' (in 1995) and ''An Extremely Goofy Movie'' (in 2000).
He constantly irritated his fellow spectators by noisily crunching peanuts and laughing loudly, till two of those fellow spectators knocked him out with their mallets (and then did the same exact laugh as he did).
Goofy became the first Disney character to get a career as a superhero, but several would follow&nbsp;— notably Donald Duck as Paperinik.
The 1950s saw Goofy transformed into a family man going through the trials of everyday life, such as dieting, giving up smoking, and the problems of raising children.
In that story his powers come from wearing a cape invented by Gyro Gearloose.
(In comic books, Goofy was regularly featured as having a nephew, Gilbert, but that character has only existed in comics, with no cartoon appearances.)
Recently, Goofy starred in a new theatrical cartoon short called ''How to Hook Up Your Home Theater'', that premiered at the Ottawa International Animation Festival.
'''Super Goof''' is Goofy's superhero alter ego who gets his powers by eating super goobers (peanuts).
According to Leonard Maltin this is what caused the ''How to...'' cartoons of the 1940s in which Goofy had little dialogue, and a narrator (often John McLeish) was used (they would also reuse Colvig's voice in recording or hire a voice actor to imitate it).
In 1939, Colvig had a fallout with Disney and left the studio, leaving Goofy without a voice.
This early version of Goofy had other differences with the later and more developed ones besides the name.
Instead the studio apparently accepted conformity as a fundamental aspect of the society of the United States.
On Disney's Toontown Online, an interactive website for kids, Goofy previously ran his own neighborhood called Goofy Speedway until the close of Toontown.
At Goofy's Gag Shop, Toons could buy gags.
Lehman does not think that Disney used these aspects of the film to poke fun at conformity.
A version of the holler is used in a cutaway in the "Dial Meg for Murder" episode of ''Family Guy'' when Goofy is cast into Hell for causing 9/11.
''Mickey's Service Station'' directed by Ben Sharpsteen, first released on March 16, 1935, was the first of the classic "Mickey, Donald, and Goofy" comedy shorts.
In the "Wacky Delly" episode of ''Rocko's Modern Life'', the holler is heard at the end of the haphazardly made cartoon created by Rocko, Heffer Wolfe, and Filburt for Ralph Bighead.
He also co-starred in a short series with Donald, including Polar Trappers, where they first appeared without Mickey Mouse.
Their food supplies consist of canned beans.
Clarabelle has been noted as Horace Horsecollar's fiancé in early decades, but according to comics from the 1960s and 1970s and more recent cartoons like "House of Mouse," "Mouseworks," and Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers, Goofy and Clarabelle seem to have affections for one another; perhaps as an attempt for Disney to give Goofy a girlfriend to match his two male co-stars.
He returned to theatrical animation in 1983 with ''Mickey's Christmas Carol''.
However, he made a comeback in Mickey's Christmas Carol as the ghost of Jacob Marley.
In a crossover story, Huey, Dewey and Louie found a super goober plant sprouted by a dropped goober, and "borrowed" Super Goof's powers; after doing a round of super deeds, the ducks' powers faded, and they had to be rescued by the Junior Woodchucks.
Goofy simply replies "I'm just Goofy."
Those films had the trio trying to cooperate in performing a certain assignment given to them.
Goofy has also been featured in television, most extensively in ''Goof Troop'' (1992–1993), as well as ''House of Mouse'' (2001–2003) and ''Mickey Mouse Clubhouse'' (2006–present).
Tony Pope voiced Goofy in the 1979 Disney album, ''Mickey Mouse Disco'' for the song, "Watch out for Goofy".
The short featured Goofy fishing with the help of Wilbur, his pet grasshopper.
Later, starting with ''How to Play Baseball'' (1942), Goofy starred in a series of cartoons where ''every'' single character in the cartoon was a different version of Goofy.
The focus shifts between Goofy trying to set traps for walruses and Donald trying to catch penguins to use as food&nbsp;— both with the same lack of success.
The son lacked Goofy's dog-like ears.
He then voiced him in ''Sport Goofy in Soccermania'' in 1987 and ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit'' in 1988.
Goofy's wife dies later on and Goofy states to his son Max in "Goof Troop," "She's up there with the stars" so his modern day appearances portray Goofy as a widower.
Some sources claim that Schrolle was not paid for the recording.
This took Goofy out of the role of just being a clumsy cartoon dog and into an Everyman figure.
Averse to using actual weapons, Goofy fights with a shield.
The decade had changed but the Disney studio followed the same story  formulas for theatrical animated shorts it had followed in the previous decade.
Super Goof's secret identity is known only to his nephew Gilbert (and, in French-produced Super Goof stories, to Mickey Mouse as well).
Goofy is portrayed as one of numerous people who had the same idea about how to spend their day.
Goofy's son Max Goof also appeared in House of Mouse as the nightclub's valet, so that Goofy juggled not only his conventional antics but also the father-role displayed in ''Goof Troop'' and ''A Goofy Movie''.
Then the short's focus started alternating between each of them facing the problems at hand, each in their own way and distinct style of comedy.
Progressively during the series Mickey's part diminished in favor of Donald, Goofy, and Pluto.
Gemstone reprinted a Disney Studio Program story written by Evanier and drawn by Jack Bradbury as a backup in their 2006 release ''Return of the Blotman''.
The short received a positive review from animation historian Jerry Beck and then had wide release on December 21, 2007 in front of ''National Treasure: Book of Secrets'' and has aired on several occasions on the Disney Channel.
Directed by Wilfred Jackson this short movie features Mickey Mouse, Minnie Mouse, Horace Horsecollar and Clarabelle Cow performing another song and dance show.
Goofy debuted in animated cartoons, starting in 1932 with ''Mickey's Revue'' as '''Dippy Dawg''', who is older than Goofy would come to be.
During the 1930s he was used extensively as part of a comedy trio with Mickey and Donald.
He also appeared in one episode of ''Disney's House of Mouse'' and in two episodes of ''Mickey Mouse Clubhouse''.
Goofy Speedway was a place where you could race cars and enter the Grand Prix, too.
In addition, the 1950s Goofy shorts gave Goofy a makeover.
The end of the short would reunite the three to share the fruits of their efforts, failure more often than success.
Goofy also appears in the children's television series, ''Mickey Mouse Clubhouse'', with his trademark attire and personality.
Goofy first appeared in ''Mickey's Revue'', first released on May 25, 1932.
It begins as a typical Mickey cartoon of the time, but what would set this short apart from all that had come before was the appearance of a new character, whose behavior served as a running gag.
In the Disney's Toontown Online event "April Toons Week," characters switch playgrounds and everything is silly.
The reason for this was simple: Between the easily frustrated Donald and Pluto and the always-living-in-a-world-of-his-own Goofy, Mickey—who became progressively gentler and more laid-back—seemed to act as the straight man of the trio.
The term "Goofy Holler" was first created by a user of the Internet Movie Database, and originated on the trivia page for ''A Goofy Movie''.
Upon realizing that Mickey has been abducted and taken to the Keyblade Graveyard by Master Xehanort in an attempt to lure Ventus out, Goofy and Donald prepare to venture out to rescue Mickey, but as they will obviously be no match for Master Xehanort, Ventus goes alone.
Additional Super Goof stories (both original and reprints) appeared in Walt Disney Comics Digest.
Originally known as '''Dippy Dawg''', the character is more commonly known simply as "Goofy," a name used in his short film series.
This laughter was provided by Pinto Colvig.
The confusion between Goofy and Pluto is also mentioned in an episode of ''Full House'' by Dave Coulier.
Later the same year, he was re-imagined as a younger dog, now called Goofy, in the short ''The Whoopee Party''.
In the show Goofy lives with his son Max and his cat Waffles, and they live next door to Pete and his family.
''Polar Trappers'', first released on June 17, 1938, was the first film to feature Goofy and Donald as a duo.
Jack Bailey also voiced Goofy in several Donald Duck cartoons.
His costar in his act was Herbie the Love Bug.
He was more intelligent, had smaller eyes with eyebrows, often his whole body was pale instead of just his face (while the rest was black), and sometimes had a normal voice.
In 1990, when Disney was publishing their own comics, Goofy starred in ''Goofy Adventures'', that featured him starring in various parodies.
'''Max Goof''' is a fictional character who is Goofy's teenage son.
Dippy Dawg made a total of four appearances in 1932 and two more in 1933, but most of them were mere cameos.
Jimmy MacDonald voiced Goofy in the 1960s Disney album, ''Donald Duck and his Friends''.
''Aquamania'' itself received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film.
(a distinctive chuckle) that is sometimes followed by a "hoo hoo hoo hoo!
Donald and Goofy later care for their King as he recuperates from his injuries.
Farmer closely imitated Colvig for projects like ''The Prince and the Pauper'', but began putting his own spin on the character in 1992's ''Goof Troop''.
Goofy is a tall, anthropomorphic dog with a Southern drawl, and typically wears a turtle neck and vest, with pants, shoes, white gloves, and a tall hat originally designed as a rumpled fedora.
According to biographer Neal Gabler, Walt Disney disliked the Goofy cartoons, thinking they were merely "stupid cartoons with gags tied together" with no larger narrative or emotional engagement and a step backwards to the early days of animation.
The holler is also used in films and cartoons in which Goofy does not appear, generally in situations that are particularly "goofy" (examples include ''Cinderella'', ''Bedknobs and Broomsticks'', ''Pete's Dragon'', ''The Rescuers'', ''The Hunchback of Notre Dame'', ''Home on the Range'' and ''Enchanted'').
The first release in the German-language Heimliche Helden book series by Ehapa published Oct. 2005 was devoted to Super Goof.
The Studio's artists found that it had become easier coming up with new gags for Goofy or Donald than Mickey, to a point that Mickey's role had become unnecessary.
Comic relief in the stories would spring from the fact that Super Goof's powers would "wear off" at the least opportune moments, such as when he was flying or in need of super strength.
The comic strips drawn by Floyd Gottfredson for Disney were generally based on what was going on in the Mickey Mouse shorts at the time but when Donald Duck's popularity led to Donald Duck gaining his own newspaper strip, Disney decided that he was no longer allowed to appear in Gottfredson's strips.
In a ''Batman: The Animated Series'' episode titled "The Strange Secret of Bruce Wayne", the Joker performs the holler when the plane crashes toward a canyon.
In both Mickey Mouse Works and House of Mouse Goofy also seemed to have a crush on Clarabelle Cow, as he asks her on a date in the House of Mouse episode "Super Goof" and is being stalked by the bovine in the Mickey Mouse Works cartoon "How To Be a Spy."
Goofy always kept a few super goobers in his hat, but would occasionally forget to restock, leading to situations in which he would have to get out of trouble without the super powers.
Max is a playable character on the Super NES video game ''Goof Troop'' (1994), the PlayStation 2 video game ''Disney Golf'' (2002), and the PC video game ''Disney's Extremely Goofy Skateboarding'' (2001).
There were even several instances where Goofy seemed to have more common sense than Sora and Donald, even saying they should "look before we leap" when Sora and Donald saw Mushu's shadow resembling a dragon, that Sora had mistaken for a Heartless.
The initial concept was developed by Disney Publications Dept.
Bob Jackman took Colvig's place when he left the Disney Studios for unknown reasons and voiced Goofy in 1951 for a brief time.
Every contestant in the boat race also looks like Goofy.
A considerably younger Dippy Dawg then appeared in ''The Whoopee Party'', first released on September 17, 1932, as a party guest and a friend of Mickey and his gang.
Similarly in comics the Mickey Mouse world with Goofy as Mickey's sidekick was usually very separate from the Donald Duck world and crossovers were rare.
When Sora, Donald, and Goofy enter the realm known as Timeless River, Goofy states that the world looks familiar; a reference to his cartoons done in the early to mid-1930s.
In many other sources, both animated and comics, the surname Goof continues to be used.
Goofy reappears in the prequel, ''Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep'', in a relatively minor role, having accompanied Mickey (along with Donald) to Yen Sid's tower to watch Mickey's Mark of Mastery Exam.
He began to look more human and less dog-like, with his ears hidden in his hat.
He also stars in the spin-off movie ''A Goofy Movie'' (1995) and its direct-to-video sequel ''An Extremely Goofy Movie'' (2000); the direct-to-video ''Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas'' (1999) and its sequel ''Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas'' (2004); and the 2001 TV series ''House of Mouse'' (as a parking valet).
Early on they became separated from each other.
