Google uses various tax avoidance strategies.
The first funding for Google was an August 1998 contribution of $100,000 from Andy Bechtolsheim, co-founder of Sun Microsystems, given before Google was incorporated.
In July 2014, Google purchased the online music service Songza.
A Google spokesman would not comment of the price.
Google cited its editorial policy at the time, stating "Google does not accept advertising if the ad or site advocates against other individuals, groups, or organizations."
In 2003, ''The New York Times'' complained about Google's indexing, claiming that Google's caching of content on its site infringed its copyright for the content.
The mission of the organization is to create awareness about climate change, global public health, and global poverty.
In 2003, after outgrowing two other locations, the company leased an office complex from Silicon Graphics at 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway in Mountain View, California.
The system will be the largest solar power system constructed on a U.S. corporate campus and one of the largest on any corporate site in the world.
An initial public offering (IPO) took place on August 19, 2004, and Google moved to its new headquarters in Mountain View, California, nicknamed the Googleplex.
Google has been estimated to run more than one million servers in data centers around the world (as of 2007).
The company also partnered with AOL to enhance each other's video search services.
Google acquired Urchin Software in April 2005, using their 'Urchin on Demand' product (along with ideas from Adaptive Path's 'Measure Map') to create Google Analytics in 2006.
The official confirmation of Google's acquisition of the Israel-based startup Waze occurred in June 2013.
The doodle was designed by Larry Page and Sergey Brin to notify users of their absence in case the servers crashed.
Also in 2007, Google's Gmail page displayed an announcement for Gmail Paper, allowing users to have email messages printed and shipped to them.
As a motivation technique, Google uses a policy often called Innovation Time Off, where Google engineers are encouraged to spend 20% of their work time on projects that interest them.
Google has a tradition of creating April Fools' Day jokes.
Google's 2005 partnerships also included financing the new .mobi top-level domain for mobile devices, along with other companies including Microsoft, Nokia, and Ericsson.
Yahoo!, a competitor of Google, also benefited because it owned 8.4&nbsp;million shares of Google before the IPO took place.
On April 4, 2011, Larry Page became CEO and Eric Schmidt became Executive Chairman of Google.
Together, they own about 14 percent of its shares and control 56 percent of the stockholder voting power through supervoting stock.
Google entered into a partnership with Sun Microsystems in October 2005 to help share and distribute each other's technologies.
In July 2015 Google released DeepDream, an image recognition software capable of creating psychedelic images using a convolutional neural network.
GOOG shares split into GOOG Class C shares and GOOGL class A shares.
Reasons ranged from shareholder pressure for employee benefit reductions to the fact that many company executives would become instant paper millionaires.
In 2011, the company had announced plans to build three data centers at a cost of more than $200&nbsp;million in Asia (Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan) and said they would be operational within two years.
In 2007, reports surfaced that Google was planning the release of its own mobile phone, possibly a competitor to Apple's iPhone.
Originally, Google ran under Stanford University's website, with the domains ''google.stanford.edu'' and ''z.stanford.edu''.
Google began encrypting data sent between data centers in 2013.
By January 2014, its market capitalization had grown to $397bn.
In addition to the many companies Google has purchased, the company has partnered with other organizations for research, advertising, and other activities.
The reason for the choice of September 27 remains unclear, and a dispute with rival search engine Yahoo!
It was also the first to keep emails from the same conversation together in one thread, similar to an Internet forum.
As a reply to this concern, co-founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page promised in a report to potential investors that the IPO would not change the company's culture.
The vast majority of the 271&nbsp;million shares remained under the control of Google, and many Google employees became instant paper millionaires.
The software uses corpus linguistics techniques, where the program "learns" from professionally translated documents, specifically UN and European Parliament proceedings.
In June 2008, Google reached an advertising agreement with Yahoo!, which would have allowed Yahoo!
In 2007 and early 2008, several top executives left Google.
Google APIs are a set of application programming interfaces (APIs) developed by Google which allow communication with Google Services and their integration to other services.
In March 2005, Agence France Presse (AFP) sued Google for copyright infringement in federal court in the District of Columbia, a case which Google settled for an undisclosed amount in a pact that included a license of the full text of AFP articles for use on Google News.
The funding will enable the Company to further enhance its core AI technologies, and develop new consumer products empowered by AI.
This wiretapping was made possible because Google did not encrypt data passed inside its own network.
Google's AdWords allows advertisers to display their advertisements in the Google content network, through either a cost-per-click or cost-per-view scheme.
In 2013, Google ranked 5th in lobbying spending, up from 213th in 2003.
Google was founded by Larry Page and Sergey Brin while they were Ph.D. students at Stanford University, California.
This model of selling keyword advertising was first pioneered by Goto.com, an Idealab spin-off created by Bill Gross.
The surge in stock price was fueled mainly by individual investors, as opposed to large institutional investors and mutual funds.
Google Drive, another part of Google's productivity suite, allows users to create, edit, and collaborate on documents in an online environment, similar to Microsoft Word.
On August 10, 2015, Google announced plans to reorganize its various interests as a holding company, Alphabet Inc., with Google as its leading subsidiary.
At a launch event on July 24, 2013, in San Francisco, a newer version of the Nexus 7 Google tablet device was released to the public, alongside the Chromecast dongle that allows users to stream YouTube and Netflix videos via smartphones.
Google has also faced allegations of sexism and ageism from former employees.
This occurred days after the Federal Trade Commission closed its investigation into the purchase.
It is supported on Android 4.4 KitKat and higher versions of Android.
Internationally, Google has over 70 offices outside the US, the majority of which are local corporate offices and data centers.
Some see the suite as competing with existing marketing cloud offerings by companies like Adobe, Oracle, Salesforce and IBM.
The stock performed well after the IPO, with shares hitting $350 for the first time on October 31, 2007, primarily because of strong sales and earnings in the online advertising market.
Google also hosts Google Books.
Google advertisements can be placed on third-party websites in a two-part program.
The filing also revealed that the Waze acquisition cost Google $966 million, instead of the $1.1 billion figure that was initially presented in media sources.
Examples of these include Search, Gmail, Translate or Google Maps.
Google-owned YouTube gave NORAD Tracks Santa its own channel.
The first use of "Google" as a verb in pop culture (TV) happened on Buffy the Vampire Slayer in 2002.
The policy was later changed.
Also in 2010, Google purchased Global IP Solutions, a Norway-based company that provides web-based teleconferencing and other related services.
Google was also nominated in 2010 to be the world's most attractive employer to graduating students in the Universum Communications talent attraction index.
The farms, which were developed by NextEra Energy Resources, will reduce fossil fuel use in the region and return profits.
In June 2008, a ''Forbes'' magazine article projected the 2008 YouTube revenue at $200&nbsp;million, noting progress in advertising sales.
Following the acquisition of Waze, Google submitted a "10-Q" filing with the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) that revealed that the corporation spent $1.3 billion on acquisitions during the first half of 2013.
In November 2013, Google announced plans for a new 1-million-sq-ft (93,000 sq m) office in London, which is due to open in 2016.
In late June 2011, Google soft-launched a social networking service called Google+.
At the same time, Ash ElDifrawi, formerly head of brand advertising, left to become chief marketing officer of Netshops.
Google does not provide detailed figures for YouTube's running costs, and YouTube's revenues in 2007 were noted as "not material" in a regulatory filing.
The New York Times had discussed the topic "Is Google God?"
Page and Brin originally nicknamed their new search engine "BackRub", because the system checked backlinks to estimate the importance of a site.
Google's commitment to such robust idealism has been increasingly been called into doubt due to a number of actions and behaviours which appear to contradict this.
Led by Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the A4AI seeks to make Internet access more affordable so that access is broadened in the developing world, where only 31% of people are online.
In 2013, a class action against several Silicon Valley companies, including Google, was filed for alleged "no cold call" agreements which restrained the recruitment of high-tech employees.
The first of these was first announced on May 27, 2009.
The corporation's consolidated revenue for the third quarter of 2013 is reported in mid-October 2013 as $14.89 billion, a 12 percent increase compared to the previous quarter.
In July 2012, Google completed the construction of a fiber-optic broadband Internet network infrastructure in Kansas City, and after building an infrastructure, Google announced pricing for Google Fiber.
The office was specially designed and built for Google and houses its largest advertising sales team, which has been instrumental in securing large partnerships.
From that point onward, Doodles have been organized and created by a team of employees termed "Doodlers".
In an attempt to advertise its own products, Google launched a website called Demo Slam, developed to demonstrate technology demos of Google Products.
In 2008, Google announced Gmail Custom time where users could change the time that the email was sent.
As of February 2012, a significant engineering team is based in New York City.
The photos were watermarked and originally had copyright notices posted on all photos, regardless of public domain status.
Search in 2005 has been suggested as the cause.
During the same December 2012 interview, Schmidt "confirmed that the company had no intention of paying more to the UK exchequer."
In 2011, Google donated 1&nbsp;million euros to International Mathematical Olympiad to support the next five annual International Mathematical Olympiads (2011–2015).
As of September 2013, Google's East Coast office is located at 76 Ninth Ave, New York City, New York.
On July 14, 2011, Google announced that Google+ had reached 10 million users just two weeks after it was launched in this "limited" trial phase.
Devotees of Google have found a non-profit online organization The Church of Google, a website where they worship the search engine giant.
Following criticism of the amount of corporate taxes that Google paid in the United Kingdom, Chairman Eric Schmidt said, "It's called capitalism.
In 2012, the company ranked 2nd in campaign donations of technology and Internet sections.
A report in July 2013 stated that Google's share of the global smartphone market, led by Samsung products, was 64% in March 2013.
The reported price is $40 million and Google spokesperson stated: "We're really impressed by the Flutter team's ability to design new technology based on cutting-edge research."
In 2010, Google Energy made its first investment in a renewable energy project, putting $38.8&nbsp;million into two wind farms in North Dakota.
In 2010, Google announced the Google Fiber project, with plans to build an ultra-high-speed broadband network for 50,000 to 500,000 customers in one or more American cities.
The first, removing the "mobile-friendly" label that highlighted pages were easy to read on mobile from its mobile search results page.
The service was originally called Writely, but was obtained by Google on March 9, 2006, and was released as an invitation-only preview.
In October 2015, Google invested in a China-based artificial intelligence (AI) company, Mobvoi.
Google's initial public offering (IPO) took place five years later on August 19, 2004.
In competition with Amazon.com, Google sells digital versions of new books.
In 2005, Google partnered with NASA Ames Research Center to build  of offices.
The 2012 acquisition of WIMM Labs, a company that previously made an Android-powered smartwatch, was confirmed in August 2013.
In February 2010, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission FERC granted Google an authorization to buy and sell energy at market rates.
It processes over one billion search requests and about 24 petabytes of user-generated data each day (as of 2009).
On May 12, 2015, Google announced the setting up of its largest campus outside the United States in Hyderabad, India.
On August 5, 2009, Google bought out its first public company, purchasing video software maker On2 Technologies for $106.5&nbsp;million.
Much of the criticism pertains to issues that have not yet been addressed by cyber law.
Increasing its advertising reach even further, Google and Fox Interactive Media of News Corporation entered into a $900&nbsp;million agreement to provide search and advertising on the then-popular social networking site MySpace.
For the 2006 fiscal year, the company reported $10.492&nbsp;billion in total advertising revenues and only $112&nbsp;million in licensing and other revenues.
During FIFA World Cup 2010, search queries including "World Cup" and "FIFA" caused the "Goooo...gle" page indicator at the bottom of every result page to read "Goooo...al!"
The company leads the development of the Android mobile operating system and the browser-only Chrome OS for a class of netbooks known as Chromebooks and desktop PCs known as Chromeboxes.
Numerous Google sites in other languages figure in the top one hundred, as do several other Google-owned sites such as YouTube and Blogger.
It was based in the garage of a friend (Susan Wojcicki) in Menlo Park, California.
Revenue came in at $14.5 billion (16.9% growth year over year), also under expectations by $110 million.
The service is Google's "email redesigned", with realtime editing, the ability to embed audio, video, and other media, and extensions that further enhance the communication experience.
This purchase was made in part to help Google gain Motorola's considerable patent portfolio on mobile phones and wireless technologies to help protect it in its ongoing patent disputes with other companies, mainly Apple and Microsoft, and to allow it to continue to freely offer Android.
The immense popularity of the search engine has led its fans calling themselves 'Googlists' as they follow 'Googlism', the new religion.
In March 1999, the company moved its offices to Palo Alto, California, which is home to several prominent Silicon Valley technology start-ups.
Other projects Google has worked on include a new collaborative communication service, a web browser, and a mobile operating system.
Before 2004, Schmidt made $250,000 per year, and Page and Brin each received an annual salary of $150,000.
On December 10, 2012, Google sold the manufacturing operations of Motorola Mobility to Flextronics for $75&nbsp;million.
Google's services contain easter eggs, such as the Swedish Chef's "Bork bork bork," Pig Latin, "Hacker" or leetspeak, Elmer Fudd, Pirate, and Klingon as language selections for its search engine.
;International locations
Google launched its Google News service in 2002, an automated service which summarizes news articles from various websites.
When this restructuring took place on October 2, 2015, Google became Alphabet's leading subsidiary, as well as the parent for Google's Internet interests.
The new premises will be able to accommodate 4,500 employees and has been identified as one of the biggest ever commercial property acquisitions in Britain.
Though web searches still appear in a batch per page format, on July 23, 2010, dictionary definitions for certain English words began appearing above the linked results for web searches.
On April 1, 2000, Google MentalPlex allegedly featured the use of mental power to search the web.
The company offered 19,605,052 shares at a price of $85 per share.
Industry reports in 2006 claimed that approximately 14 to 20&nbsp;percent of clicks were fraudulent or invalid.
Google's mission statement from the outset was "to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful," and its unofficial slogan was "Don't be evil".
The service was renamed Google Site Search in 2008.
Late in 2006, Google began to sell Custom Search Business Edition, providing customers with an advertising-free window into Google.com's index.
Google launched the Mini three years later, which was targeted at smaller organizations.
Early in 1999, while graduate students, Brin and Page decided that the search engine they had developed was taking up too much time and distracting their academic pursuits.
Three years later, Google bought the property from SGI for $319&nbsp;million.
The New York headquarters is similar in design and functionality to its Mountain View headquarters, and includes a game room, micro kitchens, and a video game area.
In 2014 Google cut ties with the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) after pressure from the Sierra Club, major unions and Google's own scientists because of ALEC's stance on climate change and opposition to renewable energy.
to feature Google advertisements on its web pages.
Gmail uses AJAX, a programming technique that allows web pages to be interactive without refreshing the browser.
Steve Ballmer (Microsoft's former CEO), Liz Figueroa, Mark Rasch, and the editors of Google Watch have criticised the privacy of Gmail, but Google claims that mail sent to or from Gmail is never read by a human being beyond the account holder and is only used to improve relevance of advertisements.
Out of the five largest American technology companies, it pays the lowest taxes to the countries of origin of its revenues.
The publication 2600: The Hacker Quarterly has compiled a list of words that the web giant's new instant search feature will not search.
In 2006, Google moved into  of office space in New York City, at 111 Eighth Avenue in Manhattan.
Daydream tool kits allow developers to build VR experiences for Daydream-ready phones and headsets, the company says, and now supports integration with Unity and Unreal game engines.
In October 2015, the motto was replaced in the Alphabet corporate code of conduct by the phrase: "Do the right thing".
The search engine calculator provides the Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything from Douglas Adams' ''The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy''.
On June 6 after the acquisition, Google created an experimental spreadsheet editing program, which was combined with Google Docs on October 10.
In addition to scanning QR codes, the app can recognize historic landmarks, import business cards, and solve Sudoku puzzles.
Google’s most efficient data center runs at  using only fresh air cooling, requiring no electrically powered air conditioning; the servers run so hot that humans cannot go near them for extended periods.
The complex became known as the Googleplex, a play on the word googolplex, the number one followed by a googol zeroes.
Recreational amenities are scattered throughout the campus and include a workout room with weights and rowing machines, locker rooms, washers and dryers, a massage room, assorted video games, table football, a baby grand piano, a billiard table, and ping pong.
The purpose of the Chief Culture Officer is to develop and maintain the culture and work on ways to keep true to the core values that the company was founded on: a flat organization with a collaborative environment.
There were concerns that Google's IPO would lead to changes in company culture.
Google went through three major periods of acquisitions, spanning 2000–2009, 2010–2012, and 2014–2015.
In 2011, Google announced Gmail Motion, an interactive way of controlling Gmail and the computer with body movements via the user's webcam.
Google also has product research and development operations in cities around the world, namely Sydney (main development location of Google Maps) and London (part of Android development), as well as numerous others including Zurich, Munich, Tokyo, Tel Aviv and Hyderabad.
In 2007, Google began sponsoring NORAD Tracks Santa, displacing former sponsor AOL.
Google acquired the company for an undisclosed amount.
Google disclosed in September 2011 that it "continuously uses enough electricity to power 200,000 homes", almost 260 million watts or about a quarter of the output of a nuclear power plant.
The service was the first online email service with one gigabyte of storage.
In 2004, Google formed the not-for-profit philanthropic Google.org, with a start-up fund of $1&nbsp;billion.
Talks range from about 40 to 70 minutes.
At that time Larry Page, Sergey Brin, and Eric Schmidt agreed to work together at Google for 20 years, until the year 2024.
, Google Inc. owned and operated six Google Data Centers across the U.S., one in Chile, one in Finland, one in Ireland, one in Belgium, one in Singapore and one on Taiwan.
It was released on the Google Play Store on April 16, 2014.
The offices would be used for research projects involving large-scale data management, nanotechnology, distributed computing, and the entrepreneurial space industry.
In October 2007, former chief financial officer of YouTube Gideon Yu joined Facebook along with Benjamin Ling, a high-ranking engineer.
On January 29, 2014, Google announced it was selling its Motorola Mobility unit to China-based Lenovo, for $2.91bn.
Among other things, the suite is designed to help "enterprise class marketers" see the complete customer journey, generate useful insights, not just more data, and deliver engaging experiences to the right people.
In 2010, Google changed its company name to Topeka in honor of Topeka, Kansas, whose mayor changed the city's name to Google for a short amount of time in an attempt to sway Google's decision in its new Google Fiber Project.
Furthermore, the Paris Civil Court ruled against Google in late 2009, asking it to remove the works of La Martinière (Éditions du Seuil) from its database.
Google's headquarters in Mountain View, California, is referred to as "the Googleplex", a play on words on the number googolplex and the headquarters itself being a ''complex'' of buildings.
On May 27, 2010, Google announced it had also closed the acquisition of the mobile ad network AdMob.
Google will continue to be the umbrella company for Alphabet's Internet interests.
DeepMind's first commercial applications were used in simulations, e-commerce and games.
Total carbon emissions for 2010 were just under 1.5 million metric tons, most due to fossil fuels that provide electricity for the data centers.
The order specifically states that Google Energy—a subsidiary of Google—holds the rights "for the sale of energy, capacity, and ancillary services at market-based rates", but acknowledges that neither Google Energy nor its affiliates "own or control any generation or transmission" facilities.
For some languages, handwriting recognition, or speech recognition can be used as input, and translated text can be pronounced through speech synthesis.
The update was introduced over the month prior to the announcement and allows users ask the search engine a question in natural language rather than entering keywords into the search box.
By that time, the name "Google" had found its way into everyday language, causing the verb "google" to be added to the Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary and the Oxford English Dictionary, denoted as "to use the Google search engine to obtain information on the Internet".
Google renamed the service to Google Earth in 2005.
The service offers over 15&nbsp;GB of free storage, shared with other Google Apps, with additional storage ranging from 20&nbsp;GB to 16&nbsp;TB available for $0.25 per 1&nbsp;GB per year.
Since 2001, Google has acquired many companies, primarily small venture capital-funded firms.
Third-party apps can use these APIs to take advantage of or extend the functionality of the existing services.
On February 3, 2014, Google released its first Chromecast SDK.
This marked the first time the company had reached this feat, topping their 2011 total of $38&nbsp;billion.
In 2004, Google acquired Keyhole, Inc.
Free food is available to employees 24/7, with the offerings provided by paid vending machines prorated based on and favoring those of better nutritional value.
The company announced the two locations will generate 169.5&nbsp;megawatts of power, enough to supply 55,000 homes.
The hallways are full of exercise balls and bicycles.
Overture Services would later be bought by Yahoo!
In 2008, Google developed a partnership with GeoEye to launch a satellite providing Google with high-resolution (0.41&nbsp;m monochrome, 1.65&nbsp;m color) imagery for Google Earth.
On April 13, 2007, Google reached an agreement to acquire DoubleClick for $3.1&nbsp;billion, giving Google valuable relationships that DoubleClick had with Web publishers and advertising agencies.
For technical topics, there is '''Google Tech Talks''' (also known as EngEDU) which is dedicated to exploring areas of technology and science.
In a post on Google's blog, Google Chief Executive and co-founder Larry Page revealed that the acquisition was a strategic move to strengthen Google's patent portfolio.
