Imposing stone houses in Neo-Classical style were erected around the canals.
Gothenburg is also home to the Gothenburg Sharks, a professional baseball team in the Elitserien division of baseball in Sweden.
Two of the noted people from Gothenburg are fictional, but have become synonymous with "people from Gothenburg".
The work started in 1810, and was carried out by 150 soldiers from the Bohus regiment.
The Universeum occasionally host debates between Swedish secondary-school students and Nobel Prize laureates or other scholars.
Tunneling is very expensive in such conditions.
In the 18th century, fishing was the most important industry.
The lack of a subway is due to the soft ground on which Gothenburg is situated.
Each year two persons who have significantly contributed to culture in the city are given the honorary titles of "Kal and Ada".
Gothenburg is the birthplace of football in Sweden as the first football match in Sweden was played there in 1892.
The Dutchmen initially won political power, and it was not until 1652, when the last Dutch politician in the city's council died, that Swedes acquired political power over Gothenburg.
Gothenburg harbour is the largest port in Scandinavia with a cargo turnover of 36.9&nbsp;million tonnes per year in 2004.
The ''Avenyn'' was created in the 1860s and 1870s as a result of an international architecture contest, and is the product of a period of extensive town planning and remodelling.
Biskopsgården is the biggest multicultural suburb on the island of Hisingen, which is a part of Gothenburg but separated from the city by the river.
Bands such as The Soundtrack of Our Lives and Ace of Base are well-known pop representatives of the city.
Not far from the central station is the Skanskaskrapan, or more commonly known as "The Lipstick".
The city's most notable sports venues are Scandinavium, and Ullevi (multisport) and the newly built Gamla Ullevi (football).
On 29December 2004, the Museum of World Culture opened near Korsvägen.
Gothenburg hosted the XIII&nbsp;FINA World Masters Championships in 2010.
Gothenburg is an intermodal logistics hub and Gothenburg harbour has access to Sweden and Norway via rail and trucks.
''Göta borg'' "Gothia Fortress" is the fort on the Göta Älv, built to protect the port.
The University of Gothenburg has about 25,000 students and is one of the largest universities in Scandinavia, and one of the most versatile in Sweden.
IFK has also won the UEFA Cup twice.
For example, the musician Jens Lekman was born in the suburb of Angered and named his 2007 release ''Night Falls Over Kortedala'' after another suburb, Kortedala.
The group stage match between the main rivals Sweden and Russia in the 2013 Bandy World Championship was played at Arena Heden in central Gothenburg.
The building has been renovated and expanded numerous times since the grand opening in October 1858.
The modern architecture of the city has been formed by such architects as Gert Wingårdh, who started as a Post-modernist in the 1980s.
In the 19th century, the wealthy bourgeoisie began to move outside the city walls which had protected the city.
The Gothenburg Synagogue at Stora Nygatan, near Drottningtorget, was built in 1855 according to the designs of the German architect August Krüger.
Some of the more notable schools are Sigrid Rudebecks gymnasium, Hvitfeldtska gymnasiet, Göteborgs Högre Samskola, Mikael Elias Teoretiska Gymnasium, and Donnergymnasiet.
Some high-schools are also connected to big Swedish companies.
These traditional forms are now sometimes replaced with the use of the Swedish ''Göteborg'', for example by The Göteborg Opera and the Göteborg Ballet.
The city has been ranked as the 12th-most inventive city in the world by ''Forbes''.
The church was built in 1603 and destroyed in 1611.
Also freight ships to North America and East Asia leave from the port.
Angered had about 50,000 inhabitants in 2015.
The award, which is one million Swedish crowns, is administrated and funded by a coalition of the City of Gothenburg and 12 companies.
Robust city walls were built during the 17th century.
The bandy department of GAIS, GAIS Bandy, played the first season in the highest division Elitserien last season.
The first internationally successfully Swedish group, instrumental rock group The Spotnicks came from Gothenburg.
Many music festivals take place in the city every year.
The main boulevard is called Kungsportsavenyn (commonly known as ''Avenyn'', "The Avenue").
The Universeum is a public science centre that opened in 2001, the largest of its kind in Scandinavia.
Diving, swimming, synchronized swimming and open-water competitions were held on 28July to 7August.
Most civil air traffic to Göteborg City Airport was via low-cost airlines such as Ryanair and Wizz Air.
The International Science Festival in Gothenburg is an annual festival since April 1997, in central Gothenburg with thought-provoking science activities for the public.
However, in 1731, the Swedish East India Company was founded, and the city flourished due to its foreign trade with highly profitable commercial expeditions to China.
The annual Gothia Cup, is the world's largest football tournament with regards to the number of participants: in 2011, a total of 35,200 players from 1,567 teams and 72 nations participated.
Many of the cultural institutions, as well as hospitals and the university, were created by donations from rich merchants and industrialists, for example the Röhsska Museum.
Gothenburg has a population of people born in Sweden of around 78%.
With the 19th century, Gothenburg evolved into a modern industrial city that continued on into the 20th century.
Like most Swedish metropolitan areas, the city has a sizeable immigrant population.
The Gustavus Adolphus pastry, eaten every 6November in Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus Day, is especially connected to, and appreciated in, Gothenburg because the city was founded by King Gustavus Adolphus.
During the summer, daylight extends 18 hours and 5 minutes, but lasts 6 hours and 32 minutes in late December.
Gustaf Adolf Square is a town square located in central Gothenburg.
The "England ferry" (''Englandsfärjan'') to Newcastle over Kristiansand (run by the Danish company DFDS Seaways) ceased at the end of October 2006, after being a Gothenburg institution since the 19th century.
Gothenburg has an oceanic climate according to Köppen climate classification.
In Dutch, Scots, and English, all being languages with a long history of being spoken in this trade and maritime-oriented city, the name Gothenburg is used for the city.
The water polo events were played on the neighboring city of Borås.
Other old variations in Swedish are ''Götheborgh'', and the more common ''Götheborg''.
After this, the predominant style in Gothenburg and rest of Sweden was Functionalism which especially dominated the suburbs such as Västra Frölunda and Bergsjön.
There is also an active indie scene in Gothenburg.
Göteborg City Airport  is closed.
By the shore of the Göta Älv at Lilla Bommen is The Göteborg Opera.
Despite its northern latitude, temperatures are quite mild throughout the year and warmer than places in similar latitude, for example Stockholm, or even somewhat further south, mainly because of the moderating influence of the warm Gulf Stream.
It is the largest amusement park in Scandinavia by number of rides, and was chosen as one of the top ten amusement parks in the world (2005) by ''Forbes''.
The river on which the city sits is the ''Göta älv'' or Gothia River.
Precipitation is regular but generally moderate throughout the year.
The working class lived in the overcrowded city district Haga in wooden houses.
Some of the noted people from Gothenburg are Academy Award Winning actress Alicia Vikander, cookbook author Sofia von Porat, footballer Gunnar Gren, artist Evert Taube, golfer Helen Alfredsson, industrialist Victor Hasselblad, singer-songwriter Björn Ulvaeus, diplomat Jan Eliasson, British Open Winner and professional golfer Henrik Stenson, and video commentator/Youtuber Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg also known as PewDiePie.
Gothenburg is classified as a global city by GaWC, with a ranking of Gamma−.
Created in the early 1900s was the Vasa Church.
The Gothenburg Film Festival, held in January since 1979, is the leading Scandinavian film festival with over 155,000 visitors each year.
Other notable clubs include BK Häcken (football), Pixbo Wallenstam IBK (floorball), multiple national handball champion Redbergslids IK, and three-time national ice hockey champion Frölunda HC, Gothenburg had a professional basketball team, Gothia Basket, until 2010 when it ceased.
Within the archipelago are the Älvsborg fortress, Vinga and Styrsö islands.
Noted buildings on the square include Gothenburg City Hall (formerly the stock exchange, opened in 1849) and the  Nordic Classicism law court.
Annual events held in the city are the Gothia Cup and the Göteborgsvarvet.
In 1807, a decision was made to tear down most of the city's wall.
It has been arranged annually since 2004, taking place at the Frihamnen venue.
It is located in Vasastan and is built of granite in a neo-Romanesque style.
Feskekôrka, or ''Fiskhallen'', is an indoor fishmarket by the Rosenlundskanalen in central Gothenburg.
The town was designed like Dutch cities such as Amsterdam, Batavia (Jakarta) and New Amsterdam (Manhattan).
This makes it the largest popular-science event in Sweden and one of the leading popular-science events in Europe.
Five Gothenburg restaurants have a star in the 2008 ''Michelin Guide'': 28&nbsp;+, Basement, Fond, Kock & Vin, Fiskekrogen, and Sjömagasinet.
The city was named after the Geats (), the inhabitants of Gothia, now southern Sweden—i.e.&nbsp;''"Geat Castle"''.
It is the second-largest city in Sweden after capital Stockholm.
The bus network, however, is almost as important.
The most noted attraction is the amusement park Liseberg, located in the central part of the city.
One of Gothenburg's most popular natural tourist attractions is the Southern Gothenburg Archipelago, which is a set of several islands that can be reached by ferry boats mainly operating from Saltholmen.
The Swedish functionalist architect Uno Åhrén served as city planner from 1932 through 1943.
Gothenburg is located on the west coast, in southwestern Sweden, about halfway between the capitals Copenhagen, Denmark, and Oslo, Norway.
Gothenburg became a city municipality with an elected city council when the first Swedish local government acts were implemented in 1863.
The Volvo museum has exhibits of the history of Volvo and the development from 1927 until today.
William Chalmers, the son of a Scottish immigrant, donated his fortunes to set up what later became the Chalmers University of Technology.
"Gothenburg" can also be seen in some older English texts.
The main canal of Gothenburg also flanks the square.
The first major architecturally interesting period is the 18th century when the East India Company made Gothenburg an important trade city.
The festival is visited by about  people each year.
In the early 1920s, on the city's 300th anniversary, the Götaplatsen square with its Neoclassical look was built.
In 2003, a major reconstruction was finished which brought the 19th-century building into the 21st century expanding the capacity for trains, travellers, and shopping.
Masthugg Church is a noted example of the style of this period.
The blue-collar industries which have dominated the city for long are still important factors in the city's economy, but they are being gradually replaced by high-tech industries.
Apart from trade, the second pillar of Gothenburg has traditionally been manufacturing and industry, which significantly contributes to the city's wealth.
In 1841, the Scotsman Alexander Keiller founded the Götaverken shipbuilding company that was in business until 1989.
It is about  long and starts at Götaplatsen&nbsp;— which is the location of the Gothenburg Museum of Art, the city's theatre, and the city library, as well as the concert hall— and stretches all the way to Kungsportsplatsen in the old city centre of Gothenburg, crossing a canal and a small park.
Volvo Cars is the largest employer in Gothenburg, not including jobs in supply companies.
The harbour developed into Sweden's main harbour for trade towards the west, and when Swedish emigration to the United States increased, Gothenburg became Sweden's main point of departure for these travelers.
The early 20th century, characterized by the National Romantic style, was rich in architectural achievements.
Another son of the city is one of Sweden's most popular singers, Håkan Hellström, who often includes many places from the city in his songs.
In 2009, the city council launched a new logotype for Gothenburg.
Angered, a suburb outside Gothenburg, consists of Hjällbo, Eriksbo, Rannebergen, Hammarkullen, Gårdsten, and Lövgärdet.
It is  high with 22&nbsp;floors and coloured in red-white stripes.
Citing the financial crisis, the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions moved the 2010 World Library and Information Congress, previously to be held in Brisbane, Australia, to Gothenburg.
Gothenburg has a diverse music community—the Gothenburg Symphony Orchestra is the best-known in classical music.
In June 2012, the festival included bands such as In Flames, Marilyn Manson, Slayer, Lamb of God, and Mastodon.
The Gunnebo House is a country house located to the south of Gothenburg, in Mölndal.
A bronze statue of the couple made by Svenrobert Lundquist, was placed outside the entrance to Liseberg in 1995.
It is located within the borders of Gothenburg Municipality.
Gothenburg's Haga district is known for its picturesque wooden houses and its cafés serving the well-known ''Haga bulle'' – a large cinnamon roll similar to the ''kanelbulle''.
An international school with campuses in Guldheden and central Gothenburg is called the International School of the Gothenburg Region.
Summers are warm and pleasant with average high temperatures of  and lows of , but temperatures of  occur on many days during the summer.
A commuter rail in Gothenburg services some nearby cities and towns.
One English text, written in the late 15th century, states the name as "Guthaeborg".
, the name is spelled "Go:teborg" on a large number of signs in the city.
Other major transportation hubs are ''Centralstationen'' (Gothenburg Central Station) and the Nils Ericson Terminal with trains and buses to various destinations in Sweden, as well as connections to Oslo and Copenhagen (via Malmö).
The French form of the city name is ''Gothembourg'', but in French texts, the Swedish name ''Göteborg'' is more frequent.
In addition to commercial airlines, the airport was also operated by a number of rescue services, including the Swedish Coast Guard, and was used for other general aviation.
It was formerly known as ''Säve Flygplats.''
In 2015, there were ten folk high schools in Gothenburg: ''Agnesbergs folkhögskola'', ''Arbetarrörelsens folkhögskola i Göteborg'', ''Finska folkhögskolan'', ''Folkhögskolan i Angered'', ''Göteborgs folkhögskola'', ''Kvinnofolkhögskolan'', ''Mo Gård folkhögskola'', ''S:ta Birgittas folkhögskola'', ''Västra Götalands folkhögskolor'' and ''Wendelsbergs folkhögskola''.
With over  of double track, the Gothenburg tram network covers most of the city and it is the largest tram/light rail network in Scandinavia.
Sweden's largest shopping centre, Nordstan, is located in central Gothenburg.
The archipelago of Gothenburg consists of rough, barren rocks and cliffs, which also is typical for the coast of Bohuslän.
Winters are cold and windy with temperatures of around , though it rarely drops below .
Along with the Dutch, the town also was heavily influenced by Scots who settled down in Gothenburg.
The city has a number of star chefs&nbsp;– over the past decade, seven of the Swedish Chef of the Year awards have been won by people from Gothenburg.
The eurodance act marketed to children gained some brief success on several international music charts in the mid-2000s.
From its founding until the late 1970s, the city was a world leader in shipbuilding, with such shipyards as Eriksbergs Mekaniska Verkstad, Götaverken, Arendalsvarvet, and Lindholmens varv.
It lies north of Gothenburg and is isolated from the rest of the city.
During the Dutch period, the town followed Dutch town laws and Dutch was proposed as the official language in the town.
The location at the mouth of the Göta älv, which feeds into Kattegatt, an arm of the North Sea, has helped the city grow in significance as a trading city.
The municipality has an assembly consisting of 81 members, elected every fourth year.
One is SKF Technical high-school (belonging to SKF) and Gothenburg's technical high-school (belonging to Volvo).
The sea, trade, and industrial history of the city is evident in the cultural life of Gothenburg.
It is a part of Ruddalens&nbsp;IP, which also has a bandy field and several football fields.
The site of the first church built in Gothenburg, subsequently destroyed by Danish invaders, is marked by a stone near the north end of the Älvsborg Bridge in the Färjenäs Park.
It was built in a neoclassical architecture towards the end of the 18th century.
It is also a popular destination for tourists on the Swedish west coast.
The climate has become significantly milder in latter decades, particularly in summer and winter; July temperatures used to be below Stockholm's 1961-1990 averages, but have since been warmer than that benchmark.
Since the name "Göteborg" contains the Swedish letter "ö" the idea was to make the name more international and up to date by "turning" the "ö" sideways.
They are a working class couple called Kal and Ada, featured in "Gothenburg jokes" (''göteborgsvitsar''), songs, plays and names of events.
Banking and finance are also important, as well as the event and tourist industry.
The city's three major football clubs, IFK Göteborg, Örgryte IS, and GAIS share a total of 34 Swedish championships between them.
The Gothenburg Central Station is in the centre of the city, next to Nordstan and Drottningtorget.
It is the most popular attraction in Sweden by number of visitors per year (more than 3&nbsp;million).
The glam rock group Supergroupies derives from Gothenburg.
The Gothenburg Award is the city's international prize that recognises and supports work to achieve sustainable development – in the Gothenburg region and from a global perspective.
In the 19th century, the first comprehensive town plan after the founding of city was created, which led to the construction of the main street, Kungsportsavenyen.
Another popular festival, Way Out West, focuses more on rock, electronic, and hip-hop genres.
Due to the Gulf Stream, the city has a mild climate and moderately heavy precipitation.
In the Treaty of Roskilde (1658), Denmark–Norway ceded the then Danish province Halland, in the south, and the Norwegian province of Bohus County or ''Bohuslän'' in the north, leaving Gothenburg less exposed.
In 2015, there were 49 high schools Gothenburg.
The Gothenburg coat of arms was based on the lion of the coat of arms of Sweden, symbolically holding a shield with the national emblem, the Three Crowns, to defend the city against its enemies.
It was completed in 1994.
The impact of Gothenburg as a main port of embarkation for Swedish emigrants is reflected by Gothenburg, Nebraska, a small Swedish settlement in the United States.
It is divided into six sections, each containing experimental workshops and a collection of reptiles, fish, and insects.
Gothenburg's own commercially successful At the Gates, In Flames, and Dark Tranquillity are credited with pioneering melodic death metal.
It is a Million Programme part of Gothenburg, like Rosengård in Malmö and Botkyrka in Stockholm.
Past winners of the award have included Kofi Annan, Al Gore, and Michael Biddle.
In Spanish the city is called Gotemburgo.
The city was heavily influenced by the Dutch, Germans, and Scots, and Dutch planners and engineers were contracted to construct the city as they had the skills needed to drain and build in the marshy areas chosen for the city.
Another noted construction is Brudaremossen TV Tower, one of the few partially guyed towers in the world.
The 2003 World Allround Speed Skating Championships were held in Rudhallen, Sweden's only indoor speed-skating arena.
Major companies operating plants in the area include SKF, Volvo, and Ericsson.
In summer, a wide variety of music festivals are held in the city, such as Way Out West and Metaltown.
The Gothenburg city hall is in the Beaux-Arts architectural style.
Gothenburg is the terminus of the Valdemar-Göteborg gas pipeline, which brings natural gas from the North Sea fields to Sweden, through Denmark.
In June 2015, the Volvo Ocean Race, professional sailing's leading crewed offshore race, concluded in Gothenburg, as well as an event in the 2015–2016 America's Cup World Series in August 2015.
Gothenburg also was the birthplace of the Swedish composer Kurt Atterberg.
The style now was an eclectic, academic, somewhat overdecorated style which the middle-class favoured.
Other well-known bands of the Gothenburg scene are thrash metal band The Haunted, progressive power metal band Evergrey, and power metal bands HammerFall and Dream Evil.
One example from this period is the East India House, which today houses the Göteborg City Museum.
The 3D-animated anthropomorphic blue frog known as Crazy Frog originally hails from Gothenburg.
Products shown include cars, trucks, marine engines, and buses.
Aeroseum, close to the Göteborg City Airport, is an aircraft museum in a former military underground air force base.
The only Swedish heavyweight champion of the world in boxing, Ingemar Johansson, who took the title from Floyd Paterson in 1959, was from Gothenburg.
The Gothenburg Metropolitan Area (''Stor-Göteborg'') has 982,360 inhabitants and extends to the municipalities of Ale, Alingsås, Göteborg, Härryda, Kungälv, Lerum, Lilla Edet, Mölndal, Partille, Stenungsund, Tjörn, Öckerö in Västra Götaland County, and Kungsbacka in Halland County.
His son James Keiller donated Keiller Park to the city in 1906.
The airport was located  northwest of the city centre.
Museums include the Gothenburg Museum of Art, and several museums of sea and navigation history, natural history, the sciences, and East India.
However, ''Göteborgs universitet'', previously designated as the Göteborg University in English, changed its name to the University of Gothenburg in 2008.
In the 1950s, the big stadium Ullevi was built when Sweden hosted the 1958 FIFA World Cup.
Perhaps the most significant type of houses of the city, Landshövdingehusen, were built in the end of the 19th century – three-storey houses with the first floor in stone and the other two in wood.
The even took place on 10–15August 2010.
Commercial operations will be gradually wound down.
The population increased tenfold in the century, from 13,000 (1800) to 130,000 (1900).,  In the 20th century, major companies that developed included SKF (1907) and Volvo (1927).
Gothenburg was able to grow into a significant port and trade centre on the west coast, because it was the only city on the west coast that, along with Marstrand, was granted the rights to trade with merchants from other countries.
There are a number of independent theatre ensembles in the city, besides institutions such as Gothenburg City Theatre, Backa Theatre (youth theatre), and Folkteatern.
DFDS Seaways' sister company, DFDS Tor Line, continues to run scheduled cargo ships between Gothenburg and several English ports, and these have limited capacity for passengers and their private vehicles.
According to Statistics Sweden in 2014, 174,540 immigrants resided in Gothenburg, which was about 18% of the population.
Historically, Gothenburg was home base from the 18th century of the Swedish East India Company.
