To sample Leibniz' scientific works is a sobering experience.
In 1768, Louis Dutens edited the first multi-volume edition of Leibniz's writings, followed in the 19th century by a number of editions, including those edited by Erdmann, Foucher de Careil, Gerhardt, Gerland, Klopp, and Mollat.
The stratagem worked; the Elector asked Leibniz to assist with the redrafting of the legal code for the Electorate.
Leibniz did not publish anything about his calculus until 1684.
The amount, variety, and disorder of Leibniz's writings are a predictable result of a situation he described in a letter as follows:
The systematic cataloguing of all of Leibniz's ''Nachlass'' began in 1901.
This subject is treated at length in the article Leibniz-Newton controversy.
Her teachings influenced Leibniz's philosophical thoughts in his later life.
He met Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld, the leading French philosophers of the day, and studied the writings of Descartes and Pascal, unpublished as well as published.
The sudden deaths of his two patrons in the same winter meant that Leibniz had to find a new basis for his career.
In early 1666, at age 19, Leibniz wrote his first book, ''De Arte Combinatoria'' (''On the Combinatorial Art''), the first part of which was also his habilitation thesis in Philosophy, which he defended in March 1666.
The main force in European geopolitics during Leibniz's adult life was the ambition of Louis XIV of France, backed by French military and economic might.
The rise of general relativity and subsequent work in the history of physics has put Leibniz's stance in a more favorable light.
Leibniz proposed to protect German-speaking Europe by distracting Louis as follows.
But Leibniz took his speculations much further.
The machine was able to execute all four basic operations (adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing), and the society quickly made him an external member.
That journal played a key role in advancing his mathematical and scientific reputation, which in turn enhanced his eminence in diplomacy, history, theology, and philosophy.
Von Boyneburg did much to promote Leibniz's reputation, and the latter's memoranda and letters began to attract favorable notice.
Leibniz then approached one of the central criticisms of Christian theism: if God is all good, all wise and all powerful, how did evil come into the world?
In 1961, Norbert Wiener suggested that Leibniz should be considered the patron saint of cybernetics.
''Historical and Linguistic Writings''.
In 1900, Bertrand Russell published a critical study of Leibniz's metaphysics.
Leibniz thought symbols were important for human understanding.
''Political, Historical, and General Correspondence''.
Leibniz states that, in lieu of God’s will, we have to understand that God “is the best of all masters” and he will know when his good succeeds, so we, therefore, must act in conformity to his good will – or as much of it as we understand (IV).
He noted with fascination how the ''I Ching'' hexagrams correspond to the binary numbers from 000000 to 111111, and concluded that this mapping was evidence of major Chinese accomplishments in the sort of philosophical mathematics he admired.
He even proposed something akin to what much later emerged as game theory.
Leibniz mainly wrote in three languages: scholastic Latin, French and German.
He was influenced by his Leipzig professor Jakob Thomasius, who also supervised his BA thesis in philosophy.
Leibniz, along with René Descartes and Baruch Spinoza, was one of the three great 17th-century advocates of rationalism.
On Leibniz's religious views, although he is considered by some biographers as a deist, he has also been claimed as a philosophical theist.
(The House of Brunswick remained Lutheran because the Duke's children did not follow their father.)
Access to his father's library, largely written in Latin, also led to his proficiency in the Latin language, which he achieved by the age of 12.
This project was motivated in part by Leibniz's belief, shared by many conservative philosophers and theologians during the Enlightenment, in the rational and enlightened nature of the Christian religion as compared to its purportedly less advanced non-Western counterparts.
Instead, by virtue of the principle of pre-established harmony, each monad follows a preprogrammed set of "instructions" peculiar to itself, so that a monad "knows" what to do at each moment.
The vastness and richness of his correspondence went unrecognized.
We also see that when Leibniz wrote, in a metaphysical vein, that "the straight line is a curve, any part of which is similar to the whole", he was anticipating topology by more than two centuries.
They were not an unambiguous success because they did not fully mechanize the carry operation.
Leibniz's ''vis viva'' (Latin for ''living force'') is ''mv''2, twice the modern kinetic energy.
In 1675 he would be admitted by the French Academy of Sciences as a foreign honorary member, despite his lack of attention to the academy.
Here too his thinking gave rise to another regrettable nationalistic dispute.
The collection of manuscript papers of Leibniz at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek – Niedersächische Landesbibliothek were inscribed on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2007.
Monads are the ultimate elements of the universe.
His father died when he was six and a half years old, and from that point on he was raised by his mother.
Complex thoughts would be represented by combining characters for simpler thoughts.
The principle of sufficient reason has been invoked in recent cosmology, and his identity of indiscernibles in quantum mechanics, a field some even credit him with having anticipated in some sense.
In 1677, he was promoted, at his request, to Privy Counselor of Justice, a post he held for the rest of his life.
The answer (according to Leibniz) is that, while God is indeed unlimited in wisdom and power, his human creations, as creations, are limited both in their wisdom and in their will (power to act).
Meanwhile, the Thirty Years' War had left German-speaking Europe exhausted, fragmented, and economically backward.
Much of Europe came to doubt that Leibniz had discovered calculus independently of Newton, and hence his whole work in mathematics and physics was neglected.
Leibniz was the first to use the term ''analysis situs'', later used in the 19th century to refer to what is now known as topology.
''Mathematical Writings''.
Granted, there is no intuitive or mnemonic way to number any set of elementary concepts using the prime numbers.
Leibniz had an ardent disciple, Christian Wolff, whose dogmatic and facile outlook did Leibniz's reputation much harm.
With this principle, there are an infinite number of perceptions within us at any given time of which we are unaware.
It was the worlds largest prize for scientific achievement prior to the Fundamental Physics Prize.
Next to calculus, and to other thoughts that have been carried out to completion, the number and variety of premonitory thrusts is overwhelming.
He reiterated these proposals in 1715.
He wrote works on philosophy, politics, law, ethics, theology, history, and philology.
In sociology he laid the ground for communication theory.
Hughes suggests that Leibniz's ideas of "simple substance" and "pre-established harmony" were directly influenced by Confucianism, pointing to the fact that they were conceived during the period that he was reading ''Confucius Sinarum Philosophus''.
These efforts included corresponding with the French bishop Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet, and involved Leibniz in some theological controversy.
His proposal that the streets of Vienna be lit with lamps burning rapeseed oil was implemented.
He devised a new theory of motion (dynamics) based on kinetic energy and potential energy, which posited space as relative, whereas Newton was thoroughly convinced that space was absolute.
We saw examples in 'packing,'...&nbsp;My Leibniz mania is further reinforced by finding that for one moment its hero attached importance to geometric scaling.
This "stepped reckoner" attracted fair attention and was the basis of his election to the Royal Society in 1673.
In 1695, Leibniz made his public entrée into European philosophy with a journal article titled "New System of the Nature and Communication of Substances".
Analytic and contemporary philosophy continue to invoke his notions of identity, individuation, and possible worlds.
Leibniz's improvement of Euclid's axiom contains the same concept.
Leibniz had declined the invitation, but had begun corresponding with the duke in 1671.
Six important collections of English translations are Wiener (1951), Parkinson (1966), Loemker (1969), Ariew and Garber (1989), Woolhouse and Francks (1998), and Strickland (2006).
Yet I recognize that a prince can go to such excess, and place the well-being of the state in such danger, that the obligation to endure ceases.
3 vols., 1663–1700.
Even though Leibniz had done much to bring about this happy event, it was not to be his hour of glory.
Leibniz's idea of reasoning through a universal language of symbols and calculations however remarkably foreshadows great 20th century developments in formal systems, such as Turing completeness, where computation was used to define equivalent universal languages (see Turing degree).
To each of these women he was correspondent, adviser, and friend.
Leibniz may have been the first computer scientist and information theorist.
In our view of God, Leibniz declares that we cannot admire the work solely because of the maker, lest we mar the glory and love God in doing so.&nbsp; Instead, we must admire the maker for the work he has done (II).
More specifically, in his correspondence and travels he urged the creation of such societies in Dresden, Saint Petersburg, Vienna, and Berlin.
In public health, he advocated establishing a medical administrative authority, with powers over epidemiology and veterinary medicine.
In the life sciences and paleontology, he revealed an amazing transformist intuition, fueled by his study of comparative anatomy and fossils.
Leibniz dated his beginning as a philosopher to his ''Discourse on Metaphysics'', which he composed in 1686 as a commentary on a running dispute between Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld.
The ambitious project has had to deal with seven languages contained in some 200,000 pages of written and printed paper.
Although for Leibniz the situs of a sequence of points is completely determined by the distance between them and is altered if those distances are altered, his admirer Euler, in the famous 1736 paper solving the Königsberg Bridge Problem and its generalizations, used the term ''geometria situs'' in such a sense that the situs remains unchanged under topological deformations.
While working on adding automatic multiplication and division to Pascal's calculator, he was the first to describe a pinwheel calculator in 1685 and invented the Leibniz wheel, used in the arithmometer, the first mass-produced mechanical calculator.
Thus Voltaire and his ''Candide'' bear some of the blame for the lingering failure to appreciate and understand Leibniz's ideas.
Leibniz very reluctantly accepted the position two years later, only after it became clear that no employment in Paris, whose intellectual stimulation he relished, or with the Habsburg imperial court, was forthcoming.
Having read ''Confucius Sinarum Philosophus'' on the first year of its publication, he concluded that Europeans could learn much from the Confucian ethical tradition.
But Gerhard and Couturat did not publish these writings until modern formal logic had emerged in Frege's ''Begriffsschrift'' and in writings by Charles Sanders Peirce and his students in the 1880s, and hence well after Boole and De Morgan began that logic in 1847.
The ''Monadologie'', composed in 1714 and published posthumously, consists of 90 aphorisms.
He complained on occasion about money, but the fair sum he left to his sole heir, his sister's stepson, proved that the Brunswicks had, by and large, paid him well.
Leibniz also wrote a short paper, ''Primae veritates'', first published by Louis Couturat in 1903 (pp.&nbsp;518–523) summarizing his views on metaphysics.
By 1677 he had a coherent system in hand, but did not publish it until 1684.
In 1669, Leibniz was appointed assessor in the Court of Appeal.
Voltaire, an admirer of Newton, also wrote ''Candide'' at least in part to discredit Leibniz's claim to having discovered calculus and Leibniz's charge that Newton's theory of universal gravitation was incorrect.
The straight line is a curve, any part of which is similar to the whole, and it alone has this property, not only among curves but among sets.'
Because Leibniz was a mathematical novice when he first wrote about the ''characteristic'', at first he did not conceive it as an algebra but rather as a universal language or script.
Monads are centers of force; substance is force, while space, matter, and motion are merely phenomenal.
There is no complete gathering of the writings of Leibniz.
But at the same time, he arrived to propose an interreligious and multicultural project to create a universal system of justice, which required from him a broad interdisciplinary perspective.
In addition, the theorem that tells how and when to differentiate under the integral sign is called the Leibniz integral rule.
Much of his writing on physics is included in Gerhardt's ''Mathematical Writings''.
Instead, he proposed the creation of a ''characteristica universalis'' or "universal characteristic", built on an alphabet of human thought in which each fundamental concept would be represented by a unique "real" character:
For example, Leibniz's phrase ''salva veritate'', meaning interchangeability without loss of or compromising the truth, recurs in Willard Quine's writings.
He hoped that this abstracting project would eventually include everything printed from his day back to Gutenberg.
He wrote in several languages, but primarily in Latin, French, and German.
He defended his ''Disputatio Metaphysica de Principio Individui'' (''Metaphysical Disputation on the Principle of Individuation''), which addressed the principle of individuation, on June 9, 1663.
The ongoing critical edition of all of Leibniz's writings is ''Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe''.
During his lifetime, he published many pamphlets and scholarly articles, but only two "philosophical" books, the ''Combinatorial Art'' and the ''Théodicée''.
In effect, apparent flaws that can be identified in this world must exist in every possible world, because otherwise God would have chosen to create the world that excluded those flaws.
In 1692, the Duke of Brunswick became a hereditary Elector of the Holy Roman Empire.
Napoleon's failed invasion of Egypt in 1798 can be seen as an unwitting, late implementation of Leibniz's plan, after the Eastern hemisphere colonial supremacy in Europe had already passed from the Dutch to the British.
Leibniz was a direct influence on Ernst Platner, who is credited with originally coining the term ''Unbewußtseyn'' (unconscious).
Additionally, the idea of subliminal stimuli can be traced back to his theory of small perceptions.
In this respect, he followed the example of his early patrons, Baron von Boyneburg and the Duke John Frederick—both cradle Lutherans who converted to Catholicism as adults—who did what they could to encourage the reunion of the two faiths, and who warmly welcomed such endeavors by others.
25 vols., 1666–1706.
He published an essay, under the pseudonym of a fictitious Polish nobleman, arguing (unsuccessfully) for the German candidate for the Polish crown.
Leibniz earned his license to practice law and his Doctorate in Law in November 1666.
The latter library was enormous for its day, as it contained more than 100,000 volumes, and Leibniz helped design a new building for it, believed to be the first building explicitly designed to be a library.
In 1666, the University of Leipzig turned down Leibniz's doctoral application and refused to grant him a Doctorate in Law, most likely due to his relative youth.
Leibniz managed to delay his arrival in Hanover until the end of 1676 after making one more short journey to London, where Newton accused him of having seen Newton's unpublished work on calculus in advance.
Leibniz's most important mathematical papers were published between 1682 and 1692, usually in a journal which he and Otto Mencke founded in 1682, the ''Acta Eruditorum''.
The extant parts of the critical edition of Leibniz's writings are organized as follows:
Leibniz was eulogized by Fontenelle, before the Academie des Sciences in Paris, which had admitted him as a foreign member in 1700.
Leibniz earned his master's degree in Philosophy on February 7, 1664.
8 vols., 1672–1698.
Leibniz exploited infinitesimals in developing calculus, manipulating them in ways suggesting that they had paradoxical algebraic properties.
The monads are "substantial forms of being" with the following properties: they are eternal, indecomposable, individual, subject to their own laws, un-interacting, and each reflecting the entire universe in a pre-established harmony (a historically important example of panpsychism).
According to Newton's substantivalism, space and time are entities in their own right, existing independently of things.
The Elector Ernest Augustus commissioned Leibniz to write a history of the House of Brunswick, going back to the time of Charlemagne or earlier, hoping that the resulting book would advance his dynastic ambitions.
He refuted the belief, widely held by Christian scholars in his day, that Hebrew was the primeval language of the human race.
From 1680 to 1685, he struggled to overcome the chronic flooding that afflicted the ducal silver mines in the Harz Mountains, but did not succeed.
Leibniz subsequently left Leipzig.
''Mathematical, Scientific, and Technical Correspondence''.
The population of Hanover was only about 10,000, and its provinciality eventually grated on Leibniz.
While Leibniz's schoolwork was largely confined to the study of a small canon of authorities, his father's library enabled him to study a wide variety of advanced philosophical and theological works—ones that he would not have otherwise been able to read until his college years.
Leibniz contributed a fair amount to the statics and dynamics emerging around him, often disagreeing with Descartes and Newton.
Beginning in 1960, Abraham Robinson worked out a rigorous foundation for Leibniz's infinitesimals, using model theory, in the context of a field of hyperreal numbers.
Leibniz's ideas regarding music and tonal perception went on to influence the laboratory studies of Wilhelm Wundt.
Further, although human actions flow from prior causes that ultimately arise in God, and therefore are known as a metaphysical certainty to God, an individual's free will is exercised within natural laws, where choices are merely contingently necessary, to be decided in the event by a "wonderful spontaneity" that provides individuals an escape from rigorous predestination.
American Leibniz studies owe much to Leroy Loemker (1904–1985) through his translations and his interpretive essays in LeClerc (1973).
The paper is undated; that he wrote it while in Vienna in 1689 was determined only in 1999, when the ongoing critical edition finally published Leibniz's philosophical writings for the period 1677–90.
Publication of Leibniz's correspondence with notables such as Antoine Arnauld, Samuel Clarke, Sophia of Hanover, and her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover, began.
For this to be true, there must also be a portion of the mind of which we are unaware at any given time.
But after a meticulous study of all of Leibniz's philosophical writings up to 1688—a study the 1999 additions to the critical edition made possible—Mercer (2001) begged to differ with Couturat's reading; the jury is still out.
In 1708, John Keill, writing in the journal of the Royal Society and with Newton's presumed blessing, accused Leibniz of having plagiarised Newton's calculus.
From these I hope to shed some light on the history of the House of Brunswick.
Much of Leibniz's work went on to have a great impact on the field of psychology.
Moreover, for George I to include Leibniz in his London court would have been deemed insulting to Newton, who was seen as having won the calculus priority dispute and whose standing in British official circles could not have been higher.
Much of his vast correspondence, especially the letters dated after 1700, remains unpublished, and much of what is published has been so only in recent decades.
Among the few people in north Germany to accept Leibniz were the Electress Sophia of Hanover (1630–1714), her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover (1668–1705), the Queen of Prussia and his avowed disciple, and Caroline of Ansbach, the consort of her grandson, the future George II.
Leibniz was baptized on July 3 of that year at St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig; his godfather was the Lutheran theologian .
Modern electronic digital computers replace Leibniz's marbles moving by gravity with shift registers, voltage gradients, and pulses of electrons, but otherwise they run roughly as Leibniz envisioned in 1679.
In his diplomatic endeavors, he at times verged on the unscrupulous, as was all too often the case with professional diplomats of his day.
I am, however, quite of the opinion of Grotius, that one ought to obey as a rule, the evil of revolution being greater beyond comparison than the evils causing it.
Since then the branches in Potsdam, Münster, Hanover and Berlin have jointly published 57 volumes of the critical edition, with an average of 870 pages, and prepared index and concordance works.
Nevertheless, it is well understood that Leibniz was a serious inventor, engineer, and applied scientist, with great respect for practical life.
Leibniz's best known contribution to metaphysics is his theory of monads, as exposited in ''Monadologie''.
A recent study argues that Leibnizian calculus was free of contradictions, and was better grounded than Berkeley's empiricist criticisms.
* lack of individuation inherent to the system of Spinoza, which represents individual creatures as merely accidental.
Monads are purported to have gotten rid of the problematic:
Leibniz devoted considerable intellectual and diplomatic effort to what would now be called ecumenical endeavor, seeking to reconcile first the Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches, later the Lutheran and Reformed churches.
Because God is “an absolutely perfect being” (I), Leibniz argues that God would be acting imperfectly if he acted with any less perfection than what he is able of (III).&nbsp;His syllogism then ends with the statement that God has made the world perfectly in all ways.&nbsp; This also effects how we should view God and his will.
In "Euclidis Prota"..., which is an attempt to tighten Euclid's axioms, he states,...: 'I have diverse definitions for the straight line.
For example, something he published anonymously in England, thinking to promote the Brunswick cause, was formally censured by the British Parliament.
Yet it remains the case that Leibniz's methods and concerns often anticipate the logic, and analytic and linguistic philosophy of the 20th century.
His next goal was to earn his license and Doctorate in Law, which normally required three years of study.
This claim can be proved today.
According to Leibniz's notebooks, a critical breakthrough occurred on November 11, 1675, when he employed integral calculus for the first time to find the area under the graph of a function ''y''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''ƒ''(''x'').
He published and defended a dissertation ''Specimen Quaestionum Philosophicarum ex Jure collectarum'' (''An Essay of Collected Philosophical Problems of Right''), arguing for both a theoretical and a pedagogical relationship between philosophy and law, in December 1664.
On the death of Queen Anne in 1714, Elector George Louis became King George I of Great Britain, under the terms of the 1701 Act of Settlement.
He believed that by the principle that phenomena found in nature were continuous by default, it was likely that the transition between conscious and unconscious states had intermediary steps.
It is obvious that if we could find characters or signs suited for expressing all our thoughts as clearly and as exactly as arithmetic expresses numbers or geometry expresses lines, we could do in all matters ''insofar as they are subject to reasoning'' all that we can do in arithmetic and geometry.
Leibniz never finished the project, in part because of his huge output on many other fronts, but also because he insisted on writing a meticulously researched and erudite book based on archival sources, when his patrons would have been quite happy with a short popular book, one perhaps little more than a genealogy with commentary, to be completed in three years or less.
He met with the Royal Society where he demonstrated a calculating machine that he had designed and had been building since 1670.
The work of Leibniz anticipated modern logic and analytic philosophy, but his philosophy also looks back to the scholastic tradition, in which conclusions are produced by applying reason to first principles or prior definitions rather than to empirical evidence.
Thus Leibniz began several years in Paris.
The use of infinitesimals in mathematics was frowned upon by followers of Karl Weierstrass, but survived in science and engineering, and even in rigorous mathematics, via the fundamental computational device known as the differential.
George Berkeley, in a tract called ''The Analyst'' and also in ''De Motu'', criticized these.
Following the motto ''theoria cum praxi'', he urged that theory be combined with practical application, and thus has been claimed as the father of applied science.
Moreover, quite a few of these letters are of essay length.
He mistakenly credits Leibniz with originating this concept.
Leibniz's notation has been widely used ever since it was published.
He also designed a book indexing system in ignorance of the only other such system then extant, that of the Bodleian Library at Oxford University.
Soon after arriving, he met Dutch physicist and mathematician Christiaan Huygens and realised that his own knowledge of mathematics and physics was patchy.
From 1687 to 1690, Leibniz traveled extensively in Germany, Austria, and Italy, seeking and finding archival materials bearing on this project.
In 1711, while traveling in northern Europe, the Russian Tsar Peter the Great stopped in Hanover and met Leibniz, who then took some interest in Russian matters for the rest of his life.
He focused heavily on perception, distinguishing between the type of perception where we are conscious of a stimulus, and the other which is being aware of a distinct perception.
For example, when a bag of rice is spilled, we see the rice but are not necessarily aware of how many grains are in the pile.
For all investigations which depend on reasoning would be carried out by transposing these characters and by a species of calculus.
Leibniz promptly returned to Paris and not, as had been planned, to Mainz.
He introduced several notations used to this day, for instance the integral sign ∫ representing an elongated S, from the Latin word ''summa'' and the ''d'' used for differentials, from the Latin word ''differentia''.
Leibniz wrote memoranda that can now be read as groping attempts to get symbolic logic—and thus his ''calculus''—off the ground.
There Leibniz came into acquaintance of Henry Oldenburg and John Collins.
Leibniz the philologist was an avid student of languages, eagerly latching on to any information about vocabulary and grammar that came his way.
This is most rare, however, and the theologian who authorizes violence under this pretext should take care against excess; excess being infinitely more dangerous than deficiency.
Monads need not be "small"; e.g., each human being constitutes a monad, in which case free will is problematic.
By virtue of these intrinsic instructions, each monad is like a little mirror of the universe.
Leibniz served three consecutive rulers of the House of Brunswick as historian, political adviser, and most consequentially, as librarian of the ducal library.
He anticipated Lagrangian interpolation and algorithmic information theory.
