The murals of Belfast and of Los Angeles offer another example of official recognition.
Keep your rosaries graffiti.jpg|Feminist graffiti in A Coruña, Spain that reads in Galician: "Keep your rosaries off our ovaries"
A 2006 exhibition at the Brooklyn Museum displayed graffiti as an art form that began in New York's outer boroughs and reached great heights in the early 1980s with the work of Crash, Lee, Daze, Keith Haring, and Jean-Michel Basquiat.
The length of delay should be a consideration for any jurisdiction planning on operating a hotline.
The murals often develop over an extended period and tend to stylization, with a strong symbolic or iconographic content.
In Australia, art historians have judged some local graffiti of sufficient creative merit to rank them firmly within the arts.
Oxford University Press's art history text ''Australian Painting 1788–2000'' concludes with a long discussion of graffiti's key place within contemporary visual culture, including the work of several Australian practitioners.
Historic forms of graffiti have helped gain understanding into the lifestyles and languages of past cultures.
A graffiti writer's tag is his or her personalized signature.
Also if a tag of this youth group or gang is placed on a building occupied by asylum seekers, for example, its racist character is even stronger.
Although short lived, the MLF was representative of London's Ladbroke Grove centered alternative and literary community of the period.
Local jurisdictions must convince the callers that their complaint of vandalism will be a priority and cleaned off right away.
Pixnit is another artist who chooses to keep her identity from the general public.
Eurofestival graffiti 2.jpg|Graffiti artist at work at Eurofestival in Turku, Finland
The Lonely Planet travel guide cites Melbourne's street as a major attraction.
The major Iranian newspaper ''Hamshahri'' has published two articles on illegal writers in the city with photographic coverage of Iranian artist A1one's works on Tehran walls.
Haring explained that "The Pop Shop makes my work accessible.
The "sprawling metropolis," of São Paulo has "become the new shrine to graffiti;" Manco alludes to "poverty and unemployment&nbsp;... and the epic struggles and conditions of the country's marginalised peoples," and to "Brazil's chronic poverty," as the main engines that "have fuelled a vibrant graffiti culture."
Banksy's art is a prime example of the classic controversy: vandalism vs. art.
Australia steals Timor Oil.jpg|East Timorese protest against Australian petroleum extraction
One early example includes the anarcho-punk band Crass, who conducted a campaign of stenciling anti-war, anarchist, feminist, and anti-consumerist messages throughout the London Underground system during the late 1970s and early 1980s.
stab into my thoughts
Style Wars is still recognized as the most prolific film representation of what was going on within the young hip hop culture of the early 1980s.
A popular graffito of the 1970s was the legend "Dick Nixon Before He Dicks You", reflecting the hostility of the youth culture to that US president.
Jesus graffito.jpg|Satirical Alexamenos graffito, possibly the earliest known representation of Jesus
On behalf of my constituents, I will do all I can to rid our community of this problem."
Fekner is known for his word installations targeting social and political issues, stenciled on buildings throughout New York.
While certain critics from within graffiti culture consider this lazy, stickers can be quite detailed in their own right and often, are used in conjunction with other materials.
Landlord, may your lies malign
Graffiti also became associated with the anti-establishment punk rock movement beginning in the 1970s.
In world terms, Brazil has "one of the most uneven distributions of income.
It's about participation on a big level, the point was that we didn't want to produce things that would cheapen the art.
A crude work that deserves little respect would be invariably removed immediately.
These systems give law enforcement personnel real-time, street-level intelligence that allows them to not only focus on the worst graffiti offenders and their damage, but also to monitor potential gang violence that is associated with the graffiti.
In 2005, a similar ad campaign was launched by Sony and executed by TATS CRU in New York, Chicago, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, and Miami to market its handheld PSP gaming system.
The gladiatorial academy at ''CIL'' IV, 4397 was scrawled with graffiti left by the gladiator Celadus Crescens (''Suspirium puellarum Celadus thraex'': "Celadus the Thracian makes the girls sigh.")
Warszawa Stary Mokotów graffiti on shop window.jpg|Graffiti as legal advertising on a grocer's shop window in Warsaw, Poland
The graffiti were left by both the foreman and his workers.
Mur de tags au Forum de Barcelone.jpg|Multi-artist graffiti in Barcelona, Spain
The anti-capitalist art group, the Space Hijackers, for example, did a piece in 2004 about the contradiction between the capitalistic elements of Banksy and his use of political imagery.
This case led to public outcry and debate on the lack of government tolerance and in support of freedom of expression.
Some cities offer a reward for information leading to the arrest and prosecution of suspects for tagging or graffiti related vandalism.
For many outside of New York, it was their first encounter with their art form.
The city was covered with names such as "De Zoot", "Vendex", and "Dr Rat".
Loyalist murals often refer to historical events dating from the war between James II and William III in the late seventeenth century, whereas Republican murals usually refer to the more recent troubles.
He is known for his political, anti-war stencil art mainly in Bristol, England, but his work may be seen anywhere from Los Angeles to Palestine.
Graffiti in Haikou near Evergreen Park - 01.JPG|In Haikou, Hainan
Some individuals, such as Alexander Brener, have used the medium to politicize other art forms, and have used the prison sentences enforced on them as a means of further protest.
Smirnoff hired artists to use reverse graffiti (the use of high pressure hoses to clean dirty surfaces to leave a clean image in the surrounding dirt) to increase awareness of their product.
Warsaw-graffiti-face.jpg|Wall art in Warsaw
Graffiti databases have increased in the past decade because they allow vandalism incidents to be fully documented against an offender and help the police and prosecution charge and prosecute offenders for multiple counts of vandalism.
All forms of graffiti, including sticker art, poster, stencil art, and wheatpasting, can be found in many places throughout the city.
This is often used against owners of property that are complacent in allowing protective boards to be defaced so long as the property is not damaged.
NYC R36 1 subway car.png|New York City Subway trains were covered in graffiti (1973)
Fay had originally received a sentence of six strokes of the cane, but the presiding president of Singapore, Ong Teng Cheong, agreed to reduce his caning sentence to four lashes.
Mural painting celebrating Pol Pot in Sundsvall.jpg|Mural tribute to Cambodian revolutionary leader Pol Pot in Sundsvall, Sweden (2007)
Georgia (666).jpg|Graffiti of Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler with sign Diarrhea above, Tbilisi
Graffiti-Bucharest.jpg|Graffiti artist in Bucharest, Romania
4091(Quisquis amat).jpg|Inscription in Pompeii lamenting a frustrated love, "Whoever loves, let him flourish, let him perish who knows not love, let him perish twice over whoever forbids love."
Other games which feature graffiti include ''Bomb the World'' (2004), an online graffiti simulation created by graffiti artist Klark Kent where users can paint trains virtually at 20 locations worldwide, and ''Super Mario Sunshine'' (2002), in which the hero, Mario must clean the city of graffiti left by the villain, Bowser Jr. in a plotline which evokes the successes of the Anti-Graffiti Task Force of New York's Mayor Rudolph Giuliani (a manifestation of the "broken window theory") or those of the "Graffiti Blasters" of Chicago's Mayor Richard M. Daley.
came the gentle breeze
Another graffiti artist can go over a piece in a matter of minutes with a simple throw-up.
This form of graffiti may be difficult to identify, as it is mostly removed by the local authority (as councils which have adopted strategies of criminalization also strive to remove graffiti quickly).
It was not only the Greeks and Romans who produced graffiti: the Maya site of Tikal in Guatemala contains examples of ancient Maya graffiti.
Graffiti have become a common stepping stone for many members of both the art and design communities in North America and abroad.
However, spray paint in aerosol cans is the number one medium for graffiti.
Berliner Mauer.jpg|Berlin Wall: "Anyone who wants to keep the world as it is, does not want it to remain"
One early example is the "Graffiti Tunnel" located at the Camperdown Campus of the University of Sydney, which is available for use by any student at the university to tag, advertise, poster, and create "art".
Many demonstrate a very high level of literacy and a deep appreciation of art and poetry.
Both sides of the conflict in Northern Ireland produce political graffiti.
GRAFFITI ON A WALL IN CHICAGO.
Under the 1966 Vandalism Act of Singapore, originally passed to curb the spread of communist graffiti in Singapore, the court sentenced him to four months in jail, a fine of S$3,500 (US$2,233), and a caning.
While not exhaustive, the graffiti gave a sense of the 'millenarian' and rebellious spirit, tempered with a good deal of verbal wit, of the strikers.
New legislation subsequently adopted included a ban on the sale of paint spray cans to persons under 18 and increases in maximum fines for the offence from NZ$200 to NZ$2,000 or extended community service.
Zeichen der Zeit Hochhaus-Graffiti.jpg|This is said to be the tallest graffiti in the world, at Hamburg-Lohbrügge, Germany
Sanctuary - Berlin Wall.JPG|Picture of two Eastern Bloc leaders kissing, on the Berlin Wall
with a club and deform her hips.
World-renowned street artist Banksy directed a film in 2010, ''Exit Through the Gift Shop'', which explored street art and commercialism.
Recognized while exhibiting and publishing several of her coloured stencils and paintings portraying the Sri Lankan Civil War and urban Britain in the early 2000s, graffiti artist Mathangi Arulpragasam, aka M.I.A., has also become known for integrating her imagery of political violence into her music videos for singles "Galang" and "Bucky Done Gun", and her cover art.
Prominent Brazilian graffiti artists include Os Gêmeos, Boleta, Nunca, Nina, Speto, Tikka, and T.Freak.
Examples are ''CIL'' IV, 7838: ''Vettium Firmum / aed''ilem ''quactiliar''ii  ''rog''ant.
These images are meant to show outsiders a stern look at whose turf is whose.
Many state governments have banned the sale or possession of spray paint to those under the age of 18 (age of majority).
Tokyo-based design magazine, ''PingMag'', has interviewed A1one and featured photographs of his work.
Graffiti still remains the one of four hip hop elements that is not considered "performance art" despite the image of the "singing and dancing star" that sells hip hop culture to the mainstream.
The word originates from Greek  — ''graphein'' — meaning "to write."
Fab 5 Freddy and Futura 2000 took hip hop graffiti to Paris and London as part of the New York City Rap Tour in 1983.
This includes such techniques as scribing.
In the UK, Banksy is the most recognizable icon for this cultural artistic movement and keeps his identity a secret to avoid arrest.
Rufus est caricature villa misteri Pompeii.jpg|Ancient Pompeii graffito caricature of a politician
Her paintings are often of flower designs above shops and stores in her local urban area of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Graffiti may also express underlying social and political messages and a whole genre of artistic expression is based upon spray paint graffiti styles.
Unrelated to hip-hop graffiti, gangs use their own form of graffiti to mark territory or to serve as an indicator of gang-related activities.
Bundesarchiv Bild 101I-309-0816-20A, Italien, Soldat zeichnend.jpg|Soldier with tropical fantasy graffiti (1943–1944)
Post Apocalyptic Zombie Graffiti, Jan 2015.jpg|Post-apocalyptic despair
Since the 1990s a growing number of artists are switching to non-permanent paints for a variety of reasons—but primarily because is it difficult for the police to apprehend them and for the courts to sentence or even convict a person for a protest that is as fleeting and less intrusive than marching in the streets.
quit ego non possim caput illae frangere fuste?
These systems can also help track costs of damage to city to help allocate an anti-graffiti budget.
Graffiti Należysz do stada?.JPG|This Polish graffiti asks, "Do you belong to the herd?"
The eruption of Vesuvius preserved graffiti in Pompeii, which includes Latin curses, magic spells, declarations of love, alphabets, political slogans, and famous literary quotes, providing insight into ancient Roman street life.
In some communities, such impermanent works survive longer than works created with permanent paints because the community views the work in the same vein as that of the civil protester who marches in the street—such protest are impermanent, but effective nevertheless.
This has two main benefits for law enforcement.
This type of graffiti can seem crude; for example fascist supporters often scrawl swastikas and other Nazi images.
Nablus Graffiti Resistance Victor Grigas 2011-01-76.jpg|Wall in Nablus, West Bank, Palestine (2011)
Rock and roll graffiti is a significant subgenre.
This was exemplified by the writer "CAP" in the documentary ''Style Wars'', who, other writers complain, ruins pieces with his quick throw ups.
Graffiti have long appeared on building walls, in latrines, railroad boxcars, subways, and bridges.
Five of them received prison sentences, ranging from eighteen months to two years.
The Israeli West Bank barrier has become a site for graffiti, reminiscent in this sense of the Berlin Wall.
Graffiti "flourishes in every conceivable space in Brazil's cities."
The student protests and general strike of May 1968 saw Paris bedecked in revolutionary, anarchistic, and situationist slogans such as ''L'ennui est contre-révolutionnaire'' ("Boredom is counterrevolutionary") and ''Lisez moins, vivez plus'' ("Read less, live more").
Stencil graffiti, originating in the early 1980s (Blek le Rat, Jef Aerosol, Speedy Graphito, Miss Tic...) is created by cutting out shapes and designs in a stiff material (such as cardboard or subject folders) to form an overall design or image.
The paint contains toxic chemicals, and the can uses chlorofluorocarbons or volatile hydrocarbon gases to spray the paint unto a surface.
Riia-002.JPG|"Let's JOKK" in Tartu refers to political scandal with the Estonian Reform Party (2012)
Yarnbombing is another recent form of graffiti.
These movements or styles tend to classify the artists by their relationship to their social and economic contexts, since, in most countries, graffiti art remains illegal in many forms except when using non-permanent paint.
Water do you sell to your guests instead.
as it has been captivated by one lass
Tsang graffiti.jpg|Street graffiti in Hong Kong
Sigiriya-graffiti.jpg|Graffiti on the Mirror Wall, Sigiriya, Sri Lanka
Much of Banksy's artwork may be seen around the streets of London and surrounding suburbs, although he has painted pictures throughout the world, including the Middle East, where he has painted on Israel's controversial West Bank barrier with satirical images of life on the other side.
In 2009 graffiti artist "Scape" published ''GRAFF; the Art & Technique of Graffiti'', the world's first book dedicated to displaying the full techniques of creating graffiti art.
Numerous other non-graffiti-centric video games allow the player to produce graffiti (such as the ''Half-Life'' series, the ''Tony Hawk's'' series, ''The Urbz: Sims in the City'', ''Rolling'', and ''Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas'').
Kilroy Was Here - Washington DC WWII Memorial - Jason Coyne.jpg|Permanent engraving of Kilroy on the World War II Memorial in Washington, DC
Many graffiti artists in Israel come from other places around the globe, such as JUIF from Los Angeles and DEVIONE from London.
:A spatial code for example, could be that there is a certain youth group in an area that is engaging heavily in racist activities.
If she can break my tender heart
This technique was primarily used by potters who would glaze their wares and then scratch a design into it.
This method of graffiti is popular amongst artists because of its swift technique that requires very little time.
This is more time-consuming and increases the likelihood of the artist getting caught.
The graffiti appear on a peristyle which was being remodeled at the time of the eruption of Vesuvius by the architect Crescens.
''Counter-Strike'', which is a ''Half-Life'' mod, allows users to create their own graffiti tags to use in the game.
As an alternative, moss graffiti is starting to catch on, which uses moss to create text or images.
The subject matter of gang-related graffiti consists of cryptic symbols and initials strictly fashioned with unique calligraphies.
You yourself drink unmixed wine,
In February 2008 Helen Clark, the New Zealand prime minister at that time, announced a government crackdown on tagging and other forms of graffiti vandalism, describing it as a destructive crime representing an invasion of public and private property.
Lord Byron's survives on one of the columns of the Temple of Poseidon at Cape Sounion in Attica, Greece.
Hagia-sofia-viking.jpg|Viking mercenary graffiti at the Hagia Sofia in Istanbul, Turkey
Tags can contain subtle and sometimes cryptic messages, and may incorporate the artist's crew initials or other letters.
Si potest illa mihi tenerum pertundere pectus
''Style Wars'' depicted not only famous graffiti artists such as Skeme, Dondi, MinOne, and ZEPHYR, but also reinforced graffiti's role within New York's emerging hip-hop culture by incorporating famous early break-dancing groups such as Rock Steady Crew into the film and featuring rap in the soundtrack.
Fay pleaded guilty to vandalizing a car in addition to stealing road signs.
Therefore, existing racist graffiti is mostly more subtle and at first sight, not easily recognized as "racist".
This is the last time I want to write my name here.
Some graffiti have their own poignancy.
A '''piece''' is a more elaborate representation of the artist's name, incorporating more stylized letters, usually incorporating a much larger range of colors.
The modern-day graffiti artist can be found with an arsenal of various materials that allow for a successful production of a piece.
Shepard Fairey rose to fame after his "Andre the Giant Has a Posse" sticker campaign, in which his art was plastered in cities throughout America.
1969(Lais felat).jpg|Ancient Pompeiian graffiti advertising by a pimp
Vote for Filip Filipovic.jpg|Wall in Sremska Street in Belgrade, Serbia, with the slogan "Vote for Filip Filipović", who was the communist candidate for the mayor of Belgrade (1920)
Gates in the 'Peace Line'.jpg|Gates in a peace line in West Belfast, marking the boundary between segregated communities in Northern Ireland
Many restrictions of civil gang injunctions are designed to help address and protect the physical environment and limit graffiti.
In July 2008, a conspiracy charge was used to convict graffiti artists for the first time.
Aiming and keeping a handstyle steady in this form of tagging is very difficult, usually coming out wavy and sloppy.
Bands such as Black Flag and Crass (and their followers) widely stenciled their names and logos, while many punk night clubs, squats, and hangouts are famous for their graffiti.
This may be attributed to various reasons or a combination of reasons.
Contemporary practitioners, accordingly, have varied and often, conflicting practices.
jasmine and water lily
After a three-month police surveillance operation, nine members of the DPM crew were convicted of conspiracy to commit criminal damage costing at least £1 million.
In the UK, Covent Garden's Boxfresh used stencil images of a Zapatista revolutionary in the hopes that cross referencing would promote their store.
Grafitti as advertising in China 02.jpg|Graffiti as advertising in Haikou, Hainan Province, China, which is an extremely common form of graffiti seen throughout the country
Mermaid Sliema.JPG|Mermaid in Sliema, Malta
The only known source of the Safaitic language, a form of proto-Arabic, is from graffiti: inscriptions scratched on to the surface of rocks and boulders in the predominantly basalt desert of southern Syria, eastern Jordan and northern Saudi Arabia.
Two, a city can seek restitution from offenders for all of the damage that they have committed, not merely a single incident.
LG graffiti 4.jpg|Graffiti in Luhansk, Ukraine
Tagging is often the example given when opponents of graffiti refer to any acts of handstyle graffiti writing (it is by far the most common form of graffiti).
why can't I hit her over the head?
It spans a period of 40 years across five continents and 114 countries.
Spray paint can be found at hardware and art stores and comes in virtually every color.
Street art, Batumi.jpg|Graffiti in Batumi, Georgia
A related term is "sgraffito", which involves scratching through one layer of pigment to reveal another beneath it.
The ancient Romans carved graffiti on walls and monuments, examples of which also survive in Egypt.
Yarnbombers occasionally target previous graffiti for modification, which had been avoided among the majority of graffiti artists.
Egyptian Anonymous - ثورة الاحفاد هترجع الامجاد.jpg|Egyptian stencil combining a Pharaonic image with a  Guy Fawkes mask
Elisabethmarkt Muenchen Graffiti 2.jpg|Decorative wall painting at Elisabethmarkt in Munich
Many other titles contain in-game depictions of graffiti, including ''The Darkness'', ''Double Dragon 3: The Rosetta Stone'', ''NetHack'', ''Samurai Champloo: Sidetracked'', ''The World Ends with You'', ''The Warriors'', ''Just Cause'', ''Portal'', and various examples of Virtual Graffiti.
Special Graffiti Zone in Taipei.JPG|Sign designating a sanctioned graffiti zone in Taipei
Some local government areas throughout Australia have introduced "anti-graffiti squads", who clean graffiti in the area, and such crews as BCW (Buffers Can't Win) have taken steps to keep one step ahead of local graffiti cleaners.
Artists paint them mostly on house gables or on the ''Peace Lines'', high walls that separate different communities.
Gang members use graffiti to designate membership throughout the gang, to differentiate rivals and associates and, most commonly, to mark borders which are both territorial and ideological.
Hollywood also paid attention, consulting writers such as PHASE 2 as it depicted the culture and gave it international exposure in movies such as ''Beat Street'' (Orion, 1984).
On top of the political aspect of graffiti as a movement, political groups and individuals may also use graffiti as a tool to spread their point of view.
This practice, due to its illegality, has generally become favored by groups excluded from the political mainstream (e.g.
The stencil is then placed on the "canvas" gently and with quick, easy strokes of the aerosol can, the image begins to appear on the intended surface.
Graffiti often has a reputation as part of a subculture that rebels against authority, although the considerations of the practitioners often diverge and can relate to a wide range of attitudes.
Artistic parallels "are often drawn between the energy of São Paulo today and 1970s New York."
Figurines by KAWS, featuring icons of pop culture, often with crossed-out eyes, run in limited editions and sell for thousands of dollars.
In this campaign, taking notice of the legal problems of the IBM campaign, Sony paid building owners for the rights to paint on their buildings "a collection of dizzy-eyed urban kids playing with the PSP as if it were a skateboard, a paddle, or a rocking horse".
Provisions of gang injunctions include things such as restricting the possession of marker pens, spray paint cans, or other sharp objects capable of defacing private or public property; spray painting, or marking with marker pens, scratching, applying stickers, or otherwise applying graffiti on any public or private property, including, but not limited to the street, alley, residences, block walls, and fences, vehicles and/or any other real or personal property.
In 2009, following the elections in Iran, protesters (who regarded the electoral result as rigged) began to deface banknotes with slogans such as "Death to the dictator".
ქორქ?.jpg|Graffiti written in Georgian script, Tbilisi
Bring destruction on your head!
OlindaGraffiti.jpg|This artwork makes use of existing windows in Olinda, Pernambuco, Brazil
One depicted a hole in the wall with an idyllic beach, while another shows a mountain landscape on the other side.
Wet with cool dew drops
In 2001, computer giant IBM launched an advertising campaign in Chicago and San Francisco which involved people spray painting on sidewalks a peace symbol, a heart, and a penguin (Linux mascot), to represent "Peace, Love, and Linux."
In the late 1980s the upside down Martini glass that was the tag for punk band Missing Foundation was the most ubiquitous graffito in lower Manhattan, and was copied by hard core punk fans throughout the US and West Germany.
From 2007, Taipei's department of cultural affairs also began permitting graffiti on fences around major public construction sites.
The religious reference  "נ נח נחמ נחמן מאומן" ("Na Nach Nachma Nachman Meuman") is commonly seen in graffiti around Israel.
far-left or far-right groups) who justify their activity by pointing out that they do not have the money – or sometimes the desire – to buy advertising to get their message across, and that a "ruling class" or "establishment" controls the mainstream press, systematically excluding the radical and alternative point of view.
