'''''la''' abuela''
In this case the question is usually not which pronoun to use, but which gender to assign a given pronoun to (for such purposes as adjective agreement).
A more general type of classifier (classifier handshapes) can be found in sign languages.
Grammatical gender is a common phenomenon in the world's languages.
These rules may override semantics in some cases: for example, the noun ''membro''/''miembro'' ("member") is always masculine, even when it refers to a girl or a woman, and ''pessoa''/''persona'' ("person") is always feminine, even when it refers to a boy or a man.
Serbo-Croatian, allow doubly marked forms both for number and gender.
Czech is an example of such a language, with a division (in the plural) between masculine animate, masculine inanimate, feminine, and neuter.
'''Modern English translation'''
*the same, said by a female: ''muito obrigad'''a'''''
Other languages, e.g.
However, in most languages, this semantic division is only partially valid, and many nouns may belong to a gender category that contrasts with their meaning (e.g.
For example, in German, the sentences "The girl has come home from school.
The neuter ''it'' may be used for a baby but not normally for an older child or adult.
A similar system applies in Czech, but the situation is somewhat different in the plural (only masculine nouns are affected, and the distinctive feature is a distinct inflective ending for masculine animate nouns in the nominative plural and for adjectives and verbs agreeing with those nouns).
The Alamblak language has two genders, masculine and feminine.
Gender agreement applies in effect only to pronouns, and the choice of pronoun is determined based on semantics (perceived qualities of the thing being referred to) rather than on any conventional assignment of particular nouns to particular genders.
For example, a language like Latin, German or Russian has a number of different declension patterns, and which pattern a particular noun follows may be highly correlated with its gender.
"woman" is usually feminine), or may be arbitrary.
'''Sie''' (f.) macht jetzt '''ihre''' (f.) Hausaufgaben.''
In terms of linguistic markedness, these languages neutralize the gender opposition in the plural, itself a marked category.
In most languages that have grammatical gender, a combination of these three types of criteria is found, although one type may be more prevalent.
Sometimes, however, there is no antecedent – the referent of the pronoun is deduced indirectly from the context.
For example, Andrew and Andrea in English, or Κωνσταντίνος and Κωνσταντίνα in Greek.
This is because it is actually a diminutive of "Magd" and in German all diminutive forms are neuter.
(A few nouns denoting inanimate things are treated grammatically as animate and vice versa.)
In German, gender distinction prevents such ambiguity.
Further examples are the Italian words ''uovo'' ("egg") and ''braccio'' ("arm").
*German ''Weib'' (neuter), meaning "woman" (the word is now pejorative and generally replaced with 'die Frau', originally 'lady', fem.
Adjectives are affected by gender in a similar way.
(This is related to the forms of the second declension Latin neuter nouns from which they derive: ''ovum'' and ''bracchium'', with nominative plurals ''ova'' and ''bracchia''.)
Many Indo-European languages retained the three genders, including most Slavic languages, Latin, Sanskrit, Ancient and Modern Greek, and German.
Other examples include:
These sets depend largely on properties of the things that the nouns denote (for example, a particular classifier may be used for long thin objects, another for flat objects, another for people, another for abstracts, etc.
woman, girl, cow...), and diminutives; the masculine encompasses all other nouns (e.g.
It is a quite common phenomenon in language development for two phonemes to merge, thereby making etymologically distinct words sound alike.
In Polish, another Slavic language, the word for moon is ''księżyc'', which is masculine.
''y '''f'''erch '''f'''awr''
'''Modern English gloss'''
Gender is one of the categories which frequently require agreement.
For more information see Gender-neutral language and Singular ''they''.
), and in other language families such as Dravidian and Northeast Caucasian, as well as several Australian Aboriginal languages like Dyirbal, and Kalaw Lagaw Ya.
Likewise, the word for "boat" is neuter in German (''das Boot''), but common gender in Swedish (''en båt'') and Dutch (''de boot'').
Nevertheless, even in Icelandic, the feminine is considered somewhat more marked than the masculine.
The manifestations of the differences are as follows:
In Swedish (which has an overall common–neuter gender system), masculinity may be argued to be a marked feature, because in the weak adjectival declension there is a distinct ending (''-e'') for naturally masculine nouns (as in ''min lill'''e'''bror'', "my little brother").
The grammatical gender of a noun manifests itself in two principal ways: in the modifications that the noun itself undergoes, and in modifications of other related words (agreement).
* '''animate–inanimate''': here nouns that denote animate things (humans and animals) generally belong to one gender, and those that denote inanimate things to another (although there may be some deviation from that principle).
), although sometimes a noun is associated with a particular classifier more by convention than for any obvious reason.
of obsolete 'der Fro', meaning 'lord')
*The Russian word луна ("moon") is feminine, whereas месяц ("crescent moon", also meaning "month") is masculine.
'''''el''' bailar''
A human–non-human (or "rational–non-rational") distinction is also found in Dravidian languages.
In them, there is a high but not absolute correlation between grammatical gender and declensional class.
*The Italian word ''scimmia'' ("ape") is feminine, whereas the Spanish word ''simio'' is masculine.
* ''velkom'''in''''' (neuter plural) – to a mixed or indeterminate group
In linguistics, '''grammatical gender''' is a specific form of noun-class system in which the division of noun classes forms an agreement system with another aspect of the language, such as adjectives, articles, pronouns, or verbs.
), and also distinguishes male and female personal names, as in the above examples.
The two features are analogous to features of Russian and Czech respectively, except that those languages make an animate/inanimate (not personal/impersonal) distinction.
The two sentences above mean literally "much obliged"; the adjective agrees with the natural gender of the speaker, that is, with the gender of the first person pronoun which does not appear explicitly here.
), and there are few or no exceptions to this rule.
Seo brade lind wæs tilu and ic hire lufode.
Nouns can sometimes vary their form to enable the derivation of differently gendered cognate nouns; for example, to produce nouns with a similar meaning but referring to someone of a different sex.
On the other hand, some Slavic languages can be argued to have added new genders to the classical three (see below).
However, there are exceptions to this principle.
For example, the greeting ''velkominn'' ("welcome") is altered depending on who is being spoken to:
Polish might be said to distinguish five genders: personal masculine (referring to male humans), animate non-personal masculine, inanimate masculine, feminine, and neuter.
The gender of a noun may affect the modifications that the noun itself undergoes, particularly the way in which the noun inflects for number and case.
Gender is only marked in personal pronouns.
(In written Finnish, for example, ''hän'' is used for "he" and "she" and ''se'' for "it", but in the colloquial language ''se'' is usually used for "he" and "she" as well.)
Masculine nouns include male animates, most fish, trees, the moon, large wooden objects, most living beings and some religious items.
The ''natural gender'' of a noun, pronoun or noun phrase is a gender to which it would be expected to belong based on relevant attributes of its referent.
*Russian also has two words for "potato": картофель which is masculine, and картошка which is feminine.
In the case of languages which have masculine and feminine genders, the relation between biological sex and grammatical gender tends to be less exact in the case of animals than in the case of people.
Finally, in the case of a nationality, in Greek there are five forms: male and female for people (and sometimes for other living beings), and masculine, feminine, and neuter for nouns.
English has no live productive gender markers.
However, if the sex of the animal is known, and particularly in the case of companion animals, the gendered pronouns (''he'' and ''she'') may be used as they would be for a human.
The Dravidian languages use this system as described below.
(Most Spanish nouns in ''-ión'' are feminine; they derive from Latin feminines in ''-o''.)
*''Das Mädchen (n.) ist aus der Schule gekommen.
As a consequence Pluralia tantum nouns (lacking a singular form) cannot be assigned a gender.
This is particularly so in the case of things with no natural gender, such as sexless objects.
In null-subject languages (and in some elliptical expressions in other languages), such agreement may take place even though the pronoun does not in fact appear.
''Robert'' and ''Roberta''); and ''-e'', of French origin (cf.
Others merged feminine and the masculine into a common gender but retained the neuter, as in Swedish and Danish (and, to some extent, Dutch; see Gender in Dutch grammar).
In English, the problem of gender determination does not arise in the plural, because gender in that language is reflected only in pronouns, and the plural pronoun ''they'' does not have gendered forms.
For other situations in which such a "default" gender assignment may be required, see  below.
Additionally, in many languages, gender is often closely correlated with the basic unmodified form (lemma) of the noun, and sometimes a noun can be modified to produce (for example) masculine and feminine words of similar meaning.
For example, in English, one may use ''it'' to refer to a child, particularly when speaking generically rather than about a particular child of known sex.
man, boy, pot, broom...).
In fact, nouns in Spanish and Portuguese (as in the other Romance languages such as Italian and French) generally follow the gender of the Latin words from which they are derived.
* ''velkom'''inn''''' (masculine singular) – to one male person
Also, most Niger–Congo languages have extensive systems of noun classes, which can be grouped into several grammatical genders.
See Czech declension.
Many German nouns, for example, do not indicate their gender through either meaning or form.
A few nouns have both personal and impersonal forms, depending on meaning (for example, ''klient'' may behave as an impersonal noun when it refers to a client in the computing sense).
Gender correlates largely with noun endings (masculine nouns typically end in a consonant, feminines in ''-a'' and neuters in ''-o'') but there are many exceptions, particularly in the case of nouns whose stems end in a soft consonant.
This only occurs with feminine singular nouns: ''mab'' "son" remains unchanged.
An example is the Zande language, which has four genders: male human, female human, animal, and inanimate.
These related words can be, depending on the language: determiners, pronouns, numerals, quantifiers, possessives, adjectives, past and passive participles, verbs, adverbs, complementizers, and adpositions.
Another African language, Defaka, has three genders: one for all male humans, one for all female humans, and a third for all the remaining nouns.
However, not all words end in "a" or "o".
In the English phrase "''a flowerbed in the garden which I maintain''" only context tells us whether the relative clause (''which I maintain'') refers to the whole garden or just the flowerbed.
::personal: ''dobrzy klienci'' ("good customers"; nominative); ''dobrych klientów'' (accusative and genitive)
For example, the French pronouns ''quelqu'un'' ("someone"), ''personne'' ("no-one") and ''quelque chose'' ("something") are all treated as masculine – this is in spite of the fact that the last two correspond to feminine nouns (''personne'' meaning "person", and ''chose'' meaning "thing").
There are three main ways by which natural languages categorize nouns into genders: according to logical or symbolic similarities in their meaning (semantic), by grouping them with other nouns that have similar form (morphological), and through apparently arbitrary convention (lexical, possibly rooted in the language's history).
To complicate matters, the Greek language often offers additional less formal versions of these.
In Icelandic (which preserves a masculine–feminine–neuter distinction in both singular and plural), the neuter is used for indeterminate or mixed gender reference even when talking about people.
The Slavic languages mostly continue the Proto-Indo-European system of three genders, masculine, feminine and neuter.
In some languages the declension pattern followed by the noun itself will be different for different genders.
'''''la''' guitarra''
'''''la''' discusión''
* ''velkom'''nar''''' (feminine plural) – to a group of females
In even rarer cases the gender may be ambiguous, e.g.
'''''el''' abuelo''
The use of the plural pronoun ''they'' with singular reference is common in practice.
Generally, a word that ends in "-a" is feminine and in "-o" masculine.
These are masculine in the singular, but form the irregular plurals ''uova'' and ''braccia'', which have the endings of the feminine singular, but have feminine plural agreement.
The parts of speech affected by gender agreement, the circumstances in which it occurs, and the way words are marked for gender vary between languages.
Normally, such exceptions are a small minority.
*Scottish Gaelic ''boireannach'' (masculine), meaning "woman"
Moreover, grammatical gender may serve to distinguish homophones.
Many have a round shape or can be explained by the role they play in mythology.
Common systems of gender division include:
The formal forms come from the name Αγγλία (England), while the less formal are variants of the formal.
In this sense it is used to disambiguate homonyms, especially when the different meanings are totally unrelated.
In the case of Russian and Polish, in the plural, they differentiate between human and non-human nouns.
In some languages the gender is distinguished only in singular number but not in plural.
(These come mostly from the Slavic languages, where gender largely correlates with the noun ending.)
Thus, in French the feminine plural pronoun ''elles'' always designates an all-female group of people (or stands for a group of nouns all of feminine gender), but the masculine equivalent ''ils'' may refer to a group of males or masculine nouns, to a mixed group, or to a group of people of unknown genders.
The Ket language has three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and most gender assignment is based on semantics, but there are many inanimate nouns outside the neuter class.
These related words can be, depending on the language: determiners, pronouns, numerals, quantifiers, possessives, adjectives, past and passive participles, verbs, adverbs, complementizers, and adpositions.
There are certain exceptions, however:
As an example, we consider Spanish, a language with two noun genders: masculine and feminine.
They are not regularly used in English or other European languages, although they parallel the use of words such as ''piece(s)'' and ''head'' in phrases like "three pieces of paper" or "thirty head of cattle".
'''', from   '''') are always masculine.
In the singular, however, the issue frequently arises when a person of unspecified or unknown gender is being referred to.
(This contrasts with the genders found in German, where ''Sonne'' "sun" is feminine, and ''Mond'' "moon" is masculine.)
(Other genderless pronouns exist, such as the impersonal pronoun ''one'', but they are not generally substitutable for a personal pronoun.)
In the Spanish sentences ''Él es un buen actor'' "''He'' is a good actor" and ''Ella es una buena actriz'' "''She'' is a good actress", almost every word undergoes gender-related changes.
When a noun with conflicting natural and grammatical gender is the antecedent of a pronoun, it may not be clear which gender of pronoun to choose.
In general, those of no importance to the Kets are feminine, whereas objects of importance (e.g.
A problem with such arguments is that, as argued by Adèle Mercier, in French and many other languages the same class of objects can be referred to by words of different grammatical gender.
Old English had three genders, masculine, feminine and neuter, but gender inflections (like many other types of inflection in English) were later greatly simplified by sound changes, and then completely lost.
Different names for the male and the female of a species are more frequent for common pets or farm animals, e.g.
*With animals, ''it'' is usually used, but when the sex of the animal is known, it may be referred to as ''he'' or ''she'' (particularly when expressing emotional connection with the animal, as with a pet).
Modern examples include, to some extent, Basque, and Ojibwe.
For example, in Portuguese:
In some other languages, the gender of nouns can again mostly be determined by physical (semantic) attributes, although there remain some nouns whose gender is not assigned in this way (Corbett calls this "semantic residue").
These anomalies may have a historical explanation (''amour'' used to be feminine in the singular too) or result from slightly different notions (''orgue'' in the singular is usually a barrel organ, whereas the plural ''orgues'' usually refers to the collection of columns in a church organ).
The word ''hire'' "her" refers to ''lind'' "shield".
Classifiers can be considered similar to genders or noun classes, in that a language which uses classifiers normally has a number of different ones, used with different sets of nouns.
Among these, role 2 is probably the most important in everyday usage.
Grammatical gender is found in many Indo-European languages (including Latin, Spanish, French, Russian, and German, but not Persian, for example), Afro-Asiatic languages (which includes the Semitic and Berber languages, etc.
::animate: ''dobry klient'' ("good customer"; nominative); ''dobrego klienta'' (accusative and genitive)
the word for "manliness" could be of feminine gender).
The world view (e.g.
In this case, the gender assignment can also be influenced by the morphology or phonology of the noun, or in some cases can be apparently arbitrary.
*In the singular, masculine animates (in the standard declension) have an accusative form identical to the genitive, and masculine inanimates have accusative identical to the nominative.
That broad shield was good and I her loved.
A typological survey of 174 languages revealed that over one fourth of them had grammatical gender.
Bulgarian ''червен'', ''червена'', ''червено'' or German ''roter'', ''rote'', ''rotes'') but only one in plural (Bulgarian ''червени'', German ''rote'') all examples mean "red".
French vélo (m.) = bicyclette (f.).
In these languages each noun has a definite gender no matter the number.
She is now doing her homework" can be translated in two ways:
In a language like English, which does not assign grammatical gender to nouns, the pronoun used for referring to objects (''it'') is often used for animals also.
*"I love you", said to a female: '''' ()
There is a certain tendency to keep the grammatical gender when a close back-reference is made, but to switch to natural gender when the reference is further away.
* '''masculine–feminine–neuter''': this is similar to the masculine–feminine system, except that there is a third available gender, so nouns with sexless or unspecified-sex referents may be either masculine, feminine, or neuter.
Common gender divisions include masculine and feminine; masculine, feminine and neuter; or animate and inanimate.
They are a prominent feature of East Asian languages, where it is common for all nouns to require a classifier when being quantified – for example, the equivalent of "three people" is often "three ''classifier'' people".
According to one definition: "Genders are classes of nouns reflected in the behaviour of associated words."
*location in an area with languages featuring noun classes;
Few or no nouns can occur in more than one class.
Many linguists believe that to be true of the middle and late stages of Proto-Indo-European.
Feminine nouns include female animates, three types of fish, some plants, the sun and other heavenly objects, some body parts and skin diseases, the soul, and some religious items.
To specify the sex of an animal, an adjective may be added, as in ''un guepardo hembra'' ("a female cheetah"), or ''una cebra macho'' ("a male zebra").
When the sex of an animal is known, it will normally be referred to using gendered pronouns consistent with its sex; otherwise the pronouns will correspond to the gender of the noun denoting its species.
For example, the Bulgarian word ''пръст'' (''prəst'') means "finger" when masculine and "soil" when feminine.
An example of such a marker might be the suffix ''-ette'' (of French provenance), but this is seldom used today, surviving mostly in either historical contexts or with disparaging or humorous intent.
Problems arise when selecting a personal pronoun to refer to someone of unspecified or unknown gender (see also  above).
The choice of ''she'', ''he'' and ''it'' comes down to whether the pronoun is intended to designate a female, a male or something else.
* ''velkom'''in''''' (feminine singular) – to one female person
However, there are about 80 nouns representing inanimate entities which are nonetheless animate in gender: heavenly objects (moon, rainbow), metal objects (hammer, ring), edible plants (sweet potato, pea), and non-metallic objects (whistle, ball).
Thus, in Spanish, ''niño'' means "boy", and ''niña'' means "girl".
And the German suffixes ''-heit'' and ''-keit'' (comparable with ''-hood'' and ''-ness'' in English) produce feminine nouns.
However, aside from a handful of nouns like "god" and "goddess", "duke" and "duchess", "tiger" and "tigress", and "waiter" and "waitress",  gender is almost exclusively found in pronouns and titles.
As regards the pronouns used to refer to animals, these generally agree in gender with the nouns denoting those animals, rather than the animals' sex (natural gender).
Many constructed languages have natural gender systems similar to that of English.
Issues may arise in languages with gender-specific pronouns in cases when the gender of the referent is unknown or not specified; this is discussed under Gender-neutral language, and in relation to English at Singular ''they''.
Gender class may be marked on the noun itself, but will also always be marked on other constituents in a noun phrase or sentence.
Examples of the Polish system:
In Arabic, nouns whose singular form ends in a ''tāʾ marbūṭa'' (traditionally a , becoming  in pausa) are of feminine gender, the only significant exceptions being the word  '''' ("caliph") and certain masculine personal names (e.g.
The characteristic ending ''-а'' of ''очил'''а''''' suggests a neuter noun, but there is no way to cross-check it and there are indeed a few masculine nouns using the same ending in their plural (''крак'''а''''' and ''рог'''а''''' are plurals of masculine ''крак'' "leg" and ''рог'' "horn").
fish, wood) are masculine.
Examples of this can be in most European languages, including English (the personal pronouns ''he'', ''she'' and ''it'' are used depending on whether the referent is male, female, or inanimate or non-human; this is in spite of the fact that English does not generally have grammatical gender).
Gender may also be predictable from the type of derivation: for instance, the verbal nouns of Stem II (e.g.
When this happens, it may be associated with a difference in the sex of the referent (as with nouns such as ''comunista'' in Spanish, which may be either masculine or feminine, depending on whether it refers to a male or a female), or with some other difference in the meaning of the word.
This paradigm can be exploited for making new words: from the masculine nouns ''abogado'' "lawyer", ''diputado'' "member of parliament" and ''doctor'' "doctor", it was straightforward to make the feminine equivalents ''abogada'', ''diputada'', and ''doctora''.
Common feminine suffixes used in English names are ''-a'', of Latin or Romance origin (cf.
Also, Polish masculine animates always form their genitive in ''-a'', whereas in the case of inanimates some use ''-a'' and some ''-u'':
