The Grand Teton Lodge Company also manages the Jenny Lake Lodge, which consists of cabins and a restaurant and Colter Bay Village, which has cabins, a restaurant, a grocery store, a laundry and a marina.
The peaks themselves were carved into horns and arêtes and the canyons were transformed from water-eroded V-shapes to glacier-carved U-shaped valleys.
From the end of the Mesozoic to present, the region went through a series of uplifts and erosional sequences.
The re-establishment of the wolves has ensured that every indigenous mammal species now exists in the park.
Jackson oversaw the trapping operations in the Teton region between 1826 and 1830.
In 2010, Grand Teton National Park started requiring all boats to display an Aquatic Invasive Species decal issued by the Wyoming Game and Fish Department or a Yellowstone National Park boat permit.
The record high is  and the record low is .
Colter was later hired by Manuel Lisa to lead fur trappers and to explore the region around the Yellowstone River.
There are also restrictions as to the seasonal accessibility to certain areas as well as the types of bait and fishing tackle permitted.
From the mid-1840s until 1860, Jackson Hole and the Teton Range were generally devoid of all but the small populations of Native American tribes that had already been there.
Rock climbing and bouldering had become popular in the park by the mid 20th century.
The Rockefeller family owned the JY Ranch, which bordered Grand Teton National Park to the southwest.
However, the tablelands above the Snake River channel are mostly sagebrush plains and in terms of acreage is the most widespread habitat in the park.
North to south, Webb, Moran, Paintbrush, Cascade, Death and Granite Canyons slice through Teton Range.
An estimated 10,000 insect species frequent the park; they pollinate plants, provide a food source for birds, fish, mammals and other animals, and help in the decomposition of wood.
Congressional efforts to prevent the expansion of Grand Teton National Park ended up putting the Snake River Land Company's holdings in limbo.
As of 2012, only four brands of bear-resistant containers had been approved for use in the Grand Teton National Park backcountry.
In 1931, the Colter Stone, a rock carved in the shape of a head with the inscription "John Colter" on one side and the year "1808" on the other, was discovered in a field in Tetonia, Idaho, which is west of Teton Pass.
Grand Teton National Park, along with Yellowstone National Park, surrounding National Forests and related protected areas constitute the  () Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem.
Lake Solitude, located at an elevation of , is in a cirque at the head of the North Fork of Cascade Canyon.
Whitebark pines generally thrive at elevations above  and produce large seeds that are high in fat content and an important food source for various species such as the  grizzly bear, red squirrel and Clark's nutcracker.
In the early 19th&nbsp;century, the first White explorers encountered the eastern Shoshone natives.
This dam failed in 1910 and a new concrete Jackson Lake Dam replaced it by 1911.
The kettles were formed when ice situated under gravel outwash from ice sheets melted as the glaciers retreated.
In addition to gray wolves, another 17 species of carnivores reside within Grand Teton National Park including grizzlies and the more commonly seen American black bear.
The Colter Stone has not been authenticated to have been created by John Colter and may have been the work of later expeditions to the region.
There are more than 1,000&nbsp;drive-in campsites and over  of hiking trails that provide access to backcountry camping areas.
By 1907, in an effort to regulate water flow for irrigation purposes, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation had constructed a log crib dam at the Snake River outlet of Jackson Lake.
Grand Teton National Park is a popular destination for mountain and rock climbers partly because the mountains are easily accessible by road.
This provision was included in the legislation that combined Jackson Hole National Monument and Grand Teton National Park in 1950.
Other non-native species of trout such as the rainbow trout and lake trout were introduced by the Wyoming Fish and Game Department or migrated out of Yellowstone.
Grand Teton has several National Park Service-run visitor centers, and privately operated concessions for motels, lodges, gas stations and marinas.
Ozone and haze may be impacting overall visibility levels.
Between 1810 and 1812, the Astorians traveled through Jackson Hole and crossed Teton Pass as they headed east in 1812.
During the Eocene and Oligocene, volcanic eruptions from the ancestral Absaroka Range buried the region under various volcanic deposits.
With an altitude variance of over , the park has a number of different ecological zones including alpine tundra, the Rocky Mountains subalpine zone where spruce-fir forests are dominant, and the valley floor, where a mixed conifer and deciduous forest zone occupies regions with better soils intermixed with sagebrush plains atop alluvial deposits.
Formed during the Archean Eon (4 to 2.5&nbsp;billion years ago), these metamorphic rocks include gneiss, schist and amphibolites.
During the Paleozoic (542 to 251&nbsp;million years ago) sandstone, shale, limestone and dolomite were deposited.
During their return trip from the Pacific Ocean, expedition member John Colter was given an early discharge so he could join two fur trappers who were heading west in search of beaver pelts.
Secretary Ickes recommended to President Franklin Roosevelt that the Antiquities Act, which permitted Presidents to set aside land for protection without the approval of Congress, be used to establish a National Monument in Jackson Hole.
Langford and Stevenson likely did not get much further than The Enclosure.
The incidence of blister rust on whitebark pines in Yellowstone National Park is slightly lower than in Grand Teton.
Grand Teton National Park is one of the ten most visited national parks in the U.S., with an average of 2.5&nbsp;million visitors annually.
Overnight camping is allowed in the winter in the backcountry with a permit and visitors should inquire about avalanche dangers.
Where these various niches overlap is known as an ecotone.
During the Pinedale glaciation, the landscape visible today was created as glaciers from the Yellowstone Plateau flowed south and formed Jackson Lake, while smaller glaciers descending from the Teton Range pushed rock moraines out from the canyons and left behind lakes near the base of the mountains.
The Snake River fine-spotted cutthroat trout (or ''Snake River cutthroat trout'') is the only native trout species in Grand Teton National Park.
Grand Teton National Park is a popular destination for mountaineering, hiking, fishing and other forms of recreation.
The Colter Bay Visitor Center was built in 1956 and was determined in 2005 to be substandard for the proper care and display of the Indian arts collection.
Commencing 66&nbsp;million years ago the Laramide orogeny was a period of mountain-building and erosion in western North America that created the ancestral Rocky Mountains.
Opened in 2007 to replace an old, inadequate visitor center, the facility is named for the late U.S.
Grand Teton National Park allows boating on all the lakes in Jackson Hole, but motorized boats can only be used on Jackson and Jenny Lakes.
Located near Jackson Lake Dam, the Jackson Lake Lodge has a total of 385 rooms, meeting facilities, a retail shop and a restaurant.
At Jenny Lake, the Jenny Lake Visitor Center is open from mid–May to mid–September.
Led by U.S. Army Captain William F. Raynolds and guided by mountain man Jim Bridger, it included naturalist F. V. Hayden, who later led other expeditions to the region.
Major tributaries which flow into the Snake River include Pacific Creek and Buffalo Fork near Moran and the Gros Ventre River at the southern border of the park.
In this treeless region, hundreds of species of grass, wildflower, moss and lichen are found.
In the case of the whitebark pine, an invasive species of fungus known as white pine blister rust weakens the tree, making it more susceptible to destruction from endemic mountain pine beetles.
These deposits also have trace quantities of gold and mercury.
Snowmobile access was permitted between Moran Junction and Flagg Ranch adjacent to the John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Memorial Parkway so that travelers using the Continental Divide Snowmobile Trail could traverse between Bridger-Teton National Forest and Yellowstone National Park.
South of Jackson Lake Dam, the Signal Mountain Lodge is managed by Forever Resorts and provides cabins, a marina, a gas station and a restaurant.
The majority of conifer species in Grand Teton National Park are heavily dependent on wildfire and this is particularly true of the Lodgepole Pine.
An adjoining 154-seat auditorium was opened to the public in April 2011.
Metamorphic rocks are the most common types found in the northern and southern sections of the Teton Range.
Lizard Creek and Signal Mountain campgrounds have 60 and 86&nbsp;campsites respectively, while the smaller Jenny Lake campground has only 49 sites for tent use only.
During the Quaternary, landslides, erosion and glacial activity deposited soils and rock debris throughout the Snake River valley of Jackson Hole and left behind terminal moraines which impound the current lakes.
This heavy glaciation is unrelated to the uplift of the range itself and is instead part of a period of global cooling known as the Quaternary glaciation.
The Snake River creates braids and channels in sections where the gradients are lower and in steeper sections, erodes and undercuts the cobblestone terraces once deposited by glaciers.
Both Middle and South Teton were first climbed on the same day, August 29, 1923, by a group of climbers led by Albert R. Ellingwood.
Some of the tools are made of obsidian which chemical analysis indicates came from sources near present-day Teton Pass, south of Grand Teton National Park.
This cycle of uplift and erosion left behind one of the most complete non-marine Cenozoic rock sequences found in North America.
The Teton Park Road between the Taggart Lake trailhead to Signal Mountain Campground is closed to vehicular traffic during the winter and this section of the road is groomed for skiing and snowshoeing traffic.
While the fault has experienced up to 7.5–earthquake magnitude events since it formed, it has been relatively quiescent during historical periods, with only a few 5.0–magnitude or greater earthquakes known to have occurred since 1850.
The north face route to the summit of Grand Teton is a world renowned climb involving a dozen distinct pitches and is rated at grade 5.8 in difficulty for the  vertical ascent.
While some National Parks in Alaska permit subsistence hunting by indigenous natives and a few other National Park Service managed areas allow hunting under highly regulated circumstances, hunting in U.S. National Parks is not generally allowed.
To the north the park is bordered by the John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Memorial Parkway, which is administered by Grand Teton National Park.
Efforts to purchase or trade these inholdings for other federal lands are ongoing and through partnerships with other entities, 10&nbsp;million dollars is hoped to be raised to acquire private inholdings by 2016.
The Teton and Yellowstone region Shoshone relocated to the Wind River Indian Reservation after it was established in 1868.
From the Lower Saddle, climbers often follow the Owen-Spalding or Exum Ridge routes to the top of Grand Teton though there are 38 distinct routes to the summit.
Native American relics remain including ''The Enclosure'', an obviously man-made structure that is located about  below the summit of Grand Teton at a point near the Upper Saddle ().
The sage covered plains of Jackson Hole are favored areas for sage grouse, Brewer's sparrow and sage thrashers, while the wetlands are frequented by great blue heron, American white pelican, sandhill crane and on rare occasions it's endangered relative, the whooping crane.
Elk, which winter on the National Elk Refuge at the southern end of Jackson Hole and northwest  into higher altitudes during spring and summer, follow a similar migratory pattern to this day.
Well north of Grand Teton lies Mount Moran, which is further from trailheads and more difficult to access and ascend.
The park is not noted for large waterfalls; however,  high Hidden Falls just west of Jenny Lake is easy to reach after a short hike.
The park has numerous lakes, including  Jackson Lake as well as streams of varying length and the upper main stem of the Snake River.
In the subalpine region from the tree line to the base of the mountains, whitebark pine, limber pine, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce are dominant.
Gill approached climbing from a gymnastics perspective and while in the Tetons became the first known climber in history to use gymnastic chalk to improve handholds and to keep hands dry while climbing.
South of Jackson Lake, Leigh, Jenny, Bradley, Taggart and Phelps Lakes rest at the outlets of the canyons which lead into the Teton Range.
Grand Teton National Park has some of the most ancient rocks found in any U.S. National Park.
The largest such facility is the Jackson Lake Lodge, which is managed by the Grand Teton Lodge Company.
However, white explorers may not have been the first to climb many of the peaks and the earliest first ascent of even the formidable Grand Teton itself might have been achieved long before written history documented it.
Today five trout species inhabit park waters.
Only non–motorized watercraft are permitted on the Snake River.
The monument and park were adjacent to each other and both were administered by the National Park Service, but the monument designation ensured no funding allotment, nor provided a level of resource protection equal to the park.
However, levels of ammonium and nitrogen have been trending slightly upwards due to deposition from rain and snow that is believed to originate from regional agricultural activities.
South of Moose on the Moose–Wilson Road, the Laurance S. Rockefeller Preserve Center is located on land that was privately owned by Laurance S. Rockefeller and is situated on Phelps Lake.
The Hayden Geological Survey named many of the mountains and lakes in the region.
Climbers are essentially on their own to determine their own skill levels and are encouraged to not take unnecessary risks.
Additionally, there has also been a slight increase in mercury and pesticides that have been detected in snow and some alpine lakes.
Other high altitude lakes can be found at over  in elevation and a few, such as Icefloe Lake, remain ice clogged for much of the year.
A series of earthquakes along the Teton Fault slowly displaced the western side of the fault upward and the eastern side of the fault downward at an average of  of displacement every 300–400&nbsp;years.
The explorations by early mountain men and subsequent expeditions failed to identify any sources of economically viable mineral wealth.
Jackson Hole is a  long by  wide graben valley with an average elevation of , its lowest point is near the southern park boundary at .
The naming of the mountains is attributed to early 19th-century French-speaking trappers—''les trois tétons'' (the three teats) was later anglicized and shortened to ''Tetons''.
Of the 14 species of owls reported, the most common is the great horned owl, though the boreal owl and great grey owl are also seen occasionally.
Owen had made two previous attempts on the peak and after publishing several accounts of this first ascent, discredited any claim that Langford and Stevenson had ever reached beyond The Enclosure in 1872.
Efforts to exchange federal land from other areas for inholdings were still in the negotiation phase in 2012.
This land and the road from the southern boundary of the park to West Thumb in Yellowstone National Park was named the John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Memorial Parkway.
The greatest elevation change is found on the Paintbrush Canyon, Alaska Basin and Garnet Canyon Trails, where elevation increases of over  are typical.
The oldest rocks dated so far are 2,680 ± 12&nbsp;million years old, though even older rocks are believed to exist in the park.
By the mid-1930s, more than a dozen different climbing routes had been established on Grand Teton including the northeast ridge in 1931 by Glenn Exum.
The park service offers guided snowshoe tours daily from the main headquarters located in Moose, Wyoming.
U.S. Government expeditions to the region commenced in the mid-19th&nbsp;century as an offshoot of exploration in Yellowstone, with the first permanent white settlers in Jackson Hole arriving in the 1880s.
'''Grand Teton National Park''' is a United States National Park in northwestern Wyoming.
Southeast of Jackson Lake, glacial depressions known as kettles are numerous.
On a connecting ridge and just north of Grand Teton lies Mount Owen, and though lower in altitude, this peak is considered more difficult to ascend.
East of the Jackson Lake Lodge lies Emma Matilda and Two Ocean Lakes.
It runs roughly north to south and rises from the floor of Jackson Hole without any foothills along a  long by  wide active fault-block mountain front.
The National Park Service requires that all snowmobiles use "Best Available Technology" (BAT) and lists various models of snowmobiles that are permitted, all of which are deemed to provide the least amount of air pollution and maximize noise abatement.
Grand Teton National Park has a semi-arid climate with the wettest months between November and January, mostly in the form of snow.
Along with surrounding National Forests, these three protected areas constitute the almost  Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, one of the largest intact mid-latitude temperate ecosystems in the world.
Another map attributed to William Clark indicates John Colter entered Jackson Hole from the northeast, crossing the Continental Divide at either Togwotee Pass or Union Pass and left the region after crossing Teton Pass, following the well established Native American trails.
The F4 Teton-Yellowstone tornado was a high altitude tornado which touched down northeast of the park on the border of the Teton Wilderness of Bridger-Teton National Forest and Yellowstone National Park.
In the valley floor, lodgepole pine is most common but Rocky Mountain Douglas-fir, and blue spruce inhabit drier areas, while aspen, cottonwood, alder, and willow are more commonly found around lakes, streams and wetlands.
The station is designed to check for various pollutants as well as ozone levels and weather.
In a study published in 2002, the Snake River was found to have better overall water quality than other river systems in Wyoming, and low levels of pollution from anthropogenic sources.
The Snake River fine-spotted cutthroat trout was identified by some researchers as a separate subspecies by the mid-1990s, and is managed as a distinct subspecies by the state of Wyoming, but is not yet recognized as such by the neighboring states of Idaho and Montana.
The Jedediah Smith Wilderness of Caribou-Targhee National Forest lies along the western boundary and includes the western slopes of the Teton Range.
Due to various changes in the ecosystem, some of them human-induced, efforts have been made to provide enhanced protection to some species of native fish and the increasingly threatened whitebark pine.
Various researchers have not been able to identify any genetic differences between the Snake River fine-spotted cutthroat trout and the Yellowstone cutthroat trout, though in terms of appearances, the Snake River subspecies has much smaller spots which cover a greater portion of the body, and the two subspecies inhabit different ecological niches.
The scenic highway with the same name passes from the southern boundary of Grand Teton National Park to West Thumb in Yellowstone National Park.
By 1942 Rockefeller had become increasingly impatient that his purchased property might never be added to the park, and wrote to the Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes that he was considering selling the land to another party.
Carved by a combination of glacier activity as well as by numerous streams, the canyons are at their lowest point along the eastern margin of the range at Jackson Hole.
Relatively common sightings of coyote, river otter, marten and badger and occasional sightings of cougar, Canadian lynx and wolverine are reported annually.
A 2005 study of the water of Jackson, Jenny and Taggart Lakes indicated that all three of these lakes had virtually pristine water quality.
Though the Teton Range was never permanently inhabited, pioneers began settling the Jackson Hole valley to the east of the range in 1884.
Middle Teton is another popular climb that is most easily summited from a saddle between it and South Teton.
Trails are well marked and routes to the summits of most peaks are long established, and for the experienced and fit, most peaks can be climbed in one day.
The Craig Thomas Discovery and Visitor Center adjacent to the park headquarters at Moose, Wyoming, is open year round.
Initial construction of the airstrip north of the town of Jackson was completed in the 1930s.
Jackson Hole residents were opposed to an expansion of Yellowstone, but were more in favor of the establishment of a separate National Park which would include the Teton Range and six lakes at the base of the mountains.
The largest lakes in the park all drain either directly or by tributary streams into the Snake River.
Fish and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Reclamation, and also, in consequence of Jackson Hole Airport's presence in the park, the Federal Aviation Administration.
Though extremely hot canopy or crown fires tend to kill Lodgepole Pine seeds, lower severity surface fires usually result in a higher post wildfire regeneration of this species.
Between 100–125 bighorn sheep dwell in the alpine and rocky zones of the peaks.
At , Grand Teton abruptly rises more than  above Jackson Hole, almost  higher than Mount Owen, the second-highest summit in the range.
Granite and pegmatite intrusions also worked their way into fissures in the older gneiss.
To the north of Mount Moran, the range eventually merges into the high altitude Yellowstone Plateau.
It is only  south of Yellowstone National Park, to which it is connected by the National Park Service-managed John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Memorial Parkway.
During the late Cretaceous, a volcanic arc west of the region deposited fine grained ash that later formed into bentonite, an important mineral resource.
After 1810, American and British fur trading companies were in competition for control of the North American fur trade, and American sovereignty over the region was not secured until the signing of the Oregon Treaty in 1846.
Grand Teton National Park, in partnership with other agencies, erected the first air quality monitoring station in the park in 2011.
Langford claimed that he and Stevenson climbed Grand Teton, but were vague as to whether they had made it to the summit.
In 1930, this plan was revealed to the residents of the region and was met with strong disapproval.
An average of 4,000 climbers per year make an attempt to summit Grand Teton and most ascend up Garnet Canyon to a mountain pass called the Lower Saddle, which is between Grand Teton and Middle Teton.
Over 300 species of birds have been sighted in the park including the calliope hummingbird, the smallest bird species in North America, as well as trumpeter swans, which is North America's largest waterfowl.
In the vicinity of Colter Bay Village, the Hermitage Point Trail is  long and considered easy.
All snowmobiles must be less than 10&nbsp;years old and have odometer readings of less than .
The dam was further enlarged in 1916, raising lake waters  as part of the Minidoka Project, designed to provide irrigation for agriculture in the state of Idaho.
In 1872, Hayden oversaw explorations in Yellowstone, while a branch of his expedition known as the Snake River Division was led by James Stevenson and explored the Teton region.
Native species of fish include the mountain whitefish, longnose dace, mountain sucker and non-native species include the Utah chub and Arctic grayling.
Eight of these peaks between Avalanche and Cascade Canyons make up the often-photographed Cathedral Group.
The park also manages 27 concession contracts that provide services such as lodging, restaurants, mountaineering guides, dude ranching, fishing and a boat shuttle on Jenny Lake.
More than 1,000&nbsp;species of vascular plants, dozens of species of mammals, 300 species of birds, more than a dozen fish species and a few species of reptiles and amphibians exist.
Of the other major peaks on the Teton Range, all were climbed by the late 1930s including Mount Moran in 1922 and Mount Owen in 1930 by Fritiof Fryxell and others after numerous previous attempts had failed.
One party employed by the British North West Company and led by explorer Donald Mackenzie entered Jackson Hole from the west in 1818 or 1819.
Grand Teton National Park covers approximately , while the John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Memorial Parkway includes .
The French trappers' ''les trois tétons'' (the three breasts) was later shortened to the Tetons.
The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem spans across portions of three states and is one of the largest intact mid-latitude ecosystems remaining on Earth.
It was financed with a combination of federal grants and private donations.
Efforts to preserve the region as a national park commenced in the late 19th&nbsp;century, and in 1929 Grand Teton National Park was established, protecting the major peaks of the Teton Range.
Proponents of continuing the elk hunt, which occurs in the fall, argue that the elk herd would become overpopulated without it, leading to vegetation degradation from overgrazing elk herds.
Ranging from moderate to strenuous in difficulty, trails leading into the canyons are rated based on distance and more importantly on the amount of elevation change.
Organized exploration of the region was halted during the American Civil War but resumed when F. V. Hayden led the well-funded Hayden Geological Survey of 1871.
The mountain-dwelling Shoshone were known as "Sheep-eaters" or "''Tukudika''" as they referred to themselves, since a staple of their diet was the Bighorn Sheep.
Whitebark pine has generally had a lower incidence of blister rust infection throughout the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem than in other regions such as Glacier National Park and the Cascade Range.
All boats are required to comply with various safety regulations including personal flotation devices for each passenger.
Lewis and Clark expedition co-leader William Clark produced a map based on the previous expedition and included the explorations of John Colter in 1807, apparently based on discussions between Clark and Colter when the two met in St. Louis, Missouri in 1810.
Numerous coal seams of  in thickness are interspersed with siltstone, claystone and other sedimentary rocks.
Any climb requiring an overnight stay in the backcountry does require a permit.
In November 2007, the Rockefeller family transferred ownership of the ranch to the park for the establishment of the Laurance S. Rockefeller Preserve, which was dedicated on June 21, 2008.
Though blister rust is not in itself the cause of increased mortality, its weakening effect on trees allows native pine beetles to more easily infest the trees, increasing mortality.
Though in a state of recession, a dozen small glaciers persist at the higher elevations near the highest peaks in the range.
Several other trails link Hermitage Point with Emma Matilda Lake and Two Ocean Lake Trails, also considered to be relatively easy hikes in the Jackson Lake Lodge area.
Grand Teton National Park is more than  air distance from any major urban or industrial area, and localized human activities have generally had a very low environmental impact on the surrounding region.
Though the Yellowstone fires of 1988 had minimal impact on Grand Teton National Park, studies conducted before and reaffirmed after that event concluded than the suppression of natural wildfires during the middle part of the 20th century decreased plant species diversity and natural regeneration of plant communities.
Further dam construction plans for other lakes in the Teton Range alarmed Yellowstone National Park superintendent Horace Albright, who sought to block such efforts.
Many tree species have evolved to mainly germinate after a wildfire.
Grand Teton National Park fisheries are managed by the Wyoming Fish and Game Department and a Wyoming state fishing license is required to fish all waterways in Grand Teton National Park.
One of the tools found is of a type associated with the Clovis culture, and tools from this cultural period date back at least 11,500&nbsp;years.
The valley of Jackson Hole remained in private ownership until the 1930s, when conservationists led by John D. Rockefeller, Jr. began purchasing land in Jackson Hole to be added to the existing national park.
Donated to Grand Teton National Park and opened to the public in 2008, the property was once part of the JY Ranch, the first dude ranch in Jackson Hole.
Slightly more elevated sections of the plains of the northern sections of Jackson Hole form forest islands with one such obvious example being Timbered Island.
Magma intrusions of diabase rocks 765&nbsp;million years ago left dikes that can be seen on the east face of Mount Moran and Middle Teton.
In Grand Teton National Park, hunters are required to obtain Wyoming hunting licenses and be deputized as park rangers.
The easiest hiking trails are located in the valley, where the altitude changes are generally minimal.
The creel limit for trout is restricted to six per day, including no more than three cutthroat trout with none longer than , while the maximum length of other trout species may not exceed , except those taken from Jackson Lake, where the maximum allowable length is .
Roosevelt created the  Jackson Hole National Monument in 1943, using the land donated from the Snake River Land Company and adding additional property from Teton National Forest.
The airport has night flight curfews and overflight restrictions, with pilots being expected to approach and depart the airport along the east, south or southwest flight corridors.
During the last 25&nbsp;years of the 19th century, the mountains of the Teton Range became a focal point for explorers wanting to claim first ascents of the peaks.
