The Grand National was designed as a cross-country steeplechase when it was first officially run in 1839.
Later in the century the race was the setting of a thriller by the popular novelist Henry Hawley Smart.
This was utilised for the first time during the 2011 race as casualties at fences 4 and 6 (Becher's Brook) resulted in marshals diverting the remaining contenders around those fences on the final lap.
*'''Arthur Ferrie''', who worked as a groundsman during the 1970s and 1980s;
Cars and coaches were locked in the course grounds, leaving some 20,000 people without their vehicles over the weekend.
Richard Johnson set a record of 20 failed attempts to win the race from 1997–2016, having finished second twice, but is still competing.
The second became known as The Fan, after a mare who refused the obstacle three years in succession.
The cores of 12 fences were rebuilt in 2012 and they are now made of a flexible plastic material which is more forgiving compared to the traditional wooden cores.
Additionally, work has been carried out to smooth the core post infrastructure of the fences with protective padding to reduce impact upon contact, and the height of the toe-boards on all fences has been increased to .
During this period, Red Rum was breaking all records to become the most successful racehorse in Grand National history.
In March 2016 it was announced that Randox Health are to take over from Crabbie's as officials partners of Aintree's three-day festival, the highlight of which is the Grand National.
to cross the finishing line first.
Longevity is no guarantee of success, however, as 13 of the 34 never tasted the glory of winning the race.
The fence was originally known as the Monument Jump but The Chair came into more regular use in the 1930s.
Since 1986, any jockey making five or more clear rounds has been awarded the Aintree Clear Rounds Award.
;Fence 3 & 19 – open ditch
These include champion jockeys such as Terry Biddlecombe, John Francome, Josh Gifford, Stan Mellor, Jonjo O'Neill (who never finished the race) and Fred Rimell.
Course officials tried to stop the runners by waving red flags, but many jockeys thought that they were protesters (some had invaded the course earlier) and so continued to race.
The course is also notable for having one of the longest run-ins from the final fence of any steeplechase, at .
These words turned out to be true, as 41 of the 42 starters fell during the race.
The race is popular amongst many people who do not normally watch or bet on horse racing at other times of the year.
When the concept of the Grand National was first envisaged it was designed as a race for gentlemen riders, meaning men who were not paid to compete, and while this was written into the conditions of the early races many of the riders who weighed out for the 1839 race were professionals for hire.
Firstly, the Great St. Albans Chase, which had clashed with the steeplechase at Aintree, was not renewed after 1838, leaving a major hole in the chasing calendar.
*'''Brian Fletcher''', a jockey who won the race three times (including Red Rum's first victory in 1973, and finished second once and third three times);
Secondly, the railway arrived in Liverpool, enabling transport to the course by rail for the first time.
The '''Grand National''' is a National Hunt horse race held annually at Aintree Racecourse in Liverpool, England.
Although the number of amateurs remained high between the wars their ability to match their professional counterparts gradually receded.
*'''Jack Anthony''', three-time winning jockey in 1911, 1915 and 1920; and
Forty yards from what seemed like certain victory, Devon Loch suddenly, and inexplicably, half-jumped into the air and collapsed in a belly-flop on the turf.
Height: , with the landing side  to  lower than the takeoff side
In 2013, when further changes were made to introduce a more flexible fence structure, there were no fatalities in the race itself although two horses died in run-up races over the same course.
The last Seagram-sponsored Grand National was in 1991.
*'''Manifesto''', who holds the record for most runs in the race, eight including two victories;
From then until 2012 it was broadcast by the BBC.
Further changes in set-up and procedure allow vets to treat horses more rapidly and in better surroundings.
*'''Sir Peter O'Sullevan''', the commentator who called home the winners of fifty Grand Nationals on radio and television from 1947 to 1997.
* Andrew Thornton (1996–2016): never in first three in 14 attempts
Many explanations have been offered for Devon Loch's behaviour on the run-in, but the incident remains inexplicable.
In 1838 and 1839 three significant events occurred to transform the Liverpool race from a small local affair to a national event.
Additional vets are stationed at the pull-up area, finishing post, and in the surgery.
*'''Tom Olliver''', who rode in nineteen Nationals, including seventeen consecutively, and won three times, as well as finishing second three times and third once;
The 1997 Grand National was postponed after two coded bomb threats were received from the Provisional Irish Republican Army.
Originally a stone wall in the very early Nationals.
Height: , with a  ditch on the takeoff side
The first past the post of the horses that completed was Esha Ness (in the second-fastest time ever), ridden by John White and trained by Jenny Pitman.
The 2011 and 2012 races each yielded two deaths, including one each at Becher's Brook.
A plain obstacle which precedes the most famous fence on the course.
The running of the 1956 Grand National witnessed one of the chase's most bizarre incidents.
The gates, hedges and ditches that they met along the way were flagged to provide them with the obstacles to be jumped along the way with posts and rails erected at the two points where the runners jumped a brook.
For every 1,000 horses taking part in modern steeplechase races, the number of fatalities is just over four, according to the British Horseracing Authority; research by Anglia Ruskin University states the rate is six per 1,000 horses.
Peter Scudamore technically lined up for thirteen Grand Nationals without winning but the last of those was the void race of 1993, which meant that he officially competed in twelve Nationals.
He rode Aldaniti, a horse deprived in its youth and which had only recently recovered from chronic leg problems.
A loose horse named Popham Down, who had unseated his rider at the first jump, suddenly veered across the leading group at the 23rd, causing them to either stop, refuse or unseat their riders.
This also marks the point where the runners are said to be re-entering the "racecourse proper".
Many other well-known jockeys have failed to win the Grand National.
It was bypassed for the first time in 2015 on the final lap as vets arrived to treat a horse who fell on the first lap.
Parts of the course were widened in 2009 to allow runners to bypass fences if required.
It takes its name from Captain Martin Becher who fell there in the first Grand National and took shelter in the small brook running along the landing side of the fence while the remainder of the field thundered over.
Finally, a committee was formed to better organise the event.
A testing obstacle that often leads to falls and unseated riders.
A public vote announced at the 2012 Grand National saw five more additions to the Legends hall:
*'''Police Constable Ken Lawson''', who was celebrating thirty-one years of service in the mounted section of Merseyside Police and was set to escort his third National winner in 2010; and
Originally bought as a yearling in 1966 for 400 guineas (£420), he passed through various training yards before being bought for 6,000 guineas (£6,300) by Ginger McCain on behalf of Noel le Mare.
The majority of the race therefore took place not on the actual Aintree Racecourse but instead in the adjoining countryside.
* Chris Grant (1980–1994): finished second thrice in 13 attempts
The last amateur rider to win the race is Marcus Armytage, who (as of 2016) set the still-standing course record of 8:47.8, when winning on Mr Frisk in 1990.
In the 1840s the Melling Road was also flanked by hedges and the runners had to jump into the road and then back out of it.
Between 2013 and 2016 it was shown by Channel 4;  the UK broadcasting rights transfer to ITV from  2017.
In the past, such amateur riders would have been joined by army officers, such as David Campbell who won in 1896, and sporting aristocrats, farmers or local huntsmen and point to point riders, who usually opted to ride their own mounts.
It was won by rider Jem Mason on the aptly named, Lottery
During the 1970s and 1980s, the Grand National saw a total of 12 horses die (half of which were at Becher's Brook); in the next 20-year period from 1990 to 2010, when modifications to the course were most significant, there were 17 equine fatalities.
This year's National was run during misty weather conditions with the going very heavy.
The Water Jump was one of the most popular jumps on the course, presenting a great jumping spectacle for those in the stands and was always a major feature in the newsreels' coverage of the race.
It is said that Ivan Straker, Seagram's UK chairman, became interested in the potential opportunity after reading a passionate newspaper article written by journalist Lord Oaksey, who, in his riding days, had come within three-quarters of a length of winning the 1963 National.
These races have long been disregarded because of the belief that they took place at Maghull and not Aintree.
Five vets remain mobile on the course during the running of the race and can initiate treatment of injured fallers at the fence.
In 2005 John Smith's took over from Martell as main sponsors of the Grand National and many of the other races at the three-day Aintree meeting for the first time.
*'''Count Karl Kinsky''', the first international winner of the race, and at his first attempt, on board the mare Zoedone in 1883;
Despite a poor start, the pair went on to win four-and-a-half lengths ahead of the much-fancied Spartan Missile, ridden by amateur jockey and 54-year-old grandfather John Thorne.
A panel of experts also selected three additional legends:
The first female jockey to complete the race was Geraldine Rees on Cheers in 1982.
The race was also the first National ride for Liam Treadwell.
One century later, the Topham family bought the course outright.
* Jeff King (1964–1980): finished third once in 15 attempts
The Grand National has been broadcast live on free-to-air terrestrial television in the United Kingdom since 1960.
Racing journalist Lord Oaksey described the resulting pile-up by saying that Popham Down had "cut down the leaders like a row of thistles".
Great Span's saddle then slipped, leaving Billy Barton in the lead until he too then fell.
Some within the horseracing community, including those with notable achievements in the Grand National such as Ginger McCain and Bob Champion, have argued that the lowering of fences and the narrowing of ditches, primarily designed to increase horse safety, has had the adverse effect by encouraging the runners to race faster.
Edward Topham, a respected handicapper and prominent member of Lynn's syndicate, began to exert greater influence over the National.
The runners started at a lane on the edge of the racecourse and raced away from the course out over open countryside towards the Leeds and Liverpool Canal.
In 2006 John Smith's launched the John Smith's People's Race which gave ten members of the public the chance to ride in a flat race at Aintree on Grand National day.
Champion and Aldaniti were instantly propelled to celebrity status, and within two years, their story had been re-created in the film ''Champions'', starring John Hurt.
Lynn set out a course, built a grandstand, and Lord Sefton laid the foundation stone on 7 February 1829.
His record was to stand for the next sixteen years.
These factors led to a more highly publicised race in 1839 which attracted a larger field of top quality horses and riders, greater press coverage and an increased attendance on race day.
*'''Carl Llewellyn''', jockey who won two Nationals including on Party Politics in 1992, and Earth Summit in 1998, the latter being the only horse to have won the Grand National and the Scottish and Welsh Nationals;
The 21st century has not seen a significant increase in female riders but it has seen them gain rides on mounts considered to have a genuine chance of winning.
The selection panel also inducted three more competitors:
It has also been broadcast on radio since 1927; BBC Radio held exclusive rights until 2013, however, Talksport also now holds radio commentary rights.
An estimated 500 to 600 million people watch the Grand National in over 140 countries.
Seven horses ran the course in its entirety, forcing a void result.
Three jockeys who led over the last fence in the National but lost the race on the run-in ended up as television commentators: Lord Oaksey (on Carrickbeg in 1963), Norman Williamson (on Mely Moss in 2000), and Richard Pitman (on Crisp in 1973).
*'''Ginger McCain''' and his record three-time winning horse '''Red Rum''';
In modern language, the phrase "to do a Devon Loch" is sometimes used to describe a last-minute failure to achieve an expected victory.
Height: , preceded by a 6&nbsp;ft (1.83 m) wide ditch
David Dick never won a Grand National but holds the record for the number of clear rounds – nine times.
In the 1967 Grand National, most of the field were hampered or dismounted in a mêlée at the 23rd fence, allowing a rank-outsider, Foinavon, to become a surprise winner at odds of 100/1.
;Fence 6 & 22 – Becher's Brook
The practise was done away with in the 1850s but the monument where the chair stood is still there.
John Smith's also added five "people's legends" who were introduced on Liverpool Day, the first day of the Grand National meeting.
The fence was the location where a distance judge sat in the earliest days of the race.
* David Casey (1997–2015): finished third once in 15 attempts
By the 21st century however, openings for amateur riders had become very rare with some years passing with no amateur riders at all taking part.
* Robert Thornton (1997–2011): never in first three in 14 attempts
*'''Richard Dunwoody''', the jockey who rode West Tip and Miinnehoma to victory and who competed in 14 Grand Nationals, being placed in eight;
However, deaths in the Grand National are higher than the average steeplechase, with six deaths per 439 horses between 2000 and 2010.
Today it is one of the most popular jumps on the course for spectators.
The course over which the race is run features much larger fences than those found on conventional National Hunt tracks.
In 1973, eight years after Mrs. Mirabel Topham announced she was seeking a buyer, the racecourse was finally sold to property developer Bill Davies.
It is the most valuable jump race in Europe, with a prize fund of £1 million in 2016.
Noted for its sharp 90-degree left turn immediately after landing.
A false start was declared, but lack of communication between course officials meant that 30 out of the 39 jockeys did not realise and began to race.
*'''John Buckingham''' and '''Foinavon''', the unlikely winners in 1967;
The first female jockey to enter the race was Charlotte Brew on the 200/1 outsider Barony Fort in the 1977 race.
The Duke was ridden by Martin Becher.
*'''Vincent O'Brien''', who trained three consecutive winners of the race in the 1950s;
The run-in is not perfectly straight: an "elbow" requires jockeys to make a slight right before finding themselves truly on the home straight.
Although Billy Barton's jockey Tommy Cullinan managed to remount and complete the race, it was Tipperary Tim who came in first at outside odds of 100/1.
A plain obstacle that comes at a point when the runners are usually in a good rhythm and thus rarely causes problems.
The races at Gatwick are not always recognised as "Grand Nationals" and their results are often omitted from winners' lists.
;Fence 16 – Water Jump
Due to the high number of injuries and deaths suffered by participating horses, animal rights groups have campaigned to have the race modified or abolished.
The most recent running of the race, in 2016, was won by Rule The World, ridden by jockey David Mullins for trainer Mouse Morris.
Hedgehunter, who would go on to win in 2005, fell at the last while leading.
In total, thirty members of the public took part in the event before it was discontinued in 2010.
Devon Loch, owned by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, had cleared the final fence in leading position, five lengths clear of E.S.B.
*'''George Dockeray''', who alongside Ginger McCain and Fred Rimell trained four National winners, starting with Lottery in the first official Grand National in 1839.
The Grand National was founded by William Lynn, a syndicate head and proprietor of the Waterloo Hotel, on land he leased in Aintree from William Molyneux, 2nd Earl of Sefton.
The winners were announced on the day of the 2010 Grand National and inscribed on commemorative plaques at Aintree.
He allegedly turned down a substantial bribe during the 1860 race from the second-placed jockey and instead rode on to win;
It was bypassed on the final lap for the first time in 2012 so that medics could treat a jockey who fell from his mount on the first lap and had broken a leg.
The fence was originally known as the Second Brook but was renamed after a horse named Valentine was reputed to have jumped the fence hind legs first in 1840.
Martell, then a Seagram subsidiary, took over sponsorship of the Aintree meeting for an initial seven years from 1992, in a £4 million deal.
* Stan Mellor (1956–1971): finished second once in 13 attempts
*'''Tommy Carberry''', the jockey who stopped Red Rum's attempt at a third success in 1975 by winning on L'Escargot, also finished second and third before going on to train the winner in 1999.
In 2010 the National became the first horse race to be televised in high-definition in the UK.
The course was secured by police who then evacuated jockeys, race personnel, and local residents along with 60,000 spectators.
;Fence 8 & 24 – Canal Turn
Foinavon, whose owner had such little faith in him that he had travelled to Worcester that day instead, had been lagging some 100 yards behind the leading pack, giving his jockey, John Buckingham, time to steer his mount wide of the havoc and make a clean jump of the fence on the outside.
*'''West Tip''', who ran in six consecutive Nationals and won once in 1986;
Despite some tired runners falling at the 30th and appearing injured, no horse deaths have occurred at the 30th fence to date.
*'''Michael Scudamore''', rider in sixteen consecutive Grand Nationals from 1951, finishing first in 1959 and also achieving a second and a third place;
Over the years, Aintree officials have worked in conjunction with animal welfare organisations to reduce the severity of some fences and to improve veterinary facilities.
*'''Captain Martin Becher''', who played a major part in bringing the National to Liverpool, rode the winner of the first precursor to the National in 1836 and was the first rider to fall into the brook at the sixth fence, which forever took his name after 1839; and
The first of these races, in 1916, was called the Racecourse Association Steeplechase, and in 1917 and 1918 the race was called the War National Steeplechase.
Many of these, particularly Becher's Brook, The Chair and the Canal Turn, have become famous in their own right and, combined with the distance of the event, create what has been called "the ultimate test of horse and rider".
The brook on the landing side of Becher's was filled in and, after the 2011 race which also saw an equine fatality at the obstacle, the incline on the landing side was levelled out and the drop on was reduced by between 4 and 5 inches (10–13&nbsp;cm) to slow the runners.
There was once a ditch before the fence but this was filled in after a mêlée in the 1928 race.
In 2008, a new veterinary surgery was constructed in the stable yard which has two large treatment boxes, an X-ray unit, video endoscopy, equine solarium, and sandpit facilities.
Height: ; fronted by a  ditch
Pitman's son Mark also led over the last fence, only to be pipped at the post when riding Garrison Savannah in 1991.
It is on this run-in — one of the longest in the United Kingdom at — that many potential winners have had victory snatched away, such as Devon Loch in 1956, Crisp in 1973, What's Up Boys in 2002 and Sunnyhillboy in 2012.
There have been no equine fatalities in the main Grand National race since 2012, however the animal welfare charity League Against Cruel Sports counts the number of horse deaths over the three-day meeting from the year 2000 to 2013 at 40.
;Fence 9 & 25 – Valentine's
Red Rum became, and remains, the only horse to have won the Grand National three times, in 1973, 1974, and 1977.
In 1973, he was in second place at the last fence, 15 lengths behind champion horse Crisp, who was carrying 23 lbs more.
Coincidentally, the race was won by a horse named Seagram.
Prior to 1888 the first two fences were located approximately halfway between the first to second and second to third jumps.
With limited accommodation available in the city, local residents opened their doors and took in many of those stranded.
In 2005, Carrie Ford finished fifth on the 8/1 second-favourite Forest Gunner.
* David Nicholson (1957–1973): never in first three in 13 attempts
* George Waddington (1861–1882): finished second once in 13 attempts
One of the smallest on the course, it was named in 1984 after the 1967 winner who avoided a mêlée at the fence to go on and win the race at outside odds of 100/1.
Finishing in 9 minutes 1.9 seconds, Red Rum broke the record for fastest completion time of the National which had previously stood since 1934 by Golden Miller.
*'''Jenny Pitman''', the first woman to train the winner of the race in 1983; and
Those requiring more specialist care can be transported by specialist horse ambulances, under police escort, to the nearby Philip Leverhulme Equine Hospital at the University of Liverpool at Leahurst.
With only two riders completing the course, this remains a record for the fewest number of finishers.
* Graham Bradley (1983–1999): finished second once in 14 attempts
The Canadian distiller provided a solid foundation on which the race's revival could be built, firstly enabling the course to be bought from Davies and to be run and managed by the Jockey Club.
To date, though, calls for the Nationals of 1836–1838 to be restored to the record books have been unsuccessful.
Two days after the purchase while trotting the horse on Southport beach, McCain noticed that Red Rum appeared lame.
Davies tripled the admission prices; consequently, the attendance at the 1975 race, won by L'Escargot, was the smallest in living memory.
*'''George Stevens''', the record five-time winning rider between 1856–1870;
While under starter's orders a series of incidents occurred which resulted in one jockey being tangled in the starting tape which had failed to rise correctly.
The other 12 riders who never won or have not as yet won, having had more than 12 rides in the race are:
The fence Becher's Brook is named after him and is where he fell in the next year’s race.
It was bypassed in 2011 along with fence 20 on the final lap, after an equine casualty.
This fence is the site of the accident that claimed the only human life in the National's history: in 1862, Joe Wynne fell here and died from his injuries, although a coroner's inquest revealed that the rider was in a gravely weakened condition through consumption.
McCain had equalled George Dockeray and Fred Rimell's record feat of training four Grand National winners.
*'''Tommy Pickernell''', who rode in seventeen Grand Nationals in the 19th century and won three.
It is said that Becher later reflected: "Water tastes disgusting without the benefits of whisky."
* Tom Scudamore (2001–2016): never in first three in 15 attempts
Throughout the Victorian era the line between the amateur and professional sportsman existed only in terms of the rider's status, and the engagement of an amateur to ride in the race was rarely considered a handicap to a contender's chances of winning.
The 2016 National was the last sponsored by Crabbie's.
The three-year deal between the alcoholic ginger beer producer and Aintree saw the race run for a record purse of £1 million in 2014.
Peter Scudamore only stopped because he saw his trainer, Martin Pipe, waving frantically at him.
Horses completing the race cover a distance of , the longest of any National Hunt race in Britain.
A plain obstacle that leads the runners alongside the canal towards two ditches.
The runners then ran the length of the racecourse before embarking on a second circuit before finishing in front of the stands.
;Fence 7 & 23 – Foinavon
