Martin was previously the National Park Service Deputy Director and superintendent of several other national parks, including Denali and Grand Teton.
The Canyon itself can act as a connection between the east and the west by providing corridors of appropriate habitat along its length.
The wettest areas support sedges and forbs.
The insect species commonly found in the river corridor and tributaries are midges, caddis flies, mayflies, stoneflies, black flies, mites, beetles, butterflies, moths, and fire ants.
Some of these grasses include blue and black grama, big galleta, Indian ricegrass and three-awns.
The Grand Canyon is part of the Colorado River basin which has developed over the past 40 million years.
However, some helicopter flights land on the Havasupai and Hualapai Indian Reservations within Grand Canyon (outside of the park boundaries).
He described the Canyon as "profound".
The Grand Canyon is  long, up to  wide and attains a depth of over a mile ().
In addition to the Ancestral Puebloans, a number of distinct cultures have inhabited the Grand Canyon area.
Lizard density tends to be highest along the stretch of land between the water's edge and the beginning of the upland desert community.
This is equivalent to traveling from Mexico to Canada.
The federal government administrators who manage park resources face many challenges.
In 1857, Edward Fitzgerald Beale was superintendent of an expedition to survey a wagon road along the 35th parallel from Fort Defiance, Arizona to the Colorado River.
Building good relations with local Native Americans Hualapai Nation and white settlers, he found the Crossing of the Fathers, and the locations what would become Lees Ferry in 1858 and Pearce Ferry (later operated by, and named for, Harrison Pearce)&nbsp;– only the latter two sites suitable for ferry operation.
Some of the common insects found at elevations above  are orange paper wasps, honey bees, black flies, tarantula hawks, stink bugs, beetles, black ants, and monarch and swallowtail butterflies.
The great depth of the Grand Canyon and especially the height of its strata (most of which formed below sea level) can be attributed to  () of uplift of the Colorado Plateau, starting about 65 million years ago (during the Laramide Orogeny).
The ancestral Colorado River responded by cutting its channel faster and deeper.
The cultural group has often been referred to in archaeology as the Anasazi, although the term is not preferred by the modern Puebloan peoples.
He had met these people briefly in previous years, thought them exceptionally interesting and wanted to become better acquainted.
The Cohonina lived to the west of the Grand Canyon, between 500 and 1200&nbsp;.
The Skywalk is about  by road from Grand Canyon Village at the South Rim.
Passing through (or portaging around) a series of dangerous rapids, the group passed down the Green River to its confluence with the Colorado River, near present-day Moab, Utah and completed the journey with many hardships through the Grand Canyon on August 13, 1869.
The Skywalk has seen mixed reviews since the site is only accessible by driving down a  dirt road, costs a minimum of $85 in total for reservation fees, a tour package and admission to the Skywalk itself and the fact that cameras or other personal equipment are not permitted on the Skywalk at any time due to the hazard of damaging the glass if dropped.
Average annual precipitation on the South Rim is less than , with  of snow; the higher North Rim usually receives  of moisture, with a typical snowfall of ; and Phantom Ranch, far below the Canyon's rims along the Colorado River at 2,500 feet (762&nbsp;m) gets just  of rain, and snow is a rarity.
Archaeological and linguistic evidence suggests the Navajo descended from the Athabaskan people near Great Slave Lake, Canada, who migrated after the 11thcentury.
The desert gopher tortoise, a threatened species, inhabits the desert scrublands in the western end of the park.
The Ancestral Puebloans were a Native American culture centered on the present-day Four Corners area of the United States.
In the early 1990s, studies indicated that emissions of SO2, a sulfate precursor, from the Navajo Generating Station affected visibility in the Canyon mainly in the winter, and which if controlled would improve wintertime visibility by 2 to 7%.
Natural seeps and springs percolating out of the canyon walls are home to 11% of all the plant species found in the Grand Canyon.
River otters may have disappeared from the park in late 20th century, and muskrats are extremely rare.
Ten are considered common along the river corridor and include lizards and snakes.
Between 100,000 and 3 million years ago, volcanic activity deposited ash and lava over the area which at times completely obstructed the river.
Powell set out to explore the Colorado River and the Grand Canyon.
Geologically, it is significant because of the thick sequence of ancient rocks that are well preserved and exposed in the walls of the canyon.
The two largest lizards in the Canyon are gila monsters and chuckwallas.
The Grand Canyon National Park superintendent is Steve Martin, appointed on February 5, 2007 to replace retiring superintendent Joe Alston.
For accurate weather in the Canyon, hikers should consult the National Weather Service's NOAA weather radio or the official National Weather Service website.
There are approximately 47 reptile species in Grand Canyon National Park.
Weather in the Grand Canyon varies according to elevation.
The Sinagua may have been ancestors of several Hopi clans.
These include issues related to the recent reintroduction into the wild of the highly endangered California condor, air tour overflight noise levels, water rights disputes with various tribal reservations that border the park, and forest fire management.
This region&nbsp;— "one of the most remote in the United States" according to the National Park Service&nbsp;— is reached only by one of three lengthy dirt tracks beginning in from St. George, Utah, Colorado City or near Pipe Spring National Monument (both in Arizona).
This increased the rate of erosion and cut nearly all of the Grand Canyon's current depth by 1.2 million years ago.
The plant also installed low-NOx SOFA burners in 2009 -2011, reducing emissions of NOx, a nitrate precursor, by 40%.
Salazar's so-called "Northern Arizona Withdrawal" is a 20-year moratorium on new mines, but allows existing mines to continue.
The '''Grand Canyon''' (Hopi: ''Ongtupqa''; , Navajo: ''Tsékooh Hatsoh'', Spanish: ''Gran Cañón'') is a steep-sided canyon carved by the Colorado River in the state of Arizona in the United States.
President Theodore Roosevelt was a major proponent of preservation of the Grand Canyon area, and visited it on numerous occasions to hunt and enjoy the scenery.
He, his chief engineer Robert Brewster Stanton, and 14 others started to explore the Grand Canyon in poorly designed cedar wood boats, with no life preservers.
Mountain lions, Kaibab squirrels, and northern goshawks are found here.
The forested rims are high enough to receive winter snowfall, but along the Colorado River in the Inner Gorge, temperatures are similar to those found in Tucson and other low elevation desert locations in Arizona.
Scenic flights are no longer allowed to fly within 1500&nbsp;feet of the rim within the national park because of a late 1990s crash.
A number of actions have been taken to preserve and further improve air quality and visibility at the Canyon.
The last aerial video footage from below the rim was filmed in 1984.
The Hualapai inhabit a  stretch along the pine-clad southern side of the Grand Canyon.
Beavers cut willows, cottonwoods, and shrubs for food, and can significantly affect the riparian vegetation.
Only 48 bird species regularly nest along the river, while others use the river as a migration corridor or as overwintering habitat.
Each year Grand Canyon National Park receives approximately 30,000 requests for backcountry permits.
There is at large camping available along many parts of the North Rim managed by Kaibab National Forest.
North-facing slopes receive about one-third the normal amount of sunlight, so plants growing there are similar to plants found at higher elevations, or in more northern latitudes.
The skywalk has attracted "thousands of visitors a year, most from Las Vegas".
On September 19, near present-day National Canyon, they came upon what May Humphreys Stacey described in his journal as "...a wonderful canyon four thousand feet deep.
The Grand Canyon Ultra Marathon is a  race over 24 hours.
The five life zones represented are the Lower Sonoran, Upper Sonoran, Transition, Canadian, and Hudsonian.
Heavy rains are common on both rims during the summer months.
The Utah tiger salamander and the Great Basin spadefoot toad are two amphibians that are common in the rim forests.
The abundance of bats, swifts, and riparian birds provides ample food for peregrines, and suitable eyrie sites are plentiful along the steep canyon walls.
What effect there is on air quality and visibility in the Canyon has been mainly from sulfates, soils, and organics.
The Park Service manages the area for primitive value with minimal improvements and services.
By the time of the arrival of Europeans in the 16thcentury, newer cultures had evolved.
In 1869, Major John Wesley Powell led the first expedition down the Canyon.
Weather conditions during the ice ages also increased the amount of water in the Colorado River drainage system.
Visitors are often surprised by these potentially extreme conditions, and this, along with the high altitude of the canyon's rims, can lead to unpleasant side effects such as dehydration, sunburn, and hypothermia.
Twenty-six species of terrestrial gastropods have been identified, primarily land snails and slugs.
The GCVTC released its final report in 1996 and initiated the Western Regional Air Partnership (WRAP), a partnership of state, tribal and federal agencies to help coordinate implementation of the Commission’s recommendations.
One of the developers is Navajo and has cited an 8 to 18 percent share of the gross revenue for the tribe as an incentive.
The conifer forests provide habitat for 52 mammal species.
Although prescribed fires also affect air quality, the controlled conditions allow the use of management techniques to minimize their impact.
The North Rim is generally open mid-May to mid-October.
The bald eagle is one species that uses the river corridor as winter habitat.
Within this woodland one can find big sagebrush, snakeweed, Mormon tea, Utah agave, banana and narrowleaf Yucca, winterfat, Indian ricegrass, dropseed, and needlegrass.
Mining has been suspended since 2009, when U.S.
Since the removal of 500 feral burros in the early 1980s, bighorn sheep numbers have rebounded.
The canyon can also be a genetic barrier to some species, like the tassel-eared squirrel.
Six rattlesnake species have been recorded in the park.
The Cohonina were ancestors of the Yuman, Havasupai, and Walapai peoples who inhabit the area today.
Temperatures on the North Rim are generally lower than those on the South Rim because of the greater elevation (averaging  above sea level).
Eleven aquatic and 26 terrestrial species of mollusks have been identified in and around Grand Canyon National Park.
The South Rim includes species such as gray fox, mule deer, bighorn sheep, rock squirrels, pinyon pine and Utah juniper.
Montane meadows and subalpine grassland communities of the Hudsonian life zone are rare and located only on the North Rim.
This zone is generally dominated by blackbrush, sagebrush, and pinyon-juniper woodlands.
According to the ''San Francisco Herald'', in a series of articles run in 1853, Captain Joseph R. Walker in January 1851 with his nephew James T. Walker and six men, traveled up the Colorado River to a point where it joined the Virgin River and continued east into Arizona, traveling along the Grand Canyon and making short exploratory side trips along the way.
Spruce-fir forests characterized by Engelmann spruce, blue spruce, Douglas fir, white fir, aspen, and mountain ash, along with several species of perennial grasses, groundsels, yarrow, cinquefoil, lupines, sedges, and asters, grow in this sub-alpine climate.
U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Grand Canyon in 1903.
The National Weather Service has had a cooperative station on the South Rim since 1903.
The uplift of the Colorado Plateau is uneven, and the Kaibab Plateau that Grand Canyon bisects is over a  higher at the North Rim (about ) than at the South Rim.
Ives led his party east into the Canyon&nbsp;— they may have been the first Europeans to travel the Diamond Creek drainage and traveled eastwards along the South Rim.
Previous estimates had placed the age of the canyon at 5–6 million years.
The Navajo, or Diné, live in a wide area stretching from the San Francisco Peaks eastwards towards the Four Corners.
Sixty-three plants found here have been given special status by the U.S.
He led a small party of men in search of water on the Coconino Plateau near the Canyon's South Rim.
In December 2012, a study published in the journal ''Science'' claimed new tests had suggested the Grand Canyon could be as old as 70 million years.
Elevations of  are in the Canadian Life Zone, which includes the North Rim and the Kaibab Plateau.
Also in 1776, Fray Francisco Garces, a Franciscan missionary, spent a week near Havasupai, unsuccessfully attempting to convert a band of Native Americans to Christianity.
This uplift has steepened the stream gradient of the Colorado River and its tributaries, which in turn has increased their speed and thus their ability to cut through rock (see the elevation summary of the Colorado River for present conditions).
Opponents such as land and mining claim holders blocked efforts to reclassify the monument as a U.S. National Park for 11 years.
Typical warm desert species such as creosote bush, white bursage, brittlebush, catclaw acacia, ocotillo, mariola, western honey mesquite, four-wing saltbush, big sagebrush, blackbrush and rubber rabbitbrush grow in this community.
This point is located to the east of the Grand Canyon Village along the Desert View Drive.
The word "Anasazi" is Navajo for "Ancient Ones" or "Ancient Enemy".
No Europeans visited the Canyon again for more than two hundred years.
It is contained within and managed by Grand Canyon National Park, the Kaibab National Forest, Grand Canyon-Parashant National Monument, the Hualapai Tribal Nation, the Havasupai people and the Navajo Nation.
Pablo de Melgrossa, Juan Galeras, and a third soldier descended some one third of the way into the Canyon until they were forced to return because of lack of water.
The canyon's ecosystem was permanently changed after the construction of the Glen Canyon Dam in 1963.
Numerous species of spiders and several species of scorpions including the bark scorpion and the giant desert hairy scorpion inhabit the riparian zone.
While some aspects about the history of incision of the canyon are debated by geologists, several recent studies support the hypothesis that the Colorado River established its course through the area about 5 to 6 million years ago.
There are a variety of snakes and lizards here, but one species of reptile, the mountain short-horned lizard, is a particularly abundant inhabitant of the piñon-juniper and ponderosa pine forests.
Everyone (in the party) admitted that he never before saw anything to match or equal this astonishing natural curiosity."
The park issues 13,000 permits, and close to 40,000 people camp overnight.
The Grand Canyon is a river valley in the Colorado Plateau that exposes uplifted Proterozoic and Paleozoic strata, and is also one of the 19 distinct physiographic sections of the Colorado Plateau province.
The Havasupai have been living in the area near Cataract Canyon since the beginning of the 13thcentury, occupying an area the size of Delaware.
This variety is largely due to the  elevation change from the Colorado River up to the highest point on the North Rim.
Differences in elevation and the resulting variations in climate are the major factors that form the various life zones and communities in and around the canyon.
Organic particles result from vehicle emissions, long-range transport from urban areas, and forest fires, as well as from VOCs emitted by vegetation in the surrounding forests.
For thousands of years, the area has been continuously inhabited by Native Americans, who built settlements within the canyon and its many caves.
Hiking down to the river and back up to the rim in one day is discouraged by park officials because of the distance, steep and rocky trails, change in elevation, and danger of heat exhaustion from the much higher temperatures at the bottom.
All overnight camping below the rim requires a backcountry permit from the Backcountry Office (BCO).
Three of the five Park woodrat species live in the desert scrub community.
The Pueblo people considered the Grand Canyon a holy site, and made pilgrimages to it.
In 1889, Frank M. Brown wanted to build a railroad along the Colorado River to carry coal.
A gondola would enable easy visits to the canyon floor where a "riverwalk" of "connected walkways, an eatery, a tramway station, a seating area and a wastewater package plant" would be situated.
The earliest a permit application is accepted is the first of the month, four months before the proposed start month.
The Mojave Desert influences the western sections of the canyon, Sonoran Desert vegetation covers the eastern sections, and ponderosa and pinyon pine forests grow on both rims.
Grand Canyon National Park is one of the world's premier natural attractions, attracting about five million visitors per year.
Beginning with the earliest explorations and excavations, researchers have believed that the Ancient Puebloans are ancestors of the modern Pueblo peoples.
Of the aquatic species, two are bivalves (clams) and nine are gastropods (snails).
In 2007, the Hualapai Tribe opened the glass-bottomed Grand Canyon Skywalk on their property, Grand Canyon West.
This community is dominated by the four-winged saltbush and creosote bush; other important plants include Utah agave, narrowleaf mesquite, ratany, catclaw acacia, and various cacti species.
These volcanic rocks are the youngest in the canyon.
Nearly two billion years of Earth's geological history have been exposed as the Colorado River and its tributaries cut their channels through layer after layer of rock while the Colorado Plateau was uplifted.
The result is deeper and longer tributary washes and canyons on the north side and shorter and steeper side canyons on the south side.
In 2012, the federal government stopped new mines in the area, which was upheld by the U.S. District Court for Arizona in 2014, but appealed by the National Mining Association, joined by the state of Arizona under Attorney General Mark Brnovich as well as Utah, Montana and Nevada.
Access to the North Rim via the primary route leading to the canyon (State Route 67) is limited during the winter season due to road closures.
Also, several critically endangered California condors that were re-introduced to the Colorado Plateau on the Arizona Strip, have made the eastern part of the Park their home.
Also in a stern wheeler steamboat "Explorer", after two months and  of difficult navigation, his party reached Black Canyon some two months after George Johnson.
Mule deer are generally not permanent residents along the river, but travel down from the rim when food and water resources there become scarce.
Weather conditions can greatly affect hiking and canyon exploration, and visitors should obtain accurate forecasts because of hazards posed by exposure to extreme temperatures, winter storms and late summer monsoons.
Approximately 30 bird species breed primarily in the desert uplands and cliffs of the inner canyon.
Coyote willow, arrowweed, seep-willow, western honey mesquite, catclaw acacia, and exotic tamarisk (saltcedar) are the predominant species.
North Rim campsites are only open seasonally due to road closures from weather and winter snowpack.
The Southern Paiutes live in what is now southern Utah and northern Arizona.
A recent study places the origins of the canyon beginning about 17 million years ago.
The first European known to have viewed the Grand Canyon was García López de Cárdenas from Spain, who arrived in 1540.
An avid outdoorsman and staunch conservationist, he established the Grand Canyon Game Preserve on November 28, 1906.
Mule deer and desert bighorn sheep are the ungulates that frequent the river corridor.
There are approximately 1,737 known species of vascular plants, 167 species of fungi, 64 species of moss and 195 species of lichen found in Grand Canyon National Park.
Of the approximately 90 bird species that breed in the coniferous forests, 51 are summer residents and at least 15 of these are known to be neotropical migrants.
Since that time, the Colorado River has driven the down-cutting of the tributaries and retreat of the cliffs, simultaneously deepening and widening the canyon.
Also in 1857, the U.S. War Department asked Lieutenant Joseph Ives to lead an expedition to assess the feasibility of an up-river navigation from the Gulf of California.
Of the fatalities, 53 have resulted from falls; 65 deaths were attributable to environmental causes, including heat stroke, cardiac arrest, dehydration, and hypothermia; 7 were caught in flash floods; 79 were drowned in the Colorado River; 242 perished in airplane and helicopter crashes (128 of them in the 1956 disaster mentioned below); 25 died in freak errors and accidents, including lightning strikes and rock falls; and 23 were the victims of homicides.
There are 33 crustacean species found in the Colorado River and its tributaries within Grand Canyon National Park.
It is not the deepest canyon in the world (Kali Gandaki Gorge in Nepal is much deeper).
The terraced walls of the canyon were created by differential erosion.
Hanging gardens, seeps and springs often contain rare plants such as the white-flowering western redbud, stream orchid, and McDougall's flaveria.
The ''Herald'' reporter then stated, "We believe that Capt.
Leopard frogs are very rare in the Colorado River corridor, and are known to exist at only a few sites.
The Upper Sonoran Life Zone includes most of the inner canyon and South Rim at elevations from .
Camping on the North and South Rims is generally restricted to established campgrounds and reservations are highly recommended, especially at the busier South Rim.
Along the Colorado River and its perennial tributaries, a riparian community exists.
Other rodents, such as antelope squirrels and pocket mice, are mostly omnivorous, using many different vegetation types.
The base level and course of the Colorado River (or its ancestral equivalent) changed 5.3 million years ago when the Gulf of California opened and lowered the river's base level (its lowest point).
Prescribed fires are typically conducted in the spring and fall in the forests adjacent to the Canyon to reduce the potential for severe forest fires and resulting smoke conditions.
The South Rim is open all year round weather permitting.
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar withdrew  from the permitting process, pending assessment of the environmental impact of mining.
Solifugids, wood spiders, garden spiders, black widow spiders and tarantulas can be found in the desert scrub and higher elevations.
National Mining Association v. Jewell is pending before the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals as of September 2015.
In his "Colorado River of the West" report to the Senate in 1861 he states that "One or two trappers profess to have seen the canyon."
Gathering nine men, four boats and food for 10&nbsp;months, he set out from Green River, Wyoming on May 24.
Grand Canyon National Park contains 129 vegetation communities, and the composition and distribution of plant species is influenced by climate, geomorphology and geology.
The view from Lipan Point shows a wide array of rock strata and the Unkar Creek area in the inner canyon.
However, this study has been criticized by those who support the "young canyon" age of around six million years as "an attempt to push the interpretation of their new data to their limits without consideration of the whole range of other geologic data sets."
Lipan Point is a promontory located on the South Rim.
Porcupines, shrews, red squirrels, tassel eared Kaibab and Abert's squirrels, black bear, mule deer, and elk are found at the park's higher elevations on the Kaibab Plateau.
Walker is reported to have said he wanted to visit the Moqui Indians, as the Hopi were then called by whites.
Airborne soils originate with windy conditions and road dust.
Rescues are required annually of unsuccessful rim-to-river-to-rim travelers.
Emissions from the Mohave Generating Station to the west were similarly found to affect visibility in the Canyon.
Many of the formations were deposited in warm shallow seas, near-shore environments (such as beaches), and swamps as the seashore repeatedly advanced and retreated over the edge of a proto-North America.
In 2014, a developer announced plans to build a multimedia complex on the canyon's rim called the Grand Canyon Escalade.
He also acted as an advisor to John Wesley Powell before his second expedition to the Grand Canyon, serving as a diplomat between Powell and the local native tribes to ensure the safety of his party.
There is a substantial amount of controversy because this research suggests such a substantial departure from prior widely supported scientific consensus.
The record high temperature on the South Rim was 105&nbsp;°F (41&nbsp;°C) on June 26, 1974, and the record low temperature was −20&nbsp;°F (−29&nbsp;°C) on January 1, 1919, February 1, 1985, and December 23, 1990.
As a result, scrubbers were added to the plant’s three units in 1997 through 1999, reducing SO2 emissions by more than 90%.
Grand Canyon National Park was finally established as the 17th U.S. National Park by an Act of Congress signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on February 26, 1919.
Almost all runoff from the North Rim (which also gets more rain and snow) flows toward the Grand Canyon, while much of the runoff on the plateau behind the South Rim flows away from the canyon (following the general tilt).
In addition to bats, coyotes, ringtails, and spotted skunks are the most numerous riparian predators and prey on invertebrates, rodents, and reptiles.
Aside from casual sightseeing from the South Rim (averaging 7,000 feet 2,100&nbsp;m above sea level), skydiving, rafting, hiking, running, and helicopter tours are popular.
Conditions in the Grand Canyon region are generally dry, but substantial precipitation occurs twice annually, during seasonal pattern shifts in winter (when Pacific storms usually deliver widespread, moderate rain and high-elevation snow to the region from the west) and in late summer (due to the North American Monsoon, which delivers waves of moisture from the southeast, causing dramatic, localized thunderstorms fueled by the heat of the day).
The "Explorer" struck a rock and was abandoned.
Additional species such as Gambel oak, New Mexico locust, mountain mahogany, elderberry, creeping mahonia, and fescue have been identified in these forests.
Federal officials started a flood in the Grand Canyon in hopes of restoring its ecosystem on March 5, 2008.
