Medium-sized prey are especially vulnerable to surplus killing, as the swift throat-biting method by which they are killed allows wolves to quickly kill one animal and move on to another.
The Latin ''lupus'' is a Sabine loanword.
Wolf populations in Poland have increased to about 800–900 individuals since being classified as a game species in 1976.
Livestock depredation has been one of the primary reasons for hunting wolves, and can pose a severe problem for wolf conservation: as well as causing economic losses, the threat of wolf predation causes great stress on livestock producers, and no foolproof solution of preventing such attacks short of exterminating wolves has been found.
Turkey may play an important role in maintaining wolves in the region, because of its contiguity with Central Asia.
First Nations residents may hunt wolves without restriction, and some provinces require licenses for residents to hunt wolves while others do not.
Cannibalism is not uncommon in wolves: during harsh winters, packs often attack weak or injured wolves, and may eat the bodies of dead pack members.
lupus'' taxonomy has been subject to numerous revisions, particularly in North America.
The gestation period lasts 62–75 days, with pups usually being born in the summer period.
Near identical interactions have been observed in Eurasia between gray wolves and golden jackals, with the latter's numbers being comparatively small in areas with high wolf densities.
Wolves from different geographic locations may howl in different fashions: the howls of European wolves are much more protracted and melodious than those of North American wolves, whose howls are louder and have a stronger emphasis on the first syllable.
Although hundreds of Iberian wolves are illegally killed annually, the population has expanded south across the river Duero and east to the Asturias and Pyrenees Mountains.
Following the two world wars, Soviet wolf populations peaked twice.
Wolves are highly territorial animals, and generally establish territories far larger than they require to survive in order to assure a steady supply of prey.
It feeds primarily on large ungulates, though it also eats smaller animals, livestock, carrion, and garbage.
The gray wolf is one of the world's best known and well researched animals, with probably more books written about it than any other wildlife species.
Wolves living near farms are more vulnerable to the disease than those living in the wilderness, probably because of prolonged contact with infected domestic animal waste.
The historical use of shepherd dogs across Eurasia has been effective against wolf predation, especially when confining sheep in the presence of several livestock-guarding dogs.
The gray wolf has interbred extensively with the eastern wolf producing a hybrid population termed Great Lakes boreal wolves.
Gray wolves are the most important predator of raccoon dogs, killing large numbers of them in the spring and summer periods.
Today, wolves have returned to the area.
Gray wolf weight varies geographically; on average, European wolves may weigh , North American wolves  and Indian and Arabian wolves .
In ideal conditions, the mated pair produces pups every year, with such offspring typically staying in the pack for 10–54 months before dispersing.
This force is sufficient to break open most bones.
In Eastern Europe, wolves were never fully exterminated, because of the area's contiguity with Asia and its large forested areas.
Black colored wolves in North America inherited the Kb allele responsible for melanism from past interbreeding with dogs, while the mutation was found to be naturally occurring in wolves from Iran.
Shepherd dogs are not particularly aggressive, but they can disrupt potential wolf predation by displaying what is to the wolf ambiguous behaviors, such as barking, social greeting, invitation to play or aggression.
Wolves eat the brown bears they kill, while brown bears seem to only eat young wolves.
Mother wolves do not leave the den for the first few weeks, relying on the fathers to provide food for them and their young.
Male gray wolves often mount each other when the highest ranking female in the pack comes into heat.
A gray wolf hunt can be divided into five stages:
The wolf was deemed a threat to ranching, which the Meiji government promoted at the time, and targeted via a bounty system and a direct chemical extermination campaign inspired by the similar contemporary American campaign.
The results suggested that the facial color pattern of canid species is related to their gaze communication, and that especially gray wolves use the gaze signal in conspecific communication.
A new pack is usually founded by an unrelated dispersing male and female, travelling together in search of an area devoid of other hostile packs.
The gray wolf is fully protected in Sweden and partially controlled in Norway.
Both Russian and North American wolves have been observed to drive prey onto crusted ice, precipices, ravines, slopes and steep banks to slow them down.
A review of the studies in the competitive effects of dogs on sympatric carnivores did not mention any research on competition between dogs and wolves.
Large wolf populations limit the numbers of small to medium-sized felines.
The gray wolf is found in approximately 80% of its historical range in Canada, thus making it an important stronghold for the species.
Triggers for dispersal include the onset of sexual maturity and competition within the pack for food.
In Asia, they may compete with dholes, though there is at least one record of a lone wolf associating with a pair of dholes in Debrigarh Wildlife Sanctuary.
It is the only species of ''Canis'' to have a range encompassing both the Old and New Worlds, and originated in Eurasia during the Pleistocene, colonizing North America on at least three separate occasions during the Rancholabrean.
A study of the estimated bite force at the canine teeth of a large sample of living and fossil mammalian predators when adjusted for the body mass found that for placental mammals, the bite force at the canines (in Newtons/kilogram of body weight) was greatest in the extinct dire wolf (163), then followed among the extant canids by the four hypercarnivores that often prey on animals larger than themselves: the African hunting dog (142), the gray wolf (136), the dhole (112), and the dingo (108).
Predatory attacks (attacks by wolves treating humans as food) may be preceded by a long period of habituation, in which wolves gradually lose their fear of humans.
Reintroduced Mexican wolves in Arizona and New Mexico are protected under the ESA and, as of late 2002, number 28 individuals in eight packs.
The gray wolf is protected in Slovakia, though an exception is made for wolves killing livestock.
The now extinct Japanese wolves were descended from large Siberian wolves, which colonized the Korean Peninsula and Japan, before it separated from mainland Asia, 20,000 years ago during the Pleistocene.
Looking awayClosed to slits
The species' modern range in North America is mostly confined to Alaska and Canada, with populations also occurring in northern Minnesota, northern Wisconsin and Michigan's Upper Peninsula, and portions of Washington, Idaho, northern Oregon, and Montana.
Dogs and gray wolves do not voluntarily interbreed in the wild, though they can produce fertile wolf-dog offspring.
, 37 subspecies of ''C.
The modern  trope of the Big Bad Wolf is a development of this.
Although the numbers of dogs killed each year are relatively low, it induces a fear of wolves entering villages and farmyards to take dogs.
When closing in on their prey, they emit a combination of a short bark and a howl.
When such foods are insufficient, they prey on lizards, snakes, frogs, rarely toads and large insects as available.
Most rabid wolf attacks occur in the spring and autumn periods.
Wolves typically locate their prey by scent, though they must usually be directly downwind of it.
Animals preferred as prey by North American wolves include moose, white-tailed deer, elk, mule deer, bighorn sheep, Dall's sheep, American bison, muskox and caribou.
The gray wolf is generally monogamous, with mated pairs usually remaining together for life, unless one of the pair dies.
Lice, such as ''Trichodectes canis'', may cause sickness in wolves, but rarely death.
This campaign was halted and wolf populations increased again by the mid-1970s.
Whining is associated with situations of anxiety, curiosity, inquiry and intimacy such as greeting, feeding pups and playing.
The majority of losses occur during the summer grazing period, with untended livestock in remote pastures being the most vulnerable to wolf predation.
Older wolves generally have more white hairs in the tip of the tail, along the nose and on the forehead.
In Croatia, wolves kill more dogs than sheep, and wolves in Russia appear to limit stray dog populations.
Postural communication in wolves consists of a variety of facial expressions, tail positions and piloerection.
Wolves may display unusually bold behavior when attacking dogs accompanied by people, sometimes ignoring nearby humans.
Howling consists of a fundamental frequency that may lie between 150 and 780&nbsp;Hz, and consists of up to 12 harmonically related overtones.
Ticks of the genus ''Ixodes'' can infect wolves with Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
The wolf survives throughout most of its historical range in Saudi Arabia, probably because of a lack of pastoralism and abundant human waste.
Wolves kill dogs on occasion, with some wolf populations relying on dogs as an important food source.
The teeth are heavy and large, being better suited to crushing bone than those of other extant canids, though not as specialised as those found in hyenas.
However, deliberate human persecution has reduced the species' range to about one third, because of livestock predation and fear over attacks on humans.
Gray wolves also practice alloparental care, in which a wolf pair may adopt the pup or pups of another.
Females tend to have narrower muzzles and foreheads, thinner necks, slightly shorter legs and less massive shoulders than males.
Furthermore, the decline in the moose populations has reduced the wolf's food supply.
Wolves in Japan became extinct during the Meiji restoration period, an extermination known as ''ōkami no kujo''.
Unlike with predatory attacks, the victims of rabid wolves are not eaten, and the attacks generally only occur on a single day.
In 2013, a captive breeding experiment in Utah between gray wolves and western coyotes produced six hybrids through artificial insemination, making this the very first hybridization case between pure coyotes and northwestern gray wolves.
The loss of a dog can lead to strong emotional responses with demands for more liberal wolf hunting regulations.
Wolves can carry over 30 roundworm species, though most roundworm infections appear benign, depending on the number of worms and the age of the host.
However, shepherd dogs are sometimes killed by wolves.
Aggressive, or self-assertive wolves are characterized by their slow and deliberate movements, high body posture and raised hackles, while submissive ones carry their bodies low, sleeken their fur and lower their ears and tail.
Growling has a fundamental frequency of 380–450&nbsp;Hz, and is usually emitted during food challenges.
The distance travelled by dispersing wolves varies widely; some stay in the vicinity of the parental group, while other individuals may travel great distances of 390&nbsp;km, 206&nbsp;km, and 670&nbsp;km from their natal packs.
His most famous is the fable of The Boy Who Cried Wolf, which is directed at those who knowingly raise false alarms, and from which the idiomatic phrase "to cry wolf" is derived.
With large prey, mature wolves usually avoid attacking frontally, instead focusing on the rear and sides of the animal.
Cases of rabid wolves are low when compared to other species, as wolves do not serve as primary reservoirs of the disease, but can be infected by animals such as dogs, jackals and foxes.
Wolves carry ectoparasites and endoparasites, with wolves in the former Soviet Union having been recorded to carry at least 50 species.
At 1.5 months of age, they are agile enough to flee from danger.
The species is now extinct in much of Western Europe, in Mexico and much of the United States.
The population increased again by 1980 to about 75,000, with 32,000 being killed in 1979.
Mongolian populations have been estimated at 10,000–30,000, while the status of wolves in China is more fragmentary.
In tests performed on a putative chupacabra carcass, mtDNA analysis showed that it was a coyote, though subsequent tests revealed that it was a coyote–gray wolf hybrid sired by a male Mexican gray wolf.
Wolf howls can under certain conditions be heard over areas of up to .
Tapeworms generally cause little harm in wolves, though this depends on the number and size of the parasites, and the sensitivity of the host.
The mouthing of each other's muzzles is a friendly gesture, while clamping on the muzzle with bared teeth is a dominance display.
Organized persecution of wolves began in Yugoslavia in 1923, with the setting up of the Wolf Extermination Committee (WEC) in Kocevje, Slovenia.
In some cases, a lone wolf is adopted into a pack to replace a deceased breeder.
The ''louveterie'' was abolished after the French Revolution in 1789, but was re-established in 1814.
There are approximately 2,000 wolves inhabiting the Iberian Peninsula, of which 150 reside in northeastern Portugal.
Male wolves give voice through an octave, passing to a deep bass with a stress on "''O''", while females produce a modulated nasal baritone with stress on "''U''".
From 1900–1930, the gray wolf was virtually eliminated from the western USA and adjoining parts of Canada, because of intensive predator control programs aimed at eradicating the species.
Wolves living in the southern Negev desert are contiguous with populations living in the Egyptian Sinai and Jordan.
The gray wolf usually carries its head at the same level as the back, raising it only when alert.
''Toxocara canis'', a hookworm known to infect wolf pups in utero, can cause intestinal irritation, bloating, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Scent marking is used for territorial advertisement, and involves urination, defecation and ground scratching.
Non-rabid wolves have attacked and killed people, mainly children, but this is rare, as wolves are relatively few, live away from people, and have developed a fear of humans from hunters and shepherds.
Should this occur, the wolves hold back, as they require the stimulus of a running animal to proceed with an attack.
Old females usually whelp in the den of their previous litter, while younger females typically den near their birthplace.
Nevertheless, coyote genetic markers have been found in some wild isolated gray wolf populations in the southern United States.
Wolves also kill red, arctic and corsac foxes, usually in disputes over carcasses, sometimes eating them.
A small wolf population occurs in the Golan Heights, and is well protected by the military activities there.
Large prey, such as moose, elk, and muskoxen, usually stand their ground.
l. communis'' as synonyms of ''C.
Wolves managed to survive in the forests of Braemar and Sutherland until 1684.
Gray wolves use different places for their diurnal rest: places with cover are preferred during cold, damp and windy weather, while wolves in dry, calm and warm weather readily rest in the open.
Poland plays a fundamental role in providing routes of expansion into neighbouring Central European countries.
As the skin on the back is usually folded, this provides a microclimate for bacterial propagation around the glands.
The species was not considered common in northern and central Saudi Arabia during the 19th century, with most early publications involving animals either from southwestern Asir, northern rocky areas bordering Jordan, or areas surrounding Riyadh.
In the east, its range overlaps with populations in Lithuania, Belorussia, Ukraine, and Slovakia.
Such gray wolves are termed "Casanova wolves" and, unlike males from established packs, they do not form pair bonds with the females they mate with.
Although the fear of wolves is pervasive in many human societies, the majority of recorded attacks on people have been attributed to animals suffering from rabies.
Passive submission usually occurs as a reaction to the approach of a dominant animal, and consists of the submissive wolf lying partly on its back and allowing the dominant wolf to sniff its anogenital area.
Wolves bear relatively large pups in small litters compared to other canid species.
The pitch usually remains constant or varies smoothly, and may change direction as many as four or five times.
Between 2005–2010, two people were killed in North America.
Other vocalisations of wolves are usually divided into three categories: growls, barks and whines.
The mean body mass of the extant gray wolf is , with the smallest specimen recorded at  and the largest at .
Wolves are a major host for rabies in Russia, Iran, Afghanistan, Iraq and India.
An appropriated den is often widened and partly remade.
However, there have been confirmed reports of wolf packs killing wolverines.
As of 2005, the total number of Swedish and Norwegian wolves is estimated to be at least one hundred, including eleven breeding pairs.
The most frequently killed hunting breeds in Scandinavia are harriers, with older animals being most at risk, likely because they are less timid than younger animals, and react to the presence of wolves differently.
The extermination of Northern Europe's wolves first became an organized effort during the Middle Ages, and continued until the late 1800s.
In addition to heterosexual behavior, homosexual behavior has been observed in gray wolves.
When wolves are together, they commonly indulge in behaviors such as nose pushing, jaw wrestling, cheek rubbing and facial licking.
Compared to its closest wild cousins (the coyote and golden jackal), the gray wolf is larger and heavier, with a broader snout, shorter ears, a shorter torso and longer tail.
It has been estimated that there are about 300 wolves in approximately  of Jammu and Kashmir in northern India, and 50 more in Himachal Pradesh.
Ancient Greek literature is similar: Autolycus ("the wolf itself"), Lycurgus ("wolf-work").
The fear of wolves has been pervasive in many societies, though humans are not part of the wolf's natural prey.
In many cultures, there are strong social and emotional bonds between humans and their dogs that can be seen as family members or working team members.
Wolf populations throughout Northern and Central Asia are largely unknown, but are estimated in the hundreds of thousands based on annual harvests.
However, one genetic study undertaken in the Caucasus Mountains showed that as many as 10% of dogs in the area, including livestock guardian dogs, are first generation hybrids.
Throughout the Middle East, the species is only protected in Israel.
Its molars have a flat chewing surface, but not to the same extent as the coyote, whose diet contains more vegetable matter.
spiralis'' isn't known to produce clinical signs in wolves, it can cause emaciation, salivation, and crippling muscle pains in dogs.
During the breeding season, female wolves secrete substances from the vagina, which communicate the females' reproductive state, and can be detected by males from long distances.
The gray wolf was once one of the world's most widely distributed mammals, living throughout the northern hemisphere north of 15°N latitude in North America and 12°N in India.
They readily visit melon fields during the summer months.
Flattened and turned down to side
l. hodophilax'', as it inhabited higher elevations and had access to larger prey, as well as a continuing genetic interaction with dispersing wolves from Siberia.
Elsewhere, it can be hunted year-round by Bedouins.
As there are few convenient places for burrows, wolf dens are usually occupied by animals of the same family.
Although hybridization between wolves and golden jackals has never been observed, evidence of such occurrences was discovered through mtDNA analysis on jackals in Bulgaria.
By 1960, few wolves remained in Sweden, because of the use of snowmobiles in hunting them, with the last specimen being killed in 1966.
One-to-one, hyenas dominate wolves, and may prey on them, but wolf packs can drive off single or outnumbered hyenas.
Some hunters are able to lure wolves by imitating their calls.
In cold climates, the gray wolf can reduce the flow of blood near its skin to conserve body heat.
Large hunting dogs such as Swedish elkhounds are more likely to survive wolf attacks because of their better ability to defend themselves.
Female wolves tend to have smoother furred limbs than males, and generally develop the smoothest overall coats as they age.
When a breeding male encounters a subordinate family member, it may stare at it, standing erect and still with the tails horizontal to its spine.
The longest hairs occur on the back, particularly on the front quarters and neck.
Resting places, play areas for the pups and food remains are commonly found around wolf dens.
Wolf bounties were regularly paid in Italy as late as 1950.
Some gray wolf packs may have multiple breeding females this way, as is the case in Yellowstone National Park.
Two forms of submissive behavior are recognized: passive and active.
Wolf howls are generally indistinguishable from those of large dogs.
Like the red wolf, it is distinguished from other ''Canis'' species by its larger size and less pointed features, particularly on the ears and muzzle.
During the Holocene, the Tsugaru Strait widened and isolated Honshu from Hokkaidō, thus causing climatic changes leading to the extinction of most large bodied ungulates inhabiting the archipelago.
If the targeted animal stands its ground, the wolves either ignore it, or try to intimidate it into running.
Wolf numbers have declined in Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1986, while the species is fully protected in neighbouring Croatia and Slovenia.
Since 2011, the Netherlands, Belgium and Denmark have also reported wolf sightings presumably by natural migration from adjacent countries.
Infections by the tapeworm ''Echinococcus granulosus'' in ungulate populations tend to increase in areas with high wolf densities, as wolves can shed ''Echinoccocus'' eggs in their feces onto grazing areas.
The gray wolf generally specializes in vulnerable individuals of large prey.
Wolf heads are common in Scottish heraldry, particularly in the coats of Clan Robertson and Skene.
The ears are covered in short hairs, which strongly project from the fur.
Habitat use by gray wolves is strongly correlated with the abundance of prey, snow conditions, absence or low livestock densities, road densities, human presence and topography.
Pups commonly growl when playing.
The tick ''Dermacentor pictus'' also infests wolves.
A wolf bounty was introduced in Sweden in 1647, after the extermination of moose and reindeer forced wolves to feed on livestock.
The secretions of the preputial glands may advertise hormonal condition or social position, as dominant wolves have been observed to stand over subordinates, apparently presenting the genital area for investigation, which may include genital licking.
Examples include Wulfhere, Cynewulf, Ceonwulf, Wulfheard, Earnwulf, Wulfmǣr, Wulfstān and Æthelwulf.
When pursuing prey, they emit a higher pitched howl, vibrating on two notes.
30,000 wolves were harvested annually out of a population of 200,000 during the 1940s, with 40,000–50,000 harvested during peak years.
Gray wolves typically dominate other canid species in areas where they both occur.
Competition with humans for livestock and game species, concerns over the danger posed by wolves to people, and habitat fragmentation pose a continued threat to the species.
By 2013 the 250 wolves in the Western Alps imposed a significant burden on traditional sheep and goat husbandry with a loss of over 5,000 animals in 2012.
Today, the wolf is represented by the many extant subspecies of ''Canis lupus'', which includes the dog and dingo.
, 37 subspecies of ''C.
Large prey, such as moose, is killed by biting large chunks of flesh from the soft perineum area, causing massive blood loss.
The victims are repeatedly bitten on the head and face, and are then dragged off and consumed, unless the wolves are driven off.
Wolves appear capable of escaping competitive exclusion from tigers only when human persecution decreases tiger numbers.
They frequently eat waterfowl and their eggs.
In some cases, wolves do not need to physically attack livestock to negatively affect it: the stress livestock experiences in being vigilant for wolves may result in miscarriages, weight loss and a decrease in meat quality.
Wolf populations only began declining in the Iberian Peninsula in the early 19th-century, and was reduced by a half of its original size by 1900.
In wolves, the incubation period is 8–21 days, and results in the host becoming agitated, deserting its pack, and travelling up to 80&nbsp;km a day, thus increasing the risk of infecting other wolves.
The wolf's legs are moderately longer than those of other canids, which enables the animal to move swiftly, and allows it to overcome the deep snow that covers most of its geographical range.
By the 1920s, wolf extermination remained a priority in the NWP and Awadh.
Wolves apparently develop the "furious" phase of rabies to a very high degree which, coupled with their size and strength, makes rabid wolves perhaps the most dangerous of rabid animals, with bites from rabid wolves being 15 times more dangerous than those of rabid dogs.
