In mid-1980, there were three gray whale sightings in the eastern Beaufort Sea, placing them  further east than their known range at the time.
With the exception of a single gray whale killed in 1999, the Makah people have been prevented from hunting by a series of legal challenges, culminating in a United States federal appeals court decision in December 2002 that required the National Marine Fisheries Service to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement.
It is unknown whether the whales' normal range once reached further south, to the Gulf of Tonkin.
Reviewing on other cases on different locations among Japanese coasts and islands observed during 2015 indicate that spatial or seasonal residencies regardless of being temporal or permanental staying once occurred throughout many parts of Japan or on other coastal Asia.
In some years, the whales have also used an offshore feeding ground in  depth southeast of Chayvo Bay, where benthic amphipods and cumaceans are the main prey species.
They have two blowholes on top of their head, which can create a distinctive V-shaped blow at the surface in calm wind conditions.
In 2005, two conservation biologists proposed a plan to airlift 50 gray whales from the Pacific Ocean to the Atlantic Ocean.
One or more visited waters firstly on Kōzu-shima and Nii-Jima for weeks then adjacent to Miho no Matsubara and behind the Tokai University campus for several weeks.
Gray Whale migrations off of the Pacific Coast were observed, initially, by Marineland of the Pacific in Palos Verdes, California.
Gray whales are known to occur in Taiwan Strait even in recent years.
In South Korea, the Gray Whale Migration Site was registered as the 126th national monument in 1962, although illegal hunts had been taken place thereafter, and there have been no recent sightings of the species in Korean waters.
Gray whales measure from  in length for newborns to  for adults (females tend to be slightly larger than adult males).
One of the pair returned to the same coasts at the same time of the year in 2015 again.
The whale feeds mainly on benthic crustaceans, which it eats by turning on its side (usually the right, resulting in loss of eyesight in the right eye for many older animals) and scooping up sediments from the sea floor.
Gray whales were once called '''devil fish''' because of their fighting behavior when hunted.
However, on May 8, 2010, a sighting of a gray whale was confirmed off the coast of Israel in the Mediterranean Sea, leading some scientists to think they might be repopulating old breeding grounds that have not been used for centuries.
Researchers used a genetic approach to estimate pre-whaling abundance based on samples from 42 California gray whales, and reported DNA variability at 10 genetic loci consistent with a population size of 76,000–118,000 individuals, three to five times larger than the average census size as measured through 2007.
The '''gray whale''' (''Eschrichtius robustus''), also known as the '''grey whale''',  '''gray back whale''', '''Pacific gray whale''', or '''California gray whale''' is a baleen whale that migrates between feeding and breeding grounds yearly.
Whalemen caught 44 with nets in Japan during the 1890s.
During the breeding season, it is common for females to have several mates.
The name ''Eschrichtius gibbosus'' is sometimes seen; this is dependent on the acceptance of a 1777 description by Erxleben.
They reasoned that, as Californian gray whales had replenished to a suitable population, surplus whales could be transported to repopulate the extinct British population.
Endangered Species Act.
* A possible sighting of a gray whale underwater off Miyako Island in November, 2009.
Several hundred more were probably caught by American and European whalemen in the Sea of Okhotsk from the 1840s to the early 20th century.
However, there have been observations of some whales showing distinctive, blackish body colors in recent years.
Gray whales (Icelandic ''sandlægja'') were described in Iceland in the early 17th century.
All of the previous modern records in the Sea of Japan were of by-catches.
DNA studies indicated that this individual might have originated from the eastern population rather than the western.
Some of the better documented historical catches show that it was common for whales to stay for months in enclosed waters elsewhere, with known records in the Seto Inland Sea and the Gulf of Tosa.
Gray whales, along with other species such as right whales and Baird's beaked whales, were common features off the north eastern coast of Hokkaido near Teshio, Ishikari Bay near Otaru, the Shakotan Peninsula, and islands in the La Pérouse Strait such as Rebun Island and Rishiri Island.
On September 8, 2007, five members of the Makah tribe shot a gray whale using high powered rifles in spite of the decision.
Investigations on the corpse indicate that this was likely a different individual from the above animal.
Physical habitat damage from drilling and dredging operations, combined with possible impacts of oil and chemical spills on benthic prey communities also warrants concern.
The only other significant catch was made in two seasons by the steam-schooner ''California'' off Malibu, California.
Breeding behavior is complex and often involves three or more animals.
The western population is listed as critically endangered by the IUCN.
Gray whaling in Magdalena Bay was revived in the winter of 1855–56 by several vessels, mainly from San Francisco, including the ship ''Leonore'', under Captain Charles Melville Scammon.
The current western gray whale population summers in the Sea of Okhotsk, mainly off Piltun Bay region at the northeastern coast of Sakhalin Island (Russian Federation).
Recent findings from either stranded or entangled specimens indicate that the original western population have become functionally extinct and possibly all the whales appeared on Japanese and Chinese coasts in modern times are vagrants or re-colonizers from the eastern population.
The Ise and Mikawa Bay region is the only location along Japanese coasts that has several records since the 1980s (a mortal entanglement in 1968, above mentioned short-stay in 1982, self-freeing entanglement in 2005), and is also the location where the first commercial whaling started.
Newborns are a darker gray to black in color.
Females lactate for approximately seven months following birth, at which point calves are weaned and maternal care begins to decrease.
Shore whaling in California and Baja California continued after this period, until the early 20th century.
Small depressions on the upper jaw each contain a lone stiff hair, but are only visible on close inspection.
Two Pacific Ocean populations are known to exist: one of not more than 130 individuals (according to the most recent population assessment in 2008) whose migratory route is presumed to be between the Sea of Okhotsk and southern Korea, and a larger one with a population between 20,000 and 22,000 individuals in the eastern Pacific traveling between the waters off Alaska and Baja California Sur.
* One whale of  was beached nearby Wadaura on March 4 in 2016.
The whale watching industry provides ecotourists and marine mammal enthusiasts the opportunity to see groups of gray whales as they migrate.
There is no evidence of historical presence in Japan south of Ōsumi Peninsula; only one skeleton has been discovered in Miyazaki Prefecture.
In addition, the existence of historical calving ground on Taiwan and Penghu Islands (with some fossil records and captures), and any presence in other areas outside of the known ranges off Babuyan Islands in Philippines and coastal Vietnamese waters in Gulf of Tonkin are unknown.
Mostly, the animal feeds in the northern waters during the summer; and opportunistically feeds during its migration, depending primarily on its extensive fat reserves.
In May 2010, a gray whale was sighted off the Mediterranean shore of Israel.
By 1934, the western gray whale was near extinction.
In December 1857, Charles Scammon, in the brig ''Boston'', along with his schooner-tender ''Marin'', entered Laguna Ojo de Liebre (Jack-Rabbit Spring Lagoon) or later known as Scammon's Lagoon (by 1860) and found one of the gray's last refuges.
There are shallow, muddy areas favorable for feeding whales off Shiretoko, such as at Shibetsu, the Notsuke Peninsula, Cape Ochiishi on Nemuro Peninsula, Mutsu Bay, along the Tottori Sand Dunes, in the Suou-nada Sea, and Omura Bay.
Because of their size and need to migrate, gray whales have rarely been held in captivity, and then only for brief periods of time.
The most notable of these observations are listed below:
* A sub-adult whale that stayed in the Ise and Mikawa Bay for nearly two months in 2012 was later confirmed to be the same individual as the small whale observed off Tahara near Cape Irago in 2010, making it the first confirmed constant migration out of Russian waters.
However, the specific subpopulation in the northwest Pacific is regarded as being "Critically Endangered".
Simpson'' and ''Kate''.
By late March or early April, the returning animals can be seen from Everett, Washington, to Puget Sound to Canada.
Factors limiting or threatening current population levels include ship strikes, entanglement in fishing gear, and changes in sea-ice coverage associated with climate change.
By late December to early January, eastern grays begin to arrive in the calving lagoons of Baja California.
* A  carcass of young female was firstly reported floating along Atami on 4 April then was washed ashore on Ito on the 6th.
Gray whales are protected under Canada's Species at Risk Act which obligates Canadian governments to prepare management plans for the whales and consider the interests of the whales when permitting development.
Since the original Asian and Atlantic populations have become extinct, it is difficult to determine the unique features among whales in these stocks.
Within only a couple of seasons, the lagoon was nearly devoid of whales.
Activities related to oil and gas exploration, including geophysical seismic surveying, pipelaying and drilling operations, increased vessel traffic, and oil spills, all pose potential threats to western gray whales.
The main feeding habitat of the western Pacific subpopulation is the shallow ( depth) shelf off northeastern Sakhalin Island, particularly off the southern portion of Piltun Lagoon, where the main prey species appear to be amphipods and isopods.
The whale died within 12 hours, sinking while heading out to sea.
He caught 20 whales.
Her migration has shown new insight into how endangered species are making drastic changes in their life style.
Remains dating from the Roman epoch were found in the Mediterranean during excavation of the antique harbor of Lattara near Montpellier in 1997, raising the question of whether Atlantic gray whales migrated up and down the coast of Europe from Wadden Sea to calve in the Mediterranean.
The North Atlantic population may have been hunted to extinction in the 18th century.
By mid-February to mid-March, the bulk of the population has arrived in the lagoons, filling them with nursing, calving and mating gray whales.
Since the mid 1990s, almost all the confirmed records of living animals in Asian waters were from Japanese coasts.
Radiocarbon dating of subfossil or fossil European (Belgium, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom) coastal remains confirms this, with whaling the possible cause.
For example, it is not known if the whales visited the southern coasts of the Korean Peninsula, adjacent to the Island of Jeju), Haiyang Island, the Gulf of Shanghai, or the Zhoushan Archipelago.
There had been a record of deceased individual thought to be harpooned by dolphin-hunters found on Hokkaido in 90s.
It is unknown whether this was a cow-calf pair, which would have been a first record in Asia.
Most notable observations of living whales after 1980s were of 17 or 18 whales along Primorsky Krai in late October, 1989 (prior to this, a pair was reported swimming in the area in 1987), followed by the record of 14 whales in La Pérouse Strait on 13th, June in 1982 (in this strait, there was another sighting of a pair in October, 1987).
A whaling station in Richmond, California, caught 311 gray whales for "scientific purposes" between 1964 and 1969.
Recent increases in sightings are confirmed in Arctic areas of the historic range for Atlantic stocks, most notably on several locations in the Laptev Sea including the New Siberian Islands in the East Siberian Sea, and around the marine mammal sanctuary of the Franz Josef Land, indicating possible earlier pioneers of re-colonizations.
This, for the most part, does not take into account the large number of calves injured or left to starve after their mothers had been killed in the breeding lagoons.
Disturbance from underwater industrial noise may displace whales from critical feeding habitat.
The Sea of Japan was once thought not to have been a migration route, until several entanglements were recorded.
Notable features that distinguish the gray whale from other mysticetes include its baleen that is variously described as cream, off-white, or blond in color and is unusually short.
Circumstantial evidence indicates whaling could have contributed to this population's decline, as the increase in whaling activity in the 17th and 18th centuries coincided with the population's disappearance.
The Gray Whale Census, an official Gray Whale migration census that has been recording data on the migration of the Pacific Gray Whale has been keeping track of the population of the Pacific Gray Whale since 1985.
* Another pair of sub-adults were confirmed swimming near the mouth of Otani River in Suruga Bay in May, 2003.
* Possibly the first confirmed record of living animals in Japanese waters in the Sea of Japan since the end of whaling occurred on 3 April 2014 at Nodumi Beach, Teradomari, Niigata.
The gray whale has a dark slate-gray color and is covered by characteristic gray-white patterns, scars left by parasites which drop off in its cold feeding grounds.
There had been 24 records along Chinese coasts including sighting, stranding, intended hunts, and bycatches since 1933.
The two populations of Pacific gray whales (east and west) are morphologically and phylogenically different.
A mature gray whale can reach , with a typical range of .
He returned the following winter (1858–59) with the bark ''Ocean Bird'' and schooner tenders ''A.M.
Limited hunting of gray whales has continued since that time, however, primarily in the Chukotka region of northeastern Russia, where large numbers of gray whales spend the summer months.
Any records of the species had not been confirmed since after 1921 on Kyushu.
If this animal is confirmed to be a gray whale, it will make the first record of any gray whale migrating to the Ryukyu Islands.
Possibilities include Daya Bay, Wailou Harbour on Leizhou Peninsula, and possibly as far south as Hainan Province and Guangxi, particularly around Hainan Island.
The last gray whale, J.J., beached herself in Marina del Rey, California where she was rushed to SeaWorld San Diego and, after 14 months, was released because she got too big to take care of.
Predicted distribution models indicate that overall range in the last glacial period was broader or more southerly distributed, and inhabitations in waters where species presences lack in present situation, such as in southern hemisphere and south Asian waters and northern Indian Ocean were possible due to feasibility of the environment on those days.
The gray whale is distributed in an eastern North Pacific (North American) population and a critically endangered western North Pacific (Asian) population.
This was the first of 11 winters from 1855 through 1865 known as the "bonanza period", during which gray whaling along the coast of Baja California reached its peak.
Many other names have been ascribed to the gray whale, including desert whale, devil fish, gray back, mussel digger and rip sack.
Differences were also observed between Korean and Chinese specimens.
Photographic identification suggests that this is a different individual than the one spotted in the Mediterranean in 2010.
The whale later stayed next to a pier on Miyake-jima on 9th, February, and later at Habushi beach on Niijima, the same beach the same individual stayed near on the previous year.
There has been gradual melting and recession of Arctic sea ice with extreme loss in 2007 rendering the Northwest Passage "fully navigable".
These areas may also have included feeding grounds.
In May 2013, a gray whale was sighted off Walvis Bay, Namibia.
Some gray whales have also been seen off western Kamchatka, but to date all whales photographed there are also known from the Piltun area.
Traveling night and day, the gray whale averages approximately  per day at an average speed of .
This round trip of  is believed to be the longest annual migration of any mammal.
This corresponds with the DNA analysis of last recorded stranding in China.
South Korea and China list gray whales as protected species of high concern.
This census is the longest running census of the Pacific Gray Whale.
At Tsuro, Shikoku, 201 were taken between 1849 and 1896.
Throughout February and March, the first to leave the lagoons are males and females without new calves.
The gray whale also lacks a dorsal fin, instead bearing 6 to 12 dorsal crenulations ("knuckles"), which are raised bumps on the midline of its rear quarter, leading to the flukes.
The real damage was done between 1911 and 1933, when Japanese whalemen killed 1,449 after Japanese companies established several whaling stations on Korean Peninsula and on Chinese coast such as near the Daya bay and on Hainan Island.
Its migration routes and wintering grounds are poorly known, the only recent information being from occasional records on both the eastern and western coasts of Japan and along the Chinese coast.
This information coupled with the recent sightings of Pacific gray whales in the Atlantic, suggests that another range expansion to the Atlantic may be commencing.
Hideo Omura once considered the Seto Inland Sea to be a historical breeding ground, but only a handful of capture records support this idea, although migrations into the sea have been confirmed.
Some recent observations indicate that historic presences of resident whales are possible: a group of two or three were observed feeding in Izu Ōshima in 1994 for almost a month, two single individuals stayed in Ise Bay for almost two months in the 1980s and in 2012, the first confirmed living individuals in Japanese EEZ in the Sea of Japan and the first of living cow-calf pairs since the end of whaling stayed for about three weeks on the coastline of Teradomari in 2014.
There have been unidentified sightings in Tokara Islands and Ryukyu Islands in recent years.
Individual whales are typically identified using photographs of their dorsal surface and matching the scars and patches associated with parasites that have fallen off the whale or are still attached.
Currently there are no accounts of twin births, although an instance of twins ''in utero'' has been reported.
It was first confirmed occurrences of the species on remote, oceanic islands in Japan.
This single ovulation event is believed to coincide with the species’ annual migration patterns, when births can occur in warmer waters.
The common name of the whale comes from its coloration.
In May and June 2013 a gray whale was sighted off the coast of Namibia – the first confirmed in the Southern Hemisphere.
As of 2001, the Californian gray whale population had grown to about 26,000.
Van Deinse points out that the "scrag whale", described by P. Dudley in 1725 as one of the species hunted by the early New England whalers, was almost certainly the gray whale.
Similarly, radiocarbon dating of American east coastal subfossil remains confirm gray whales existed at least through the 17th century.
Only a few were caught from two whaling stations on the coast of California from 1919 to 1926, and a single station in Washington (1911–21) accounted for the capture of another.
Most females show biennial reproduction, although annual births have been reported.
This mammal descended from filter-feeding whales that appeared at the beginning of the Oligocene, over 30 million years ago.
The gray whale is the sole living species in the genus '''''Eschrichtius''''', which in turn is the sole living genus in the family Eschrichtiidae.
The gray whale is traditionally placed as the only living species in its genus and family.
* A pair of thin juveniles were sighted off Kuroshio, Kōchi, a renowned town for whale-watching tourism of resident and sub-resident populations of Bryde's Whales, in 1997.
Several whales seen off Sakhalin and on Kamchatka Peninsula are confirmed to migrate towards eastern side of Pacific and join the larger eastern population.
Possibly the same individual was seen off Futo as well.
In his 1835 history of Nantucket Island, Obed Macy wrote that in the early pre-1672 colony, a whale of the kind called "scragg" entered the harbor and was pursued and killed by the settlers.
In 1936, gray whales became protected in the United States.
The first gray whale, who was captured in Scammon's Lagoon, Baja California in 1965, was named Gigi and died two months later from an infection.
Van Deinse points out the "scrag whale", described by P. Dudley in 1725, as one target of early New England whalers, was almost certainly the gray whale.
By mid-December to early January, the majority are usually found between Monterey and San Diego such as at Morro bay, often visible from shore.
Anti-whaling groups have protested the hunt, saying the meat from the whales is not for traditional native consumption, but is used instead to feed animals in government-run fur farms; they cite annual catch numbers that rose dramatically during the 1940s, at the time when state-run fur farms were being established in the region.
The gestation period for gray whales is approximately 13&nbsp; months.
It has been speculated that this whale crossed from the Pacific to the Atlantic via the Northwest Passage, since an alternative route around Cape Horn would not be contiguous to the whale's established territory.
The northwest Pacific population is also listed as endangered by the U.S. government’s National Marine Fisheries Service under the U.S.
In three months, he caught 47 cows, yielding  of oil.
This population ranged at least from Southampton, New York, to Jupiter Island, Florida, the latest from 1675.
The second gray whale, who was captured in 1972 from the same lagoon, was named Gigi II and was released a year later after becoming too big.
In his 1835 history of Nantucket Island, Obed Macy wrote that in the early pre-1672 colony a whale of the kind called "scragg" entered the harbor and was pursued and killed by the settlers.
Recent DNA analysis indicates certain rorquals of the family Balaenopteridae, such as the humpback whale, ''Megaptera novaeangliae'', and fin whale, ''Balaenoptera physalus'', are more closely related to the gray whale than they are to some other rorquals, such as the minke whales.
Information from this census is listed through the American Cetacean Society of Los Angeles (ACSLA).
Along Japanese coasts, four females including a cow-calf pair were trapped and killed in nets in the 2000s.
The Japanese began to catch gray whales beginning in the 1570s.
There have been eight to fifteen sightings and stray records including unconfirmed sightings and re-sightings of the same individual, and one later killed by net-entanglement.
It is classified as a baleen whale and has baleen, or whalebone, which acts like a sieve, to capture small sea animals, including amphipods taken in along with sand, water and other material.
Other areas with several sighting or stranding records in recent years are off the Kumanonada Sea in Wakayama, off  Oshika Peninsula in Tohoku, and on coastlines close to Tomakomai, Hokkaido.
The calf is born tail first, and measures about  in length.
Scientists from the Namibian Dolphin Project confirmed the whale's identity and thus provides the only sighting of this species in the Southern Hemisphere.
this plan has not been undertaken.
The Russian IWC delegation has said that the hunt is justified under the aboriginal/subsistence exemption, since the fur farms provide a necessary economic base for the region's native population.
This is known as the dorsal ridge.
Both male and female whales reach puberty at approximately eight years of age.
In January 2011, a gray whale that had been tagged in the western population was tracked as far east as the eastern population range off the coast of British Columbia.
These areas are at the southwestern end of the known range.
In the winter of 1859–60, Scammon, again in the bark ''Ocean Bird'', along with several other vessels, performed a similar feat of daring by entering San Ignacio Lagoon to the south where he discovered the last breeding lagoon.
The IWC Bowhead, Right and Gray Whale subcommittee in 2011 reiterated the conservation risk to western gray whales is large because of the small size of the population and the potential anthropogenic impacts.
The living Pacific species was described by Cope as ''Rhachianectes glaucus'' in 1869.
John Edward Gray placed it in its own genus in 1865, naming it in honour of physician and zoologist Daniel Frederik Eschricht.
At Kawajiri, Nagato, 169 gray whales were caught between 1698 and 1889.
Genetic analysis of fossil and prefossil gray whale remains in the Atlantic Ocean suggests several waves of dispersal from the Pacific to the Atlantic related to successive periods of climactic warming - during the Pleistocene prior to the last glacial period and the early Holocene immediately following the opening of the Bering Strait.
Other than DNA structures, differences in proportions of several body parts and body colors including skeletal features, and length ratios of flippers and baleen plates have been confirmed between Eastern and Western populations, and some claims that the original eastern and western groups could have been much more distinct than previously thought, enough to be counted as subspecies.
* One of the above pair returned on the same beaches at the same time of a year in 2015.
Currently, the annual quota for the gray whale catch in the region is 140 per year.
Two individuals, measuring ten and five metres respectively, stayed near the mouth of Shinano River for three weeks.
The three most popular lagoons are Laguna Ojo de Liebre (formerly known in English as Scammon's Lagoon after whaleman Charles Melville Scammon, who discovered the lagoons in the 1850s and hunted the grays), San Ignacio, and Magdalena.
In the winters of 1934–35 and 1935–36, the ''California'' anchored off Point Dume in Paradise Cove, processing gray whales.
This sighting was unusual because of the location on mid-latitude in summer time.
NOAA has collected surveys gray whale population since at least the 1960s.
Females show highly synchronized reproduction, undergoing oestrus in late November to early December.
However, there were numerous records of whales along the Genkai Sea off Yamaguchi Prefecture, in Ine Bay in the Gulf of Wakasa, and in Tsushima.
They had been seasonal migrants to coastal waters of both sides of Atlantic, including the Baltic Sea, Wadden Sea, the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the Bay of Fundy, and Pamlico Sound.
Only a dozen or so were taken by British Columbian stations, nearly all of them in 1953 at Coal Harbour.
The historical calving grounds were unknown but might have been along southern Chinese coasts from Zhejiang and Fujian Province to Guangdong, especially south of Hailing Island and to near Hong Kong.
Not only were the whales taken in Magdalena Bay, but also by ships anchored along the coast from San Diego south to Cabo San Lucas and from whaling stations from Crescent City in northern California south to San Ignacio Lagoon.
Pursuant to an agreement between the United States and Russia, the Makah tribe of Washington claimed four whales from the IWC quota established at the 1997 meeting.
As of 2008, the IUCN regards the gray whale as being of "Least Concern" from a conservation perspective.
As of July 2013, the Namibian whale was still being seen regularly.
* A young whale was observed by land-based fishermen at Cape Irago in March, 2015.
The common name of the whale comes from the gray patches and white mottling on its dark skin.
Offshore gas and oil development in the Okhotsk Sea within  of the primary feeding ground off northeast Sakhalin Island is of particular concern.
The round-trip journey of one gray whale has set a new record for the longest mammal migration, covering a distance of more than 22,000 kilometres across the Pacific Ocean.
Often, a few mothers linger with their young calves well into May.
From 1891 to 1966, an estimated 1,800–2,000 gray whales were caught, with peak catches of between 100 and 200 annually occurring in the 1910s.
