Sightings do not include physical interaction, encounters include physical interaction without harm, shark bites include minor and major shark bite incidents, including those that do and do not require medical attention, and fatal shark bite incidents are those that result in death.
Baited drum lines are deployed near popular beaches using hooks designed to catch great white sharks, as well as bull and tiger sharks.
Contrary to popular belief, great white sharks do not mistake humans for seals.
In South Australia, playing rock music recordings underwater, including the AC/DC album ''Back in Black'' has also been used experimentally to attract sharks.
California sea lions (''Zalophus californianus'') are ambushed from below and struck mid-body before being dragged and eaten.
However, the phylogeny of the great white is still in dispute.
This shark was estimated to be more than  long by Peter Resiley, and has been designated as KANGA.
The popularity of cage diving and swimming with sharks is at the focus of a booming tourist industry.
Delivery is in spring and summer.
The findings indicated that estimations by P.&nbsp;Resiley and J.&nbsp;Abela are reasonable and could not be ruled out.
In fact, the social structure of a clan is probably most aptly compared to that of a wolf pack; in that each member has a clearly established rank and each clan has an alpha leader.
Shark expert Peter Klimley used a rod-and-reel rig and trolled carcasses of a seal, a pig, and a sheep from his boat in the South Farallons.
Sharks were drawn to the carcass by chemical and odour detection, spread by strong winds.
Interspecific competition between the great white shark and the orca is probable in regions where dietary preferences of both species may overlap.
A study in 2012 revealed that Australia's White Shark population was separated by Bass Strait into genetically distinct eastern and western populations, indicating a need for the development of regional conservation strategies.
It is included in Appendix II of CITES, meaning that international trade in the species requires a permit.
In August 1981, a white shark survived for 16 days at SeaWorld San Diego before being released.
This technique is especially used on adult male elephant seals, which are typically larger than the shark, ranging between , and are potentially dangerous adversaries.
In 2013, great white sharks were added to California's Endangered Species Act.
When members of different clans meet, they establish social rank nonviolently through any of a variety of interactions.
When the shark bites, it shakes its head side-to-side, helping the teeth saw off large chunks of flesh.
The question of maximum weight is complicated by the unresolved question of whether or not to include the shark's stomach contents when weighing the shark.
When conserving energy the core body temperature can drop to match the surroundings.
Humans are not the preferred prey of the great white shark, but, nevertheless, the great white is responsible for the largest number of reported and identified fatal unprovoked shark attacks on humans.
According to another study from 2014 by George H. Burgess, Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida, there are about 2000 great white sharks near the California coast, which is 10 times higher than the previous estimate of 219 by Barbara Block.
A similar study tracked a different great white shark from South Africa swimming to Australia's northwestern coast and back, a journey of  in under nine months.
Because the behavior is unpredictable, it is very hard to document.
In 2015 Massachusetts banned catching, cage diving, feeding, towing decoys, or baiting and chumming for its significant and highly predictable migratory great white population without an appropriate research permit.
They much prefer a fat, protein-rich seal.
Great whites also rely on the fat and oils stored within their livers for long-distance migrations across nutrient-poor areas of the oceans.
They seem to be highly opportunistic.
Deep Blue would also later gain significant attention when she was filmed interacting with researcher Mauricio Hoyas Pallida in a viral video that Mauricio posted on Facebook on June 11, 2015.
He grew to  and  before release.
A number of very large unconfirmed great white shark specimens have been recorded.
However, photographic evidence suggested that these specimens were larger than the size estimations yielded through Randall's methods.
Other operators draw the bait away from the cage, causing the shark to swim past the divers.
The IUCN notes that very little is known about the actual status of the great white shark, but as it appears uncommon compared to other widely distributed species, it is considered vulnerable.
The government claims they are not culling the sharks, but are using a "targeted, localised, hazard mitigation strategy".
Presently, human-caused shark mortality is continuing, primarily from accidental and illegal catching in commercial and recreational fishing as well as from being caught in beach protection netting, and the populations of great white shark in Australia are yet to recover.
A recent review recommends that only in the very rare instances where a shark clearly predated on a human should the bite incident be termed an "attack," which implies predation, and that otherwise it is more accurate to class bite incidents as "sighting", "encounter", "bite incident", or "fatal bite incident".
The sharks were frequently observed regurgitating chunks of blubber and immediately returning to feed, possibly in order to replace low energy yield pieces with high energy yield pieces, using their teeth as mechanoreceptors to distinguish them.
One of these adaptations is a "rete mirabile" (Latin for "wonderful net").
Prey is normally attacked sub-surface.
However, there was a report considered reliable by some experts in the past, of a larger great white shark specimen from Cuba in 1945.
His first meal as a captive was a large salmon steak on 8 September 2006, and as of that date, he was estimated to be  in length and to weigh approximately .
The upper and lower lobes on the tail fin are approximately the same size which is similar to some mackerel sharks.
The great white has an 11-month gestation period.
Off Seal Island, False Bay in South Africa, the sharks ambush brown fur seals (''Arctocephalus pusillus'') from below at high speeds, hitting the seal mid-body.
Another similar attack apparently occurred there in 2000, but its outcome is not clear.
While tiger sharks which are typically both a few feet smaller and have a leaner, less heavy body structure than white sharks, have been confirmed to reach at least  in the length, an unverified specimen was reported to have measured  in length and weighed , more than two times heavier than the largest confirmed specimen at .
), harbour porpoises (''Phocoena phocoena''), and Dall's porpoises (''Phocoenoides dalli'').
In 1984, shortly before its opening day, the Monterey Bay Aquarium in Monterey, California, housed its first great white shark which had died after 10 days.
In 2008, a team of scientists led by Stephen Wroe conducted an experiment to determine the great white shark's jaw power and findings indicated that a specimen massing  could exert a bite force of .
It has been suggested that government licensing strategies may help enforce these responsible tourism.
The idea of containing a live great white at SeaWorld Orlando was used in the 1983 film ''Jaws 3-D''.
In one case in 1936, a large shark leapt completely into the South African fishing boat ''Lucky Jim'', knocking a crewman into the sea.
A February 2010 study by Barbara Block of Stanford University estimated the world population of great white sharks to be lower than 3,500 individuals, making the species more vulnerable to extinction than the tiger, whose population is in the same range.
Another juvenile female was captured near Malibu on 12 August 2009, introduced to the Outer Bay exhibit on 26 August 2009, and was successfully released into the wild on 4 November 2009.
This keeps certain parts of the body (particularly the stomach) at temperatures up to 14&nbsp;°C (25&nbsp;°F) above that of the surrounding water, while the heart and gills remain at sea temperature.
Many bite incidents occur in waters with low visibility or other situations which impair the shark's senses.
The orca held the shark upside down to induce tonic immobility and kept the shark still for fifteen minutes, causing it to suffocate.
The study reveals the forces and behaviors its skull is adapted to handle and resolves competing theories about its feeding behavior.
Sharks taken during the long interval between birth and sexual maturity never reproduce, making population recovery and growth difficult.
Almost nothing is known about the reproduction of great whites.
The great white shark is arguably the world's largest known extant macropredatory fish, and is one of the primary predators of marine mammals.
McCosker and Timothy C. Tricas, an author and professor at the University of Hawaii, suggest that a standard pattern for great whites is to make an initial devastating attack and then wait for the prey to weaken before consuming the wounded animal.
One of the largest adult great whites ever exhibited was at Japan's Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium in 2016, where a  male was exhibited for three days before dying.
After they arrive, they change behavior and do short dives to about  for up to ten minutes.
Humans, for the most part, are too bony for their liking.
This female great white was  long.
Monterey Bay Aquarium housed a third great white, a juvenile male, for 162 days between 27 August 2007, and 5 February 2008.
A particularly infamous great white shark, supposedly of record proportions, once patrolled the area that comprises False Bay, South Africa, was said to be well over  during the early 1980s.
An incident was documented on 4 October 1997, in the Farallon Islands off California in the United States.
The earliest known fossils of the great white shark are about 16 million years old.
While she did swim well, the shark fed only one time during her stay and was tagged and released on 7 September 2008.
Great white sharks can accelerate to over  for short bursts.
A great white shark's success in raising its core temperature is an example of gigantothermy.
The animal was captured in the waters off of Malibu.
This shark's behavior and social structure is not well understood.
According to a 2014 study the lifespan of great white sharks is estimated to be as long as 70 years or more, well above older estimates, making it one of the longest lived cartilaginous fish currently known.
According to J.&nbsp;E. Randall, the largest white shark reliably measured was a  individual reported from Ledge Point, Western Australia in 1987.
They go so fast that they can completely leave the water.
They had the rare success of getting the shark to feed in captivity before its release.
The great white shark has no known natural predators other than the killer whale.
At present, hang baits are illegal off Isla Guadalupe and reputable dive operators do not use them.
These findings challenge the traditional notion that the great white is a coastal species.
The question of the Port Fairy shark was settled in the 1970s when J.&nbsp;E. Randall examined the shark's jaws and "found that the Port Fairy shark was of the order of 5&nbsp;m (17&nbsp;ft) in length and suggested that a mistake had been made in the original record, in 1870, of the shark's length".
By drawing bait on a wire towards the cage, tour operators lure the shark to the cage, possibly striking it, exacerbating this problem.
The maximum penalty is a $250,000 fine and up to six months in prison.
The investigating team concluded that the importance of whale carcasses, particularly for the largest white sharks, has been underestimated.
In great white sharks, sexual dimorphism is present, and females are generally larger than males.
Great white sharks are carnivorous and prey upon fish (e.g.
That is a fraction of the tourism value of a live shark; tourism is a more sustainable economic activity than shark fishing.
After initially feeding on the whale caudal peduncle and fluke, the sharks would investigate the carcass by slowly swimming around it and mouthing several parts before selecting a blubber-rich area.
Male great whites on average measure  long, while females at .
Their success rate is 55% in the first 2 hours, falling to 40% in late morning after which hunting stops.
A particularly large female great white nicknamed "Deep Blue", estimated measuring at  was filmed off Guadalupe during shooting for the 2014 episode of Shark Week "Jaws Strikes Back".
From above, the darker shade blends with the sea and from below it exposes a minimal silhouette against the sunlight.
This policy was met with widespread condemenation from the scientific community, which showed that species responsible for bite incidents were notoriously hard to identify, that the drum lines failed to capture white sharks, as intended, and that the government also failed to show any correlation between their drum line policy and a decrease in shark bite incidents in the region.
From 1990 to 2011 there have been a total of 139 unprovoked great white shark bite incidents, 29 fatal.
Sharks that sink faster during drift dives were revealed to use up their internal stores of energy quicker than those which sink in a dive at more leisurely rates.
However, J.&nbsp;E. Randall believed that great white shark may have exceeded  in length.
Studies by Stanford University and the Monterey Bay Aquarium published on 17 July 2013 revealed that In addition to controlling the sharks' buoyancy, the liver of great whites is essential in migration patterns.
The generic name was identified with Linnaeus' specific name and the current scientific name, ''Carcharodon carcharias'', was finalized.
Great white sharks, like all other sharks, have an extra sense given by the ampullae of Lorenzini which enables them to detect the electromagnetic field emitted by the movement of living animals.
Of all shark species, the great white shark is responsible for by far the largest number of recorded shark bite incidents on humans, with 272 documented unprovoked bite incidents on humans as of 2012.
Companies object to being blamed for shark bite incidents, pointing out that lightning tends to strike humans more often than sharks bite humans.
At Seal Island, white sharks have been observed arriving and departing in stable "clans" of two to six individuals on a yearly basis.
Therefore, the great white shark can be considered an endothermic poikilotherm because its body temperature is not constant but is internally regulated.
The great white shark, however, is rarely an object of commercial fishing, although its flesh is considered valuable.
The great white shark has a robust, large, conical snout.
Great whites are so sensitive they can detect variations of half a billionth of a volt.
Great whites sharks are at around  when born, and grow about  each year.
The great white shark is one of only a few sharks known to regularly lift its head above the sea surface to gaze at other objects such as prey.
Also, responsible dive operators do not feed sharks.
Whether clan members are related is unknown but they get along peacefully enough.
This shark was also estimated to be around  long by John Abela and has been designated as MALTA.
Tricas and McCosker's underwater observations suggest that sharks are attracted to boats by the electrical fields they generate, which are picked up by the ampullae of Lorenzini and confuse the shark about whether or not wounded prey might be near-by.
Great white sharks, like many other sharks, have rows of serrated teeth behind the main ones, ready to replace any that break off.
Prior to August 1981, no great white shark in captivity lived longer than 11 days.
However, Cappo drew criticism because he used shark size estimation methods proposed by J.&nbsp;E. Randall to suggest that the KANGA specimen was  long.
These wrong measurements would make the alleged shark more than five times heavier than it really was.
Most fish have a less-developed but similar sense using their body's lateral line.
The shark's late sexual maturity, low reproductive rate and slow growth make it vulnerable to pressures such as overfishing and environmental change.
At close range, this allows the shark to locate even immobile animals by detecting their heartbeat.
The reasons for their migration and what they do at their destination is still unknown.
As of April 2007, great white sharks were fully protected within  of New Zealand and additionally from fishing by New Zealand-flagged boats outside this range.
Maximum life span was originally believed to be more than 30 years, but a study by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution placed it at upwards of 70 years.
The great white shark is further listed as Threatened in Victoria under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act, and as rare or likely to become extinct under Schedule 5 of the Wildlife Conservation Act in Western Australia.
They have bumped or knocked people overboard, usually biting the boat from the stern.
The sharks attacked all three baits but rejected the sheep carcass.
Further research shows that they can tell in one bite whether or not the object is worth predating upon.
These observations argue against traditional theories that white sharks are coastal territorial predators, and open up the possibility of interaction between shark populations that were previously thought to have been discrete.
From data collected, the population of great whites in the North Pacific was estimated to be fewer than 340 individuals.
This shark, known locally as the "Submarine", had a legendary reputation that was supposedly well founded.
This technique is often used on cape fur seals at Seal Island in False Bay, South Africa.
A great white displays countershading, by having a white underside and a grey dorsal area (sometimes in a brown or blue shade) that gives an overall mottled appearance.
Juvenile white sharks predominantly prey on fish including other elasmobranchs, as their jaws are not strong enough to withstand the forces required to attack larger prey such as pinnipeds and cetaceans until they reach a length of  or more, at which point their jaw cartilage mineralizes enough to withstand the impact of biting into larger prey species.
However, a new hypothesis proposes that the ''C.&nbsp;megalodon'' and the great white are distant relatives (albeit sharing the family Lamnidae).
It is unclear how much of a concurrent increase in fishing for great white sharks has caused the decline of great white shark populations from the 1970s to the present.
However, some researchers have hypothesized that the reason the proportion of fatalities is low is not because sharks do not like human flesh, but because humans are often able to escape after the first bite.
The largest great white recognized by the International Game Fish Association (IGFA) is one caught by Alf Dean in the south Australian waters in 1959, weighing .
When hunting, great whites tend to separate and resolve conflicts with rituals and displays.
seals, fur seals, and sea lions), sea turtles, sea otters (''Enhydra lutris'') and seabirds.
Cage diving is most common at sites where great whites are frequent including the coast of South Africa, the Neptune Islands in South Australia, and Guadalupe Island in Baja California.
Many of the incidents seemed to be "test-bites".
The national conservation status of the great white shark is reflected by all Australian states under their respective laws, granting the species full protection throughout Australia regardless of jurisdiction.
With fees between £50 and £150 per person, a single live shark that visits each boat can create anywhere between £9,000 and £27,000 of revenue daily.
Another white shark that was tagged off of the South African coast swam to the southern coast of Australia and back within the year.
In the open ocean, it has been recorded at depths as great as .
The Monterey Bay Aquarium added a  long male into their redesigned "Open Sea" exhibit on 31 August 2011.
The orca then proceeded to eat the dead shark's liver.
megalodon'' had teeth that were superficially not too dissimilar with those of great white sharks, but its teeth were far larger.
Cases where an adult Stejneger's beaked whale (''Mesoplodon stejnegeri''), with a mean mass of around , and a juvenile Cuvier's beaked whale (''Ziphius cavirostris''), an individual estimated at , were hunted and killed by great white sharks have also been observed.
The shark pup's powerful jaws begin to develop in the first month.
These sharks prefer prey with a high content of energy-rich fat.
In 2015, a pod of orcas was recorded to have killed a great white shark off South Australia.
Not until September 2004 was the aquarium able to place a great white on long-term exhibit.
White sharks are generally very curious animals, display intelligence and may also turn to socializing if the situation demands it.
The heaviest species of bony fish, the oceanic sunfish (''Mola mola''), has been found in great white shark stomachs.
For example, the dive industry in Gansbaai, South Africa consists of six boat operators with each boat guiding 30 people each day.
On the evening of 31 August 2006, the aquarium introduced a juvenile male caught outside Santa Monica Bay.
The coloration makes it difficult for prey to spot the shark because it breaks up the shark's outline when seen from the side.
With a single bite a great white can take in up to  of flesh, and can also consume several hundred kilograms of food.
In 2014 the state government of Western Australia led by Premier Colin Barnett implemented a policy of killing large sharks.
Detailed observations were made of four whale carcasses in False Bay between 2000 and 2010.
This behavior has also been seen in at least one group of blacktip reef sharks, but this might be learned from interaction with humans (it is theorized that the shark may also be able to smell better this way because smell travels through air faster than through water).
If casually captured (it happens for example in some tonnare in the Mediterranean), it is misleadingly sold as ''smooth-hound shark''.
On the journey out, they swim slowly and dive down to around .
In a similar fashion, I.&nbsp;K. Fergusson also used shark size estimation methods proposed by J.&nbsp;E. Randall to suggest that the MALTA specimen was  long.
Only five of the 108 authenticated unprovoked shark bite incidents reported from the Pacific Coast during the 20th century involved kayakers.
The crew were undertaking a population study using sardines as bait, and the incident was judged not to be an attack on the boat but an accident.
White sharks also attack dolphins and porpoises from above, behind or below to avoid being detected by their echolocation.
The great white shark is notable for its size, with mature female individuals growing up to  in length and  in weight.
Just under half of observed breach attacks are successful.
More than any documented bite incident, Peter Benchley's best-selling novel ''Jaws'' and the subsequent 1975 film adaptation directed by Steven Spielberg provided the great white shark with the image of being a "man eater" in the public mind.
Adults of this species weigh  on average, however mature females can have an average mass of .
Great white sharks were previously thought to reach sexual maturity at around 15 years of age, but actually take far longer; male great white sharks reach sexual maturity at age 26, while females take 33 years to reach sexual maturity.
These three species are generally quite docile in disposition and given to passively filter-feeding on very small organisms.
Some other macropredatory sharks such as the Greenland shark (''Somniosus microcephalus'') and the Pacific sleeper shark (''S.
Most commonly though, juvenile elephant seals are the most frequently eaten at elephant seal colonies.
The policy is intended to protect users of the marine environment from shark bite incidents, following the deaths of seven people on the Western Australian coastline in the years 2010–2013.
Great whites have also been known to eat objects that they are unable to digest.
After feeding for several hours, the sharks appeared to become lethargic, no longer swimming to the surface; they were observed mouthing the carcass but apparently unable to bite hard enough to remove flesh, they would instead bounce off and slowly sink.
When hunting sea turtles, they appear to simply bite through the carapace around a flipper, immobilizing the turtle.
The shark tourist industry has some financial leverage in conserving this animal.
Another great white specimen of similar size has been verified by the Canadian Shark Research Center: A female caught by David McKendrick of Alberton, Prince Edward Island, in August 1988 in the Gulf of St.&nbsp;Lawrence off Prince Edward Island.
Groups of dolphins have occasionally been observed defending themselves from sharks with mobbing behaviour.
Great white sharks also test-bite buoys, flotsam, and other unfamiliar objects, and they might grab a human or a surfboard to identify what it is.
The great white is also more closely related to an ancient mako shark, ''Isurus hastalis'', than to the ''C.&nbsp;megalodon'', a theory that seems to be supported with the discovery of a complete set of jaws with 222 teeth and 45 vertebrae of the extinct transitional species ''Carcharodon hubbelli'' in 1988 and published on 14 November 2012.
The Northern Pacific population of great whites is suspected to breed off of the Sea of Cortez, as evidenced by local fisherman who have said to have caught them and evidenced by teeth found at dump sites for discarded parts from their catches.
The original hypothesis for the great white's origins is that it shares a common ancestor with a prehistoric shark, such as the ''C.&nbsp;megalodon''.
Their position is that further research needs to be done before banning practices such as chumming, which may alter natural behavior.
In addition, white sharks attack and prey upon beaked whales.
A young female, which was caught off the coast of Ventura, was kept in the aquarium's  Outer Bay exhibit for 198 days before she was released in March 2005.
Some evidence points to the near-soporific effect of a large feast (such as a whale carcass) possibly inducing mating.
She was released because she would not eat and constantly bumped against the walls.
Large sharks found hooked but still alive are shot and their bodies discarded at sea.
Thus, a team of scientists—H.&nbsp;F. Mollet, G.&nbsp;M. Cailliet, A.&nbsp;P. Klimley, D.&nbsp;A. Ebert, A.&nbsp;D. Testi, and L.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;V. Compagno—reviewed the cases of the KANGA and MALTA specimens in 1996 to resolve the dispute by conducting a comprehensive morphometric analysis of the remains of these sharks and re-examination of photographic evidence in an attempt to validate the original size estimations and their findings were consistent with them.
A breach is the result of a high speed approach to the surface with the resulting momentum taking the shark partially or completely clear of the water.
