* Yucatán great horned owl, '''''Bubo virginianus mayensis''''' (Nelson, 1901)
Occasionally, domestic carnivores are also prey.
It is the only subspecies where the iris is amber, not yellow.
In great horned owls, mated pairs occupy territories year-round and long-term.
Again, like owls, diurnal raptors are attacked depending on the relative similarity of their habitat preferences to the owl.
The great horned owl is the heaviest extant owl in Central and South America and is the second heaviest owl in North America, after the closely related but very different looking snowy owl.
However, many of these are not true races and only examples of individual or clinal variation.
For owls found in more tropical climates, the dates of the breeding season are somewhat undefined.
:A lowland form occurring in disjunct populations from eastern Colombia to the Guyanas; also from Brazil and Uruguay south of the Amazon Basin to Bolivia, the Buenos Aires Province in northern Argentina and western Paraguay; resident all-year.
From experimentally raising young owls in captivity, Paul L. Errington felt that they were a bird of “essentially low intelligence” who could only hunt when partially wild and instinctually driven by hunger to hunt whatever they first encounter.
All great horned owls have a facial disc.
From Washington to Baja California a very important food is the pocket mice, primarily the Great Basin pocket mouse (''Perognathus parvus'').
Among 209 banded nestlings in yet another study, 67% were found dead after independence: 56 were found shot, 41 were trapped, 15 hit by cars, 14 found dead on highways and 14 electrocuted by overhead power lines.
In mountainous areas of North America, they are usually absent above the tree line, but great horned owls can be found up to  in California and  in the Rockies.
the rats were seven times more abundant in pellets from the Upper Midwest.
Despite the great diversity of prey taken by these predators, in most of the Continental United States from the East to the Midwest as well as Canada and Alaska, great horned owls largely live off just a handful of prey species: three species of lagomorph: the eastern cottontail (''Sylvilagus floridanus''), the snowshoe hare (''Lepus americanus'') and the black-tailed jackrabbit (''Lepus californicus''); two species of New World mice: the white-footed mouse and the North American deermouse (''Peromyscus leucopus & maniculatus''),  approximately three species of vole: the meadow, prairie and woodland voles (''Microtus pennsylvanicus, ochrogaster & pinetorum'') and one introduced pest, the brown rat.
The outer ear openings, which are concealed by feathers on the sides of the head, is relatively smaller than that of the Eurasian eagle owl, being  in vertical axis, with the left ear slightly larger than the right.
This can be reddish, brown or gray in color (depending on geographical and racial variation) and is demarked by a dark rim culminating in bold, blackish side brackets.
In 14 studies accumulated for comparison from across North America, ''Microtus'' and ''Peromyscus'' were each the most numerous prey in 5 of the studies (together 10 out of 14).
In one study, the leading cause of death for owls was collision with cars, entanglement with wires, flying into buildings and, lastly, electrocution.
Pine and other coniferous trees may be preferred where available since they are particularly dense and provide cover throughout the year.
Anemia, caused by ''Leucocytozoon ziemanni'' and the drinking of blood by swarming, blood-drinking blackflies (''Simulium'' ssp.
), the muskrat (''Ondatra zibethicus''), the northern grasshopper mouse (''Onychomys leucogaster''), the northern pygmy mouse (''Baiomys taylori'') and jumping mice (''Zapus'' & ''Napaeozapus'' ssp.
It is heavily built, with a barrel-shaped body, a large head and broad wings.
Includes the previously described form of  ''B.
This is a large race going on linear measurements, which in Alaskan owls outmatch those of all other races but for ''heterocnemis'' in Ontario (which may itself be a discontinuous eastern wing of this race).
The great horned owl can take up residence in trees that border all manner of deciduous, coniferous, and mixed forests, tropical rainforests, pampas, prairie, mountainous areas, deserts, subarctic tundra, rocky coasts, mangrove swamp forests, and some urban areas.
Whereas owls of any age are freely attacked by great horned owls whether nesting or not, when it comes to diurnal raptors, great horned owls are mainly a danger around the nest.
Raptorial birds in general tend to have large, conspicuous nests which may make them easier for a hunting owl to locate.
They are generally rare in non-tidal wetland habitat, and are replaced in the high Arctic tundra by snowy owls.
The great horned owl is the provincial bird of Alberta.
v. subarcticus'' shows a very high degree of clinal variation, ranging from in the Contiguous United States where owls are often medium-grayish and more heavily marked to the Subarctic zone in Canada where very pale birds with almost non-existent markings are prominent.
Due to its natural-colored plumage, it is well camouflaged both while active at night and while roosting during the day.
At dusk, the owl utters a few calls before flying to a more open sing-post, i.e.
* Northeastern great horned owl, '''''Bubo virginianus heterocnemis''''' (Oberholser, 1904)
Anecdotally, both snowy and great horned owls have rarely been reported to dominate or even kill one another depending on the size and disposition of the individual owls, although the snowy's preference for more open areas again acts as something of a buffer.
Several incidences have been recorded of dozens or even hundreds of crows appearing to mob a great horned owl.
Going on median reported linear measurements (since body mass is unknown), this is the largest bodied subspecies on average.
In winter, this race may disperses southwards throughout Ontario to as far as the Northeastern United States.
The tail in both sexes can range from .
It is commonly believed that routine insectivory in great horned owls is mainly restricted to inexperienced young owls too unskilled to graduate to larger prey yet.
), was a leading cause of juvenile mortality in the Yukon.
When first hatched the young are covered in whitish gray down, with some brownish about the wings.
), the golden mouse (''Ochrotomys nuttalli''), red-backed voles & bog lemmings (''Myodes'' & ''Synaptomys'' ssp.
On the contrary, in Costa Rica, within the range of the possibly synonymous ''mesembrinus'', great horned owls average approximately , the lightest average mass reported anywhere for this species.
The tail, being relatively short as is typical of most owls, is  long.
v. mayensis'' is smaller than all North American horned owls, even the smallish ''pallescens'', and is only slightly larger at median than the following race.
All told, over 500 species have been identified as great horned owl prey, with dozens more identified only to genus or general type (especially numerous invertebrates) and presumably several more unknown from their relatively little-studied populations in the neotropics.
Similarly, as mainly recorded in New England, attempts to reintroduce ospreys, after they were also hit hard by DDT, were effected by heavy owl predation on nestlings, and the owls were also recorded to take a large toll locally on the threatened colonies of roseate terns.
The breeding habitat of the great horned owl extends high into the subarctic of North America, where they are found up to the northwestern and southern Mackenzie Mountains, Keewatin, Ontario, northern Manitoba, Fort Chimo in Ungava, Okak, Newfoundland and Labrador, Anticosti Island and Prince Edward Island.
Altogether, about a dozen lagomorphs species are known to be hunted by the owl, from the relatively tiny  pygmy rabbit to several hares weighing more than .
This is likely due to the fact that the larger passerines usually roost in relatively open spots and have larger, more conspicuous nests.
It tends to be richly tinged with rufous and barred distinctly blackish-brown below with rather soft contrast.
In most of North America, courtship is from October to December and mates are chosen by December to January.
Mammals (more than 200 species) and, considerably secondarily in general, birds (nearly 300 species) make up the majority of their diet.
On occasion, this species exhibits “an indescribable assemblage of hoots, chuckles, screeches and squawks, given so rapidly and disconnectedly that the effect is both startling and amusing”.
In the Rocky Mountains, Northwestern United States, northern New England and eastern Canada, egg laying is from early March to late April.
This species is strictly monogamous.
Estimated mass of individual prey for the owls has ranged from as little as  to as much as  Estimated mean weight of prey items found at nests and routine perches in various studies has ranged from  in one study from Washington, where the primary prey was ''Perognathus'', to  in the Upper Midwest, where the primary prey was ''Sylvilagus''.
At least eight species of shrews are taken by opportunity and make up the smallest mammalian prey taken by great horned owls, as specimens of least shrew (''Cryptotis parva'') or masked shrew (''Sorex cinereus'') have had an estimated weight of only .
In Brazil, it was found in a small study that birds overall outnumbered mammals in pellets, although most were not determined to species and the ones that were shown a tremendously diverse assemblage of birds with no obvious dietary preference.
Hen harriers, northern goshawks, Cooper's hawks, Harris's hawks, red-tailed hawks, Swainson's hawks, ferruginous hawks, red-shouldered hawks, American kestrels, peregrine falcons, prairie falcons (''Falco mexicanus'') and common ravens (''Corvus corax'') are among the reported species who have been recorded diving on great horned owls when they discover them.
swooping at on the wing.
Occasionally raccoons and American black bears consume eggs and nestlings from tree nests and Virginia opossum may take the rare unguarded egg.
Hunting and trapping of great horned owls may continue on a small scale but is now illegal in most countries.
At Kluane  in the Yukon Territory, incursions into neighboring territories were observed only twice—by females when neighboring female had died or emigrated, suggesting that territorial defense may be sex specific.
When the owls try to fly off to avoid this harassment, they are often followed by the corvids.
Weighing a mere  and  on average, the nine species of New World mice in ''Peromyscus'' and eight species voles in ''Microtus'' recorded in the diet would appear to be overly small to be as important as they are to a predatory bird of this size.
:A medium-pale form, fairly similar to ''pallescens'' in both hue and ventral markings.
Remarkably, in the Morley Nelson Snake River Birds of Prey National Conservation Area of Idaho, individual rodents (1159 counted) were more than 10 times more numerous than lagomorphs (114 counted) by quantity and yet the jackrabbit and mountain cottontail still made up approximately half of the biomass.
In northwestern Utah and north-central Alberta, egg-laying can be 3–4 weeks earlier than usual when food is abundant and weather is favorable.
The nestlings of even larger species like trumpeter swans (''Cygnus buccinator''), American white pelicans (''Pelecanus eryhtrorhynchos''), brown pelicans (''Pelecanus occidentalis'') and sandhill cranes (''Grus canadensis'') have also been killed by these owls.
From Southern California to northern Louisiana, egg laying is from early February to late March.
On occasion owls may actually walk on the ground in pursuit of small prey or, rarely, inside a chicken coop to prey on the fowl within.
large bare branch or large rocks to deliver song.
Radio-telemetry revealed that such floaters concentrate along boundaries of established territories.
Moderately barred and tinged buff or ochraceous on the underside.
These forms may be reported in winter as far south as Colorado and Texas, but these are in times of irruption.
Other owls, most notably the great grey owl, habitually crash into the surface of the snow to access voles in their tunnels, a habit only rarely recorded in great horned owls presumably due to its less refined hearing.
The great horned owl is generally a poor walker on the ground; it walks like a starling, with a pronounced side-to-side gait.
Only three birds have had published weights, two males scaling  and one female weighing .
Almost every study comparing the diets of North American owls illustrates the considerable overlap in the dietary selection of these species, as all species, besides the primarily insectivorous varieties, rely on many of the same small rodent species for most of their diet, extending from the small northern saw-whet owl and eastern screech owl to the great horned and great grey owls.
This race shows no little to no reddish coloration.
Even tropical great horned owls have feathered legs and feet.
Almost all fossils indicate these owls were larger than modern great horned owls.
In general, great horned owls are most vulnerable in the early stages of life, although few species press attacks on the owl's nests due to the ferocious defensive abilities of the parents.
Females are somewhat larger than males.
The great horned owl is both the most prolific and diverse predator in America of other birds of prey, with other accomplished raptor-hunters such as the goshawk and the golden eagle being more restricted in range, habitat and number in North America and thus having a more minor impact.
The earliest competent hooting by juvenile owls is not until January.
However, lizards are largely unavailable as prey due to their typically diurnal periods of activity.
The female's call is higher and rises in pitch at the end of the call.
A case of an owl scavenging a white-tailed deer (''Odocoileus virginianus'') carcass, ultimately tearing off the deer's leg, was captured on a motion capture video camera set out to film wildlife.
It is clearly inefficient for owls of this size to attempt to raise young on a diet of foods as small as insects.
* Common/eastern great horned owl, '''''Bubo virginianus virginianus''''' (Gmelin, 1788)
The great horned owl rarely misses an opportunity to hunt reptiles and amphibians.
can average nearly as light as .
The first genuine nature conservationists, while campaigning against the "Extermination Being Waged Against the Hawks and Owls", continued to advocate the destruction of great horned owls due to their predatory effect on other wildlife.
* Rocky Mountains great horned owl, '''''Bubo virginianus pinorum''''' (Dickerman & Johnson, 2008)
Unexpectedly, although it is not the longest-winged, the nominate is the heaviest known race as males weigh from , averaging , and females weigh from , averaging ; the prior figures originally from a huge sample around Michigan.
Because fewer of these alternative prey species are available in boreal forest during winter, owls had to emigrate or suffer high mortalities if they stayed.
The kind of posture is well known as a further method of camouflage for other owls, like long-eared owls or great grey owls, especially if humans or other potential mammalian carnivores approach them.
In semi-desert and other arid habitats, kangaroo rats become increasingly important prey, ten species have been reported in the diet but most prominently the Ord's  and Merriam's kangaroo rats (''Dipodomys ordii & merriami''), both being widespread, numerous and relatively diminutive (at .
The Magellanic horned owl was once considered a subspecies of the great horned, but is now almost universally considered a distinct species, as is supported by genetic materials, with the great horned being the paraspecies.
Downslope movements into valleys occupied by ''pallescens'' might occur, but this needs study.
The highest frequency reported was the report of ''Leptodactylus'' frogs in 18% of 85 pellets from Brazil.
v. nacurutu'' is a medium-sized race, smaller than most in North America but not as small as some of the Mexican races.
Body mass ranges from , averaging , in males and from , averaging , in females.
the corvids (14 species) and icterids (14 species) and, secondarily, the kingbirds (''Tyrannus'' ssp.
The underparts of the species are usually light with some brown horizontal barring; the upper parts and upper wings are generally a mottled brown usually bearing heavy, complex darker markings.
Arthur C. Bent also noted the variability in temperaments of great horned owls to their handlers, some generally pleasant, though most are eventually aggressive.
Even in North America, they are rare in landscapes including more than 70% old-growth forest, such as the aspen forest of the Rockies.
Eastern and western screech owls may be most vulnerable since they prefer similar wooded edge habitat.
During courtship in late fall or early winter, the male attracts the attention of his mate by hooting emphatically while leaning over (with the tail folded or cocked) and puffing up his white throat to look like a ball.
The often recognized race ''B.
In a pair of studies from Colorado, the average weight of prey for long-eared owls was ,  for barn owl and  for the great horned owl.
In both sexes, tail length is  and bill length is .
In the Appalachian Mountains, they appear to use old-growth forest but in Arkansas are actually often found near temporary agricultural openings in the midst of large areas of woodland.
During hunting forays, they often fly about  from perch to perch, stopping to survey for food at each, until they sense a prey item below.
West of the Rocky Mountains, the biometric mean prey is typically under , i.e.
In one extraordinary case, 113 brown rat (''Rattus norvegicus'') carcasses were found around a single owl roost, and all of the rats were relatively intact except that their skull had been cleaved open and their brains had been removed.
The Arikara of the Great Plains had mystic owl societies in which initiates were made to adorn facial mask made of the wing and tail feathers of great horned owls.
At the peak of the 10 year hare cycle, snowshoe hares were by far the largest component of both summer and winter diets (77–81% and 90–99%, respectively, in Alberta; 83–86% and 75–98%, respectively, in the Yukon Territory).
Feet pale with dusky mottling.
This is one of the largest-bodied subspecies.
A signature method when dealing with large prey for the great horned owl is to behead the victims before it takes to its nest or eating perch.
Great horned owls seem to be the most long-living owl in North America.
No weights are known to have been published.
This is mid-to-large race, with a wing chord length of , averaging , in males and , averaging , in females.
Most accipitrids will readily mob them, as will falcons.
Adults generally have no natural predators, excepting both North American eagles and other owls of their own species.
Many types of invertebrates are recorded as prey.
The age at which the young leave the nest is variable based on the abundance of food.
''nigrescens'' and the Magellanic horned owl, deserves more study.
The wing chord length is , averaging , in males and , averaging , in females.
Although rare, carrion-feeding has been recorded in great horned owls, especially ones wintering in Canada and other northern areas during harsh weather.
However, ''mesembrinus'' type owls are discontinuous in range, with only paler owls from ''pallescens'' and ''mayensis'' found in the in-between range before the northern ''virginianus'' reappears back up in South Texas.
One instance of an owl taking a bobcat (''Lynx rufus'') as prey was also reportedly observed.
The relationship between great horned owls and other raptorial birds in its range is usually decidedly one-sided.
Where clear-cutting occurs in old-growth areas of the Pacific Northwest, spotted owls have been badly affected by considerable great horned owl predation.
The extent of down gradually diminishes, developing mature-looking plumage by late summer, although many first year birds still have scattered bits of down into autumn.
The extent of predation on other owls depends on the habitat preferences of the other species.
This is not to say that raptors ever comprise a significant portion in any known study of this owl's diet but predation can be seriously detrimental for such prey, as raptors tend to be territorial and sparsely distributed as a rule and thus can be effectively decimated by a small number of losses.
Hunting flights are slow, often quartering low above the ground where prey is likely to occur in open country or open woodland.
Members from most North American families are known as prey, although among smaller types such as chickadees, warblers, sparrows, cardinals, wrens and most tyrant flycatchers only a few species from each have been recorded.
There are individual and regional variations in overall color, with birds from the subarctic showing a washed-out, light-buff color, while those from the Pacific Coast of North America, Central America and much of South America can be a dark brownish color overlaid with blackish blotching.
Darker individuals tend to have a deeper fulvous base to their upper sides.
Statistically, the most significant avian prey seems to be galliforms, of which they are known to have preyed on 23 species, basically consisting of all of the native species found in the United States.
Cases where the quills of porcupines have killed or functionally disabled them have been observed as well.
On average, it is the smallest known subspecies.
More so than diurnal varieties of raptor, fairly significant numbers of owls are hunted, as all species are to some extent nocturnal and thus their corresponding activity can attract the horned owl's unwanted attention.
Now, most tree nests used by great horned owls are those constructed by other animals, often from a height of about  off the ground.
In both sexes, known bill and tarsal lengths are  and .
Males select nesting sites and bring the females' attention to them by flying to them and then stomping on them.
The older name ''wapacuthu'' was occasionally used for this subspecies, but it cannot with certainty be assigned to a recognizable taxon and is thus considered a ''nomen dubium''.
At the lowest point of the hare's cycle, summer diets consisted of only 0–16% snowshoe hare in Alberta and 12.7% in the Yukon.
Brief hovering flight (for about 6–18 seconds) have been described, especially in windy areas.
Its primary diet appears to be rabbits and hares, rats and mice and voles, although it freely hunts any animal it can overtake, primarily other rodents and small mammals, but also larger mid-sized mammals, various birds, reptiles, amphibians and invertebrates.
However, not all prey can be swallowed at once, and owls will also fly with prey to a perch and tear off pieces with their bill.
The facial disc can range from gray to reddish-gray to dark rufous.
In prairies, grasslands and deserts, they can successfully live year around as long as there are rocky canyon, steep gullies and/or wooded coulees with shade-giving trees to provide them shelter and nesting sites.
Occasionally, nestlings and fledglings will fall from the nest too early to escape or to competently defend themselves and have then fallen prey to foxes, bobcat, coyotes, or wild or feral cats.
He often flies up and down on a perch, while approaching the potential mate.
This has been determined from owls who have porcupine quills imbedded in them, sometimes resulting in death.
In Brazil, white-eared opossum (''Didelphis albiventris'') were found in 12% of pellets, but all specimens appeared to be juveniles each weighing about .
The long-eared owl and barn owls are often compared to the great horned owl as these medium-sized species often occur in abutting habitats and often hunt primarily the same vole and mice species, although the alternate prey of the great horned tends to be much larger, including the smaller owls themselves.
* Northern/subarctic great horned owl, '''''Bubo virginianus subarcticus''''' (Hoy, 1852)
Occasionally, great horned owls may be killed by their own prey.
Thus, small bounties were offered in trade for owl bodies.
No published weights are known.
This subspecies may be synonymous with ''saturatus'', although it is distributed far to the east of that race.
Thus lightly populated rural regions can be ideal.
Many warrior-based tribes of Native Americans admired the great horned owl for their “strength, courage and beauty”.
Due to the proclivity of skunk predation, great horned owls nests frequently smell strongly of skunk and occasionally will even stink so powerfully of skunk that they leave the smell at kill sites or on prey remains.
The great horned owl's song is normally a low-pitched but loud ''ho-ho-hoo hoo hoo'' (or also transcribed as ''bu-bubu booh'', ''who-hoo-ho-oo'' or ''who-ho-o-o, whoo-hoo-o-o, whoo'') and can either last for five to four syllables.
In ornithological study, the great horned owl is often compared to the Eurasian eagle-owl (''Bubo bubo''), a closely related species which, despite the latter's notably larger size, occupies the same ecological niche in Eurasia, and the red-tailed hawk (''Buteo jamaicensis''), with which it often shares similar habitat, prey and nesting habits by day and is thus something of a diurnal ecological equivalent.
During their initial dispersal in fall, juvenile owls have a high mortality rate, frequently more than 50%.
Road kills are sometimes opportunistically eaten.
The great horned owl's eyes, just slightly smaller than the eyes of a human being, are large even for an owl and rank proportionately among the largest eyes of all terrestrial vertebrates.
Due to their very broad dietary habits, the great horned owls share their prey with many other predators, including avian, mammalian and reptilian ones.
This is a fairly small-bodied race, in fact including the lightest wild great horned owl adult ever weighed.
Due to their short but broad wings, great horned owls are ideally suited for low speed and maneuverability.
They have been known to predate more than 110 different species of assorted water bird.
One owl's stomach in California included at least 43 Jerusalem crickets (''Stenopelmatus fuscus'').
77% of the ducks in that study were juveniles, the largest duck being a male mallard (''Anas platyrhnychos'') weighing approximately , but nearly all the coots were adults.
Further north in Colorado, in the absence of jackrabbits, the mountain cottontails falls to third place by number (12.9%) behind the northern pocket gopher (36.5%) and prairie vole (24.7%) but still dominates the biomass, making up about half.
In the west of Canada, ''subarcticus'' may hybridize with the dark ''saturatus'' and may do the same with this similarly dark ''heterocnemis'' in the east.
In some big females, the gripping power of the great horned owl may be comparable to much larger raptor species such as the golden eagle.
Mean body weight is  for females and  for males.
Calling seems to peak after rather than before midnight.
:This is the palest form of horned owl, with the ground color essentially whitish with a faint buff tinge above; black underside barring variable from indistinct to pronounced, being most often prominent on the upper chest amongst otherwise pale plumage.
Intergrades with ''pallescens'' in San Diego County, California (see also below).
The status of this form, especially the relationships between the scattered subpopulations and with ssp.
Owls can snatch birds and some arboreal mammals directly from tree branches in a glide as well.
On Protection Island in Washington State, introduced common peafowl (''Pavo cristatus'') are an important prey item.
Errington characterized the predatory pressure exerted on bobwhites by great horned owls as “light but continuous pressure”, which may be considered characteristic of the species' hunting of all galliforms.
Usually coveys of quail are partially protected by spending the night roosting communally in dense thickets but should a hunting owl be able to track down the communal roost, losses can be fairly heavy until the roost relocates.
The fact that many of the nests great horned owls use are constructed by accipitrids may lead to localized conflicts, almost always to the detriment of the hawks rather than the owls.
From both the tropics and the United States, several species of opossum may be taken, down to the size of the tiny dwarf fat-tailed mouse opossum (''Thylamys velutinus'').
By late autumn, first-year birds look similar to adults but with a slightly warmer, reddish tinge, less well developed ear tufts and a smaller white throat patch.
When a peregrine falcon repeatedly attacked a great horned owl near its nest along the Hudson River, it was apparently unable to dispatch the larger raptor despite several powerful strikes.
