When the sailing ships gave way to steamships, they were called ''steamboats''—the same term used on the Mississippi.
Popularized in French-influenced transliteration as ''Gitchigumi'' as in Gordon Lightfoot's 1976 story song, ''The Wreck of the'' Edmund Fitzgerald, or ''Gitchee Gumee'' as in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's 1855 epic poem, ''The Song of Hiawatha'').
Köppen climate classification '''Dfa''' (in southern areas) and '''Dfb''' (in northern parts) with varying influences from air masses from other regions including dry, cold Arctic systems, mild Pacific air masses from the West, and warm, wet tropical systems from the south and the Gulf of Mexico.
Under the U.S. "Water Resources Development Act", diversion of water from the Great Lakes Basin requires the approval of all eight Great Lakes governors through the Great Lakes Commission, which rarely occurs.
The indigenous Ojibwe call it ''gichi gumi'' (from Ojibwe ''gichi'' big, large, great; ''gumi'' water, lake, sea.
New York and Wisconsin's jurisdictions extend into two lakes, and the remaining states into one of the lakes.
However, shifts in shipping to wider ocean-going container ships — which do not fit through the locks on these routes — have limited container shipping on the lakes.
The lakes also moderate seasonal temperatures to some degree, but not with as large an influence as do large oceans; they absorb heat and cool the air in summer, then slowly radiate that heat in autumn.
The iron ore and much of the stone and coal are used in the steel industry.
In August 2007, the Great Lakes Shipwreck Historical Society announced that it had found the wreckage of ''Cyprus'', a  long, century-old ore carrier.
The ruffe, a small percid fish from Eurasia, became the most abundant fish species in Lake Superior's Saint Louis River within five years of its detection in 1986.
Since that time, the eight Great Lakes Governors and the Premiers of Ontario and Quebec have negotiated the Great Lakes-Saint Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources Agreement and the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Compact that would prevent most future diversion proposals and all long-distance ones.
One newspaper reported that the long-term average level has gone down about 20 inches because of dredging and subsequent erosion in the St. Clair River.
The southern half of the Great Lakes is bordered by the Great Lakes Megalopolis.
These storms mainly occur during the night, and the systems sometimes have small embedded tornadoes, but more often straight-line winds accompanied by intense lightning.
Running cut logs down the tributary rivers into the Great Lakes also dislocated sediments.
Dozens of other Areas of Concern have received partial cleanups such as the Rouge River (Michigan) and Waukegan Harbor (Illinois).
There is also some shipping of liquid and containerized cargo but most container ships cannot pass the locks on the Saint Lawrence Seaway because the ships are too wide.
$elevation at:577 text:"577&nbsp;ft (176&nbsp;m)"
*Great Lakes Storm of 1913
This is a result of significant expenditures to date on both infrastructure and technology, and robust regulatory systems that have proven to be, on the whole, quite effective."
The lakes are divided among the jurisdictions of the Canadian province of Ontario and the U.S. states of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York.
The International Joint Commission in 2009 summarized the change: "Since the early 1970s, the level of treatment to reduce pollution from waste water discharges to the Great Lakes has improved considerably.
This temperature buffering produces areas known as "fruit belts", where fruit can be produced that is typically grown much farther south.
''Cyprus'' sank during a Lake Superior storm on October 11, 1907, during its second voyage while hauling iron ore from Superior, Wisconsin, to Buffalo, New York.
bar:Erie from:359 till:569 width:49 color:blue2
The lakes contained in 2009 84% of the surface freshwater of North America; if the water were evenly distributed over the entire continent's land area, it would reach a depth of 1.5 meters (5 feet).
There are no plans to raise her as the site is being treated as a war grave.
Marie, ONSuperior, WIThunder Bay, ON
Though the five lakes reside in separate basins, they form a single, naturally interconnected body of fresh water, within the Great Lakes Basin.
The population of giant freshwater mussels was eliminated as the mussels were harvested for use as buttons by early Great Lakes entrepreneurs.
Officials said they would look into alternative ammunition, modifying the proposed zones and have more public dialogue before proposing a new plan.
There are no plans to raise the ship as it would quickly deteriorate in open air.
Those living on the shore of Lake Superior often refer to all the other lakes as "the lower lakes", because they are farther south.
Land below the glaciers "rebounded" as it was uncovered.
The '''Great Lakes''' (also called the '''Laurentian Great Lakes''',  or the '''Great Lakes of North America''') are a series of interconnected freshwater lakes located primarily in the upper midwest region of North America, on the Canada–United States border, which connect to the Atlantic Ocean through the Saint Lawrence River.
More vessels have been lost in the Whitefish Point area than any other part of Lake Superior.
The greatest concentration of shipwrecks lies near Thunder Bay (Michigan), beneath Lake Huron, near the point where eastbound and westbound shipping lanes converge.
The Great Lakes are an important source of fishing.
Michigan has the longest shoreline of the United States, bordering roughly  of shoreline, followed by Wisconsin (), New York (), and Ohio ().
All measurements at Low Water Datum.
In the first half of the 20th century large luxurious passenger steamers sailed the lakes in opulence.
Both Ontario and Michigan include in their boundaries portions of four of the lakes: Ontario does not border Lake Michigan, and Michigan does not border Lake Ontario.
The total surface is , and the total volume (measured at the low water datum) is .
It was more economical to transport the ingredients for steel to centralized plants rather than try to make steel on the spot.
The first ship to sink in Lake Michigan was ''Le Griffon'', also the first ship to sail the Great Lakes.
id:textoutsidebar value:redorange
The states have removed dams from rivers where necessary.
The retreat of the ice sheet left behind a large amount of meltwater (see Lake Algonquin and Lake Chicago) that filled up the basins that the glaciers had carved, thus creating the Great Lakes as we know them today.
Define $elevation = shift:(0,15) mark:(line,textoutsidebar) textcolor:textoutsidebar
By April 2015 the water level had recovered to 7 inches (17.5&nbsp;cm) more than the "long term monthly average".
The sea lamprey, which has been particularly damaging to the native lake trout population, is another example of a marine invasive species in the Great Lakes.
For instance, Western Michigan has apple and cherry orchards, and vineyards cultivated adjacent to the lake shore as far north as the Grand Traverse Bay and Nottawasaga Bay in central Ontario.
This describes when older sewerage systems, which combine storm water with sewage into single sewers heading to the treatment plant, are temporarily overwhelmed by heavy rainstorms.
Snow belts are found in Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York, United States; and Ontario, Canada.
In the late 1960s, the various state and federal governments began stocking several species of salmonids, including the native lake trout as well as non-native chinook and coho salmon; by the 1980s, alewife populations had dropped drastically.
During settlement, the Great Lakes and its rivers were the only practical means of moving people and freight.
Mercury has been known for health related problems such as birth defects in humans and animals, and the near extinction of eagles in the Great Lakes region.
Discharge of toxic substances has been sharply reduced.
While the lake levels have been preserved, intensive human population growth only began in the region in the 20th century and continues today.
The first of 43 "Great Lakes Areas of Concern" to be formally "de-listed" due to successful cleanup was Ontario's Collingwood Harbour in 1994; Ontario's Severn Sound followed in 2003.
The lakes themselves also have a moderating effect on the climate; they can also increase precipitation totals and produce lake effect snowfall.
Hundreds of ships have met their end on the lakes.
With these two canals an all-inland water route was provided between New York City and New Orleans.
Lake Michigan is the only one of the Great Lakes that is located entirely within the United States; the others form a water boundary between the United States and Canada.
By the mid-1980s, most jurisdictions bordering the Great Lakes had controlled phosphate detergents, resulting in sharp reductions in the frequency and extent of the blooms.
$maxdepth at:359 text:"210&nbsp;ft (64&nbsp;m)"
It is somewhat more detailed and protective, though its legal strength has not yet been tested in court.
The immigration routes still have an effect today.
Define $maxdepth = shift:(0,-11) mark:(line,textoutsidebar) textcolor:textoutsidebar
According to the bi-national (U.S. and Canadian) resource book, ''The Great Lakes: An Environmental Atlas and Resource Book'': "The largest Great Lakes fish harvests were recorded in 1889 and 1899 at some  147 million pounds."
Following a small uproar, the Senate voted to revoke the designation on 24 March (although New York and Vermont universities would continue to receive funds to monitor and study the lake).
Doty'' was found in Lake Michigan by an exploration diving team led by dive boat Captain Jitka Hanakova from her boat the Molly V. The ship sank in October 1898, probably attempting to rescue a small schooner, the Olive Jeanette, during a terrible storm.
International treaties regulate large diversions.
id:textinbar value:yelloworange
The Great Lakes have been observed to help intensify storms, such as Hurricane Hazel in 1954, and the 2011 Goderich, Ontario tornado, which moved onshore as a tornadic waterspout.
Until 1970, mercury was not listed as a harmful chemical, according to the United States Federal Water Quality Administration.
The large size of the Great Lakes increases the risk of water travel; storms and reefs are common threats.
When a second fault line, the Saint Lawrence rift, formed approximately 570&nbsp;million years ago, the basis for Lakes Ontario and Erie were created, along with what would become the Saint Lawrence River.
Five years after first being observed in the St. Clair River, the round goby can now be found in all of the Great Lakes.
Commercial tug-and-barge traffic on these waterways is heavy.
Barges from middle North America were able to reach the Atlantic Ocean from the Great Lakes when the Welland canal opened in 1824 and the later Erie Canal opened in 1825.
Lake Champlain briefly became the sixth Great Lake of the United States on 6 March 1998, when President Clinton signed Senate Bill 927.
$maxdepth at:-348 text:"925&nbsp;ft (282&nbsp;m)"
Possible schemes for bottled water plants and diversion to dry regions of the continent raise concerns.
By the mid-1950s, the lake trout populations of Lakes Michigan and Huron were reduced, with the lamprey deemed largely to blame.
By 1801, the New York Legislature found it necessary to pass regulations curtailing obstructions to the natural migrations of Atlantic salmon from Lake Erie into their spawning channels.
The total surface area of the lakes is approximately —nearly the same size as the United Kingdom, and larger than the U.S. states of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, and New Hampshire combined.
Since the 19th century an estimated 160 new species have found their way into the Great Lakes ecosystem; many have become invasive; the overseas ship ballast and ship hull parasitism are causing severe economic and ecological impacts.
Both served as training ships to qualify naval aviators in carrier landing and takeoff.
The Wisconsin Fisheries Commission noted a reduction of roughly 25% in general fish harvests by 1875.
Consisting of Lakes Superior, Michigan, Huron (or Michigan–Huron), Erie, and Ontario, they form the largest group of freshwater lakes on Earth, containing 21% of the world's surface fresh water by volume.
After railroads and surface roads developed, the freight and passenger businesses dwindled and, except for ferries and a few foreign cruise ships, has now vanished.
Other protective legislation was passed, as well, but enforcement remained difficult.
Vessels sailing north on Lake Michigan are considered "upbound" even though they are sailing toward its effluent current.
ImageSize = width:595 height:250
Lakes Huron and Michigan are sometimes considered a single lake, called Lake Michigan–Huron, because they are one hydrological body of water connected by the Straits of Mackinac.
Invasive species, particularly zebra and quagga mussels, may be at least partially responsible for the collapse of the deepwater demersal fish community in Lake Huron, as well as drastic unprecedented changes in the zooplankton community of the lake.
$avgdepth at:298 shift:(0,2) text:"279&nbsp;ft (85&nbsp;m)"
During World War II, the risk of submarine attacks against coastal training facilities motivated the United States Navy to operate two aircraft carriers on the Great Lakes,  and .
Studies conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency have shown that when the mercury comes in contact with many of the bacteria and compounds in the fresh water, it forms the compound methyl mercury, which has a much greater impact on human health than elemental mercury due to a higher propensity for absorption.
Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that the economic impact of the zebra mussel could be about $5&nbsp;billion over the next decade.
As of 2007, four car ferry services cross the Great Lakes, two on Lake Michigan: a steamer from Ludington, Michigan, to Manitowoc, Wisconsin, and a high speed catamaran from Milwaukee to Muskegon, Michigan, one on Lake Erie: a boat from Kingsville, Ontario, or Leamington, Ontario, to Pelee Island, Ontario, then onto Sandusky, Ohio, and one on Lake Huron: the M.S.
On December 18, 2006, the Coast Guard announced its decision to withdraw the entire proposal.
$maxdepth at:-173 text:"750&nbsp;ft (229&nbsp;m)"
Both of these islands are large enough to contain multiple lakes themselves — for instance, Manitoulin Island's Lake Manitou is the world's largest lake located on a freshwater island.
The lakes drain a large watershed via many rivers, and are studded with approximately 35,000 islands.
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical
Chi-Cheemaun  runs between Tobermory and South Baymouth, Manitoulin Island, operated by the Owen Sound Transportation Company.
One of the more common sights on the lakes has been since about 1950 the 1,000‑by‑105-foot (305-by-32-meter),  self-unloader.
The Great Lakes are also connected by canal to the Gulf of Mexico by way of the Illinois River (from the Chicago River) and the Mississippi River.
Moreover, between 1879 and 1899, reported whitefish harvests declined from some 24.3 million pounds (11 million&nbsp;kg) to just over 9 million pounds (4 million&nbsp;kg).
Today, the Great Lakes fleet is much smaller in numbers than it once was because of the increased use of overland freight, and a few larger ships replacing many small ones.
This valuable resource is collectively administered by the state and provincial governments adjacent to the lakes, who have agreed to the Great Lakes Compact to regulate water supply and use.
In the early 19th century, the government of Upper Canada found it necessary to introduce similar legislation prohibiting the use of weirs and nets at the mouths of Lake Ontario's tributaries.
According to the Inland Seas Education Association, on average a new species enters the Great Lakes every eight months.
In June 2008, deep sea divers in Lake Ontario found the wreck of the 1780 Royal Navy warship  in what has been described as an "archaeological miracle".
Although the lakes contain a large percentage of the world's fresh water, the Great Lakes supply only a small portion of U.S. drinking water on a national basis.
at:-40 text:"average~depth"
Reports about this issue on the U.S. side highlight five large municipal systems (those of Detroit, Cleveland, Buffalo, Milwaukee and Gary) as being the largest current periodic sources of untreated discharges into the Great Lakes.
It has been estimated that the foundational geology that created the conditions shaping the present day upper Great Lakes was laid from 1.1 to 1.2 billion years ago, when two previously fused tectonic plates split apart and created the Midcontinent Rift, which crossed the Great Lakes Tectonic Zone.
*Index: Shipwrecks in the Great Lakes
Its range, which has expanded to Lake Huron, poses a significant threat to the lower lake fishery.
In the 19th century and early 20th centuries, iron and other ores such as copper were shipped south on (downbound ships), and supplies, food, and coal were shipped north (upbound).
Several ferries currently operate on the Great Lakes to carry passengers to various islands, including Isle Royale, Drummond Island, Pelee Island, Mackinac Island, Beaver Island, Bois Blanc Island (Ontario), Bois Blanc Island (Michigan), Kelleys Island, South Bass Island, North Manitou Island, South Manitou Island, Harsens Island, Manitoulin Island, and the Toronto Islands.
Its wreck may have been found in 2004, but a wreck subsequently discovered in a different location was also claimed in 2014 to be ''Le Griffon''.
In August 2006, the plan was published in the Federal Register.
Rather large severe thunderstorms covering wide areas are well known in the Great Lakes during mid-summer; these Mesoscale convective complexs or MCCs can cause damage to wide swaths of forest and shatter glass in city buildings.
Annually, only about 1% is "new" water originating from rivers, precipitation, and groundwater springs that drain into the lakes.
Some of these forests are second or third growth (i.e.
These firing ranges would be open to the public when not in use.
Overfishing has been cited as a possible reason for a decrease in population of various whitefish, important because of their culinary desirability and, hence, economic consequence.
This is most noticeable along Lake Superior's shores.
The ships also have a distinctive design (see Lake freighter).
In 2013, news of a garbage patch of plastic pollution in the lakes was released.
Lake Michigan–Huron hit all-time record low levels in 2013; according to the US Army Corps of Engineers, the previous record low had been set in 1964.
Logging, urbanization, and agriculture uses have changed that relationship.
Many other water sports are practiced on the lakes such as yachting, sea kayaking, diving, kitesurfing, powerboating, and lake surfing.
Historically, evaporation has been balanced by drainage, making the level of the lakes constant.
Pleasure boats can also enter or exit the Great Lakes by way of the Erie Canal and Hudson River in New York.
Define $avgdepth = mark:(line,textinbar) textcolor:textinbar
Even late in winter, the lakes often have no icepack in the middle.
Sport fishing, commercial fishing, and Native American fishing represent a U.S.$4 billion a year industry with salmon, whitefish, smelt, lake trout, bass and walleye being major catches.
: English translation of the French term ''lac supérieur'' (upper lake), referring to its position north of Lake Huron.
The Saint Lawrence Seaway and Great Lakes Waterway make the Great Lakes accessible to ocean-going vessels.
Tourism and recreation are major industries on the Great Lakes.
they have been logged before, changing their composition).
*Great Storms of the North American Great Lakes
Ships that primarily trade on the lakes are known as ''lakers''.
The domestic bulk freight developed because of the nearby mines.
On December 13, 2005, the Governors and Premiers signed these two agreements, the first of which is between all ten jurisdictions.
This designation, however, is not universal.
The total amount of shipping on the lakes has been on a downward trend for several years.
Caught in a 1679 storm while trading furs between Green Bay and Michilimacinac, it was lost with all hands aboard.
Most Great Lakes trade is of bulk material, and bulk freighters of Seawaymax-size or less can move throughout the entire lakes and out to the Atlantic.
Since general freight these days is transported by railroads and trucks, domestic ships mostly move bulk cargoes, such as iron ore, coal and limestone for the steel industry.
The Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve serves as an underwater museum to protect the many shipwrecks in this area.
$maxdepth at:-559 text:"802&nbsp;ft (244&nbsp;m)"
An international ferry across Lake Ontario Rochester, New York, to Toronto ran during 2004 and 2005, but is no longer in operation.
The prevailing winds from the west pick up the air and moisture from the lake surface, which is slightly warmer in relation to the cold surface winds above.
The straits are  wide and  deep; the water levels – currently at  – rise and fall together, and the flow between Michigan and Huron frequently reverses direction.
The Lake Superior shipwreck coast from Grand Marais, Michigan, to Whitefish Point became known as the "Graveyard of the Great Lakes".
id:blue3 value:rgb(0.2,0.2,0.85)
generating jobs for more than 2,000 workers, and hauling 14 million pounds per year.
This corresponds to thinking of Lakes Erie and Ontario as "down south" and the others as "up north".
From 1844 through 1857, palace steamers carried passengers and cargo around the Great Lakes.
In addition, the mussels may be a nuisance to industries by clogging pipes.
This is a laker with a conveyor belt system that can unload itself by swinging a crane over the side.
Grain exports are also a major cargo on the lakes.
Concerns by the mid-19th century included obstructions in the rivers which prevented salmon and lake sturgeon from reaching their spawning grounds.
In 1998, the Canadian company Nova Group won approval from the Province of Ontario to withdraw  of Lake Superior water annually to ship by tanker to Asian countries.
The Great Lakes are used to supply drinking water to tens of millions of people in bordering areas.
AlignBars = justify
id:blue2 value:rgb(0.1,0.1,0.8)
$elevation at:600 text:"600&nbsp;ft (183&nbsp;m)"
Lake Superior is the second largest lake in the world by area, and Lake Michigan is the largest lake that is entirely within one country.
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-1000
In the early 21st century, Lake Superior's shores are 91% forested, Lake Huron 68%, Lake Ontario 49%, Lake Michigan 41%, and Lake Erie, where logging and urbanization has been most extensive, 21%.
id:blue4 value:rgb(0.3,0.3,0.9)
The Great Lakes coast measures approximately ; however, the length of a coastline is impossible to measure exactly and is not a well-defined measure (see Coastline paradox).
This is enough water to cover the 48 contiguous U.S. states to a uniform depth of .
Introductions into the Great Lakes include the zebra mussel, which was first discovered in 1988, and quagga mussel in 1989.
Throughout history, fish populations were the early indicator of the condition of the Lakes, and have remained one of the key indicators even in the current era of sophisticated analyses and measuring instruments.
While enormous public investments such as the Deep Tunnel projects in Chicago and Milwaukee have greatly reduced the frequency and volume of these events, they have not been eliminated.
Implementation of secondary treatment of municipal sewage by major cities greatly reduced the routine discharge of untreated sewage during the 1970s and 1980s.
This is similar to the effect of warmer air dropping snow as it passes over mountain ranges.
This form of mercury is not detrimental to a majority of fish types, but is very detrimental to people and other wildlife animals who consume the fish.
The organisms living on the bottom of shallow waters are similar to those found in smaller lakes.
The Great Lakes Restoration Initiative, described as "the largest investment in the Great Lakes in two decades," was funded at $475 million in the U.S. federal government's Fiscal Year 2011 budget, and $300 million in the Fiscal Year 2012 budget.
at:243 text:"surface~elevation"
In the early years of the 21st century, water levels in the Great Lakes were a concern.
Related to the lake effect is the regular occurrence of fog over medium-sized areas, particularly along the shorelines of the lakes.
Several Native American tribes inhabited the region since at least 1000 BC, after the end of the Wisconsin glaciation.
The first U.S. Clean Water Act, passed by a Congressional override after being vetoed by US President Richard Nixon in 1972, was a key piece of legislation, along with the bi-national Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement signed by Canada and the U.S. A variety of steps taken to process industrial and municipal pollution discharges into the system greatly improved water quality by the 1980s, and Lake Erie in particular is significantly cleaner.
The Great Lakes contained 21% of the world's surface fresh water around the year 2000: , or 6.0×1015 U.S.&nbsp;gallons (2.3×1016 liters).
Some icebreakers ply the lakes, keeping the shipping lanes open through other periods of ice on the lakes.
Concerns over diversion of Lake water are of concern to both Americans and Canadians.
The agreements strengthen protection against abusive water withdrawal practices within the Great Lakes basin.
The largest among them is Manitoulin Island in Lake Huron, the largest island in any inland body of water in the world.
PlotArea = width:525 height:200 left:50 bottom:15
