Hunt's account greatly details how the seal was chosen, containing sketches of other suggestions for a great seal which were made, such as Franklin's suggested motto "Rebellion to tyrants is obedience to God", information on the illegal seal, iterations and changes that have been made to the seal, and it also includes detailed descriptions of the symbology of the great seal (such as that provided by Charles Thomson).
The members of the consulting group were somewhat disparaging of the design of even the obverse, but especially critical of the reverse, and suggested not making it at all.
On August 4, 1945, a delegation from the Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union presented a carved wooden plaque of the Great Seal to U.S.
The press in use today was made in 1903 by R. Hoe & Co's chief cabinetmaker Frederick S. Betchley in conjunction with the 1904 die, with the cabinet being made of mahogany.
Dwight eventually agreed and did not order the die, though he said it was "not improper" that one eventually be made.
On June 13, 1782, the Congress turned to its Secretary Charles Thomson, and provided all material submitted by the first three committees.
Franklin owned a 1702 emblem book, which included an eagle with olive branch and arrows near its talons, which may have been a source for Thomson.
John Peter Van Ness Throop of Washington D.C. engraved a new die in 1841, which is also sometimes known as the "illegal seal" because only six arrows are shown rather than the required thirteen.
The project apparently was aided by William Barton, as the official law was printed along with supplemental notes from Barton.
The same note also used an Eye of Providence, taken from the first committee's design.
The seal, and apparently its press, was saved when Washington, D.C. was burned in 1814 though no one knows by whom.
Surrounding the main elements was the inscription "Seal of the United States of America MDCCLXXVI".
It is nearly identical to previous versions, which in turn were based on Lossing's 1856 version.
The eagle itself was unmistakably a bald eagle, without a crest.
Although not specified by law, the olive branch is usually depicted with 13 leaves and 13 olives, again representing the 13 original states.
When the copyright on the pamphlet expired, Hunt expounded upon the information in more detail.
From the eagle's perspective, it holds a bundle of 13 arrows in its left talon, (referring to the 13 original states), and an olive branch in its right talon, together symbolizing that the United States has "a strong desire for peace, but will always be ready for war."
The paper was placed between the die and counterdie, resulting in a sharper impression in the paper than from one die alone.
The shield has a gold chain border with a badge at the bottom.
The workmanship on the die was relatively poor, with no impression being very clear, and it is considered the poorest of all Great Seal dies.
When envelopes containing letters need to be sealed, the wafer is imprinted first and then glued to the sealed envelope.
Also, two small heraldic errors which had persisted on all previous seal dies were fixed: the rays of the glory were drawn with dots to indicate the tincture gold, and the background of the stars was drawn with horizontal lines to indicate azure.
This first die was used until 1841, and is now on display in the National Archives in Washington, D.C.
It hung in the ambassador's Moscow residential study for seven years, until it was exposed in 1952 during the tenure of Ambassador George F. Kennan.
The die was engraved by Max Zietler of the Philadelphia firm of Baily Banks & Biddle in 1903 (and is thus sometimes called the 1903 die), but final delivery was delayed until January 1904 due to issues with the press.
No drawing made by the engraver has ever been found, and it is not known if Thomson provided any.
It is the same size as the first die, and is made of bronze.
The first committee consisted of Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and John Adams.
It is officially used on documents such as United States passports, military insignia, embassy placards, and various flags.
There was no die made of the reverse side of the seal (and in fact, one has never been made).
The shield had six sections, each representing "the Countries from which these States have been peopled" (England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, and Holland), surrounded by the initials of all thirteen states.
File:American Silver Eagle, reverse.jpg|American Silver Eagle
The most notable differences were slightly larger stars and lettering.
For the reverse, Franklin's design of Moses parting the Red Sea was used.
The motto alluded to the magazine being a collection of articles obtained from other newspapers, and was used in most of its editions until 1833.
In 1866, the first counterdie was made, which is the same design in opposite relief.
Shortly after the first die, the Congress of the Confederation ordered a smaller seal for the use of the President of the Congress.
Lossing's reverse has heavily influenced all future renditions, including today's official version.
A brief and official explanation of the symbolism, was prepared in the form of a historical sketch (or pamphlet) of the seal of the United States, entitled, ''The Seal of the United States: How it was Developed and Adopte''d.
In honor of the fact that there were originally thirteen States in the Union, the inclusion of items consisting of this number is a common motif in the seal.
Barton had at first specified "on the Summit of it a Palm Tree, proper," with the explanation that "The Palm Tree, when burnt down to the very Root, naturally rises fairer than ever," but later crossed it out and replaced it with the Eye of Providence, taken from the first committee's design.
The crest was a radiant constellation of thirteen stars.
Under the arms, there was also a pole with a liberty cap and a balance of justice.
Motto, "Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God."
On September 15, 1789, the United States Congress ordered "that the seal heretofore used by the United States in Congress assembled, shall be, and hereby is declared to be, the seal of the United States."
There have been several presses used since the seal was introduced, but none of the mechanisms used from 1782 through 1904 have survived.
Dupré added a UNITED STATES OF AMERICA legend around the sides, and a small rosette of leaves in the exergue below the eagle.
Of the four men whose ideas were adopted, neither Charles Thomson, Pierre Du Simitière nor William Barton were Masons and, while Francis Hopkinson has been alleged to have had Masonic connections, there is no firm evidence to support the claim.
Even before the mint, the 1787 Brasher Doubloon had a depiction of the arms on one side.
From 1945 to 1955, the Great Seal changed quarters almost once a year.
After two more years, Congress formed a third committee on May 4, 1782, this time consisting of John Rutledge, Arthur Middleton, and Elias Boudinot.
It is a very similar design to the first Great Seal die and obviously copied from it, even including a border of acanthus leaves.
Holding the document with one hand, the weighted arm of the press is pulled with the other, driving the die down onto the wafer, impressing the seal in relief.
The clouds are in a full circle, though, instead of an arc, and the rays extend beyond them in all directions.
Among them was a basic design for any gold or silver coins; the obverse was required to have an "impression emblematic of liberty", with the reverse having a "figure or representation of an eagle".
This is evident even in the different versions of the seal die.
The shield of the Great Seal has seven white stripes and six red ones – essentially, a white background with six red stripes.
There was some discussion among State Department officials whether to redo the design again, but given the thought that had gone into the 1885 version, it was decided to recreate that design.
The motto, Bella vel Paci."
To this day, there has never been an official die made of the reverse.
The 13 arrows were restored, in accordance with the original law, and the olive branch was depicted with 13 leaves and 13 olives.
In 1790 it was decided to award diplomatic medals to foreign envoys at the end of their service, as a less-extravagant version of the European custom to give diplomats expensive gifts upon their departure.
Hopkinson's first design had a shield with thirteen diagonal red and white stripes, supported on one side by a figure bearing an olive branch and representing peace, and on the other an Indian warrior holding a bow and arrow, and holding a quiver.
This was the first time a design for the reverse had been officially issued by the U.S. government.
On July 24, 1789, President Washington asked Thomson to deliver the seal to the Department of Foreign Affairs in the person of Roger Alden, who kept it until the Department of State was created.
There is no fruit on the olive branch, and the engraver added a border of acanthus leaves.
The document is then placed between the die and counterdie, with the wafer lined up between them.
In August 1776, Du Simitière showed his design, which was more along conventional heraldic lines.
This seal's use apparently did not pass over to the new government in 1789.
Second, unlike the American flag, the outermost stripes are white, not red; so as not to violate the heraldic rule of tincture.
In the July 1856 ''Harper's New Monthly Magazine'', historian Benson John Lossing wrote an article on the Great Seal.
These claims, however, misstate the facts.
Barton then came up with another design, which the committee submitted back to Congress on May 9, 1782, just five days after being formed.
The carpet was 22 by 40 feet, and was made by William Peter Sprague, an Englishman from Axminster (probably trained under Thomas Whitty) who had set up a factory in Philadelphia.
The use of counterdies continues to this day.
In his second proposal, the Indian warrior was replaced by a soldier holding a sword, and the motto was shortened to ''Bello vel paci'', meaning "For war or for peace".
Although the reverse side of the seal was designed for this purpose, a die was still not made but rather the obverse was impressed on one side only using the regular die.
For the reverse, Dupré apparently followed one of Jefferson's suggestions, depicting a scene of international commerce portrayed as Mercury (the god of diplomacy) in conference with the genius of America (shown as an Indian chief, similar to some early American copper coins).
A more technically proper blazon would have been ''argent, six pallets gules...'' (six red stripes on a white field), but the phrase used was chosen to preserve the reference to the 13 original states.
The current die is the seventh, and was made in 1986.
However, this did not conform to the European tradition of using much larger seals for treaties.
IN JUNE 1782 THE UNITED STATES CONGRESS APPROVED A DESIGN WHICH WAS MANUFACTURED IN SEPTEMBER OF THAT YEAR.
between the design being accepted and its first use), although the exact date is not known.
Where the top of the pyramid should be, the Eye of Providence watches over it.
Thomas Jefferson (then the Secretary of State) instructed the U.S. chargé d'affaires in Paris (William Short) to contract with a local engraver to make the medals, since the first was to go to the Marquis de la Luzerne, the former French minister.
The current rendering of the reverse was made by Teagle & Little of Norfolk, Virginia, in 1972.
For three and a half years no further action was taken, during which time the Continental Congress was forced out of Philadelphia before returning in 1778.
It was cut sometime between June and September, 1782 (i.e.
On March 25, 1780, a second committee to design a great seal was formed, which consisted of James Lovell, John Morin Scott, and William Churchill Houston.
They referred the matter back to the committee, which did no further work on the matter.
In 1955, the seal was put on public display for the first time in a central location in the Department's main building.
These dies eventually wear down, requiring replacements to be made.
Adams chose a painting known as the "Judgment of Hercules" where the young Hercules must choose to travel either on the flowery path of self-indulgence or the rugged, more difficult, uphill path of duty to others and honor to himself.
It is used approximately 2,000 to 3,000 times a year.
(see Olive Branch Petition).
Similar to other nations, the United States needed an official symbol of sovereignty to formalize and seal (or sign) international treaties and transactions.
The eagle is a great deal more robust, and clutches the olive branch and arrows from behind.
2,000 TO 3,000 TIMES A YEAR THE SEAL IS USED ON TREATIES AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS; PROCLAMATIONS; AND COMMISSIONS OF AMBASSADORS, FOREIGN SERVICE OFFICERS, AND ALL OTHER CIVIL OFFICERS APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT.
Like the first committee, they sought the help of someone more experienced in heraldry, this time Francis Hopkinson, who did most of the work.
Once again, Congress did not find the result acceptable.
Short chose Augustin Dupré, a leading engraver of the time, who completed the medals in 1792.
The central design was the U.S. coat of arms, complete with the constellation of 13 stars, surrounded by the linked shields of all thirteen states.
According to Totten, two proofs were made in time for the June 20, 1882, centennial date with general circulation following in October 1882.
To illustrate the article, along with copies of Hopkinson's and Barton's original drawings and his own interpretations of the first committee's designs, he also included an apparently original version of the reverse.
St. Paul's Chapel in New York City has a large oil painting of the national coat of arms, believed installed sometime in 1786.
IN ADDITION WE SEE THE SEAL DESIGN EVERY DAY ON THE BACK OF THE ONE DOLLAR BILL.
Furthermore, contrary to the claims of these conspiracy theories, the Great Seal was not created by Freemasons.
File:GreatSealWaferImprinted.jpg|The imprinted seal
At the top is an eagle and on the pillar in the shield is a "Phoenix in Flames".
There were no stars in the chief (the area at the top of the shield), as is sometimes seen, as there are none specified in the blazon and thus including them would violate the rules of heraldry.
The supporter of the shield is a bald eagle with its wings outstretched (or "displayed," in heraldic terms).
Both Hunt and the authors of ''Eagle and the Shield'' speculate it was meant to be used by either the President of the Congress or later by the President of the United States, but there is no other evidence to support this.
As the designers recognized, this is a technically incorrect blazon under traditional English heraldic rules, since in English practice a vertically striped shield would be described as "paly", not "paleways", and it could not be striped of an uneven number.
The motto was ''Bello vel pace paratus'', meaning "prepared in war or in peace".
These included Justin Winsor, a historical scholar, Charles Eliot Norton, a Harvard professor, William H. Whitmore, author of ''Elements of Heraldry'', John Denison Chaplin, Jr., an expert on engraving and associate editor of ''American Cyclopædia'', the sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens, and even the botanist Asa Gray to help with the olive branch.
He also added fruits to the olive branch, changed the shape of the shield, and depicted the crest differently (though using the same arrangement of six-pointed stars).
Congress was however not impressed, and on the same day ordered that the report "lie on the table", ending the work of the committee.
There was no indication that it could actually be used in a seal press, and a search of government documents showed no use of the seal anywhere.
It is marked with the contracted completion date of June 15, 1903, but delays and reworking pushed final delivery into early 1904.
Several skippets were made at a time, which the State Department used as needed.
The clouds are in an inverted arc, much like the official die, but the rays of the glory extend down beyond the clouds and in back of the eagle.
In a letter accompanying their designs, Tiffany gave their reasonings behind various elements.
Also by custom, since 1885 there are thirteen leaves and thirteen olives on the olive branch.
While variants turn up in other places (for example a poem often ascribed to Virgil called ''Moretum'' contains the phrase ''E Pluribus Unus''), this is the oldest known use of the exact phrase.
The date in Roman numerals is 1776."
Two mottos appear: ''Annuit cœptis'' signifies that Providence has "approved of (our) undertakings."
File:GreatSealCounterdie.jpg|The wafer is positioned over the counterdie
Rays from a Pillar of Fire in the Clouds reaching to Moses, to express that he acts by Command of the Deity."
While using a depiction of the national arms was not necessary, various different arms designs were often used until the early 1900s, and still sometimes appear today on commemorative coins.
While they were three of the five primary authors of the Declaration of Independence, they had little experience in heraldry and sought the help of Pierre Eugene du Simitiere, an artist living in Philadelphia who would later also design the state seals of Delaware and New Jersey and start a museum of the Revolutionary War.
On April 28, 1786, the Congress authorized creation of Indian Peace Medals with the coat of arms (obverse of the Great Seal) on one side, and various designs on the other.
Dupré created an elegant design, especially interesting for the position of the wings, which are more horizontal ("extended" in heraldic terms) than most other emblazonments.
Their existence was eventually forgotten until the 1870s, when references to the medals in Jefferson's papers were connected to the discovery of Dupré's lead working model.
The medals were typically oval and made of silver, and were fairly large.
For the reverse, Barber directly copied Trenchard's 1786 design.
This depiction more resembles the Egyptian pyramids, and changed the Eye of Providence to a left eye.
European powers had traditionally given "peace medals" to Native American Indians in an attempt to curry favor, and the newly created United States followed suit.
The Eye of Providence was, on the other hand, a fairly common Christian motif throughout the Middle Ages and Renaissance, and was commonly used as such in Europe as well as America throughout the 18th century.
He also considered adding flowers to the olive branch, but decided against it, as "the unspecified number of flowers would be assumed to mean something when it would not".
Hopkinson also designed a seal for the Admiralty (Navy), which incorporated a chevron consisting of seven red stripes and six white ones.
As a coat of arms, the design has official colors; the physical Great Seal itself, as affixed to paper, is monochrome.
The origins and purpose of this die remain unknown.
Today's Seal of the President of the United States, which developed by custom over a long period before being defined in law, is a more full-featured version of the Great Seal.
The seal was once required on presidential proclamations, and on some now-obsolete documents such as exequaturs and Mediterranean passports.
For the reverse, Thomson essentially kept Barton's design, but re-added the triangle around the Eye of Providence and changed the mottos to ''Annuit Cœptis'' and ''Novus Ordo Seclorum''.
As with the first design, several elements were eventually used in the final seal; the thirteen stripes on the shield with their colors, the constellation of stars surrounded by clouds, the olive branch, and the arrows (from Hopkinson's first proposal).
The motto was taken in turn from ''Gentleman's Journal'', a similar magazine which ran briefly from 1692 to 1694.
According to Henry A. Wallace (then the Secretary of Agriculture in President Franklin D. Roosevelt's cabinet), in 1934 he saw a 1909 pamphlet on the Great Seal by Gaillard Hunt.
Trenchard's obverse featured randomly placed stars, like Thomson's drawing, and had the rays of the glory extending beyond the clouds upward, with the clouds themselves being in an arc.
More recent research has not been able to verify this claim, with no record of this seal being found.
After only 17 years, the seal was no longer making a good impression (probably due to a worn counterdie).
The 1782 resolution adopting the seal blazons the image on the reverse as "A pyramid unfinished.
On July 1, 1902, Congress passed an act to appropriate $1250 to have the seal recut.
The pyramid is conventionally shown as consisting of 13 layers to refer to the 13 original states.
Barton drew a design very quickly, using a rooster on the crest, but it was much too complex.
While the Eye of Providence is today a common Masonic motif, this was not the case during the 1770s and 1780s (the decades when the Great Seal was being designed and approved).
Other changes include a more vigorous and uncrested eagle, the removal of the acanthus leaves, a general crowding of the design upward, a different shape to the shield, and fruit on the olive branch (four olives).
State currency may have provided further inspiration; a 1775 South Carolina bill showed a bundle of 13 arrows and a 1775 Maryland note depicted a hand with an olive branch of 13 leaves.
Some had suggested allowing the rays of the sun to extend through the clouds, as appears to be specified in the original law and sometimes seen in other versions, but Whitehouse rejected that idea and kept with the traditional die representation.
The skippets themselves also were engraved with the seal design.
When the U.S. government moved back to Philadelphia in 1790, the city, in an attempt to convince the federal government not to move to Washington, was determined to provide luxurious accommodations at Congress Hall, the recently constructed building where Congress was to meet.
The enclosure remains locked at all times, even during the sealing of a document.
The identity of the engraver is also not known; it may have been Robert Scot but Thomson may also have found a private engraver on his own.
First, it has no stars on the blue chief (though other arms based on it do: the chief of the arms of the United States Senate may show 13 or 50, and the shield of the 9/11 Commission has, sometimes, 50 mullets on the chief).
The die was first used on January 26, 1904, and was used for 26 years.
Their final blazon, printed in Congress journals on May 17, was: "The Shield charged on the Field Azure with 13 diagonal stripes alternate rouge and argent.
The pyramid had come from another Continental currency note designed in 1778 by Hopkinson, this time the $50 note, which had a nearly identical pyramid and the motto ''Perennis''.
This work was largely based on a two-volume work written in 1897 by Charles A. L. Totten titled ''Our Inheritance in the Great Seal of Manasseh, the United States of America: It's History and Heraldry; and It's Signification unto the 'Great People' thus Sealed.''
Barton also wrote a more properly heraldic blazon.
It was first used by Thomson on September 16, 1782, to verify signatures on a document which authorized George Washington to negotiate an exchange of prisoners.
When Hopkinson designed these flags, he was running the Navy as chairman of the Continental Navy Board.
By early 1881 the State Department started responding to criticism of the seal, resulting first in an 1882 centennial commemorative medal, and then with Secretary of State Frederick Frelinghuysen asking for funds to create a new design and dies of both the obverse and reverse on January 11, 1884, after getting estimates of the cost.
Only two medals (both made of gold) were given before the practice was terminated, one posthumously to de la Luzerne and the other to his successor Count de Moustier.
The 1782 resolution of Congress adopting the arms, still in force, legally blazoned the shield as "Paleways of 13 pieces, argent and gules; a chief, azure."
For the obverse, Barber primarily used Trenchard's 1786 ''Columbian Magazine'' version, but replaced the eagle with the superior one from Dupré's 1792 Diplomatic Medal (which had been rediscovered a few years before).
The arrows also mirror those in the arms of the Dutch Republic, the only country in Europe with a representative government at the time, which depicted a lion holding seven arrows representing their seven provinces.
File:25 центов Барбера 1898 года (реверс).png|1898 Barber quarter
The blazon does not specify the arrangement of the stars (which were randomly placed in Thomson's sketch) nor the number of points; the engraver chose six-pointed stars (typical of English heraldry), and arranged them in a larger six-pointed star.
Thomson took elements from all three previous committees, coming up with a new design which provided the basis for the final seal.
The shield had thirteen stripes, this time in a chevron pattern, and the eagle's claws held an olive branch and a bundle of thirteen arrows.
The pamphlet included a full-color copy of the reverse of the Great Seal, which Wallace had never seen.
According to David Barrett, a Masonic researcher, the Eye seems to have been used only sporadically by the Masons in those decades, and was not adopted as a common Masonic symbol until 1797, several years after the Great Seal of the United States had already been designed.
The Coinage Act of 1792 established the U.S. Mint and created the U.S. system of currency, and most of its rules were followed for many years.
For the reverse, Barton used a pyramid of thirteen steps, with the radiant Eye of Providence overhead, and used the mottos ''Deo Favente'' ("With God favoring") and ''Perennis'' (Everlasting).
Thomson sent his designs back to Barton, who made some final alterations.
Over its head there appears a "glory" with 13 mullets (stars) on a blue field.
The first die depicts a relatively crude crested eagle, thin-legged and somewhat awkward.
The Seal of the President of the United States is directly based on the Great Seal, and its elements are used in numerous government agency and state seals.
The five-pointed stars were arranged in a six-pointed star pattern (like the future 1841 die).
The obverse of the great seal is used as the national '''coat of arms of the United States'''.
The first bill to contain both sides of the seal was the series 1935 $1 silver certificate.
This remains the official definition of the Great Seal today.
Decades later, in 1936, Dorsett wrote again regarding his die, and this time it was investigated more thoroughly.
The quality of the 1885 design, coupled with a spirit of bureaucratic standardization that characterized that era, has driven most of these out of official use.
Theodore F. Dwight, Chief of the Bureau of Rolls and Library of the Department of State, supervised the process.
Thomson included a page of explanatory notes, but no drawing was submitted.
The Masi treaty die was used until 1871, almost exclusively for treaties, at which point the U.S. government discontinued the use of pendant seals.
In October and November 2007, two more dies were discovered in Rhode Island with exactly the same design (though cut in relief), even down to the same small flaws.
The reverse has never been cut (as a seal) but appears, for example, on the back of the one-dollar bill.
The stripes on the shield were changed again, this time to "palewise" (vertical), and the eagle's wing position was changed to "displayed" (wingtips up) instead of "rising".
