Natural mummies are also known from Funk Island, and the eyes and internal organs of the last two birds from 1844 are stored in the Zoological Museum, Copenhagen.
The black beak was heavy and hooked, with grooves on its surface.
When European explorers discovered what are today known as penguins in the Southern Hemisphere, they noticed their similar appearance to the great auk and named them after this bird, although they are not closely related.
The egg was yellowish white to light ochre with a varying pattern of black, brown or greyish spots and lines which often congregated on the large end.
When the colony was initially discovered in 1835, nearly fifty birds were present.
Standing about  tall and weighing around  as adult birds, the flightless great auk was the second largest member of both its family and the order Charadriiformes, surpassed only by the mancalline ''Miomancalla''.
The Irish name for the great auk is 'falcóg mhór', meaning 'big seabird/auk'.
By the mid-16th century, the nesting colonies along the European side of the Atlantic were nearly all eliminated by humans killing this bird for its down, which was used to make pillows.
Its favourite prey were fish, including Atlantic menhaden and capelin, and crustaceans.
According to one account, the chick was covered with grey down.
The last pair, found incubating an egg, was killed there on 3 July 1844, on request from a merchant who wanted specimens, with Jón Brandsson and Sigurður Ísleifsson strangling the adults and Ketill Ketilsson smashing the egg with his boot.
Three men from St Kilda caught a single "garefowl", noticing its little wings and the large white spot on its head.
The back was primarily a glossy black, and the stomach was white.
Analysis of mtDNA sequences has confirmed morphological and biogeographical studies suggesting that the razorbill is the great auk's closest living relative.
Prior to that, hunting by local natives can be documented from Late Stone Age Scandinavia and eastern North America, as well as from early 5th century Labrador, where the bird seems to have occurred only as a straggler.
The bird also appears in Farley Mowat's ''Sea of Slaughter''.
By that time the murres, or Atlantic guillemots, had apparently already split from the other Atlantic alcids.
Great auk pairs mated for life.
The English painter and writer Errol Fuller produced "Last Stand" for his monograph on the species.
Some ornithologists still feel it is more appropriate to retain the species in the genus ''Alca''.
Ogden Nash warns that humans could suffer the same fate as the great auk in his short poem "A Caution to Everybody."
The Dorset Eskimos also hunted it; the Saqqaq in Greenland overhunted the species, causing a local reduction in range.
The bird's down was in high demand in Europe, a factor which largely eliminated the European populations by the mid-16th century.
Historical descriptions of the great auk's breeding behaviour are somewhat unreliable.
The great auk is also present in a wide variety of other works of fiction.
The pair took turns incubating the egg in an upright position for the 39 to 44 days before the egg hatched, typically in June, although eggs could be present at the colonies as late as August.
The egg was ovate and elongate in shape, and averaged  in length and  across at the widest point.
The extinct Beothuks of Newfoundland made pudding out of the auk's eggs.
These sailors also introduced rats onto the islands.
The auk's calls included low croaking and a hoarse scream.
During summer, the great auk's plumage showed a white patch over each eye.
Records suggest that this species may have bred on Cape Cod, Massachusetts.
They tied it up and kept it alive for three days, until a large storm arose.
These birds are believed to have had a life span of about 20 to 25 years.
Their main food was fish, usually  in length and weighing , but occasionally their prey was up to half the bird's own length.
The present whereabouts of six of the eggs are unknown, and several other eggs have been accidentally destroyed.
When not breeding, the auks spent their time foraging in the waters of the North Atlantic, ranging as far south as northern Spain and also around the coast of Canada, Greenland, Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Norway, Ireland, and Great Britain.
Males and females were similar in plumage, although there is evidence for differences in size, particularly in the bill and femur length.
Walton Ford, the American painter, has featured great auks in two paintings: "The Witch of St. Kilda" and "Funk Island".
The great auk had disappeared from Funk Island by 1800, and an account by Aaron Thomas of HMS ''Boston'' from 1794 described how the bird had been systematically slaughtered until then:
The last colony of great auks lived on Geirfuglasker (the "Great Auk Rock") off Iceland.
They had few natural predators, mainly large marine mammals, such as the orca, and white-tailed eagles.
The scientific journal of the American Ornithologists' Union is named ''The Auk'' in honour of this bird.
With its increasing rarity, specimens of the great auk and its eggs became collectible and highly prized by rich Europeans, and the loss of a large number of its eggs to collection contributed to the demise of the species.
Some authors have questioned whether this hunting method actually occurred successfully.
When the colonies included other species of alcid, the great auks were dominant due to their size.
In the short story ''The Harbor-Master'', by Robert W. Chambers, the discovery and attempted recovery of the last known pair of great auks is central to the plot (which also involves a proto-H.P.
This has led to an alternative English common name for the bird, "garefowl" or "gairfowl".
Great auk eggs were also a valued food source, as the eggs were three times the size of a murre's and had a large yolk.
Known from bones found in the Yorktown Formation of the Lee Creek Mine in North Carolina, it is believed to have split along with the great auk from a common ancestor.
The wings were only  in length and the longest wing feathers were only  long.
Some individuals had grey plumage on their flanks, but the purpose of this is unknown.
It is the subject of a ballet, ''Still Life at the Penguin Café'', and a song, "A Dream Too Far", in the ecological musical Rockford's Rock Opera.
It is believed that the variation in the egg's streaks enabled the parents to recognize their egg in the colony.
No hatchling specimens exist.
The great auk was an important part of many Native American cultures, both as a food source and as a symbolic item.
They are believed to have fed cooperatively in flocks.
During summer, the great auk developed a wide white eye patch over the eye, which had a hazel or chestnut iris.
It appears in many works of children's literature.
The species was not placed in its own genus, ''Pinguinus'', until 1791.
The great auk was not closely related to the other extinct genera of flightless alcids, ''Mancalla'', ''Praemancalla'', and ''Alcodes''.
Native Americans valued the great auk as a food source during the winter and as an important symbol.
This species is estimated to have had a maximum population in the millions.
Great auk specialist John Wolley interviewed the two men who killed the last birds, and Ísleifsson described the act as follows:
This islet was a volcanic rock surrounded by cliffs which made it inaccessible to humans, but in 1830 the islet submerged after a volcanic eruption, and the birds moved to the nearby island of Eldey, which was accessible from a single side.
In St. John's, those violating a 1775 law banning hunting the great auk for its feathers or eggs were publicly flogged, though hunting for use as fishing bait was still permitted.
They nested in extremely dense and social colonies, laying one egg on bare rock.
A great auk is collected by fictional naturalist Stephen Maturin in the Patrick O'Brian historical novel ''The Surgeon's Mate''.
Later, European sailors used the auks as a navigational beacon, as the presence of these birds signalled that the Grand Banks of Newfoundland were near.
The great auk is one of the more frequently referenced extinct birds in literature, much like the famous Dodo.
The great auk was capable of accelerating under water, then shooting out of the water to land on a rocky ledge above the ocean's surface.
Nearly half of the bird bones found in graves at this site were of the great auk, suggesting that it had cultural significance for the Maritime Archaic people.
Following the bird's extinction, remains of the great auk increased dramatically in value, and auctions of specimens created intense interest in Victorian Britain, where 15 specimens are now located, the largest number of any country.
Its ability to dive this deeply reduced competition with other alcid species.
On the North American side, eider down was initially preferred, but once the eiders were nearly driven to extinction in the 1770s, down collectors switched to the auk at the same time that hunting for food, fishing bait, and oil decreased.
The price of its eggs sometimes reached up to 11 times the amount earned by a skilled worker in a year.
According to Homer Hickam's memoir, ''Rocket Boys'', and its film production, ''October Sky'', the early rockets he and his friends built were ironically named "Auk".
Eggers only collected eggs without embryos growing inside them and typically discarded the eggs with embryos.
Eggers, individuals who visited the nesting sites of the great auk to collect their eggs, quickly realized that the birds did not all lay their eggs on the same day, so they could make return visits to the same breeding colony.
The '''great auk''' (''Pinguinus impennis'') was a flightless bird of the alcid family that became extinct in the mid-19th century.
This work also details the harvesting of a colony of auks.
A captive auk was observed making a gurgling noise when anxious.
It is the only British bird made extinct in historic times.
This species had no innate fear of human beings, and their flightlessness and awkwardness on land compounded their vulnerability.
(It has been suggested that some of the bones discovered in Florida may be the result of aboriginal trading.)
The molecular data are compatible with either view, but the weight of evidence suggests placing the great auk in a distinct genus.
Two mounted skins were destroyed in the 20th century, one in the Mainz Museum during the Second World War, and one in the Museu Bocage, Lisbon, was destroyed by a fire in 1978.
It could also hold its breath for 15 minutes, longer than a seal.
The great auk is the subject of a novel, ''The Last Great Auk'' by Allen Eckert, which tells of the events leading to the extinction of the great auk as seen from the perspective of the last one alive.
They were hunted for food, for feathers, and as specimens for museums and private collections.
''Pinguinus alfrednewtoni'' was a larger  and also flightless member of the genus ''Pinguinus'' that lived during the Early Pliocene.
The great auk left the North Atlantic waters for land only to breed, even roosting at sea when not breeding.
Female great auks would lay only one egg each year, between late May and early June, although they could lay a replacement egg if the first one was lost.
''Penguin Island'', a 1908 French satirical novel by the Nobel Prize winning author Anatole France, narrates the fictional history of a great auk population that is mistakenly baptized by a nearsighted missionary.
Though thousands of isolated bones were collected from 19th century Funk Island to Neolithic middens, only a few complete skeletons exist.
The Norse called the great auk ''geirfugl'', which means "spearbird".
Polar bears preyed on nesting colonies of the auk.
Its early French name was ''apponatz''.
The sailors then herded hundreds of these auks onto the ships, where they were slaughtered.
To conserve energy, most dives were shallower.
Its feet and short claws were black while the webbed skin between the toes was brownish black.
The great auk was known to dive to depths of  and it has been claimed that the species was able to dive to depths of .
Once paired, they nested at the base of cliffs in colonies, where they likely copulated.
It is uncertain where their skins are located today, but according to Errol Fuller, three are suspected due to their connection to a specific dealer in Copenhagen; the specimens in Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History, in the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, and the one in Übersee-Museum Bremen.
Early explorers, including Jacques Cartier and numerous ships attempting to find gold on Baffin Island, were not provisioned with food for the journey home, and therefore used this species as both a convenient food source and bait for fishing.
A specimen was bought in 1971 by the Icelandic Museum of National History for £9000, which placed it in the Guinness Book of Records as the most expensive stuffed bird ever sold.
A cigarette company, the British Great Auk Cigarettes, was named after this bird.
Many Maritime Archaic people were buried with great auk bones, and one was buried covered in over 200 auk beaks, which are assumed to have been part of a cloak made of their skins.
By the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the breeding range of the great auk was restricted to Funk Island, Grimsey Island, Eldey Island, the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and St Kilda Island.
In winter, the throat became white.
Lovecraftian element of suspense).
They are believed to have mated for life, although some theorize that auks could have mated outside their pair, a trait seen in the razorbill.
The young bird took only two or three weeks to mature enough to abandon the nest and land for the water, typically around the middle of July.
Although agile in the water, it was clumsy on land.
In years when there was a shortage of food, the auk did not breed.
The auk appeared chubby due to a thick layer of fat necessary for warmth.
This bird is also featured in a variety of other media.
Great auks began pairing in early and mid-May.
Early European explorers to the Americas used the auk as a convenient food source or as fishing bait, reducing its numbers.
Each egg and skin has been assigned a number by specialists.
It had a black back and a white belly.
Other fish suggested as potential prey include lumpsuckers, shorthorn sculpins, cod, crustaceans, and sand lance.
These were very limiting requirements and it is believed that the great auk never had more than 20 breeding colonies.
Its bones have been found as far south as Florida, where it may have occurred during four periods: around 1000 BC, 1000 AD, the 15th century, and the 17th century.
These colonies were extremely crowded and dense, with some estimates stating that there was a nesting auk for every  of land.
This alcid typically fed in shoaling waters which were shallower than those frequented by other alcids, although after the breeding season they had been sighted up to  from land.
The parents also took turns feeding their chick.
Instead, the auk was a powerful swimmer, a trait that it used in hunting.
The wings were only  long, rendering the bird flightless.
The Little Ice Age may have reduced the population of the great auk by exposing more of their breeding islands to predation by polar bears, but massive exploitation for their down drastically reduced the population.
Both parents incubated the egg for about six weeks before the young hatched.
Juvenile birds had less prominent grooves in their beaks and had mottled white and black necks, while the eye spot found in adults was not present; instead, a grey line ran through the eyes (which still had the white eye ring) to just below the ears.
The localities of only seven former breeding colonies are known: Papa Westray in the Orkney Islands, St Kilda off Scotland, Grimsey Island and Eldey Island and Geirfuglasker near Iceland, Funk Island near Newfoundland, and the Bird Rocks (Rochers-aux-Oiseaux) in the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
When they did run, it was awkwardly and with short steps in a straight line.
A later claim of a live individual sighted in 1852 on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland has been accepted by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
The story first appeared in ''Ainslee's Magazine'' (Aug 1889) and was slightly revised to become the first five chapters of Chambers'episodic novel ''In Search of the Unknown'', (Harper and Brothers Publishers, New York, 1904).
A great auk appears as a prized possession of Baba the Turk in Igor Stravinsky's opera ''The Rake's Progress'' (libretto by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman).
The neck and legs were short, and the head and wings small.
Great auks reacted to noises, but were rarely scared by the sight of something.
On the islet of Stac an Armin, St Kilda, Scotland, in July 1840, the last great auk seen in the Britain was caught and killed.
Its growing rarity increased interest from European museums and private collectors in obtaining skins and eggs of the bird.
In 1553, the auk received its first official protection, and in 1794 Great Britain banned the killing of this species for its feathers.
Some of the later vessels anchored next to a colony and ran out planks to the land.
The auks that lived further north averaged larger in size than the more southerly members of the species.
The great auk was hunted on a significant scale for food, eggs, and its down feathers from at least the 8th century.
Hatchlings were grey and downy, but their exact appearance is unknown, since no skins exist today.
During the winter, the great auk migrated south either in pairs or in small groups, and never with the entire nesting colony.
These colonies were very social.
Charles Kingsley's ''The Water-Babies, A Fairy Tale for a Land Baby'' depicts a great auk telling the tale of its species' extinction.
During the summer, the auk's chin and throat were blackish-brown, and the inside of the mouth was yellow.
The generic name is derived from the Spanish and Portuguese name for the species, and the specific name ''impennis'' is from Latin and refers to the lack of flight feathers or pennae.
(In  this image, Kingsley's artist played with or misunderstood the words "large pair of white spectacles", intended to mean the natural white patches on the bird's face.)
The great auk was found in the cold North Atlantic coastal waters along the coasts of Canada, the northeastern United States, Norway, Greenland, Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Ireland, Great Britain, France, and northern Spain.
On 3 July 1844, the last two confirmed specimens were killed on Eldey, off the coast of Iceland, which also eliminated the last known breeding attempt.
It was common on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland.
Great auks sexually matured when they were four to seven years old.
This species was capable of banking, veering, and turning underwater.
Believing that the auk was a witch and the cause of the storm, they then killed it by beating it with a stick.
Funk Island was the largest known breeding colony.
The great auk was  tall and weighed around , making it the second largest member of the alcid family (''Miomancalla'' was larger).
The legs were far back on the bird's body, which gave it powerful swimming and diving abilities.
There are unconfirmed later reports of roaming individuals being seen or caught.
Due to its outward similarity to the razorbill (apart from flightlessness and size), the great auk was often placed in the genus ''Alca'', following Linnaeus.
The egg was white with variable brown marbling.
The great auk migrated north and south away from the breeding colonies after the chicks fledged and tended to go southward during late autumn and winter.
The rookeries of the great auk were found from Baffin Bay to the Gulf of St. Lawrence, across the far northern Atlantic, including Iceland, and in Norway and the British Isles in Europe.
It bred on rocky, isolated islands with easy access to the ocean and a plentiful food supply, a rarity in nature that provided only a few breeding sites for the auks.
The nesting sites also needed to be close to rich feeding areas and be far enough from the mainland to discourage visitation by humans and polar bears.
The Inuit name for the great auk was ''isarukitsok'', which meant "little wing".
Based on remains associated with great auk bones found on Funk Island and on ecological and morphological considerations, it seems that Atlantic menhaden and capelin were their favoured prey.
Museums, desiring the skins of the auk for preservation and display, quickly began collecting birds from the colony.
The great auk was one of the 4400 animal species originally described by Carl Linnaeus in his 18th-century work, ''Systema Naturae'', in which it was named ''Alca impennis''.
Mated pairs had a social display in which they bobbed their heads, showing off their white eye patch, bill markings, and yellow mouth.
All but four of the surviving skins are in summer plumage, and only two of these are immature.
The great auk was generally an excellent swimmer, using its wings to propel itself underwater.
The great auk typically did not go further south than Massachusetts Bay in the winter.
While swimming, the head was held up but the neck was drawn in.
The bill was large at  long and curved downwards at the top; the bill also had deep white grooves in both the upper and lower mandibles, up to seven on the upper mandible and twelve on the lower mandible in summer, though there were fewer in winter.
For their nesting colonies the great auks required rocky islands with sloping shorelines that provided access to the seashore.
Images of the great auk have been found in bone necklaces.
He associates the great auk with the mythical roc as a method of formally returning the main character to a sleepy land of fantasy and memory.
During winter, the auk lost these patches, instead developing a white band stretching between the eyes.
The name ''Alca'' is a Latin derivative of the Scandinavian word for razorbills and their relatives.
A person buried at the Maritime Archaic site at Port au Choix, Newfoundland, dating to about 2000 BC, was found surrounded by more than 200 great auk beaks, which are believed to have been part of a suit made from their skins, with the heads left attached as decoration.
It was the only modern species in the genus '''''Pinguinus''''' (unrelated to penguins, although it was the first bird to be called penguin).
Razorbill-like birds were common in the Atlantic during the Pliocene, but the evolution of the little auk is sparsely documented.
The following cladogram shows the placement of the great auk among its closest relatives, based on a 2004 genetic study:
The great auk is mentioned in several novels and the scientific journal of the American Ornithologists' Union is named ''The Auk'' in honour of this bird.
The great auk was also closely related to the little auk (dovekie), which underwent a radically different evolution compared to ''Pinguinus''.
The young auk left the nest site after two or three weeks although the parents continued to care for it.
The Basque name is ''arponaz'', meaning "spearbill".
The great auk is the mascot of the Archmere Academy in Claymont, Delaware, Sir Sandford Fleming College in Ontario, and the Adelaide University Choral Society (AUCS) in Australia.
The auks used their bills aggressively both in the dense nesting sites and when threatened or captured by humans.
The great auk also appeared on one stamp in a set of five depicting extinct birds issued by Cuba in 1974.
A record of a bird in 1852 is considered by some to be the last sighting of the species.
In his novel ''Ulysses'', James Joyce mentions the bird while the novel's main character is drifting into sleep.
It may be derived from the Welsh ''pen gwyn'' "white head", although the etymology is debated.
The young of the great auk are believed to have eaten plankton and, possibly, fish and crustaceans regurgitated by adult auks.
During winter the auk moulted and lost this eye patch, which was replaced with a wide white band and a gray line of feathers which stretched from the eye to the ear.
Scientists soon began to realize that the great auk was disappearing and it became the beneficiary of many early environmental laws, but this proved not to be enough.
