The campaign is focused on slowing, and eventually ending, the world's consumption of oil; with activist activities taking place against companies that pursue oil drilling as a venture.
As a result, proposals were made to keep the legs of such platforms on the sea bed in future, to serve as habitat.
In November 2011, the criteria were updated, as the industry had progressed since 2006, with the objective to get companies setting ambitious goals for greenhouse gas reduction, the use of renewable power up to 100 percent, producing long lasting products free of hazardous substances and increasing sustainable practices across the global electronics supply chain.
In the Leaderboard we can find one main ranking with the overall scores and another three rankings for each one of the evaluated areas where we can find the top companies contributing in each.
According to Reuters, Statoil was slated to begin drilling "three oil wells in the Apollo, Atlantis and Mercury prospects in the Hoop area, which is some 300 km away from the mainland of Norway" in the summer of 2014.
Greenpeace has accused several corporations, such as Unilever, Nike, KFC, KitKat and McDonald's of having links to the deforestation of the tropical rainforests, resulting in policy changes in several of the companies under criticism.
At their subsequent trial they admitted trying to shut the station down, but argued that they were legally justified because they were trying to prevent climate change from causing greater damage to property elsewhere around the world.
He also accused Greenpeace of having unofficial agreements with polluting companies where the companies paid Greenpeace to keep them from attacking the company's image.
The incident received publicity in Finland, for example in the large newspapers ''Helsingin Sanomat'' and ''Ilta-Sanomat''.
The report goes on to assert that the Youngor Group and Well Dyeing Factory Ltd. - the two companies behind the facilities - have commercial relationships with a range of major clothing brands, including Abercrombie & Fitch, Adidas, Bauer Hockey, Calvin Klein, Converse, Cortefiel, H&M, Lacoste, Li Ning, Metersbonwe Group, Nike, Phillips-Van Heusen and Puma AG.
Acknowledging that mass production of palm oil may be disastrous on biodiversity of forests, Greenpeace is actively campaigning against the production, urging the industries and the government to turn to other forms of energy resources.
Their intention was to expose what they considered embezzlement of the meat collected during whale hunts.
Greenpeace screens all major donations in order to ensure it does not receive unwanted donations.
As deforestation contributes to global warming, Greenpeace has demanded that REDD (Reduced Emission from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) should be included in the climate treaty following the Kyoto treaty.
Later in 1985 the ''Rainbow Warrior'' was to lead a flotilla of protest vessels into the waters surrounding Moruroa atoll, site of French nuclear testing.
In Philadelphia, in 2006, Greenpeace issued a press release that said "In the twenty years since the Chernobyl tragedy, the world's worst nuclear accident, there have been nearly FILL IN ALARMIST AND ARMAGEDDONIST FACTOID HERE".
In the mid-1970s some Greenpeace members started an independent campaign, Project Ahab, against commercial whaling, since Irving Stowe was against Greenpeace focusing on other issues than nuclear weapons.
McTaggart was supposedly beaten to the point that he lost sight in one of his eyes.
The protests did not stop the U.S. from detonating the bomb.
The criteria used reflected the demands of the Toxic Tech campaign where they demanded to the electronics companies to make products without toxic substances and take them back and recycle them once they are not going to be used any longer.
Greenpeace was one of the leading participants advocating early phase-out of ozone depleting substances in the Montreal Protocol.
The final report warned of plane crashes and reactor meltdowns.
Moore has argued that Greenpeace today is motivated by politics rather than science and that none of his "fellow directors had any formal science education".
The French Government also paid ₣2.3 million compensation to the family of the photographer.
Animal protection magazine ''Animal People'' reported in March 1997 that Greenpeace France and Greenpeace International had sued Olivier Vermont and his publisher Albin Michel for issuing "defamatory statements, untruths, distortions of the facts and absurd allegations".
Within half a year Greenpeace would move in to share the upstairs office space with The Society Promoting Environmental Conservation at 4th and Maple in Kitsilano.
The European Greenpeace paid the debt of the Canadian Greenpeace office and on October 14, 1979, '''Greenpeace International''' came into existence.
There was no single founder".
It was the first case where preventing property damage caused by climate change has been used as part of a "lawful excuse" defense in court.
Environmental historian Frank Zelko dates the formation of the "Don't Make a Wave Committee" to 1969 and according to Jim Bohlen the group adopted the name "Don't Make a Wave Committee" on 28 November 1969.
After a "public uproar" Greenpeace announced that Husting would commute via train in the future.
Greenpeace claimed the activists were "absolutely careful to protect the Nazca lines," but this is contradicted by video and photographs showing the activists wearing conventional shoes (not special protective shoes) while walking on the site.
The sinking of the ''Rainbow Warrior'' occurred when the French government secretly bombed the ship in Auckland harbour on orders from François Mitterrand himself.
In 2014, the annual revenue of Greenpeace was reported to be about €300 million (US$400 million) although they lost about €4 million (US$5 million) in currency speculation that year.
Since in the mid-1990s the number of supporters started to decrease, Greenpeace pioneered the use of face-to-face fundraising where fundraisers actively seek new supporters at public places, subscribing them for a monthly direct debit donation.
According to a spokesman from Greenpeace Russia, they stayed on the rig for about three hours.
By 1977 there were 15 to 20 Greenpeace groups around the world.
In July 2011, Greenpeace released its Dirty Laundry report accusing some of the world's top fashion and sportswear brands of releasing toxic waste into China's rivers.
According to The Maritime Executive (2014), Statoil says "Statoil respects people's right to make a legal protest, and we feel it is important to have a democratic debate around the oil industry.
Under the new structure, the local offices would contribute a percentage of their income to the international organization, which would take responsibility for setting the overall direction of the movement with each regional office having one vote.
On April 9, 2015, The Union Home Ministry blocked all the bank accounts of Greenpeace India on allegations of illegal opening and non disclosure of bank accounts to income tax authorities and financial mishandling of foreign donations.
Greenpeace argues that resources should be spent on programs that are already working and helping to relieve malnutrition.
Although EDF claimed that a security firm had only been employed to monitor Greenpeace, the court disagreed, jailing the head and deputy head of EDF's nuclear security operation for three years each.
"The damage done is irreparable and the apologies offered by the environmental group aren't enough," she said at a news conference.
Following the accusations, Greenpeace India Executive Director, Samit Aich stepped down following an internal review.
The EU decided to ban illegal timber on July 2010.
Greenpeace has a staff of 2,400 and 15,000 volunteers globally.
This practice can stimulate developing economies and creates more robust food security", adding that, "if Africans truly have no other alternative, the controversial GE maize should be milled so it can't be planted.
There were seven more protesters on the rig at the time, but the Norwegian police could not remove them immediately because the rig was a flag of convenience ship registered in the Marshall Islands and thus regarded as a ship in the open sea, as long as it did not begin drilling.
Concerning the decision of Zambia, Greenpeace has stated that, "it was obvious to us that if no non-GM aid was being offered then they should absolutely accept GM food aid.
Greenpeace Australia commenced operation in the 1970s.
In 2011 two fifths of the world's total production of refrigerators were based on Greenfreeze technology, with over 600 million units in use.
Because Patrick Moore was among the crew of the first protest voyage and the beginning of the journey is often referred as the birthday of Greenpeace, Moore also considers himself one of the founders.
EDF appealed the conviction, the company was cleared of conspiracy to spy on Greenpeace and the fine was cancelled.
Later in May 2015, the Delhi High Court provided interim relief to open two of its domestic accounts to allow regular operations of the organisations but the money frozen by government was not allowed to be used pending further trial.
The letter stated: "We urge Greenpeace and its supporters to re-examine the experience of farmers and consumers worldwide with crops and foods improved through biotechnology, recognize the findings of authoritative scientific bodies and regulatory agencies, and abandon their campaign against "GMOs" in general and Golden Rice in particular.
For example, shark hunting is a much bigger problem for the environment, but since sharks are hated they're not a big money maker in the US.
Greenpeace East Asia's first office was opened in Hong Kong in 1997.
The nuclear test was criticized and the U.S. decided not to continue with their test plans at Amchitka.
This resulted in banning of the advert.
Greenpeace was fined US$7,000 for damaging the reef and agreed to pay the fine saying they felt responsible for the damage, although Greenpeace stated that the Philippines government had given it outdated charts.
According to Moore the already campaigning organization was "simply changing the name" in 1972.
Disputes between offices over fund-raising and organizational direction split the global movement as the North American offices were reluctant to be under the authority of the Vancouver office and its president Patrick Moore.
According to both Patrick Moore and an interview with Dorothy Stowe, Dorothy Metcalfe, Jim Bohlen and Robert Hunter, the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee were Paul Cote, Irving and Dorothy Stowe and Jim and Marie Bohlen.
Greenpeace, together with other environmental NGOs, also campaigned for ten years for the EU to ban import of illegal timber.
Greenpeace purchased the ''Rainbow Warrior'' (originally launched as the ''Sir William Hardy'' in 1955) at a cost of £40,000.
Greenpeace itself says on its web page that "there's a joke that in any bar in Vancouver, Canada, you can sit down next to someone who claims to have founded Greenpeace.
Greenpeace opposes the planned use of golden rice, a variety of ''Oryza sativa'' rice produced through genetic engineering to biosynthesize beta-carotene, a precursor of pro-vitamin A in the edible parts of rice.
This "golden rice 2" was developed and patented by Syngenta, which provoked Greenpeace to renew its allegation that the project is driven by profit motives and to serve as propaganda aimed at increasing public opinion of GMO products.
According to sociologists Marc Mormont and Christine Dasnoy, Greenpeace played a significant role in raising public awareness of global warming in the 1990s.
There has never been a single confirmed case of a negative health outcome for humans or animals from their consumption.
Greenpeace has also supported the rejection of GM food from the US in famine-stricken Zambia as long as supplies of non-genetically engineered grain exist, stating that the US "should follow in the European Union's footsteps and allow aid recipients to choose their food aid, buying it locally if they wish.
The Norwegian police stated that Statoil asked Greenpeace to stop preventing its activities, but Greenpeace ignored the warning.
David McTaggart lobbied the Canadian Greenpeace Foundation to accept a new structure which would bring the scattered Greenpeace offices under the auspices of a single global organization.
Greenpeace East Asia now campaigns in Hong Kong, Mainland China, Taiwan and South Korea.
Statoil denies the Greenpeace statement.
Soon after, according to Reuters, all the activists were set free without any fine.
Foundation donations are also rejected if the foundations attach unreasonable conditions, restrictions or constraints on Greenpeace activities or if the donation would compromise the independence and aims of Greenpeace.
The board accepted his resignation, soon after Divya Raghunandan then Programme Director also resigned from her post and quit Greenpeace India.
Subsequently, the Stowe home at 2775 Courtenay Street became the headquarters.
Their environmental impacts have been shown repeatedly to be less damaging to the environment, and a boon to global biodiversity."
Greenpeace said in a press conference that the tree was originally from a logged area in the ancient forest which was supposed to be protected.
The activities of Greenpeace in the arctic have mainly involved the Edinburgh-based oil and gas exploration company, Cairn Energy; and range from protests at the Cairn Energy's headquarters to scaling their oil rigs in an attempt to halt the drilling process.
It uses direct action, lobbying, and research to achieve its goals.
In particular, Greenpeace has expressed concern over the lack of safety testing being done on GMO crops such as golden rice and of "playing with the lives of people...using Golden Rice to promote more GMOs".
A 1969 demonstration of 7,000 people blocked a major U.S.–Canada border crossing in British Columbia, carrying signs reading "Don't Make A Wave.
Greenpeace is also critical of extracting petroleum from oil sands and has used direct action to block the oil sand operations at Athabasca, Canada.
Greenpeace regards the petroleum activities of Statoil as "illegal".
Therefore there are a few shades of gray about who might lay claim to being a founder of Greenpeace."
This killed Dutch freelance photographer Fernando Pereira, who thought it was safe to enter the boat to get his photographic material after a first small explosion, but drowned as a result of a second, larger explosion.
Both The Daily Telegraph and The Guardian described the acquittal as embarrassment to the Brown Ministry.
It's Your Fault If Our Fault Goes".
Using the money raised with the concert, the Don't Make a Wave Committee chartered a ship, the ''Phyllis Cormack'' owned and sailed by John Cormack.
In fact, there was no single founder: name, idea, spirit and tactics can all be said to have separate lineages".
In case of contradiction of the company policy, are published and clearly explained the corresponding penalty points.
The letter goes on to say that "Opposition based on emotion and dogma contradicted by data must be stopped."
After this Greenpeace tried to navigate to the test site with other vessels, until the U.S. detonated the bomb.
Much of the activities of the "Go Beyond Oil" campaign have been focused on drilling for oil in the Arctic and areas affected by the Deepwater Horizon disaster.
The "Greenpeace Declaration of Interdependence" was published by Greenpeace in the ''Greenpeace Chronicles'' (Winter 1976-77).
Metsähallitus accused Greenpeace of theft and said that the tree was from a normal forest and had been left standing because of its old age.
According to a Greenpeace spokesman, the memo was a joke that was accidentally released.
During the 1990s Greenpeace conducted many anti-whaling expeditions in Norway.
Paul Watson, founder of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society maintains that he also was one of the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee and Greenpeace.
Volunteers restored and refitted it over a period of four months.
In June 2015 following a revelation by an ex-employee in web forum about repeated sexual harassment and rape at Greenpeace India and subsequent harassment for complaints, multiple women employees of Greenpeace India has come out talking about similar incidents of sexual harassment, bullying and rape at Greenpeace India.
In 1989 Greenpeace commissioned a replacement Rainbow Warrior vessel, sometimes referred to as ''Rainbow Warrior II''.
Canadian ecologist Patrick Moore, an early Greenpeace member, left the organization in 1986 when it, according to Moore, decided to support a universal ban on chlorine in drinking water.
In 2013, three activists of Greenpeace got on a Statoil's oil rig, wearing bear suits.
The idea ended up in the press and was linked to The Sierra Club.
According to Vermont he found misconduct, and continued to find it, from Amsterdam to the International office.
He argues that any realistic plan to reduce reliance on fossil fuels  or greenhouse gas emissions need increased use of nuclear energy.
Phil Radford, Executive Director of Greenpeace US responded that nuclear energy is too risky, takes too long to build to address climate change, and claims that most countries, including the U.S., could shift to nearly 100% renewable energy while phasing out nuclear power by 2050.
The current directors of Greenpeace International are Bunny McDiarmaid and Jennifer Morgan and the current Chair of the Board is Brazilian Ana Toni.
The activists in bear suits "were escorted" to the shore.
The organisation was accused of protecting the offenders.
The alternative proposed by Greenpeace is to discourage mono-cropping and to increase production of crops which are naturally nutrient-rich (containing other nutrients not found in golden rice in addition to beta-carotene).
United Nations Environment Programme awarded Greenpeace for "outstanding contributions to the protection of the Earth's ozone layer" in 1997.
On its official website, Greenpeace defines its mission as the following:
Greenpeace opposed the proposals, citing the fact that the reefs formed by the coral are at risk, not the coral itself, and that such a move would not promote development of such reefs, and expose coral species to toxic substances found in oil.
According to Patrick Moore, who was an early member but has since distanced himself from Greenpeace, and Rex Weyler, the name of "The Don't Make a Wave Committee" was officially changed to Greenpeace Foundation in 1972.
Greenpeace responded stating that "Accusations that anyone is blocking genetically engineered 'Golden' rice are false" and that they support "...investing in climate-resilient ecological agriculture and empowering farmers to access a balanced and nutritious diet, rather than pouring money down the drain for GE 'Golden' rice."
Octan has appeared in countless sets, computer and console games, can be seen at Legoland parks, and is featured as the corporation headed by the villain President Business in The Lego Movie.
The organisation has also received a notice from the ministry.
The regional offices work largely autonomously under the supervision of Greenpeace International.
30 ''Arctic Sunrise'' activists were arrested in the Pechora Sea, 19 September 2013, witnessing oil-drilling and protesting at the Gazprom platform Prirazlomnaya by the Russian Coast Guard.
Greenpeace also highlighted that Metsähallitus admitted the value of the forest afterwards as Metsähallitus currently refers to Koitajoki as a distinctive area because of its old growth forests.
Culture Minister Diana Álvarez-Calderón said that evidence gathered during an investigation by the government will be used as part of a legal suit against Greenpeace.
In Sweden however Greenpeace had more than 80.000 donators, so they decided to merge all national Nordic Greenpeace organizations into Greenpeace Nordic.
The criticism was that Greenpeace only campaigned against whales to gain economic donations from the US economy, and it had little to do with saving the environment.
Scientific and regulatory agencies around the world have repeatedly and consistently found crops and foods improved through biotechnology to be as safe as, if not safer than those derived from any other method of production.
One of the positive results of the campaign was GAR(Golden Agri-Resources), the world's second largest palm oil production company, deciding to commit itself to forest conservation.
Later in the 1970s, the organization widened its focus to include toxic waste and commercial seal hunting.
Currently Greenpeace considers global warming to be the greatest environmental problem facing the Earth.
It retired from service on 16 August 2011, to be replaced by the third generation vessel.
Executive directors of Greenpeace USA have included Richard Grossman, Barbara Dudley, Kristin Engberg, John Passacantando, Phil Radford, and Annie Leonard.
The French Government in 1987 agreed to pay New Zealand compensation of NZ$13 million and formally apologised for the bombing.
Watson has since criticized Greenpeace of rewriting their history.
In 2013, after the IRS performed a follow-up audit, which again was clean, and, following claims of politically motivated IRS audits of groups affiliated with the Tea Party Movement, Greenpeace U.S. Executive Director Phil Radford called for a Congressional investigation into all politically motivated audits – including those allegedly targeting the Tea Party Movement, the NAACP, and Greenpeace.
In the letter, they also called upon governments of the world to "do everything in their power to oppose Greenpeace's actions and accelerate the access of farmers to all the tools of modern biology, especially seeds improved through biotechnology."
For this Greenpeace calls for the industrialized countries to cut their emissions at least 40% by 2020 (from 1990 levels) and to give substantial funding for developing countries to build a sustainable energy capacity, to adapt to the inevitable consequences of global warming, and to stop deforestation by 2020.
Greenpeace replied that the tree had fallen down because the protective forest around it had been clearcut, and that they wanted to highlight the fate of old forests in general, not the fate of one particular tree.
This voyage was sponsored and organized by the New Zealand branch of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
Greenpeace used to list Moore among "founders and first members" of but has later stated that while Moore was a significant early member, he was not among the founders of Greenpeace in 1970.
In 2013 reports noted that Pascal Husting, the director of Greenpeace International's "international programme" was commuting 250 miles via plane, despite Greenpeace's activism to reduce air travel due to carbon footprint.
Greenpeace has continued to criticize the big oil company for their "green wash," arguing that Statoil hid the truth that it is doing the risky oil drilling by holding "Lego League" with Lego and distracting people's attention to the company's project, and it also argues that Statoil has to alter its attitude toward environments (Norway's News in English 2014).
They were convicted of theft and trespass in September 2010 by the Aomori district court.
Frank Zelko has commented that "unlike Friends of the Earth, for example, which sprung fully formed from the forehead of David Brower, Greenpeace developed in a more evolutionary manner.
Greenpeace is known for its direct actions and has been described as the most visible environmental organization in the world.
Greenpeace views the construction of Olkiluoto 3 nuclear power plant in Finland as an example of the problems on building new nuclear power.
In 1978, Greenpeace launched the original ''Rainbow Warrior'', a , former fishing trawler named for the book ''Warriors of the Rainbow'', which inspired early activist Robert Hunter on the first voyage to Amchitka.
Greenpeace receives its funding from individual supporters and foundations.
The organization does not accept money from governments, intergovernmental organizations, political parties or corporations in order to avoid their influence.
As Rex Weyler put it in his chronology, ''Greenpeace'', in 1969, Irving and Dorothy Stowe's "quiet home on Courtenay Street would soon become a hub of monumental, global significance".
Scientific analysis of samples from both facilities revealed the presence of hazardous and persistent hormone disruptor chemicals, including alkylphenols, perfluorinated compounds and perfluorooctane sulfonate.
The organization has also focused on CFCs, because of both their global warming potential and their effect on the ozone layer.
In March 2006  ''The Wall Street Journal'' reported that PIW's "federal tax filing, covering August 2003 to July 2004, stated that $120,000 of the $124,095 the group received in contributions during that period came from Exxon Mobil."
In July 2014, Greenpeace launched a global boycott campaign to persuade Lego to cease producing toys carrying the oil company Shell's logo in response to Shell's plans to drill for oil in the Arctic.
In 2008, most of the €202.5 million received by the organization was donated by about 2.6 million regular supporters, mainly from Europe.
Amchitka, the 1970 concert that launched Greenpeace was published by Greenpeace in November 2009 on CD and is also available as an mp3 download via the Amchitka concert website.
After that, the manager of Greenpeace Norway Norway Truls Gulowsen answered a phone interview, stating that "Five protesters left the rig by helicopter last night and three returned to a nearby Greenpeace ship."
The "Go Beyond Oil" campaign also involves applying political pressure on the governments who allow oil exploration in their territories; with the group stating that one of the key aims of the "Go Beyond Oil" campaign is to "work to expose the lengths the oil industry is willing to go to squeeze the last barrels out of the ground and put pressure on industry and governments to move beyond oil."
The IRS conducted an extensive review and concluded in December 2005 that Greenpeace USA continued to qualify for its tax-exempt status.
In the autumn of 1971, the ship sailed towards Amchitka and faced the U.S. Coast Guard ship ''Confidence'' which forced the activists to turn back.
Because of the unsuccessful anti-whale campaign in Norway in the early 1990s Greenpeace lost all economic support in Norway and they had to close the national branch.
After a brief investigation of their allegations was ended, Sato and Suzuki were arrested and charged with theft and trespass.
Greenpeace was one of the first parties to formulate a sustainable development scenario for climate change mitigation, which it did in 1993.
Irving Stowe arranged a benefit concert (supported by Joan Baez) that took place on October 16, 1970 at the Pacific Coliseum in Vancouver.
Greenpeace has said "the growth in aviation is ruining our chances of stopping dangerous climate change".
The six activists were acquitted.
The global organization does not accept funding from governments, corporations, or political parties, relying on 2.9 million individual supporters and foundation grants.
Together with EREC, Greenpeace has formulated a global energy scenario, "Energy Revolution", where 80% of the world's total energy is produced with renewables, and the emissions of the energy sector are decreased by over 80% of the 1990 levels by 2050.
In 2011, a French court fined Électricité de France (EDF) €1.5m and jailed two senior employees for spying on Greenpeace, including hacking into Greenpeace's computer systems.
Every three months, Greenpeace released a new updated edition of the guide.
In 2013, Greenpeace launched the "Detox Fashion" campaign, which signed up some fashion brands to stop the discharge of toxic chemicals into rivers as a result of the production of their clothes.
In 1972 the yacht ''Vega'', a  ketch owned by David McTaggart, was renamed ''Greenpeace III'' and sailed in an anti-nuclear protest into the exclusion zone at Moruroa to attempt to disrupt French nuclear testing.
After the incidents of Moruroa Atoll, David McTaggart had moved to France to battle in court with the French state and helped to develop the cooperation of European Greenpeace groups.
Adam Woolf from Greenpeace also stated that, "fifty years ago there were many experts who would be lined up and swear there was no link between smoking and bad health."
Two employees of the security firm, Kargus, run by a former member of France's secret services, received sentences of three and two years respectively.
A resolution to protect the very vulnerable wildlife and ecosystem.
Amnesty International said that the arrests and following raids on Greenpeace Japan office and homes of five of Greenpeace staff members were aimed at intimidating activists and non-governmental organizations.
Bruce Cox, Director of Greenpeace Canada, responded that Greenpeace has never demanded a universal chlorine ban and that Greenpeace does not oppose use of chlorine in drinking water or in pharmaceutical uses, adding that "Mr. Moore is alone in his recollection of a fight over chlorine and/or use of science as his reason for leaving Greenpeace."
There is a conflict over oil rigs in the Arctic Ocean between the Norwegian Government and Greenpeace.
After the office in the Stowe home, (and after the first concert fund-raiser) Greenpeace functions moved to other private homes and held public meetings weekly on Wednesday nights at the Kitsilano Neighborhood House before settling, in the autumn of 1974, in a small office shared with the SPEC environmental group at 2007 West 4th at Maple in Kitsilano.
Since the Guide was released in 2006, along with other similar campaigns has driven numerous improvements.
While no earthquake or tsunami followed the test, the opposition grew when the U.S. announced they would detonate a bomb five times more powerful than the first one.
Greenpeace responded stating that "Accusations that anyone is blocking genetically engineered 'Golden' rice are false" and that they support "...investing in climate-resilient ecological agriculture and empowering farmers to access a balanced and nutritious diet, rather than pouring money down the drain for GE 'Golden' rice."
As members of the Sierra Club Canada, they were frustrated by the lack of action by the organization.
Greenpeace has a general consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council and is a founding member of the INGO Accountability Charter; an international non-governmental organization that intends to foster accountability and transparency of non-governmental organizations.
Researcher Vanessa Timmer dates the official incorporation to 1971.
However, one of McTaggart's crew members photographed the incident and went public.
According to the Greenpeace web site, The Don't Make a Wave Committee was established in 1970.
In 2005 the ''Rainbow Warrior II'' ran aground on and damaged the Tubbataha Reef in the Philippines while inspecting the reef for coral bleaching.
Using direct action, Greenpeace has protested several times against coal by occupying coal power plants and blocking coal shipments and mining operations, in places such as New Zealand, Svalbard, Australia, and the United Kingdom.
The ship was renamed ''Greenpeace'' for the protest after a term coined by activist Bill Darnell.
Although Greenpeace had stated that the true efficiency of the golden rice program in treating malnourished populations was its primary concern as early as 2001, statements from March and April 2005 also continued to express concern over human health and environmental safety.
Norwegian government and police reportedly allowed the coast guard to tow the Greenpeace ship.
The movement has been the most active in Indonesia where already 6 million hectares are used for palm oil plantation and has plans for another 4 million hectares by 2015.
The first office was opened in a backroom, storefront on Cypress and West Broadway SE corner in Kitsilano, Vancouver.
The regional boards also appoint a trustee to The Greenpeace International Annual General Meeting, where the trustees elect or remove the board of directors of Greenpeace International.
We have established robust plans for the operation, and feel confident they can be carried out safely and without accidents."
