Similarly, in Sudanese Arabic, dark-skinned people are described as أخضر ''akhḍar'', the term which in Standard Arabic stands unambiguously for "green".
Green is a symbol of Ireland, which is often referred to as the "Emerald Isle".
However, comparative linguistics makes clear that these terms were coined independently, over the past few millennia, and there is no identifiable single Proto-Indo-European or word for "green".
Early 14th century BC.
Among European Americans, green eyes are most common among those of recent Celtic and Germanic ancestry, about 16%.
A unique green (green appearing neither yellowish nor bluish) is produced on such a device by mixing light from the green primary with some light from the blue primary.
This is shown on the national flag of Ireland.
Green is common in nature, as many plants are green because of a complex chemical known as chlorophyll, which is involved in photosynthesis.
The green cedar of Lebanon tree on the Flag of Lebanon officially represents steadiness and tolerance.
Chlorophyll absorbs the long wavelengths of light (red) and short wavelengths of light (blue) much more efficiently than the wavelengths that appear green to the human eye, so light reflected by plants is enriched in green.
In the subtractive color system,  used in painting and color printing, green is created by a combination of yellow and blue, or yellow and cyan;  in the RGB color model, used on television and computer screens, it is one of the additive primary colors, along with red and blue, which are mixed in different combinations to create all other colors.
Green is the color most commonly associated in the U.S. and Europe with springtime, freshness, and hope.
In some Far East cultures the color green is used as a symbol of sickness and/or nausea.
Light which triggers this greenness response more than the yellowness or blueness of the other color opponent mechanism is called green.
Unfortunately for those who wanted or were required to wear green, there were no good vegetal green dyes which resisted washing and sunlight.
Several African countries thus use the color on their flags, including Nigeria, South Africa, Ghana, Senegal, Mali, Ethiopia, Togo, Guinea, Benin, and Zimbabwe.
Green laser pointers outputting at 532nm (563.5 THz) are relatively inexpensive compared to other wavelengths of the same power, and are very popular due to their good beam quality and very high apparent brightness.
File:Limes.jpg|Lime green, Named for the lime fruit, inclines toward yellow.
Green and red were standardized as the colors of international railroad signals in the 19th century.
File:Ermitáž.jpg|Malachite green.
Other green wavelengths are also available using DPSS technology ranging from 501&nbsp;nm to 543&nbsp;nm.
(Tomb of Nefertari, 12951253 BC).
Japanese also has two terms that refer specifically to the color green, 緑 (''midori'', which is derived from the classical Japanese descriptive verb ''midoru'' "to be in leaf, to flourish" in reference to trees) and グリーン (''guriin'', which is derived from the English word "green").
Green earth is a natural pigment used since the time of the Roman Empire.
Red could only be worn by the nobility, brown and gray by peasants, and green by merchants, bankers and the gentry and their families.
Green lasers have a wide variety of applications, including pointing, illumination, surgery, laser light shows, spectroscopy, interferometry, fluorescence, holography, machine vision, non-lethal weapons and bird control.
530–590&nbsp;nm ("green/yellow").
In the theater and in films, green was often connected with horror or ghost stories, and with corpses.
They also used finely-ground malachite, which made a luminous green.
The first traffic light, using green and red gas lamps, was erected in 1868 in front of the Houses of Parliament in London.
Green is also the traditional color of safety and permission;  a green light means go ahead,  a green card permits permanent residence in the United States.
The Pan-African colors are borrowed from the Ethiopian flag, one of the oldest independent African countries.
In Europe and the U.S. green is sometimes associated with death (green has several seemingly contrary associations), sickness, or the devil, but in China its associations are very positive, as the symbol of fertility and happiness.
It is the most important color in Islam.
In 1912, the first modern electric traffic lights were put up in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Viridian, also called chrome green, is a pigment made with chromium oxide dihydrate, was patented in 1859.
The late nineteenth century also brought the systematic study of color theory, and particularly the study of how complementary colors such as red and green reinforced each other when they were placed next to each other.
Green is one of the Christmas colors as well, possibly dating back to pre-Christian times, when evergreens were worshiped for their ability to maintain their color through the winter season.
There is no green pigment in green eyes;  like the color of blue eyes, it is an optical illusion; its appearance is caused by the combination of an amber or light brown pigmentation of the stroma, given by a low or moderate concentration of melanin, with the blue tone imparted by the Rayleigh scattering of the reflected light.
Green animals include, especially, amphibians, reptiles, and some fish, birds and insects.
For example, the Slavic ''zelenъ'' is cognate with Sanskrit ''hari'' "yellow, ochre, golden".
Green chrome oxide was a new synthetic green created by a chemist named Pannetier in Paris in about 1835.
Everywhere it is a battle and antithesis of the most different reds and greens."
While it is the color most associated by Europeans and Americans with good health, it is also the color most often associated with toxicity and poison.
Green was contrasted to the smoky grays and blacks of the Industrial Revolution.
In Persian and Sudanese poetry, dark-skinned women, called "green" women, were considered erotic.
Examples include green cheese, a term for a fresh, unaged cheese, and greenhorn, an inexperienced person.
It is also often associated with the culture of Gaelic Ireland, and is a color of the flag of Ireland.
Verdigris is made by placing  a plate or blade of copper, brass or bronze, slightly warmed, into a vat of fermenting wine, leaving it there for several weeks, and then scraping off and drying the green powder that forms on the metal.
The crescent and star symbolizes progress and bright future respectively.
* The flag of Italy (1797) was modeled after the French tricolor.
Shakespeare also used it in the Merchant of Venice, speaking of "green-eyed jealousy."
By the Second Century AD, the Romans were using green in paintings, mosaics and glass, and there were ten different words in Latin for varieties of green.
The hall is blood red and pale yellow, with a green billiard table in the center, and four lamps of lemon yellow, with rays of orange and green.
The Emperor of China usually used the dragon as a symbol of his imperial power and strength.
Green was originally chosen because it deterred counterfeiters, who tried to use early camera equipment to duplicate banknotes.
The flag of Hamas, as well as the flag of Iran, is green, symbolizing their Islamist ideology.
Palettes of green facial makeup, made with malachite, were found in tombs.
File:M1943 Field Jacket.jpg|Olive drab was the standard color of U.S. Army combat uniforms from World War II through the Vietnam War.
This word is cognate with the Ancient Greek γλαυκός "bluish green", contrasting with χλωρός "yellowish green" discussed above.
"Green" in modern European languages corresponds to about 520–570&nbsp;nm, but many historical and non-European languages make other choices, e.g.
Green is the color associated with Puerto Rico's Independence Party, the smallest of Puerto Rico's three major political parties and which advocates for Puerto Rican independence from the United States.
File:Osiris-tomb-of-Nefertari.jpg|The Ancient Egyptian god Osiris, ruler of the underworld and of rebirth and regeneration, was typically shown with a green face.
Al-Khidr ("The Green One"), was an important Qur'anic figure who was said to have met and traveled with Moses.
Romans used green holly and evergreen as decorations for their winter solstice celebration called Saturnalia, which eventually evolved into a Christmas celebration.
Turacoverdin is one chemical which can cause a green hue in birds, especially.
Describing his painting, The ''Night Cafe'', to his brother Theo in 1888, Van Gogh wrote: "I sought to express with red and green the terrible human passions.
They can also be found in Southern Europe, West Asia, Central Asia, and South Asia.
In more contemporary terms, they are 藍 (''lán'', in Mandarin) and 綠 (''lǜ'', in Mandarin) respectively.
Red is the most active color, blue the most passive; green, in the middle, is the color of neutrality and calm, sometimes used in architecture and design for these reasons.
There was a solid foundation for this association; in the nineteenth century several popular paints and pigments, notably verdigris, vert de Schweinfurt and vert de Paris, were highly toxic, containing copper or arsenic.
A green light source typically has a spectral power distribution dominated by energy with a wavelength of roughly 487570&nbsp;nm.
In Irish folklore and English folklore, the color was sometimes was associated with witchcraft, and with faeries and spirits.
In the Middle Ages and Renaissance, the color of clothing showed a person's social rank and profession.
Latin with ''viridis'' also has a genuine and widely used term for "green".
This was because in ancient China, prostitutes were called "the family of the green lantern" and a prostitute's family would wear a green headscarf.
This can causes their feces to look green as well.
In Thailand, the color green is consider auspicious for those born on a Wednesday day (light green for those born at night).
One of the more notable uses of this meaning is found in ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz''.
File:Pot tripode Musée Guimet 2418.jpg|A 10th-century celadon pot from China (Musee Guimet, Paris).
Blue and green together symbolize harmony and balance.
In Iceland, 89% of women and 87% of men have either blue or green eye color.
For painting on the walls of tombs or on papyrus, Egyptian artists used finely-ground malachite, mined in the west Sinai and the eastern desert- A paintbox with malachite pigment was found inside the tomb of King Tutankhamun.
In 532 AD rioting between the factions began after one race, which led to the massacre of green supporters and the destruction of much of the center of Constantinople.
Green S (E142) is prohibited in many countries, for it is known to cause hyperactivity, asthma, urticaria, and insomnia.
The pigments available to painters were more varied; monks in monasteries used use of verdigris, made by soaking copper in fermenting wine, to color medieval manuscripts.
It was the banner of the Society of United Irishmen, which organized the Irish Rebellion of 1798, calling for Irish independence.
Other versions say it is the color of the Italian landscape, or symbolizes hope.
There is no natural source for green food colorings which has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration.
In this story is the Emerald City, where everyone wears tinted glasses which make everything look green.
Mixtures of oxidized cobalt and zinc were also used to create green paints as early as the 18th century.
Smoke can be turned green by a mixture: solvent yellow 33, solvent green 3, lactose, magnesium carbonate plus sodium carbonate added to potassium chlorate.
In additive color devices such as computer displays and televisions, one of the primary light sources is typically a narrow-spectrum yellowish-green of dominant wavelength ~550nm; this "green" primary is combined with an orangish-red "red" primary and a purplish-blue "blue" primary to produce any color in betweenthe RGB color model.
It hunts insects in green vegetation, where it is well camouflaged.
In wall paintings, the ruler of the underworld, Osiris, was typically portrayed with a green face, because green was the symbol of good health and rebirth.
File:Saihouji-kokedera01.jpg|Moss green.
Like other common colors, green has several completely opposite associations.
It was also known as Guignet Green.
450–530&nbsp;nm ("blue/green") and another for ca.
Likewise the Slavic languages with ''zelenъ''.
The Romans had a greater appreciation for the color green; it was the color of Venus, the goddess of gardens, vegetables and vineyards.The Romans made a fine green earth pigment, which was widely used in the wall paintings of Pompeii, Herculaneum, Lyon, Vaison-la-Romaine, and other Roman cities.
The French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau celebrated the virtues of nature, The German poet and philosopher Goethe declared that green was the most restful color, suitable for decorating bedrooms.
Green eyes are most common in Northern and Central Europe.
Green is often used to symbolize rebirth and renewal and immortality.
(See distinction of green from blue) These languages have introduced supplementary vocabulary to denote "green", but these terms are recognizable as recent adoptions that are not in origin color terms (much like the English adjective orange being in origin not a color term but the name of a fruit).
A giant malachite vase in the Hermitage Museum, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
On a traditional color wheel, based on subtractive color, the complementary color to green is considered to be red.
Jade can be many different shades of green.
This has led to similar campaigns in advertising, as companies have sold green, or environmentally friendly, products.
In Ancient Greece, green and blue were sometimes considered the same color, and the same word sometimes described the color of the sea and the color of trees.
Sven Rinman, a Swedish chemist, discovered this compound in 1780.
Many minerals provide pigments which have been used in green paints and dyes over the centuries.
Chromium(III) oxide (Cr2O3), is called chrome green, also called viridian or institutional green when used as a pigment.
The intoxicating drink absinthe was known as "the green fairy".
It was worn by both the living and dead, particularly around the eyes, to protect them from evil.
Vietnamese uses a single word for both blue and green, ''xanh'', with variants such as ''xanh da trời'' (azure, lit.
Ancient Greek also had a term for yellowish, pale green – χλωρός, ''chloros'' (cf.
Humans have imitated this by wearing green clothing as a camouflage in military and other fields.
The earliest films of Frankenstein were in black and white, but in the poster for the 1935 version ''The Bride of Frankenstein'', the monster had a green face.
and according to the Koran (XVIII, 31 and LXXVI, 21), those fortunate enough to live in paradise wear green silk robes.
It also symbolized the sea, which was called the "Very Green."
Several minerals have a green color, including the emerald, which is colored green by its chromium content.
The type of Irish fairy known as a leprechaun is commonly portrayed wearing a green suit, though before the 20th century he was usually described as wearing a red suit.
Related to ''virere'' "to grow" and ''ver'' "spring", it gave rise to words in several Romance languages, French ''vert'', Italian ''verde'' (and English ''vert'', ''verdure'' etc.).
Green continues to be used because the public now associates it with a strong and stable currency.
Among the more notable green minerals, however is the emerald, which is colored green by trace amounts of chromium and sometimes vanadium.
The Chinese character 青 (pronounced ''qīng'' in Mandarin, ''ao'' in Japanese, and ''thanh'' in Sino-Vietnamese) has a meaning that covers both blue and green; blue and green are traditionally considered shades of "青".
The process of making verdigris was described in ancient times by Pliny.
According to tradition, the robe and banner of Muhammad were green.
Green on some African flags represents the natural richness of Africa.
Many flags of the Islamic world are green, as the color is considered sacred in Islam (see below).
Since 1861, the reverse side of the dollar bill has been green.
When Ireland achieved independence in 1922, green was incorporated into the national flag.
The hieroglyph for green represented a growing papyrus sprout, showing the close connection between green, vegetation, vigor and growth.
Thus, Persian erotic poetry, dark-skinned women are addressed as ''sabz-eh'', as in phrases like سبز گندم گون ''sabz-eh-gandom-gun'' (literally "''dark'' wheat colored") or سبز مليح ''sabz-eh-malih'' ("a ''dark'' beauty").
Green is a strong trend in the Irish holiday St. Patrick's Day.
Pigments, in this case, are minerals which reflect the color green, rather that emitting it through luminescent or phosphorescent qualities.
It symbolized the environmental movement, and also a new politics of the left which rejected traditional socialism and communism.
An infrared laser diode at 808nm is used to pump a crystal of neodymium-doped yttrium vanadium oxide (Nd:YVO4) or neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd:YAG) and induces it to emit 281.76 THz (1064&nbsp;nm).
Animals typically use the color green as camouflage, blending in with the chlorophyll green of the surrounding environment.
Studies show that a green environment can reduce fatigue.
Green is the traditional color of Islam.
* The Flag of Bangladesh has a green field based on a similar flag used during the Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971.
Emerald green was a synthetic deep green made in the 19th century by hydrating chrome oxide.
Chlorophyll, the E numbers E140 and E141, is the most common green chemical found in nature, and only allowed in certain medicines and cosmetic materials.
Green pyrotechnic flares can use a mix ratio 75:25 of boron and potassium nitrate.
The benches in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom, where the landed gentry sat, are colored green.
Vincent van Gogh used it, along with Prussian blue, to create a dark blue sky with a greenish tint in his painting Cafe terrace at night.
Green was the traditional color of Irish nationalism, beginning in the 17th century.
Lasers emitting in the green part of the spectrum are widely available to the general public in a wide range of output powers.
Green the color most commonly associated in Europe and the U.S. with youth.
File:NCI 2 green olives.jpg|Olive or olive green.
In the 2009 federal elections, the party won 10.7% of the votes and 68 out of 622 seats in the Bundestag.
Many cities have designated a garden or park as a green space, and use green trash bins and containers.
Leonardo da Vinci, in his treatise  on painting, warned artists not to use it.
The Celtic languages had a term for "blue/green/grey", Proto-Celtic ''*glasto-'', which gave rise to Old Irish ''glas'' "green, grey" and to Welsh ''glas'' "blue".
Thus, the languages mentioned above (Germanic, Romance, Slavic, Greek) have old terms for "green" which are derived from words for fresh, sprouting vegetation.
The SVP was founded on September 22, 1971 and has 90,000 members.
The Australian Greens party was founded in 1992.
The largest green party in Europe is Alliance '90/The Greens (German: Bündnis 90/Die Grünen) in Germany, which was formed in 1993 from the merger of the German Green Party, founded in West Germany in 1980, and Alliance 90, founded during the Revolution of 1989–1990 in East Germany.
Large deposits were found in the South of France near Nice, and in Italy around Verona, on Cyprus, and in Bohemia.
In the 1980s green became a political symbol, the color of the Green Party in Germany and in many other European countries.
However, in Japan, although the traffic lights have the same colors that other countries have, the green light is described using the same word as for blue, "aoi", because green is considered a shade of aoi; similarly, green variants of certain fruits and vegetables such as green apples, green ''shiso'' (as opposed to red apples and red shiso) will be described with the word "aoi".
The color is particularly identified with the republican and nationalist traditions in modern times.
Many creatures have adapted to their green environments by taking on a green hue themselves as camouflage.
Green in Europe and the United States is sometimes associated with status and prosperity.
Aristotle considered that green was located midway between black, symbolizing the earth, and white, symbolizing water.
Green is restful to the eye.
It was used by the Romans in the murals of Pompeii, and in Celtic medieval manuscripts as early as the 5th century AD.
In China, green is associated with the east, with sunrise, and with life and growth.
Greenpeace is a non-governmental environmental organization which emerged from the anti-nuclear and peace movements in the 1970s.
using a term for the range of ca.
Other chemicals which generally contribute to greenness among organisms are flavins (lychochromes) and hemanovadin.
These studies were avidly followed by artists such as Vincent van Gogh.
The 1977 flag of Libya consisted of a simple green field with no other characteristics.
File:Gardens of Nakh 1.JPG|The gardens of ancient Egypt were symbols of rebirth.
The Persian language is traditionally lacking a black/blue/green distinction.
For example, broadleaf forests typically have a yellow-green light about them as the trees filter the light.
In the 1980s green became the color of a number of new European political parties organized around an agenda of environmentalism.
Saihō-ji (Kyoto), also known as the "Moss Garden", in Kyoto, Japan, begun in 1339
The Persian word سبز ''sabz'' can mean "green", "black", or "dark".
The dragon is also a symbol of power, strength, and good luck.
It is the color of living grass and leaves and as a result is the color most associated with springtime, growth and nature.
Green dyes were made out of the fern, plantain, buckthorn berries, the juice of nettles and of leeks, the digitalis plant, the broom plant, the leaves of the fraxinus, or ash tree, and the bark of the alder tree,  but they rapidly faded or changed color.
In the comparative study of color terms in the world's languages, green is only found as a separate category in languages with the fully developed range of six colors (white, black, red, green, yellow, and blue), or more rarely in systems with five colors (white, red, yellow, green, and black/blue).
The expression "green-eyed monster" was first used by William Shakespeare in Othello: "it is the green-eyed monster which doth mock the meat it feeds on."
The green represented the royal family.
By far the largest contributor to green in nature is chlorophyll, the chemical by which plants photosynthesize and convert sunlight into chemical energy.
From the Middle Ages to the 19th century it was often worn by bankers, merchants country gentlemen and others who were wealthy but not members of the nobility.
In the United States green was connected with the dollar bill.
Ceramics from ancient Mesopotamia show people wearing vivid green costumes, but it is not known how the colors were produced.
In many video games, green signifies both health and completed objectives, opposite red.
Its use largely ended in the late 19th century, when it was replaced by the safer and more stable chrome green.
Political groups advocating environmental protection and social justice describe themselves as part of the  Green movement, some naming themselves Green parties.
It is the color of many environmental organizations, such as Greenpeace, and of the Green Parties in Europe.
Their purple color arose because they extracted energy in the green portion of the spectrum using bacteriorhodopsin.
In the 18th and 19th century, green was associated with the romantic movement in literature and art.
A green cross is commonly used to designate pharmacies in Europe.
A study of Icelandic and Dutch adults found green eyes to be much more prevalent in women than in men.
The dragon dance is a popular feature of Chinese festivals.
