About 12% of the population speaks Danish as a first or sole language, particularly Danish immigrants in Greenland, many of whom fill positions such as administrators, professionals, academics, or skilled tradesmen.
It was a part of the Arctic small tool tradition.
The nearest countries are Canada, to the west and southwest across Baffin Bay, and Iceland, east of Greenland in the Atlantic Ocean.
The weight of the ice sheet has depressed the central land area to form a basin lying more than  below sea level, while elevations rise suddenly and steeply near the coast.
A UNESCO report has labelled the other dialects as endangered and measures are now being considered to protect the East Greenlandic dialects.
(See Gemstone industry in Greenland).
The public sector, including publicly owned enterprises and the municipalities, plays a dominant role in Greenland's economy.
Most finds of Saqqaq-period archaeological remains have been around Disko Bay, including the site of Saqqaq after which the culture is named.
About half the government revenues come from grants from the Danish government, an important supplement to the gross domestic product (GDP).
It was from Greenland and Iceland that Norwegians would set sail to discover America for Europeans almost 500 years before Columbus and attempt to colonize land.
Greenland had been a protected and very isolated society until 1940.
Around 800&nbsp;BC, the Saqqaq culture disappeared and the Early Dorset culture emerged in western Greenland and the Independence II culture in northern Greenland.
Other significant social issues faced by Greenland are high rates of unemployment, alcoholism and HIV/AIDS.
During its construction, there were as many as 12,000 American residents but in recent years the number has been below 1,000.
Greenland's flora comprises about 500 species of higher plants, i.e.
In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC) upon achieving self-rule, in view of the EEC's commercial fishing regulations and an EEC ban on seal skin products.
Some controversy surrounds the history of the island, specifically over whether the island might have been revealed during a brief warm period in Greenland during the mid-20th&nbsp;century.
The EEC later became the European Union (EU, renamed and expanded in scope in 1992).
Under the new structure, in effect since 21 June 2009, Greenland can gradually assume responsibility for policing, judicial system, company law, accounting, and auditing; mineral resource activities; aviation; law of legal capacity, family law and succession law; aliens and border controls; the working environment; and financial regulation and supervision, while the Danish government retains control of foreign affairs and defence.
The monarch is not answerable for his or her actions, and the monarch's person is sacrosanct.
However, recent archeological studies somewhat challenge the general assumption that the Norse colonisation had a dramatic negative environmental effect on the vegetation.
flowering plants, ferns, horsetails and lycopodiophyta.
Gradually, Greenland was opened up to Danish merchants, and closed to those from other countries.
Greenland is the world's largest non-continental island and the third largest country in North America.
Greenland has a population of 56,370 (January 2013 estimate), of whom 88% are Greenlandic Inuit (including mixed persons).
Greenland hosts a biennial international the world's largest multisport and cultural event for young people of the Arctic for the second time in 2016.
An alternative between Greenland and USA/Canada is Air Iceland/Icelandair with a plane change in Iceland.
The major air bases were Bluie West-1 at Narsarsuaq and Bluie West-8 at Søndre Strømfjord (Kangerlussuaq), both of which are still used as Greenland's major international airports.
The long distances and lack of roads divides the domestic market into many small units that have high operating costs.
The Danish Sirius Patrol guarded the northeastern shores of Greenland in 1942 using dogsleds, detecting several German weather stations and alerting American troops who then destroyed them.
According to a 2010 census, Greenland holds the highest suicide rate in the world.
The expedition can be seen as part of the Dano-Norwegian colonization of the Americas.
In 1501, Corte-Real returned with his brother, Miguel Corte-Real.
In 1953 Greenland was made an equal part of the Danish Kingdom.
A referendum on greater autonomy was approved on 25 November 2008.
Ben Keene, the atlas's editor, commented: "In the last two or three decades, global warming has reduced the size of glaciers throughout the Arctic and earlier this year, news sources confirmed what climate scientists already knew: water, not rock, lay beneath this ice bridge on the east coast of Greenland.
There are dozens of species of seals and whales along the coast.
The ice flows generally to the coast from the centre of the island.
If the Greenland ice sheet were to melt away completely, the world's sea level would rise by more than .
While the policies "succeeded" in the sense of creating a demographic shift turning Greenlanders from being primarily subsistence hunters into being urbanized wage earners, the policy also backfired to produce a reassertion of Greenlandic cultural identity by the Greenlandic elite, leading to a movement in favour of independence that reached its peak in the 1970s.
Icelandic saga accounts of life in Greenland were composed in the 13th century and later, and do not constitute primary sources for the history of early Norse Greenland.
They also indicate that during the last interglacial period, 130,000–116,000&nbsp;years ago, when local temperatures were on average  higher than now, the glaciers on Greenland did not completely melt away.
Bluie was the military code name for Greenland.
Gross domestic product per capita is equivalent to that of the average economies of Europe.
There are many higher schools in Greenland, including the University of Greenland in Nuuk.
The Norse colonies disappeared in the late 15th&nbsp;century.
Upon the brothers' return to Portugal, the cartographic information supplied by Corte-Real was incorporated into a new map of the world which was presented to Ercole I d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, by Alberto Cantino in 1502.
Though physiographically a part of the continent of North America, Greenland has been politically and culturally associated with Europe (specifically Norway and Denmark, the colonial powers, as well as the nearby island of Iceland) for more than a millennium.
Rediscovering these colonists and spreading ideas of the Protestant Reformation among them was one of the primary reasons for the Danish recolonization in the 18th century.
The first, and still the largest, is Buksefjord hydroelectric power plant.
Up to the year 1979 (Stage 0) it shows Historical to Holocene, i.e.
The average daily temperature of Nuuk, Greenland varies over the seasons from .
Under the patronage of the Royal Mission College in Copenhagen, Norwegian and Danish Lutherans and German Moravian missionaries searched for the missing Norse settlements, but no Norse were found, and instead they began preaching to the Inuit.
Their snowlines rose step by step up to the level of 1979.
In 1721, a joint mercantile and clerical expedition led by Danish-Norwegian missionary Hans Egede was sent to Greenland, not knowing whether a Norse civilization remained there.
But at the same time alcohol prices are much higher, meaning that consumption has a high social impact.
Kangerlussuaq Airport around 100&nbsp;km (60 miles) inland from the west coast is the major airport of Greenland and the hub for domestic flights.
Despite this change, in 1946 a commission including the highest Greenlandic council, the Landsrådene, recommended patience and no radical reform of the system.
Analysis of the layering and chemical composition of the cores has provided a revolutionary new record of climate change in the Northern Hemisphere going back about 100,000&nbsp;years, and illustrated that the world's weather and temperature have often shifted rapidly from one seemingly stable state to another, with worldwide consequences.
In 1500, King Manuel&nbsp;I of Portugal sent Gaspar Corte-Real to Greenland in search of a Northwest Passage to Asia which, according to the Treaty of Tordesillas, was part of Portugal's influence.
The Kingdom of Denmark is a constitutional monarchy, in which Queen Margrethe II is the head of state.
Secondary education is available in several places in the country.
The name of the country in Greenlandic (Kalaallisut) is  ("land of the Kalaallit").
Each of these dialects is almost unintelligible to the speakers of the other, and are considered by some linguists to be separate languages.
This applies to all of the Kingdom of Denmark, except for the Faroe Islands, as the Church of the Faroe Islands became independent in 2007.
Denmark–Norway claimed Greenland for centuries.
It is expected that much of the labour needed will be imported.
The state oil company Nunaoil was created to help develop the hydrocarbon industry in Greenland.
The island is sparsely populated in vegetation; plant life consists mainly of grassland and small bushes, which is regularly grazed by livestock.
Greenland is the world's largest island (it is smaller than Australia, which is considered a continent).
Nearly all Greenlanders live along the fjords in the south-west of the main island, which has a relatively mild climate.
The New Testament was translated piecemeal from the time of the very first settlement on Kangeq Island, but the first translation of the whole Bible was not completed until 1900.
In 2003, a small island, 35 by 15 metres (115 by 49 ft) in length and width, was discovered by arctic explorer Dennis Schmitt and his team at the coordinates of 83-42.
Along with his extended family and his thralls, he set out in ships to explore icy land known to lie to the northwest.
A secret attempt by the United States to construct a subterranean network of nuclear missile launch sites in the Greenlandic ice cap named Project Iceworm was carried out from Camp Century from 1960 to 1966 before being abandoned as unworkable.
The 1310 m-high Qaqugdluit-mountain-land on the south-side of the peninsula Nugssuaq, situated  west of the Greenland inland ice at 70° 7’50.92"N 51°44’30.52"W, is exemplary of the numerous mountain areas of West-Greenland.
Additional proceeds from the sale of fishing licences and the annual compensation from the EU represents 280&nbsp;million DKK per year.
In 1950 Greenland was reintroduced into the sphere of military influence of the United States when Denmark agreed to allow the US to reestablish Thule Air Base, which was greatly expanded between 1951 and 1953 as part of a unified NATO Cold War defense strategy.
Marine mammals include the hooded seal (''Cystophora cristata'') as well as the grey seal (''Halichoerus grypus'').
70% of its energy is from renewable sources.
All civil aviation matters are handled by the Civil Aviation Administration Denmark.
The settlements, such as Brattahlíð, thrived for centuries but disappeared sometime in the 15th century, perhaps at the onset of the Little Ice Age.
Greenland's head of state is Margrethe&nbsp;II, Queen regnant of Denmark.
However, in a referendum in 1982, a majority of the population voted for Greenland to withdraw from the EEC (later expanded into the EU), which was effected in 1985.
The oldest sport association in Greenland is the Greenland Ski Federation (GIF), founded in 1969.
On 21 June 2009, Greenland gained self-rule with provisions for assuming responsibility for self-government of judicial affairs, policing, and natural resources.
Inuit, or Kalaallit, culture has a strong artistic tradition, dating back thousands of years.
After 15&nbsp;years in Greenland, Hans Egede left his son Paul Egede in charge of the mission in Greenland and returned to Denmark where he established a Greenland Seminary.
Greenland has been inhabited off and on for at least the last 4,500 years by Arctic peoples whose forebears migrated there from what is now Canada.
However, EU law largely does not apply to Greenland except in the area of trade.
Today, the major religion is Protestant Christianity, represented mainly by the Church of Denmark, which is Lutheran in orientation.
Some popular Greenlandic bands and artists include Sume (classic rock), Chilly Friday (rock), Siissisoq (rock), Nuuk Posse (hip hop) and Rasmus Lyberth (folk), who performed in the Danish Eurovision Song Contest 1979, performing in Greenlandic.
However, it is the 17th member of the N.F.-Board.
The singer-songwriter Simon Lynge is the first musical artist from Greenland to have an album released across the United Kingdom, and to perform at the UK's Glastonbury Festival.
In 1979 the glacier tongues came to an end – according to the extent and height of the glacier nourishing area – between  above sea level.
This happened when the then-President of the GIF Daniel Switching took the initiative to found federations and institute reforms.
During this war, the system of government changed: Governor Eske Brun ruled the island under a law of 1925 that allowed governors to take control under extreme circumstances; Governor Aksel Svane was transferred to the United States to lead the commission to supply Greenland.
The current commissioner is Mikaela Engell.
A debate about the role of Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) and Danish in future society is ongoing.
The Thule Culture migrated from Alaska around 1000, reaching Greenland around 1300.
Greenland also has a successful, albeit small, music culture.
These DNA samples suggest that the temperature probably reached  in the summer and  in the winter.
Traditional art-making practices thrive in the ''Ammassalik''.
The current Prime Minister is Kim Kielsen of the Siumut Party.
Its nourishing areas consisted of high-lying plateau-glaciers and local ice caps.
There are approximately 700 known species of insects in Greenland, which is low compared with other countries (over one million species have been described worldwide).
An improved translation using the modern orthography was completed in 2000.
This new colony was centred at Godthåb ("Good Hope") on the southwest coast.
The orthography of Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) was established in 1851 and revised in 1973, and the country has a 100% literacy rate.
Intercontinental flights connect mainly to Copenhagen.
From 2400&nbsp;BC to 1300&nbsp;BC, the Independence I culture existed in northern Greenland.
Greenland's connection to Denmark was severed on 9 April 1940, early in World War&nbsp;II, when Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany.
The extreme north of Greenland, Peary Land, is not covered by an ice sheet, because the air there is too dry to produce snow, which is essential in the production and maintenance of an ice sheet.
A survey led by French scientist Paul-Emile Victor in 1951 concluded that, under the ice sheet, Greenland is composed of three large islands.
On steep mountainsides breed large colonies of auks, puffins, skuas, and kittiwakes.
The earliest entry of the Paleo-Eskimo into Greenland is thought to have occurred about 2500&nbsp;BC.
The music culture of Greenland also includes traditional Inuit music, largely revolving around singing and drums.
The most common tree native to Greenland is the European white birch (''Betula pubescens'') along with gray-leaf willow (''Salix glauca''), rowans (''Sorbus aucuparia''), common junipers (''Juniperus communis'') and other smaller trees, mainly willows.
A final report (G-50) was presented in 1950: Greenland was to be a modern welfare state with Denmark as sponsor and example.
The radio station Jørgen Brønlund Fjord was, until 1950, the northernmost permanent outpost in the world.
The island was named Place of the Year by the Oxford Atlas of the World in 2007.
Other mineral prospects are improving as prices are increasing.
While Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) is dominant in all smaller settlements, a part of the population of Inuit or mixed ancestry, especially in towns, speaks Danish.
Several thousand Greenlandic Inuit reside in Denmark proper.
The local population of three nearby villages was moved over 100&nbsp;kilometres (62&nbsp;mi) away in the winter.
Greenland thus became a Danish colony in 1814, and a part of the Danish Realm in 1953 under the Constitution of Denmark.
The Queen of Denmark, Margrethe&nbsp;II, remains Greenland's Head of state.
However, following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the monarch have since become strictly representative and ceremonial, such as the formal appointment and dismissal of the Prime Minister and other ministers in the executive government.
However, a recent study suggests a much warmer planet in relatively recent geological times: Scientists who probed  through a Greenland glacier to recover the oldest plant&nbsp;DNA on record said that the planet was far warmer hundreds of thousands of years ago than is generally believed.
These include iron, uranium, aluminium, nickel, platinum, tungsten, titanium, and copper.
The current snowline (Stage 0) runs nearly unchanged.
Greenland Ski Federation is further divided into Alpine and cross-country selection committees.
From 986, Greenland's west coast was settled by Icelanders and Norwegians, through a contingent of 14 boats led by Erik the Red.
The governing body, the Football Association of Greenland (''Kalaallit Nunaanni Arsaattartut Kattuffiat''), is not yet a member of FIFA because of ongoing disagreements with FIFA leadership and an inability to grow grass for regulation grass pitches.
That view contrasts sharply with the prevailing one that a lush forest of this kind could not have existed in Greenland any later than 2.4&nbsp;million years ago.
The Eastern Settlement was likely abandoned in the early to mid-15th century, during this cold period.
It is spoken by about 50,000 people, making it the most populous of the Eskimo–Aleut language family, spoken by more people than all the other languages of the family combined.
Three-quarters of Greenland is covered by the only permanent ice sheet outside of Antarctica.
The ''Cantino'' planisphere, made in Lisbon, accurately depicts the southern coastline of Greenland.
The Thule culture was the first to introduce to Greenland such technological innovations as dog sleds and toggling harpoons.
Approximately 225 species of fish are known from the waters surrounding Greenland, and the fishing industry is a major part of Greenland's economy, accounting for approximately the majority of the country's total exports.
Birds, especially seabirds, are an important part of Greenland's animal life.
During the oldest Postglacial Stage VII an ice-stream-network from valley glaciers joining each other, has completely covered the landscape.
On 8 April 1941, the United States occupied Greenland to defend it against a possible invasion by Germany.
Today Greenlandic culture is a blending of traditional Inuit (Kalaallit) and Scandinavian culture.
The last four are found naturally only in East Greenland, having immigrated from Ellesmere Island.
Land fauna consists predominantly of animals that have spread from North America or for a lot of birds and insects coming from Europe.
In 1973, Greenland joined the European Economic Community with Denmark.
The total area of Greenland is  (including other offshore minor islands), of which the Greenland ice sheet covers  (81%) and has a volume of approximately .
The Kalaallit are the indigenous Greenlandic Inuit people who inhabit the country's western region.
There are still Christian missionaries on the island, but mainly from charismatic movements proselytizing fellow Christians.
A study of North Atlantic seasonal temperature variability showed a significant decrease in maximum summer temperatures beginning in the late 13th century to early 14th century—as much as 6–8&nbsp;°C lower than modern summer temperatures.
The study also found that the lowest winter temperatures of the last 2000 years occurred in the late 14th century and early 15th century.
Whether this island is permanent is not confirmed as of yet.
Traditionally many Greenlanders have received higher education in Denmark.
Between 1991 and 2004, monitoring of the weather at one location (Swiss Camp) showed that the average winter temperature had risen almost .
While there are no official census data on religion in Greenland, the Bishop of Greenland Sofie Petersen estimates that 85% of the Greenlandic population are members of her congregation.
The law came into effect on 1 May 1979.
Air transportation exists both within Greenland and between the island and other nations.
Between 1989 and 1993, US and European climate researchers drilled into the summit of Greenland's ice sheet, obtaining a pair of  long ice cores.
A chapter in the Konungs skuggsjá (The King's Mirror) describes Norse Greenland's exports and imports as well as grain cultivation.
From around 2500&nbsp;BC to 800&nbsp;BC, southern and western Greenland was inhabited by the Saqqaq culture.
The European Union has urged Greenland to restrict People's Republic of China development of rare-earth projects, as China accounts for 95 percent of the world's current supply.
Also, Greenlanders were recognized as a separate people under international law.
Although the country's environment is generally ill-suited for golf, there are nevertheless golf courses in the island.
Following World War II, the United States developed a geopolitical interest in Greenland, and in 1946 the United States offered to buy Greenland from Denmark for $100,000,000, but Denmark refused to sell it.
Of land birds that are usually sedentary, can be highlighted arctic redpoll, ptarmigan, short-eared owl, snowy owl, gyrfalcon and in West Greenland the white-tailed eagle.
They have to be classified as belonging to the global glacier advances in the years 1811 to 1850 and 1880 to 1900 ("Little Ice Age"), 1910 to 1930, 1948 and 1953.
Of the other groups, the lichens are the largest with about 950 species; of major fungal species are known 600–700; mosses and algae anything less.
The remaining 12% are of European descent, mainly Greenland Danes.
The Kingdom of Norway was extensive and a military power until the mid-14th century.
As a consequence of political complications in relation to Denmark's entry into the European Common Market in 1972, a further desire to establish the legality of Greenland's status formed in Denmark, resulting in the Home Rule Act of 1979, which gave Greenland limited autonomy with its own legislature taking control of some internal policies, while the Parliament of Denmark maintained full control of external policies, security, and natural resources.
Species represented include the beluga whale, blue whale, Greenland whale, fin whale, humpback whale, minke whale, narwhal, pilot whale, sperm whale.
Breeding migratory birds are also including snow bunting, lapland bunting, ringed plover, red-throated loon and red-necked phalarope.
Both Greenlandic and Danish have been used in public affairs since the establishment of home rule in 1979; the majority of the population can speak both languages.
The majority of Greenland, however, is less than  in elevation.
There is a 10-year compulsory schooling for children.
Interpretation of ice core and clam shell data suggests that between 800 and 1300, the regions around the fjords of southern Greenland experienced a relatively mild climate several degrees Celsius higher than usual in the North Atlantic, with trees and herbaceous plants growing and livestock being farmed.
In the early 18th century, Scandinavia and Greenland came back into contact with each other, and Denmark-Norway affirmed sovereignty over the island.
Finding the sea frozen, they headed south and arrived in Labrador and Newfoundland.
system in the world.
Denmark maintains control of foreign affairs and defence matters.
Due to the uplift of the snowline about that c.  – what corresponds to a warming about c.  –, since 1979 there exists a plateau- glaciation with small glacier tongues hanging down on the margins that nearly did not reach the main valley bottoms any more.
The Arctic Umiaq Line ferry acts as a lifeline for western Greenland, connecting the various cities and settlements.
At least four scientific expedition stations and camps had been established on the ice sheet in the ice-covered central part of Greenland (indicated as pale blue in the map to the right): Eismitte, North Ice, North GRIP Camp and The Raven Skiway.
Postglacial glacier stages dating back at least 7000 and at most c. 10 000 years.
The Church of Denmark is the established church through the Constitution of Denmark:
In 2008, the people of Greenland passed a referendum supporting greater autonomy; 75% of votes cast were in favour.
Whales frequently pass very close to Greenlandic shores in the late summer and early autumn.
Greenland competes in the biennial Island Games, as well as the biennial Arctic Winter Games (AWG).
Two years later, the first step towards a change of government was initiated when a grand commission was established.
After finding a habitable area and settling there, he named it '''' (translated as "Greenland"), supposedly in the hope that the pleasant name would attract settlers.
The majority of the population is Lutheran.
Named "Uunartoq Qeqertaq" (English: ''Warming Island''), this island has always been present off the coast of Greenland, but was covered by a glacier.
The pertinent climatic glacier- snowline (ELA) ran at c.  in height.
In 1994 and again in 2002, they won the Hodgson Trophy for fair play.
The sea is rich in fish and invertebrates, especially in the milder West Greenland Current, and a large part of the Greenland fauna associated with marine production, including large colonies of seabirds.
The Kalaallit are known for an art form of figures called ''tupilak'' or a "spirit object."
They shared the island with the late Dorset culture inhabitants who occupied the northern and western parts, and later with the Thule culture arriving from the north.
More than 17,000 people reside in Nuuk, the capital city.
