At least the verse, if not the complete gradual, is for the solo cantor and are in elaborate, ornate style with long, wide-ranged melismata.
Outside the larger cities, the number of available clergy dropped, and lay men started singing these parts.
Some practising researchers favour a closer look at non Western (liturgical) traditions, in such cultures where the tradition of modal monophony was never abandoned.
Gregorian chant is sung in the Office during the canonical hours and in the liturgy of the Mass.
The Kyrie consists of a threefold repetition of "Kyrie eleison" ("Lord, have mercy"), a threefold repetition of "Christe eleison" ("Christ have mercy"), followed by another threefold repetition of "Kyrie eleison."
Gregorian chant was traditionally sung by choirs of men and boys in churches, or by men and women of religious orders in their chapels.
This is why the Mass as a compositional form, as set by composers like Palestrina or Mozart, features a Kyrie but not an Introit.
Graduals are accompanied by an elaborate Verse, so that it actually consists in two different parts, A B.
These basic melodic units combined into larger phrases through a complex system expressed by cheironomic hand-gestures.
These verses however, are among the most ornate and elaborated in the whole chant repertoire.
Often, a Gregorian chant (sometimes in modified form) would be used as a ''cantus firmus'', so that the consecutive notes of the chant determined the harmonic progression.
Certain classes of Gregorian chant have a separate musical formula for each mode, allowing one section of the chant to transition smoothly into the next section, such as the psalm verses that are sung between the repetition of antiphons, or the Gloria Patri.
Over time, the verses were reduced in number, usually to just one psalm verse and the doxology, or even omitted entirely.
In older chants, "Kyrie eleison imas" ("Lord, have mercy on us") can be found.
Ambrosian chant alone survived to the present day, preserved in Milan due to the musical reputation and ecclesiastical authority of St. Ambrose.
While the standard repertory of Gregorian Chant was partly being supplanted with new forms of polyphony, the earlier melo-rhythmic refinements of monophonic chant seem to fall into disuse.
The B-flat was an integral part of the system of hexachords rather than an accidental.
With some exceptions, these tables confirm the short vs. long distinctions in Cardine’s 'Semiologie Gregorienne'.
Correlating the various word and neume variables, substantial correlations were found for the word variables 'accented syllable' and 'contextual syllable duration'.
hard), written squarely, indicates B-natural and serves to cancel the b-mollum.
When a syllable has a large number of notes, a series of smaller such groups of neumes are written in succession, read from left to right.
A sort of musical stenography that seems to focus on gestures and tone-movements but not the specific pitches of individual notes, nor the relative starting pitches of each neume.
He reorganized the Schola Cantorum and established a more uniform standard in church services, gathering chants from among the regional traditions as widely as he could manage.
Using Psalm Tone i with an antiphon in Mode 1 makes for a smooth transition between the end of the antiphon and the intonation of the tone, and the ending of the tone can then be chosen to provide a smooth transition back to the antiphon.
He was often depicted as receiving the dictation of plainchant from a dove representing the Holy Spirit, thus giving Gregorian chant the stamp of being divinely inspired.
The non-psalmodic chants, including the Ordinary of the Mass, sequences, and hymns, were originally intended for congregational singing.
The monks of Solesmes brought in their heaviest artillery in this battle, as indeed the academically sound 'Paleo' was intended to be a war-tank, meant to abolish once and for all the corrupted Pustet edition.
Not much is known about the particular vocal stylings or performance practices used for Gregorian chant in the Middle Ages.
This reconstructed chant was academically praised, but rejected by Rome until 1903, when Pope Leo XIII died.
Singing has been part of the Christian liturgy since the earliest days of the Church.
neumes for a word (contextual variables).
The Solesmes editions insert phrasing marks and note-lengthening ''episema'' and ''mora'' marks not found in the original sources.
"Amen" and "alleluia" come from Hebrew, and the threefold "sanctus" derives from the threefold "kadosh" of the Kedushah.
It became conventional wisdom that listening to Gregorian chant increased the production of alpha waves in the brain, reinforcing the popular reputation of Gregorian chant as tranquilizing music.
Each mode is distinguished by its ''final'', ''dominant'', and ''ambitus''.
Gregorian chant evolved to fulfill various functions in the Roman Catholic liturgy.
Around 375, antiphonal psalmody became popular in the Christian East; in 386, St. Ambrose introduced this practice to the West.
Gregorian melodies provided musical material and served as models for tropes and liturgical dramas.
He devised a new graphic adaptation of square notation 'simplex' in which he integrated the rhythmic indications of the two most relevant sources, that of Laon and Skt.
The earliest notated sources of Gregorian chant (written ca.
At the close of the Office, one of four ''Marian antiphons'' is sung.
VI as transmitted in a Cambrai manuscript, uses the form ABA CDC EFE', with shifts in tessitura between sections.
More complex chants are sung by trained soloists and choirs.
These polyphonic arrangements usually incorporate elements of the original chant.
Charlemagne continued his father's policy of favoring the Roman Rite over the local Gallican traditions.
During the 20th century, Gregorian chant underwent a musicological and popular resurgence.
Ever since restoration of Chant was taken up in Solesmes, there have been lengthy discussions of exactly what course was to be taken.
The neumatic manuscripts display great sophistication and precision in notation and a wealth of graphic signs to indicate the musical gesture and proper pronunciation of the text.
It is interesting that the distinction between the first two rules and the latter rule can also be found in early treatises on music, introducing the terms ''metrum'' and ''rhythmus''.
In the 10th century, virtually no musical manuscripts were being notated in Italy.
In 1984 Chris Hakkennes published his own transcription of the Graduale Triplex.
indicates a plagal mode, where the melody moves below the final.
950) used symbols called ''neumes'' (Gr.
These traditions may have evolved from a hypothetical year-round repertory of 5th-century plainchant after the western Roman Empire collapsed.
In contrast to the ancient Greek system of tetrachords (a collection of four continuous notes) that descend by two tones and a semitone, the Enchiriadis writings base their tone-system on a tetrachord that corresponds to the four finals of chant, D, E, F, and G. The disjunct tetrachords in the Enchiriadis system have been the subject of much speculation, because they do not correspond to the diatonic framework that became the standard Medieval scale (for example, there is a high F#, a note not recognized by later Medieval writers).
Neither tropes nor organum, however, belong to the chant repertory proper.
Offertories are sung during the offering of Eucharistic bread and wine.
In 885, Pope Stephen V banned the Slavonic liturgy, leading to the ascendancy of Gregorian chant in Eastern Catholic lands including Poland, Moravia, Slovakia, and Austria.
:Modes 7 and 8 are the authentic and plagal modes ending on G, sometimes called Mixolydian and Hypomixolydian.
Gregorian chant has been also used in ''Vision of Escaflowne'' and ''Death Note'' anime series, Disney's The Hunchback of Notre Dame, the theme of the Temple of Time in the Legend of Zelda series and the Halo series of videogames, although it had been used in such a number of productions and movies that this is only a very selective list of examples.
By the 9th century the Gallican rite and chant had effectively been eliminated, although not without local resistance.
The first extant sources with musical notation were written around 930 (Graduale Laon).
The oriscus, quilisma, and liquescent neumes indicate special vocal treatments, that have been largely neglected due to uncertainty as to how to sing them.
Gallen and Laon) manifest such rhythmic diversity and melodic – rhythmic ornamentations for which there is hardly a living performance tradition in the Western world.
The Graduale Triplex made widely accessible the original notation of Sankt Gallen and Laon (compiled after 930 AD) in a single chantbook and was a huge step forward.
The modal melodies of chant provide unusual sounds to ears attuned to modern scales.
Gregorian chant was originally used for singing the Office (by male and female religious) and for singing the parts of the Mass pertaining to the lay faithful (male and female), the celebrant (priest, always male) and the choir (composed of male ordained clergy, except in convents).
Contemporary groups that endeavour to sing according to the manuscript traditions have evolved after 1975.
This variety in notation must have served a practical purpose and therefore a musical significance.
Although popular legend credits Pope St. Gregory the Great with inventing Gregorian chant, scholars believe that it arose from a later Carolingian synthesis of Roman chant and Gallican chant.
Chants of the Office, sung during the canonical hours, have their roots in the early 4th century, when desert monks following St. Anthony introduced the practice of continuous psalmody, singing the complete cycle of 150 psalms each week.
Musical elements that would later be used in the Roman Rite began to appear in the 3rd century.
Canonical hours have their roots in Jewish prayer hours.
Another medieval innovation had the solo cantor sing the opening words of responsorial chants, with the full chorus finishing the end of the opening phrase.
Scholars are still debating how plainchant developed during the 5th through the 9th centuries, as information from this period is scarce.
For example, in four medieval manuscripts, the Communion ''Circuibo'' was transcribed using a different mode in each.
Other ancient witnesses such as Pope Clement I, Tertullian, St. Athanasius, and Egeria confirm the practice, although in poetic or obscure ways that shed little light on how music sounded during this period.
Tracts are melismatic settings of psalm verses and use frequent recurring cadences and they are strongly centonized.
Melismatic chants are the most ornate chants in which elaborate melodies are sung on long sustained vowels as in the Alleluia, ranging from five or six notes per syllable to over sixty in the more prolix melismata.
In 1562–63, the Council of Trent banned most sequences.
Communion melodies are often tonally ambiguous and do not fit into a single musical mode which has led to the same communio being classed in different modes in different manuscripts or editions.
One school of thought, including Wagner, Jammers, and Lipphardt, advocated imposing rhythmic meters on chants, although they disagreed on how that should be done.
Because of the textual repetition, various musical repeat structures occur in these chants.
Mozarabic chant survived the influx of the Visigoths and Moors, but not the Roman-backed prelates newly installed in Spain during the Reconquista.
Likewise, simple chants are often syllabic throughout with only a few instances where two or more notes are sung on one syllable.
On the basis of this ongoing research it has become obvious that the Graduale and other chantbooks contain many melodic errors, some very consistently, (the mis-interpretation of third and eighth mode) necessitating a new edition of the Graduale according to state-of-the-art melodic restitutions.
It has also been used in ''The Omen'''s main theme, "Ave Satani".
This practice appears to have begun in the Middle Ages.
Most psalmodic chants are antiphonal and responsorial, sung to free melodies of varying complexity.
The structure of their texts largely defines their musical style.
Mocquereau divided melodies into two- and three-note phrases, each beginning with an ''ictus'', akin to a beat, notated in chantbooks as a small vertical mark.
Moreover, it could be established that the multiple correlation (''R'') between the two types of variables reaches its maximum (''R'' is about 0.80) if the neumatic elements are evaluated according to the following rules of duration: (a) neume elements that represent short notes in neumes consisting of at least two notes have duration values of 1 time; (b) neume elements that represent long notes in neumes consisting of at least two notes have duration values of 2 times; (c) neumes consisting of only one note are characterized by flexible duration values (with an average value of 2 times), which take over the duration values of the syllables to match.
In his motu proprio ''Tra le sollecitudini'', Pius X mandated the use of Gregorian chant, encouraging the faithful to sing the Ordinary of the Mass, although he reserved the singing of the Propers for males.
The Marian antiphons, especially ''Alma Redemptoris Mater'', were frequently arranged by Renaissance composers.
On the evidence of congruence throughout various manuscripts (which were duly published in facsimile editions with ample editorial introductions) Solesmes was able to work out a practical reconstruction.
Similar examples exist throughout the repertory.
Both the syllable lengths and the neume lengths were also expressed in relation to the total duration of the syllables, resp.
Skips of a third are common, and larger skips far more common than in other plainchant repertories such as Ambrosian chant or Beneventan chant.
John the Deacon, biographer (c. 872) of Pope Gregory I, modestly claimed that the saint "compiled a patchwork antiphonary", unsurprisingly, given his considerable work with liturgical development.
This system of square notation is standard in modern chantbooks.
In presentation the Communio is similar to the Introitus, an antiphon with a series of psalm verses.
For example, the Credo was added to the Roman Rite at the behest of the Emperor Henry II in 1014.
Additional symbols developed, such as the ''custos'', placed at the end of a system to show the next pitch.
While this custom is maintained in traditionalist Catholic communities (most of which allow all-female scholas as well, though), the Catholic Church no longer persists with this ban.
The most straightforward is recitation on the same tone, which is called "syllabic" as each syllable is sung to a single tone.
Gregorian chant is vaguely imitated into other genres, such as London Boys' "Requiem" and some other dance compositions, Enigma's "Sadeness (Part I)", the chant interpretation of pop and rock by the German band Gregorian, the new-age project Era, the techno project E Nomine, many of the songs by American power/thrash metal band Iced Earth, and the work of black metal band Deathspell Omega.
The earlier notated manuscripts are primarily from Regensburg in Germany, St. Gall in Switzerland, Laon and St.
The Alleluia is also in two parts, the alleluia proper and the psalmverse, by which the Alleluia is identified (Alleluia V. Pascha nostrum).
The studies of Cardine and his students (Godehard Joppich, Luigi Augustoni, Johannes B. Göschl, Marie-Noël Colette, Rupert Fischer, Marie-Claire Billecocq, Alexander M. Schweitzer to name a few) have clearly demonstrated that rhythm in Gregorian chant as notated in the 10th century rhythmic manuscripts (notably Skt.
Offertories are in form closest to Responsories, which are likewise accompanied by at least one Verse and the opening sections of both Off.
Not every Gregorian chant fits neatly into Guido's hexachords or into the system of eight modes.
Gregorian chant had a significant impact on the development of medieval and Renaissance music.
Finals were altered, melodic ranges reduced, melismata trimmed, B-flats eliminated, and repeated words removed.
In the fifth century, a singing school, the Schola Cantorum, was founded at Rome to provide training in church musicianship.
The note lengthenings recommended by the Solesmes school remain influential, though not prescriptive.
Many German-speaking areas, however, continued to use unpitched neumes into the twelfth century.
sign, of the hand) to indicate tone-movements and relative duration within each syllable.
Since the 1970s, with the influential insights of Dom Eugène Cardine (see below under 'rhythm'), ornamental neumes have received more attention from both researchers and performers.
Offertories once had highly prolix melodies in their verses, but the use of verses in Gregorian Offertories disappeared around the 12th century.
By the 16th century, the fifth line added to the musical staff had become standard.
The bass clef and the flat, natural, and sharp accidentals derived directly from Gregorian notation.
Charlemagne, once elevated to Holy Roman Emperor, aggressively spread Gregorian chant throughout his empire to consolidate religious and secular power, requiring the clergy to use the new repertory on pain of death.
Later redactions such as the ''Editio medicaea'' of 1614 rewrote chant so that melismata, with their melodic accent, fell on accented syllables.
Given the fact that Chant was learned in an oral tradition in which the texts and melodies were sung from memory, this was obviously not necessary.
The square notation that had been devised for plainchant was borrowed and adapted for other kinds of music.
Given the oral teaching tradition of Gregorian chant, modern reconstruction of intended rhythm from the written notation of Gregorian chant has always been a source of debate among modern scholars.
Because of the length of these texts, these chants often break into musical subsections corresponding with textual breaks.
As a response to this need and following the Holy See's invitation to edit a more critical edition, in 2011 the first volume "De Dominicis et Festis" of the "Graduale Novum Editio Magis Critica Iuxta SC 117"was published by Libreria Editrice Vatican and ConBrio Verlagsgesellschaft, Regensburg.
As it could also be demonstrated by Van Kampen that melodic peaks often coincide with the word accent (see also), the conclusion seems warranted that the Gregorian melodies enhance the expressiveness of the Latin words by mimicking to some extent both the accentuation of the sacred words (pitch differences between neumes) and the relative duration of the word syllables (by paying attention to well-defined length differences between the individual notes of a neume).
Vernacular hymns such as "Christ ist erstanden" and "Nun bitten wir den Heiligen Geist" adapted original Gregorian melodies to translated texts.
Reinforced by the legend of Pope Gregory, Gregorian chant was taken to be the authentic, original chant of Rome, a misconception that continues to this day.
For example, the Collect for Easter consists of 127 syllables sung to 131 pitches, with 108 of these pitches being the reciting note A and the other 23 pitches flexing down to G. Liturgical recitatives are commonly found in the accentus chants of the liturgy, such as the intonations of the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel during the Mass, and in the direct psalmody of the Office.
Certain groupings of neumes were used to indicate repeating rhythms called rhythmic modes.
Other symbols indicated changes in articulation, duration, or tempo, such as a letter "t" to indicate a tenuto.
An opposing interpretation, represented by Pothier and Mocquereau, supported a free rhythm of equal note values, although some notes are lengthened for textual emphasis or musical effect.
Melodic motion is primarily stepwise.
Although corresponding plagal and authentic modes have the same final, they have different dominants.
In direct psalmody, psalm verses are sung without refrains to simple, formulaic tones.
Often the first part is sung again, creating a 'rondeau' A B A.
This last section is therefore called the 'repetenda' and is in performance the last melodic line of the chant.
Apel has described these four songs as "among the most beautiful creations of the late Middle Ages."
Introits are antiphonal chants, typically consisting of an antiphon, a psalm verse, a repeat of the antiphon, an intonation of the Gloria Patri Doxology, and a final repeat of the antiphon.
They have their own Gregorian melodies, but because they are short and simple, and have rarely been the subject of later musical composition, they are often omitted in discussion.
The main exception to this is the sequence, whose origins lay in troping the extended melisma of Alleluia chants known as the jubilus, but the sequences, like the tropes, were later officially suppressed.
In the late 19th century, early liturgical and musical manuscripts were unearthed and edited.
To complicate matters further, many ornamental neumes used in the earliest manuscripts pose difficulties on the interpretation of rhythm.
are partly repeated after the verse(s).
Responsorial chants are often composed of an amalgamation of various stock musical phrases, pieced together in a practice called ''centonization''.
Consistent relative heightening first developed in the Aquitaine region, particularly at St.
These mode III Introits, however, use both G and C as reciting tones, and often begin with a decorated leap from G to C to establish this tonality.
The Alleluia is known for the ''jubilus'', an extended joyful melisma on the last vowel of 'Alleluia'.
This innovation allowed the soloist to fix the pitch of the chant for the chorus and to cue the choral entrance.
Typical melodic features include a characteristic ambitus, and also characteristic intervallic patterns relative to a referential mode final, incipits and cadences, the use of reciting tones at a particular distance from the final, around which the other notes of the melody revolve, and a vocabulary of musical motifs woven together through a process called centonization to create families of related chants.
Several Introits in mode 3, including ''Loquetur Dominus'' above, exhibit melodic similarities.
The use of chant as a cantus firmus was the predominant practice until the Baroque period, when the stronger harmonic progressions made possible by an independent bass line became standard.
Certain phrases are used only at the beginnings of chants, or only at the end, or only in certain combinations, creating musical families of chants such as the ''Iustus ut palma'' family of Graduals.
Dom Cardine had many students who have each in their own way continued their semiological studies, some of whom also started experimenting in applying the newly understood principles in performance practice.
Gregorian chant was categorized into eight modes, influenced by the eightfold division of Byzantine chants called the ''oktoechos''.
Nevertheless, the lore surrounding Pope Gregory I was sufficient to culminate in his portrayal as the actual author of Gregorian Chant.
Some favored a strict academic rigour and wanted to postpone publications, while others concentrated on practical matters and wanted to supplant the corrupted tradition as soon as possible.
Early Gregorian chant was revised to conform to the theoretical structure of the modes.
For example, there are chants — especially from German sources – whose neumes suggest a warbling of pitches between the notes E and F, outside the hexachord system, or in other words, employing a form of chromatism.
In this approach the so-called earlier 'rhythmic' manuscripts of unheightened neumes that carry a wealth of melo-rhythmic information but not of exact pitches, are compared in large tables of comparison with relevant later 'melodic' manuscripts' that are written on lines or use double alphabetic and neumes notation over the text, but as a rule have less rhythmic refinement compared to the earlier group.
However, when Gregorian chant as plainchant experienced a popular resurgence during the new-age and world-music movements of the 1980s and '90s, the iconic album was somewhat unexpectedly ''Chant'', recorded by the Benedictine monks of Santo Domingo de Silos, Spain.
But the developments were abundant as well.
In 1904, the Vatican edition of the Solesmes chant was commissioned.
The changes made in the new system of chants were so significant that they have led some scholars to speculate that it was named in honor of the contemporary Pope Gregory II.
Among the composers who most frequently wrote polyphonic settings of the Propers were William Byrd and Tomás Luis de Victoria.
Reciting tones often dominate their melodic structures.
Recent developments involve an intensifying of the semiological approach according to Dom Cardine, which also gave a new impetus to the research into melodic variants in various manuscripts of chant.
Dom Eugene Cardine, (1905–1988) monk from Solesmes, published his 'Semiologie Gregorienne' in 1970 in which he clearly explains the musical significance of the neumes of the early chant manuscripts.
Earlier, Dom Prosper Guéranger revived the monastic tradition in Solesmes.
Despite these attempts to impose modal consistency, some chants — notably Communions — defy simple modal assignment.
The 3rd-century Greek "Oxyrhynchus hymn" survived with musical notation, but the connection between this hymn and the plainchant tradition is uncertain.
The actual pitch of the Gregorian chant is not fixed, so the piece can be sung in whichever range is most comfortable.
Another form of early notation used a system of letters corresponding to different pitches, much as Shaker music is notated.
Hexachords could be built on C (the natural hexachord, C-D-E^F-G-A), F (the soft hexachord, using a B-flat, F-G-A^Bb-C-D), or G (the hard hexachord, using a B-natural, G-A-B^C-D-E).
Gregorian melodies are more likely to traverse a seventh than a full octave, so that melodies rarely travel from D up to the D an octave higher, but often travel from D to the C a seventh higher, using such patterns as D-F-G-A-C. Gregorian melodies often explore chains of pitches, such as F-A-C, around which the other notes of the chant gravitate.
Gregorian chant has in its long history been subjected to a series of redactions to bring it up to changing contemporary tastes and practice.
The late 8th century saw a steadily increasing influence of the Carolingian monarchs over the popes.
The most complete collection of chants is the ''Liber usualis'', which contains the chants for the Tridentine Mass and the most commonly used Office chants.
Although fully admitting the importance of Hakkennes' melodic revisions, the rhythmical solution suggested in the Graduale Lagal was actually found by Van Kampen (see above) to be rather modestly related to the text of the chant.
The Gregorian repertory was further systematized for use in the Roman Rite, and scholars weigh the relative influences of Roman and Carolingian practices upon the development of plainchant.
Nevertheless, Gregory's authorship is popularly accepted by some as fact to this day.
Willi Apel and Robert Snow assert a scholarly consensus that Gregorian chant developed around 750 from a synthesis of Roman and Gallican chants, and was commissioned by the Carolingian rulers in France.
According to Grout, his goal was to organize the bodies of chants from diverse traditions into a uniform and orderly whole for use by the entire western region of the Church.
Early Gregorian chant, like Ambrosian and Old Roman chant, whose melodies are most closely related to Gregorian, did not use the modal system.
Starting with the expectation that the rhythm of Gregorian chant (and thus the duration of the individual notes) anyway adds to the expressivity of the sacred Latin texts, several word-related variables were studied for their relationship with several neume-related variables, exploring these relationships in a sample of introit chants using such statistical methods as correlational analysis and multiple regression analysis.
The modern Solesmes editions of Gregorian chant follow this interpretation.
The Propers may also be replaced by choral settings on certain solemn occasions.
'''Gregorian chant''' is the central tradition of Western plainchant, a form of monophonic, unaccompanied sacred song of the western Roman Catholic Church.
According to James McKinnon, over a brief period in the 8th century, a project overseen by Chrodegang of Metz in the favorable atmosphere of the Carolingian monarchs also compiled the core liturgy of the Roman Mass and promoted its use in Francia and throughout Gaul.
Psalmodic chants include ''direct psalmody'', ''antiphonal chants'', and ''responsorial chants''.
However, Odo of Cluny, a renowned monastic reformer, praised the intellectual and musical virtuosity to be found in chant:
The last melisma of the verse is the same as the jubilus attached to the Alleluia.
The Gloria recites the Greater Doxology, and the Credo intones the Nicene Creed.
This occurs notably in the Offertories; in chants with shorter, repeating texts such as the Kyrie and Agnus Dei; and in longer chants with clear textual divisions such as the Great Responsories, the Gloria, and the Credo.
This school of interpretation claims the support of historical authorities such as St Augustine, Remigius, Guido and Aribo.
The various neume elements were evaluated by attaching different duration values to them, both in terms of semiological propositions (nuanced durations according to the manner of neume writing in Chris Hakkennes’ Graduale Lagal), and in terms of fixed duration values that were based on mensuralistic notions, however with ratios between short and long notes ranging from 1 : 1, via 1 : 1.2, 1 : 1.4, etc.
The scale patterns are organized against a background pattern formed of conjunct and disjunct tetrachords, producing a larger pitch system called the gamut.
