Stylized pictures of early grenades, emitting a flame, are used as ornaments on military uniforms, particularly in Britain, France (esp.
36 was about 30 yards with a danger area of about 100 yds.
The explosion does not cause shrapnel injury, but can still burn.
The British Home Guard was instructed that the throwing range of the No.
This makes incendiary grenades useful for destroying weapons caches, artillery, and vehicles.
Most AP grenades are designed to detonate either after a time delay or on impact.
Some grenade types also have a safety clip to prevent the handle from coming off in transit.
The branch insignia of the U.S.&nbsp;Army Ordnance Corps also uses this symbol, the grenade being symbolic of explosive ordnance in general.
White phosphorus was used in the No 76 Special Incendiary Grenade by the British Home Guard during World War&nbsp;II.
French Gendarmerie and the French Army), and Italy (Carabinieri).
The primer explodes and ignites the fuse (sometimes called the delay element).
The Confederacy used spherical hand grenades that weighed about six pounds, sometimes with a paper fuse.
Thus, to use a grenade, the lever is grasped (to prevent release), then the pin is removed, and then the grenade is thrown, which releases the lever and ignites the detonator, triggering explosion.
Alternatively, a voice alert can be given immediately after throwing the grenade, shouting "frag out" (for "fragmentation grenade outgoing"); this reduces or eliminates the element of surprise.
They can cause serious physical injury, especially the rubber shrapnel from the casing.
They also include include smoke and incendiary grenades.
The use of Greek fire spread to Muslim armies in the Near East, from where it reached China by the 10th century.
The Union relied on experimental Ketchum Grenades, which had a tail to ensure that the nose would strike the target and start the fuse.
Due to improvements in modern tank armor, anti-tank hand grenades are generally considered obsolete.
The external segmentation of the original Mills bomb was retained, since it provided a positive grip surface.
Some types have an additional payload of CS gas.
Fragments may travel more than
The Mills bombs and the Soviet F1 are examples of defensive grenades.
The British Grenadier Guards took their name and cap badge of a burning grenade from repelling an attack of French Grenadiers at Waterloo.
This reaction produces a tremendous amount of heat, burning at 2,200&nbsp;°C (4,000&nbsp;°F).
The chemical reaction that produces the heat is called a ''thermite reaction''.
The Chinese also discovered the explosive potential of packing hollowed cannonball shells with gunpowder.
In the case of the US Mk3A2, the casualty radius is published as 2 meters (6–7 feet) in ''open'' areas, but fragments and bits of fuse may be projected as far as 200 meters from the detonation point.
Smoke grenades are used as ground-to-ground or ground-to-air signalling devices, target or landing zone marking devices, and to create a smoke-screen for concealment.
Fuses are frequently fixed, though the Russian UZRGM () fuses are interchangeable and allow the delay to be varied, or replaced by a zero-delay pull fuse.
Chemical and gas grenades burn or release a gas, and do not explode.
The Mills bomb underwent numerous modifications.
In China, during the Song Dynasty (960–1279AD), weapons known as Zhen Tian Lei (震天雷, "Sky-shaking Thunder") were created when Chinese soldiers packed gunpowder into ceramic or metal containers.
The safety clip was introduced in the M61 grenade (1960s, Vietnam War), and is also known as the "jungle clip" – this provides a backup for the safety pin, in case it is dislodged, notably by jungle growth.
This segmentation was thought to aid fragmentation and increase the grenade's deadliness, but later research showed that it did not improve fragmentation.
36M, was specially designed and waterproofed with shellac for use initially in the hot climate of Mesopotamia in 1917, and remained in production for many years.
Improvised hand grenades were also used to great effect by the Russian defenders of Port Arthur during the Russo-Japanese War.
The body of modern incendiary grenades is practically the same as that of a smoke grenade.
The use of target triggered grenades and AP mines is banned to the signatories of the Ottawa Treaty and may be treated as a war crime wherever it is ratified.
Conversely, on identifying an incoming enemy grenade, friendly forces shout "grenade".
An alternative technique is to release the lever ''before'' throwing the grenade, which allows the fuse to burn partially and decrease the time to detonation after throwing; this is referred to as ''cooking''.
Throwing a grenade up stairs is dangerous, due to the risk of it falling back down; it is much safer to throw a grenade down stairs, so it is safer to capture a building from the top, rather than the bottom.
This new weapon had improvements from the experience of the first months of the war: the shape was more modern, with an external groove pattern for better grip and easier fragmentation.
Sting grenades, also known as stingball or sting ball grenades, are stun grenades based on the design of the fragmentation grenade.
Practice grenades are similar in handling and function to other hand grenades, except that they only produce a loud popping noise and a puff of smoke on detonation.
This basic "pin-and-pineapple" design is still used in some modern grenades.
The bent end of the safety pin increases the force required to remove it, reducing the risk of accidental arming.
While in principle it is possible to legally obtain and possess hand grenades in some states, in practice they are not generally  available.
The main ones are the safety clip and the bent end of the safety pin.
The mid-14th-century book, ''Huolongjing (火龙经, "Fire Dragon Manual")'', written by Jiao Yu (焦玉), recorded an earlier Song-era cast iron cannon known as the "flying-cloud thunderclap cannon" (飞云霹雳炮; feiyun pili pao).
Grenades generally explode near the floor, causing spalling downwards towards lower floors.
Later, glass containers were employed.
He then throws the grenade towards the target.
The final variation of the Mills bomb, the No.
The Italian Besozzi grenade had a five-second fuse with a match-tip that was ignited by striking on a ring on the soldier's hand.
It did not, but the superficially similar British stick grenade design of 1908 did.
Improvised grenades were increasingly used from the mid-19th century, being especially useful in trench warfare.
Its first use in English dates from the 1590s.
This is potentially dangerous due to the risk of confusion.
They were explosive-filled steel canisters with a triggering pin and a distinctive deeply notched exterior surface.
These grenade-based booby traps are simple to construct in the field as long as instant fuzes are available; a delay in detonation can allow the intended target to take cover.
The manuscript stated that (Needham's modified Wade-Giles spelling):
It is intended that people struck by the shrapnel will receive a series of fast, painful stings, without serious injury.
36, a variant with a detachable base plate to allow use with a rifle discharger cup.
The M67 frag grenade has an advertised effective kill zone of five meter radius, while the casualty-inducing radius is approximately fifteen meters.
Grenadiers were originally soldiers who specialized in throwing grenades.
Immediately before throwing the grenade, the soldier pulled a small porcelain ball at the end of a string attached to the friction igniter.
The Spanish artillery arm uses a flaming grenade as its badge.
Grenades have often been used in the field to construct booby traps, using some action of the intended target (such as opening a door, or starting a car) to trigger the grenade.
Fragmentation grenades are common in armies.
HC smoke contains hydrochloric acid and is harmful to breathe.
Occasionally CR gas is used instead of CS.
The Mills had a grooved cast iron "pineapple" with a central striker held by a close hand lever and secured with a pin.
William Mills, a hand grenade designer from Sunderland, patented, developed and manufactured the "Mills bomb" at the Mills Munition Factory in Birmingham, England in 1915, designating it the No.5.
He began his experiments with developing a grenade while serving as a sergeant in the Oscarsborg Fortress.
They must consequently be registered with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, are taxed, and are illegal in states that ban Title II weapons.
The F1 was used by many foreign armies from 1915 to 1940.
36 (but not the 36M) followed in 1932.
The body is a tube with holes along the sides that emit the light and sound of the explosion.
This concept evolved further with the No.
He had success in marketing his weapon to the French, and was appointed as a Knight of the French Legion in 1916 for the invention.
This is particularly important because the safety lever is often used as a carry hook, despite the obvious danger this poses.
The second expectation proved deceptive, since the explosion in practice gave no more than 10 fragments (although the pattern was designed to split into all the 38 drawn divisions).
This simple design continued to evolve throughout the First and Second World Wars, with the Model 24 grenade (popularly known as the "potato masher") becoming one of the most easily recognized of all small arms.
This started the time fuse, which fired the detonator after a delay.
An early, fairly weak example was the British Sticky bomb of 1940.
; Pull fuse: A pull fuse is a zero-delay fuse used in booby traps: the grenade detonates immediately when the striker retaining pin is removed.
In 1643, it is possible that "Grenados" were thrown amongst the Welsh at Holt Bridge during the English Civil War.
In other uses, such as to reach upper floors of a building, a grenade may be lobbed for greater distance or accuracy.
U.S.&nbsp;Navy Aviation Ordnanceman's rating badge features a winged device of similar design.
A competent thrower could manage  with reasonable accuracy, but the grenade could throw lethal fragments farther than this; after throwing, the user had to take cover immediately.
Various models using a percussion fuse were built, but this type of fuse suffered from various practical problems, and they were not commissioned in large numbers.
These allow the smoke to be released when the grenade is ignited.
The word "grenade" derives from the French word for a "small explosive shell".
The US Army Armament Research, Development and Engineering Center (ARDEC) announced in 2016 that they were developing a grenade which could operate in either fragmentation or blast mode, selectable at time of use, the electronically fuzed Enhanced Tactical Multi-Purpose (ET-MP) hand grenade.
The most basic technique involves wedging a grenade in a tight spot so the safety lever does not leave the grenade when the pin is pulled.
Screening smoke grenades usually contain HC (hexachloroethane/zinc) smoke mixture or TA (terephthalic acid) smoke mixture.
Once the soldier throws the grenade, the safety lever releases, the striker throws the safety lever away from the grenade body as it rotates to detonate the primer.
Left-handed soldiers are advised to invert the grenade, so the thumb is still the digit that holds the safety lever.
In coloured smoke grenades, the filler consists of 250 to 350&nbsp;grams of coloured smoke mixture (mostly potassium chlorate, lactose and a dye).
Soldiers are trained to throw grenades in standing, prone-to-standing, kneeling, prone-to-kneeling, and alternate prone positions and in under- or side-arm throws.
This weapon was widely used by American G.I.s The heavy, segmented bodies of "pineapple" type grenades produce an unpredictable pattern of fragmentation.
Byzantine soldiers learned that Greek fire, a Byzantine invention of the previous century, could not only be thrown by flamethrowers at the enemy, but also in stone and ceramic jars.
In the American Civil War, both sides used hand grenades equipped with a plunger that detonated the device on impact.
In the middle of this is a bursting bomb, or grenade.
It contained explosive material with an iron fragmentation band, with an impact fuse, detonating when the top of the grenade hit the ground.
They were used in the Waco Siege.
Rudimentary incendiary grenades appeared in the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire, not long after the reign of Leo&nbsp;III (717-741).
A key concern is that the grenade is not picked up and thrown back.
Instead of using a metal casing to produce shrapnel, they are made from hard rubber and are filled with around 100 rubber balls.
The Molotov cocktail received its name during the Soviet invasion of Finland in 1939 Winter War, but had been used earlier in the decade by Franco's troops during the Spanish Civil War.
A range of hand-thrown grenades have been designed for use against armoured vehicles.
Another type is the throwing practice grenade which is completely inert and often cast in one piece.
To use the grenade, the base cap was unscrewed, permitting the ball and cord to fall out.
The United States Marine Corps uses the grenade as part of the insignia for one officer rank and one Staff NCO rank on their uniforms.
They are weapons that are designed to disperse lethal fragments on detonation.
Modern fragmentation grenades, such as the United States M67 grenade, have a wounding radius of  – half that of older style grenades, which can still be encountered – and can be thrown about .
It is used to give soldiers a feel for the weight and shape of real grenades and for practicing precision throwing.
Many countries, including India, the People's Republic of China, Russia, and the United States, have not signed the treaty citing self-defense needs.
Concussion grenades can also be used as general explosives, for instance for demolition.
After the Second World War Britain adopted grenades that contained segmented coiled wire in smooth metal casings.
If the grenade is thrown from a standing position the thrower must then immediately seek cover or lie prone if no cover is nearby.
It was named by Finnish troops during the Winter War, after the former Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov, whom they deemed responsible for the war, and a humorous reference to the Soviet bombs nicknamed "Molotov bread baskets" in Finland.
Other stick grenades exist however, such as the Russian RGD-33 and Model 1914 grenades, the German Model 43 grenade and the British No 1 Grenade and Sticky bomb.
It is likely derived from Old French pomegranate (influenced by Spanish ''granada''), so called because the many-seeded fruit suggested the powder-filled, fragmenting bomb, or from similarity of shape.
To use a grenade, the soldier grips it with the throwing hand, ensuring that his thumb holds the safety lever in place; if there is a safety clip, it is removed prior to use.
The United States developed the Mk 2 hand grenade before the war, nicknamed the "pineapple" for its grooved surface.
When using an antipersonnel grenade, the objective is to have the grenade explode so that the target is within its effective radius.
Approximately 75,000,000 grenades were manufactured during World War I, used in the war and remaining in use through to the Second World War.
In the United States grenades are classed as destructive devices, a form of Title II weapons under the National Firearms Act.
Designs such as the German ''Panzerwurfmine'' (L) and the Soviet RPG-43, RPG-40, RPG-6 and RKG-3 series of grenades used a HEAT warhead on one end and some method to stabilize flight and increase the likelihood of the 90 degree hit necessary for the shaped charge to be effective.
As an interim measure, troops often improvised their own grenades, such as the Jam Tin Grenade.
A pull cord ran down the hollow handle from the detonator within the explosive head, terminating in a porcelain ball held in place by a detachable base closing cap.
In 1902, the British War Office announced that hand grenades were obsolete and had no place in modern warfare.
It burns at a temperature of 2,800&nbsp;°C (5,000&nbsp;°F).
The pin is typically attached to a tripwire.
; Timed fuse: In a timed fuse grenade, the fuse is ignited on release of the safety lever, and detonation occurs following a timed delay.
A long cane handle (approximately 16 inches) allowed the user to throw the grenade further than the blast of the explosion.
5 with a rodded base plug which allowed it to be fired from a rifle.
Tear gas grenades are similar to smoke grenades in shape and operation.
In 1044, a military book ''Wujing Zongyao'' ("Compilation of Military Classics") described various gunpowder recipes in which one can find, according to Joseph Needham, the prototype of the modern hand grenade.
They have also been used as anti-personnel depth chargees around watercraft; some, such as the US Mk 40 concussion grenade, are specifically designed for use against enemy divers and frogmen.
Sting grenades are sometimes called "stinger grenades", which is a genericized trademark as "Stinger" is trademarked by Defense Technology for its line of sting grenades.
They also used 'Rains' and 'Adams' grenades, which were similar to the Ketchum in appearance and mechanism.
There are two main types, one producing coloured smoke for signaling, and the other and screening smoke.
Fusilier regiments in the British and Commonwealth tradition (e.g.,&nbsp;the Princess Louise Fusiliers, Canadian Army) wear a cap-badge depicting flaming grenade, reflecting their historic use of grenades in the assault.
The pre-formed fragmentation may be spherical, cuboid, wire or notched wire.
Marten Hale, better known for patenting the Hales rifle grenade, developed a modern hand grenade in 1906, but was unsuccessful in persuading the British Army to adopt the weapon until 1913.
The flag of the Russian Ground Forces also bears a flaming grenade device.
The potato-masher was fired by a friction igniter in the head, activated by a pull string threaded through the hollow handle.
The filler consists of about 4.5&nbsp;grams of a pyrotechnic metal-oxidant mix of magnesium or aluminium and an oxidizer such as ammonium perchlorate or potassium perchlorate.
Abandoned booby traps and discarded grenades contribute to the problem of unexploded ordnance (UXO).
The USMC preferred technique to prevent this is a hard-throw, skip/bounce technique, where the grenade is thrown hard enough that it bounces or skips around, being hard to pick up and throw back – this is applicable when clearing a room, for instance.
In tear gas grenades the filler is generally 80 to 120 grams of CS gas combined with a pyrotechnic composition which burns to generate an aerosol of CS-laden smoke.
The loud blast causes temporary loss of hearing, and also disturbs the fluid in the ear, causing loss of balance.
A shorter delay is useful to reduce the ability of the enemy to take cover or throw the grenade back, and can also used to allow the grenade to burst in the air over defensive positions.
The Mk 40 kills or otherwise incapacitates the target by creating a lethal shockwave underwater.
Thermite incendiary grenades are not intended to be thrown and generally have a shorter delay fuse than other grenades (e.g.
Some grenades are designed to be thrown longer distances.
It is designed to produce a blinding flash of light and loud noise without causing permanent injury.
On detonation, the rubber balls, and shrapnel from the rubber casing, explode outward in all directions as a form of less-lethal shrapnel.
The concussion effect, rather than any expelled fragments, is the effective killer.
The F1 grenade was first produced in limited quantities by the French State in May 1915.
This technique is inherently dangerous, due to shorter delay (hence closer explosion), greater complexity (must make sure to throw after waiting), and increased variability (fuses vary from grenade to grenade, and waiting increases the overall variability in delay), and thus is discouraged in the U.S. Marine Corps, and banned in training.
These grenades are designed to temporarily neutralize the combat effectiveness of enemies by disorienting their senses.
These grenades are usually classed as offensive weapons, because the small effective casualty radius is much less than the distance it can be thrown.
The concussive blast of the detonation can injure and the heat created can ignite flammable materials such as fuel.
Thermite and white phosphorus cause some of the worst and most painful burn injuries because they burn so quickly and at such a high temperature.
During World War II the United Kingdom used incendiary grenades based on white phosphorus.
Fragmentation grenades can be divided into two main types, defensive and offensive, where the former are designed to be used from a position of cover, (e.g.
76 Special Incendiary Grenade, was mainly issued to the Home Guard as an anti-tank weapon.
The design proved to be very functional, especially due to its stability compared to other grenades of the same period.
Sting grenades do not reliably incapacitate people, so they are dangerous to use against armed subjects.
The fires that occurred during the Iranian Embassy Siege in London were caused by stun grenades.
Hale's chief competitor was Nils Waltersen Aasen, who invented his design in 1906 in Norway, receiving a patent for it in England.
When the word ''grenade'' is used without specification, and context does not suggest otherwise, it is generally assumed to refer to a fragmentation grenade.
This causes extreme irritation to the eyes and, if inhaled, to the nose and throat.
Chief Warrant Officers designated as a Marine Gunner replace the rank insignia worn on the left collar with a "Bursting Bomb" and a larger "Bursting Bomb" insignia is worn 3/4" above the rank insignia on both shoulder epaulets when a coat is worn.
Improved fragmentation designs were later made with the notches on the inside, but at that time they would have been too expensive to produce.
The soldier then grabs the safety pin's pull ring with the index or middle finger of the other hand and removes it.
Additionally, the rank insignia for Master Gunnery Sergeant has three chevrons pointing up, with four rockers on the bottom.
The word "grenade" originated during the events surrounding the Glorious Revolution in 1688, where cricket ball-sized iron spheres packed with gunpowder and fitted with slow-burning wicks were first used against the Jacobites in the battles of Killiecrankie and Glen Shiel.
The body is a sheet-steel cylinder with emission holes in the top and bottom.
The thermate burns without an external oxygen source, allowing it to burn underwater.
At first, the grenade was fitted with a seven-second fuse, but during combat in the Battle of France in 1940, this delay proved too long — giving defenders time to escape the explosion or to throw the grenade back — so the delay was reduced to four seconds.
The preferred technique in the US forces when attacking is to show the grenade to fellow friendly forces, receiving a visual acknowledgement, to avoid alerting the enemy.
The Finnish Army Corps of Engineers' emblem consists of a stick hand grenade (symbolizing demolition) and a shovel (symbolizing construction) in saltire.
In a letter to his sister, Colonel Hugh Robert Hibbert described an improvised grenade that was employed by British troops during the Crimean War (1854–1856):
In addition, white phosphorus is very poisonous: a dose of 50-100 milligrams is lethal to the average human.
in a slit trench or behind a suitable wall,) and have an effective radius greater than the distance they can be thrown, while the latter are for use by assault troops, and have a smaller effective fragmentation radius.
The grenade body can be reused.
Despite this, the Mills bomb remained the standard grenade of the British Armed Forces and was manufactured in the UK until 1972, when it was replaced by the L2 series.
These grenades were not very effective (probably because a direct hit would be necessary for the grenade to have effect) and, as a result, saw little use.
Early in World War I, combatant nations only had small grenades, similar to Hales' and Aasen's design.
The Royal Laboratory developed the No 1 Grenade in 1908.
The potato-masher is often incorrectly thought to have had an impact fuse.
The body is generally made of a hard synthetic material or steel, which will provide some fragmentation as shards and splinters, though in modern grenades a pre-formed fragmentation matrix is often used.
However, they were used with modest success against lightly-armored MRAP vehicles designed for protection only against improvised explosive devices in insurgency in Iraq in the early twentyfirst century.
The filler is 600 to 800&nbsp;grams of thermate, which is an improved version of World War&nbsp;II-era thermite.
23 were declared obsolete and the No.
