* ''The Divine Garbo'' (1990), TNT, produced by Ellen M. Krass and Susan F. Walker, narrated by Glenn Close
He made an offer but Stiller demanded that Garbo be part of any contract, convinced that she would be an asset to his career.
"We were very close—like sisters," the reticent Koger said.
Finally, in 1939, Garbo was nominated for ''Ninotchka'', but again came away empty-handed.
Parts of the footage were included in the 2005 TCM documentary ''Garbo''.
Green, who became an important friend and walking companion, was in the habit of tape-recording all of his telephone calls and, with Garbo's permission, recorded many of his conversations with her.
After nearly a year of negotiations, Garbo agreed to renew her contract with MGM on the condition she would star in ''Queen Christina'' and her salary would be increased to $300,000 per film.
She made no public appearances and assiduously tried to avoid the publicity she loathed.
The role gained her a second Academy Award nomination.
The girl, look at the girl!"
After the screening, his daughter reported, he was unwavering: "I'll take her without him.
Gilbert allegedly proposed to her numerous times, with Garbo agreeing but backing out at the last minute.
The movie, however, met with controversy upon its release; censors objected to the scenes in which Garbo disguised herself as a man and kissed a female co-star.
She immediately stirred interest with her first silent film, ''Torrent'', released in 1926; a year later, her performance in ''Flesh and the Devil'', her third movie, made her an international star.
The film won that year's Academy Award for Best Picture.
In his last will and testament, Green bequeathed in 2011 all of the tapes, which reveal Garbo's personality in later life, sense of humor, and various eccentricities, to the film archives at Wesleyan University.
Victor Seastrom, a respected Swedish director at MGM, was a good friend of Stiller and encouraged Mayer to meet him on a trip to Berlin.
Her career revived upon her turn to comedy in ''Ninotchka'' (1939), which earned her a third Academy Award nomination, but after the failure of ''Two-Faced Woman'' (1941), she retired from the screen, at the age of 35, after acting in twenty-eight films.
In 1925, Garbo, then twenty and unable to speak English, was brought over from Sweden at the request of Mayer.
The film's success certified Garbo's successful transition to talkies.
"It was her eyes," his daughter recalled him saying; "I can make a star out of her."
The film's screenplay had been written by Viertel, and although MGM had been reluctant to make the movie, they relented at Garbo's insistence.
She spent the night at the Washington, D.C. home of philanthropist Florence Mahoney.
Thalberg was impressed and began grooming the young actress the following day, arranging to fix her teeth, making sure she lost weight, and giving her English lessons."
They costarred again in three more hits, ''Love'' (1927), ''A Woman of Affairs'' (1928), and ''Queen Christina'' (1933).
He was immediately struck by Garbo's magnetism and became more interested in her than in Stiller.
Many critics and film historians consider her performance as the doomed courtesan Marguerite Gautier in ''Camille'' (1936) to be her finest.
After the box office failure of ''Conquest'', MGM decided a change of pace was needed to resurrect her declining popularity.
Number one is the girl."
Garbo's career soon declined, however, and she was one of the many stars labeled "Box Office Poison" in 1938.
For both Garbo (who did not want to play another vamp and did not like the script any more than she did the first one) and Stiller, ''The Temptress'' was a harrowing experience.
Production was marred, however, by the sudden death of Thalberg, then only thirty-seven, which plunged the  Hollywood studios into a "state of profound shock," writes David Bret.
Garbo first worked as a soap-lather girl in a barber's shop but eventually, on the advice of her friends, applied for, and accepted, a position in the PUB department store running errands and working in the millinery department.
When asked about these eccentric requirements, she said "If I am by myself, my face will do things I cannot do with it otherwise."
Daum later claimed that towards the end, she also suffered from gastrointestinal and periodontal ailments.
However, according to Thalberg's actress wife, Norma Shearer, Garbo did not necessarily agree with his ideas:
The type of historical and melodramatic films she began to make on the advice of Viertel were highly successful abroad but considerably less so in the United States.
Accounts differ on the circumstances of her first contract with Louis B. Mayer, at that time vice president and general manager of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.
Garbo never married, had no children, and lived alone as an adult.
In an interview in 1928, she explained that her desire for privacy began when she was a child, stating "as early as I can remember, I have wanted to be alone.
She still thought she would continue when the war was over though she was ambivalent and indecisive about returning to the screen.
After filming ended, Garbo—along with a different director and cast—filmed a German-language version of ''Anna Christie'' that was released in December 1930.
Italian motion picture director Luchino Visconti allegedly attempted to bring Garbo back to the screen in 1969 with a small part, Maria Sophia, Queen of Naples, in his adaptation of Proust's ''Remembrance of Things Past''.
George Cukor, director of ''Two-Faced Woman'', and often blamed for its failure, said "People often glibly say that the failure of ''Two-Faced Woman'' finished Garbo's career.
However, the financing failed to materialize and the project was abandoned.
The film was internationally successful and did better than MGM expected domestically.
The success led Irving Thalberg, head of production at MGM, to cast her in a similar role in ''The Temptress'' (1926), based on another Ibáñez novel.
The impact of Garbo's acting and screen presence quickly established her reputation as one of Hollywood's greatest actresses.
''Queen Christina'' was a lavish production, becoming one of the studio's biggest productions at the time.
About her work in silents, film critic Ty Burr said "This was a new kind of actor—not the stage actor who had to play to the far seats but someone who could just look and with her eyes literally go from rage to sorrow in just a close-up."
The film was a critical failure, but, contrary to popular belief, performed reasonably well at the box office.
''Ninotchka'' premiered in October 1939, publicized with the catchphrase "Garbo laughs!
Mayer balked, but eventually agreed to a private viewing of ''Gösta Berling''.
As she had been during her Hollywood years, Garbo, with her innate need for solitude, was often reclusive.
In late 1929, MGM cast Garbo in ''Anna Christie'' (1930), a film adaptation of the 1922 play by Eugene O'Neill, her first speaking role.
She was paired opposite Robert Montgomery in ''Inspiration'' (1931), and her popularity was used to boost the career of the relatively unknown Clark Gable in ''Susan Lenox (Her Fall and Rise)'' (1931).
From then on, Garbo declined all opportunities to return to the screen.
Although Garbo was humiliated by the negative reviews of ''Two-Faced Woman'', she did not at first intend to retire.
Her mentor Stiller, who had persuaded her to take the part, was assigned to direct.
She followed her role in ''Gösta Berling'' with a starring role in the 1925 German film ''Die freudlose Gasse'' (''Joyless Street'' or ''The Street of Sorrow''), directed by G. W. Pabst and co-starring Asta Nielsen.
Her grief for Thalberg, some believe, was more profound than for John Gilbert, who died earlier that same year.
The screenplay was adapted by Frances Marion and the film was produced by Irving Thalberg and Paul Bern.
It was as if she had diamonds in her bones and in her interior light struggled to come out through the pores of her skin.
But MGM eventually capitalized on it, for it bolstered the image of the silent and reclusive woman of mystery.
''Two-Faced Woman'' was her last film; she was thirty-six and had made twenty-eight feature films in sixteen years.
Her success continued in films such as ''Mata Hari'' (1931) and ''Grand Hotel'' (1932).
Soon after their romance began, Gilbert began helping her acting on the set, teaching her how to behave like a star, how to socialize at parties, and how to deal with studio bosses.
Garbo received her first Academy Award for Best Actress nomination for her performance, although she lost to MGM colleague Norma Shearer.
Garbo selected George Cukor's romantic drama ''Camille'' (1936) as her next project.
Garbo would later recall:
She starred in three of them with popular leading man John Gilbert.
After learning of Pollak's pregnancy in 1930, for example, Garbo wrote "We cannot help our nature, as God has created it.
Recent biographers and others believe that Garbo was bisexual or lesbian, and that she had intimate relationships with women as well as with men.
She has been praised in the media and by personalities in cinema and culture, including:
But I have always thought you and I belonged together".
She would later confess she had an inferiority complex about this.
In his diary, Erich Maria Remarque discusses a liaison with Garbo in 1941 and in his memoir, Cecil Beaton described an affair with her in 1947 and 1948.
Her most famous romance was with her frequent co-star, John Gilbert, with whom she lived intermittently in 1926 and 1927.
Despite her popularity as a silent star, the studio feared that her Swedish accent might impair her work in sound and delayed the shift for as long as possible.
For her leading man, MGM suggested Charles Boyer or Laurence Olivier, but Garbo rejected both, preferring her former co-star and lover, John Gilbert.
She is closely associated with a line from ''Grand Hotel'', one which the American Film Institute in 2005 voted the 30th most memorable movie quote of all time, "I want to be alone; I just want to be alone."
In retirement, Garbo generally led a private life of simplicity and leisure.
In 1931, Garbo befriended the writer and acknowledged lesbian Mercedes de Acosta, introduced to her by her close friend, Salka Viertel, and, according to Garbo's and de Acosta's biographers, began a sporadic and volatile romance.
In 1949, she was offered the role of fictional silent film star Norma Desmond in ''Sunset Boulevard''.
Throughout her life, Garbo was known for taking long, daily walks with companions or by herself.
Reshooting ''The Temptress'' was expensive and even though it became one of the top-grossing films of the 1926–27 season, it was the only Garbo film of the period to lose money.
For her next movie, the studio teamed her with producer-director Ernst Lubitsch to film ''Ninotchka'', her first comedy.
Garbo possessed a subtlety and naturalism in her acting that set her apart from other actors and actresses of the period.
Greta Garbo died on 15 April 1990, aged 84, in the hospital, as a result of pneumonia and renal failure.
Garbo received her nomination for her work in both ''Anna Christie'' and ''Romance''.
Max Ophüls was slated to adapt and direct.
In her follow-up film, ''Romance'' (1930), she portrayed an Italian opera star opposite Lewis Stone.
She signed a one-picture deal in 1942 to make ''The Girl from Leningrad'' but the project quickly dissolved.
Garbo referred to the film as "my grave."
I was afraid he would tell me what to do and boss me.
She prohibited visitors—including the studio brass—from her sets and demanded that black flats or screens surround her to prevent extras and technicians from watching her.
She "lowers her head to look calculating or flutters her lips," he says.
Cukor carefully crafted Garbo's portrayal of Marguerite Gatier, a lower-class woman, who becomes the world-renowned mistress Camille.
As one biographer put it, "All moviegoers demanded of a Garbo production was Greta Garbo."
His death also added to the sombre mood required for the closing scenes of ''Camille''.
Occasionally, she jet-setted with well-known and wealthy personalities, striving to guard her privacy as she had during her career.
She won a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress award for her performance, and she was again nominated for an Academy Award.
Garbo's first talking film was ''Anna Christie'' (1930).
She lost out to Irving Thalberg's wife, Norma Shearer, who won for ''The Divorcee''.
There are two recent versions of what happened next.
The studio balked at the idea of casting Gilbert, fearing his declining popularity would hurt the film's profits, but Garbo prevailed.
", and was the highest-grossing film of the year.
In the winter of 1919, the Spanish flu spread throughout Stockholm and Garbo's father, to whom she was very close, became ill.
You could see thought.
But on the other side, she's afraid of it."
I really wanted to live another life."
De Rothschild introduced her to Samuel Adams Green, a well-known art collector and curator in New York, and the two formed an immediate bond.
Yet she was an imaginative child and a natural leader who became interested in theatre at an early age.
''Gone With the Wind'' swept the major awards, including Best Actress, which went to Vivien Leigh.
She hated school and preferred to play alone.
Although she expected to work with Stiller on her first film, she was cast in ''Torrent'' (1926), an adaptation of a novel by Vicente Blasco Ibáñez, with director Monta Bell.
On 6 April 2011, Sveriges Riksbank announced that Garbo's portrait will be featured on the 100 krona banknote, beginning in 2014–15.
But, contrary to myth, she had, from the beginning, many friends and acquaintances with whom she socialized, and, later, traveled.
Vieira wrote: "Audiences were mesmerized by her beauty and titillated by her love scenes with Gilbert.
I did not like my work.
In 1932, her popularity allowed her to dictate the terms of her contract and she became increasingly selective about her roles.
In 1957, she was awarded The George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for distinguished contribution to the art of film.
It's not the same anymore, being able to pull it off."
She was once designated the most beautiful woman who ever lived by the ''Guinness Book of World Records''.
In 1927 Garbo was introduced to stage and screen actress Lilyan Tashman and they may have had an affair, according to some writers.
The two remained friends—with ups and downs—for almost thirty years during which time Garbo wrote de Acosta 181 letters, cards, and telegrams which are kept at the Rosenbach Museum & Library in Philadelphia.
The screen tests—the last time Garbo stepped in front of a movie camera—were thought to have been lost for forty-one years until they were rediscovered in 1990 by film historians Leonard Maltin and Jeanine Basinger.
Her aversion to publicity and the press was undeniably genuine, and exasperating to the studio at first.
Sixteen minutes into the film, she famously utters her first line, "Gimme a whiskey, ginger ale on the side, and don't be stingy, baby."
In 1937, she met conductor Leopold Stokowski with whom she had a highly publicized friendship or romance while traveling throughout Europe the following year.
Garbo's niece Gray Reisfield told museum specialist James Wagner at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, quoted in a 2000 press release: "Garbo always spoke of it as a magical evening."
Schlee would split his time between the two, becoming Garbo's close companion and advisor until his death in 1964.
Several letters suggest she may have had romantic feelings for Pollak for many years.
I detest crowds, don't like many people."
She was a sensation."
She won the National Board of Review Best Acting Award for ''Camille'', 1936, ''Ninotchka'', 1939, and ''Two-Faced Woman'', 1941.
Nor did she ever appear at Oscar ceremonies even when she was nominated.
About their first movie, ''Flesh and the Devil'' (1926), silent film expert Kevin Brownlow states that "she gave a more erotic performance than Hollywood had ever seen."
She made several screen tests, learned the script, and arrived in Rome in the summer of 1949 to shoot the picture.
Before long, she began modeling hats for the store's catalogues which led to a more lucrative job as a fashion model.
Garbo was nominated three times for the Academy Award for Best Actress.
He married Anna, who had recently moved from Högsby.
Although her domestic popularity was undiminished in the early 1930s, high profits for Garbo's films after ''Queen Christina'' in 1933 depended on the foreign market for their success.
In late 1920, a director of film commercials for the store began casting Garbo in roles advertising women's clothing.
She had a talent that few actresses or actors possess.
At the age of 13, Garbo graduated from school, and, typical of a Swedish working class girl at that time, she did not attend high school.
She played a "double" role that featured her dancing the rumba, swimming, and skiing.
Garbo launched her career with a secondary role in the 1924 Swedish film ''The Saga of Gosta Berling''.
Her son (played by Ron Silver) sets about trying to get Garbo to visit his mother at the hospital.
Worlds turned on her movements."
Film historian and critic David Denby argues that Garbo introduced a subtlety of expression to the art of silent acting and that its effect on audiences cannot be exaggerated.
As she approached her sixtieth birthday, she told a frequent walking companion "In a few days, it will be the anniversary of the sorrow that never leaves me, that will never leave me for the rest of my life."
Of all the stars who have ever fired the imaginations of audiences, none has quite projected a magnetism and a mystique equal to Garbo's.
In the midst of the Great Depression, American screen audiences seemed to favor "home-grown" screen couples, such as Clark Gable and Jean Harlow.
In 1941 she met the Russian-born millionaire, George Schlee, who was introduced to her by his wife, fashion designer Valentina.
She played opposite Lars Hanson, a well-known Swedish actor.
* ''Greta Garbo: The Mysterious Lady'' (1998), Biography Channel, narrated by Peter Graves
Garbo followed with two of her most famous roles.
Garbo also became an art collector in her later life; her collection, including works from painters such as Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Pierre Bonnard, and Kees van Dongen, was worth millions of dollars when she died.
When the film premiered in New York on 12 December 1936, it became an international success, Garbo's first major success in three years.
It certainly threw her, but I think that what really happened was that she just gave up.
She would move her head just a little bit and the whole screen would come alive, like a strong breeze that made itself felt.
With George Cukor's ''Two-Faced Woman'' (1941), MGM attempted to capitalize on Garbo's success in ''Ninotchka'' by casting her in a romantic comedy which sought to portray her as a chic, modern woman.
The April 1990 Washington Post obituary said that "at the peak of her popularity she was a virtual cult figure".
Now on the verge of returning to Sweden, she wrote to her boyfriend back home: "You're quite right when you think I don't feel at home here.
The Swedish royal medal, Litteris et Artibus, awarded to people who have made important contributions to culture, especially music, dramatic art or literature, was presented to Garbo in January 1937.
Garbo's popularity had considerably dropped, and when her contract expired soon thereafter, she returned briefly to Sweden.
Her critically acclaimed performance won her the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress.
Garbo had invested wisely, primarily in stocks and bonds, and left her entire estate, $32,042,429—$57,000,000 by 2013 rates—to her niece, Gray Reisfield.
After only one film, she was given top billing, playing opposite Antonio Moreno.
The following year, she played a Russian ballerina in ''Grand Hotel'' (1932), opposite an ensemble cast, including John Barrymore, Joan Crawford, and Wallace Beery among others.
Her nomination that year included her performance in ''Romance'' (1930).
They chose to go Los Angeles on their own, but another five weeks passed with no contacts from the studio.
The theme became a running gag beginning in her silent pictures.
It is also arguable, says one biographer, that she was bipolar.
However, after a meeting with film producer Charles Brackett, she insisted that she had no interest in the part whatsoever.
Still, Garbo signed a contract in 1948 with producer Walter Wanger, who had produced ''Queen Christina'', to shoot a picture based on Balzac's ''La Duchesse de Langeais''.
In 1975, she wrote a poem about not being able to touch the hand of her friend with whom she might have been walking through life.
Garbo's follow-up project was Clarence Brown's lavish production of ''Conquest'' (1937) opposite Charles Boyer.
I cannot analyze this woman's acting.
The most extraordinary woman (in art) that I have encountered in my life.
During World War II, Garbo secretly worked for MI6.
The Gustafssons were impoverished and lived in a three-bedroom cold-water flat at Blekingegatan No.
Nicholas Turner, Garbo's close friend for 33 years, said that, after Garbo bought an apartment in the same building, "Garbo moved in and took Schlee right away from Valentina."
", commenting on the departure of Garbo's serious and melancholy image as she transferred to comedy.
'''Greta Garbo''' (born '''Greta Lovisa Gustafsson'''; ; 18 September 1905 – 15 April 1990), was a Swedish-born American film actress and an international star and icon during the 1920s and 1930s.
I always wanted to be the boss."
"Garbo-watching" became a sport for photographers, the media, admirers, and curious New Yorkers, but she maintained her elusive mystique to the end.
Later, she would participate in amateur theatre with her friends and frequent the Mosebacke Theatre.
A photograph appeared in the media in early 1990, showing Koger assisting Garbo, who was walking with a cane, into the hospital.
* ''Greta Garbo: A Lone Star'' (2001), AMC
Her parents met in Stockholm where her father visited from Frinnaryd.
She was awarded an Academy Honorary Award "for her luminous and unforgettable screen performances" in 1954.
Many critics have said that few of Garbo's twenty-four Hollywood films are artistically exceptional, and that many are simply bad.
Garbo also worried about her age.
You could see it in her eyes as she looked from one to the other.
Specific accomplishments included gathering information on Axel Wenner-Gren, a Swedish millionaire industrialist and reputed friend of Hermann Goering, and paving the way to a meeting between Danish physicist Niels Bohr and King Gustav V of Sweden, which helped lead to the rescue of the Danish Jews.
A Swedish friend in Los Angeles decided to help her by contacting MGM producer Irving Thalberg, who agreed to give her a screen test.
After appearing in ''As You Desire Me'' (1932), the first of three Garbo films which co-starred Melvyn Douglas, Garbo's MGM contract expired and she returned to Sweden.
The film concerns a dying Garbo fan (Anne Bancroft) whose last wish is to meet her idol.
