Grizzly bears are well-documented catching leaping salmon in their mouths at Brooks Falls in Katmai National Park and Preserve in Alaska.
However, modern genetic testing reveals the grizzly to be a subspecies of the brown bear (''Ursus arctos'').
In northern Alaska, grizzlies are a significant predator of caribou, mostly taking sick or old individuals or calves.
Along with increasing species richness, soil disturbance causes nitrogen to be dug up from lower soil layers, and makes nitrogen more readily available in the environment.
On 22 September 2009, U.S. District Judge Donald W. Molloy reinstated protection due to the decline of whitebark pine tree, whose nuts are an important source of food for the bears.
An education program run by Revelstoke Bear Aware was put in place in 1996.
less commonly called the '''silvertip bear''', is any North American morphological form or subspecies of brown bear, including the mainland '''grizzly''' (''Ursus arctos horribilis''), '''Kodiak bear''' (''U.
Male grizzly bears have large territories, up to , making finding a female scent difficult in such low population densities.
a. middendorffi''), '''peninsular grizzly''' (''U.
The refuge is a five-acre terrain which has functioned as a home for two orphaned grizzly bears since 2001.
Grizzlies are considered more aggressive compared to black bears when defending themselves and their offspring.
While foraging for tree roots, plant bulbs, or ground squirrels, bears stir up the soil.
There has been no confirmed sighting of a grizzly in Colorado since 1979.
Every other year, females (sows) produce one to four young (usually two) which are small and weigh only about  at birth.
The purpose of this refuge is to provide awareness and education to the public about grizzly bears, as well as providing an area for research and observation of this secluded species.
To date, most corridors are found to be infrequently used, and thus genetic isolation is currently occurring, which can result in inbreeding and therefore an increased frequency of deleterious genes through genetic drift.
Coyotes, foxes, and wolverines are generally regarded as pests to the grizzlies rather than competition, though they may compete for smaller prey, such as ground squirrels and rabbits.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Grizzly bears occasionally prey on small mammals, such as marmots, ground squirrels, lemmings, and voles.
Grizzly bears are especially dangerous because of the force of their bite, which has been measured at over 8 megapascals (1160 psi).
The segregation of black bear and grizzly bear populations is possibly due to competitive exclusion.
Bear awareness programs have been developed by numerous towns in British Columbia, Canada, to help prevent conflicts with both black and grizzly bears.
The best place to view grizzly bears in the island is probably Pack Creek, in the Stan Price State Wildlife Sanctuary.
Fish and Wildlife Service "de-listed" the population, effectively removing Endangered Species Act protections for grizzlies in the Yellowstone National Park area.
In preparation for winter, bears can gain approximately , during a period of hyperphagia, before going into hibernation.
After the grizzly consumes the fruit, the seeds are excreted and thereby dispersed in a germinable condition.
Typically, the conflict will be in the defense of young or over a carcass, which is commonly an elk killed by wolves.
Confrontations are rare because of the differences in size, habitats, and diets of the bear species.
Combining Canada and the United States, grizzly bears inhabit approximately half the area of their historical range.
There are two morphological forms of ''Ursus arctos'', the grizzly and the coastal brown bears, but these morphological forms do not have distinct mtDNA lineages.
(See brown bear for a discussion of brown bears outside of North America).
Scientists do not use the name grizzly bear but call it the '''North American brown bear'''.
Other provinces and the United States may use a combination of methods for population estimates.
There have been several accounts, primarily from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, of cougars and grizzly bears killing each other in fights to the death.
Traveling in groups of six or more can significantly reduce the chance of bear-related injuries while hiking in bear country.
Several environmental organizations, including the NRDC, brought a lawsuit against the federal government to relist the grizzly bear.
A pronounced hump appears on their shoulders; the hump is a good way to distinguish a grizzly bear from a black bear, as black bears do not have this hump.
The park is located on the Alaskan Peninsula about  southwest of the city of Anchorage.
Such bears are translocated or killed because they pose a threat to humans.
Since the program began just 4 grizzlies have been destroyed and 5 have been relocated.
Therefore, everywhere it is the "brown bear"; in North America, it is the "grizzly", but these are all the same species, ''Ursus arctos''.
The fact that grizzly bears are less numerous and even protected in some areas, means that preventing conflict with grizzlies is especially important.
Population fragmentation of grizzlies may destabilize the population from inbreeding depression.
Fish and Wildlife initiated the process of an environmental impact statement that started in the fall of 2014 to begin the recovery process of grizzly bears to the North Cascades region.
Larger prey includes bison and moose, which are sometimes taken by bears in Yellowstone National Park.
When grizzly bears fish for salmon along the coasts of Alaska and British Columbia, they often only eat the skin, brain and roe of the fish.
government kills approximately 50 problem bears each year and overall spends more than one million dollars annually to address bear complaints, relocate bears and kill them.
The male grizzly bear's hibernation ends in early to mid-March, while females emerge in April or early May.
Grizzly bears occasionally kill cougars in disputes over kills.
The dens are typically at elevations above  on north-facing slopes.
At such sites such as Brooks Falls and McNeil Falls in Alaska, big male grizzlies fight regularly for the best fishing spots.
A final plan and environmental impact statement is expected to be released in the spring of 2017 and a record of decision in the summer of 2017.
This process not only helps grizzlies access their food, but also increases species richness in alpine ecosystems.
For back-country campers, hanging food between trees at a height unreachable to bears is a common procedure, although some grizzlies can climb and reach hanging food in other ways.
In 1996 the International Union for Conservation of Nature moved the grizzly bear to the lower risk "Least Concern" status on the IUCN Red List.
The McNeil River State Game Refuge, containing Chenik Lake and a smaller number of grizzly bears, has been closed to grizzly hunting since 1995.
This, in turn, is creating a decline in genetic diversity, and therefore the overall fitness of the general population is lowered.
Population estimates for British Columbia are based on hair-snagging, DNA-based inventories, mark-and-recapture, and a refined multiple regression model.
A large coastal male of this size may stand up to  tall on its hind legs and be up to  at the shoulder.
Black bears generally stay out of grizzly territory, but grizzlies may occasionally enter black bear terrain to obtain food sources both bears enjoy, such as pine nuts, acorns, mushrooms, and berries.
The Admiralty Island National Monument protects the densest population — 1,600 bears on a 1,600-square mile island.
Grizzlies have less competition with cougars than with other predators, such as coyotes, wolves, and other bears.
Although grizzlies are of the order Carnivora and have the digestive system of carnivores, they are normally omnivores: their diets consist of both plants and animals.
These are estimates because bears move in and out of these areas, and it is therefore impossible to conduct a precise count.
For a female, these average weights would be 136&nbsp;kilograms (300&nbsp;lb) inland and 227&nbsp;kilograms (500&nbsp;lb) coastal, respectively.
Rausch found that North America has but one species of grizzly.
Conservation efforts have become an increasingly vital investment over recent decades, as population numbers have dramatically declined.
An estimated 3500 Kodiak grizzly bears inhabit the island, 2300 of these in the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge.
A bear killing a human in a national park may be killed to prevent its attacking again.
Grizzly bears can "partially" recycle their body wastes during this period.
In 2008, it was estimated there were 16,014 grizzly bears.
The interactions of grizzly bears with the wolves of Yellowstone have been under considerable study.
There are five recovery zones for grizzly bears in the lower 48 states including the North Cascades ecosystem in Washington state.
This is due, in part, to the richness of their diets.
When this happens, it is usually with the grizzly being the aggressor.
Grizzlies in Alaska supplement their diet of salmon and clams with sedge grass and berries.
About 600 more live in Wyoming, in the Yellowstone-Teton area.
In northern Alaska, grizzly bears often encounter muskox.
Cubs feed entirely on their mother's milk until summer comes, after which they still drink milk but begin to eat solid foods.
If the wolves become aggressive with the bear, it is normally in the form of quick nips at its hind legs.
The grizzly bear has several relationships with its ecosystem.
Nonetheless, after careful study, naturalist George Ord formally classified it in 1815 – not for its hair, but for its character – as ''Ursus horribilis'' ("terrifying bear").
The National Park Service and U.S.
An estimated 144 individual bears have been identified at the falls in a single summer with as many as 74 at one time; 60 or more bears at the falls is a frequent sight, and it is not uncommon to see 100 bears at the falls throughout a single day.
In the ten years preceding the development of a community education program in Revelstoke, 16 grizzlies were destroyed and a further 107 were relocated away from the town.
The relationship between grizzly bears and other predators is mostly one-sided; grizzly bears will approach feeding predators to steal their kill.
A lot of the efforts made have been through different organizations efforts to educate the public on grizzly bear safety, habits of grizzly bears and different ways to reduce human-bear conflict.
The most famous example of such predation is in Denali National Park and Preserve, where grizzlies chase, pounce on, and dig up Arctic ground squirrels to eat.
Increased human–bear interaction has created "problem bears": bears adapted to human activities or habitat.
Although variable in color from blond to nearly black, grizzly bear fur is typically brown with darker legs and commonly white or blond tipped fur on the flank and back.
During this time, female grizzly bears give birth to their offspring, who then consume milk from their mother and gain strength for the remainder of the hibernation period.
Packs of coyotes have also displaced grizzly bears in disputes over kills.
They frequently prey on baby deer left in the grass, and occasionally they raid the nests of raptors such as bald eagles.
In light of these issues, conservation plans often include migration corridors by way of long strips of "park forest" to connect less developed areas, or by way of tunnels and overpasses over busy roads.
The Refuge for Endangered Wildlife located on Grouse Mountain in Vancouver is an example of a different type of conservation effort for the diminishing grizzly bear population.
Keeping garbage securely stored, harvesting fruit when ripe, securing livestock behind electric fences, and storing pet food indoors are all measures promoted by bear awareness programs.
The oldest wild inland grizzly was 34 years old in Alaska; the oldest coastal bear was 39.
Thus, the bear will sit down and use its ability to protect itself in a full circle.
There is some debate amongst professionals as to whether grizzly bears technically hibernate: much of this debate revolves around body temperature and the ability of the bears to move around during hibernation on occasion.
An experiment in Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming in the United States showed removal of wolves and grizzly bears caused populations of their herbivorous prey to increase.
These can include blueberries, blackberries (''Rubus fruticosus''), salmon berries (''Rubus spectabilis''), cranberries (''Vaccinium oxycoccos''), buffalo berries (''Shepherdia argentea''), soapberries (''Shepherdia canadensis''), and huckleberries (''Vaccinium parvifolium''), depending on the environment.
Classification has been revised along genetic lines.
Wolverines are aggressive enough to occasionally persist until the bear finishes eating, leaving more scraps  than normal for the smaller animal.
Once the young leave or are killed, females may not produce another litter for three or more years, depending on environmental conditions.
Fish and Wildlife Service proposed to withdraw Endangered Species Act protections from grizzly bears in and around Yellowstone National Park, as the current estimated population of 700 now exceeds the stated recovery plan goal of 500 individuals in the region.
This is due to numerous ecological factors.
In the 19th century, the grizzly was classified as 86 distinct species.
In fact, grizzly bears are such important predators of moose and elk calves in Alaska and in Yellowstone, that they may kill as many as 51 percent of elk or moose calves born that year.
The grizzly bear is, by nature, a long-living animal.
There are an estimated 70–100 grizzly bears living in northern and eastern Idaho.
They also inhabited North Africa and the Middle East.
Most adult female grizzlies weigh , while adult males weigh on average .
However, by 1928 only seven grizzlies remained and by 1953 only one species remained globally.
Various berries constitute an important food source when they are available.
In the recovery areas that adjoin Canada, bears also move back and forth across the international boundary.
The McNeil River State Game Sanctuary and Refuge, on the McNeil River, is home to the greatest concentration of brown bears in the world.
When food is abundant, grizzly bears will feed in groups.
Grizzly bears along the Alaskan coast also scavenge on dead or washed up whales.
This provides evidence grizzly bears represent a keystone predator, having a major influence on the entire ecosystem they inhabit.
Salmon are at a disadvantage when they leap waterfalls because they cluster together at their bases and are therefore easier targets for the grizzlies.
Aside from the distinguishing hump a grizzly bear can be identified by a "dished in" profile of their face with short, rounded ears, whereas a black bear has a straight face profile and longer ears.
With the high fat content of salmon, it is not uncommon to encounter grizzlies in Alaska weighing .
When choosing the location of a park focused on grizzly bear conservation, factors such as habitat quality and connectivity to other habitat patches are considered.
Grizzly bears also readily scavenge food or carrion left behind by other animals.
For example, many Pacific coastal islands off British Columbia and Alaska support either the black bear or the grizzly, but rarely both.
In 2008, it was estimated there were 16,014 grizzly bears in the British Columbia population, which was lower than previously estimated due to refinements in the population model.
It has been found that spruce tree (''Picea glauca'') foliage within  of the stream where the salmon have been obtained contains nitrogen originating from salmon on which the bears preyed.
In Alberta and British Columbia, the species is considered to be at risk.
Grizzlies in Alaska also regularly prey on moose calves, which in Denali National Park may be their main source of meat.
Grizzly bears hibernate for 5–7 months each year except where the climate is warm, as the California grizzly did not hibernate.
Using GPS collar tracking, scientists can study whether or not these efforts are actually making a positive contribution towards resolving the problem.
Grizzly bears do not defecate or urinate throughout the entire hibernation period.
In the United States, national efforts have been made since 1982 for the recovery plan of grizzly bears.
In September 2007, a hunter produced evidence of one bear in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness ecosystem, by killing a male grizzly bear there.
Because bison and moose are dangerous prey, grizzlies usually use cover to stalk them and/or pick off weak individuals or calves.
The bear then may retaliate by chasing the wolves.
Coastal areas host the highest population densities year round because there is a larger variety of food sources available, but Brooks Camp hosts the highest population (100 bears).
Grizzly bears will also eat birds and their eggs, and gather in large numbers at fishing sites to feed on spawning salmon.
Farther north, in Alberta, Canada, intense DNA hair-snagging studies in 2000 showed the grizzly population to be increasing faster than what it was formerly believed to be, and Alberta Sustainable Resource Development calculated a population of 841 bears.
In all, the Katmai-McNeil area has an estimated 2500 grizzly bears.
In 2002, the Endangered Species Conservation Committee recommended that the Alberta grizzly bear population be designated as threatened due to recent estimates of grizzly bear mortality rates that indicated the population was in decline.
Katmai National Park and Preserve is one of the best spots to view brown bears.
Meat, as already described, is an important part of a grizzly's diet.
A sow is protective of her offspring and will attack if she thinks she or her cubs are threatened.
These nitrogen influxes to the forest are directly related to the presence of grizzly bears and salmon.
Revelstoke, British Columbia is a community that demonstrates the success of this approach.
20 to 30 grizzlies can be observed at the creek at one time and like Brooks Camp, visitors can watch bears from an above platform.
Newborn bears may weigh less than .
Grizzly bears have also been blamed in the decline of elk in Yellowstone National Park when the actual predators were thought to be gray wolves.
Average total length in this subspecies is , with an average shoulder height of  and hindfoot length of .
In Yellowstone National Park in the United States, the grizzly bear's diet consists mostly of whitebark pine nuts, tubers, grasses, various rodents, army cutworm moths, and scavenged carcasses.
When a grizzly descends on a cougar feeding on its kill, the cougar usually gives way to the bear.
Fish and Wildlife Service concentrates its effort to restore grizzly bears in six recovery areas.
For example, many grizzly bears will visit meadows right after an avalanche or glacier slide.
An area that contains both bear digs and undisturbed land has greater plant diversity than an area that contains just undisturbed land.
As the wolves and grizzly compete for the kill, one wolf may try to distract the bear while the others feed.
None of these, however, match the fat content of the salmon available in Alaska and British Columbia.
The removal of wolves and the grizzly bear in California may have greatly reduced the abundance of the endangered San Joaquin Kit Fox.
In Canada, there are approximately 25,000 grizzly bears occupying British Columbia, Alberta, the tundra areas of the Ungava Peninsula and the northern tip of Labrador-Quebec, the Yukon, the Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and the northern part of Manitoba.
In general, the other species will leave the carcasses for the bear to avoid competition or predation.
Environment Canada consider the grizzly bear to a "special concern" species, as it is particularly sensitive to human activities and natural threats.
Grizzly bears have one of the lowest reproductive rates of all terrestrial mammals in North America.
Fish and Wildlife Service claims the Cabinet-Yaak and Selkirk areas are linked through British Columbia, a claim that is disputed.
Some of the best bear viewing in the world occurs on coastal areas of the Alaska Peninsula, including in  Lake Clark National Park and Preserve, Katmai National Park and Preserve, and the McNeil River State Game Sanctuary and Refuge.
Brown bears are found in Asia, Europe, and North America, giving them the widest ranges of bear species.
Nitrogen cycling is not only facilitated by grizzlies digging for food, it is also accomplished via their habit of carrying salmon carcasses into surrounding forests.
Most grizzly bear attacks result from a bear that has been surprised at very close range, especially if it has a supply of food to protect, or female grizzlies protecting their offspring.
One example of these efforts is the Khutzeymateen Grizzly Bear Sanctuary located along the north coast of British Columbia; at  in size, it is composed of key habitat for this threatened species.
Cougars generally give the bears a wide berth.
The grizzly bear uses its keen sense of smell to locate the kill.
Coastal grizzlies, often referred to by the popular but geographically redundant synonym of "brown bear" or "Alaskan brown bear" are larger and darker than inland grizzlies, which is why they, too, were considered a different species from grizzlies.
Once mated with a male in the summer, the female delays embryo implantation until hibernation, during which miscarriage can occur if the female does not receive the proper nutrients and caloric intake.
Except for females with cubs, grizzlies are normally solitary, active animals, but in coastal areas, grizzlies gather around streams, lakes, rivers, and ponds during the salmon spawn.
In the Yukon River area, mature female grizzlies can weigh as little as .
In May 2002, the Canadian Species at Risk Act listed the Prairie population (Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba range) of grizzly bears as extirpated in Canada.
In March 2007, the U.S.
Grizzly bears do not reach sexual maturity until they are at least five years old.
In certain areas, grizzly bears outcompete black bears for the same resources.
Competition with other predators and predation on cubs are other possible limiting factors for grizzly bear recovery, though grizzly bears also benefit from scavenged carcasses from predators as an easy food source when other food sources decline.
The grizzly bear currently has legal protection in Mexico, European countries, some areas of Canada and in the United States.
The average lifespan for a male is estimated at 22 years, with that of a female being slightly longer at 26.
Although the diets of grizzly bears vary extensively based on seasonal and regional changes, plants make up a large portion of them, with some estimates as high as 80–90%.
An area that has been dug by the grizzly bear has significantly more nitrogen than an undisturbed area.
Usually such incidents involve only one or two grizzlies at a carcass, but up to ten large males have been seen at a time eating a dead humpback whale.
With the reintroduction of gray wolves to Yellowstone, many visitors have witnessed a once common struggle between a keystone species, the grizzly bear, and its historic rival, the gray wolf.
A grizzly bear's front claws measure about 2-4 inches in length and a black bear's measure about 1-2 inches in length.
Current data suggest female grizzly bears are disproportionately less likely than males to use these corridors, which can prevent mate access and decrease the number of offspring.
In regions where both species coexist, they are divided by landscape gradients such as age of forest, elevation and openness of land.
Several studies show that grizzly bears may follow the caribou herds year-round in order to maintain their food supply.
Some studies have shown germination success is indeed increased as a result of seeds being deposited along with nutrients in feces.
During the spring and fall, directly before and after the salmon runs, berries and grass make up the mainstay of the diets of coastal grizzlies.
An alternative to hanging food is to use a bear canister.
Black bears are not strong competition for prey because they have a more herbivorous diet.
These are Northern Continental Divide (Montana), Yellowstone (Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho), Cabinet-Yaak (Montana and Idaho), Selway-Bitterroot (Montana and Idaho), Selkirk (Idaho and Washington), and North Cascades (Washington).
All of the Katmai-McNeil area is closed to hunting except for Katmai National Preserve, where regulated legal hunting takes place.
Mothers may see their cubs in later years but both avoid each other.
In North America, grizzly bears previously ranged from Alaska down to Mexico and as far east as the western shores of Hudson Bay; the species is now found in Alaska, south through much of western Canada, and into portions of the northwestern United States (including Idaho, Montana, Washington, and Wyoming), extending as far south as Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks.
In doing so, they provide a food source for gulls, ravens, and foxes, all of which eat salmon as well; this benefits both the bear and the smaller predators.
Grizzly bears tend to favor old forests with high productivity, higher elevations and more open habitats compared with black bears.
In coastal areas of the park, such as  Hallo Bay, Geographic Harbor, Swikshak Lagoon, American Creek, Big River, Kamishak River, Savonoski River, Moraine Creek, Funnel Creek, Battle Creek, Nantuk Creek, Kukak Bay, and Kaflia Bay you can often watch bears fishing alongside wolves, eagles, and river otters.
