Cleveland's law practice brought only a moderate income, perhaps because Cleveland spent considerable time at the couple's vacation home Grey Gables at Buzzard Bay, where fishing became his obsession.
Wisconsin and Massachusetts were two of the few states that remained under the control of Cleveland's allies.
When Britain and Venezuela disagreed over the boundary between Venezuela and the colony of British Guiana, Cleveland and Secretary of State Richard Olney protested.
In Cleveland's first term, no new states had been admitted in more than a decade, owing to Congressional Democrats' reluctance to admit states they believed would send Republican members.
Moreover, Cleveland believed that altering Gould's franchise would violate the Contract Clause of the federal Constitution.
Cleveland won praise for his honesty, self-reliance, integrity, and commitment to the principles of classical liberalism.
Cleveland's margin of victory was, at the time, the largest in a contested New York election; the Democrats also picked up seats in both houses of the New York State Legislature.
As sheriff, Cleveland was responsible for either personally carrying out the execution or paying a deputy $10 to perform the task.
When she returned to school, President Cleveland received her mother's permission to correspond with her, and they were soon engaged to be married.
Cleveland also withdrew from Senate consideration the Berlin Conference treaty which guaranteed an open door for U.S. interests in the Congo.
Cleveland's health had been declining for several years, and in the autumn of 1907 he fell seriously ill.
The Board and the program are usually called the Endicott Board and the Endicott Program.
After leaving the White House on March 4, 1897, Cleveland lived in retirement at his estate, Westland Mansion, in Princeton, New Jersey.
They also blistered Blaine for attending a banquet with some of New York City's wealthiest men.
However, unlike the previous bachelor president James Buchanan, Cleveland did not remain a bachelor for very long.
Cleveland agreed with Blount's report, which found the populace to be opposed to annexation.
The other, Benjamin Harrison, was in office at the time that the change was made.
Closer to home, Cleveland adopted a broad interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine that not only prohibited new European colonies, but also declared an American national interest in any matter of substance within the hemisphere.
Most governors supported Cleveland except Democrat John P. Altgeld of Illinois, who became his bitter foe in 1896.
On the second ballot, Tammany threw its support behind Butler, but the rest of the delegates shifted to Cleveland, who won.
He was the second President to wed while in office, and has been the only President married in the White House.
New York Democratic party officials began to consider Cleveland a possible nominee for governor.
In the intervening four years, Honolulu businessmen of European and American ancestry had denounced Queen Liliuokalani as a tyrant who rejected constitutional government.
He is the only President in American history to serve two non-consecutive terms in office.
As his second administration began, disaster hit the nation when the Panic of 1893 produced a severe national depression, which Cleveland was unable to reverse.
By the time they reached Washington, only a few hundred remained, and when they were arrested the next day for walking on the lawn of the United States Capitol, the group scattered.
He shunned the circles of higher society of Buffalo in which his uncle's family traveled.
In the 1980s, analysis of the specimen finally confirmed the tumor to be verrucous carcinoma, a low-grade epithelial cancer with a low potential for metastasis.
Cleveland succeeded in ushering in the 1894 repeal of this law (ch.
Because the railroads carried the mail, and because several of the affected lines were in federal receivership, Cleveland believed a federal solution was appropriate.
After the votes were counted, Cleveland narrowly won all four of the swing states, including New York by 1200 votes.
Most of the Board's recommendations were implemented, and by 1910 27 locations were defended by over 70 forts.
This affiliation was more of an office sharing arrangement, though quite compatible.
Republican victory in that state, where Cleveland lost by just 2,348 votes, was sufficient to propel Harrison to victory, despite his loss of the nationwide popular vote.
American tariffs had been high since the Civil War, and by the 1880s the tariff brought in so much revenue that the government was running a surplus.
By June 1894, 125,000 railroad workers were on strike, paralyzing the nation's commerce.
The lands were forfeited, resulting in the return of approximately .
With a split in the state Republican party in 1882, the Democratic party was considered to be at an advantage; there were several contenders for that party's nomination.
Secretary of State Thomas F. Bayard negotiated an extension to the Chinese Exclusion Act, and Cleveland lobbied the Congress to pass the Scott Act, written by Congressman William Lawrence Scott, which prevented the return of Chinese immigrants who left the United States.
The relative positions to be assumed by men and women in the working out of our civilization were assigned long ago by a higher intelligence."
The first to attract attention was his veto of a bill to reduce the fares on New York City elevated trains to five cents.
These included two judges to the United States circuit courts, nine judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 30 judges to the United States district courts.
In 1906, a group of New Jersey Democrats promoted Cleveland as a possible candidate for the United States Senate.
He stopped first in Buffalo, New York, where his uncle, Lewis F. Allen, gave him a clerical job.
The Mugwumps, including such men as Carl Schurz and Henry Ward Beecher, were more concerned with morality than with party, and felt Cleveland was a kindred soul who would promote civil service reform and fight for efficiency in government.
Keen, stated after Cleveland's death that the tumor was a carcinoma.
The panic was worsened by the acute shortage of gold that resulted from the increased coinage of silver, and Cleveland called Congress into special session to deal with the problem.
Among the acts that established his reputation was a veto of the street-cleaning bill passed by the Common Council.
Although completion of the four steel-hulled warships begun under the previous administration was delayed due to a corruption investigation and subsequent bankruptcy of their building yard, these ships were completed in a timely manner in naval shipyards once the investigation was over.
Several doctors, including Dr.
Halpin had been involved with several men at the time, including Cleveland's friend and law partner, Oscar Folsom, for whom the child was named.
Cleveland silently supported the Gold Democrats' third-party ticket that promised to defend the gold standard, limit government and oppose high tariffs, but he declined their nomination for a third term.
Utah, however, was believed to be Democratic.
They failed for lack of unity and a national leader, as Illinois governor John Peter Altgeld had been born in Germany and was ineligible to be nominated for President.
He possessed honesty, courage, firmness, independence, and common sense.
The Enforcement Act of 1871 had provided for a detailed federal overseeing of the electoral process, from registration to the certification of returns.
Under the guise of a vacation cruise, Cleveland and his surgeon, Dr. Joseph Bryant, left for New York.
Cleveland led on the first ballot, with 392 votes out of 820.
At 21 years, Frances Folsom Cleveland was the youngest First Lady in history, and the public soon warmed to her beauty and warm personality.
Cleveland used the veto far more often than any president up to that time.
He secretly bought a farmhouse, Oak View (or Oak Hill), in a rural upland part of the District of Columbia, in 1886, and remodeled it into a Queen Anne style summer estate.
In 1868, Cleveland attracted professional attention for his winning defense of a libel suit against the editor of Buffalo's ''Commercial Advertiser''.
Cleveland was the leader of the pro-business Bourbon Democrats who opposed high tariffs, Free Silver, inflation, imperialism, and subsidies to business, farmers, or veterans.
While some of his decisions were influenced by party concerns, more of Cleveland's appointments were decided by merit alone than was the case in his predecessors' administrations.
After his father died in 1853, he again left school so as to help support his family.
Cleveland was a formidable policymaker, and he also drew corresponding criticism.
The debate over the coinage was as heated as ever, and the effects of the panic had driven more moderates to support repealing the coinage provisions of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act.
Among the Democrats, Samuel J. Tilden was the initial front-runner, having been the party's nominee in the contested election of 1876.
Daniel Manning, a party insider who admired Cleveland's record, was instrumental in his candidacy.
Blaine's nomination alienated many Republicans who viewed Blaine as ambitious and immoral.
Elected to Congress in 1872, Bass did not spend much time at the firm, but Cleveland and Bissell soon rose to the top of Buffalo's legal community.
Cleveland's portrait was on the U.S. $1000 bill of series 1928 and series 1934.
Cleveland consulted occasionally with President Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909), but was financially unable to accept the chairmanship of the commission handling the Coal Strike of 1902.
Later, in 1896, another vacancy on the Court led Cleveland to consider Hornblower again, but he declined to be nominated.
He was the winner of the popular vote for president three timesin 1884, 1888, and 1892and was one of the three Democrats (with Andrew Johnson and Woodrow Wilson) to serve as president during the era of Republican political domination dating from 1861 to 1933.
When confronted with the scandal, Cleveland immediately instructed his supporters to "Above all, tell the truth."
The Republicans nominated Benjamin Harrison of Indiana for President and Levi P. Morton of New York for Vice President.
He refused to promote the previous administration's Nicaragua canal treaty, and generally was less of an expansionist in foreign relations.
The Panic of 1893 had damaged labor conditions across the United States, and the victory of anti-silver legislation worsened the mood of western laborers.
In 1895-96 Secretary of the Navy Hilary A. Herbert, having recently adopted the aggressive naval strategy advocated by Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan, successfully proposed ordering five battleships (the  and es) and sixteen torpedo boats.
The pendulum thus swung from stronger attempts to protect voting rights to the repealing of voting rights protections; this in turn led to unsuccessful attempts to have the federal courts protect voting rights in ''Giles v. Harris'', 189 U.S. 475 (1903), and ''Giles v. Teasley'', 193 U.S. 146 (1904).
Unlike the turbulent and controversial elections of 1876, 1884, and 1888, the 1892 election was, according to Cleveland biographer Allan Nevins, "the cleanest, quietest, and most creditable in the memory of the post-war generation," in part because Harrison's wife, Caroline, was dying of tuberculosis.
From his earliest involvement in politics, Cleveland aligned with the Democratic Party.
The experience was valuable and brief, and the living conditions quite austere.
Thus, all of Cleveland's appointments to the circuit courts were made in his first term, and all of his appointments to the Courts of Appeals were made in his second.
In 1917, one of the surgeons present on the ''Oneida'', Dr. William W. Keen, wrote an article detailing the operation.
It ultimately weakened the tribal governments and allowed individual Indians to sell land and keep the money.
He became known as Grover in his adult life.
He and Secretary of the Navy William C. Whitney undertook to modernize the navy and canceled construction contracts that had resulted in inferior ships.
The bill passed the Senate with more than 600 amendments attached that nullified most of the reforms.
The warning was appropriate, for in the Congressional elections, Republicans won their biggest landslide in decades, taking full control of the House, while the Populists lost most of their support.
Weaver promised Free Silver, generous veterans' pensions, and an eight-hour work day.
Dispute over the tariff persisted into the 1888 presidential election.
The Clevelands had five children: Ruth (1891–1904), Esther (1893–1980), Marion (1895–1977), Richard Folsom (1897–1974), and Francis Grover (1903–1995).
Cleveland was easily renominated at the Democratic convention in St. Louis.
Lamar, was a former Mississippi Senator who served in Cleveland's Cabinet as Interior Secretary.
A notable incident of his term took place on September 6, 1872, when Patrick Morrissey was executed, who had been convicted of murdering his mother.
His intervention in the Pullman Strike of 1894 to keep the railroads moving angered labor unions nationwide in addition to the party in Illinois; his support of the gold standard and opposition to Free Silver alienated the agrarian wing of the Democratic Party.
Lamar's nomination was confirmed by the narrow margin of 32 to 28.
When the more notorious politicians were left off the Democratic ticket, Cleveland accepted the nomination.
Shortly before the 1884 election, the Republican media published an affidavit from Halpin in which she stated that until she met Cleveland, her "life was pure and spotless", and "there is not, and never was, a doubt as to the paternity of our child, and the attempt of Grover Cleveland, or his friends, to couple the name of Oscar Folsom, or any one else, with that boy, for that purpose is simply infamous and false."
But by standing with a Latin American nation against the encroachment of a colonial power, Cleveland improved relations with the United States' southern neighbors, and at the same time, the cordial manner in which the negotiations were conducted also made for good relations with Britain.
Even so, his reputation for probity and good character survived the troubles of his second term.
The campaign focused on the candidates' moral standards, as each side cast aspersions on their opponents.
Even though Coxey's Army may not have been a threat to the government, it signaled a growing dissatisfaction in the West with Eastern monetary policies.
In his first term in office, Cleveland sought a summer house to escape the heat and smells of Washington, D.C., near enough the capital.
The second Cleveland administration was as committed to military modernization as the first, and ordered the first ships of a navy capable of offensive action.
These ships included the "second-class battleships"  and , designed to match modern armored ships recently acquired by South American countries from Europe, such as the Brazilian battleship ''Riachuelo''.
Chief Justice Morrison Waite died a few months later, and Cleveland nominated Melville Fuller to fill his seat on April 30, 1888.
In 1865, he ran for District Attorney, losing narrowly to his friend and roommate, Lyman K. Bass, the Republican nominee.
Commentator Jeff Jacoby notes that, "Not since George Washington had a candidate for President been so renowned for his rectitude."
Many Westerners, traditionally Republican voters, defected to James Weaver, the candidate of the new Populist Party.
The Republicans campaigned heavily on the tariff issue, turning out protectionist voters in the important industrial states of the North.
For the Navy, the Cleveland administration spearheaded by Secretary of the Navy William Collins Whitney moved towards modernization, although no ships were constructed that could match the best European warships.
But unlike that year, when Cleveland had triumphed in all four, in 1888 he won only two, losing his home state of New York by 14,373 votes.
Despite some desperate maneuvering by Hill, Cleveland was nominated on the first ballot at the convention in Chicago.
Cleveland vetoed the expenditure.
While they lived in New York, the Clevelands' first child, Ruth, was born in 1891.
Five days after taking office on March 9, 1893, Cleveland withdrew the treaty from the Senate and sent former Congressman James Henderson Blount to Hawai'i to investigate the conditions there.
The incumbent, John F. Dryden, was not seeking re-election, and some Democrats felt that the former President could attract the votes of some disaffected Republican legislators who might be drawn to Cleveland's statesmanship and conservatism.
Vice President Hendricks having died in 1885, the Democrats chose Allen G. Thurman of Ohio to be Cleveland's new running mate.
As in 1884, the election focused on the swing states of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Indiana.
Neighbors later described him as "full of fun and inclined to play pranks," and fond of outdoor sports.
The bill had broad support because the trains' owner, Jay Gould, was unpopular, and his fare increases were widely denounced.
Lamar charged that the rights of way for this land must be returned to the public because the railroads failed to extend their lines according to agreements.
The electoral votes of closely contested New York, New Jersey, Indiana, and Connecticut would determine the election.
Agrarians nominated Bryan again in 1900.
In 1885 Cleveland appointed the Board of Fortifications under Secretary of War William C. Endicott to recommend a new coastal fortification system for the United States.
The Republican party remained divided against itself, and in the general election Cleveland emerged the victor, with 535,318 votes to Republican nominee Charles J. Folger's 342,464.
As the surplus grew, Cleveland and the reformers called for a tariff for revenue only.
Cleveland viewed Native Americans as wards of the state, saying in his first inaugural address that "this guardianship involves, on our part, efforts for the improvement of their condition and enforcement of their rights."
Despite the initial popularity of the fare-reduction bill, the newspapers praised Cleveland's veto.
The surgery occurred on July 1, to give Cleveland time to make a full recovery in time for the upcoming Congressional session.
Each of the other candidates had hindrances to his nomination: Bayard had spoken in favor of secession in 1861, making him unacceptable to Northerners; Butler, conversely, was reviled throughout the South for his actions during the Civil War; Thurman was generally well liked, but was growing old and infirm, and his views on the silver question were uncertain.
He took office January 2, 1882.
Their factions deadlocked, and the convention could not agree on a nominee.
The Tammany Hall Democrats adhered to the national ticket, allowing a united Democratic party to carry New York.
Cleveland enjoyed many years of life after the tumor was removed, and there was some debate as to whether it was actually malignant.
He won the election by a 303-vote margin and took office on January 1, 1871 at age 33.
In 1887, he signed an act creating the Interstate Commerce Commission.
Cleveland, in third place on the first ballot, picked up support in subsequent votes and emerged as the compromise choice.
Completion of these ships nearly doubled the Navy's battleships and created a new torpedo boat force, which previously had only two boats.
Cleveland was a committed non-interventionist who had campaigned in opposition to expansion and imperialism.
Shortly after, he died.
While the popular vote total was close, with Cleveland winning by just one-quarter of a percent, the electoral votes gave Cleveland a majority of 219–182.
He encouraged the idea of cultural assimilation, pushing for the passage of the Dawes Act, which provided for distribution of Indian lands to individual members of tribes, rather than having them continued to be held in trust for the tribes by the federal government.
Cleveland angered railroad investors by ordering an investigation of western lands they held by government grant.
The Democrats spread the word of this implied Catholic insult on the eve of the election.
In reply, one of the foremost silverites, Richard P. Bland, introduced a bill in 1886 that would require the government to coin unlimited amounts of silver, inflating the then-deflating currency.
His crusade for political reform and fiscal conservatism made him an icon for American conservatives of the era.
Cleveland's supporters rehashed the old allegations that Blaine had corruptly influenced legislation in favor of the Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad and the Union Pacific Railway, later profiting on the sale of bonds he owned in both companies.
On June 2, 1886, Cleveland married Frances Folsom in the Blue Room at the White House.
The GOP standard bearer was weakened by alienating the Mugwumps, and the Conkling faction, recently disenfranchised by President Arthur.
In 1850, Cleveland's father took a pastorate in Clinton, Oneida County, New York, and the family relocated there.
British Prime Minister Lord Salisbury and the British ambassador to Washington, Julian Pauncefote, misjudged how important successful resolution of the dispute was to the American government, having prolonged the crisis before ultimately accepting the American demand for arbitration.
Up to that point, Cleveland's political career had been honorable and unexceptional.
In New York, the Tammany Democrats decided that they would gain more from supporting a Democrat they disliked than a Republican who would do nothing for them.
As a supporter of greenbacks and Free Silver to inflate the currency and alleviate economic distress in the rural districts, Stevenson balanced the otherwise hard-money, gold-standard ticket headed by Cleveland.
He returned home to Holland Patent at the end of 1854, where an elder in his church offered to pay for his college education if he would promise to become a minister.
After his term as sheriff ended, Cleveland returned to his law practice, opening a firm with his friends Lyman K. Bass and Wilson S. Bissell.
Cleveland declined, and in 1855 he decided to move west.
Cleveland, forced against his better judgment to lobby the Congress for repeal, convinced enough Democrats – and along with eastern Republicans, they formed a 48–37 majority for repeal.
His message to Congress in 1887 (quoted at right) highlighted the injustice of taking more money from the people than the government needed to pay its operating expenses.
The Republicans re-nominated President Harrison, making the 1892 election a rematch of the one four years earlier.
Stephen Grover Cleveland was born on March 18, 1837, in Caldwell, New Jersey to Richard Falley Cleveland and Ann (née Neal) Cleveland.
The result was a retention of the status quo, and a postponement of the resolution of the Free Silver issue.
One of the most volatile issues of the 1880s was whether the currency should be backed by gold and silver, or by gold alone.
The Irish, a significant group in three of the swing states, did appear inclined to support Blaine until a Republican, Samuel D. Burchard, gave a speech pivotal for the Democrats, denouncing them as the party of "Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion."
Depletion of the Treasury's gold reserves continued, at a lesser rate, and subsequent bond issues replenished supplies of gold.
Theodore Roosevelt, then a member of the Assembly, had reluctantly voted for the bill to which Cleveland objected, in a desire to punish the unscrupulous railroad barons.
Cleveland also asked the state legislature to form a Commission to develop a plan to improve the sewer system in Buffalo at a much lower cost than previously proposed locally; this plan was successfully adopted.
Cleveland's defiance of political corruption won him popular acclaim, and the enmity of the influential Tammany Hall organization in New York City.
As biographer Allan Nevins wrote, "Probably no man in the country, on March 4, 1881, had less thought than this limited, simple, sturdy attorney of Buffalo that four years later he would be standing in Washington and taking the oath as President of the United States."
Other suggestions included ameloblastoma or a benign salivary mixed tumor (also known as a pleomorphic adenoma).
Cleveland's father was a Presbyterian minister who was originally from Connecticut.
He had no endowments that thousands of men do not have.
Hill united the anti-Cleveland elements of the Democratic party—silverites, protectionists, and Tammany Hall—but was unable to create a coalition large enough to deny Cleveland the nomination.
Cleveland was elected mayor with 15,120 votes, as against 11,528 for Milton C. Beebe, his opponent.
When William Burnham Woods died, Cleveland nominated Lamar to his seat in late 1887.
After lengthy debate, the bill passed the House by a considerable margin.
Harrison did not personally campaign at all.
Cleveland chose the latter course, paying $150 to George Benninsky, a thirty-two-year-old Polish immigrant, to serve in his place.
This, combined with uncertainty about Mormon polygamy (disavowed in 1890), led it to be excluded from the new states.
It was during this period that Cleveland began a brief relationship with a widow, Maria Crofts Halpin, and later assumed responsibility for supporting her and a child born at the time.
; this was especially the case with policy making positions.
The two leading Democratic candidates were Roswell P. Flower and Henry W. Slocum.
Even so, he believed it was an improvement over the McKinley tariff and allowed it to become law without his signature.
With the American Civil War raging, Congress passed the Conscription Act of 1863, requiring able-bodied men to serve in the army if called upon, or else to hire a substitute.
In 1895 he became the first U.S. President who was filmed.
The legislative revisions of the past four years also made imported goods so expensive that now many voters favored tariff reform and were skeptical of big business.
On some of the most damaging correspondence, Blaine had written "Burn this letter", giving Democrats the last line to their rallying cry: "Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine, the continental liar from the state of Maine, 'Burn this letter!"
The first U.S. postage stamp to honor Cleveland appeared in 1923.
The team, sedating Cleveland with nitrous oxide and ether, successfully removed parts of his upper left jaw and hard palate.
Endicott also proposed to Congress a system of examinations for Army officer promotions.
Secretary of the Interior Lucius Q.C.
Cleveland's factional enemies gained control of the Democratic Party in state after state, including full control in Illinois and Michigan, and made major gains in Ohio, Indiana, Iowa and other states.
In the month before Cleveland's 1885 inauguration, President Arthur opened four million acres of Winnebago and Crow Creek Indian lands in the Dakota Territory to white settlement by executive order.
In his veto message, he espoused a theory of limited government:
In spite of reservations about the hanging, Cleveland executed Morrissey himself; he hanged another murderer, John Gaffney, on February 14, 1873.
The matter became a campaign issue for the GOP in his first presidential campaign.
