The 2009 festival had over 200 films shown in more than 16 theatres and open-air forums, such as the inflatable screens set up in places such as Chapultepec, La Rambla Cataluña and La Minerva.
International firms started building facilities in Mexico, especially Guadalajara, displacing Mexican firms, especially in information technology.
An album collecting a number of these melodies was produced called "Mariachi Rock-O."
''FDI'' ranked it as the most business-friendly Latin American city in 2007.
The Palace of Justice was finished in 1897.
Officially, 206 people were killed, nearly 500 injured and 15,000 were left homeless.
In 1844, General Mariano Paredes y Arrillaga initiated a revolt against the government of President Antonio López de Santa Anna, which the president managed to quell personally.
The increase in population brought with it an increase in the size of what is now called Greater Guadalajara, rather than an increase in the population density of the city.
Andares is another important commercial center in Zapopan.
In that year, the event gave out awards totaling 500,000 USD.
This made the music a symbol of west Mexico, and after the migration of many people from the Guadalajara area to Mexico City (mostly settling near Plaza Garibaldi), it then became a symbol of Mexican identity as well Guadalajara hosts the Festival of Mariachi and Charreria, which began in 1994.
It has four façades of quarried stone.
The French-inspired "Lafayette" neighborhood has many fine examples of early 20th-century residences that were later converted into boutiques and restaurants.
The Festival Cultural de Mayo (May Cultural Festival) began in 1988.
A media report in early October 2013 stated that five major Indian IT (information technology) companies have established offices in Guadalajara, while several other Indian IT companies continue to explore the option of expanding to Mexico.
The Jalisco Regional Museum (Ex seminary de San José) was built at the beginning of the 18th century to be the Seminario Conciliar de San José.
International firms have invested here to take advantage of the relatively cheap but educated and highly productive labor, establishing manufacturing plants that re-export their products to the United States, as well as provide goods for the internal Mexican market.
The painting collection includes works by Juan Correa, Cristóbal de Villalpando and José de Ibarra.
The architecture is a mix of Gothic, Baroque, Moorish and Neoclassical.
The Temple of San Juan de Dios, a Baroque church built in the 17th century, is next to the market.
One of the prized exhibits is a complete mammoth skeleton.
In 1794, the Hospital Real de San Miguel de Belén, or simply the Hospital de Belén, was opened The hospital was opened in 2016.
More than 350,000 people attend from Mexico and abroad.
Other dishes that are popular here include pozole, a soup prepared with hominy, chicken or pork and various condiments and pipián, which is a sauce prepared with peanuts, squash and sesame seed.
Guadalajara is home to ITESO, a Jesuit university, and has campuses of several private schools such as the Universidad del Valle de México, Tec de Monterrey, Universidad Marista de Guadalajara,Universidad Guadalajara LAMAR, Universidad Panamericana Sede Guadalajara, as well as the Universidad Autónoma de Guadalajara (UAG), which was founded in 1935 and is the oldest private university in Mexico, and Universidad del Valle de Atemajac (UNIVA).
Since then, the city has evolved into four sectors, which are still more-or-less class centered.
The northward movement of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone brings a great deal of rain in the summer months, whereas for the rest of the year, the climate is rather arid.
Although the temperature is warm year-round, Guadalajara has very strong seasonal variation in precipitation.
The Rotonda de los Hombres Ilustres (Rotunda of Illustrious Men) is a monument made of quarried stone, built in 1952 to honor the memory of distinguished people from Jalisco.
The historic downtown of Guadalajara is the oldest section of the city, where it was founded and where the oldest buildings are.
Like other municipalities in Mexico, Guadalajara is governed by a municipal president, who exercises executive power for three consecutive years.
Atlas fans are collectively called  (the faithful) by themselves; younger followers are gathered as "Barra 51" ; La Barra 51 is a strong organized supporter group.
The municipality is the second most densely populated in Mexico, the first being Ciudad Nezahualcóyotl in State of Mexico.
Ranch culture became a very important aspect of Jalisco's and Guadalajara's identity since this time.
There, temperatures around  can be recorded during the coldest nights.
In 1976, it was completely remodeled for its present use.
Today, it is the home of the Instituto Cultural Cabañas (Cabañas Cultural Institute) and its main attraction is the murals by José Clemente Orozco, which covers the main entrance hall.
The settlement did not last long at this spot due to the lack of water; in 1533 it was moved to a location near Tonalá.
The façade is Neoclassical and its main entrance is topped by a triangular pediment.
The current name was adopted in 1988, as it became the orchestra for the state, not just the city of Guadalajara although it remains based here.
The other is industry, which has been the engine of economic growth and the basis of Guadalajara's economic importance nationally even though it employs only about a third of the population.
Guadalajara remained the capital of Nueva Galicia with some modifications until the Mexican War of Independence.
There are plans to take these bands on tour in Mexico, the United States and Europe.
The city has remained there to this day.
This makes Guadalajara's economic fortunes dependent on those of the U.S., both as a source of investment and as a market for its goods.
The Ex-Hospicio Cabañas extends along the entire east side of the Plaza.
It was named after Bishop Ruiz de Cabañas y Crespo.
The events of this festival take place in venues all over the metropolitan area.
To attract private corporate investment, regulatory control eased and most commercial developments now are controlled by private concerns.
It was ranked fifth among the best Mexican universities in 2012.
The connection between the city and mariachi began in 1907 when an eight-piece mariachi band and four dancers from the city performed on stage at the president's residence for both Porfirio Díaz and the secretary of State of the United States.
Ultimately, however, these people were cleared of all charges.
Its population surpassed one million in 1964, and by the 1970s it was Mexico's second largest city and the largest in western Mexico.
Most of the modern city's urbanization took place between the 1940s and the 1980s, with the population doubling every ten years until it stood at 2.5 million in 1980.
In 2009 Moody's Investors Service assigned ratings of Ba1 (Global scale, local currency) and A1.mx (Mexican national scale).
Despite the violence, the 19th century was a period of economic, technological and social growth for the city.
Across the street is the municipal palace which was built in 1952.
A circular structure of 17 columns surrounds 98 urns containing the remains of those honored.
It was built in 1987, and it is considered the most important convention center in Mexico.
In the historic center of the city is the Plaza de los Mariachis, named such as many groups play here.
Other, more traditional industries, such as shoes, textiles and food processing are also important contributing factors.
Guadalajara manages one of the largest budgets among Mexican municipalities and its revenue per capita indicator (Ps.
French troops entered the city during the French Intervention in 1864, and the city was retaken by Mexican troops in 1866.
Urbanization centered on the city spreads out over seven other municipalities; of Zapopan, Tlaquepaque, Tonalá, Tlajomulco de Zuñiga, El Salto, Ixtlahuacán de los Membrillos and Juanacatlán.
The Hospicio Cabañas in the historic center is a World Heritage Site.
Mariachi bands from all over the world participate, coming from countries such as Venezuela, Cuba, Belgium, Chile, France, Australia, Slovak Republic, Canada and the United States.
The new bus rapid transit (BRT) system, Macrobús, was launched in March and runs along Avenida Independencia.
Guadalajara is a cultural center of Mexico, considered by most to be the home of mariachi music and host to a number of large-scale cultural events such as the Guadalajara International Film Festival, the Guadalajara International Book Fair, and globally renowned cultural events which draw international crowds.
It held concerts from that time until 1924, when state funding was lost.
It centers on Paseo Morelos/Paseo Hospicio from the Plaza de Armas, where the seats of ecclesiastical and secular power are, east toward the Plaza de Mariachis and the Hospicio Cabañas.
The entity underwent a number of reorganizations since then, but the modern university as it exists today was established in 1925, when the governor of Jalisco convened professors, students and others to re-establish the university.
This property was generally bought in the edges of the city, which were urbanizing into ''fraccionamientos'', or residential areas.
It hosts art exhibits and fashion shows, and has an area for cultural workshops.
This office is currently occupied by Enrique Alfaro (Movimiento Ciudadano).
In 1971, the orchestra became affiliated with the Department of Fine Arts of the State of Jalisco.
The Plaza de los Mariachis is faced by restaurants where one can hear live mariachis play, especially at night.
A large number of restaurants, bars, bakeries and cafés participate as well as producers of beer, wine and tequila.
Activities include book presentations, academic talks, forums, and events for children.
Within Guadalajara's historic downtown, there are many squares and public parks: Parque Morelos, Plaza de los Mariachis, Plaza Fundadores, Plaza Tapatia, Plaza del Agave, Parque Revolucion, Jardin del Santuario, Plaza de Armas, Plaza de la Liberacion, Plaza Guadalajara and the Rotonda de los Hombres Ilustres, the last four of which surround the cathedral to form a Latin Cross.
Guadalajara is the 10th largest city in Latin America in population, urban area and gross domestic product.
The Guadalajara light rail/metro system, named SITEUR (Sistema de Tren Eléctrico Urbano), Spanish for Urban Electrical Train System, provides rapid transit service within Guadalajara and the neighboring municipalities of Zapopan and Tlaquepaque.
The city was established in five other places before moving to its current location.
Phase I of the Macrobús project opened in 2009 with a 16&nbsp;km long corridor following Calzada Independencia and serving 27 stations.
For these attributes and others, the city was named an American Capital of Culture in 2005.
It was founded in 1591.
During the rainy season, afternoon storms are very common and can sometimes bring hail flurries to the city, especially toward late August or September.
From 1861 to 1914, it housed a school called Liceo de Varones.
The 2009 festival featured 358 artists in 118 activities.
Viceroy Antonio de Mendoza had to take control of the campaign to suppress the revolt after the Spanish were defeated in several engagements.
The modern architecture of Guadalajara has a numerous figures of different architectural production from the neo-regionalism to the primitiveness of the 60's.
This has led to tensions between traditional markets, such as the Mercardo Libertad, and retailers such as department stores and supermarkets.
The city hosts the Feria Internacional Gastronomía (International Gastronomy Fair) each year in September showcasing Mexican and international cuisines.
Royalist forces marched to Guadalajara, arriving in January 1811 with nearly 6,000&nbsp;men.
This site was settled by Cristóbal de Oñate as commissioned by Nuño de Guzmán, with the purpose of securing recent conquests and defending them against the still-hostile natives.
The Cathedral is bordered to the east by the Plaza de la Liberación, nicknamed the Plaza de las Dos Copas, referring to the two fountains on the east and west sides.
Hidalgo did sign a proclamation ending slavery, which was honored in the country since after the war.
The trains are electric and have a top speed of .
It also has a bustling network of pedestrianised streets.
Between the Cathedral and the Hospicio is the large Plaza Tapatía which covers 70,000 m2.
Galerías Guadalajara covers  and has 220 stores.
Then the sandwich is covered in a red tomato/chili pepper sauce.
They are considered one of the city's symbols.
The plaza is in the exact spot where the city was founded and contains a sculpture depicting Cristobal de Oñate at the event (finsemana).
The plaza was renovated for the 2011 Pan American Games in anticipation of the crowds visiting.
The historical center hosts religious and civil colonial buildings, which are noted for their architectural and historical significance and are a rich mix of styles which are rooted in indigenous cultural contributions (mainly from Ute origin), incorporated in the Mozarabic and castizo, and later in modern European influences (mainly French and Italian) and American (specifically, from the United States).
Other works included a second terminal in the airport, a highway to Puerto Vallarta and a bypass for the southern part of the city.
While it is a modern city, it has kept many of the rural traditions of Jalisco, such as mariachi and a strong sense of Catholicism.
They've won also a single Championship back in 1994 as they defeated Santos.
The Legislative Place is Neoclassical and was originally built in the 18th century.
Three days before the explosion, residents started complaining of a strong gasoline-like smell coming from the sewers.
This metropolitan area had a population of 4,298,715 in 2008.
Oro and Universidad de Guadalajara.
Within the city itself, there are many forms of public transportation.
Its main portal is of yellow stone.
This sandwich is an oblong "bolillo" bun (made denser in Guadalajara than in the rest of the country) filled with pork and other ingredients.
Among these murals is "Hombre del Fuego" (Man of Fire), considered to be one of Orozco's finest works.
Behind the theater is another plaza with a fountain called the Fuente de los Fundadores (Fountain of the Founders).
It became the second Mexican University in 1792.
Guadalajara is a center of learning with six universities, two culinary institutes and a thriving art scene.
It attracts people in the fields of art, culture and politics from Mexico and abroad.
In 1918, it became the Museum of Fine Arts.
Over 750 mariachi musicians play traditional melodies on the plaza, and along with the restaurants and other businesses, the plaza supports more than 830 families.
However, while Santa Anna was in Guadalajara, a revolt called the Revolution of the Three Hours brought José Joaquín Herrera to the presidency and put Santa Anna into exile.
The Palace of the State Government is in Churrigueresque and Neoclassical styles and was begun in the 17th century and finished in 1774.
It is served in bowls with minced onion, limes and tortillas.
The Guadalajara trolleybus system has been operating since the 1970s, and there are private companies operating regular city buses.
However, violence by the rebel army to city residents, especially royalists, soured the welcome.
Guadalajara was officially founded on February 19, 1550 in the Valley of Atemajac.
Guadalajara is the distribution center for the region and its demands have led to a shifting of employment, from traditional agriculture and crafts to manufacturing and commerce in urban centers.
The event awards prizes such as the Premio FIL for literature, the Premio de Literatura Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, also for literature, and the Reconocimento al Mérito Editorial for publishing houses.
It is ranked in the top ten in Latin America in gross domestic product and the third highest ranking in Mexico.
The war was initiated by the natives due to the cruel treatment of Indians by Nuño de Guzmán, in particular the enslavement of captured natives.
Southeast of this plaza is the Mercado Libertad, also called the Mercado de San Juan de Dios, one of the largest traditional markets in Mexico.
Its has an additional private entrance on the top floor of the adjacent parking lot.
There is an extensive exposition of books and other materials in Spanish, Portuguese and English, covering academia, culture, the arts and more for sale.
Most of the economy revolves around commerce, employing 60% of the population.
The Casa de los Perros (House of the Dogs) was constructed in 1896 in Neoclassical design.
With a population of 1,495,189 it is Mexico's fourth most populous municipality.
Telecom and computer equipment from Guadalajara accounts for about a quarter of Mexico's electronics exports.
They are a crusty dense baguette style bread like that associated with Italy or France, and are very different from the soft bolillos found in most of the rest of Mexico.
Rail lines connecting the city to the Pacific coast and north to the United States intensified trade and allowed products from rural areas of Jalisco state to be shipped.
Among the many structures of beauty is the International Headquarters Temple of La Luz del Mundo in Colonia Hermosa Provincia, which is the largest in Latin America.
In August 2009, 542 mariachi musicians played together for a little over ten minutes to break the world's record for largest mariachi group.
Mi Bici Pública, PBSC Urban Solutions-based public bike share system, was launched in 2014.
The Guadalajara International Book Fair is the largest Spanish language book fair in the world held each year over nine days at the Expo Guadalajara.
However, it is the electronics and information technology sectors that have nicknamed the city the "Silicon Valley of Mexico."
Construction of the cathedral was begun in 1563.
The city is also host to several dance and ballet companies such as the Chamber Ballet of Jalisco, the Folkloric Ballet of the University of Guadalajara, and University of Guadalajara Contemporary Ballet.
On April 22, 1992, gasoline explosions in the sewer system over four hours destroyed  of streets in the downtown district of Analco.
In the 1980s, it was described as a "divided city" east to west based on socioeconomic class.
However, the outskirts of the city (generally those close to the Primavera Forest) experience in average cooler temperatures than the city itself.
From 1884 to 1890, electrical service, railroad service and the Observatory were established.
It was decided to move the city once again, this time to Atemajac, as it was more defensible.
This kind of service is mostly related to online and telephone technical support.
Exports from the city went from 3.92 billion USD in 1995 to 14.3 billion in 2003.
The Hospicio Cabañas, which is home to some of the paintings (murals and easel) by José Clemente Orozco, was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1997.
Arrests were made to indict those responsible for the blasts.
The best-known venue for this purposes is the Expo Guadalajara, a large convention center surrounded by several hotels.
Off this east-west axis are other significant constructions.
The Orquesta Filarmónica de Jalisco (Jalisco Philarmonic Orchestra) was founded by José Rolón in 1915.
This phenomenon began after the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
In 1791, the University of Guadalajara was established in the city, which was then the capital of Nueva Galicia.
This has not been favorable for the unskilled working class and traditional labor sectors.
In 2009, Nobel prize winner Orhan Pamuk, German children's author Cornelia Funke and Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa participated with about 500 other authors present.
The event attracts names such as Mexican director Guillermo del Toro, Greek director Constantin Costa-Gavras, Spanish actor Antonio Banderas and U.S. actor Edward James Olmos.
Line 3 will run from Zapopan, in the northwest, to Tlaquepaque and Tonalá, in the southeast, via the city centre.
A large segment of the commercial sector caters to tourists and other visitors.
In 1575, religious orders such as the Augustinians and Dominicans arrived, which would make the city a center for evangelization efforts.
Its two towers were built in the 19th century after an earthquake destroyed the originals.
Guadalajara is the cultural center of western Mexico and the second most important cultural center in the country.
Guadalajara has twenty two museums, which include the Regional Museum of Jalisco, the Wax Museum, the Trompo Mágico children's museum and the Museum of Anthropology.
In its 2007 survey entitled "Cities of the Future", ''FDi magazine'' ranked Guadalajara highest among major Mexican cities and designated Guadalajara as having the second strongest economic potential of any major North American city behind Chicago.
There are several thousand indigenous language speakers in Guadalajara although the majority of the indigenous population is integrated within the general population and can speak Spanish.
The trend emerged after 2006 and the Mexican government offers incentives to foreign companies.
One of the problems this has created is that when there are economic downturns, these international firms scale back.
The population of the municipality has stagnated, and even declined, slowly but steadily since the early 1990s.
The interior was completely remodeled after an explosion in 1859.
During the Porfiriato the French style invaded the city because of the passion of former president Porfirio Díaz in the trends of French style, also Italian architects were responsible for shaping the Gothic structures that were built in the city.
It was inaugurated and began its function as an orphanage in 1810, in spite of the fact that it would not be finished until 1845.
The city is in the central region of Jalisco in the Western-Pacific area of Mexico.
International investment has affected the labor market in the metro area and that of the rural towns and villages that surround it.
His name recalls Atlas' the year of first championship in the Primera División de México in 1951.
Commerce and tourism employ most: about 60% of the population.
In addition to being a cultural and recreational attraction and thanks to its privileged geographical location, the city serves as an axis to nearby popular beach destinations such as Puerto Vallarta, Manzanillo and Mazatlán.
However, its traditional advantage of proximity to the U.S. market is one reason Guadalajara stays competitive.
Highway 80D leads northwest toward Aguascalientes, and Highway 54D leads southward to the coast via Colima.
This has led to mass migration from the rural areas to the metropolitan area.
There are already 13 existing venues in Guadalajara that the games will use, including the Jalisco Stadium, UAG 3 de Marzo Stadium, and the UAG Gymnasium.
The conflict ended after Mendoza made some concessions to the Indians such as freeing the Indian slaves and granting amnesty.
Their second choice was to make a stand at the Puente de Calderon just outside the city.
This city was named the American Capital of Culture for 2005.
Four PEMEX (the state oil company) officials were indicted and charged, on the basis of negligence.
Cold fronts in winter can sometimes bring light rain to the city for several days in a row.
Hidalgo had between 80,000 and 100,000&nbsp;men and 95&nbsp;cannons, but the better-trained royalists won, decimating the insurgent army, forcing Hidalgo to flee toward Aguascalientes.
The Plaza de Armas is a rectangular plaza with gardens, ironwork benches and an ironwork kiosk which was made in Paris in the 19th century.
Snowfall is extraordinarily rare, with the last recorded one occurring in December 1997, which was the first time in 116 years, since it last fell in 1881.
The upper classes tend to live in Hidalgo and Juárez in the northwest and southwest, while lower classes tend to live in the city center, Libertad in the north east and southeast in Reforma.
A recent innovation has been the fusion of mariachi melodies and instruments with rock and roll performed by rock musicians in the Guadalajara area.
Guadalajara is home to four professional football teams; Guadalajara, also known as ''Chivas'', Atlas, C.D.
Bionico is a popular local dessert.
