Including the required construction workers, this buildup would increase Guam's population by 45%.
After birth control and adoption efforts were ineffective, the U.S. military began culling the herds in 2002 leading to organized protests from island residents.
There were also "''makåhna''" (similar to shamans), skilled in healing and medicine.
Guam's largest single private sector employer, with about 1,400 jobs, was Continental Micronesia, a subsidiary of Continental Airlines; it is now a part of United Airlines, a subsidiary of Chicago-based United Continental Holdings, Inc.  the Continental Micronesia annual payroll in Guam was $90 million.
During the past century, the dense forests of northern Guam have been largely replaced by thick ''tangan-tangan'' brush (''Leucaena leucocephala'').
Guam is said to have many more insects and 40 times more spiders than neighboring islands, and the forests are almost completely silent due to lack of birdsong, because the number of birds, their natural predators, are severely diminished.
The devastation caused by the snake has been significant over the past several decades.
CRB is native to Southern Asia and distributed throughout Asia and the Western Pacific including Sri Lanka, Upolu, Samoa, American Samoa, Palau, New Britain, West Irian, New Ireland, Pak Island and Manus Island (New Guinea), Fiji, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Mauritius, and Reunion.
Under the Treaty of Paris, Spain ceded Guam to the United States on December 10, 1898.
Two aspects of indigenous pre-Hispanic culture that withstood time are chenchule' and inafa'maolek.
Guam's educational system has always faced unique challenges as a small community located  from the U.S. mainland with a very diverse student body including many students who come from backgrounds without traditional American education.
In addition, the U.S.
Some historians estimate that war violence killed 10% of Guam's  20,000 population.
He also ordered the construction of schools, roads and other infrastructure.
The military and village communities have "adoption" programs where Guam's population and military personnel stationed on Guam perform community service projects.
While Guam's Chamorro culture has indigenous roots, the cultures of both Guam and the Northern Marianas have many similarities with Spanish and Mexican culture due to three centuries of Spanish rule.
Invasive grass species that rely on fire as part of their natural life cycle grow in many regularly burned areas.
They do, however, get to vote for party delegates in presidential primaries.
Jules Dumont d'Urville made two visits, the first in May 1828.
Despite paying no income or excise tax, it receives large transfer payments from the general revenues of the U.S. federal treasury.
The highest risk of typhoons is during September and October.
Steep coastal cliffs dominate the north, while the southern end of the island is mountainous, with lower hills in between.
A possible source for these stones, the Rota Latte Stone Quarry, was discovered in 1925 on Rota.
Before World War II, Guam and three other territories – American Samoa, Hawaii, and the Philippines – were the only American jurisdictions in the Pacific Ocean.
The University of Guam (UOG) and Guam Community College, both fully accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, offer courses in higher education.
A U.S. Navy yard was established at Piti in 1899, and a marine barracks at Sumay in 1901.
In September 2012, 13 AF was inactivated and its functions merged into PACAF.
An infestation of the coconut rhinoceros beetle (CRB), ''Oryctes rhinoceros'', was detected on Guam on September 12, 2007.
Poachers often start fires to attract deer to the new growth.
Delimiting surveys performed September 13–25, 2007 indicated that the infestation was limited to Tumon Bay and Faifai Beach, an area of approximately .
However, due to the Guam and CNMI visa waiver program for certain countries, an eligibility pre-clearance check is carried on Guam for flights to the States.
Pan American Airways established a seaplane base on the island for its San Francisco-Manila-Hong Kong route, and the Commercial Pacific Cable Company built a telegraph/telephone station in 1903.
In 2003, Guam had a 14% unemployment rate, and the government suffered a $314&nbsp;million shortfall.
Guam lies between 13.2°N and 13.7°N and between 144.6°E and 145.0°E, and has an area of , making it the 32nd largest island of the United States.
Postal System (postal abbreviation: GU, ZIP code range: 96910–96932), mail to Guam from the U.S. mainland is considered domestic and no additional charges are required.
Traveling between Guam and the States through a foreign point, however, does require a passport.
Efforts have been made to protect Guam's coral reef habitats from pollution, eroded silt and overfishing, problems that have led to decreased fish populations.
The port is the shipping and receiving point for containers designated for the island's U.S. Department of Defense installations, Andersen Air Force Base and Commander, Naval Forces Marianas and eventually the Third Marine Expeditionary Force.
Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan was the first European to visit the island on March 6, 1521.
In 1947, the U.S. military is thought to have planted tangan-tangan by seeding the island from the air to prevent erosion.
Guam is represented in rugby union by the Guam national rugby union team.
The host unit was later designated  the 36th Wing (36 WG), assigned to the Pacific Air Forces (PACAF) Thirteenth Air Force (13AF).
In the 1980s and early 1990s, there was a significant movement in favor of the territory becoming a commonwealth, which would give it a level of self-government similar to Puerto Rico and the Northern Mariana Islands.
In recent years, the Department of Agriculture, Division of Aquatic and Wildlife Resources has established several new marine preserves where fish populations are monitored by biologists.
Rovers FC and Guam Shipyard are the league's most competitive and successful clubs, both have won nine championships in the past years.
A marine seaplane unit was stationed in Guam from 1921 to 1930, the first in the Pacific.
Intermittent warfare lasting from July 23, 1670 until July 1695, plus the typhoons of 1671 and 1693, and in particular the smallpox epidemic of 1688, reduced the Chamorro population from 50,000 to 10,000 to less than 5,000.
Tinangaja, a virus affecting coconut palms, was first observed on the island in 1917 when copra production was still a major part of Guam's economy.
The Guamanian Chamorros were treated as an occupied enemy by the Japanese military.
Spanish colonization commenced on June 15, 1668 with the arrival of Diego Luis de San Vitores and Pedro Calungsod, who established the first Catholic church.
Since Super Typhoon Pamela in 1976, wooden structures have been largely replaced by concrete structures.
A federal Guam National Wildlife Refuge in northern Guam protects the decimated sea turtle population in addition to a small colony of Mariana fruit bats.
The weather is generally very warm and humid with little seasonal temperature variation.
(Since Guam is a significant vacation spot for scuba divers, this is important.)
During the qualifying round, Guam clinched their first FIFA World Cup Qualifying win by defeating Turkmenistan.
Between the 1500s and the 1700s, Guam was an important stopover for the Spanish Manila Galleons.
Since 1974, about 124 historic sites in Guam have been recognized under the U.S. National Register of Historic Places.
Guam was transferred to U.S. Navy control on 23 December 1898 by Executive Order 108-A.
U.S. board certified doctors and dentists practice in all specialties.
Many Chamorros also have Spanish surnames because of their conversion to Roman Catholic Christianity and the adoption of names from the Catálogo alfabético de apellidos, a phenomenon also common to the Philippines.
Following the Philippine–American War, Emilio Aguinaldo and Apolinario Mabini were exiled on Guam in 1901.
Challenger Deep, the deepest surveyed point in the Oceans, is southwest of Guam at  deep.
Many villagers serve in the military or are retired.
On August 6, 1997, Guam was the site of the Korean Air Flight 801 aircraft accident.
Guam endured hostilities when American forces recaptured the island on July 21, 1944; Liberation Day commemorates the victory.
The men's national football team are known as the "matao" team.
During the Spanish–American War, the United States captured Guam on June 21, 1898.
Over the years, Congress had appropriated "Compact Impact" aids to Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands and Hawaii, and eventually this appropriation was written into each renewed Compact.
Guam is located in ''Typhoon Alley'' and it is common for the island to be threatened by tropical storms and possible typhoons during the wet season.
Other bird species threatened by the brown tree snake include the Mariana crow, the Mariana swiftlet, and the Micronesian starling, though populations are present on other islands, including Rota.
DoDEA schools, which also serve children of some federal civilian employees, had an attendance of 2,500 in 2000.
Located in the western Pacific Ocean, Guam is one of five American territories with an established civilian government.
However, due to its proximity to Anatahan, vog (i.e.
Matao is the definition of highest level or "noble" class; the matao team have done exceptionally well under the head coach Gary White.
The island of Guam is  long and  wide,  the size of Singapore.
2) of the U.S. Constitution.
Naval Hospital in Agana Heights serves active-duty members and dependents of the military community.
'''North Field'''  was established in 1944, and was renamed for Brigadier General James Roy Andersen (1904–1945) as Andersen Air Force Base.
Guam, along with the rest of the Mariana and Caroline Islands, were treated as part of Spain's colony in the Philippines.
Harvest of sea turtle eggs was a common occurrence on Guam before World War II.
The ancient-Chamorro society had four classes: ''chamorri'' (chiefs), ''matua'' (upper class), ''achaot'' (middle class), and ''mana'chang'' (lower class).
After his arrival in 1674, Captain Damian de Esplana ordered the arrest of rebels who attacked the population of certain towns.
Guam entered the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification Group D. Guam hosted qualifying games on island for the first time in 2015.
During the rainy season sediment is carried by the heavy rains into the Fena Lake Reservoir and Ugum River, leading to water quality problems for southern Guam.
Approximately one thousand people died during the occupation, according to Congressional testimony in 2004.
Among its municipalities, Mongmong-Toto-Maite has the highest density at 1,425/km² (3,691/sq mi), whereas Inarajan and Umatac have the lowest density at 47/km² (119/sq mi).
Some, however, continue to claim the compensation is not enough or that the distribution of actual compensation received is significantly disproportionate.
The highest point is Mount Lamlam at  above sea level.
Guam is served by the Antonio B.
The island experiences occasional earthquakes due to its location on the western edge of the Pacific Plate and near the Philippine Sea Plate.
The United States Geological Survey also has dogs that can detect snakes in forested environments around the region's islands.
Guam is governed by a popularly elected governor and a unicameral 15-member legislature, whose members are known as senators.
This is the armature, or core, that everything in Chamorro culture revolves around.
Believed to be a stowaway on a U.S. military transport near the end of World War II, the brown tree snake (''Boiga irregularis'') was accidentally introduced to Guam, that previously had no native species of snake.
U.S. citizens in Guam vote in a straw poll for their choice in the U.S. Presidential general election, but since Guam has no votes in the Electoral College, the poll has no real effect.
It is a relatively short flight from Asia or Australia compared to Hawaii, with hotels and seven public golf courses accommodating over a million tourists per year.
It is the biggest single segment of Micronesia, the largest islands between the island of Kyushu (Japan), New Guinea, the Philippines, and the Hawaiian Islands.
When Magellan arrived on Guam, he was greeted by hundreds of small outrigger canoes that appeared to be flying over the water, due to their considerable speed.
Although set on Guam, ''No Man Is an Island'' (1962) was not shot there, but in the Republic of the Philippines.
Much of Guam's foliage was lost during World War II.
The first European to discover Guam was Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan, sailing for the King of Spain, when he sighted the island on March 6, 1521 during his fleet's circumnavigation of the globe.
The Northern Mariana Islands had become a Japanese protectorate before the war.
Soil stabilization efforts by volunteers and forestry workers (planting trees) have had little success in preserving natural habitats.
Guam was colonized in 1668 with settlers, like Diego Luis de San Vitores, a Catholic missionary.
There is one subscriber-based air ambulance located on the island, CareJet, which provides emergency patient transportation across Guam and surrounding islands.
The United States returned and fought the Battle of Guam from July 21 to August 10, 1944, to recapture the island from Japanese military occupation.
Due to foreign cultural influence from Spain, most aspects of the early indigenous culture have been lost, though there has been a resurgence in preserving any remaining pre-Hispanic culture in the last few decades.
They can, however, occur year-round.
After World War II, the Guam Organic Act of 1950 established Guam as an unincorporated organized territory of the United States, provided for the structure of the island's civilian government, and granted the people U.S. citizenship.
Antonio Pigafetta (one of Magellan's original 18) said that the name was the name "Island of Sails", but he also writes that the inhabitants "entered the ships and stole whatever they could lay their hands on", including "the small boat that was fastened to the poop of the flagship."
Although the colorful and impressive flame tree (''Delonix regia'') is found throughout the Marianas, the tree on Guam has been largely decimated.
Many active duty personnel and Defense Department civilians also live in the villages outside of the military installation areas.
Under the provisions of a special law by Congress, it is Guam's treasury rather than the U.S. treasury that receives the federal income taxes paid by local taxpayers (including military and civilian federal employees assigned to Guam).
Sergeant Shoichi Yokoi, who surrendered in January 1972, appears to have been the last confirmed Japanese holdout in Guam.
The island is outside the United States customs zone so Guam is responsible for establishing and operating its own customs and quarantine agency and jurisdiction.
The top football division in Guam is the Guam Men's Soccer League.
Guam is the closest land mass to the Mariana Trench, a deep subduction zone, that lies beside the island chain to the east.
The Compacts give citizens of these island nations generally no restrictions to reside in the United States (also its territories), and many were attracted to Guam due to its proximity, environmental, and cultural familiarity.
Their society was organized along matrilineal clans.
Most fires are man-caused with 80% resulting from arson.
The capital city is Hagåtña, and the most populous city is Dededo.
A coral table reef surrounds most of Guam, and the limestone plateau provide the source for most of the island's fresh water.
The ''matua'' were located in the coastal villages, which meant they had the best access to fishing grounds, whereas the ''mana'chang'' were located in the interior of the island.
Grasslands and "barrens" have replaced previously forested areas leading to greater soil erosion.
The speed of mail traveling between Guam and the states varies depending on size and time of year.
Guam Department of Agriculture (GDA) placed quarantine on all properties within the Tumon area on October 5 and later expanded the quarantine to about  on October 25; approximately  radius in all directions from all known locations of CRB infestation.
It is expected to stabilize with the transfer of U.S. Marine Corps' 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force, currently in Okinawa, Japan, (approximately 8,000 Marines, along with their 10,000 dependents), to Guam between 2010 and 2015.
The highest point in Guam is Mount Lamlam at an elevation of .
The core culture or Pengngan Chamorro is based on complex social protocol centered upon respect: From sniffing over the hands of the elders (called mangnginge in Chamorro), the passing down of legends, chants, and courtship rituals, to a person asking for permission from spiritual ancestors before entering a jungle or ancient battle grounds.
Light, first-class items generally take less than a week to or from the mainland, but larger first-class or Priority items can take a week or two.
The highest temperature ever recorded in Guam was  on April 18, 1971 and April 1, 1990, and the lowest temperature ever recorded was  on February 8, 1973.
Guam's Cathedral Dulce Nombre de Maria was formally opened on February 2, 1669, as was the Royal College of San Juan de Letran.
Guam elects one non-voting delegate, currently Democrat Madeleine Z. Bordallo, to the United States House of Representatives.
The Compacts of Free Association between the United States, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the Republic of Palau accorded the former entities of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands a political status of "free association" with the United States.
It was the Chamorros from the Northern Marianas who were brought to Guam to serve as interpreters and in other capacities for the occupying Japanese force.
It is a powerful concern for mutuality rather than individualism and private property rights."
Guam Public Library System operates the Nieves M. Flores Memorial Library in Hagåtña and five branch libraries.
The increasing numbers of Chamorros, especially Chamorro youth, relocating to the U.S. Mainland has further complicated both definition and preservation of Chamorro identity.
These outrigger canoes were called Proas, and resulted in Magellan naming Guam ''Islas de las Velas Latinas'' ("Islands of the Lateen sails").
The Commercial Port of Guam is the island's lifeline because most products must be shipped into Guam for consumers.
On December 7, 1941, hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor,  Guam was captured by the Japanese, and was occupied for thirty months.
Villagers and the military community are interconnected in many ways.
In September 1997 the DoDEA opened its own schools for children of military personnel.
Reports of loud chirping frogs native to Puerto Rico and known as coquí, that may have arrived from Hawaii, have led to fears that the noise could threaten Guam's tourism.
The modern Chamorro language is a Malayo-Polynesian language with much Spanish and Filipino influence.
Tangan-tangan was present on the island before 1905.
After a smallpox epidemic killed 3,644 Guamanians in 1856, Carolinians and Japanese were permitted to settle in the Marianas.
By 2012, these plans had been cut to only have a maximum of 4,800 Marines stationed on the island, two thirds of which would be there on a rotational basis without their dependents.
In January 2011, the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 indicated that recent significant events will delay the deadline for realigning U.S. Marine Corps service members and their families from Okinawa to Guam.
From 1565 to 1815, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands, the only Spanish outpost in the Pacific Ocean east of the Philippines, was an important resting stop for the Manila galleons, a fleet that covered the Pacific trade route between Acapulco and Manila.
For travel from the Northern Mariana Islands to Guam, a pre-flight passport and visa check is performed before boarding the flight to Guam.
While only a few masters exist to continue traditional art forms, the resurgence of interest among the Chamorros to preserve the language and culture has resulted in a growing number of young Chamorros who seek to continue the ancient ways of the Chamorro people.
Chenchule' is the intricate system of reciprocity at the heart of Chamorro society.
Guam's Japanese occupation lasted for approximately thirty-one months.
The United States Department of Agriculture has trained detector dogs to keep the snakes out of the island's cargo flow.
The cosmopolitan and multicultural nature of modern Guam poses challenges for Chamorros struggling to preserve their culture and identity amidst forces of acculturation.
Guam temporarily hosted 100,000 Vietnamese refugees in 1975, and 6,600 Kurdish refugees in 1996.
Guam's economy depends primarily on tourism, Department of Defense installations and locally owned businesses.
From the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries, the Spanish introduced pigs, dogs, chickens, the Philippine deer (''Rusa mariannus''), black francolins, and carabao (a subspecies of water buffalo), which have cultural significance.
''Latte'' stones are stone pillars that are found only in the Mariana Islands; and, they are a recent development in Pre-Contact Chamorro society.
The Guam Department of Education serves the entire island of Guam.
The remaining months (July to November) constitute the rainy season.
Among them were the Guam rail (or ''ko'ko''' bird in Chamorro) and the Guam flycatcher, both common throughout the island.
The Boeing 747–300 jetliner was preparing to land when it crashed into a hill, killing 228 of the 254 people on board.
The most intense typhoon to pass over Guam recently was Super Typhoon Pongsona, with sustained winds of , gusts to , which slammed Guam on December 8, 2002, leaving massive destruction.
UFC fighter Jon Tuck fights out of Guam, who boasts a professional record of 9 wins and 3 losses, with three of those wins whilst with the UFC.
The United States occupied the island in the 1898 Spanish–American War, as part of the Treaty of Paris.
''Matua'' and ''mana'chang'' rarely communicated with each other, and ''matua'' often used ''achaot'' as intermediaries.
Guam is among the seventeen Non-Self-Governing Territories of the United Nations.
In a February 2010 letter, the United States Environmental Protection Agency sharply criticized these plans because of a water shortfall, sewage problems and the impact on coral reefs.
Therefore, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection only carries immigration (but not customs) functions.
More than 18,000 Japanese were killed as only 485 surrendered.
Post-contact Chamorro cuisine is largely based on corn, and includes tortillas, tamales, atole and chilaquiles, which are a clear influence from Spanish trade between Mesoamerica and Asia.
It is slightly venomous, but relatively harmless to human beings; it is nocturnal.
Although 75% of the tourists are Japanese, Guam receives a sizable number of tourists from South Korea, the U.S., the Philippines, and Taiwan.
Over the years, a number of films have been shot on Guam, including ''Shiro's Head'' (directed by the Muna brothers) and the government-funded ''Max Havoc: Curse of the Dragon'' (2004).
Master craftsmen and women specialize in weavings, including plaited work (niyok- and åkgak-leaf baskets, mats, bags, hats, and food containments), loom-woven material (kalachucha-hibiscus and banana fiber skirts, belts and burial shrouds), and body ornamentation (bead and shell necklaces, bracelets, earrings, belts and combs made from tortoise shells and Spondylus).
In addition, the Defense Authorization Act cut approximately $320 million from the 2011 budget request.
Invading animal species are not the only threat to Guam's native flora.
The Government of Guam maintains the island's main health care facility, Guam Memorial Hospital, in Tamuning.
The latte-stone was used as a foundation on which thatched huts were built.
A small Jewish community exists as well.
Before the introduction of the brown tree snake, Guam was home to several endemic bird species.
Guam Public Schools have struggled with problems such as high dropout rates and poor test scores.
The Chamorros, Guam's indigenous people, settled the island approximately 4,000 years ago.
The mean high temperature is 86&nbsp;°F (30&nbsp;°C) and mean low is 76&nbsp;°F (24&nbsp;°C) with an average annual rainfall of 96&nbsp;inches (2,180&nbsp;mm).
Wildfires plague the forested areas of Guam every dry season despite the island's humid climate.
Andersen Air Force Base played a major role in the Vietnam War.
Francisco de Irrisarri y Vinar controlled internal affairs more strictly than his predecessors in order to curb tensions.
Over the years, it was claimed by some in Guam that the territory has had to bear the brunt of this agreement in the form of public assistance programs and public education for those from the regions involved, and the federal government should compensate the states and territories affected by this type of migration.
By July 1695, Quiroga had completed the pacification process in Guam, Rota, Tinian and Aguigan.
After the war, this would cause resentment between the Guamanian Chamorros and the Chamorros of the Northern Marianas.
Despite Magellan's visit, Guam was not officially claimed by Spain until January 26, 1565 by General Miguel López de Legazpi.
In an effort to ensure protection of sea turtles on Guam, routine sightings are counted during aerial surveys and nest sites are recorded and monitored for hatchlings.
It is the southernmost and largest island in the Mariana island chain and is also the largest island in Micronesia.
Hostilities eventually led to the destruction of villages such as Chochogo, Pepura, Tumon, Sidia-Aty, Sagua, Nagan and Ninca.
Belief in spirits of ancient Chamorros called "''Taotao mo'na''" still persists as a remnant of pre-European culture.
According to many elders, ko'ko' birds were common in Guam before World War II.
Most residents travel within Guam using personally owned vehicles.
In 2015, 161,785 people resided on Guam.
