Chinese Super League
The present city spans  on both sides of the river from  to  longitude and  to  latitude in south-central Guangdong.
Most of them are rural migrants, and they speak only Mandarin.
Guangzhou was long the only Chinese port permitted for most foreign traders.
** North route: Airport South Station–Tiyu Xilu Station
Muslims sacked the city in 758 and were massacred by the Chinese rebel Huang Chao in 878, along with the Jews, Christians, and Parsis.
Ultimately successful, it turned him into the country's paramount leader.
A Gothic Revival edifice which was built by hand from 1861 to 1888 under French direction, its original Latin and French stained-glass windows were destroyed during the wars and amid the Cultural Revolution; they have since been replaced by English ones.
Following the Portuguese conquest of Malacca, Rafael Perestrello travelled to Guangzhou as a passenger on a native junk in 1516.
The "Canton Coup" on 20 March 1926 saw Chiang solidify his control over the Nationalists and their army against Wang Jingwei, the party's left wing, its Communist allies, and its Soviet advisors.
In December 2014, the Guiyang–Guangzhou High-Speed Railway and Nanning-Guangzhou Railway began service with trains running at top speeds of  and , respectively.
The former name "City of the Immortals" came from the same story.
The first section of the Haizhu Tram line opened on 31 December 2014.
Rumors even circulated that Portuguese were eating the children.
It occupies the entirety of Xiaoguwei Island in Panyu District, covering an area of about .
Guangzhou's other fully accredited and degree-granting universities and colleges include:
The former name "Canton" derived from Portuguese '''' or '''', a muddling of dialectical pronunciations of "Guangdong" (e.g., Hakka ''Kóng-tûng'').
The Canton System was maintained until the outbreak of the First Opium War in 1839.
Legendary accounts claimed the soldiers at Panyu were so vigilant that they did not remove their armor for three years.
The Guangzhou traffic bureau claimed to have reported reduced traffic problems and accidents in the downtown area since the ban.
The region enjoyed considerable cultural and economic success in this period.
The city was part of a network of signal towers so effective that messages could be relayed to Beijing—about  away—in less than 24 hours.
Qing-era Guangzhou had around 124 religious pavilions, halls, and temples.
In 2013, the GDP reached ¥1542 billion (US$248 billion), per capita was ¥120,515 (US $19,459).
The major industries encouraged in the zone include international trade, logistics, processing  and computer software.
The two main comprehensive libraries are Guangzhou Library and Sun Yat-sen Library of Guangdong Province.
File:Guangzhou (6344321124).jpg|Guangzhou's CBD, including the IFC (''right'')
It replaced the old Baiyun International Airport, which was very close to the city centre and failed to meet the city's fast-growing air traffic demand.
This led to rioting and a military stand-off in the western suburbs from 10–15 October; its suppression damaged Xiguan with large fire.
The first independent American ship arrived in 1784 and the first colonial Australian one in 1788.
The concession for the Canton–Hankow Railway was awarded to the American China Development Co. in 1898.
Most of Guangzhou's population is Han Chinese.
The People's Liberation Army entered the city on 14 October 1949.
* Line 8: Fenghuang Xincun Station–Wanshengwei Station
It was adopted as the Postal Map Romanization of Guangzhou and remained in common use until the gradual adoption of pinyin.
A partition wall with four gates divided the northern "old town" from the southern "new town" closer to the river; the suburb of Xiguan ("West Gate") stretched beyond and the boats of fishers, traders, and Tanka ("boat people") almost entirely concealed the riverbank for about .
Nestorian Christians first arrived in China via the overland Silk Road, but suffered during Emperor Wuzong's 845 persecution and were essentially extinct by the year 1000.
By May, he had ended civilian control of the military and begun his Northern Expedition against the warlords of the north.
Radio Guangdong has a 30-minute weekly English programme, ''Guangdong Today'', which is broadcast globally through the World Radio Network.
Around &nbsp;520, Emperor Wu of the Liang ordered the construction of the Baozhuangyan Temple and the Xilai Monastery to store the relics of Cambodian Buddhist saints which had been brought to the city and to house the monks beginning to assemble there.
The Second Battle of Canton was fought two months later.
It also has the advantage of Guangzhou Metro line 4 which is being extended to Nansha Ferry Terminal.
The Export Processing Zone was founded in 2005.
Guangzhou Evergrande FC has risen in recent years to be a powerhouse in association football in the People's Republic of China, having won five consecutive national titles in 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.
Effective January 1, 2007, the municipal government banned motorcycles in Guangdong's urban areas.
The Portuguese from Macau and Spaniards from Manila returned, as did private Muslim, Armenian, and English traders.
* Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering
Guangdong Evergrande Women's Volleyball Club
The Qing-era ban on foreigners limited missionaries until it was abolished following the First Opium War, although the Protestant Robert Morrison was able to perform some work through his service with the British factory.
The National People's Congress approved a development plan for the Pearl River Delta in January 2009; on March 19 the same year, the Guangzhou and Foshan municipal governments agreed to establish a framework to merge the two cities.
The last recorded snowfall in the city was on 24 January 2016, 87 years after the second last recorded snowfall.
* Guangzhou Sports University
The elevation of the prefecture generally increases from southwest to northeast, with mountains forming the backbone of the city and the ocean comprising the front.
The name Guangzhou was made official the next year.
Guangzhou has some of the best Chinese-language newspapers and magazines in mainland China, most of which are published by three major newspaper groups in the city, the Guangzhou Daily Press Group, Nanfang Press Corporation, and the Yangcheng Evening News Group.
Among the most important is the Temple of the Five Immortals, honoring the five immortals credited with introducing rice cultivation at the foundation of the city.
Sun Yat-sen Library of Guangdong Province has the largest collection of ancient books in Southern China.
The library has moved to a new building in Zhujiang New Town, which fully opened on 23 June 2013.
Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao
The same year, it hosted the first Asian Para Games from December 12 to 19.
The old town of Guangzhou was near Baiyun Mountain on the east bank of the Pearl River (Zhujiang) about  from its junction with the South China Sea and about  below its head of navigation.
His armies were then kept in the field largely through tax levies collected through the city's efficient police force.
From the 104th session onwards, the fair moved to the new Guangzhou International Convention and Exhibition Center () in Pazhou, from the older complex in Liuhua.
The Eight Views of Ram City are Guangzhou's eight most famous tourist attractions.
The following modern list was chosen through public appraisal in 2011:
* Guangdong University of Technology
* 1987 The 6th National Games of China
File:John Thomson - Wah Lum Chu, Canton - Google Art Project.jpg| at the  (Hualin) in the 1870s
Amid the Warlord Era, the Guangzhou government was overwhelmed by Lu Rongting's Guangxi Clique.
File:Flowery Pagoda.jpg | The Flowery Pagoda at the Temple of the Six Banyan Trees in 1863
The Pearl is the 3rd-largest river of China.
Guangzhou's main airport is the Baiyun International Airport in Huadu District; it opened on August 5, 2004.
Baiyun Mountain is now locally referred to as the city's "lung" ().
File:Shop of Tingqua, the painter.jpg| An 1855 painting of the gallery of Tingqua, one of the most successful suppliers of "export paintings" for Guangzhou's foreign traders.
A successful ambush then annihilated a Han force which had been sent to arrest him.
The Qing became somewhat more open to foreign trade after gaining control of Taiwan in 1683.
The Chinese abbreviation for Guangzhou is '''''', after its nickname "Rice City".
The GICEC is served by two stations on Metro Line 8.
The former was carved out of Panyu, the latter from parts of Baiyun, Tianhe, Zengcheng, and an exclave within Huangpu.
* Guangdong University of Foreign Studies
Current professional sports clubs based in Guangzhou include:
It borrowed $2,000,000 from the German Empire for its army and navy, then declared war on it on September 13.
File:Guangzhou Tower.jpg | Canton Tower (2009)
* Guangdong University of Finance
Sun and Chiang used Soviet funds and weapons to develop the Whampoa Military Academy on Changzhou from 1924 on.
But due to rapid industrialisation, it is also considered one of the most polluted cities.
File:刘庆伏狼驹3.jpg | A brick carving at the Guangzhou Folk Art Museum, housed in the Chen Clan Ancestral Hall
Guangzhou Library is a public library in Guangzhou.
In 1927, Zhang Fakui recovered Guangzhou from the New Guangxi Clique.
* "Wetlands Singing at Night": Nansha Wetlands Park
* Line 5: Jiaokou Station–Wenchong Station
* "Science City, Splendid as Brocade"
* South China Normal University
The old Baiyun International Airport was in operation for 72 years.
The 19th-century name "" derived from Nanjing Mandarin and the town's status as a prefectural capital.
* 2007 The 8th National Traditional Games of Ethnic Minorities of the People's Republic of China
Before the establishment of the prefecture, the town was known as '''Panyu''', a name still borne by one of Guangzhou's districts in the hinterlands.
The Zhizhi Temple was founded in &nbsp;233 from the estate of a Wu official; it is said to comprise the residence of Zhao Jiande, the last of the Nanyue kings, and has been known as the Guangxiao Temple ("Temple of Bright Filial Piety") since the Ming.
The club competed in the 2013 FIFA Club World Cup, where it lost 3–0 in the semi-final stage to the 2012–13 UEFA Champions League winners FC Bayern Munich.
The Guangzhou Higher Education Mega Centre, also known as Guangzhou University Town (), is a large tertiary education complex located in the southeast suburbs of Guangzhou.
With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 17 percent in March and April to 52 percent in November, the city receives 1,628 hours of bright sunshine annually, considerably less than nearby Shenzhen and Hong Kong.
Guangzhou has two local radio stations: the provincial Radio Guangdong and the municipal Radio Guangzhou.
* Line 1: Guangzhou East Railway Station–Xilang Station
Guangzhou Sport University Gymnasium
Guangzhou was visited by the Moroccan traveler Ibn Battuta during his 14th-century journey around the world; he detailed the process by which the Chinese constructed their large ships in the port's shipyards.
''Guǎngzhōu'' is the pinyin romanisation of the Chinese name , which was simplified in mainland China to  in the 1950s.
For the three consecutive years 2013–2015, Forbes ranked Guangzhou as the best commercial city on the Chinese mainland.
File:Canton1860.jpg|Vrooman's 1860 map of the "City and Entire Suburbs of Canton", one of the first made after the treaties of Tianjin and Beijing permitted foreigners full access to Guangzhou's walled city
As with elsewhere in the People's Republic of China, the household registration system (''hukou'') limits migrants' access to residences, educational institutions, and other public benefits.
Amid the decline of Qing prestige and the chaos of the Taiping Rebellion, the Punti and Hakka waged a series of clan wars from 1855 to 1867.
Archaeological evidence shows that Panyu was an expansive commercial centre: in addition to items from central China, archaeologists have found remains originating from Southeast Asia, India, and even Africa.
In August, Sun Yat-sen established the Guangzhou Military Government as part of the Constitutional Protection Movement.
The Beijing-based China National Radio also broadcasts Mandarin programmes in the city.
* "Liwan's Wonderful Scenery": Liwan Lake
Guangzhou has had a Muslim community since the earliest days of Islam; the native or nativised adherents of the faith are known as the Hui.
As late as the early 20th century, most of the city continued to be made up of rice paddies.
Currently the metro network is made up of nine lines, covering a total length of .
Direct routes connected the Middle East and China, as shown in records of a Chinese prisoner returning home from Iraq twelve years after his capture at Talas.
Upon the fall of the Qin, General Zhao Tuo established his own kingdom of Nanyue and made Panyu its capital in 204&nbsp;.
The Ocean Banner Temple on Henan Island, once famous in the west as the only tourist spot in Guangzhou accessible to foreigners, has been reopened as the Hoi Tong Monastery.
Buddhism is the most prominent religion in Guangzhou.
File:Lai Afong, Canton commercial street view, c1880.jpg | Lai Afong's photograph of a commercial street in Guangzhou
Sun fled to Shanghai in November 1918 until Chen Jiongming restored him in October 1920 during the Yuegui Wars.
Since the opening up of China in the 1980s, there has been renewed interest in Christianity, but Guangzhou maintains pressure on underground churches which avoid registration with government officials.
The main exports were tea and porcelain.
A long-term plan is to make the city's metro system expand to over  by 2020 with 15 lines in operation.
The Guangdong Through Train departs from the Guangzhou East railway station and arrives at the Hung Hom KCR station in Kowloon, Hong Kong.
The team also won the AFC Champions League in 2013 and 2015.
Its total planned area is .
The Portuguese undertook not to raise fortifications and to pay customs dues; three years later, after providing the Chinese with assistance suppressing their former pirate allies, the Portuguese were permitted to warehouse their goods at Macau instead of Guangzhou itself.
Amid the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms that followed the collapse of the Tang Dynasty, the Later Liang governor Liu Yan used his base at Panyu to establish a "Great Yue" or "Southern Han" empire, which lasted from 917 to 971.
This name originally referred to the Imperial Chinese Guang Prefecture.
The zone was founded in 1992.
The area's fast-growing economy and high demand for labour has produced a huge "floating population" of migrant workers.
Since the 1980s, the city's close proximity to Hong Kong and Shenzhen and its ties to overseas Chinese have made it one of the major beneficiaries of China's opening up under Deng Xiaoping.
Although it originally and chiefly applied to the walled city, it was also used in English in reference to Guangdong generally.
Combined, these were the largest sporting events the city ever hosted.
* South China Agricultural University
The major industries encouraged in the zone include automobile assembly, biotechnology and heavy industry.
The built-up area of the Pearl River Delta Economic Zone covers around  and has been estimated to house 44 million people, including Guangzhou's nine urban districts, Shenzhen (10.36m), Dongguan (8.22m), Zhongshan (3.12m), most of Foshan (7.2m), Jiangmen (1.82m), Zhuhai (890k), and Huizhou's Huiyang District (760k).
Huaisheng Mosque is one of the oldest extant mosques in the world, variously said to have been founded by the city's existing Arab community around the time of Muhammad's revelation or by Muhammad's visiting uncle in 627.
Unit 8604, a section of the Imperial Japanese Army's Unit 731, conducted bacteriological research in the city during the war.
The third pandemic of plague reached Guangzhou in 1894 and caused the death of 60,000 people in a few weeks.
File:Canton1920 d006 map of of the city.jpg | The US Navy's Dept of Navigation's 1920 map of "Canton"
* Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University
File:Guangzhou_BaiyunShan.jpg | Zhujiang New City from Pakwan or Baiyun Mountain
China Baseball League
The Muslims who martyred themselves opposing the Manchu conquest of the city are still honored by a national monument at the tomb of "the Loyal Trio of Muslims".
File:The Bund Canton.jpg|The Guangzhou Bund in 1930, with rows of Tanka boats.
Tianhe Sports Center baseball field
The new Republic of China merged the eastern part of Nanhai County and the northern part of Panyu County with Guangzhou in 1918 and established an urban council to govern it.
However, in recent years there has been an increase in Mandarin programmes on most Cantonese channels.
They have varied over time since the Song dynasty, with some being named or demoted by emperors.
The 2010 census found Guangzhou's population to be 12.78 million.
The Xilai Monastery was renamed the Hualin Temple ("Flowery Forest Temple") after its reconstruction during the Qing.
During Sun's life, his son Sun Fo served as mayor of Guangzhou when he was in power from 1920 on; his role did not survive Sun's death by cancer in 1925.
As an adjective, it is still used in describing the people, language, and culture of Guangzhou and Guangdong.
Under the Southern Han, the city was renamed '''Xingwang'''.
From the 10th to 12th century, there are records that the large foreign communities were not exclusively male, but included "Persian women".
In recent years, there has been a rapidly increasing number of foreign residents and illegal immigrants from the Middle East, Eastern Europe and Southeast Asia, as well as from Africa.
The character  or —which also appears in the names Guangdong, Guangxi, and Liangguang—means "broad" or "expansive" and refers to the valley of the Pearl River in comparison with the hill country of Hunan and Fujian by which it was reached by the Chinese.
* Guangzhou College of South China University of Technology
Motorcycles found violating the ban are confiscated.
Notably, it is also home to thousands of African expatriates, including people from Nigeria, Angola, and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The two leading newspapers of the city are ''Guangzhou Daily'' and ''Southern Metropolis Daily''.
Guangzhou, like most of southern China, is also notably observant concerning ancestral veneration during occasions like the Tomb Sweeping and Ghost Festivals.
After the fall of Fuzhou in October 1646, the Longwu Emperor's brother Zhu Yuyue fled by sea to Guangzhou.
File:Guangzhou dusk panorama.jpg | Downtown Guangzhou (2011)
Panyu was established on the east bank of the Pearl River in 214&nbsp; to serve as a base for the Qin Empire's first failed invasion of the Baiyue lands in southern China.
This is particularly true in the United States, Canada, and Australia.
The Baozhuangyan is now known as the Temple of the Six Banyan Trees, after a famous poem composed by Su Shi after a visit during the Northern Song.
In 2014 the city's administrative area was estimated to have a population of 13,080,500 and forms part of one of the most populous metropolitan agglomerations on Earth.
In addition to Guangzhou's Chinese-language publications, there are a few English magazines and newspapers.
The northern hills, since urbanized, were bare and covered with traditional graves.
His report induced Fernão Pires de Andrade to sail to the city with eight ships the next year, but De Andrade's exploration was understood as spying and his brother Simão and others began attempting to monopolize trade, enslaving Chinese women and children, engaging in piracy, and fortifying the island of Tamão.
Radio stations from cities around Guangzhou mainly broadcast in Cantonese and can be received in different parts of the city, depending on the radio stations' locations and transmission power.
The municipality was expanded in the year 2000, with Huadu and Panyu joining the city as urban districts and Conghua and Zengcheng as more rural counties.
The temples were damaged by both the Republican campaign to "Promote Education with Temple Property" () and the Maoist Cultural Revolution but have been renovated since the opening up that began in the 1980s.
This airport is the second busiest airport in terms of traffic movements in China.
As a meeting place of merchants from all over the world, Guangzhou became a major contributor to the rise of the modern global economy.
J.P. Morgan was awarded millions in damages and the line to Wuchang wasn't completed until 1936 and a unified Beijing–Guangzhou Railway waited until the completion of Wuhan's Yangtze River Bridge in 1957.
In January 2011, the Guangzhou–Zhuhai Intercity Railway started service at an average speed of .
Frequent coach services are also provided with coaches departing every day from different locations (mostly major hotels) around the city.
* 1991 The 1st FIFA Women's World Cup
* Guangzhou Free Trade Zone
Relations were not always peaceful: Muslims sacked the city on 30 October 758 and were massacred by the Chinese rebel Huang Chao in 878, along with the city's Jews, Christians, and Parsis.
These were joined by the occasional Prussian or Trieste Company vessel.
They have taken on many jobs that the local citizens are unwilling to do.
It is located in the east of Huangpu District and near to Guangzhou Economic and Technological Development Zone.
It is the trade fair with the longest history, highest level, largest scale in China.
* "Towers Shining through the New Town"
In May 2014, legally-employed migrants in Guangzhou were permitted to receive a ''hukou'' card allowing them to marry and obtain permission for their pregnancies in the city, rather than having to return to their official hometowns as previously.
Incorporated into the Han Empire, Panyu became a provincial capital.
File:Nieuhof-Ambassade-vers-la-Chine-1665 0744-2.tif| Nieuhof's imaginative 1665 map of "Kanton", made from second-hand accounts while Europeans were still forbidden from entering the walled city
The route is approximately  in length and the ride takes less than two hours.
In the 19th century, most of the city's buildings were still only one or two storeys.
** South route: Tianhe Coach Terminal Station–Panyu Square Station via Tiyu Xilu Station
It lost trade to other ports such as Hong Kong and Shanghai, but continued to serve as a major entrepôt.
* Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine
It is sometimes abbreviated as GZ.
