Honduras joined with El Salvador, and Nicaragua and Costa Rica with Guatemala.
Pollen samples from Petén and the Pacific coast indicate that maize cultivation had been developed by 3500 BC.
Guzmán then left for Jalapa, where he struck a deal with the rebels, while Luis Batres Juarros convinced president Paredes to deal with Carrera.
The Guatemalan Civil War ended in 1996 with a peace accord between the guerrillas and the government, negotiated by the United Nations through intense brokerage by nations such as Norway and Spain.
source: Center for Legal Action in Human Rights (CALDH)
German settlers acquired land and grew coffee plantations in Alta Verapaz and Quetzaltenango.
The majority are descendants of German and Spanish settlers, followed by other Europeans like Italians, British, French, Swiss, Belgians, Dutch, Russians and Danish.
Mendez Montenegro was the candidate of the Revolutionary Party, a center-left party that had its origins in the post-Ubico era.
The name "Guatemala" comes from the Nahuatl word ''Cuauhtēmallān'' (nahwiki), or "place of many trees", a derivative of the K'iche' Mayan word for "many trees".
Elections were held by the people against the will of Estrada Cabrera and thus he had the president-elect murdered in retaliation.
These rivers include the Polochic and Dulce Rivers, which drain into Lake Izabal, the Motagua River, the Sarstún, which forms the boundary with Belize, and the Usumacinta River, which forms the boundary between Petén and Chiapas, Mexico.
He greatly strengthened the police force, turning it into one of the most efficient and ruthless in Latin America.
As historical tourism is the colonial city of Antigua Guatemala, which is recognized by UNESCO Cultural Heritage.
The cause of the collapse is debated, but the Drought Theory is gaining currency, supported by evidence such as lakebeds, ancient pollen, and others.
Hernán Cortés, who had led the Spanish conquest of Mexico, granted a permit to Captains Gonzalo de Alvarado and his brother, Pedro de Alvarado, to conquer this land.
Guatemala is a highly diverse country, populated by a variety of ethnic, cultural, racial, and linguistic groups.
On 1 July 1944 Ubico was forced to resign from the presidency in response to a wave of protests and a general strike inspired by brutal labor conditions among plantation workers.
The Supreme Court approved.
Guatemala’s Congress named a commission of five legislators to consider whether to remove the president’s immunity from prosecution.
Manuel Barillas was unique among liberal presidents of Guatemala between 1871 and 1944: he handed over power to his successor peacefully.
The Captaincy-general was dissolved two years later.
Guzmán was sure of victory this time, but his plan evaporated when, in his absence Carrera and his native allies occupied Quetzaltenango; Carrera appointed Ignacio Yrigoyen as Corregidor and convinced him that he should work with the k'iche', mam, q'anjobal and mam leaders to keep the region under control.
Guatemala received about two million tourists annually.
Guatemala is very popular for its archaeological sites, pre-Hispanic cities as well as tourist-religious centers like the Basilica of Esquipulas in the city of Esquipulas and the beautiful beaches on the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of Guatemala.
The Maya abandoned many of the cities of the central lowlands or were killed off by a drought-induced famine.
In the meantime, Carrera decided to return to Guatemala and did so, entering at Huehuetenango, where he met with native leaders and told them that they must remain united to prevail; the leaders agreed and slowly the segregated native communities started developing a new Indian identity under Carrera's leadership.
He granted the company  of public land in exchange for a promise to build a port, a promise he later waived.
Asked whether he planned to resign, he wrote: "I will face whatever is necessary to face, and what the law requires."
As a result, the government of Spain broke off diplomatic relations with Guatemala.
Ydigoras' government was ousted in 1963 when the Guatemalan Air Force attacked several military bases; the coup was led by his Defense Minister, Colonel Enrique Peralta Azurdia.
Guatemalan patients choose between indigenous treatments or Western medicine when they engage with the health system.
Below are estimates of the number of Guatemalans living abroad for certain countries:
Military advisers from the United States Army Special Forces (Green Berets) were sent to Guatemala to train these troops and help transform the army into a modern counter-insurgency force, which eventually made it the most sophisticated in Central America.
The 1996 peace accords that ended the decades-long civil war removed a major obstacle to foreign investment.
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets of Guatemala City.
Guatemala has 14 ecoregions ranging from mangrove forests to both ocean littorals with 5 different ecosystems.
Even though the colony eventually crumbled, Belgium continued to support Carrera in the mid-19th century, although Britain continued to be the main business and political partner to Carrera's regime.
Guatemala has about 16,000 doctors for its 16 million people about half the ration the WHO recommends.
He dressed ostentatiously and surrounded himself with statues and paintings of Napoleon, regularly commenting on the similarities between their appearances.
The strike in Guatemala City was full of a diverse and peaceful crowd ranging from the indigenous poor to the well-heeled, and it included many students from public and private universities.
This government was overthrown in 1982 and General Efraín Ríos Montt was named President of the military junta.
Less than 1% are indigenous non-Maya.
The head of the Social Security Institute and at least five other ministers pooled funds to buy him luxurious gifts such as motorboats, spending over $4.7 in three years.
The liberal forces impaled Alvarez's head on a pike as a warning to followers of the Guatemalan caudillo.
The Guatemalan radio station Emisoras Unidas reported exchanging text messages with Perez Molina.
During the first presidency, from 1844 to 1848, he brought the country back from excessive conservatism to a moderate regime, and – with the advice of Juan José de Aycinena y Piñol and Pedro de Aycinena – restored relations with the Church in Rome with a Concordat ratified in 1854.
Rafael Carrera was elected Guatemalan Governor in 1844.
On his way out, Yrigoyen murmured to a friend: Now he is the King of the Indians, indeed!
However, Ubico was an admirer of European fascists, such as Francisco Franco and Benito Mussolini, and considered himself to be "another Napoleon".
Many middle and upper-class children go to private schools.
Morazán used the proceeds to support Los Altos and then replaced Valenzuela with Mariano Rivera Paz, a member of the Aycinena clan, although he did not return to that clan any property confiscated in 1829.
Happy with what he heard from general Reyna Barrios, Barillas made sure that a huge column of Quetzaltenango and Totonicapán Indigenous people came down from the mountains to vote for general Reyna Barrios.
Both these museums are housed on the Universidad Francisco Marroquín campus.
In 1838 the liberal forces of Honduran leader Francisco Morazán and of Guatemalan José Francisco Barrundia invaded Guatemala and reached San Sur, where they executed Chúa Alvarez, father-in-law of Rafael Carrera, then a military commander and later the first president of Guatemala.
As a consequence of the subsidization of US American corn, Guatemala imports nearly half of its corn from the United States that is using 40 percent of its crop harvest for biofuel production.
His "Christian Socialist" policies were inspired to a large extent by the U.S. New Deal of President Franklin D. Roosevelt during the Great Depression.
The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
In some areas such as Baja Verapaz, the Truth Commission found that the Guatemalan state engaged in an intentional policy of genocide against particular ethnic groups in the Civil War.
Castillo Armas reversed Decree 900 and ruled until July 26, 1957, when he was assassinated by Romeo Vásquez, a member of his personal guard.
Congress appointed former Universidad de San Carlos President Alfonso Fuentes Soria as the new vice president in substitution of Maldonado.
Guatemala's "Liberal Revolution" came in 1871 under the leadership of Justo Rufino Barrios, who worked to modernize the country, improve trade, and introduce new crops and manufacturing.
In 1979, the U.S. president, Jimmy Carter, who had until then been providing public support for the government forces, ordered a ban on all military aid to the Guatemalan Army because of its widespread and systematic abuse of human rights.
Even the liberal generals like Serapio Cruz realized that Rafael Carrera's political and military presence made him practically invincible.
He then prepared to attack Petapa near Guatemala City, where he was victorious, although with heavy casualties.
Afro-Guatemalans and mulattos descended primarily from banana plantation workers.
There are also significant number of German, Chinese, French and English language speakers.
Evidence such as obsidian arrowheads found in various parts of the country, suggests a human presence as early as 18,000 BC.
They also urged people to bring water, food and sunblock, but not to cover their faces or wear political party colors.
Organisers made clear that no political party or group was behind the event, and instructed protesters at the event to follow the law.
Since the peace accords Guatemala has had both economic growth and successive democratic elections, most recently in 2015.
The Guatemalan government armed forces launched an assault that killed almost everyone inside in a fire that consumed the building.
The tight relationship between Church and State had been ratified by the Concordat of 1852, which was the law until Cerna was deposed in 1871.
Access to water and sanitation services has slowly risen over the years in Guatemala.
White Guatemalans of European descent (also called Criollo) represent 18.5% of the population.
This was the name the Tlaxcaltecan soldiers who accompanied Pedro de Alvarado during the Spanish Conquest gave to this territory.
Settlers from Germany arrived in the mid-19th century.
Guatemala's abundance of biologically significant and unique ecosystems includes a large number of endemic species and contributes to Mesoamerica's designation as a biodiversity hotspot.
Since the end of the Guatemalan Civil War in 1997 the Ministry of Health has extended healthcare access to 54% of the rural population.
Estrada Cabrera often employed brutal methods to assert his authority.
In August 2015, a Guatemalan court ruled that Rios Montt could stand trial for genocide and crimes against humanity, but that he could not be sentenced due to his age and deteriorating health.
More than one million people were forced to flee their homes and hundreds of villages were destroyed.
The prominence of US Ambassador Todd Robinson in the Guatemalan political scene once the scandal broke led to the suspicion that the US government was behind the investigation, perhaps because it needed an honest government in Guatemala to counter the presence of China and Russia in the region.
By late 1850, Vasconcelos was getting impatient at the slow progress of the war with Guatemala and decided to plan an open attack.
In January 2012 Efrain Rios Montt, the former dictator of Guatemala, appeared in a Guatemalan court on genocide charges.
Guatemala has a modest military, sized between 15,000 and 20,000 personnel.
From 1960 to 1996, Guatemala endured a bloody civil war fought between the US-backed government and leftist rebels, including massacres of the Maya population perpetrated by the military.
480,665&nbsp;– 1,489,426
File:Tikal Giaguaro.jpg|TikalPetén
In one incident, when UFCO went directly to Estrada Cabrera to resolve a strike (after the armed forces refused to respond), the president ordered an armed unit to enter a workers' compound.
In 1963, the junta called an election, which permitted Arevalo to return from exile and contest.
A New York grand jury had indicted Portillo Cabrera in 2009 for embezzlement; following his acquittal on those charges in Guatemala that country's Supreme Court authorized his extradition to the US.
On February 4, 1976, a major earthquake destroyed several cities and caused more than 25,000 deaths, especially among the poor, whose housing was substandard.
The ''Compagnie belge de colonisation'' (Belgian Colonization Company), commissioned by Belgian King Leopold I, became the administrator of Santo Tomas de Castilla replacing the failed British Eastern Coast of Central America Commercial and Agricultural Company.
In 1966, Julio César Méndez Montenegro was elected president of Guatemala under the banner "Democratic Opening".
CICIG reported its cases so often on Thursdays that Guatemalans coined the term "CICIG Thurdays".
Ex-President Alfonso Portillo was arrested in January 2010 while trying to flee Guatemala.
Alvarado later turned against the Kaqchikel, and eventually brought the entire region under Spanish domination.
The distribution of income is highly unequal with more than half of the population below the national poverty line and just over 400,000 (3.2%) unemployed.
14,253&nbsp;– 34,665
The liberals in Los Altos began severely criticizing the Conservative government of Rivera Paz.
Organic coffee, sugar, textiles, fresh vegetables, and bananas are the country's main exports.
Both the El Tigre and Monos pyramids encompass a volume greater than 250,000 cubic meters, and the city lay at the center of a populous and well-integrated region.
The peace accords signed in December 1996 provide for the translation of some official documents and voting materials into several indigenous languages (see summary of main substantive accords) and mandate the provision of interpreters in legal cases for non-Spanish speakers.
It also boasts private museums such as the Ixchel, which focuses on textiles, and the Popol Vuh, which focuses on Maya archaeology.
Inflation was 3.9% in 2010.
The country became a pariah state internationally, although the regime received considerable support from the Reagan Administration, and Reagan himself described Ríos Montt as "a man of great personal integrity."
The rivers are short and shallow in the Pacific drainage basin, larger and deeper in the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico drainage basins.
Negotiations are currently under way under the auspices of the Organization of American States to conclude it.
By that time his power had declined drastically and he was reliant upon the loyalty of a few generals.
Guatemala's location between the Caribbean Sea and Pacific Ocean makes it a target for hurricanes such as Hurricane Mitch in 1998 and Hurricane Stan in October 2005, which killed more than 1,500 people.
He was in that position until he died on April 14, 1865.
In 1851 Guatemala defeated an Allied army from Honduras and El Salvador in the Battle of La Arada.
While the United States threatened intervention if he was removed through revolution, a bipartisan coalition came together to remove him from the presidency.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has grown from 40,000 members in 1984 to 164,000 in 1998, and continues to expand.
Before long, Spanish contact resulted in an epidemic that devastated native populations.
While he pursued some measures to set up a foundation for economic prosperity to please the conservative landowners, military challenges at home and in a three-year war with Honduras, El Salvador, and Nicaragua dominated his presidency.
Guatemala's highlands lie along the Motagua Fault, part of the boundary between the Caribbean and North American tectonic plates.
Taking advantage of Salazar's good faith and Ferrera's weapons, Carrera took Guatemala City by surprise on April 13, 1839; Castro Salazar, Mariano Gálvez and Barrundia fled before the arrival of Carrera's militia men.
For example, two of the three moves of the capital of Guatemala have been due to volcanic mudflows in 1541 and earthquakes in 1773.
On 11 September 1541, the new capital was flooded when the lagoon in the crater of the Agua Volcano collapsed due to heavy rains and earthquakes; the capital was then moved  to Antigua Guatemala in the Panchoy Valley, now a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The UN anti-corruption committee has reported on other cases since then, and more than 20 government officials have stepped down.
The revelations provoked more public outrage than had been seen since the presidency of General Kjell Eugenio Laugerud García.
He continued the bloody campaign of torture, forced disappearances, and "scorched earth" warfare.
The private sector called for his resignation; however, he also managed to get support from entrepreneurs that were not affiliated with the private sector chambers: Mario López Estrada - grand child of former dictator Manuel Estrada Cabrera and the billionaire owner of cellular phone companies - had some of his executives assume the vacated cabinet positions.
Knowing that Morazán had gone to El Salvador, Carrera tried to take Salamá with the small force that remained, but was defeated, and lost his brother Laureano in combat.
The agricultural sector accounts for about two-fifths of exports, and half of the labor force.
The majority of the Guatemalan diaspora is located in the United States of America, with estimates ranging from 480,665 to 1,489,426.
Although Arévalo was popular among nationalists, he had enemies in the church and the military, and faced at least 25 coup attempts during his presidency.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Congress of the Republic.
Guatemala is demographically one of the youngest countries in the Western Hemisphere, comparable to most of central Africa and Iraq.
Urban groups who had spearheaded regular protests since the scandal broke in April, on the 27th sought to unite with the rural and indigenous organizations who orchestrated the road blocks.
Believing Carrera totally defeated, Morazán and Barrundia marched to Guatemala City, and were welcomed as saviors by state governor Pedro Valenzuela and members of the conservative Aycinena clan, who proposed to sponsor one of the liberal battalions, while Valenzuela and Barrundia gave Morazán all the Guatemalan resources needed to solve any financial problem he had.
Both sides made major concessions.
His chosen replacement, General Juan Federico Ponce Vaides, was forced out of office on October 20, 1944 by a coup d'état led by Major Francisco Javier Arana and Captain Jacobo Árbenz Guzmán.
In 1906 Estrada faced serious revolts against his rule; the rebels were supported by the governments of some of the other Central American nations, but Estrada succeeded in putting them down.
In June 2016 a United Nations-backed prosecutor described the administration of Pérez Molina to a crime syndicate and outlined another corruption case, this one dubbed ''Cooperacha'' (Kick-in).
On 5 September 1848, the criollos altenses chose a formal government led by Fernando Antonio Martínez.
These laws created tremendous resentment against him among agricultural laborers.
Of these, 6.7% are endemic and 8.1% are threatened.
After Carrera returned from exile in 1849 the president of El Salvador, Doroteo Vasconcelos, granted asylum to the Guatemalan liberals, who harassed the Guatemalan government in several different forms: José Francisco Barrundia did it through a liberal newspaper established with that specific goal; Vasconcelos gave support during a whole year to a rebel faction "La Montaña", in eastern Guatemala, providing and distributing money and weapons.
In 1898 the Legislature convened for the election of President Estrada Cabrera, who triumphed thanks to the large number of soldiers and policemen who went to vote in civilian clothes and to the large number of illiterate family that they brought with them to the polls.
File:GT056-Antigua Arch-low.jpeg|Antigua GuatemalaSacatepéquez
Here, the Cocos Plate is sinking beneath the Caribbean Plate, producing volcanic activity inland of the coast.
He was removed from office after the national assembly charged that he was mentally incompetent, and appointed Carlos Herrera in his place on April 8, 1920.
Guatemala attained independence in 1821 as part of the Federal Republic of Central America, which dissolved in 1841.
The Guatemalan government claimed that the activists set the fire, thus immolating themselves.
Extra-Judicial Killings in Guatemala
Some protesters demanded the general election be postponed, both because of the crisis and because it was plagued with accusations of irregularities.
By 1972, members of the guerrilla movement entered the country from Mexico and settled in the Western Highlands.
In 1999, U.S. president Bill Clinton said that the United States had been wrong to have provide support to the Guatemalan military forces that took part in these brutal civilian killings.
Sites dating back to 6500 BC have been found in the Quiché region in the Highlands, and Sipacate and Escuintla on the central Pacific coast.
Following negotiations in San Salvador, Carlos Castillo Armas became President on 7 July 1954.
During Barrrios's first term in office, the power of the landowners over the rural peasantry increased.
The most important members of the Liberal Party of Guatemala and liberal enemies of the conservative régime moved to Los Altos, leaving their exile in El Salvador.
However the Spanish ambassador survived the fire and disputed this claim, saying that the Guatemalan police intentionally killed almost everyone inside and set the fire to erase traces of their acts.
This city was destroyed by several earthquakes in 1773–1774.
Over the past two decades, particularly since the end of the civil war, Guatemala has seen heightened missionary activity.
The Garífuna, descended primarily from Black Africans who lived and intermarried with indigenous peoples from St. Vincent, live mainly in Livingston and Puerto Barrios.
Advances such as writing, epigraphy, and the calendar did not originate with the Maya; however, their civilization fully developed them.
File:Puerto Quetzal at dawn.jpg|Puerto QuetzalEscuintla
This could lead to further legal actions.
Completing a transoceanic railway was a main objective of his government, with a goal to attract international investors at a time when the Panama Canal was not built yet.
Guatemala faces many social problems and is one of the poorest countries in Latin America.
In 1907 Estrada narrowly survived an assassination attempt when a bomb exploded near his carriage.
In 1944, authoritarian leader Jorge Ubico was overthrown by a pro-democratic military coup, initiating a decade-long revolution that led to sweeping social and economic reforms.
Ríos Montt was overthrown by General Óscar Humberto Mejía Victores, who called for an election of a national constitutional assembly to write a new constitution, leading to a free election in 1986, won by Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo, the candidate of the Christian Democracy Party.
One of Estrada Cabrera's most famous and most bitter legacies was allowing the entry of the United Fruit Company (UFCO) into the Guatemalan economic and political arena.
the Ministry of Health lacked the financial means to monitor or evaluate its programs.
Right at the beginning of his first presidential period he started prosecuting his political rivals and soon established a well-organized web of spies.
On May 10, 2013, Rios Montt was found guilty and sentenced to 80 years in prison.
The conviction was later overturned, and Montt's trial resumed in January 2015.
Within days, over 10,000 people RSVPed that they would attend.
Pérez Molina meanwhile had been losing support by the day.
A growing Korean community in Guatemala City and in nearby Mixco, currently numbers about 50,000.
In 1840, Belgium began to act as an external source of support for Carrera's independence movement, in an effort to exert influence in Central America.
The interim government was led by Guzmán himself and had Florencio Molina and the priest Fernando Davila as his Cabinet members.
From 1970 to 2016, and particularly since the 1990s, Guatemala has experienced the rapid growth of Evangelical Protestantism, currently more than 38% of the population, and still growing.
At Coatepeque the Guatemalans suffered a severe defeat, which was followed by a truce.
In 1982, the four guerrilla groups, EGP, ORPA, FAR and PGT, merged and formed the URNG, influenced by the Salvadoran guerrilla FMLN, the Nicaraguan FSLN and Cuba's government, in order to become stronger.
Organizations such as Child Aid and Pueblo a Pueblo, which train teachers in villages throughout the Central Highlands region, are working to improve educational outcomes for children.
The government of Guatemala tried to reach to a peaceful solution, but two years of bloody conflict followed.
He gave them greater authority to shoot and imprison people suspected of breaking the labor laws.
Many contemporary music groups in Guatemala play Caribbean music, salsa, Garifuna-influenced punta, Latin pop, Mexican regional, and mariachi.
During the colonial period, Guatemala was an audiencia, a captaincy-general (''Capitanía General de Guatemala'') of Spain, and a part of New Spain (Mexico).
A similar proportion of Guatemalans (41%) are of full Amerindian ancestry, which is among one of the largest percentage in Latin America, behind only Peru and Bolivia.
Castillo Armas was the only candidate, winning the election with 99% of the vote.
File:San Diego volcano.jpg|Güija lakeJutiapa
Arévalo built new health centers, increased funding for education, and drafted a more liberal labor law, while criminalizing unions in workplaces with less than 500 workers, and cracking down on communists.
Guatemala also has free trade agreements with Taiwan and Colombia.
Only 1,710 of the nearly 350,000 private land-holdings were affected by the law, which benefited approximately 500,000 individuals, or one-sixth of the population.
This fault has been responsible for several major earthquakes in historic times, including a 7.5 magnitude tremor on February 4, 1976 which killed more than 25,000 people.
Other tourist destinations are the national parks and other protected areas such as the Maya Biosphere Reserve.
Christianity continues to remain strong and vital for the life of Guatemalan society, but its composition has changed over generations of social and political unrest.
U.S. President Harry Truman authorized Operation PBFORTUNE to topple Árbenz in 1952, with the support of Nicaraguan dictator Anastasio Somoza García, but the operation was aborted when too many details became public.
The company received import duty and real estate tax exemptions from the government and controlled more land than any other individual or group.
He also provided airstrips in the region of Petén for what later became the US-sponsored, failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961.
Thousands of protesters took to the streets again, this time to demand the increasingly isolated president’s resignation.
Back in Guatemala City within a few months, Carrera was commander-in-chief, backed by military and political support of the Indian communities from the densely populated western highlands.
The service sector is the largest component of GDP at 63%, followed by the industry sector at 23.8% and the agriculture sector at 13.2% (2010 est.).
In its territory there are fascinating Maya archaeological sites (Tikal in the Peten, Quiriguá in Izabal, Iximche in Tecpan Chimaltenango and Guatemala City).
