Even the dwarf rabbit is much stronger than the guinea pig and may cause intentional or inadvertent injury.
Other causes of hair loss can be due to hormonal upsets caused by underlying medical conditions such as ovarian cysts.
Allergy shots can successfully treat an allergy to guinea pigs, although treatment can take up to 18 months.
Guinea pigs learn to recognize and bond with other individual guinea pigs, and testing of boars shows their neuroendocrine stress response is significantly lowered in the presence of a bonded female when compared to the presence of unfamiliar females.
The cecotropes (or caecal pellets) are eaten directly from the anus, unless the guinea pig is pregnant or obese.
They startle extremely easily, and either freeze in place for long periods or run for cover with rapid, darting motions when they sense danger.
Like humans, but unlike most other mammals, guinea pigs cannot synthesize their own vitamin C and must obtain this vital nutrient from food.
The use of guinea pigs in scientific experimentation dates back at least to the 17th century, when the Italian biologists Marcello Malpighi and Carlo Fracassati conducted vivisections of guinea pigs in their examinations of anatomic structures.
In Switzerland, owning a single guinea pig is considered harmful to its well-being and forbidden by law.
The animals were frequently used as model organisms in the 19th and 20th centuries, resulting in the epithet "guinea pig" for a test subject, but have since been largely replaced by other rodents such as mice and rats.
The animal may be served fried (''chactado'' or ''frito''), broiled (''asado''), or roasted (''al horno''), and in urban restaurants may also be served in a casserole or a fricassee.
*Chirping, a less-common sound, likened to bird song, seems to be related to stress, or when a baby guinea pig wants to be fed.
Dolittle'', and Linny the Guinea pig is a co-star on Nick Jr.'s ''Wonder Pets''.
Their placental structure is similar to that of humans, and their gestation period can be divided into trimesters that resemble the stages of fetal development in humans.
The reason for potential calcification is a metabolic disease, like ochronosis.
A constant supply of hay or other food is generally recommended, as guinea pigs feed continuously and may develop habits such as chewing on their own hair if food is not present.
Domesticated guinea pigs occur in many breeds, which have been developed since their introduction to Europe and North America.
Some species of cavy identified in the 20th century, such as ''C.
The animal remains an important aspect of certain religious events in both rural and urban areas of Peru.
In the Tungurahua and Cotopaxi provinces of central Ecuador, guinea pigs are employed in the celebrations surrounding the feast of Corpus Christi as part of the ''Ensayo'', which is a community meal, and the ''Octava'', where ''castillos'' (greased poles) are erected with prizes tied to the crossbars, from which several guinea pigs may be hung.
Guinea pig strains used in scientific research are primarily outbred strains.
Signs of toxemia include anorexia, lack of energy, excessive salivation, a sweet or fruity breath odor due to ketones, and seizures in advanced cases.
Because of the long gestation period and the large size of the pups, pregnant females may become large and eggplant-shaped, although the change in size and shape varies.
The earliest known written account of the guinea pig dates from 1547, in a description of the animal from Santo Domingo; because cavies are not native to Hispaniola, the animal was earlier believed to have been introduced there by Spanish travelers.
Subsequent research using wider sampling has restored consensus among mammalian biologists that the current classification of rodents as monophyletic is justified.
The German word for them is ''Meerschweinchen'', literally "little sea pig", which has been translated into Polish as ''świnka morska'', into Hungarian as ''tengerimalac'', and into Russian as ''морская свинка''.
Present at a level 10 times that found in other mammals, the insulin in guinea pigs may be important in growth regulation, a role usually played by growth hormone.
A guinea pig named Rodney, voiced by Chris Rock, was a prominent character in the 1998 film ''Dr.
Wild cavies are found on grassy plains and occupy an ecological niche similar to that of cattle.
Both rural and urban families raise guinea pigs for supplementary income, and the animals are commonly bought and sold at local markets and large-scale municipal fairs.
Domestic guinea pigs generally live in cages, although some owners of large numbers of guinea pigs dedicate entire rooms to their pets.
Hay or straw dust can also cause sneezing.
The heat from the guinea pig's respiration melted snow surrounding the calorimeter, showing that respiratory gas exchange is a combustion, similar to a candle burning.
Guinea pigs have been launched into orbital space flight several times, first by the USSR on the Sputnik 9 biosatellite of March 9, 1961 – with a successful recovery.
If a guinea pig is lost, it may wheek for assistance.
One proposed explanation is that the animals were brought to Europe by way of Guinea, leading people to think they had originated there.
guianae'', may be domestic guinea pigs that have become feral by reintroduction into the wild.
If guinea pigs do not ingest enough vitamin C, they can suffer from potentially fatal scurvy.
The guinea pig is able to breed year-round, with birth peaks usually coming in the spring; as many as five litters can be produced per year.
The book became a national bestseller in the United States, thus further popularizing the term, and spurred the growth of the consumer protection movement.
However, as lagomorphs, rabbits have different nutritional requirements, so the two species cannot be fed the same food.
Females that have never given birth may develop irreversible fusing of the pubic symphysis, a joint in the pelvis, due to calcification which may occur between six and 10 months of age.
Cavy clubs and associations dedicated to the showing and breeding of guinea pigs have been established worldwide.
They are timid explorers and often hesitate to attempt an escape from their cage even when an opportunity presents itself.
Pregnancy toxemia appears to be most common in hot climates.
*A "wheek" is a loud noise, the name of which is onomatopoeic, also known as a whistle.
Their molars are particularly suited for grinding plant matter, and grow continuously throughout the animal's life.
The 2009 Walt Disney Pictures movie ''G-Force'' features a group of highly intelligent guinea pigs trained as operatives of the U.S. government.
How the animals came to be called "pigs" is not clear.
Guinea pigs are prey animals whose survival instinct is to mask pain and signs of illness, and many times health problems may not be apparent until a condition is severe or in its advanced stages.
In Cameroon, they are widely distributed.
Grass is the guinea pig's natural diet.
After its cage has been cleaned, a guinea pig typically urinates and drags its lower body across the floor of the cage to mark its territory.
Groups of boars often chew each other's hair, but this is a method of establishing hierarchy within a group, rather than a social gesture.
Because guinea pigs' teeth grow constantly, they routinely gnaw, lest their teeth become too large for their mouths, a common problem in rodents.
Cohabitating females assist in mothering duties if lactating.
Since the 1960s, efforts have been made to increase consumption of the animal outside South America.
While courting, a male usually purrs deeply, swaying and circling the female in a behavior called "rumblestrutting".
The earliest known illustration of a domestic guinea pig is a painting (artist unknown) in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery in London, dated to 1580, which shows a girl in typical Elizabethan dress holding a tortoise-shell guinea pig in her hands; she is flanked by her two brothers, one of whom holds a pet bird.
Guinea pigs require about 10&nbsp;mg of vitamin C daily (20&nbsp;mg if pregnant), which can be obtained through fresh, raw fruits and vegetables (such as broccoli, apple, cabbage, carrot, celery, and spinach) or through dietary supplements.
Of the inbred strains that have been created, the two still used with any frequency are, following Sewall Wright's designations, "Strain 2" and "Strain 13".
Guinea pigs can learn complex paths to food, and can accurately remember a learned path for months.
The picture dates from the same period as the oldest recorded guinea pig remains in England, which are a partial cavy skeleton found at Hill Hall (Essex), an Elizabethan manor house, and dated to around 1575.
Since the middle 20th century, they have been replaced in laboratory contexts primarily by mice and rats.
Guinea pigs have an unusual insulin mutation, and are a suitable species for the generation of anti-insulin antibodies.
''Cabiai'' may be an adaptation of the Portuguese ''çavia'' (now ''savia''), which is itself derived from the Tupi word ''saujá'', meaning rat.
Unlike the offspring of most other rodents, which are altricial at birth, newborn pups are well-developed with hair, teeth, claws, and partial eyesight; they are immediately mobile, and begin eating solid food immediately, though they continue to suckle.
Some noted appearances of the animal in literature include the short story "Pigs Is Pigs" by Ellis Parker Butler, which is a tale of bureaucratic incompetence.
Guinea pigs that become familiar with their owner will whistle on the owner's approach; they will also learn to whistle in response to the rustling of plastic bags or the opening of refrigerator doors, where their food is most commonly stored.
Inbred strains are less common and are usually used for very specific research, such as immune system molecular biology.
In the ''South Park'' season 12 episode "Pandemic 2: The Startling", giant guinea pigs dressed in costumes rampage over the Earth.
Traditionally, the animal was reserved for ceremonial meals by indigenous people in the Andean highlands, but since the 1960s, it has become more socially acceptable for consumption by all people.
If they become pregnant after this has happened, the birth canal will not widen sufficiently; this may lead to dystocia and death as they attempt to give birth.
Guinea pigs tend to be fickle eaters when it comes to fresh fruits and vegetables, having learned early in life what is and is not appropriate to consume, and their habits are difficult to change after maturity.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped animals and often depicted the guinea pig in their art.
Guinea pigs (called ''cuy'', ''cuye'', or ''curí'') were originally domesticated for their meat in the Andes.
For example, sailing ships stopping to reprovision in the New World would pick up stores of guinea pigs, which provided an easily transportable source of fresh meat.
It is sometimes used to find other guinea pigs if they are running.
In 1780, Antoine Lavoisier used a guinea pig in his experiments with the calorimeter, a device used to measure heat production.
''Pachamanca'' or ''huatia'', a process similar to barbecueing, is also popular, and is usually served with corn beer (''chicha'') in traditional settings.
Groups of boars may also get along, provided their cage has enough space, they are introduced at an early age, and no females are present.
''Cavia'' is New Latin; it is derived from ''cabiai'', the animal's name in the language of the Galibi tribes once native to French Guiana.
Because guinea pigs require much less room than traditional livestock and reproduce extremely quickly, they are a more profitable source of food and income than many traditional stock animals, such as pigs and cattle; moreover, they can be raised in an urban environment.
They are also very good swimmers.
Guinea pigs were popular laboratory animals until the later 20th century; about 2.5 million guinea pigs were used annually in the U.S. for research in the 1960s, but that total decreased to about 375,000 by the mid-1990s.
However, they do not consume all their feces indiscriminately, but produce special soft pellets, called cecotropes, which recycle B vitamins, fiber, and bacteria required for proper digestion.
The most common varieties found in pet stores are the English shorthair (also known as the American), which have a short, smooth coat, and the Abyssinian, whose coat is ruffled with cowlicks, or rosettes.
Their docile nature; friendly, even affectionate responsiveness to handling and feeding; and the relative ease of caring for them, continue to make guinea pigs a popular pet.
A guinea pig named Bugsy appears in the 2008 film ''Bedtime Stories''.
Treatment of disease is made more difficult by the extreme sensitivity guinea pigs have to most antibiotics, including penicillin, which kill off the intestinal flora and quickly bring on episodes of diarrhea and in some cases, death.
Despite their common name, these animals are not in the Suidae, or pig family, nor do they originate from Guinea.
The guinea pig was first domesticated as early as 5000 BC for food by tribes in the Andean region of South America (the present-day southern part of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia), some thousands of years after the domestication of the South American camelids.
In the 1990s and 2000s, the university began exporting the larger breed guinea pigs to Europe, Japan, and the United States in the hope of increasing human consumption outside of these countries in northern South America.
Recent studies applying molecular markers, in addition to studying the skull and skeletal morphology of current and mummified animals, revealed that the ancestor is most likely ''Cavia tschudii''.
In reality television, guinea pig meat has been consumed as an exotic dish by such Western celebrity chefs as Andrew Zimmern (for his show ''Bizarre Foods''), Anthony Bourdain in ''No Reservations'', and Jeff Corwin in his show ''Extreme Cuisine''.
Domestic guinea pigs have developed a different biological rhythm from their wild counterparts, and have longer periods of activity followed by short periods of sleep in between.
Common uses included identification of brucellosis, Chagas disease, cholera, diphtheria, foot-and-mouth disease, glanders, Q fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and various strains of typhus.
Female genitals are distinguished by a Y-shaped configuration formed from a vulvar flap, while the male genitals may look similar, with the penis and anus forming a like shape, the penis will protrude if pressure is applied to the surrounding hair.
Its normal body temperature is ,  so its ideal ambient air temperature range is similar to a human's, about .
They  tend to be most active during dawn and dusk, when it is harder for predators to spot them.
Peruvians consume an estimated 65 million guinea pigs each year, and the animal is so entrenched in the culture that one famous painting of the Last Supper in the main cathedral in Cusco shows Christ and the 12 disciples dining on guinea pig.
Guinea pig sight is not as good as that of a human, but they have a wider angle of vision (about 340°) and see in partial color (dichromacy).
The domestic guinea pig plays an important role in the folk culture of many Indigenous South American groups, especially as a food source, but also in folk medicine and in community religious ceremonies.
Guinea pigs benefit from feeding on fresh grass hay, such as timothy hay, in addition to food pellets which are often based from timothy.
A milky-white substance is secreted from their eyes and rubbed into the hair during the grooming process.
Peruvian research universities, especially La Molina National Agrarian University, began experimental programs in the 1960s with the intention of breeding larger-sized guinea pigs.
Mange mites (''Trixacarus caviae'') are a common cause of hair loss, and other symptoms may also include excessive scratching, unusually aggressive behavior when touched (due to pain), and, in some instances, seizures.
Additionally, any plant which grows from a bulb (e.g., tulip or onion) is normally considered poisonous, as well as ivy and oak tree leaves.
Guinea pigs also chew on cloth, paper, plastic, and rubber.
This derives from the Middle High German name ''merswin''.
Guinea pigs are large for rodents, weighing between , and measuring between  in length.
*A rumbling sound is normally related to dominance within a group, though it can also come as a response to being scared or angry.
From about 1200 AD to the Spanish conquest in 1532, selective breeding resulted in many varieties of domestic guinea pigs, which form the basis for some of the modern domestic breeds.
A healthy, normal female guinea pig's pubic symphysis does not calcify.
Opinion is divided over the cohousing of guinea pigs and domestic rabbits.
The '''guinea pig''' (''Cavia porcellus''), also called the '''cavy''' or '''domestic guinea pig''', is a species of rodent belonging to the family Caviidae and the genus ''Cavia''.
Two major guinea pig allergens, Cav p I and Cav p II, have been identified in guinea pig fluids (urine and saliva) and guinea pig dander.
An expression of general excitement, it may occur in response to the presence of its owner or to feeding.
The Japanese word for guinea pig is "モルモット" (''morumotto''), which derives from the name of another mountain-dwelling rodent, the marmot; this is what guinea pigs were called by the Dutch traders who first brought them to Nagasaki in 1843.
Other serious complications of pregnancy can include a prolapsed uterus, hypocalcaemia, and mastitis.
A low rumble while walking away reluctantly shows passive resistance.
The Blockbuster campaign is considered by some guinea pig advocates to have been a factor in the rise of caging guinea pigs and rabbits together.
It continues to be a major part of the diet in Peru and Bolivia, particularly in the Andes Mountains highlands; it is also eaten in some areas of Ecuador (mainly in the Sierra) and Colombia.
Organizations devoted to competitive breeding of guinea pigs have been formed worldwide, and many specialized breeds of guinea pig, with varying coat colors and compositions, are cultivated by breeders.
Many other, possibly less scientifically based explanations of the German name exist.
Guinea pigs do not generally thrive when housed with other species.
They do not respond well to sudden changes in diet; they may stop eating and starve rather than accept new food types.
China also launched and recovered a biosatellite in 1990 which included guinea pigs as passengers.
Less common uses included research in pharmacology and irradiation.
Spanish, Dutch, and English traders brought guinea pigs to Europe, where they quickly became popular as exotic pets among the upper classes and royalty, including Queen Elizabeth I.
A video game based on the movie was also released.
fulgida'', and ''C.
A religious celebration known as ''jaca tsariy'' ("collecting the cuys") is a major festival in many villages in the Antonio Raimondi province of eastern Peru, and is celebrated in smaller ceremonies in Lima.
While they do not burrow or build nests, they frequently seek shelter in the burrows of other animals, as well as in crevices and tunnels formed by vegetation.
Statues dating from ''circa'' 500 BC to 500 AD that depict guinea pigs have been unearthed in archaeological digs in Peru and Ecuador.
Allergic reactions following direct exposure to guinea pigs in domestic settings have also been reported.
In geriatric boars or sows (the condition is rarer in young ones), the muscles which allow the softer pellets to be expelled from the anus for consumption can become weak.
When excited, guinea pigs may repeatedly perform little hops in the air (known as "popcorning"), a movement analogous to the ferret's war dance.
Folklore traditions involving guinea pigs are numerous; they are exchanged as gifts, used in customary social and religious ceremonies, and frequently referenced in spoken metaphors.
Activity is scattered randomly over the day; aside from avoidance of intense light, no regular circadian patterns are apparent.
Non-sexual simulated mounting for dominance is also common among same-sex groups.
The guinea pig was most extensively implemented in research and diagnosis of infectious diseases.
These are the most common sounds made by the guinea pig:
A hairless and immunodeficient breed was the result of a spontaneous genetic mutation in inbred laboratory strains from the Hartley stock at the Eastman Kodak Company in 1979.
*Squealing or shrieking is a high-pitched sound of discontent, in response to pain or danger.
Domesticated guinea pigs thrive in groups of two or more; groups of sows, or groups of one or more sows and a neutered boar are common combinations.
In these cases, the rumble often sounds higher and the body vibrates shortly.
Shorthair breeds are typically brushed weekly, while longhair breeds may require daily grooming.
In Western societies, the domestic guinea pig has enjoyed widespread popularity as a household pet since its introduction by European traders in the 16th century.
Most commonly, the roan coloration of Abyssinian guinea pigs is associated with congenital eye disorders and problems with the digestive system.
Cages are often lined with wood shavings or a similar material.
This might take place if the original parents die or are for some reason separated from them.
Black guinea pigs are considered especially useful for diagnoses.
They originated in the Andes, and earlier studies based on biochemistry and hybridization suggest they are domesticated descendants of a closely related species of cavy such as ''Cavia aperea'', ''C.
These methods are widely accepted in many parts of the Andes, where Western medicine is either unavailable or distrusted.
Guinea pigs were used in some major advertising campaigns in the 1990s and 2000s, notably for Egg Banking plc, Snapple, and Blockbuster Video.
According to the 2006 ''Guinness World Records'', the longest living guinea pig survived 14&nbsp;years, 10.5&nbsp;months.
Hairless breeds of guinea pigs have been used in scientific research since the 1980s, particularly for dermatological studies.
Males reach sexual maturity at 3–5 weeks; females can be fertile as early as four weeks and can carry litters before they are adults.
Another appearance is in ''The Magician's Nephew'' by C. S. Lewis: in the first (chronologically) of his ''The Chronicles of Narnia'' series, a guinea pig is the first creature to travel to the Wood between the Worlds.
They are built somewhat like pigs, with large heads relative to their bodies, stout necks, and rounded rumps with no tail of any consequence; some of the sounds they emit are very similar to those made by pigs, and they also spend a large amount of time eating.
Complement, an important component for serology, was first isolated from the blood of the guinea pig.
These varieties vary in hair and color composition.
People who are allergic to guinea pigs are usually allergic to hamsters and gerbils, as well.
Male and female guinea pigs do not differ in external appearance apart from general size.
Similar organizations exist in Australia (Australian National Cavy Council) and New Zealand (New Zealand Cavy Council).
If handled correctly early in life, guinea pigs become amenable to being picked up and carried, and seldom bite or scratch.
The exact form the ''jaca tsariy'' takes differs from town to town; in some localities, a ''sirvinti'' (servant) is appointed to go from door to door, collecting donations of guinea pigs, while in others, guinea pigs may be brought to a communal area to be released in a mock bullfight.
However, it has not been known when and where the animals have been introduced to Africa.
This creates a condition known as anal impaction, which prevents the boar from redigesting cecotropes, though harder pellets may pass through the impacted mass.
Male guinea pigs may also mark their territory in this way when they are taken out of their cages.
Also popular among breeders are the Peruvian and the Sheltie (or Silkie), both straight longhair breeds, and the Texel, a curly longhair.
Guinea pigs may also suffer from "running lice" (''Gliricola porcelli''), a small, white insect which can be seen moving through the hair; their eggs, which appear as black or white specks attached to the hair, are sometimes referred to as "static lice".
They are rubbed against the bodies of the sick, and are seen as a supernatural medium.
The Peruvian town of Churin has an annual festival which involves dressing guinea pigs in elaborate costumes for a competition.
Other genetic disorders include "waltzing disease" (deafness coupled with a tendency to run in circles), palsy, and tremor conditions.
This dates back to the early 20th century; the Oxford English Dictionary notes its first usage in this capacity in 1913.
Vocalization is the primary means of communication between members of the species.
Most grass-eating mammals are quite large and have a long digestive tract; while guinea pigs have much longer colons than most rodents, they must also supplement their diet by coprophagy, the eating of their own feces.
Pneumonia may also be accompanied by torticollis and can be fatal.
Butler's story, in turn, inspired the ''Star Trek: The Original Series'' episode "The Trouble With Tribbles", written by David Gerrold.
Like many rodents, guinea pigs sometimes participate in social grooming, and they regularly self-groom.
From the accidental discovery in 1907 that scurvy could be induced in guinea pigs, to their use to prove the chemical structure of the "ascorbutic factor" in 1932, the guinea pig model proved a crucial part of vitamin C research.
They have well-developed senses of hearing, smell, and touch.
They are also frequently held in rural households in Iringa Region of southwestern Tanzania.
Litters yield one to six pups, with an average of three; the largest recorded litter size is 17.
The Chinese refer to them as 豚鼠 (''túnshǔ'', 'pig mouse'), and sometimes as Netherlands pig (荷蘭豬, ''hélánzhū'') or Indian mouse (天竺鼠, ''tiānzhúshǔ'').
Guinea pig meat is high in protein and low in fat and cholesterol, and is described as being similar to rabbit and the dark meat of chicken.
In the TV movie ''Shredderman Rules'', the main character and the main character's crush both have guinea pigs which play a minor part in the plot.
Similar to the inherited genetic diseases of other breeds of animal (such as hip dysplasia in canines), a number of genetic abnormalities of guinea pigs have been reported.
Guinea pigs played a major role in the establishment of germ theory in the late 19th century, through the experiments of Louis Pasteur, Émile Roux, and Robert Koch.
Guinea pigs are not well suited to environments that feature wind or frequent drafts, and respond poorly to extremes of humidity outside of the range of 30–70%.
Subsequent university efforts have sought to change breeding and husbandry procedures in South America, to make the raising of guinea pigs as livestock more economically sustainable.
Rabbits may also harbor diseases (such as respiratory infections from ''Bordetella'' and ''Pasteurella''), to which guinea pigs are susceptible.
The guinea pig was first described in the West in 1554 by the Swiss naturalist Conrad Gessner.
Large litters result in higher incidences of stillbirth, but because the pups are delivered at an advanced stage of development, lack of access to the mother's milk has little effect on the mortality rate of newborns.
Healthy diets for guinea pigs require a complex balance of calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, potassium, and hydrogen ions; adequate amounts of vitamins E, A, and D are also necessary.
Ironically, breeders tend to use the more formal "cavy" to describe the animal, while in scientific and laboratory contexts, it is far more commonly referred to by the more colloquial "guinea pig".
This originally meant "dolphin" and was used because of the animals' grunting sounds (which were thought to be similar).
"Cubes and Coroplast" (or C&C) style cages are now a common choice.
