The resultant electrical signal can then be electronically amplified.
The sound is projected either acoustically or through electrical amplification (for an acoustic guitar or an electric guitar, respectively).
The quality of vibration of the fingerboard is the principal characteristic for generating the best treble tone.
There is no tension adjustment on this form of reinforcement.
Ovation makes a modern variation, with a rounded back/side assembly molded from artificial materials.
The lower strap button is usually located at the bottom (bridge end) of the body.
Invariant chord-shapes are an advantage of other regular tunings, such as major-thirds and all-fifths tunings.
The guitar is called viola, or violão in Brazil, where it is often used with an extra seventh string by choro musicians to provide extra bass support.
Pinching a string against a fret on fretboard effectively shortens the vibrating length of the string, producing a higher pitch.
The twelfth fret divides the scale length exactly into two halves, and the 24th fret position divides one of those halves in half again.
Single-coil pickups are susceptible to noise induced from electric fields, usually mains-frequency (60 or 50&nbsp;hertz) hum.
The vihuela enjoyed only a relatively short period of popularity in Spain and Italy during an era dominated elsewhere in Europe by the lute; the last surviving published music for the instrument appeared in 1576.
The top, back and ribs of an acoustic guitar body are very thin (1–2&nbsp;mm), so a flexible piece of wood called lining is glued into the corners where the rib meets the top and back.
This interior reinforcement provides 5 to 20&nbsp;mm of solid gluing area for these corner joints.
Some performers who have become famous for playing slide are Robert Johnson, Elmore James, Ry Cooder, George Harrison, Bonnie Raitt, Derek Trucks, Warren Haynes, Duane Allman, Muddy Waters, Rory Gallagher, and George Thorogood.
They were more often used as rhythm instruments in ensembles than as solo instruments, and can often be seen in that role in early music performances.
See the section "Neck" below for the importance of the length of the fretboard in connection to other dimensions of the guitar.
On all electric, acoustic and original guitars, the bridge holds the strings in place on the body.
The typical locations for inlay are on the fretboard, headstock, and on acoustic guitars around the soundhole, known as the rosette.
Simpler inlays are often made of plastic or painted.
The sound is frequently modified by other electronic devices (effects units) or the natural distortion of valves (vacuum tubes) or the pre-amp in the amplifier.
Some slide players use a so-called Dobro guitar.
In contrast, in standard tuning, the shape of inversions depends on the involvement of the irregular major-third.
The classical guitar is often played as a solo instrument using a comprehensive finger-picking technique.
), such as flamenco, require that a scratchplate or pickguard be fitted to nylon-string instruments.
A commonly applied approximation used in selection of a pickup is that less wire (lower DC resistance) = brighter sound, more wire = "fat" tone.
* Extending the tunings of violins and cellos, all-fifths tuning offers an expanded range CGDAEB, which however has been impossible to implement on a conventional guitar.
Some older or high-end instruments have inlays made of mother of pearl, abalone, ivory, colored wood or other exotic materials and designs.
Some acoustic and classical guitars only have a single strap button at the bottom of the body—the other end must be tied onto the headstock, above the nut and below the machine heads.
Modern dimensions of the classical instrument were established by the Spaniard Antonio de Torres Jurado (1817–1892).
At least two instruments called "guitars" were in use in Spain by 1200: the '''' (Latin guitar) and the so-called '''' (Moorish guitar).
Some Steinberger electric guitars, owing to their minimalist and lightweight design, have both strap buttons at the bottom of the body.
Many luthiers consider the top the dominant factor in determining the sound quality.
Among these are "jumbo" frets, which have much thicker gauge, allowing for use of a slight vibrato technique from pushing the string down harder and softer.
Many bodies consist of good-sounding but inexpensive woods, like ash, with a "top", or thin layer of another, more attractive wood (such as maple with a natural "flame" pattern) glued to the top of the basic wood.
Other types of material used to make guitar necks are graphite (Steinberger guitars), aluminum (Kramer Guitars, Travis Bean and Veleno guitars), or carbon fiber (Modulus Guitars and ThreeGuitars).
The tuning is named for the open chord,  Open D, open G, and open A are popular tunings.
The most common are strap buttons, also called strap pins, which are flanged steel posts anchored to the guitar with screws.
There are three main types of modern acoustic guitar: the classical guitar (nylon-string guitar), the steel-string acoustic guitar, and the archtop guitar.
Many guitars feature other layouts, including six-in-line tuners (featured on Fender Stratocasters) or even "4+2" (e.g.
Classical guitars, also known as "Spanish" guitars, are typically strung with nylon strings, plucked with the fingers, played in a seated position and are used to play a diversity of musical styles including classical music.
The bending stress on the neck is considerable, particularly when heavier gauge strings are used (see Tuning), and the ability of the neck to resist bending (see Truss rod) is important to the guitar's ability to hold a constant pitch during tuning or when strings are fretted.
Other artists go a step further, by using an eight-string guitar with two extra low strings.
In this layout, the headstocks are commonly symmetrical.
Differing patterns of internal bracing have been used over time by luthiers.
Left-handed players sometimes choose an opposite-handed (mirror) instrument, although some play in a standard-handed manner, others play a standard-handed guitar reversed, and still others (for example Jimi Hendrix) play a standard-handed guitar strung in reverse.
An instrument that is played exclusively in this manner (using a metal bar) is called a steel guitar or pedal steel.
These employ piezoelectricity to generate the musical signal and are popular in hybrid electro-acoustic guitars.
The guitar is a type of chordophone, traditionally constructed from wood and strung with either gut, nylon or steel strings and distinguished from other chordophones by its construction and tuning.
Some luthiers prefer this method of construction as they claim it allows better sustain of each note.
Some instruments may not have a neck joint at all, having the neck and sides built as one piece and the body built around it.
Classical guitars do not require truss rods, as their nylon strings exert a lower tensile force with lesser potential to cause structural problems.
The chime-like sound of the 12-string electric guitar was the basis of jangle pop.
Single-coil pickups, one magnet wrapped in copper wire, are used by guitarists seeking a brighter, twangier sound with greater dynamic range.
A capo (short for ''capotasto'') is used to change the pitch of open strings.
Rarely, on some acoustics, the upper strap button is located on the headstock.
The introduction of the double-coil humbucker in the mid-1950s did away with this problem through the use of two coils, one of which is wired in a reverse polarity orientation.
Some are spring-loaded and feature a "whammy bar", a removable arm that lets the player modulate the pitch by changing the tension on the strings.
The physical principle of the guitar is therefore similar to the loudspeaker.
Guitars have varying accommodations for attaching a strap.
In acoustic guitars, string vibration is transmitted through the bridge and saddle to the body via sound board.
These include tapping, extensive use of legato through pull-offs and hammer-ons (also known as slurs), pinch harmonics, volume swells, and use of a tremolo arm or effects pedals.
Many musicians use open tunings when playing slide guitar.
Picks come in many shapes and sizes.
Archtop guitars are steel-string instruments in which the top (and often the back) of the instrument are carved, from a solid billet, into a curved, rather than a flat, shape.
Its grooves guide the strings onto the fretboard, giving consistent lateral string placement.
The four-string bass, by far the most common, is usually tuned the same as the double bass, which corresponds to pitches one octave lower than the four lowest pitched strings of a guitar (E, A, D, and G).
Capos are clipped onto the fretboard with the aid of spring tension, or in some models, elastic tension.
The majority of the instrument's sound is heard through the vibration of the guitar top as the energy of the vibrating strings is transferred to it.
This last configuration differs from a true opposite handed guitar in that the saddle is normally angled in such a way that the bass strings are slightly longer than the treble strings to improve intonation.
These contain magnets that are tightly wrapped in a coil, or coils, of copper wire.
The necks of bottles were often used in blues and country music.
"Hex" is a prefix meaning six.
The vibration of the strings creates a small voltage in the coils surrounding the magnets.
Flamenco guitars are very similar in construction, but they are associated with a more percussive tone.
Rosette designs vary from simple concentric circles to delicate fretwork mimicking the historic rosette of lutes.
Ernie Ball Music Man).
Each one is primarily chosen for their aesthetic effect and can be decorated with inlays and purfling.
Similar to the flat top guitar in appearance, but with a body that may be made of brass, nickel-silver, or steel as well as wood, the sound of the resonator guitar is produced by one or more aluminum resonator cones mounted in the middle of the top.
In many cases the electronics have some sort of shielding to prevent pickup of external interference and noise.
Classical and flamenco guitars historically used gut strings, but these have been superseded by polymer materials, such as nylon and fluorocarbon.
The strings are paired in courses as in a modern 12-string guitar, but they only have four or five courses of strings rather than six single strings normally used now.
They are substantially smaller, more delicate in construction, and generate less volume.
It was also larger than the contemporary four-course guitars.
Guitars constructed like this are often called "flame tops".
The bass guitar is a transposing instrument, as it is notated in bass clef an octave higher than it sounds (as is the double bass) to avoid excessive ledger lines.
In general, flat notes are corrected by moving the saddle forward and sharp notes by moving it backwards.
In an acoustic instrument, the body of the guitar is a major determinant of the overall sound quality.
Body size, shape and style has changed over time.
Some aspects to consider in a guitar neck may be the overall width of the fretboard, scale (distance between the frets), the neck wood, the type of neck construction (for example, the neck may be glued in or bolted on), and the shape (profile) of the back of the neck.
It is fitted with machine heads that adjust the tension of the strings, which in turn affects the pitch.
The modern guitar was preceded by the gittern, the vihuela, the four-course Renaissance guitar, and the five-course baroque guitar, all of which contributed to the development of the modern six-string instrument.
A guitar's frets, fretboard, tuners, headstock, and truss rod, all attached to a long wooden extension, collectively constitute its neck.
Timbers for tone woods are chosen for both strength and ability to transfer mechanical energy from the strings to the air within the guitar body.
* In major-thirds tuning, the interval between open strings is always a major third.
Bracing not only strengthens the top against potential collapse due to the stress exerted by the tensioned strings, but also affects the resonance characteristics of the top.
The modern word ''guitar,'' and its antecedents, has been applied to a wide variety of chordophones since classical times and as such causes confusion.
The Spanish vihuela, called in Italian the "", a guitar-like instrument of the 15th and 16th centuries, is widely considered to have been the single most important influence in the development of the baroque guitar.
Double neck electric guitars have two necks, allowing the musician to quickly switch between guitar sounds.
The tone of an acoustic guitar is produced by the strings' vibration, amplified by the body of the guitar, which acts as a resonating chamber.
Its pitch sounds one octave lower than it is notated on a score.
Some chords, which are conventional in folk music, are difficult to play even in all-fourths and major-thirds tunings, which do not require more hand-stretching than standard tuning.
Modern guitar strings are constructed from metal, polymers, or animal or plant product materials.
The headstock is located at the end of the guitar neck farthest from the body.
The standard guitar has six strings, but four-, seven-, eight-, nine-, ten-, eleven-, twelve-, thirteen- and eighteen-string guitars are also available.
Some instruments use a zero fret just in front of the nut.
MIDI converters use a hexaphonic guitar signal to determine pitch, duration, attack, and decay characteristics.
It is a common feature on steel-string acoustic guitars.
In Portugal, the word ''viola'' referred to the guitar, as ''guitarra'' meant the "Portuguese guitar", a variety of cittern.
(Gaspar Sanz's ''Instrucción de Música sobre la Guitarra Española'' of 1674 contains his whole output for the solo guitar.)
Although the development of the earliest "guitars" is lost in the history of medieval Spain, two instruments are commonly cited as their most influential predecessors, the European lute and its cousin, the four-string oud; the latter was brought to Iberia by the Moors in the 8th century.
The highest two courses are tuned in unison, while the others are tuned in octaves.
The lower fretboard action (the height of the strings from the fingerboard), lighter (thinner) strings, and its electrical amplification lend the electric guitar to techniques less frequently used on acoustic guitars.
Traditional electromagnetic pickups are either single-coil or double-coil.
The term "finger-picking" can also refer to a specific tradition of folk, blues, bluegrass, and country guitar playing in the United States.
Open tunings are common in blues and folk music, and they are used in the playing of slide and bottleneck guitars.
Classical performers are known to use them to enable modern instruments to match the pitch of historical instruments such as the renaissance lute.
The classical guitar's wide, flat neck allows the musician to play scales, arpeggios, and certain chord forms more easily and with less adjacent string interference than on other styles of guitar.
A "guitar pick" or "plectrum" is a small piece of hard material generally held between the thumb and first finger of the picking hand and is used to "pick" the strings.
Though a guitar may be played on its own, there are a variety of common accessories used for holding and playing the guitar.
It is flat on classical guitars and slightly curved crosswise on acoustic and electric guitars.
Some truss rods can only be accessed by removing the neck.
A thinner pick (between 0.2 and 0.5&nbsp;mm) is usually used for strumming or rhythm playing, whereas thicker picks (between 0.7 and 1.5+ mm) are usually used for single-note lines or lead playing.
Inlays are visual elements set into the exterior surface of a guitar.
The main purpose of the bridge on an acoustic guitar is to transfer the vibration from the strings to the soundboard, which vibrates the air inside of the guitar, thereby amplifying the sound produced by the strings.
On guitars that have them, these components and the wires that connect them allow the player to control some aspects of the sound like volume or tone using knobs, switches, or buttons.
Instruments with larger areas for the guitar top were introduced by Martin in an attempt to create louder volume levels.
fossilized tooth, ivory, etc. )
During final construction, a small section of the outside corners is carved or routed out and filled with binding material on the outside corners and decorative strips of material next to the binding, which are called purfling.
The acoustic bass guitar is a bass instrument with a hollow wooden body similar to, though usually somewhat larger than, that of a 6-string acoustic guitar.
Regular tunings thus appeal to new guitarists and also to jazz-guitarists, whose improvisation is simplified by regular intervals.
When the string vibrates, the shape of the crystal is distorted, and the stresses associated with this change produce tiny voltages across the crystal that can be amplified and manipulated.
For the regular tunings, chords may be moved diagonally around the fretboard.
The tension of the rod and neck assembly is adjusted by a hex nut or an allen-key bolt on the rod, usually located either at the headstock, sometimes under a cover, or just inside the body of the guitar underneath the fretboard and accessible through the sound hole.
Many contemporary rock bands re-tune all strings by several semi-tones, making, for example, Drop-C or Drop-B tunings.
Some guitars also have a tone-control knob, and some guitars with multiple pickups have pickup selector switches or knobs to determine which pickup(s) are activated.
The pitch of each consecutive fret is defined at a half-step interval on the chromatic scale.
On the other hand, some chords are more difficult to play in a regular tuning than in standard tuning.
It can, more rarely, be found with 5 or 6 strings, which provides a wider range of notes to be played with less movement up and down the neck.
It simplifies the playing of simple fifths (powerchords).
Some bridges also allow for alternate tunings at the touch of a button.
All similar chords in the chromatic scale can then be played by barring a single fret.
To raise the guitar's pitch by one semitone, the player would clip the capo onto the fretboard just below the first fret.
The electric guitar is used extensively in jazz, blues, R & B, and rock and roll.
The twelve-string guitar usually has steel strings, and it is widely used in folk music, blues, and rock and roll.
In Mexico, the popular mariachi band includes a range of guitars, from the small ''requinto'' to the ''guitarrón,'' a guitar larger than a cello, which is tuned in the bass register.
Bolt-on necks, though they are historically associated with cheaper instruments, do offer greater flexibility in the guitar's set-up, and allow easier access for neck joint maintenance and repairs.
The sound board is typically made of tone woods such as spruce or cedar.
Modern guitars can be constructed to suit both left- and right-handed players.
Guitars can be divided into two broad categories, acoustic and electric:
Chords are inverted simply by raising one or two notes by three strings.
In practice, luthiers determine fret positions using the constant 17.817—an approximation to 1/(1-1/).
The shape of the neck can also vary, from a gentle "C" curve to a more pronounced "V" curve.
The acoustic guitar is used in many kinds of music including folk, country, bluegrass, pop, jazz, and blues.
Fender Stratocaster-type guitars generally utilize three single-coil pickups, while most Gibson Les Paul types use humbucker pickups.
A guitar strap is a strip of material with an attachment mechanism on each end, made to hold a guitar via the shoulders at an adjustable length.
Such pickups are usually placed right underneath the guitar strings.
Frets are available in several different gauges and can be fitted according to player preference.
By the 16th century, the vihuela's construction had more in common with the modern guitar, with its curved one-piece ribs, than with the viols, and more like a larger version of the contemporary four-course guitars.
Consequently, four frets suffice to play the chromatic scale.
Strap buttons are sometimes replaced with "strap locks", which connect the guitar to the strap more securely.
Other alternative materials to wood are used in guitar body construction.
Most electrics have a polyurethane or nitrocellulose lacquer finish.
The raised notes are played with the same finger as the original notes.
The body of an acoustic guitar has a sound hole through which sound projects.
This signal voltage is carried to a guitar amplifier that drives a loudspeaker.
All-fifths tuning is used for the lowest five strings of the new standard tuning of Robert Fripp and his former students in Guitar Craft courses; new standard tuning has a high G on its last string CGDAE-G.
The upper strap button is usually located near or at the top (neck end) of the body: on the upper body curve, at the tip of the upper "horn" (on a double cutaway), or at the neck joint (heel).
Kerfed lining is also called kerfing because it is scored, or "kerfed"(incompletely sawn through), to allow it to bend with the shape of the rib).
To reduce string friction in the nut, which can adversely affect tuning stability, some guitarists fit a roller nut.
Dots are usually inlaid into the upper edge of the fretboard in the same positions, small enough to be visible only to the player.
Solid linings are often used in classical guitars, while kerfed lining is most often found in steel string acoustics.
Dropping down the lowest string a whole tone results in the "drop-D" (or "dropped D") tuning.
This arrangement lets on-board or external electronics process the strings individually for modeling or MIDI conversion.
Bindings that edge the finger and sound boards are sometimes inlaid.
There are two main types of magnetic pickups, single- and double-coil (or humbucker), each of which can be passive or active.
Renaissance and Baroque guitars are easily distinguished because the Renaissance guitar is very plain and the Baroque guitar is very ornate, with ivory or wood inlays all over the neck and body, and a paper-cutout inverted "wedding cake" inside the hole.
Two strap buttons come pre-attached to virtually all electric guitars, and many steel-string acoustic guitars.
The saddle of a guitar refers to the part of the bridge that physically supports the strings.
''Open tuning'' refers to a guitar tuned so that strumming the open strings produces a chord, typically a major chord.
The method of transmitting sound resonance to the cone is either a "biscuit" bridge, made of a small piece of hardwood at the vertex of the cone (Nationals), or a "spider" bridge, made of metal and mounted around the rim of the (inverted) cone (Dobros).
In Colombia, the traditional quartet includes a range of instruments too, from the small ''bandola'' (sometimes known as the Deleuze-Guattari, for use when traveling or in confined rooms or spaces), to the slightly larger tiple, to the full-sized classical guitar.
Some guitars (such as Steinbergers) do not have headstocks at all, in which case the tuning machines are located elsewhere, either on the body or the bridge.
Notationally, the guitar is considered a transposing instrument.
These at their simplest consist of passive components such as potentiometers and capacitors, but may also include specialized integrated circuits or other active components requiring batteries for power, for preamplification and signal processing, or even for electronic tuning.
Those that combine piezoelectric pickups and magnetic pickups are sometimes known as hybrid guitars.
Most modern guitars feature a 12" neck radius, while older guitars from the 1960s and 1970s usually feature a 6-8" neck radius.
The type of resonator guitar with a neck with a square cross-section—called "square neck" or "Hawaiian"—is usually played face up, on the lap of the seated player, and often with a metal or glass slide.
The first successful magnetic pickup for a guitar was invented by George Beauchamp, and incorporated into the 1931 Ro-Pat-In (later Rickenbacker) "Frying Pan" lap steel; other manufacturers, notably Gibson, soon began to install pickups in archtop models.
The wood used to make the fretboard usually differs from the wood in the rest of the neck.
"Scalloped" fretboards, where the wood of the fretboard itself is "scooped out" between the frets, allow a dramatic vibrato effect.
In addition to fretboard inlay, the headstock and soundhole surround are also frequently inlaid.
The original purpose of the resonator was to produce a very loud sound; this purpose has been largely superseded by electrical amplification, but the resonator guitar is still played because of its distinctive tone.
The 12-string guitar is also made in electric forms.
have become popular with some players.
Many variations are possible from the roughly classical-sized OO and Parlour to the large Dreadnought (the most commonly available type) and Jumbo.
Instruments utilizing "steel" strings may have strings made from alloys incorporating steel, nickel or phosphor bronze.
A common form of scordatura involves tuning the 3rd string to F to mimic the standard tuning of the lute, especially when playing renaissance repertoire originally written for that instrument.
These are designed so that everything from the machine heads down to the bridge are located on the same piece of wood.
In 1982 Uli Jon Roth developed the "Sky Guitar", with a vastly extended number of frets, which was the first guitar to venture into the upper registers of the violin.
