Persia was the destination for many of these commodities, and they were partly paid for in horses and pearls taken from Hormuz (Barbosa, I, p.&nbsp;82).
Gujarat is state with surplus electricity.
the south Indian Rashtrakuta Dynasty and the east Indian Pala Empire dominated India from the 8th to 10th centuries.
After Timur's sacking of Delhi at the end of the 14th century weakened the Sultanate, Gujarat's Muslim Rajput governor Zafar Khan Muzaffar (Muzaffar Shah I) asserted his independence, and his son, Sultan Ahmed Shah (ruled 1411 to 1442), established Ahmedabad as the capital.
In 1292 the Vaghelas became tributaries of the Yadava dynasty of Devagiri in the Deccan.
Muslims are the biggest minority in the state accounting for 9.5%  of the population.
It was during the rule of Dhruvasena Maitrak that Chinese philosopher-traveler Xuanzang visited in 640 AD along the Silk Road.
The ancient history of Gujarat was enriched by the commercial activities of its inhabitants.
* City Services&nbsp;— GSRTC also provides city bus services at Surat, Vadodara, Vapi, Gandhinagar and Ahmedabad, within the state of Gujarat.
Its capital city is Gandhinagar, while its largest city is Ahmedabad.
From 1297 to 1300, Allauddin Khilji, the Turkic Sultan of Delhi, destroyed the Hindu metropolis of Anhilwara and incorporated Gujarat into the Delhi Sultanate.
Historically, the state of Gujarat has been one of the main centres of the Indus Valley Civilization.
Many structures in the state are built in this fashion.
Aurangzeb had great love for his place of birth.
The Lakhota Museum at Jamnagar is a palace transformed into museum, which was residence of the Jadeja Rajputs.
Amongst livestock raised are buffalo and other cattle, sheep, and goats.
IIMT STUDIES also launched GET SET GO programme in 2013 in Affiliation with Gujarat Technological University and Gujarat Knowledge Society, Department of Technical Education- Government of Gujarat.
Gujarat has an area of  with the longest coast line(24% of Indian sea coast) , dotted with 41 ports: one major, 11 intermediate and 29 minor.
The Kutch Festival or Rann Festival (Gujarati: કચ્છ or રણ ઉત્સવ) is a festival celebrated at Kutch during Mahashivratri.
Nearly 100% of Gujarat's 18,000 villages have been claimed to have electricity connection for 24-hr power through the Jyotigram Yojana.
However, whilst they have led to increased productivity, their effect on equity in the region has been questioned, because membership in agricultural co-operatives has tended to favour landowners whilst limiting the entry of landless agricultural labourers.
Famous Mumbai theatre veteran, Alyque Padamsee, best known in the English-speaking world for playing Muhammad Ali Jinnah in Sir Richard Attenborough's ''Gandhi'', was from a traditional Gujarati-Kutchi family from Kathiawar.
The Government of Gujarat is promoting bicycles to reduce pollution.
General Pulakesi, a Chalukya prince of Lata, received the title Avanijanashraya (refuge of the people of the earth) and honorific of "repeller of the unrepellable" by the south Indian Emperor Vikramaditya II of the Chalukya dynasty for the protection of Gujarat during the battle at Navsari where Syrian troops suffered a crushing defeat.
Drawn by the religious renaissance taking place under Akbar, Mohammed Ghaus moved to Gujarat and established spiritual centers for the Shattari Sufi order from Iran, founding the Ek Toda Mosque and producing such devotees as Wajihuddin Alvi of Ahmedabad whose many successors moved to Bijapur during the height of the Adil Shahi dynasty.
Gujarat is the largest producer of milk in India.
Morvi dam failure in 1979 resulted in death of thousands of people and large economic loss.
It is expected to complete by December 2018.
On 12March 1930 he vowed that he would not return to the Ashram until India won independence.
This tradition was followed by other Gujaratis.
During and after India's State of Emergency of 1975–1977, public support for the INC eroded, but it continued to hold government until 1995 with brief rule of nine months by Janata Morcha.
File:Vijay Vilas - 2009.JPG|Vijay Vilas Palace, Mandvi, Kutch
The Gujarat National Law University situated at Gandhinagar is the 5th Best Law School currently in India.
Situated  from the village of Kharaghoda in the Surendranagar District and Pakistan's Sindh province.
File:Sardar Patel Memorial Karamsad.JPG|Sardar Patel Memorial, Karamsad
Gujarat was a major center of Indian Ocean trade, and their capital at Anhilwara (Patan) was one of the largest cities in India, with population estimated at 100,000 in the year 1000.
Since then literature has flourished till date.
The state was an early point of contact with the west, and the first British commercial outpost in India was in Gujarat.
Many have focused on subsidies and credit to farmers and rather than collective gathering, they have focused on facilitating collective processing and marketing of produce.
Agitation by Gujarati nationalists, the Mahagujarat Movement, and Marathi nationalists, the Samyukta Maharashtra, for their own states led to the split of Bombay state on linguistic lines; on 1 May 1960, it became the new states of Gujarat and Maharashtra.
Gujarat's relations with Egypt, which was then the premier Arab power in the Middle East remained friendly over the next century and the Egyptian scholar, ''Badruddin-ad-Damamimi'', spent several years in Gujarat in the shade of the Sultan before proceeding to the Bahmani Sultanate of the Deccan.
Gujarat is one of the most popular states in India for tourism with an annual footfall of 19.81 million tourists in 2010–11.
The British East India Company established a factory in Surat in 1614 following the commercial treaty made with Mughal Emperor Nuruddin Salim Jahangir, which formed their first base in India, but it was eclipsed by Bombay after the English received it from Portugal in 1668 as part of the marriage treaty of Charles II of England and Catherine of Braganza, daughter of King John IV of Portugal.
In 2003, 92% of the world's diamonds were cut and polished in Surat.
A five-day festival is held during Maha Shivaratri at the fort of Girnar, Junagadh, known as the Bhavanth Mahadev Fair (Gujarati: ભવનાથ નો મેળો).
Dhuvaran has a thermal power station, which uses coal, oil, and gas.
Portugal was the first European power to arrive in Gujarat, and aftermath the Battle of Diu and Treaty of Bassein, acquired several enclaves along the Gujarati coast, including Daman and Diu as well as Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
It is the only one of its kind in all Asia.
According to a 2009 report on economic freedom by the Cato Institute, Gujarat is the first most free state in India (the second one being Tamil Nadu).
The 'Khushboo Gujarat Ki' campaign by Bollywood megastar Amitabh Bachchan has enhanced tourism in Gujarat by 14 per cent, twice that of national growth rate.
The descendants of those Zoroastrian refugees came to be known as the Parsi.
These networks extended to the Philippines in the east, East Africa in the west, and via maritime and the inland caravan route to Russia in the north.
The  long tracks of the first phase  of MEGA, a metro rail system for Ahmedabad and Gandhinagar is under construction.
The ancient city of Dholavira is one of the largest and most prominent archaeological sites in India, belonging to the Indus Valley Civilization.
Junagadh is the largest producer of groundnut and garlic in the state contributing 26% and 34% to total production respectively.
Gujarat is home to the Gujarati people.
He was defeated and overthrown by the superior forces of Allauddin Khilji from Delhi in 1297.
According to the official sources, against demand of 40,793 million units during the nine months since April 2010, Gujarat produced 43,848 million units.
Being the major trade gateway and departure harbour of pilgrim ships to Mecca, it gave the Mughal Empire free access to the Arabian sea and control over the rich commerce that passed through its ports.
However, the Arab invaders were defeated and repelled from the areas east of the Indus river by a Hindu alliance between the north Indian Gurjar Emperor Nagabhata I of the Pratihara Dynasty, the south Indian Emperor Vikramaditya II of the Chalukya dynasty and many other local small Hindu kingdoms.
One other tower called GIFT Two has been finished and more towers are planned.
Parts of Rajasthan and Gujarat have been known as ''Gurjaratra'' (country Gurjars's most populous region) or ''Gurjarabhumi'' (land of the Gurjars) for centuries before the Mughal period.
Lothal is believed to be one of the world's first seaports.
As per the census of 2011, the state has a sex ratio of 918 girls for every 1000 boys, one of the lowest (ranked 24) amongst the 29 states in India.
The Arabian Sea makes up the state's western coast.
International Institute of Management and Technical Studies affiliated with Gujarat Knowledge Society, European Association for Distance Learning, Association of Indian Management Schools and Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association has performed globally for its Higher Education Certification courses for working professionals.
The Zoroastrians, also known in India as Parsi and Irani, are believed to have migrated to Gujarat to escape adverse conditions in Persia and maintain their traditions.
In 2001, following the loss of two assembly seats in by-elections, Keshubhai Patel resigned and yielded power to Narendra Modi.
It is believed to be one of the healthiest cuisines in India.
With the new government policy of biotechnology, Junagadh has been identified as one of the agriculture biotechnology zone.
At least 13 species of dinosaurs were present there, possibly for more than 100 million years until their extinction some 66 million years ago.
People from the Kutch region of Gujarat also speak in the Kutchi mother tongue, and to a great extent appreciate Sindhi as well.
BJP retained the power in subsequent elections in 2007 and 2012 and Narendra Modi continued as the Chief Minister.
The omnipresent instruments in Gujarati folk music include wind instruments, such as ''turi'', ''bungal'', and ''pava'', string instruments, such as the ''ravan hattho'', ''ektaro'', and ''jantar'' and percussion instruments, such as the ''manjira'' and ''zanz'' pot drum.
Gujarat has four national parks and 21 sanctuaries.
File:Lakhota Lake Museum.JPG|Lakhota Museum in Jamnagar
In 1704, he wrote a letter to his eldest son, Muhammad Azam Shah, asking him to be kind and considerate to the people of Dahod as it was his birthplace.
Apart from this, the GSRTC provides special bus services for festivals, industrial zones, schools, colleges and pilgrim places.
The most recent discovery was Gola Dhoro.
Vadodara Railway Station is the busiest railway station in Gujarat and the fourth busiest railway station in India.
The territory and income of the empire were vastly increased.
Muhammad Azam was then the Subedar (governor) of Gujarat.
When taking all renewable energy sources into account, Gujarat has the highest share of renewable energy sources in India, about 14% (12,489 MW )
Girnar is the tallest peak and Saputara is the only hill-station in the state.
The Solanki dynasty  ruled Gujarat from c. 960 to 1243.
An independent Muslim community continued to flourish in Gujarat for the next hundred years, championed by Arab merchants settling along the western coast belonging to the Shafi'ite madhhab.
His government lasted only two years.
The Sabarmati is the largest river in Gujarat followed by the Tapi, although the Narmada covers the longest distance in its passage through the state.
They are spread across the large plains of Saurashtra and the mountains of South Gujarat.
The incident of the cup-bearer killed by a lion might indicate that the port city described is in Gujarat.
Gujarat University, Kadi Sarva Vishwavidyalaya, Sardar Patel University, Ahmedabad University, Saurashtra University, Veer Narmad South Gujarat University, Dharmsinh Desai University and Hemchandracharya North Gujarat University are also amongst reputed universities, affiliating many reputed colleges.
Gujarati food is primarily vegetarian.
The earthquake killed around 20,000 people (including at least 18 in South-eastern Pakistan), injured another 167,000 and destroyed nearly 400,000 homes.
Later, the Gujarat Sultanate allied with the Ottomans and Egyptian Mamluks naval fleets led by governor-generals Malik Ayyaz and Amir Husain Al-Kurdi, vanquished the Portuguese in the 1508 Battle of Chaul resulting in the first Portuguese defeat at sea in the Indian Ocean.
The oldest written record of Gujarat's 2,000-year maritime history is documented in a Greek book titled ''The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea: Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century''.
The state ranks 15th alongside Germany in a list of 142 nations worldwide, and actually ranks higher than several developed nations.
The folk costume of this dance is ''chaniya choli'' for women and ''kedia'' for men.
The Ambaji Fair is held in the Hindu month of Bhadrapad (around August–September) at Ambaji, during a time which is particularly suitable for farmers, when the busy monsoon season is about to end.
Some stories propose a Brahmin named Tritresta was the first to bring Gujarati migrants with him to Java, so some scholars equate him with Aji Saka.
As per the districts, The Dangs has the largest area under forest cover.
Gujarat is the main producer of tobacco, cotton, and groundnuts in India.
A sizeable proportion of Gujarati Muslims are bilingual in both languages; Islamic academic institutions (Darul Uloom) place a high prestige on learning Urdu and Arabic, with students' memorising the Quran and ''ahadith'', and emphasising the oral and literary importance of mastering these languages as a compulsory rite of religion.
There is a small Jewish community centred around Magen Abraham Synagogue.
BJP again won election in 1998 with clear majority.
In 1026, the famous Somnath temple in Gujarat was destroyed by Mahmud of Ghazni.
File:Ahmedabad Synagogue.jpg|Magen Abraham Jewish Synagogue
Humayun had also briefly occupied the province in 1536, but fled due to the threat Bahadur Shah, the Gujarat king, imposed.
In all, 8668 MOUs worth  12500&nbsp;billion were signed, estimated to create 2.5&nbsp;million new job opportunities in the state.
Junagadh lacks major industries or plants.
It is also the birthplace of Mahatma Gandhi and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, great iconic figures of India's Independence movement.
Congress continued to govern Gujarat after the state's creation in 1960.
Over 20% of the ''S&P CNX 500'' conglomerates have corporate offices in Gujarat.
* Mofussil Services&nbsp;— It connects major cities, smaller towns and villages within Gujarat.
(GCMMF), is jointly owned by around 2.6 million milk producers in Gujarat.
The strengths of Gujarat's agricultural success have been attributed to diversified crops and cropping patters; climatic diversity (8 climatic zones for agriculture); the existence of 4 agricultural universities in the state, which promote research in agricultural efficiency and sustainability; co-operatives; adoption of hi-tech agriculture such as tissue culture, green houses and shed-net houses; agriculture export zones; strong marketing infrastructure, which includes cold storages, processing units, logistic hubs and consultancy facilities.
It is also the home state of two Indian prime ministers - Morarji Desai (1977-1979) and an incumbent, Narendra Modi.
Mudra Institute of Communications Ahmedabad(MICA) is one of the most famous institutes for mass communication and is well-renowned across India.
Gujarat borders Pakistan's Sindh province to the northwest, is bounded by the Arabian Sea to the southwest, the state of Rajasthan to the northeast, Madhya Pradesh to the east, and by Maharashtra, Union territories of Diu, Daman, Dadra and Nagar Haveli to the south.
Jamnagar is the hub for manufacturing brass parts.
Recently, the Gujarat Government has upgraded its installed capacity of 13,258 megawatts (MW) by adding another 3,488 MW.
Amul has been seen as one of the best examples of cooperative achievement and success in a developing economy and The Amul pattern of growth has been taken as a model for rural development, particularly in the agricultural sector of developing economies.
The leader of the majority party or coalition in the legislature (Chief Minister) or his or her designee acts as the Leader of the Legislative Assembly.
It was also the home of Mahatma Gandhi and Vallabhbhai Patel, who preached unity between all religions and became a worldwide figure for peaceful struggle against tyranny.
The Sun Temple, Modhera is a ticketed monument, handled by the Archaeological Survey of India.
It is one of India's most prosperous states, having a per-capita GDP significantly above India's average.
The Legislative Assembly elects a speaker who presides over the meetings of the legislature.
The company stirred the White Revolution of India (also known as Operation Flood), the world's biggest dairy development program, and made the milk-deficient nation of India the largest milk producer in the world, in 2010.
After Narendra Modi became the Prime Minister of India in 2014, Anandiben Patel became the first female Chief Minister of the state.
The state is rich in calcite, gypsum, manganese, lignite, bauxite, limestone, agate, feldspar, and quartz sand, and successful mining of these minerals is done in their specified areas.
At the time of his birth, his father, Shah Jahan, was then the Subedar (governor) of Gujarat whilst his (Shah Jahan's) father, Jehangir, was the Mughal Emperor.
The population of Gujarat State was 60,383,628, according to the 2011 census data.
Presence of huge reserves of limestone makes the cement industry a thriving industrial sector.
"Iron Man of India", Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Independent India's first Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister, was from Karamsad, "Hulk of India" Krishna Johan Srikanth traced heritage to this land, Gujarat, and finally "Spider-man" of India Makar Shah Jal, pioneer of silk-weaving was Gujarati.
The first ever Gujarati film, ''Narsinh Mehtah'', was produced in 1932.
Other native languages spoken in low proportions are Bhili and Gamit, which are spoken exclusively among the tribals.
Gujarati (ગુજરાતી ''Gujǎrātī''?)
File:Mohabat Maqbara.JPG|The Mohabat Maqbara is a palace-mausoleum in the Junagadh district
Religions in Gujarat with the largest number of adherents are: Hinduism, Islam, Jainism, Christianity, Sikhism and Buddhism.
Ketan Mehta and Sanjay Leela Bhansali explored artistic use of bhavai in films such as ''Bhavni Bhavai'', ''Oh Darling!
Gujarat invests in development of solar energy in the state and has had India's largest solar power plant as of January 2012.
Amul Was formed as a dairy cooperative in 1946, in the city of Anand, Gujarat.
Since then excavations have thrown up a veritable trove of dinosaur remains – eggs, bones, and a skeleton which is now kept in a Kolkata museum – bringing hordes of scientists and tourists to the locale.
Gujarat sold surplus power to 12 states: Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, and West Bengal.₨
The name "Rann" comes from the Hindi word ran (रण) meaning "salt marsh".
Gujarati literature's history may be traced to 1000 AD.
File:Bhavnath Mahadev.jpg|Bhavnath Mahadev, Girnar, Junagadh
Assistance and advice for this project was given by local agricultural universities and crop and soil-specific data was added to the database.
The problem is exacerbated because electricity for farmers is subsidized, leaving little incentive to conserve water.
70% of Gujarat's area is classified as semi-arid to arid climatically, thus the demand on water from various economic activities puts a strain on the supply.
The construction started on 14 March 2015.
The region is believed to be the place where Arjuna took up the difficult task of piercing the eye of a fish, rotating at the end of a pole, by looking at its reflection in the pond water, to marry Draupadi.
The Calico Museum of Textiles is managed by the ''Sarabhai Foundation'' and is one of the most popular tourist spots in Ahmedabad.
Historically, the north was known as Anarta, the Kathiawar peninsula, "Saurastra", and the south as "Lata".
Dhirubhai Ambani, founder of Reliance industries was from Chorvad, Gujarat.
Somnath is the first amongst twelve Jyotirlingas, and is mentioned in the Rigveda.
Kalol, Khambhat, and Ankleshwar are today known for their oil and natural gas production.
National Security Guards intervented to end siege killing both terrorists.
Later in the 17th century, Gujarat came under control of the Maratha Empire who dominated the politics of India.
Other fairs in Gujarat include Dang Durbar, Shamlaji Fair, Chitra Vichitra Fair, Dhrang Fair and Vautha Fair.
Junagadh boasts of some of the best tourist destinations in the state so tourism is considered to be a progressing sector.
In the early 8th century, the Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate established an Empire which stretched from Spain in the west to Afghanistan and modern-day Pakistan in the east.
The first capital of Gujarat was Ahmedabad; the capital was moved to Gandhinagar in 1970.
File:Mandvi Beach.jpg|Mandvi Beach, Kutch
An example of co-operative success in Gujarat can be illustrated through dairy co-operatives, with the particular example of Amul (Anand Milk Union Limited).
Pulakesi received the title Avanijanashraya (refuge of the people of the earth) by Vikramaditya II for the protection of Gujarat.
The Arab rulers tried to expand their empire southeast, which culminated in the Caliphate campaigns in India fought in 730 CE.
Gujarat is governed by a Legislative Assembly of 182 members.
A one megawatt (MW) solar power project set up at Chandrasan, Gujarat uses solar panels fixed over a 750-metre stretch of an irrigation canal.
The conquest of the Kingdom of Gujarat marked a significant event of Akbar's reign.
Modern-day Gujarat is derived from Sanskrit (''Gurjar-Rashtra''), the Gurjar nation.
Gujarat has seventeen airports.
In the emerging area of legal education, a premier institution Gujarat National Law University was founded in the capital city Gandhinagar which started imparting education from the year 2004 and is ranked in top institutions in the country.
This success was lauded by former President of India, Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam.
A huge contribution to Gujarati language literature came from the Swaminarayan paramhanso, like Bramhanand, Premanand, with prose like Vachanamrut and poetry in the form of bhajans.
It is working on reverse osmosis, electro membrane process, salt and marine chemicals, analytical science, marine biotechnology, and other related fields.
For example, in the Ajanta Frescoes, a Gujarati prince is shown entering Sri Lanka.
The world's largest shipbreaking yard is in Gujarat near Bhavnagar at Alang.
About 59 million people speak Gujarati, making it the 26th most-spoken native language in the world.
As access to electricity in rural areas increased, subermersible electric pumps became more popular in the 1980s and 1990s.
The Sardar Sarovar Project is built on the Narmada River, one of the major rivers of peninsular India with a length of around .
It is one of only three rivers in peninsular India that run from east to west – the others being the Tapi River and the Mahi River.
Institute of Management under Nirma University is constantly ranked amongst the top MBA colleges in India.
Gujarati folk music, known as ''Sugam Sangeet'', is a hereditary profession of the Barot, Gadhvi and Charan communities.
The soft soil made hatching and protecting eggs easier for the animals.
Apart from Navratri and Uttarayana, Diwali, Holi, Tazia and others are also celebrated.
By the 1990s, groundwater abstraction rates exceeded groundwater recharge rate in many districts, whilst only 37.5% of all districts has "safe" recharge rates.
The three major Indian dynasties such as the northwest Indian Gurjara-Pratihara Dynasty,
Of the total gross irrigated area, 16–17% is irrigated by government-owned canals and 83–84% by privately owned tube wells and other wells extracting groundwater, which is the predominant source of irrigation and water supply to the agricultural areas.
It has allotted 716 MW of solar power capacity to 34 national and international solar project developers in 2009, against the planned 500 MW capacity under its solar power policy.
Gujarat has a variety of museums on different genres that are run by the state's Department of Museums located at the principal state museum, Baroda Museum & Picture Gallery in Vadodara, which is also the location of the Maharaja Fateh Singh Museum.
are situated in different parts of Gujarat.
In the 1995 Assembly elections, the Congress lost to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) led by Keshubhai Patel who became the Chief Minister.
* Intercity Bus Services&nbsp;— It also connects major cities&nbsp;— Ahmedabad, Surat,Veraval, Vapi, Vadodara (Baroda) and Rajkot.
The population density is 308&nbsp;km−2 (797.6/sq mi), lower than other Indian states.
Gujarat government collected the ''Best State Award'' for 'Citizen Security' by IBN7 Diamond States on 24 December 2012.
Aurangzeb was a notable expansionist and was amongst the wealthiest of the Mughal rulers with an annual yearly tribute of £38,624,680 (in 1690).
Gir Forest National Park in the southwest part of the state covers part of the lions' habitat.
Prince Vijaya was banished by his father for his lawlessness and set forth with a band of adventurers.
There is clear historical evidence of trade and commerce ties with Egypt, Bahrain and Sumer in the Persian Gulf during the time period of 1000 to 750 BC.
File:Rann of Kutch - White Desert 2.jpg|thumb|White Desert view from Mount Karo
