Today's major industrial cities of the Russian Arctic, such as Norilsk, Vorkuta, and Magadan, were originally camps built by prisoners and run by ex-prisoners.
Another cultural phenomenon in the Soviet Union linked with the Gulag was the forced migration of many artists and other people of culture to Siberia.
By late 1929 Stalin started a program known as "dekulakization".
Analysis of various indirect data, including own experience and testimonies of numerous witnesses
After having appeared as an instrument and place for isolating counterrevolutionary and criminal elements, the Gulag, because of its principle of "correction by forced labor", quickly became, in fact, an independent branch of the national economy secured on the cheap labor force presented by prisoners.
It is well known that practically every one of them had several branches, many of which were quite large.
In general, the central administrative bodies showed a discernible interest in maintaining the labor force of prisoners in a condition allowing the fulfillment of construction and production plans handed down from above.
Some of those earlier estimates (both high and low) are shown in the table below.
The working territory of logging presented by itself a square and was surrounded by forest clearing.
Local newspapers and magazines were published and even some scientific research was carried out (e.g., a local botanical garden was maintained but unfortunately later lost completely).
(for GUPVI, see Main Administration for Affairs of Prisoners of War and Internees).
In addition, for persons who served full term, but who were denied the free choice of place of residence, it was recommended to assign them for "free settlement" and give them land in the general vicinity of the place of confinement.
Despite its low capital costs, the camp economy suffered from serious flaws.
October 5, 1954 – April 4, 1956
The first half of 1933 prisons saw more new incoming inmates than the three previous years combined.
The first such camps were created in 1918 and the term is widely used to describe any forced labor camp in the USSR.
A number of Soviet dissidents described the continuation of the Gulag after it was officially closed: Anatoli Marchenko (who actually died in a camp in 1986), Vladimir Bukovsky, Yuri Orlov, Nathan Shcharansky, all of them released from the Gulag and given permission to emigrate to the West, after years of international pressure on Soviet authorities.
The amnesty in March 1953 was limited to non-political prisoners and for political prisoners sentenced to not more than 5 years, therefore mostly those convicted for common crimes were then freed.
Gorky organised in 1933 a trip of 120 writers and artists to the White Sea–Baltic Canal, 36 of them wrote a propaganda book about the construction published in 1934 and destroyed in 1937.
), occasional violators of criminal law
Analysis of the output of the Soviet enterprises run by NKVD
Between 1934 and 1941, the number of prisoners with higher education increased more than eight times, and the number of prisoners with high education increased five times.
For one, actual productivity almost never matched estimates: the estimates proved far too optimistic.
Many people released from camps were restricted from settling in larger cities.
However, taking into account the likelihood of unreliable record keeping, and the fact that it was common practice to release prisoners who were either suffering from incurable diseases or near death, non-state estimates of the actual Gulag death toll are usually higher.
According with the estimates, in total, during the whole period of the existence of GUPVI there were over 500 POW camps (within the Soviet Union and abroad), which imprisoned over 4,000,000 POW.
With the new emphasis on Gulag as the means of concentrating cheap labor, new camps were then constructed throughout the Soviet sphere of influence, wherever the economic task at hand dictated their existence (or was designed specifically to avail itself of them, such as the White Sea-Baltic Canal or the Baikal Amur Mainline), including facilities in big cities — parts of the famous Moscow Metro and the Moscow State University new campus were built by forced labor.
In any case, the development of the camp system followed economic lines.
Approximately 300,000 Polish prisoners of war were captured by the USSR during and after the "Polish Defensive War".
If prisoner deaths from labor colonies and special settlements are included, the death toll rises to 2,749,163, although the historian who compiled this estimate (J. Otto Pohl) stresses that it is incomplete, and doesn't cover all prisoner categories for every year.
Considering the overall conditions and their influence on inmates, it is important to distinguish three major strata of Gulag inmates:
In August 7, 1932 Stalin passed a law that stated that for petty theft there should be a minimum sentence of ten years or execution.
In the early 1930s, a tightening of Soviet penal policy caused significant growth of the prison camp population.
In those days, people were highly responsible for non-fulfilment of plan.
It seems that a resultant of these objective departmental interests was a sufficient degree of reliability of the reports.
In 1927 the official in charge of prison administration wrote:
When the tide of the war turned, however, and the Soviets started pushing the Axis invaders back, fresh batches of laborers replenished the camps.
Stalin demanded that the kulak class be completely wiped out.
The majority of Gulag camps were positioned in extremely remote areas of northeastern Siberia (the best known clusters are ''Sevvostlag'' (''The North-East Camps'') along Kolyma river and ''Norillag'' near Norilsk) and in the southeastern parts of the Soviet Union, mainly in the steppes of Kazakhstan (''Luglag'', ''Steplag'', ''Peschanlag'').
The centralized detention facilities temporarily ceased functioning.
As a result, the Soviet government pushed the Gulag to "do more with less".
Thus, Sergei Maksudov alleged that although literary sources, for example the books of Lev Razgon or Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, did not envisage the total number of the camps very well and markedly exaggerated their size, on the other hand, Viktor Zemskov, who published many documents by the NKVD and KGB, was far from understanding of the Gulag essence and the nature of socio-political processes in the country.
In 1995, Zemskov wrote that foreign scientists have begun to be admitted to the restricted-access collection of these documents in the State Archive of the Russian Federation since 1992.
Its major function was the organization of foreign forced labor in the Soviet Union.
On February 11, 1945, at the conclusion of the Yalta Conference, the United States and United Kingdom signed a Repatriation Agreement with the Soviet Union.
Annotirovanniy Ukazatel Del GA RF'' (''Soviet Repressive and Punitive Policy.
During this time, not only did food become scarce, but the NKVD limited rations in an attempt to motivate the prisoners to work harder for more food, a policy that lasted until 1948.
About 14 million people were in the Gulag labor camps from 1929 to 1953 (the estimates for the period 1918–1929 are even more difficult to calculate).
Moreover, the NKVD gathered skilled workers and specialists from throughout the Gulag into 380 special colonies which produced tanks, airplanes, armaments, and ammunition.
After Nazi Germany's defeat, ten NKVD-run "special camps" subordinate to the Gulag were set up in the Soviet Occupation Zone of post-war Germany.
The convicts in such camps were actively involved in all kinds of labor with one of them being logging (''lesopoval'').
This period accounts for about half of gulag deaths, according to Russian statistics.
In order to complete all of their projects, camp administrators moved prisoners from project to project.
It would be virtually impossible to reflect the entire mass of Gulag facilities on a map that would also account for the various times of their existence."
It is also necessary to note that not all conclusion drawn by Zemskov based on his data had been generally accepted.
Remote monasteries in particular were frequently reused as sites for new camps.
In some cases, teams of inmates were dropped off in new territory with a limited supply of resources and left to set up a new camp or die.
There were several camps outside the Soviet Union, in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Mongolia, which were under the direct control of the Gulag.
Chislennost i Usloviya Soderzhaniya'' (''The Population of the Gulag.
The internment system grew rapidly, reaching population of 100,000 in the 1920s and from the very beginning it had a very high mortality rate.
The inmates of "corrective labour colonies" served shorter terms; these colonies were located in less remote parts of the USSR, and they were run by local NKVD administration.
Collection of Documents in Seven Volumes'') wherein each of its seven volumes covered a particular issue indicated in the title of the volume: the first volume has the title ''Massovye Repressii v SSSR'' (''Mass Repression in the USSR''), the second volume has the title ''Karatelnaya Sistema.
Although most of them fit the definition of forced labour, only labour camps, and labour colonies were associated with punitive forced labour in detention.
However, camps were generally spread throughout the entire Soviet Union, including the European parts of Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine.
According to some sources, over 1.5 million surviving Red Army soldiers imprisoned by the Germans were sent to the Gulag.
Konets 1920-kh — Pervaya Polovina 1950-kh Godov.
The first corrective labour camps after the revolution were established in 1918 (Solovki) and legalized by a decree "On creation of the forced-labor camps" on April 15, 1919.
These had been generally accepted by leading Western scholars,  despite the fact that a number of inconsistencies were found in this statistics.
Sobranie Dokumentov v 7 Tomakh'' (''The History of Stalin’s Gulag.
Further, in 1945, about 100 filtration camps were set for repatriated Ostarbeiter, POWs, and other displaced persons, which processed more than 4,000,000 people.
+Historical estimates of the GULAG population size (in chronological order)
The memoirs of Alexander Dolgun, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Varlam Shalamov and Yevgenia Ginzburg, among others, became a symbol of defiance in Soviet society.
Prisoners sentenced to "katorga works" were sent to  Gulag prison camps with the most harsh regime and many of them perished.
Some independent estimates are as low as 1.6 million deaths during the whole period from 1929 to 1953, while other estimates go beyond 10 million.
In late 2000s, some human rights activists accused authorities of gradual removal of Gulag remembrance from places such as Perm-36 and Solovki prison camp.
At first, transportation remained a priority.
Tantalized by large rewards as well, they began aiding authorities in the capture of Gulag inmates.
However, according to the official data, the total number of sentences for political and antistate (espionage, terrorism) crimes in USSR in 1939–41 was 211,106.
Among the prisoners there are some so ragged and liceridden that they pose a sanitary danger to the rest.
The estimated total number of those who died in imprisonment in 1930–53 is at least 1.76 million, about half of which occurred between 1941–43 following the German invasion.
These included monetary bonuses (since the early 1930s) and wage payments (from 1950 onwards), cuts of individual sentences, general early-release schemes for norm fulfillment and overfulfillment (until 1939, again in selected camps from 1946 onwards), preferential treatment, and privileges for the most productive workers (shock workers or Stakhanovites in Soviet parlance).
These were vast and sparsely inhabited regions with no roads (in fact, the construction of the roads themselves was assigned to the inmates of specialized railroad camps) or sources of food, but rich in minerals and other natural resources (such as timber).
According to some estimates, hundreds of thousands of Polish citizens and inhabitants of the other annexed lands, regardless of their ethnic origin, were arrested and sent to the Gulag camps.
The Russian penal system, despite reforms and a reduction in prison population, informally or formally continues many practices endemic to the ''Gulag'' system, including forced labor, inmates policing inmates, and prisoner intimidation.
The NKVD employed a system of setting unrealistically high production goals, straining resources in an attempt to encourage higher productivity.
That the body would lie with its feet to the camp and its head away from it was considered sufficient evidence of an escape attempt.
It is also said that Gulags in colder areas were less concerned with finding escaped prisoners as they would die anyhow from the severely cold winters.
00447, tens of thousands of Gulag inmates were executed in 1937–38 for "continuing counterrevolutionary activities".
Mora & Zwiernag (1945)
With fewer able-bodied workers and few supplies from outside the camp system, camp administrators had to find a way to maintain production.
Immediately after the German attack on the Soviet Union in June 1941 the conditions in camps worsened drastically: quotas were increased, rations cut, and medical supplies came close to none, all of which led to a sharp increase in mortality.
In addition, scarcity of machinery and tools plagued the camps, and the tools that the camps did have quickly broke.
Distrust, hostility, and even hatred for the intelligentsia was a common characteristic of the Soviet leaders.
In 1926, the Oimiakon (Оймякон) village in this region registered the record low temperature of −71.2&nbsp;°C (−96&nbsp;°F).
The results of these archival studies convinced many scholars, including Robert Conquest or Stephen Wheatcroft to reconsider their earlier estimates of the size of the GULAG population, although the 'high numbers' of arrested and deaths are not radically different from earlier estimates.
Sometimes it took several waves of colonists before any one group survived to establish the camp.
It resulted in their increased share in the overall composition of the camp prisoners.
These prisoners were also lucky to be in the gulag in the early 1930s.
These "special camps" were former Stalags, prisons, or Nazi concentration camps such as Sachsenhausen (special camp number 7) and Buchenwald (special camp number 2).
As the Red Army recaptured territories from the Germans, an influx of Soviet ex-POWs greatly increased the Gulag population.
In 1960 the Ministerstvo Vnutrennikh Del (MVD) ceased to function as the Soviet-wide administration of the camps in favor of individual republic MVD branches.
Solzhenitsyn (1975)
The glasnost political reforms in the late 1980s and the subsequent dissolution of the USSR led to the release of a large amount of formerly classified archival documents, including new demographic and NKVD data.
According with other estimates, at the beginning of 1953 the total number of prisoners in prison camps was more than 2.4 million of which more than 465,000 were political prisoners.
Most prisoners were compelled to perform harsh physical labor.
Analysis of demographic data.
A very precise map was made by the Memorial Foundation.
As a result, Maksudov charges that Zemskov attempts to make generalized statements with reference to a particular document, as a rule, do not hold water.
In 2004 and 2005, some archival documents were published in the edition ''Istoriya Stalinskogo Gulaga.
While considering the issue of reliability of the primary data provided by corrective labor institutions, it is necessary to take into account the following two circumstances.
This resulted in 60,000 people being sent to the camps and another 154,000 exiled in a mere four months.
This resulted in a Renaissance of sorts in places like Magadan, where, for example, the quality of theatre production was comparable to Moscow's and Eddie Rosner played jazz.
The institutional analysis of the Soviet concentration system is complicated by the formal distinction between GULAG and GUPVI.
On the other hand, overstatement of data of the number of prisoners also did not comply with departmental interests, because it was fraught with the same (i.e., impossible) increase in production tasks set by planning bodies.
*Dedicated criminals: "thieves in law"
The Unified State Political Administration (OGPU) quickly realized the problem, and began to reform the dekulakization process.
The infamous complexes were those at Kolyma, Norilsk, and Vorkuta, all in arctic or subarctic regions.
British and U.S. civilian authorities ordered their military forces in Europe to deport to the Soviet Union up to two million former residents of the Soviet Union, including persons who had left the Russian Empire and established different citizenship years before.
The Kulaks were supposedly wealthy (comparatively to other Soviet peasants) and were considered to be capitalists by the state, and by extension enemies of socialism.
Further, if an escaping prisoner was shot, guards could be fined amounts that were often equivalent to one or two weeks wages.
Analysis of the official GULAG statistics by Western scholars immediately demonstrated that, despite their inconsistency, they do not support previously published higher estimates.
While this practice denied the Germans a source of free labor, it also further restricted the Gulag's capacity to keep up with the Red Army's demands.
As a rule, they were situated in remote parts of the USSR, and labour conditions were extremely hard there.
Out of General Anders' 80,000 evacuees from Soviet Union gathered in Great Britain only 310 volunteered to return to Soviet-controlled Poland in 1947.
On the one hand, their administration was not interested to understate the number of prisoners in its reports, because it would have automatically led to a decrease in the food supply plan for camps, prisons, and corrective labor colonies.
Forced labor camps continued to function outside of the agency until late 80s (Perm-36 closed in 1987).
Right before the war, forced labor provided 46.5% of the nation's nickel, 76% of its tin, 40% of its cobalt, 40.5% of its chrome-iron ore, 60% of its gold, and 25.3% of its timber.
Structure and Cadres''), the third volume has the title ''Ekonomika Gulaga'' (''Economy of the Gulag''), the forth volume has the title ''Naselenie Gulaga.
During and after World War II, freed POWs went to special "filtration" camps.
According to French historian Nicolas Werth, the mountains of the materials of the Gulag archives, which are stored in funds of the State Archive of the Russian Federation and are being constantly exposed during the last fifteen years, represent only a very small part of bureaucratic prose of immense size left over the decades of “creativity” by the "dull and reptile" organization managing the Gulag.
Hundreds of thousands of persons were arrested and sentenced to long prison terms on the grounds of one of the multiple passages of the notorious Article 58 of the Criminal Codes of the Union republics, which defined punishment for various forms of "counterrevolutionary activities".
This was only the beginning of the dekulakization process.
Naftaly Frenkel is credited for the introduction of this policy.
It was presented to the world as an example of the new Soviet method for "re-education of class enemies" and reintegrating them through labor into Soviet society.
The GULAG system was introduced to isolate and eliminate class-alien, socially dangerous, disruptive, suspicious, and other disloyal elements, whose deeds and thoughts were not contributing to the strengthening of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The two main types were "Vechecka Special-purpose Camps" () and forced labor camps ().
From other hand, during some periods of Gulag history the official figures of GULAG population reflected the camps' capacity, not the actual amount of inmates, so the actual figures were 15% higher in, e.g.
After Lenin's death in 1924, Stalin was able to take control of the government, and began to form the gulag system.
Mortality in Gulag camps in 1934–40 was 4–6 times higher than average in the Soviet Union.
In many ways the GUPVI system was similar to GULAG.
The "special settlers", as the Soviet government referred to them, all lived on starvation level rations, and many people starved to death in the camps, and anyone who was healthy enough to escape tried to do just that.
It is estimated that of the 40,000 people collecting state pensions in Vorkuta, 32,000 are trapped former gulag inmates, or their descendants.
Sent to NKVD as ''spetskontingent'' (i.e.
A severe famine of 1931-1933 was sweeping across many different regions in the Soviet Union due to the effects of Stalin’s “Five Year Plan” program.
The camps lost still more prisoners to the war effort.
Anton Antonov-Ovseenko (1999)
The official term, "corrective labor camp", was suggested for official politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union use in the session of July 27, 1929.
The exploitation of prison labor, the system of squeezing "golden sweat" from them, the organization of production in places of confinement, which while profitable from a commercial point of view is fundamentally lacking in corrective significance – these are entirely inadmissible in Soviet places of confinement.
'''Year the estimate was made for'''
Persons who served terms as "politicals" were nuisances for "First Departments" (, outlets of the secret police at all enterprises and institutions), because former "politicals" had to be monitored.
The GULAG was an administration body that watched over the camps; eventually its name would be used for these camps retrospectively.
The gulag inherited this approach from the katorga system.
Locals who captured a runaway were given rewards.
The GULAG was reduced in size following Stalin’s death in 1953, in a period known as the Khrushchev Thaw.
According to German researchers, Sachsenhausen, where 12,500 Soviet era victims have been uncovered, should be seen as an integral part of the Gulag system.
While it was effective in compelling many prisoners to work harder, for many a prisoner it had the adverse effect, accelerating the exhaustion and sometimes causing the death of persons unable to fulfill high production quota.
Statistical reports made by the OGPU-NKVD-MGB-MVD between the 1930s and 1950s are kept in the State Archive of the Russian Federation formerly called Central State Archive of the October Revolution (CSAOR).
The situation slowly improved in the final period and after the end of the war.
The release of political prisoners started in 1954 and became widespread, and also coupled with mass rehabilitations, after Nikita Khrushchev's denunciation of Stalinism in his Secret Speech at the 20th Congress of the CPSU in February 1956.
In most periods and economic branches, the degree of mechanization of work processes was significantly lower than in the civilian industry: tools were often primitive and machinery, if existent, short in supply.
However, to one degree or another, the large majority of prisoners at most times faced meager food rations, inadequate clothing, overcrowding, poorly insulated housing, poor hygiene, and inadequate health care.
Many laborers received early releases so that they could be drafted and sent to the front.
During 1920–50, the leaders of the Communist Party and Soviet state considered repression as a tool for securing the normal functioning of the Soviet state system, as well as preserving and strengthening positions of their social base, the working class (when the Bolsheviks took power, peasants represented 80% of the population).
Struktura i Kadry'' (''Punitive System.
Some scholars support this view, though it is controversial, considering that with the obvious exception of the war years, a very large majority of people who entered the Gulag left alive.
Even as the pool of workers shrank, demand for outputs continued to grow rapidly.
The  Great Terror of 1936-1938 had provided a large supply of free labor, but by the start of World War II the purges had slowed down.
GUPVI was the Main Administration for Affairs of Prisoners of War and Internees (, GUPVI), a department of NKVD (later MVD) in charge of handling of foreign civilian internees and POWs in the Soviet Union during and in the aftermath of World War II (1939–1953).
These prisoners have deteriorated to the point of losing any resemblance to human beings.
(See also Foreign forced labor in the Soviet Union.)
Annotated Index of Cases of the SA RF'').
During evacuations, machinery received priority, leaving prisoners to reach safety on foot.
Besides a wide array of punishments for prisoners refusing to work (which, in practice, were sometimes applied to prisoners that were too enfeebled to meet production quota), they instituted a number of positive incentives intended to boost productivity.
In 1942 the Gulag set up the Supply Administration to find their own food and industrial goods.
In March 1940, there were 53 Gulag camp directorates (colloquially referred to as simply "camps") and 423 labor colonies in the USSR.
The harsh living, and working conditions in the camps forced inmates to attempt to flee knowing that they would surely perish if they didn’t attempt.
1937 Census figures, arrest and deaths estimates, variety of personal and literary sources.
Until 1934, lack of food due to Stalin’s policies, and the outbreak of diseases due to poor working conditions started to destabilize Stalin’s Gulag system.
Forced labor as a "method of reeducation" was applied in Solovki prison camp as early as from 1920s, based on Trotsky's experiments with forced labor camps for Czech war prisoners from 1918 and his proposals to introduce "compulsory labor service" voiced in ''Terrorism and Communism''.
The major noted distinction from GULAG was the absence of convicted criminals in the GUPVI camps.
The site on the Solovetsky Islands in the White Sea is one of the earliest and also most noteworthy, taking root soon after the Revolution in 1918.
It was the short form of the official name ''Гла́вное управле́ние исправи́тельно-трудовы́х лагере́й и коло́ний'' (''Glavnoye upravleniye ispravityelno-trudovykh lagerey i koloniy''), the "Main Administration of Corrective Labor Camps and Labor Settlements".
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, winner of the 1970 Nobel Prize in Literature, who spent eight years of Gulag incarceration, gave the term its international repute with the publication of ''The Gulag Archipelago'' in 1973.
Since many of these existed only for short periods, the number of camp administrations at any given point was lower.
They were known as "free settlers" (вольнопоселенцы, ''volnoposelentsy'', not to be confused with the term ссыльнопоселенцы,''ssyl'noposelentsy'', "exile settlers").
Many songs by the authors-performers known as the ''bards'', most notably Vladimir Vysotsky and Alexander Galich, neither of whom ever served time in the camps, describe life inside the Gulag and glorified the life of "Zeks".
Andrei Vyshinsky, procurator of the Soviet Union, wrote a memorandum to NKVD chief Nikolai Yezhov in 1938 which stated:
In the words of a former Gulag prisoner: "By the spring of 1942, the camp ceased to function.
He added that without distinguishing the degree of accuracy and reliability of certain figures, without making a critical analysis of sources, without comparing new data with already known information, Zemskov absolutizes the published materials by presenting them as the ultimate truth.
Moscow's memorial is on Lubyanka Square, the site of the headquarters of the NKVD.
Results of the checks and the filtration of the repatriants (by March 1, 1946)
In addition, factories converted to produce ammunition, uniforms, and other supplies.
Various categories of prisoners were defined: petty criminals, POWs of the Russian Civil War, officials accused of corruption, sabotage and embezzlement, political enemies, dissidents and other people deemed dangerous for the state.
One Soviet report stated that, in early 1933 up to 15% of the prison population in Uzbekistan died monthly.
Persons who served a term in a camp or in a prison were restricted from taking a wide range of jobs.
Political prisoners continued to be kept in one of the most famous camps Perm-36 until 1987 when it was closed.
In his words, the trouble with most western writers is that they do not benefit from such comparisons.
Amid glasnost and democratization in the late 1980s, Viktor Zemskov and other Russian researchers managed to gain access to the documents and published the highly classified statistical data collected by the OGPU-NKVD-MGB-MVD and related to the number of the Gulag prisoners, special settlers, etc.
This would prove extremely important when the German advance into the Soviet Union started in 1941.
According with some estimates, the total population of the camps varied from 510,307 in 1934 to 1,727,970 in 1953.
