It has been suggested that the sturdy construction techniques used in Israeli cities, coupled with the fact that Scuds were only launched at night, played an important role in limiting the number of casualties from Scud attacks.
One of the West's main concerns was the significant threat Iraq posed to Saudi Arabia.
US Army General Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. was designated to be the commander of the Coalition forces in the Persian Gulf area.
A patrolling E-8 Joint STARS aircraft observed the retreating forces and relayed the information to the DDM-8 air operations center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Aerial and ground combat was confined to Iraq, Kuwait, and areas on Saudi Arabia's border.
Once the allies had penetrated deep into Iraqi territory, they turned eastward, launching a flank attack against the elite Republican Guard before it could escape.
Hundreds of Iraqi troops were killed.
In 1992, the US Defense Secretary during the war, Dick Cheney, made the same point:I would guess if we had gone in there, we would still have forces in Baghdad today.
Initial draining of the Central Marshes was intended to reclaim land for agriculture but later all three marshes would become a tool of war and revenge.
Although they were retreating, this convoy was bombed so extensively by Coalition air forces that it came to be known as the Highway of Death.
Iraqi anti-aircraft defenses, including Man-portable air-defense systems, were surprisingly ineffective against Coalition aircraft and the Coalition suffered only 75 aircraft losses in over 100,000 sorties, 44 of which were the result of Iraqi action.
Saddam stated that he would attempt last-ditch negotiations with the Kuwaitis but Iraq "would not accept death".
The Iraqis fiercely resisted, and the Americans eventually withdrew as planned back into the Wadi Al-Batin.
The real reason was to help them succeed in the war against Iran."
The World Bank responded by speeding up the disbursement of existing project and adjustment loans.
It was also feared that if Israel used Syrian or Jordanian airspace to attack Iraq, they would intervene in the war on Iraq's side or attack Israel.
After four days of fighting, Iraqi forces were expelled from Kuwait.
Counter-reconnaissance generally includes destroying or repelling the enemy's reconnaissance elements and denying their commander any observation of friendly forces.
At the conference, Iraq was authorized to fly armed helicopters on their side of the temporary border, ostensibly for government transit due to the damage done to civilian infrastructure.
The network had previously convinced the Iraqi government to allow installation of a permanent audio circuit in their makeshift bureau.
In order for the cartel to maintain its desired price of $18 a barrel, discipline was required.
President Bush then repeated the incubator allegations on television.
The Iraqi Army's occupation of Kuwait that began 2 August 1990 was met with international condemnation, and brought immediate economic sanctions against Iraq by members of the UN Security Council.
At the same time, the war's coverage was new in its instantaneousness.
Some factors considered as possibilities include exposure to depleted uranium, chemical weapons, anthrax vaccines given to deploying soldiers, and/or infectious diseases.
Argentina was the only Latin American country to participate in the 1991 Gulf War sending a destroyer, ARA Almirante Brown (D-10), a corvette, ARA Spiro (P-43) (later replaced by another corvette, ARA Rosales (P-42)) and a supply ship (ARA ''Bahía San Blas'' (B-4)) to participate on the  United Nations blockade and sea control effort of the Persian Gulf.
One newspaper story reported that US commanders estimated thousands of Iraqi soldiers surrendered, escaping live burial during the two-day assault 24–26 February 1991.
Chuck Horner, Commander of US and allied air operations, has written:
British Army regiments (mainly with the 1st Armoured Division), Royal Air Force squadrons and Royal Navy vessels were mobilized in the Persian Gulf.
A British crew from CBS News (David Green and Andy Thompson), equipped with satellite transmission equipment traveled with the front line forces and, having transmitted live TV pictures of the fighting en route, arrived the day before the forces in Kuwait City, broadcasting live television from the city and covering the entrance of the Arab forces the next day.
Its ruling dynasty, the al-Sabah family, had concluded a protectorate agreement in 1899 that assigned responsibility for its foreign affairs to the United Kingdom.
A day after the deadline set in Resolution 678, the Coalition launched a massive air campaign, which began the general offensive codenamed Operation Desert Storm.
Following Kuwait's conquest, the Iraqi Army was within easy striking distance of Saudi oil fields.
Shortly after the Iraqi invasion, US Defense Secretary Dick Cheney made the first of several visits to Saudi Arabia where King Fahd requested US military assistance.
On 10 March 1991, 540,000 US troops began moving out of the Persian Gulf.
In March 1982, Iran began a successful counteroffensive (Operation Undeniable Victory), and the US increased its support for Iraq to prevent Iran from forcing a surrender.
The next Coalition targets were command and communication facilities.
In January, the Division was placed under the tactical control of the XVIII Airborne Corps.
Coalition forces pressed another ten kilometers into Iraqi territory, and captured their objective within three hours.
The first units to move into Iraq were three patrols of the British Special Air Service's B squadron, call signs Bravo One Zero, Bravo Two Zero, and Bravo Three Zero, in late January.
Iraqi ground forces consolidated their control of Kuwait City, then headed south and redeployed along the Saudi border.
Some estimate that Iraq sustained between 20,000 and 35,000 fatalities.
When the first Iraqi missiles hit Israel, some people injected themselves with an antidote for nerve gas.
The plan was implemented and became the basis for US preparedness to respond to the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in 1991.
These vehicles and the retreating soldiers were subsequently attacked, resulting in a 60&nbsp;km stretch of highway strewn with debris—the Highway of Death.
On 29 November 1990, the Security Council passed Resolution 678 which gave Iraq until 15 January 1991 to withdraw from Kuwait and empowered states to use "all necessary means" to force Iraq out of Kuwait after the deadline.
The US Patriot missile was used in combat for the first time.
Discussions in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, mediated on the Arab League's behalf by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, were held on 31 July and led Mubarak to believe that a peaceful course could be established.
A total of 48 US Air Force F-15s from the 1st Fighter Wing at Langley Air Force Base, Virginia, landed in Saudi Arabia, and immediately commenced round the clock air patrols of the Saudi–Kuwait–Iraq border to discourage further Iraqi military advances.
The series' first program  War, Oil and Power was compiled and released in 1990, before the war broke out.
Among the American dead were three female soldiers.
It was then that I decided to act to check that aggression."
Those visits were always conducted in the presence of officers, and were subject to both prior approval by the military and censorship afterward.
Additionally, he requested an "immediate freeze of all boycott and siege decisions" and a general normalization of relations with Iraq.
On 3 August, the Arab League passed its own resolution, which called for a solution to the conflict from within the League, and warned against outside intervention; Iraq and Libya were the only two Arab League states which opposed a resolution for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
They were 24 states, comprising most of the OECD countries plus some Gulf states: Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Kuwait.
The United Kingdom committed the largest contingent of any European state that participated in the war's combat operations.
Iraq pressured both nations to forgive the debts, but they refused.
Control of these fields, along with Kuwaiti and Iraqi reserves, would have given Saddam control over the majority of the world's oil reserves.
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia paid around US$32 billion of the US$60 billion cost.
However, a year after the war, this allegation was revealed to be a fabrication.
By 1988, at the Iran–Iraq War's end, the Iraqi Army was the world's fourth largest army; it consisted of 955,000 standing soldiers and 650,000 paramilitary forces in the Popular Army.
Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) and satellite communication systems were also important.
About 25% of Saudi Arabia's contribution was paid in the form of in-kind services to the troops, such as food and transportation.
Jordan and Iraq both looked for more discipline, with little success.
In a December 1999 interview with Rahimullah Yusufzai, bin Laden said he felt that Americans were "too near to Mecca" and considered this a provocation to the entire Islamic world.
As combat operations progressed Task Force 1-41 Infantry engaged at short range multiple dug in enemy tanks in ambush positions.
In response to the threat of Scuds on Israel, the US rapidly sent a Patriot missile air defense artillery battalion to Israel along with two batteries of MIM-104 Patriot missiles for the protection of civilians.
On 29 January, Iraqi forces attacked and occupied the lightly defended Saudi city of Khafji with tanks and infantry.
The Battle of Khafji was an example of how air power could single-handedly hinder the advance of enemy ground forces.
Iraqi secret police broke his nose, dislocated his shoulder and punctured his eardrum.
About 30–40% of this came from allied raids on Iraqi coastal targets.
According to the Project on Defense Alternatives study, between 20,000 and 26,000 Iraqi military personnel were killed in the conflict while 75,000 others were wounded.
In addition, various phases of each operation may have a unique operational name.
The Iraqi response was to immediately order the invasion.
Coalition forces had the significant advantage of being able to operate under the protection of air supremacy that had been achieved by their air forces before the start of the main ground offensive.
They appeared to be Iraqi Soviet-made BTRs and tanks.
A pact of non-interference and non-aggression was signed between the countries, followed by a Kuwaiti-Iraqi deal for Iraq to supply Kuwait with water for drinking and irrigation, although a request for Kuwait to lease Iraq Umm Qasr was rejected.
The agreement called for Iraq to withdraw troops to pre-invasion positions within six weeks following a total cease-fire, and called for monitoring of the cease-fire and withdrawal to be overseen by the UN Security Council.
Iraqi troops offered only light resistance.
However, the US did begin to condemn Iraq's human rights record, including the well-known use of torture.
Both were used in command and control area of operations.
About halfway through the war, Iraq's government decided to allow live satellite transmissions from the country by Western news organizations, and US journalists returned en masse to Baghdad.
Over 14,000 rounds of artillery and over 4,900 MLRS rockets were fired at Iraqi forces during these raids.
The conclusions were threefold: first oil stocks needed to be increased among members of the International Energy Agency and, if necessary, released early in the event of oil market disruption; second the United States needed to beef up the security of friendly Arab states in the region and thirdly an embargo should be placed on sales of military equipment to Iran and Iraq.
Unlike many previous engagements, the destruction of the first Iraqi tanks did not result in a mass surrender.
A long convoy of retreating Iraqi troops formed along the main Iraq-Kuwait highway.
Baker then moved to enter talks with Egypt, whose leadership he considered to be "the moderate voice of the middle east".
The first stop was Saudi Arabia, who a month before had already granted permission to the United States to use its facilities.
There was some criticism of the Bush administration, as they chose to allow Saddam to remain in power instead of pushing on to capture Baghdad and overthrowing his government.
According to the Jewish Virtual Library, a total of 74 Israelis died as a result of the Iraqi attacks: two directly and the rest from suffocation and heart attacks.
The Coalition's advance was much swifter than US generals had expected.
Several tank battles took place, but apart from that, Coalition troops encountered minimal resistance, as most Iraqi troops surrendered.
# The use of GPS made it possible for Coalition forces to navigate without reference to roads or other fixed landmarks.
Major Michael Donnelly, a USAF officer during the War, helped publicize the syndrome and advocated for veterans' rights in this regard.
A Palestinian exodus from Kuwait took place during and after the Gulf War.
However, when no US support came, Iraqi generals remained loyal to Saddam and brutally crushed the Kurdish uprising.
A National Security Planning Group meeting was formed, chaired by then Vice President George H. W. Bush to review US options.
The draining of the Qurna Marshes also called The '''Draining of the Mesopotamian Marshes''' occurred in Iraq and to a smaller degree in Iran between the 1950s and 1990s to clear large areas of the marshes in the Tigris-Euphrates river system.
The Palestinians who fled Kuwait were Jordanian citizens.
For Egypt, the cost totaled $1 billion, 3% of GDP.
They encountered trenches, barbed wire, and minefields.
Other objectives included the destruction of the launchers and their fiber-optic communications arrays that lay in pipelines and relayed coordinates to the TEL operators that were launching attacks against Israel.
After the incident, the commander of the 1st Brigade said: "I know burying people like that sounds pretty nasty, but it would be even nastier if we had to put our troops in the trenches and clean them out with bayonets."
Significant controversy regarding the long term safety of depleted uranium exists, although detractors claim pyrophoric, genotoxic, and teratogenic heavy metal effects.
One Saudi civilian was killed, and 78 others were injured.
Baker flew to Rome for a brief visit with the Italians in which he was promised the use of some military equipment, before journeying to Germany to meet with American ally Chancellor Kohl.
Another enemy platoon, including six vehicles, was reported as being to the northeast of the Task Force.
Within 12 hours, most resistance had ended within Kuwait and the royal family had fled, leaving Iraq in control of most of Kuwait.
Local media outlets in cities across the country screened similar oppositional media.
The draining of the Qurna Marshes was an irrigation project in Iraq during and immediately after the war, to drain a large area of marshes in the Tigris–Euphrates river system.
On 25 February 1991, a Scud missile hit a US Army barracks of the 14th Quartermaster Detachment, out of Greensburg, Pennsylvania, stationed in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, killing 28 soldiers and injuring over 100.
Following Saddam's declaration that "binary chemical weapons" would be used on Israel if it used military force against Iraq, Washington halted part of its funding.
On 24 February, British and American armored forces crossed the Iraq–Kuwait border and entered Iraq in large numbers, taking hundreds of prisoners.
Two BBC journalists, John Simpson and Bob Simpson (no relation), defied their editors and remained in Baghdad to report on the war's progress.
Ostensibly, this was because of improvement in the regime's record, although former US Assistant Defense Secretary Noel Koch later stated: "No one had any doubts about the Iraqis' continued involvement in terrorism&nbsp;...
Initially, the French operated independently under national command and control, but coordinated closely with the Americans (via CENTCOM) and Saudis.
Iraq launched Scud missiles against Coalition military targets in Saudi Arabia and against Israel.
Iraq also had a number of grievances with Saudi Arabia.
Meanwhile, forces from Arab states advanced into Kuwait from the east, encountering little resistance and suffering few casualties.
In addition, the US moved to support its ally Saudi Arabia, whose importance in the region, and as a key supplier of oil, made it of considerable geopolitical importance.
Also, when US Secretary of State James Baker met with Tariq Aziz in Geneva, Switzerland, for last minute peace talks in early 1991, Aziz reportedly made no concrete proposals and did not outline any hypothetical Iraqi moves.
Three US soldiers were killed and nine wounded as well with only one M2 Bradley IFV turret destroyed, but they had taken 40 prisoners and destroyed five tanks, and successfully deceived the Iraqis.
Some felt that the war was an internal Arab affair, or didn't want to increase US influence in the Middle East.
Another incident during the war highlighted the question of large-scale Iraqi combat deaths.
US President George H. W. Bush deployed US forces into Saudi Arabia, and urged other countries to send their own forces to the scene.
In Coalition-occupied Iraqi territory, a peace conference was held where a ceasefire agreement was negotiated and signed by both sides.
It was decided to send British armored forces into Kuwait fifteen hours ahead of schedule, and to send US forces after the Republican Guard.
The missiles were fired at both military and civilian targets.
A key element of US political-military and energy economic planning occurred in early 1984.
Newspapers all over the world also covered the war and ''Time'' magazine published a special issue dated 28 January 1991, the headline "WAR IN THE GULF" emblazoned on the cover over a picture of Baghdad taken as the war began.
Members of British Special Air Service Bravo Two Zero were captured while providing information about an Iraqi supply line of Scud missiles to Coalition forces.
The increased importance of air attacks from both Coalition warplanes and cruise missiles led to controversy over the number of civilian deaths caused during Desert Storm's initial stages.
Kuwait had been a part of the Ottoman Empire's province of Basra, something that Iraq claimed made it rightful Iraq territory.
Israel prepared to militarily retaliate, as its policy for the previous forty years had always been retaliation.
Land mines had been placed in areas around the oil wells, and a military cleaning of the areas was necessary before the fires could be put out.
Elements of the 2nd Brigade, 1st Battalion 5th Cavalry of the 1st Cavalry Division of the US Army performed a direct attack into Iraq on 15 February 1991, followed by one in force on 20 February that led directly through 7 Iraqi divisions which were caught off guard.
The Coalition rejected the proposal, but said that retreating Iraqi forces wouldn't be attacked, and gave twenty-four hours for Iraq to withdraw their forces.
This was a vital step in ensuring Arab states were represented in the coalition.
France also deployed several combat aircraft and naval units.
The pre-war strength of the Kuwait Air Force was around 2,200 Kuwaiti personnel, with 80 aircraft and forty helicopters.
These systems provided essential communications links between air, ground, and naval forces.
The war was marked by the introduction of live news broadcasts from the front lines of the battle, principally by the US network CNN.
The PLO opposed it as well.
The US remained officially neutral after Iraq's invasion of Iran in 1980, which became the Iran–Iraq War, although it provided resources, political support, and some "non-military" aircraft to Iraq.
The Iraqis resisted fiercely from dug-in positions and stationary vehicles, and even mounted armored charges.
US and British special operations forces had been covertly inserted into western Iraq to aid in the search for and destruction of Scuds.
Gulf War veterans' children born after the war had a certain kidney defect that was not found in Gulf War veterans' children born before the war.
The Coalition ceased its advance, and declared a cease-fire 100 hours after the ground campaign started.
This later became known as ''checkbook diplomacy''.
On the 23rd, the CIA reported that Iraq had moved 30,000 troops to the Iraq-Kuwait border, and the US naval fleet in the Persian Gulf was placed on alert.
After this attack, the Israelis warned that if the US failed to stop the attacks, they would.
It hired the public relations firm Hill & Knowlton for about $11 million, paid by Kuwait's government.
On 23 January, Iraq dumped  of crude oil into the Persian Gulf, causing the largest offshore oil spill in history at that time.
The PLO's Yasser Arafat expressed that neither he nor Saddam insisted that solving the Israel–Palestine issues should be a precondition to solving the issues in Kuwait, though he did acknowledge a "strong link" between these problems.
One of these losses is a confirmed air-air victory.
Two examples of this are the US Navy's Grumman E-2 Hawkeye and the US Air Force's Boeing E-3 Sentry.
The Coalition advance was preceded by a heavy artillery and rocket barrage, after which 150,000 troops and 1,500 tanks began their advance.
Saddam Hussein had closely micromanaged Iraqi forces in the Iran–Iraq War, and initiative at lower levels was discouraged.
For forty-two consecutive days and nights, the coalition forces subjected Iraq to the most intensive air bombardment in military history.
In Kuwait, the Emir was restored, and suspected Iraqi collaborators were repressed.
Researchers found that infants born to male veterans of the 1991 war had higher rates of two types of heart valve defects.
The largest single loss of life among Coalition forces happened on 25 February 1991, when an Iraqi Al Hussein missile hit a US military barrack in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, killing 28 US Army Reservists from Pennsylvania.
Of the 148 US troops who died in battle, 24% were killed by friendly fire, a total of 35 service personnel.
As the Scud attacks continued, the Israelis grew increasingly impatient, and considered taking unilateral military action against Iraq.
To permit these to be used to best effect, the "selective availability" feature of the GPS system was turned off for the duration of Desert Storm, allowing these commercial receivers to provide the same precision as the military equipment.
The Task Force found itself engaged in six hours of combat in order to clear the extensive bunker complex.
They deliberately did great harm to Iraq's ability to support itself as an industrial society&nbsp;..." In the Jan/Feb 1995 edition of ''Foreign Affairs'', French diplomat Eric Rouleau wrote: "The Iraqi people, who were not consulted about the invasion, have paid the price for their government's madness&nbsp;... Iraqis understood the legitimacy of a military action to drive their army from Kuwait, but they have had difficulty comprehending the Allied rationale for using air power to systematically destroy or cripple Iraqi infrastructure and industry: electric power stations (92 percent of installed capacity destroyed), refineries (80 percent of production capacity), petrochemical complexes, telecommunications centers (including 135 telephone networks), bridges (more than 100), roads, highways, railroads, hundreds of locomotives and boxcars full of goods, radio and television broadcasting stations, cement plants, and factories producing aluminum, textiles, electric cables, and medical supplies."
Some escaped to be killed or captured by other coalition forces.
The next day, 7 September, he did just that, and the Emir of Kuwait, displaced in a Sheraton hotel outside his invaded country, easily agreed.
The result was a slump in the oil price – as low as $10 a barrel – with a resulting loss of $7 billion a year to Iraq, equal to its 1989 balance of payments deficit.
In a US bid to open full diplomatic relations with Iraq, the country was removed from the US list of State Sponsors of Terrorism.
Kuwaiti forces were tasked with liberating the city.
Petersburg Times'' acquired two commercial Soviet satellite images made at the time in question, which showed nothing but empty desert.
In all, 190 Coalition troops were killed by Iraqi fire during the war, 113 of whom were American, out of a total of 358 Coalition deaths.
Further, there is at least one incident of a software error causing a Patriot missile's failure to engage an incoming Scud, resulting in deaths.
On 22 January 1991, a Scud missile and two Coalition Patriots that had been fired to intercept it but missed, and hit the Israeli city of Ramat Gan.
This was the first time since the Korean War that Canada's military had participated in offensive combat operations.
This analysis is based on Iraqi prisoner of war reports.
In August 1990, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney committed the Canadian Forces to deploy a Naval Task Group.
Patrick Day Sloyan of ''Newsday'' reported, "Bradley Fighting Vehicles and Vulcan armored carriers straddled the trench lines and fired into the Iraqi soldiers as the tanks covered them with mounds of sand.
Specifically, he called for Israel to withdraw from occupied territories in Palestine, Syria, and Lebanon, Syria to withdraw from Lebanon, and "mutual withdrawals by Iraq and Iran and arrangement for the situation in Kuwait."
After the initial bombing, Arnett remained behind and was, for a time, the only American TV correspondent reporting from Iraq.
The Battle of Khafji ended two days later when the Iraqis were driven back by the Saudi Arabian National Guard, supported by Qatari forces and US Marines.
These defensive positions were occupied by a brigade-sized element.
The Canadian Commander in the Middle East was Commodore Kenneth J. Summers.
Alternative media outlets provided views in opposition to the war.
Approximately 230 Israelis were injured.
Kuwait's policy, which led to this exodus, was a response to alignment of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and the PLO with Saddam Hussein.
The details of the Hill & Knowlton public relations campaign, including the incubator testimony, were published in John R. MacArthur's ''Second Front: Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War'' (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1992), and came to wide public attention when an Op-ed by MacArthur was published in ''The New York Times''.
The breach was preceded by a heavy artillery barrage, led by 4th Battalion of the 3rd Field Artillery Regiment  and the 210th Field Artillery Brigade, to soften up Iraqi defenses.
We would not have been able to get everybody out and bring everybody home.And the final point that I think needs to be made is this question of casualties.
News World Order was the title of another program in the series; it focused on the media's complicity in promoting the war, as well as Americans' reactions to the media coverage.
This movement's left flank was protected by France's 6th Light Armoured Division Daguet.
Much of the material was airlifted or carried to the staging areas via fast sealift ships, allowing a quick buildup.
The main Iraqi thrust into Kuwait City was conducted by commandos deployed by helicopters and boats to attack the city from the sea, while other divisions seized the airports and two airbases.
The marshes are typically divided into three main sub-marshes, the Hawizeh, Central, and Hammar Marshes and all three were drained at different times for different reasons.
Operating on the left flank of the US XVIII Airborne Corps, the main French Army force was the 6th Light Armoured Division, including troops from the French Foreign Legion.
Saddam immediately used funding to incorporate central intelligence into Syria and ultimately prevented the impending air strike.
Moments later, Brokaw announced to his viewers that the air attack had begun.
