In 1897 Father John Gerard of Stonyhurst College, namesake of John Gerard (who, following the plot's discovery, had evaded capture), wrote an account called ''What was the Gunpowder Plot?
Queen Elizabeth allowed him to escape with his life after fining him 4,000&nbsp;marks (equivalent to more than £6&nbsp;million in 2008), after which he sold his estate in Chastleton.
In 1603 Catesby helped to organise a mission to the new king of Spain, Philip III, urging Philip to launch an invasion attempt on England, which they assured him would be well supported, particularly by the English Catholics.
The use of torture was forbidden, except by royal prerogative or a body such as the Privy Council or Star Chamber.
Tall, with a red beard, he was seen as trustworthy and, like Fawkes, capable of looking after himself.
He was to be "put to death halfway between heaven and earth as unworthy of both".
In January 1606, during the first sitting of Parliament since the plot, the Observance of 5th November Act 1605 was passed, making services and sermons commemorating the event an annual feature of English life; the act remained in force until 1859.
From there they continued their journey to Huddington.
He also appointed Scottish nobles such as George Home to his court, which proved unpopular with the Parliament of England.
Undercrofts were common features at the time, used to house a variety of materials including food and firewood.
Measuring devices placed in the chamber to calculate the force of the blast were themselves destroyed by the explosion; the skull of the dummy representing King James, which had been placed on a throne inside the chamber surrounded by courtiers, peers and bishops, was found a considerable distance from the site.
Garnet answered that such actions could often be excused, but according to his own account later admonished Catesby during a second meeting in July in Essex, showing him a letter from the pope which forbade rebellion.
Reflecting "partisan public sentiment on an English-Protestant national holiday", in the published editions of 1645 and 1673 the poem is preceded by five epigrams on the subject of the Gunpowder Plot, apparently written by Milton in preparation for the larger work.
Under torture Garnet admitted that he had heard of the plot from fellow Jesuit Oswald Tesimond, who had learnt of it in confession from Catesby.
Much of the "rather nervous" James I's political writing was "concerned with the threat of Catholic assassination and refutation of the Catholic argument that 'faith did not need to be kept with heretics'".
Reputed to be an intelligent, thoughtful man, he sheltered Catholics at his home at Snitterfield, and was another who had been involved in the Essex revolt of 1601.
Salisbury wrote to his English ambassadors abroad, informing them of what had occurred, and also reminding them that the King bore no ill will to his Catholic neighbours.
Despite Thomas Habington's protests, the men spent the next four days searching the house.
Catesby also apparently asked for £2,000, and the use of Rushton Hall in Northamptonshire.
Some of the prisoners were reportedly despondent, but others were nonchalant, even smoking tobacco.
Finally, on 14&nbsp;October Catesby invited Francis Tresham into the conspiracy.
The first meeting between the five conspirators took place on 20&nbsp;May 1604, probably at the Duck and Drake Inn, just off the Strand, Thomas Wintour's usual residence when staying in London.
Catesby convinced him that despite the plot's failure, an armed struggle was still a real possibility.
Three days later, he ordered all Jesuits and all other Catholic priests to leave the country, and reimposed the collection of fines for recusancy.
Keen not to seem too intriguing, and wanting to allow the King to take the credit for unveiling the conspiracy, Salisbury feigned ignorance.
On 28&nbsp;July, the ever-present threat of the plague again delayed the opening of Parliament, this time until Tuesday 5&nbsp;November.
On 20&nbsp;January the local Justice and his retainers arrived at Thomas Habington's home, Hindlip Hall, to arrest the Jesuits.
During a search of the House of Lords at about midnight on 4&nbsp;November 1605, Fawkes was discovered guarding 36&nbsp;barrels of gunpowder—enough to reduce the House of Lords to rubble—and arrested.
The foreign powers, when mentioned, were accorded due respect, but the priests were accursed, their behaviour analysed and criticised wherever possible.
In Boston, the revelry took on anti-authoritarian overtones, and often became so dangerous that many would not venture out of their homes.
Leading papists, rather than causing trouble as anticipated, reacted to the news by offering their enthusiastic support for the new monarch.
Those of more moderate means had to pay two-thirds of their annual rental income; middle class recusants were fined one shilling a week, although the collection of all these fines was "haphazard and negligent".
The two men returned to England late in April 1604, telling Catesby that Spanish support was unlikely.
Concern was voiced by Pope Clement VIII that using violence to achieve a restoration of Catholic power in England would result in the destruction of those that remained.
Bates, who was considered lower class, was brought from the Gatehouse Prison.
According to the biographer Esther Forbes, the Guy Fawkes Day celebration in the pre-revolutionary American colonies was a very popular holiday.
Several days earlier, on 9&nbsp;January, Robert Wintour and Stephen Littleton were captured.
Montague, Mordaunt, and Stourton (Tresham's brother-in-law) were also imprisoned in the Tower.
The playwright William Shakespeare had already used the family history of Northumberland's family in his ''Henry IV'' series of plays, and the events of the Gunpowder Plot seem to have featured alongside the earlier Gowrie conspiracy in ''Macbeth'', written some time between 1603 and 1607.
She was examined twice but the charges against her were eventually dropped.
Catesby and Percy were reportedly killed by a single lucky shot.
Keyes did not wait for the hangman's command and jumped from the gallows, but he survived the drop and was led to the quartering block.
On 7&nbsp;November his resolve was broken; he confessed late that day, and again over the following two days.
James ordered a ceasefire in the conflict with Spain, and even though the two countries were still technically at war, King Philip III sent his envoy, Don Juan de Tassis, to congratulate James on his accession.
His interrogators resorted to the forgery of correspondence between Garnet and other Catholics, but to no avail.
Many at the time felt that Salisbury had been involved in the plot to gain favour with the King and enact more stridently anti-Catholic legislation.
In London, news of the plot was spreading, and the authorities set extra guards on the city gates, closed the ports, and protected the house of the Spanish Ambassador, which was surrounded by an angry mob.
On 24&nbsp;January, starving, two priests left their hiding places and were discovered.
Some time before the end of November, Garnet moved to Hindlip Hall near Worcester, the home of the Habingtons, where he wrote a letter to the Privy Council protesting his innocence.
By coincidence, and ignorant of the plot, Father John Gerard (a friend of Catesby's) was celebrating Mass in another room, and the five men subsequently received the Eucharist.
Catesby may have embarked on the scheme after hopes of securing greater religious tolerance under King James had faded, leaving many English Catholics disappointed.
Rookwood left soon after, and managed to cover 30&nbsp;miles in two hours on one horse.
A terrified servant then revealed that Garnet, who had often stayed at the house, had recently given a Mass there.
Tresham was the son of the Catholic Thomas Tresham, and a cousin to Robert Catesby—the two had been raised together.
Garnet refuted all the charges against him, and explained the Catholic position on such matters, but he was nevertheless found guilty and sentenced to death.
Following their oath, the plotters left London and returned to their homes.
Whynniard's building was along a right-angle to the House of Lords, alongside a passageway called Parliament Place, which itself led to Parliament Stairs and the River Thames.
He also told Acquaviva that "there is a risk that some private endeavour may commit treason or use force against the King", and urged the pope to issue a public brief against the use of force.
The mention of Percy's name aroused further suspicion as he was already known to the authorities as a Catholic agitator.
Bates left the group and travelled to Coughton Court to deliver a letter from Catesby, to Father Garnet and the other priests, informing them of what had transpired, and asking for their help in raising an army.
He overtook Keyes, who had set off earlier, then Wright and Percy at Little Brickhill, before catching Catesby, John Wright, and Bates on the same road.
Several made a stand against the pursuing Sheriff of Worcester and his men at Holbeche House; in the ensuing battle, Catesby was one of those shot and killed.
Everard Digby was a young man who was generally well liked, and lived at Gayhurst House in Buckinghamshire.
Both were also given significant fines.
In March 2002 workers cataloguing archives of diarist John Evelyn at the British Library found a box containing a number of gunpowder samples, including a compressed bar with a note in Evelyn's handwriting stating that it had belonged to Guy Fawkes.
The plot was revealed to the authorities in an anonymous letter sent to William Parker, 4th&nbsp;Baron Monteagle, on 26&nbsp;October 1605.
Fawkes, who had 10&nbsp;years of military experience fighting in the Spanish Netherlands in suppression of the Dutch Revolt, was given charge of the explosives.
Whynniard's undercroft, on the ground floor, was directly beneath the first-floor House of Lords, and may once have been part of the palace's medieval kitchen.
The final three conspirators were recruited in late 1605.
For the Catholic expatriates engaged in that struggle, the restoration by force of a Catholic monarchy was an intriguing possibility, but following the failed Spanish invasion of England in 1588 the papacy had taken a longer-term view on the return of a Catholic monarch to the English throne.
At some point during Northumberland's command in the Low Countries, Percy became his agent in his communications with James.
For decades, the English had lived under a monarch who refused to provide an heir, but James arrived with a family and a future line of succession.
In "John Johnson's" initial interrogation he revealed nothing other than the name of his mother, and that he was from Yorkshire.
He therefore elected to wait, to see how events unfolded.
Then he would be decapitated, and the dismembered parts of his body displayed so that they might become "prey for the fowls of the air".
The English Secretary of State, Robert Cecil, negotiated secretly with Mary's son, James VI of Scotland, who had a strong claim to the English throne as Elizabeth's first cousin twice removed.
Confessions and declarations from the prisoners were then read aloud, and finally the prisoners were allowed to speak.
Thomas Wintour and Littleton, on their way from Huddington to Holbeche House, were told by a messenger that Catesby had died.
On Sunday 3&nbsp;November Percy, Catesby and Wintour had a final meeting, where Percy told his colleagues that they should "abide the uttermost triall", and reminded them of their ship waiting at anchor on the Thames.
A further note, written in the 19th century, confirmed this provenance, although in 1952 the document acquired a new comment: "but there was none left!"
All those involved in both plots were arrested in July and tried in autumn 1603; Sir George Brooke was executed, but James, keen not to have too bloody a start to his reign, reprieved Cobham, Grey, and Markham while they were at the scaffold.
The penalties for refusal were severe; fines were imposed for recusancy, and repeat offenders risked imprisonment and execution.
Garnet may have been questioned on as many as 23&nbsp;occasions.
Their hiding place at Hagley, the home of Humphrey Littleton (brother of MP John Littleton, imprisoned for treason in 1601 for his part in the Essex revolt) was betrayed by a cook, who grew suspicious of the amount of food sent up for his master's consumption.
The supply of gunpowder was theoretically controlled by the government, but it was easily obtained from illicit sources.
This prompted  a refutation later that year by Samuel Gardiner, who argued that Gerard had gone too far in trying to "wipe away the reproach" which the plot had exacted on generations of English Catholics.
Some exiled Catholics favoured Philip II of Spain's daughter, Infanta Isabella, as Elizabeth's successor.
Catholicism became marginalised, but despite the threat of torture or execution, priests continued to practise their faith in secret.
Although anti-Catholic legislation was introduced soon after the plot's discovery, many important and loyal Catholics retained high office during King James I's reign.
Although he was convicted of treason and sentenced to death, doubt has been cast on how much he really knew of the plot.
Although gunpowder does not explode unless physically contained, a spark from the fire landed on the powder and the resultant flames engulfed Catesby, Rookwood, Grant, and a man named Morgan (a member of the hunting party).
Eventually Garnet let slip a crucial piece of information, that there was only one man who could testify that he had any knowledge of the plot.
The following day, Thomas Wintour, Ambrose Rookwood, Robert Keyes, and Guy Fawkes were hanged, drawn and quartered, opposite the building they had planned to blow up, in the Old Palace Yard at Westminster.
The details of the plot were finalised in October, in a series of taverns across London and Daventry.
Digby, who had intended to give himself up, was caught by a small group of pursuers.
Monteagle's servant, Thomas Ward, had family connections with the Wright brothers, and sent a message to Catesby about the betrayal.
Grant, Morgan, Rookwood, and Wintour were arrested.
November the 5th firework displays and bonfire parties are common throughout Britain, in major public displays and in private gardens.
His responsibility was to take charge of Catesby's house in Lambeth, where the gunpowder and other supplies were to be stored.
On 9&nbsp;June, Percy's patron, the Earl of Northumberland, appointed him to the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen at Arms, a mounted troop of 50&nbsp;bodyguards to the King.
Tesimond and Gerard managed to escape the country and live out their days in freedom; Garnet was not so lucky.
Another writer influenced by the plot was John Milton, who in 1626 wrote what one commentator has called a "critically vexing poem", ''In Quintum Novembris''.
Nevertheless, he maintained his composure and insisted that he had acted alone.
Raleigh, who had watched while his colleagues sweated, and who was due to be executed a few days later, was also pardoned.
He insisted that the plot had been the work of only a few Catholics, not of the English Catholics as a whole, and he reminded the assembly to rejoice at his survival, since kings were divinely appointed and he owed his escape to a miracle.
The power of the explosion was such that the  deep concrete walls (replicating how archives suggest the walls of the old House of Lords were constructed) were reduced to rubble.
In December Catesby recruited his servant, Thomas Bates, into the plot, after the latter accidentally became aware of it.
Northumberland remained in the Tower and on 27&nbsp;June 1606 was finally charged with contempt.
In a letter of 6&nbsp;November James wrote: "The gentler tortours tortures are to be first used unto him, ''et sic per gradus ad ima tenditur'' and thus by steps extended to greater ones, and so God speed your good work."
The King, meanwhile, spent much of the summer away from the city, hunting.
James's succession was announced by a proclamation from Cecil on 24&nbsp;March, which was generally celebrated.
The group of six conspirators stopped at Ashby St Ledgers at about 6&nbsp;pm, where they met Robert Wintour and updated him on their situation.
In what became known as the Bye Plot, the priests William Watson and William Clark planned to kidnap James and hold him in the Tower of London until he agreed to be more tolerant towards Catholics.
Having broken the seal, he handed the letter to a servant who read it aloud:
Queen Elizabeth, unmarried and childless, steadfastly refused to name an heir.
Percy was reputedly a "serious" character who had converted to the Catholic faith.
The Gunpowder Plot was commemorated for years by special sermons and other public acts, such as the ringing of church bells.
The experiment was conducted on the Advantica Spadeadam test site, and demonstrated that the explosion, if the gunpowder was in good order, would have killed all those in the building.
Meanwhile, Thomas Wintour stayed in London, and even went to Westminster to see what was happening.
The building was occupied by Scottish commissioners appointed by the King to consider his plans for the unification of England and Scotland, so the plotters hired Catesby's lodgings in Lambeth, on the opposite bank of the Thames, from where their stored gunpowder and other supplies could be conveniently rowed across each night.
Catholic Emancipation took another 200&nbsp;years, but many important and loyal Catholics retained high office during King James I's reign.
The Popish Plot of 1678 sparked renewed interest in the Gunpowder Plot, resulting in a book by Thomas Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln, which refuted "a bold and groundless surmise that all this was a contrivance of Secretary Cecil".
English Catholics struggled in a society dominated by the newly separate and increasingly Protestant Church of England.
James's attitude towards Catholics was more moderate than that of his predecessor, perhaps even tolerant.
Concern over the plague meant that rather than sitting in February, as the plotters had originally planned for, Parliament would not sit again until 3&nbsp;October 1605.
Tresham was arrested on 12&nbsp;November, and taken to the Tower three days later.
Henry's daughter, Elizabeth I, responded to the growing religious divide by introducing the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, which required anyone appointed to a public or church office to swear allegiance to the monarch as head of the Church and state.
Digby and his wife, Mary Mulshaw, had accompanied the priest on his pilgrimage, and the two men were reportedly close friends.
Such conspiracy theories alleged that Salisbury had either actually invented the plot or allowed it to continue when his agents had already infiltrated it, for the purposes of propaganda.
The two priests, condemned by the pope, and "very bloodily handled", were executed.
The fate of Princes Henry and Charles would be improvised; their role in state ceremonies was, as yet, uncertain.
Thomas Bates confessed on 4&nbsp;December, providing much of the information that Salisbury needed to link the Catholic clergy to the plot.
Rookwood was a young man with recusant connections, whose stable of horses at Coldham Hall in Stanningfield, Suffolk was an important factor in his enlistment.
The Privy Council suspected that Northumberland would have been Princess Elizabeth's protector had the plot succeeded, but there was insufficient evidence to convict him.
Also present at the meeting was John Wright, a devout Catholic said to be one of the best swordsmen of his day, and a man who had taken part with Catesby in the Earl of Essex's rebellion three years earlier.
By 4&nbsp;November Digby was ensconced with a "hunting party" at Dunchurch, ready to abduct Princess Elizabeth.
Garnet and Catesby met for a third time on 24&nbsp;July 1605, at the house of the wealthy catholic Anne Vaux in Enfield Chase.
On 19&nbsp;March, the King gave his opening speech to his first English Parliament in which he spoke of his desire to secure peace, but only by "profession of the true religion".
Unused and filthy, its location was ideal for what the group planned to do.
A devout Catholic, he married Gertrude Talbot, who was from a family of recusants.
He also spoke of a Christian union and reiterated his desire to avoid religious persecution.
It was announced on 24&nbsp;December that the re-opening of Parliament would be delayed.
The programme also disproved claims that some deterioration in the quality of the gunpowder would have prevented the explosion.
In his confession, Tresham claimed that he had asked Catesby if the plot would damn their souls, to which Catesby had replied it would not, and that the plight of England's Catholics required that it be done.
The following day members of the Privy Council visited the King at the Palace of Whitehall and informed him that, based on the information that Salisbury had given them a week earlier, on Monday the Lord Chamberlain Thomas Howard, 1st Earl of Suffolk would undertake a search of the Houses of Parliament, "both above and below".
The list of traitors' names was read aloud, beginning with those of the priests: Garnet, Tesimond, and Gerard.
Catesby and the others arrived at Huddington early in the afternoon, and were met by Thomas Wintour.
Fawkes left the country for a short time.
At that point, Littleton left, but Thomas arrived at the house to find Catesby alive, albeit scorched.
For the Catholics, the King's speech made it clear that they were not to "increase their number and strength in this Kingdom", that "they might be in hope to erect their Religion again".
The cellars under the Houses of Parliament continued to be leased out to private individuals until 1678, when news of the Popish Plot broke.
Northumberland's brothers, Sir Allen and Sir Josceline, were arrested.
That same evening Catesby, likely accompanied by John Wright and Bates, set off for the Midlands.
Walter Raleigh, who was languishing in the Tower owing to his involvement in the Main Plot, and whose wife was a first cousin of Lady Catesby, declared he had had no knowledge of the conspiracy.
Only two confessions were printed in full: Fawkes's confession of 8&nbsp;November, and Wintour's of 23&nbsp;November.
The same day, Percy visited the Earl of Northumberland—who was uninvolved in the conspiracy—to see if he could discern what rumours surrounded the letter to Monteagle.
Calculations showed that Fawkes, who was skilled in the use of gunpowder, had deployed double the amount needed.
Cecil received news of the plot from several sources, including the Archpriest George Blackwell, who instructed his priests to have no part in any such schemes.
For the first round of interrogations, no real proof exists that these people were tortured, although on several occasions Salisbury certainly suggested that they should be.
Wintour's testimony makes no mention of his brother, Robert.
The very few Catholics of great wealth who refused to attend services at their parish church were fined £20 per month.
Digby shouted "If I may but hear any of your lordships say, you forgive me, I shall go more cheerfully to the gallows."
The conspirators returned to London in October 1604, when Robert Keyes, a "desperate man, ruined and indebted" was admitted to the group.
In the absence of any sign that James would move to end the persecution of Catholics, as some had hoped for, several members of the clergy (including two anti-Jesuit priests) decided to take matters into their own hands.
The conspirators' principal aim was to kill King James, but many other important targets would also be present at the State Opening, including the monarch's nearest relatives and members of the Privy Council.
In the summer of 1606, laws against recusancy were strengthened; the Popish Recusants Act returned England to the Elizabethan system of fines and restrictions, introduced a sacramental test, and an Oath of Allegiance, requiring Catholics to abjure as a "heresy" the doctrine that "princes excommunicated by the Pope could be deposed or assassinated".
Housed at Coombe Abbey near Coventry, the Princess lived only ten miles north of Warwick—convenient for the plotters, most of whom lived in the Midlands.
There was little doubt, according to Coke, that the plot had been invented by the Jesuits.
Wintour had also attempted to convince the Spanish envoy Don Juan de Tassis that "3,000 Catholics" were ready and waiting to support such an invasion.
John Grant was not so lucky, and had been blinded by the fire.
Gardiner portrayed Salisbury as guilty of nothing more than opportunism.
Once the King and his Parliament were dead, the plotters intended to install Elizabeth on the English throne as a titular Queen.
According to the findings of the programme, no one within  of the blast could have survived, and all of the stained glass windows in Westminster Abbey would have been shattered, as would all of the windows in the vicinity of the Palace.
Digby was asked by Catesby to rent Coughton Court near Alcester.
The home of Anne Vaux at Enfield Chase was searched, revealing the presence of trap doors and hidden passages.
More gunpowder was brought into the room, along with firewood to conceal it.
An arrest warrant was issued against Thomas Percy, and his patron, the Earl of Northumberland, was placed under house arrest.
His cousin Humphrey, despite his cooperation with the authorities, met his end at Red Hill near Worcester.
Amongst others, they approached Henry IV of France for funding, but were unsuccessful.
Logistically, digging a tunnel would have proved extremely difficult, especially as none of the conspirators had any experience of mining.
Percy was concerned for his patron, Northumberland, and the young Earl of Arundel's name was brought up; Catesby suggested that a minor wound might keep him from the chamber on that day.
Jesuit priests, whose presence in England was punishable by death, also demonstrated their support for James, who was widely believed to embody "the natural order of things".
He was visited regularly by his wife, a nurse, and his servant William Vavasour, who documented his strangury.
Thomas Wintour (1571–1606) was chosen as the emissary, but the Spanish king, although sympathetic to the plight of Catholics in England, was intent on making peace with James.
Even more discontent resulted when the King allowed his Scottish nobles to collect the recusancy fines.
Keyes appeared to accept his fate, Bates and Robert Wintour begged for mercy, and Grant explained his involvement as "a conspiracy intended but never effected".
Tired and desperate, they spread out some of the now-soaked gunpowder in front of the fire, to dry out.
Salisbury believed his story, and authorised his release.
Northumberland, although not a Catholic himself, planned to build a strong relationship with James in order to better the prospects of English Catholics, and to reduce the family disgrace caused by his separation from his wife Martha Wright, a favourite of Elizabeth.
That the Bye Plot had been revealed by Catholics was instrumental in saving them from further persecution, and James was grateful enough to allow pardons for those recusants who sued for them, as well as postponing payment of their fines for a year.
Some of the gunpowder guarded by Fawkes may have survived.
To Father John Gerard, these words were almost certainly responsible for the heightened levels of persecution the members of his faith now suffered, and for the priest Oswald Tesimond they were a rebuttal of the early claims that the King had made, upon which the papists had built their hopes.
The first to speak was the Speaker of the House of Commons (later Master of the Rolls), Sir Edward Philips, who described the intent behind the plot in lurid detail.
Although weakened by his torture, Fawkes managed to jump from the gallows and break his neck, thus avoiding the agony of the gruesome latter part of his execution.
He died early on the morning of 23&nbsp;December, and was buried in the Tower.
In the second week of June Catesby met in London the principal Jesuit in England, Father Henry Garnet, and asked him about the morality of entering into an undertaking which might involve the destruction of the innocent, together with the guilty.
Meanwhile the government used the revelation of the plot to accelerate its persecution of Catholics.
He was described by contemporaries as "a good-looking man, about six feet tall, athletic and a good swordsman".
Salisbury informed the Earl of Worcester, considered to have recusant sympathies, and the suspected papist Henry Howard, 1st Earl of Northampton, but kept news of the plot from the King, who was busy hunting in Cambridgeshire and not expected back for several days.
Many Catholics believed that her Catholic cousin, Mary, Queen of Scots, was the legitimate heir to the English throne, but she had been executed for treason in 1587.
