This "corned" gunpowder was from 30% to 300% more powerful.
Even larger grains were produced for artillery bore diameters greater than about .
From the violence of that salt called saltpeter together with sulfur and willow charcoal, combined into a powder so horrible a sound is made by the bursting of a thing so small, no more than a bit of parchment containing it, that we find the ear assaulted by a noise exceeding the roar of strong thunder, and a flash brighter than the most brilliant lightning."
Portuguese and Spanish invaders were unpleasantly surprised and even outgunned on occasion.
In the mid-19th century, measurements were made determining that the burning rate within a grain of black powder (or a tightly packed mass) is about 0.20 fps, while the rate of ignition propagation from grain to grain is around 30 fps, over two orders of magnitude faster.
Gunpowder and gunpowder weapons were transmitted to India through the Mongol invasions of India.
For instance, the Arabic word ''naft'' transitioned from denoting naphtha to denoting gunpowder, and the Chinese word ''pào'' evolved from meaning catapult to referring to cannon.
The first chronicled use of "fire spears" (or "fire lances") is at the siege of De'an in 1132 by Song forces against the Jin.
In addition to being a nuisance, the residue from burnt black powder is hygroscopic and with the addition of moisture absorbed from the air, this residue forms a caustic substance.
Partington dates the gunpowder recipes to approximately 1300.
Two British physicists, Andrew Noble and Frederick Abel, worked to improve the properties of black powder during the late 19th century.
The "stud gun" drove nails or screws into solid concrete, a function not possible with hydraulic tools.
The Chinese "Wu Ching Tsung Yao" (''Complete Essentials from the Military Classics''), written by Tseng Kung-Liang between 1040–1044, provides encyclopedia references to a variety of mixtures that included petrochemicals—as well as garlic and honey.
During the Second Anglo-Mysore War Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan unleashed the Mysorean rockets at their British opponents effectively defeating them on various occasions.
German Franciscan monk named Berthold Schwarz, who likely read Bacon's works, is credited with introducing the recipe in Germany, thus earning it the German name ''Schwarzpulver'', which translates literally into English as ''Black powder''.
The Javanese Majapahit Empire was arguably able to encompass much of modern-day Indonesia due to its unique mastery of bronze smithing and use of a central arsenal fed by a large number of cottage industries within the immediate region.
According to a colonel McKenzie quoted in Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, ''The History of Java'' (1817), the purest sulfur was supplied from a crater from a mountain near the straits of Bali.
The resurgent Singhasari Empire overtook Sriwijaya and later emerged as the Majapahit whose warfare featured the use of fire-arms and cannonade.
The Dutch, French, Portuguese, and English used Chhapra as a center of saltpeter refining.
Black powder is still used as a delay element in various munitions where its slow-burning properties are valuable.
Although saltpeter from new Prussian-style putrefaction works had not been produced yet (the process taking about 18 months), in only a year France had gunpowder to export.
The best wood for the purpose is Pacific willow, but others such as alder or buckthorn can be used.
Albertus Magnus died in 1280.
After manufacturing grains from press-cake in the usual way, his process tumbled the powder with graphite dust for 12 hours.
Pounds's study ''The Medieval Castle in England and Wales,'' many English castles had been deserted and others were crumbling.
Low explosives deflagrate (i.e., burn) at ''subsonic'' speeds, whereas high explosives detonate, producing a supersonic wave.
The mixture formulas in this book do not contain enough saltpeter to create an explosive however; being limited to at most 50% saltpeter, they produce an incendiary.
The Mongols were defeated by Alauddin Khilji of the Delhi Sultanate, and some of the Mongol soldiers remained in northern India after their conversion to Islam.
The earliest surviving documentary evidence for the use of the hand cannon, considered the oldest type of portable firearm and a forerunner of the handgun, are from several Arabic manuscripts dated to the 14th century.
Ownership and manufacture of gunpowder was later prohibited by the colonial Dutch occupiers.
The dust from "repairing" powder in the field was a major hazard.
This claim has been disputed by historians of science including Lynn Thorndike, John Maxson Stillman and George Sarton and by Bacon's editor Robert Steele, both in terms of authenticity of the work, and with respect to the decryption method.
The ingredients are reduced in particle size and mixed as intimately as possible.
They shoveled damp mill cake into a two-foot square box, placed this beneath a screw press and reduced it to  its volume.
Black powder is also used in fireworks for lifting shells, in rockets as fuel, and in certain special effects.
Other historians urge caution regarding claims of Islamic firearms use in the 1204-1324 period as late medieval Arabic texts used the same word for gunpowder, ''naft'', that they used for an earlier incendiary, naphtha.
: 6 KNO3 + C7H4O → 3 K2CO3 + 4 CO2 + 2 H2O + 3 N2
The Mughal emperor Akbar mass-produced matchlocks for the Mughal Army.
Corned powder also retained the advantage of low moisture absorption, as even tiny grains still had much less surface area to attract water than a floury powder.
The Mughals began to use bamboo rockets (mainly for signalling) and employ sappers: special units that undermined heavy stone fortifications to plant gunpowder charges.
It was written in the ''Tarikh-i Firishta'' (1606–1607) that Nasir ud din Mahmud the ruler of the Delhi Sultanate presented the envoy of the Mongol ruler Hulegu Khan with a dazzling pyrotechnics display upon his arrival in Delhi in 1258.
Historically, a marble or limestone edge runner mill, running on a limestone bed, was used in Great Britain; however, by the mid 19th century this had changed to either an iron-shod stone wheel or a cast iron wheel running on an iron bed.
The mainstream scholarly consensus is that gunpowder was invented in China, spread through the Middle East, and then into Europe, although there is a dispute over how much the Chinese advancements in gunpowder warfare influenced later advancements in the Middle East and Europe.
From then on the employment of gunpowder warfare in India was prevalent, with events such as the "Siege of Belgaum" in 1473 by Sultan Muhammad Shah Bahmani.
The demise of the Majapahit empire and the dispersal of disaffected skilled bronze cannon-smiths to Brunei, modern Sumatra, Malaysia and the Philippines lead to widespread use, especially in the Makassar Strait.
Recognized grain sizes are Gunpowder G 7, G 20, G 40, and G 90.
Another recipe, for artificial "thunder", specifies a mixture of one pound native sulfur, two pounds linden or willow charcoal, and six pounds of saltpeter.
The British Congreve rockets used 62.4% saltpeter, 23.2% charcoal and 14.4% sulfur, but the British Mark VII gunpowder was changed to 65% saltpeter, 20% charcoal and 15% sulfur.
French war powder in 1879 used the ratio 75% saltpeter, 12.5% charcoal, 12.5% sulfur.
In Europe, one of the first mentions of gunpowder use appears in a passage found in Roger Bacon's ''Opus Maius'' and ''Opus Tertium'' in what has been interpreted as being firecrackers.
The most telling passage reads: "We have an example of these things (that act on the senses) in the sound and fire of that children's toy which is made in many diverse parts of the world; i.e., a device no bigger than one's thumb.
The English Civil War (1642–1645) led to an expansion of the gunpowder industry, with the repeal of the Royal Patent in August 1641.
Al-Hassan claims that in the Battle of Ain Jalut of 1260, the Mamluks used against the Mongols in "the first cannon in history" gunpowder formula with near-identical ideal composition ratios for explosive gunpowder.
Guns made of bronze were recovered from Calicut (1504)- the former capital of the Zamorins
In any case, the formula claimed to have been decrypted (7:5:5 saltpeter:charcoal:sulfur) is not useful for firearms use or even firecrackers, burning slowly and producing mostly smoke.
Javanese bronze breech-loaded swivel-guns, known as meriam, or erroneously as lantaka, was used widely by the Majapahit navy as well as by pirates and rival lords.
Gunpowder was invented in the 9th century in China, and the earliest record of a written formula for gunpowder appears in the 11th century Song dynasty text, ''Wujing Zongyao''.
These ratios have varied over the centuries and by country, and can be altered somewhat depending on the purpose of the powder.
In 1875 DuPont introduced ''Hexagonal'' powder for large artillery, which was pressed using shaped plates with a small center core—about  diameter, like a wagon wheel nut, the center hole widened as the grain burned.
Gunpowder-making and metal-smelting and casting for shot and cannon fee was closely held by skilled military tradesmen, who formed guilds that collected dues, tested apprentices, and gave pensions.
The idea may well have been brought from Peru by Cornish miners returning home after completing their contracts.
Besides black powder, there are other historically important types of gunpowder.
Smokeless powder has different burning properties (pressure vs. time) and can generate higher pressures and work per gram.
In the United States, gunpowder grains were designated F (for fine) or C (for coarse).
They typically contain 70.5 parts of saltpeter and 29.5 parts of charcoal.
The Home Office removed gunpowder from its list of ''Permitted Explosives''; and shortly afterwards, on 31 December 1931, the former Curtis & Harvey's Glynneath gunpowder factory at Pontneddfechan, in Wales, closed down, and it was demolished by fire in 1932.
These products, which should not be confused with smokeless powders, aim to produce less fouling (solid residue), while maintaining the traditional volumetric measurement system for charges.
The powder-makers would then shape the resulting paste of dampened gunpowder, known as mill cake, into corns, or grains, to dry.
Gunpowder grains can alternatively be categorized by mesh size: the BSS sieve mesh size, being the smallest mesh size, which retains no grains.
A coarser grade for use in military artillery blanks was designated A-1.
A sample reaction for sulfur-free gunpowder would be
Before long, powder-makers standardized the process by forcing mill cake through sieves instead of corning powder by hand.
File:武经总要全前集卷十二 霹雳火球图.jpg|Fire bomb
Hasan al-Rammah included 107 gunpowder recipes in his text ''al-Furusiyyah wa al-Manasib al-Harbiyya'' (''The Book of Military Horsemanship and Ingenious War Devices''), 22 of which are for rockets.
A chief beneficiary of this surplus was the American Revolution.
Archaeological evidence of a hand cannon has been excavated in Manchuria dated from the late 13th century and the shells of explosive bombs have been discovered in a shipwreck off the shore of Japan dated from 1281, during the Mongol invasions of Japan.
It would have used potassium chloride from the Staßfurt mines, near Magdeburg, Germany, which had recently become available in industrial quantities.
Loading cannons or bombards before the powder-making advances of the Renaissance was a skilled art.
To reduce the likelihood of accidental ignition by static electricity, the granules of modern black powder are typically coated with graphite, which prevents the build-up of electrostatic charge.
The soot contains potassium oxide or sodium oxide that turns into potassium hydroxide, or sodium hydroxide, which corrodes wrought iron or steel gun barrels.
Its advantage was that it was believed at the time to be less corrosive than smokeless powders then in use.
The state-controlled manufacture of gunpowder by the Ottoman Empire through early supply chains to obtain nitre, sulfur and high-quality charcoal from oaks in Anatolia contributed significantly to its expansion between the 15th and 18th century.
Ignition of the powder packed behind a bullet must generate enough pressure to force it from the muzzle at high speed, but not enough to rupture the gun barrel.
The last remaining gunpowder mill at the Royal Gunpowder Factory, Waltham Abbey was damaged by a German parachute mine in 1941 and it never reopened.
The Dutch punishment for possession of non-permitted gunpowder appears to have been amputation.
These grades were sorted on a system of screens with oversize retained on a mesh of 6 wires per inch, A-1 retained on 10 wires per inch, Fg retained on 14, FFg on 24, FFFg on 46, and FFFFg on 60.
Claims of less corrosiveness of these products have been controversial however.
This formed a graphite coating on each grain that reduced its ability to absorb moisture.
The Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan is known to have introduced much more advanced matchlocks, their designs were a combination of Ottoman and Mughal designs.
Black powder arms must be well cleaned both inside and out to remove the residue.
At this battle the Mongols not only used gunpowder in early Chinese firearms but in the earliest grenades as well.
Saltpeter harvesting was recorded by Dutch and German travelers as being common in even the smallest villages and was collected from the decomposition process of large dung hills specifically piled for the purpose.
The ''Liber Ignium'', or ''Book of Fires'', attributed to Marcus Graecus, is a collection of incendiary recipes, including some gunpowder recipes.
Powder used for rocketry can use a slower burn rate since it accelerates the projectile for a much longer time—whereas powders for weapons such as flintlocks, cap-locks, or matchlocks need a higher burn rate to accelerate the projectile in a much shorter distance.
The current standard composition for the black powders that are manufactured by pyrotechnicians was adopted as long ago as 1780.
Gunpowder was also being made or stored at other Royal castles, such as Portchester.
The spread of gunpowder across Asia from China is widely attributed to the Mongols.
Documentary and archeological evidence indicate that Arab or Indian traders introduced gunpowder, gonnes, muskets, blunderbusses, and cannons to the Javanese, Acehnese, and Batak via long established commercial trade routes around the early to mid 14th century.
Gunpowder is no longer used in modern explosive military warheads, nor is it used as main explosive in mining operations due to its cost relative to that of newer alternatives such as ammonium nitrate/fuel oil (ANFO).
Most of the bulk semi-smokeless powders ceased to be manufactured in the 1920s.
The hard, dense product was broken again into tiny pieces, which were separated with sieves to produce a uniform product for each purpose: coarse powders for cannons, finer grained powders for muskets, and the finest for small hand guns and priming.
Lesmok had some of the bulk of black powder for dispersing primer residue, but somewhat less total bulk than straight black powder, thus requiring less frequent bore cleaning.
For the most powerful black powder, meal powder, a wood charcoal, is used.
'''Gunpowder''', also known as '''black powder''', is the earliest known chemical explosive.
Proportions by weight are 75% potassium nitrate (known as saltpeter or saltpetre), 15% softwood charcoal, and 10% sulfur.
A slow match for flame throwing mechanisms using the siphon principle and for fireworks and rockets is mentioned.
One recipe for "flying fire" (''ingis volatilis'') involves saltpeter, sulfur, and colophonium, which, when inserted into a reed or hollow wood, "flies away suddenly and burns up everything."
Originally this was with a mortar-and-pestle or a similarly operating stamping-mill, using copper, bronze or other non-sparking materials, until supplanted by the rotating ball mill principle with non-sparking bronze or lead.
After 1800, instead of forming grains by hand or with sieves, the damp ''mill-cake'' was pressed in molds to increase its density and extract the liquid, forming ''press-cake''.
It was not until later in the 19th century when the syndicalist production of Turkish gunpowder was greatly reduced, which coincided with the decline of its military might.
The improvement was based on reducing the surface area of a higher density composition.
However, the sulfur content of traditional gunpowders caused corrosion problems with Cordite Mk I and this led to the introduction of a range of sulfur-free gunpowders, of varying grain sizes.
File:武经总要 竹火鷂 鐵嘴火鷂.jpg|Fire grenade
Failure to mitigate primer corrosion by dispersion caused the false impression that nitrocellulose-based powder caused corrosion.
Forming the damp paste into ''corn''-sized clumps by hand or with the use of a sieve instead of larger balls produced a product after drying that loaded much better, as each tiny piece provided its own surrounding air space that allowed much more rapid combustion than a fine powder.
Ever since the founding of the Sultanate of Mysore by Hyder Ali, French military officers were employed to train the Mysore Army.
Smokeless powders ranged in color from brownish tan to yellow to white.
The Chinese wasted little time in applying gunpowder to the development of weapons, and in the centuries that followed, they produced a variety of gunpowder weapons, including flamethrowers, rockets, bombs, and land mines, before inventing guns as a projectile weapon.
Cannons usually used lower burn rate powders, because most would burst with higher burn rate powders.
Charcoal does not consist of pure carbon; rather, it consists of partially pyrolyzed cellulose, in which the wood is not completely decomposed.
Fines designated FFFFFg were usually reprocessed to minimize explosive dust hazards.
This left the sole United Kingdom gunpowder factory at ICI Nobel's Ardeer site in Scotland; it too closed in October 1976.
(Sharp grains rounded off in transport, producing fine "meal dust" that changed the burning properties.)
File:武经总要前集卷十二 霹雳火球制法.jpg|Instruction for fire bomb in ''Wujing zongyao''
Akbar is personally known to have shot a leading Rajput commander during the Siege of Chittorgarh.
Some of the gunpowder recipes of ''De Mirabilibus Mundi'' of Albertus Magnus are identical to the recipes of the ''Liber Ignium'', and according to Partington, "may have been taken from that work, rather than conversely."
The rest ends up as a thick layer of soot inside the barrel.
It is a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and potassium nitrate (saltpeter).
The ''Essentials'' was however written by a Song dynasty court bureaucrat, and there is little evidence that it had any immediate impact on warfare; there is no mention of gunpowder use in the chronicles of the wars against the Tanguts in the 11th century, and China was otherwise mostly at peace during this century.
They broke the dried slabs with hammers or rollers, and sorted the granules with sieves into different grades.
Complete manufactured devices containing black powder are usually classified as ''Group D: Secondary detonating substance, or black powder, or article containing secondary detonating substance'', such as firework, class D model rocket engine, etc., for shipment because they are harder to ignite than loose powder.
(The principle of wet mixing to prevent the separation of dry ingredients, invented for gunpowder, is used today in the pharmaceutical industry.)
Gunpowder's specific gravity is 1.70–1.82 (mercury method) or 1.92–2.08 (pycnometer), and it has a pH of 6.0–8.0.
After that, a diverse variety of firearms, large guns in particular, became visible in Tanjore, Dacca, Bijapur, and Murshidabad.
It is also difficult to accurately translate original alchemy texts, especially medieval Chinese texts that try to explain phenomena through metaphor, into modern scientific language with rigidly defined terminology.
"Brown gunpowder" is cited as composed of 79% nitre, 3% sulfur, and 18% charcoal per 100 of dry powder, with about 2% moisture.
Also, in 1846, two plants were built in south-west England to make blasting powder using this sodium nitrate.
The sulfur and charcoal act as fuels, and the saltpeter is an oxidizer.
After he discovered that France was not self-sufficient in gunpowder, a Gunpowder Administration was established;  to head it, the lawyer Antoine Lavoisier was appointed.
In 1774 Louis XVI ascended to the throne of France at age 20.
After the end of World War I, the majority of the United Kingdom gunpowder manufacturers merged into a single company, "Explosives Trades limited"; and number of sites were closed down, including those in Ireland.
Grain diameter decreased with a larger number of Fs and increased with a larger number of Cs, ranging from about  for 7F to  for 7C.
In Great Britain between the 15th and 19th centuries charcoal from alder buckthorn was greatly prized for gunpowder manufacture; cottonwood was used by the American Confederate States.
The shipwrecked Ottoman Admiral Seydi Ali Reis is known to have introduced the earliest type of matchlock weapons, which the Ottomans used against the Portuguese during the Siege of Diu (1531).
The mix was dampened with alcohol or water during grinding to prevent accidental ignition.
Shah Jahan also countered the British and other Europeans in his province of Gujarāt, which supplied Europe saltpeter for use in gunpowder warfare during the 17th century.
As explosives, they all fall into the category of Class 1.
Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan were the first to introduce modern cannons and muskets, their army was also the first in India to have official uniforms.
Owing to the large market of antique and replica black-powder firearms in the US, modern gunpowder substitutes like Pyrodex, Triple Seven and Black Mag3 pellets have been developed since the 1970s.
In the centuries following the Chinese discovery, gunpowder weapons began appearing in the Muslim world, Europe, and India.
When the cannon was fired through the touchhole, turbulence from the initial surface combustion caused the rest of the powder to be rapidly exposed to the flame.
Because of its burning properties and the amount of heat and gas volume that it generates, gunpowder has been widely used as a propellant in firearms and as a pyrotechnic composition in fireworks.
This formed the basis for the Noble-Abel gas equation for internal ballistics.
It was sold to Winchester and others primarily for .22 and .32 small calibers.
The German printer and publisher Christiaan Egenolff adapted an earlier work on pyrotechnics from manuscript to print form, publishing his ''Büchsenmeysterei'' in 1529 and reprinting it in 1531.
Carbon differs from ordinary charcoal.
Thus, a black powder composition containing pure carbon would burn similarly to a match head, at best.
Gunpowder is classified as a low explosive because of its relatively slow decomposition rate and consequently low brisance.
The United Nations Model Regulations on the Transportation of Dangerous Goods and national transportation authorities, such as United States Department of Transportation, have classified gunpowder (black powder) as a ''Group A: Primary explosive substance'' for shipment because it ignites so easily.
Larger cast cannons were easily muzzle-loaded with corned powder using a long-handled ladle.
Gunpowder production in Britain appears to have started in the mid 14th century with the aim of supplying the English Crown.
The first reference to the incendiary properties of such mixtures is the passage of the ''Zhenyuan miaodao yaolüe'', a Taoist text tentatively dated to the mid-9th century: "Some have heated together sulfur, realgar and saltpeter with honey; smoke and flames result, so that their hands and faces have been burnt, and even the whole house where they were working burned down."
Neither the use of graphite nor sodium nitrate was new.
Black powder is a granular mixture of
However, because of its low brisance, black powder causes fewer fractures and results in more usable stone compared to other explosives, making black powder useful for blasting monumental stone such as granite and marble.
The balls were then crushed in a mortar by the gunner immediately before use, with the old problem of uneven particle size and packing causing unpredictable results.
By 1882 German makers also produced hexagonal grained powders of a similar size for artillery.
Circa 1540, the Javanese, always alert for new weapons found the newly arrived Portuguese weaponry superior to that of the locally made variants.
By careful testing and adjusting the proportions and grinding time, powder from mills such as at Essonne outside Paris became the best in the world by 1788, and inexpensive.
Gunpowder is a low explosive, so it does not detonate but rather deflagrates.
Around the late 14th century, European powdermakers first began adding liquid during grinding to improve mixing, reduce dust, and with it the risk of explosion.
This was followed by the closure of the gunpowder section at the Royal Ordnance Factory, ROF Chorley, the section was closed and demolished at the end of World War II; and ICI Nobel's Roslin gunpowder factory, which closed in 1954.
The bulkier black powder fouling better disperses primer residue.
Prismatic Brown Powder is a large-grained product the Rottweil Company introduced in 1884 in Germany, which was adopted by the British Royal Navy shortly thereafter.
Early writings potentially mentioning gunpowder are sometimes marked by a linguistic process where old words acquired new meanings.
The Mysorean rockets inspired the development of the Congreve rocket, which the British widely utilized during the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812.
Lavoisier instituted a crash program to increase saltpeter production, revised (and later eliminated) the ''droit de fouille'', researched best refining and powder manufacturing methods, instituted management and record-keeping, and established pricing that encouraged private investment in works.
This can rupture older weapons designed for black powder.
Beginning in the 1930s, gunpowder or smokeless powder was used in rivet guns, stun guns for animals, cable splicers and other industrial construction tools.
Similarly, the refusal of their Qizilbash forces to use firearms contributed to the Safavid rout at Chaldiran in 1514.
Another advance was the manufacture of kiln charcoal by distilling wood in heated iron retorts instead of burning it in earthen pits.
In the early 20th century, British artillery officer Henry William Lovett Hime proposed that another work tentatively attributed to Bacon, ''Epistola de Secretis Operibus Artis et Naturae, et de Nullitate Magiae'' contained an encrypted formula for gunpowder.
The optimum size of the grain depended on its use; larger for large cannon, finer for small arms.
Gunpowder was widely used to fill artillery shells and in mining and civil engineering to blast rock until the second half of the 19th century, when the first high explosives were put into use.
At the beginning of the 19th century, makers increased density further by static pressing.
Because ''corned'' black powder grains made with saltpeter are less affected by moisture in the air, they can be stored unsealed without degradation by humidity.
In the United Kingdom, the main service gunpowders were classified RFG (rifle grained fine) with diameter of one or two millimeters and RLG (rifle grained large) for grain diameters between two and six millimeters.
Like black powder, they were produced in different grain sizes.
English war powder in 1879 used the ratio 75% saltpeter, 15% charcoal, 10% sulfur.
Inappropriately fine-grained powder often caused cannons to burst before the projectile could move down the barrel, due to the high initial spike in pressure.
Gunpowder is mainly used in older guns now because the propellants used today are too powerful and could break the already fragile barrels.
The term ''black powder'' was coined in the late 19th century, primarily in the United States, to distinguish prior gunpowder formulations from the new smokeless powders and semi-smokeless powders, in cases where these are not referred to as cordite.
Because of this unreliability, soldiers carrying muskets, known as musketeers, were armed with additional weapons such as swords or pikes.
The matchlock musket or pistol (an early gun ignition system), as well as the flintlock would often be unusable in wet weather, due to powder in the pan being exposed and dampened.
During this time, European manufacturers also began regularly purifying saltpeter, using wood ashes containing potassium carbonate to precipitate calcium from their dung liquor, and using ox blood, alum, and slices of turnip to clarify the solution.
In his patent he was careful to state that his claim was for the combination of graphite with sodium nitrate-based powder, rather than for either of the two individual technologies.
Typically, the breech-loading powder chamber in the rear of the piece was filled only about half full, the serpentine powder neither too compressed nor too loose, a wooden bung pounded in to seal the chamber from the barrel when assembled, and the projectile placed on.
Semi-smokeless powders featured bulk volume properties that approximated black powder, but had significantly reduced amounts of smoke and combustion products.
During the 18th century, gunpowder factories became increasingly dependent on mechanical energy.
This is implied by al-Rammah's usage of "terms that suggested he derived his knowledge from Chinese sources" and his references to saltpeter as "Chinese snow" ( ''''), fireworks as "Chinese flowers" and rockets as "Chinese arrows".
