Alma Mahler survived her husband by more than 50&nbsp;years, dying in 1964.
Shortly after these family and health setbacks the premiere of the First Symphony, in Budapest on 21 November 1889, was a disappointment.
Late in his life he was briefly director of New York's Metropolitan Opera and the New York Philharmonic.
Here, using a text by Hans Bethge based on ancient Chinese poems, he composed ''Das Lied von der Erde'' ("The Song of the Earth").
Later that year, in November, Mahler conducted the premiere of his Fourth Symphony, in Munich, and was on the rostrum for the first complete performance of the Third Symphony, at the Allgemeiner Deutscher Musikverein festival at Krefeld on 9 June 1902.
After conducting the Hofoper orchestra in a farewell concert performance of his Second Symphony on 24 November, Mahler left Vienna for New York in early December.
Within this same period Mahler's works began to be performed with increasing frequency.
The examples of Wagner and Bruckner encouraged Mahler to extend the scale of his symphonic works well beyond the previously accepted standards, to embrace an entire world of feeling.
The two engaged in a lively disagreement about a ballet by Alexander von Zemlinsky (Alma was one of Zemlinsky's pupils), but agreed to meet at the Hofoper the following day.
On 8 April the Mahler family and a permanent nurse left New York on board SS ''Amerika'' bound for Europe.
This Mahler did in his first season, when he conducted Wagner's ''Tristan und Isolde'' for the first time and gave acclaimed performances of the same composer's ''Tannhäuser'' and ''Siegfried''.
The composer's daughter Anna Mahler became a well-known sculptor; she died in 1988.
At the premiere of the latter's First String Quartet in February 1907, Mahler reportedly was held back from physically attacking the hecklers.
In April 1886, Mahler left Prague to take up his post at the Neues Stadttheater in Leipzig, where rivalry with his senior colleague Arthur Nikisch began at once.
Immediately following this devastating loss, Mahler learned that his heart was defective, a diagnosis subsequently confirmed by a Vienna specialist, who ordered a curtailment of all forms of vigorous exercise.
Between his Laibach and Olmütz appointments he worked on settings of verses by Richard Leander and Tirso de Molina, later collected as Volume&nbsp;I of ''Lieder und Gesänge'' ("Songs and Airs").
This, his first substantial composition, shows traces of Wagnerian and Brucknerian influences, yet includes many musical elements which musicologist Deryck Cooke describes as "pure Mahler".
Alma soon became resentful because of Mahler's insistence that there could only be one composer in the family and that she had given up her music studies to accommodate him.
For its 1908–09 season the Metropolitan management brought in the Italian conductor Arturo Toscanini to share duties with Mahler, who made only 19&nbsp;appearances in the entire season.
Despite poor relations with the orchestra, Mahler brought five new operas to the theatre, including Bizet's ''Carmen'', and won over the press that had initially been hostile to him.
Nikisch's illness, in January 1887, meant that Mahler took charge of the whole cycle, and scored a resounding public success.
After his Fourth and Fifth Symphonies failed to gain general public approval, Mahler was convinced that his Sixth would finally succeed.
Zweig also wrote that "to have seen Gustav Mahler on the street in Vienna was an event that one would proudly report to his comrades the next morning as it if were a personal triumph."
This was primarily over how the two should share conducting duties for the theatre's new production of Wagner's ''Ring'' cycle.
The Paris concerts were poorly attended and lost money – Mahler had to borrow the orchestra's fare home from the Rothschilds.
Pollini was prepared to give Mahler considerable leeway if the conductor could provide commercial as well as artistic success.
Early in 1902 Mahler met Alfred Roller, an artist and designer associated with the Vienna Secession movement.
This account was criticised by later biographers as incomplete, selective and self-serving, and for providing a distorted picture of Mahler's life.
Composer-conductor Julius Harrison described Mahler's symphonies as "interesting at times, but laboriously put together" and as lacking creative spark.
However, Mahler refused further such invitations as he was anxious to reserve his summers for composing.
Despite the unpleasant atmosphere, Mahler had moments of success at Kassel.
His involvement with the Weber family was complicated by a romantic attachment to Carl von Weber's wife Marion which, though intense on both sides, ultimately came to nothing.
The works of the brief final period—''Das Lied von der Erde'', the Ninth and (incomplete) Tenth Symphonies—are expressions of personal experience, as Mahler faced death.
Donald Mitchell writes that this interaction is the backcloth against which all Mahler's music can be considered.
However, musicologist Donald Mitchell notes specific relationships between the middle period songs and their contemporaneous symphonies—the second ''Kindertotenlieder'' song and the Adagietto from the Fifth Symphony, the last ''Kindertotenlieder'' song and the Sixth Symphony finale.
Mahler initially gave the first three symphonies full descriptive programmes, all of which he later repudiated.
In April 1901, dogged by a recurrence of ill-health and wearied by more complaints from the orchestra, Mahler relinquished the Philharmonic concerts conductorship.
Born in Bohemia (then part of Austrian Empire) as a German-speaking Jew of humble circumstances, Mahler displayed his musical gifts at an early age.
These works were frequently controversial when first performed, and several were slow to receive critical and popular approval; exceptions included his Symphony No.
Hoping to escape from his job in the theatre, Mahler unsuccessfully sought a post as Bülow's permanent assistant.
It is not known whether he saw any of Wagner's operas during his student years.
In November 1901, he met Alma Schindler, the stepdaughter of painter Carl Moll, at a social gathering that included the theatre director Max Burckhard.
While in his lifetime his status as a conductor was established beyond question, his own music gained wide popularity only after periods of relative neglect which included a ban on its performance in much of Europe during the Nazi era.
Mahler accepted this, and started to positively encourage her to write music, even editing, orchestrating and promoting some of her works.
These thinkers continued to influence Mahler and his music long after his student days were over.
After graduating from the Vienna Conservatory in 1878, he held a succession of conducting posts of rising importance in the opera houses of Europe, culminating in his appointment in 1897 as director of the Vienna Court Opera (Hofoper).
A mix of enthusiasm, consternation and critical contempt became the normal response to new Mahler symphonies, although the songs were better received.
In December 1903 Mahler faced a revolt by stagehands, whose demands for better conditions he rejected in the belief that extremists were manipulating his staff.
This short stay ended unhappily, with Mahler's dismissal following an outburst during rehearsals.
Yet, Schonberg concedes, most of the symphonies contain sections in which Mahler the "deep thinker" is transcended by the splendour of Mahler the musician.
From this background the future composer developed early on a permanent sense of exile, "always an intruder, never welcomed".
The range of musical moods, Cooke maintains, comes from Mahler's "amazing orchestration" which, in the writer's view, defies analysis—"it speaks for itself".
Mahler began negotiating with the director of the Hamburg Stadttheater; in May 1891, having agreed to a contract there, he resigned his Budapest post.
He developed his performing skills sufficiently to be considered a local ''Wunderkind'' and gave his first public performance at the town theatre when he was ten years old.
On the other hand, Mahler's family considered Alma to be flirtatious, unreliable, and too fond of seeing young men fall for her charms.
However, according to Schonberg, Beethoven's struggles were those of "an indomitable and triumphant hero", whereas Mahler's are those of "a psychic weakling, a complaining adolescent who&nbsp;... enjoyed his misery, wanting the whole world to see how he was suffering."
He made good progress in his piano studies with Epstein and won prizes at the end of each of his first two years.
Early in 1907 he began discussions with Heinrich Conried, director of the New York Metropolitan Opera, and in June signed a contract, on very favourable terms, for four seasons' conducting in New York.
Vienna, the imperial Habsburg capital, had recently elected an anti-Semitic conservative mayor, Karl Lueger, who had once proclaimed: "I myself decide who is a Jew and who isn't."
He bought a modest house in the village of Kalischt (Kaliště), halfway between Prague in Bohemia and Brno in Moravia, in the geographic center of today's Czech Republic.
The middle period comprises a triptych of purely instrumental symphonies (the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh), the ''Rückert'' songs and the ''Kindertotenlieder'', two final ''Wunderhorn'' settings and, in some reckonings, Mahler's last great affirmative statement, the choral Eighth Symphony.
Its first performance was delayed until 1901, when it was presented in a revised, shortened form.
The Second Symphony begins in C minor and ends in E flat.
After a week's trial at the Royal Theatre in the Hessian town of Kassel, Mahler became the theatre's "Musical and Choral Director" from August 1883.
The melodies for the second and fourth songs of the cycle were incorporated into the First Symphony, which Mahler finished in 1888, at the height of his relationship with Marion von Weber.
Now firmly under the influence of the ''Wunderhorn'' folk-poem collection, Mahler produced a stream of song settings at Steinbach, and composed his Second and Third Symphonies there.
In his lifetime, Mahler's works and their performances attracted wide interest, but rarely unqualified approval; for years after its 1889 premiere critics and public struggled to understand the First Symphony, described by one critic after an 1898 Dresden performance as "the dullest symphonic work the new epoch has produced."
The main works of the first period are the first four symphonies, the ''Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen'' song cycle and various song collections in which the ''Wunderhorn'' songs predominate.
After leaving the University in 1879, Mahler made some money as a piano teacher, continued to compose, and in 1880 finished a dramatic cantata, ''Das klagende Lied'' ("The Song of Lamentation").
A technical device much used by Mahler is that of "progressive tonality", which Deryck Cooke describes as "the procedure of resolving a symphonic conflict in a different key from that in which it was stated", and which is often used "to symbolise the gradual ascendancy of a certain value by progress from one key to another over the whole course of a symphony".
Mahler had by now abandoned all explicit programmes and descriptive titles; he wanted to write "absolute" music that spoke for itself.
Around Christmas 1910 he began suffering from a sore throat, which persisted.
From Beethoven, Liszt and (from a different musical tradition) Berlioz came the concept of writing music with an inherent narrative or "programme", and of breaking away from the traditional four-movement symphony format.
This production caused anger among the more extreme Viennese German nationalists, who accused Mahler of "fraternising with the anti-dynastic, inferior Czech nation".
A second daughter, Anna, was born in 1904.
In Austria, Mahler's work experienced a brief renaissance between 1934 and 1938, a period known today as 'Austrofascism', when the authoritarian regime with the help of Alma Mahler and Bruno Walter, who were both on friendly terms with the new chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg, sought to make Mahler into a national icon (with a status comparable to that of Wagner in Germany).
The Sixth Symphony, unusually for Mahler, begins and ends in the same key, A minor, signifying that in this case the conflict is unresolved.
Such generous praise was rare, particularly after Mahler's accession to the Vienna Hofoper directorship.
Despite this event, Mahler has been described as a lifelong agnostic.
She wrote in her diary: "How hard it is to be so mercilessly deprived of&nbsp;... things closest to one's heart".
Schoenberg's Serenade, Op.
His conducting of ''Tristan'' enthralled the young composer Ralph Vaughan Williams, who "staggered home in a daze and could not sleep for two nights."
Few of Mahler's student compositions have survived; most were abandoned when he became dissatisfied with them.
His final Budapest triumph was a performance of ''Don Giovanni'' which won him praise from Brahms, who was present.
Wolf was unable to submit to the strict disciplines of the Conservatory and was expelled.
The illness was, however, a further depressing factor; at the end of the summer the villa at Maiernigg was closed, and never revisited.
An ardent, but ultimately unfulfilled, love affair with soprano Johanna Richter led Mahler to write a series of love poems which became the text of his song cycle ''Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen'' ("Songs of a Wayfarer").
By that time he was at odds with the opera house's administration over the amount of time he was spending on his own music, and was preparing to leave.
He made his initial mark in May 1897 with much-praised performances of Wagner's ''Lohengrin'' and Mozart's ''Die Zauberflöte''.
Two years later, on 7 July 1860, their second son, Gustav, was born.
Mahler's last work employing vocal and orchestral forces, ''Das Lied von der Erde'', is subtitled "A Symphony&nbsp;..."—Mitchell categorises it as a "song ''and'' symphony".
The Austrian author Stefan Zweig, in his memoirs ''The World of Yesterday'' (1942), described Mahler's appointment as an example of the Viennese public's general distrust of young artists: "Once, when an amazing exception occurred and Gustav Mahler was named director of the Court Opera at thirty-eight years old, a frightened murmur and astonishment ran through Vienna, because someone had entrusted the highest institute of art to 'such a young person' ...
During his Budapest years Mahler's compositional output had been limited to the ''Wunderhorn'' song settings that became Volumes&nbsp;II and III of ''Lieder und Gesänge'', and amendments to the First Symphony.
Shortly after the ''Zauberflöte'' triumph, Mahler was forced to take sick leave for several weeks, during which he was nursed by his sister Justine and his long-time companion, the viola player Natalie Bauer-Lechner.
Unwilling to remain in Kassel for another year, Mahler resigned in July 1885, and through good fortune was offered a standby appointment as an assistant conductor at the Neues Deutsches Theater (New German Theatre) in Prague.
Four of the ''Rückert-Lieder'', and ''Kindertotenlieder'', were introduced in Vienna on 29 January 1905.
He later wrote: "From the moment I crossed the threshold of the Olmütz theatre I felt like one awaiting the wrath of God."
In 1938, Mengelberg revealed the existence of the so-called "Dresden archive", a series of manuscripts in the possession of the widowed Marion von Weber.
Mahler "first nights" now became increasingly frequent musical events; he conducted the first performances of the Fifth and Sixth Symphonies at Cologne and Essen respectively, in 1904 and 1906.
Mitchell concludes with the statement: "Even were his own music not to survive, Mahler would still enjoy a substantial immortality in the music of these pre-eminent successors who have embraced his art and assimilated his techniques."
Even more brass, nothing but brass!"
Cooke considers these works to be a loving (rather than a bitter) farewell to life; the composer Alban Berg called the Ninth "the most marvellous thing that Mahler ever wrote".
Although this early evidence of cross-fertilisation is important, it is during Mahler's extended ''Wunderhorn'' phase, in which his Second, Third and Fourth Symphonies were written, that the song and symphony genres are consistently intermingled.
Bernhard Mahler, the pedlar's son and the composer's father, elevated himself to the ranks of the petite bourgeoisie by becoming a coachman and later an innkeeper.
In London, ''The Times'' obituary said his conducting was "more accomplished than that of any man save Richter", and that his symphonies were "undoubtedly interesting in their union of modern orchestral richness with a melodic simplicity that often approached banality", though it was too early to judge their ultimate worth.
The union of song and symphonic form in Mahler's music is, in Cooke's view, organic; "his songs flower naturally into symphonic movements, being already symphonic in cast."
Dmitri Shostakovich and Benjamin Britten are among later 20th-century composers who admired and were influenced by Mahler.
Mahler's biographer Jonathan Carr says that the composer's head was "not only full of the sound of Bohemian bands, trumpet calls and marches, Bruckner chorales and Schubert sonatas.
His many enemies in the city used the anti-Semitic and conservative press to denigrate almost every performance of a Mahler work; thus the Third Symphony, a success in Krefeld in 1902, was treated in Vienna with critical scorn: "Anyone who has committed such a deed deserves a couple of years in prison."
Mahler was by nature moody and authoritarian—Natalie Bauer-Lechner, his earlier partner, said that living with him was "like being on a boat that is ceaselessly rocked to and fro by the waves".
He continued to make occasional guest appearances at the Met, his last performance being Tchaikovsky's ''The Queen of Spades'' on 5 March 1910.
Here, Mahler conducted his first full-scale opera, Verdi's ''Il trovatore'', one of more than 50 that he presented during his time in Laibach.
The Eighth was a sensationally successful performance that was immediately taken to New York where it scored a further triumph.
He overcame the bar that existed against the appointment of a Jew to this post by what may have been a pragmatic conversion to Roman Catholicism in February 1897.
In Britain and elsewhere, Carr notes, the extent of Mahler performances and recordings has replaced a relative famine with a glut, bringing problems of over-familiarity.
The Society aims to create a complete critical edition of Mahler's works, and to commemorate all aspects of the composer's life.
After completing the symphony, Mahler composed a 20-minute funeral march, or ''Totenfeier'', which later became the first movement of his Second Symphony.
The occasion was a triumph—"easily Mahler's biggest lifetime success", according to biographer Robert Carr— but was overshadowed by the composer's discovery, before the event, that Alma had begun an affair with the young architect Walter Gropius.
After 1945 his compositions were rediscovered and championed by a new generation of listeners; Mahler then became one of the most frequently performed and recorded of all composers, a position he has sustained into the 21st century.
Back in Europe for the summer of 1909, Mahler worked on his Ninth Symphony and made a conducting tour of the Netherlands.
The highlight of Mahler's 1910 summer was the first performance of the Eighth Symphony at Munich on 12 September, the last of his works to be premiered in his lifetime.
In Mahler's middle and late periods, the song-symphony relationship is less direct.
All of these elements would later contribute to his mature musical vocabulary.
He destroyed a symphonic movement prepared for an end-of-term competition, after its scornful rejection by the autocratic director Joseph Hellmesberger on the grounds of copying errors.
Thus, from Beethoven's Ninth Symphony came the idea of using soloists and a choir within the symphonic genre.
In a gesture of love, Mahler dedicated his Eighth Symphony to her.
In 1940 she published a memoir of her years with Mahler, entitled ''Gustav Mahler: Memories and Letters''.
In 1881, he was engaged at the Landestheater in Laibach (now Ljubljana, in Slovenia), where the small but resourceful company was prepared to attempt more ambitious works.
During his ten years in Vienna, Mahler had brought new life to the opera house and cleared its debts, but had won few friends—it was said that he treated his musicians in the way a lion tamer treated his animals.
Nevertheless, his innovative productions and insistence on the highest performance standards ensured his reputation as one of the greatest of opera conductors, particularly as an interpreter of the stage works of Wagner, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky.
The premiere at the Stadttheater, in January 1888, was an important occasion at which Tchaikovsky was present, as were the heads of various opera houses.
None of these final works were performed in Mahler's lifetime.
Bernard Shaw, in his role as music critic, thought that the musical audiences of the 1930s would find Mahler (and Bruckner) "expensively second-rate".
He and Alma returned to New York in November 1910, where Mahler threw himself into a busy Philharmonic season of concerts and tours.
On 19 September 1908 the premiere of the Seventh Symphony, in Prague, was deemed by Alma Mahler a critical rather than a popular success.
In Leipzig, Mahler befriended Carl von Weber, grandson of the composer, and agreed to prepare a performing version of Carl Maria von Weber's unfinished opera ''Die drei Pintos'' ("The Three Pintos").
Mahler's Hamburg post was as chief conductor, subordinate to the director, Bernhard Pohl (known as Pollini) who retained overall artistic control.
Mahler's future conducting assistant Bruno Walter, who was present, said that "one may date Mahler's rise to fame as a composer from that day."
He was interviewed, made a good impression, and was offered the post from October 1888.
However, through the efforts of an old Viennese friend, Guido Adler, Mahler's name went forward as a potential director of the Royal Hungarian Opera in Budapest.
In the early part of the season Mahler conducted three concerts with the New York Symphony Orchestra.
In 1893 he acquired a retreat at Steinbach, on the banks of Lake Attersee in Upper Austria, and established a pattern that persisted for the rest of his life; summers would henceforth be dedicated to composition, at Steinbach or its successor retreats.
In December 1860, Bernhard Mahler moved with his wife and infant son, Gustav, to the town of Iglau (Jihlava),  to the south-east, where he built up a distillery and tavern business.
At the Stadttheater Mahler introduced numerous new operas: Verdi's ''Falstaff'', Humperdinck's ''Hänsel und Gretel'', and works by Smetana.
Mahler had made it clear that his ultimate goal was an appointment in Vienna, and from 1895 onward was manoeuvring, with the help of influential friends, to secure the directorship of the Vienna Hofoper.
His departing message to the company, which he pinned to a notice board, was later torn down and scattered over the floor.
Performances of Mahler's works became less frequent after his death.
Themes from the ''Wunderhorn'' song ''Das himmlische Leben'' ("The Heavenly Life"), composed in 1892, became a key element in the Third Symphony completed in 1896; the song itself forms the finale to the Fourth (1900) and its melody is central to the whole composition.
On arriving in Budapest in October 1888, Mahler encountered a cultural conflict between conservative Hungarian nationalists who favoured a policy of Magyarisation, and progressives who wanted to maintain and develop the country's Austro-German cultural traditions.
In a busy first season Mahler's performances were widely praised, especially his ''Fidelio'' on 20 March 1908, in which he insisted on using replicas being made of Roller's Vienna sets.
In the summer of 1880, Mahler took his first professional conducting job, in a small wooden theatre in the spa town of Bad Hall, south of Linz.
This concert also introduced several recent ''Wunderhorn'' settings.
On 22 May 1911 Mahler was buried in the Grinzing cemetery (de), as he had requested.
Harold Schonberg comments that "it is hard to think of a composer who arouses equal loyalty", adding that "a response of anything short of rapture to the Mahler symphonies will bring to the critic long letters of furious denunciation".
Mahler returned to Vienna in early August to prepare for Vienna's first uncut version of the ''Ring'' cycle.
One of these movements, the "Blumine", later discarded, was based on a passage from his earlier work ''Der Trompeter von Säckingen''.
In Prague, the emergence of Czech National Revival had increased the popularity and importance of the new Czech National Theatre, and had led to a downturn in the Neues Deutsches Theater's fortunes.
One of Freud's observations was that much damage had been done by Mahler's insisting that Alma give up her composing.
In Britain the Hallé Orchestra brought ''Das Lied'' and the Ninth Symphony to Manchester in 1931; Sir Henry Wood staged the Eighth in London in 1930, and again in 1938 when the young Benjamin Britten found the performance "execrable" but was nevertheless impressed by the music.
Some of Mahler's immediate musical successors included the composers of the Second Viennese School, notably Arnold Schoenberg, Alban Berg and Anton Webern.
The repertory was exclusively operetta; it was, in Carr's words "a dismal little job", which Mahler accepted only after Julius Epstein told him he would soon work his way up.
Mitchell highlights Britten's "marvellously keen, spare and independent writing for the wind in&nbsp;... the first movement of the Cello Symphony of 1963 which clearly belongs to that order of dazzling transparency and instrumental emancipation which Mahler did so much to establish".
This suspicion – that all young people were 'not very reliable' – ran through all circles at that time."
In April 1899 he conducted the Viennese premiere of his Second Symphony; 17 February 1901 saw the first public performance of his early work ''Das klagende Lied'', in a revised two-part form.
The 1909–10 New York Philharmonic season was long and taxing; Mahler rehearsed and conducted 46 concerts, but his programmes were often too demanding for popular tastes.
The American composers Leonard Bernstein and Samuel Barber were also influenced by Mahler's work.
While working on the last of his ''Des Knaben Wunderhorn'' settings he started his Fourth Symphony, which he completed in 1900.
In a letter to Alma dated 16 February 1902, Mahler wrote, with reference to Richard Strauss: "My day will come when his is ended.
Except for his juvenilia, few of which have survived, Mahler composed only in the media of song and symphony, with a close and complex interrelationship between the two.
Another triumph was the German premiere of Tchaikovsky's ''Eugene Onegin'', in the presence of the composer, who called Mahler's conducting "astounding", and later asserted in a letter that he believed Mahler was "positively a genius".
2  and the triumphant premiere of his Eighth Symphony in 1910.
Mahler's ''œuvre'' is relatively small; for much of his life composing was necessarily a part-time activity while he earned his living as a conductor.
He devised, but did not publish, titles for each of the movements for the Fourth Symphony; from these titles the German music critic Paul Bekker conjectured a programme in which Death appears in the Scherzo "in the friendly, legendary guise of the fiddler tempting his flock to follow him out of this world".
The remaining Vienna years were to prove particularly fruitful.
Alma, on doctors' orders, was absent, but among the mourners at a relatively pomp-free funeral were Arnold Schoenberg (whose wreath described Mahler as "the holy Gustav Mahler"), Bruno Walter, Alfred Roller, the Secessionist painter Gustav Klimt, and representatives from many of the great European opera houses.
They reached Paris ten days later, where Mahler entered a clinic at Neuilly, but there was no improvement; on 11 May he was taken by train to the Lŏw sanatorium in Vienna, where he died on 18 May.
In the summer of 1907 Mahler, exhausted from the effects of the campaign against him in Vienna, took his family to Maiernigg.
In the Netherlands the advocacy of Willem Mengelberg ensured that Mahler remained popular there, and Mengelberg's engagement with the New York Philharmonic from 1922 to 1928 brought Mahler regularly to American audiences.
In spite of the emotional distractions, during the summer of 1910 Mahler worked on his Tenth Symphony, completing the Adagio and drafting four more movements.
In this more liberated age, enthusiasm for Mahler expanded even into places—Spain, France, Italy—which had long been resistant to him.
In his three seasons he had performed around 80 different works, which included pieces by relatively unknown composers such as Hermann Goetz, Wilhelm Kienzl and the Italian Lorenzo Perosi.
While Mahler's methods improved standards, his histrionic and dictatorial conducting style was resented by orchestra members and singers alike.
When Richter resigned as head of the Vienna Philharmonic subscription concerts in September 1898, the concerts committee had unanimously chosen Mahler as his successor.
Mahler's friend Hugo Wolf told Bauer-Lechner that "for the first time I have heard the ''Ring'' as I have always dreamed of hearing it while reading the score."
On 27 October 1893, at Hamburg's Ludwig Konzerthaus, Mahler conducted a revised version of his First Symphony; still in its original five-movement form, it was presented as a ''Tondichtung'' (tone poem) under the descriptive name "Titan".
The young Mahler was auditioned by the renowned pianist Julius Epstein, and accepted for 1875–76.
In this period songs and symphonies are closely related and the symphonic works are programmatic.
24 (1923), Berg's Three Pieces for Orchestra (1915) and Webern's Six Pieces (1928) all carry echoes of Mahler's Seventh Symphony.
Iglau was then a thriving commercial town of 20,000&nbsp;people where Gustav was introduced to music through street songs, dance tunes, folk melodies, and the trumpet calls and marches of the local military band.
The Czech composer-journalist Max Brod has also identified Jewish tunes and rhythms in Mahler's music.
This meeting led to a rapid courtship; Mahler and Alma were married at a private ceremony on 9 March 1902.
Earlier, in 1916, Leopold Stokowski had given the American premieres of the Eighth Symphony and ''Das Lied von der Erde'' in Philadelphia.
Subsequently, the two were rarely in agreement, but kept their divisions private.
True to this belief, Mahler drew material from many sources into his songs and symphonic works: bird calls and cow-bells to evoke nature and the countryside, bugle fanfares, street melodies and country dances to summon the lost world of his childhood.
This technique was also used by Mahler's Danish contemporary Carl Nielsen.
However, its reception was dominated by satirical comments on Mahler's unconventional percussion effects—the use of a wooden mallet, birch rods and a huge square bass drum.
Mahler's first orchestral song cycle, ''Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen'', composed at Kassel, was based on his own verses, although the first poem, "Wenn mein Schatz Hochzeit macht" ("When my love becomes a bride") closely follows the text of a ''Wunderhorn'' poem.
He enjoyed early success presenting works by Mozart and Wagner, composers with whom he would be particularly associated for the rest of his career, but his individualistic and increasingly autocratic conducting style led to friction, and a falling out with his more experienced fellow-conductor, Ludwig Slansky.
Viennese critic Heinrich Reinhardt dismissed the symphony as "Brass, lots of brass, incredibly much brass!
After completing his six-month engagement, Mahler returned to Vienna and worked part-time as chorus-master at the Vienna Carltheater.
