The first article of the document recognises the containment of Venezuela to consider null and void the decision of the court defined its border with British Guiana.
This is part of the data collection for the nomination dossier.
Its blend of Indo-Guyanese (East Indian) and Afro-Guyanese (African) cultures gives it similarities to Trinidad and distinguishes it from other parts of the Americas.
The educational system does not sufficiently focus on the training of Guyanese in science and technology, technical and vocational subjects, business management, or computer sciences.
There are  of highway, of which  are paved.
The clean, unpolluted waters of the Essequibo watershed support a remarkable diversity of fish and aquatic invertebrates, and are home to giant otters, capybaras, and several species of caimans.
The majority of Indo-Guyanese are descended from indentured servants who came from Bhojpuri-speaking areas of North India.
Meanwhile, as a result of the Kaieteur National Park being considered too small, there is a proposal to prepare a nomination for a Cluster Site that will include the Kaieteur National Park, the Iwokrama Forest and the Kanuku Mountains.
In 1992, the first "free and fair" elections were overseen by former United States President Jimmy Carter, and the People's Progressive Party has led the country since.
Originally inhabited by several indigenous groups, Guyana was settled by the Dutch before coming under British control in the late 18th century.
According to 2011 estimates from the WHO, HIV prevalence is 1.2% of the adult population (ages 15–49).
Guyana signed the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage treaty in 1977, the first Caribbean country to do so.
Thus far, the country has received $115 million of the total grant.
The maritime component of the territorial dispute with Suriname was arbitrated by the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea, and a ruling was announced on 21 September 2007.
This important event followed a request made by the Wai Wai community to the government of Guyana and Conservation International Guyana (CIG) for assistance in developing a sustainable plan for their lands in Konashen.
Guyanese of mixed heritage make up 16.7%, while the indigenous peoples (known locally as Amerindians) make up 9.1%.
In 2008 the public utility Guyana Water Inc implemented a Turnaround Plan (TAP) to reduce non-revenue water and to financially consolidate the utility.
The Konashen COCA is relatively unique in that it contains a high level of biological diversity and richness that remains in nearly pristine condition; such places have become rare on earth.
The Corentyne river forms the border with Suriname.
'''Guyana''' (pronounced  or ), officially the '''Co-operative Republic of Guyana''', is a sovereign state on the northern mainland of South America.
Chronic problems include a shortage of skilled labour and a deficient infrastructure.
Guyana has one of the highest levels of biodiversity in the world.
Guyana continues in its bid for a World Heritage Site.
On land, large mammals, such as jaguars, tapirs, bush dogs, giant anteaters, and saki monkeys are still common.
A tentative list indicating an intention to nominate Historic Georgetown was submitted to UNESCO in December 2004.
Its other neighbour, Surinam, claims for itself a part of the eastern territory southeast of the country specifically about 15,600 square kilometres called Tigri Area which currently accounts for 7.26% of the country.
Guyana's educational system is considered to be among the best in the Caribbean, but it deteriorated significantly in the 1980s, because of inadequate funding and emigration of many highly educated citizens.
Although Christopher Columbus sighted Guyana during his third voyage (in 1498), the Dutch were the first to establish colonies: Essequibo (1616), Berbice (1627), and Demerara (1752).
Key issues in the water and sanitation sector in Guyana are poor service quality, a low level of cost recovery and low levels of access.
Guyana's tropical climate, unique geology, and relatively pristine ecosystems support extensive areas of species-rich rain forests and natural habitats with high levels of endemism.
Guyana submitted the Kaieteur National Park, including the Kaieteur Falls, to UNESCO as its first World Heritage Site nomination.
Guyana is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the north, Brazil to the south and southwest, Suriname to the east and Venezuela to the west.
For international football purposes, Guyana is part of CONCACAF.
When the British surveyed British Guiana in 1840, they included the entire Cuyuni River basin within the colony.
Guyana holds two of the World Wildlife Fund's Global 200 eco-regions, the Guianan and Guiana Highlands moist forests.
Thanks to the very low human population density of the area, most of these forests are still intact.
Guyana has one of the largest unspoiled rainforests in South America, some parts of which are almost inaccessible by humans.
Work continues, after a period of hiatus, on the nomination dossier for Historic Georgetown.
In the mid-1990s, Guyana began the process of selecting sites for World Heritage nomination, and three sites were considered: Kaieteur National Park, Shell Beach and Historic Georgetown.
While the adjustment to VAT has been difficult, it may improve day-to-day life because of the significant additional funds the government will have available for public spending.
The rich natural history of British Guiana was described by early explorers Sir Walter Raleigh and Charles Waterton and later by naturalists Sir David Attenborough and Gerald Durrell.
Schools have introduced the CAPE exams which all other Caribbean countries have introduced.
Guyana also has five courses for horse racing.
In doing so Guyana created the world's largest Community-Owned Conservation Area.
Therefore, the claim area is under the authority of the government of Guyana is not resolved until something different under the treaty.
More than 80% of Guyana is still covered by forests, those forest also contains the worlds rarest orcids  ranging from dry evergreen and seasonal forests to montane and lowland evergreen rain forests.
They are followed by the Afro-Guyanese, the descendants of slaves from Africa, who constitute 30.2%.
The Value Added Tax (VAT) was brought into effect, replacing six different taxes.
After the British assumed control in 1796, the Dutch formally ceded the area in 1814.
Most of the forests found here are tall, evergreen hill-land and lower montane forests, with large expanses of flooded forest along major rivers.
The new 15,000-seat Providence Stadium, also referred to as Guyana National Stadium, was built in time for the World Cup and was ready for the beginning of play on 28 March.
By 1997, work on Kaieteur National Park was started, and in 1998 work on Historic Georgetown was begun.
There are ports at Georgetown, Port Kaituma, and New Amsterdam.
The indigenous groups include the Arawaks, the Wai Wai, the Caribs, the Akawaio, the Arecuna, the Patamona, the Wapixana, the Macushi and the Warao.
Unlike other areas of South America, over 70% of the natural habitat remains pristine.
Major private sector organisations include the Private Sector Commission (PSC) and the Georgetown Chamber of Commerce & Industry (GCCI);
Indo-Guyanese made up 51.9% of the total population in 1980, but by 1991 this had fallen to 48.6%, and then to 43.5% in the 2002 census.
The nomination of Kaieteur National Park as a World Heritage Site was not successful, primarily because the area was seen by the evaluators as being too small, especially when compared with the Central Suriname Nature Reserve that had just been nominated as a World Heritage Site (2000).
Executive power is exercised by the government.
The government initiated a major overhaul of the tax code in early 2007.
Guyana also has the distinction of being the only South American nation in which English is the official language.
Venezuela calls this region "Zona en Reclamación" (Reclamation Zone) and Venezuelan maps of the national territory routinely include it, drawing it in with dashed lines.
The Guyanese education system is modelled on the former British education system.
The largest ethnic group is the Indo-Guyanese (also known as East Indians), the descendants of indentured servants from India, who make up 43.5% of the population, according to the 2002 census.
This represents an increase of 47.3% or annual growth of 3.5%.
Guyana played host to international cricket matches as part of the 2007 Cricket World Cup (CWC 2007).
There are nine indigenous tribes residing in Guyana: the Wai Wai, Macushi, Patamona, Arawak, Carib, Wapishana, Arecuna, Akawaio, and Warrau.
Although the education system recovered in the 1990s, it still does not produce the quality of educated students necessary for Guyana to modernise its workforce.
The two parties are principally organised along ethnic lines and as a result often clash on issues related to the allocation of resources.
This fact has given rise to various non-exploitative, environmentally sustainable industries such as ecotourism, successfully capitalising on the biological wealth of the Konashen COCA with comparatively little enduring impact.
Students are expected to take the NGSA (National Grade Six Assessment) for entrance into high school in grade 7.
In 2008, the country joined the Union of South American Nations as a founding member.
The UK to sign the document recognise the claim and nonconformity of Venezuela remembering and find a practical, peaceful and satisfactory solution for the parties, The border disputes persist and no final settlement has been reached
This stems from a 2009 agreement between the nations for a total of $250 million for protecting and maintaining the natural habitat.
Venezuela did not agree with this as it claimed all lands west of the Essequibo River.
Low prices for key mining and agricultural commodities combined with troubles in the bauxite and sugar industries, had threatened the government's tenuous fiscal position and dimmed prospects for the future.
Historically the Arawak and Carib tribes dominated Guyana.
Over 400 species of birds have been reported from the region, and the reptile and amphibian faunas are similarly rich.
In 1967 a Surinamese survey team was found in the New River Triangle and was forcibly removed.
Guyana shares similar interests with the islands in the West Indies, such as food, festive events, music, sports, etc.
Navigable waterways extend , including the Berbice, Demerara, and Essequibo rivers.
NRW reduction is expected to be 5% per annum for the three-year period of the plan, A midterm review is now due to examine the success of the TAP.
Jagdeo was lauded by IDB President Moreno for his strong leadership and negotiating skills in pursuing debt relief for Guyana and several other regional countries.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the political landscape was dominated by the People's National Congress.
The Smithsonian Institution has identified nearly 2,700 species of plants from this region, representing 239 distinct families, and there are certainly additional species still to be recorded.
With small growth in the overall population, the decline in the shares of the two larger groups has resulted in the relative increase of shares of the multiracial and Amerindian groups.
Approximately eight thousand species of plants occur in Guyana, half of which are found nowhere else.
They take the CXC at the end of high school.
Guyana, with 1,168 vertebrate species, 814 bird species, boasts one of the richest mammalian fauna assemblages of any comparably sized area in the world.
Guyana, Suriname and the Falkland Islands are the only three regions in South America which drive on the left.
Guyana has ratified the treaty.
Mount Roraima and Guyana's table-top mountains (tepuis) are said to have been the inspiration for Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's 1912 novel ''The Lost World''.
Until recently, the government was juggling a sizeable external debt against the urgent need for expanded public investment.
There are also many volcanic escarpments and waterfalls, including Kaieteur Falls which is believed to be the largest water drop in the world.
The Venezuelan government exposes the November 12, 1962 the government of London nine points on which they base their claim, in 1966 The Geneva Accord was signed between Venezuela and the United Kingdom ( on behalf of its then colony British Guiana ) in Geneva (Switzerland) on 17 February 1966.
The region known as "the Guianas" consists of the large shield landmass north of the Amazon River and east of the Orinoco River known as the "land of many waters".
The American government supported Forbes Burnham during the early years of independence because Cheddi Jagan was identified as a Marxist.
They provided secret financial support and political campaign advice to Burnham's People's National Congress, to the detriment of the Jagan-led People's Progressive Party, which was mostly supported by Guyanese of East Indian background.
The ruling concerning the Caribbean Sea north of both nations found both parties violated treaty obligations and declined to order any compensation to either party.
In 1838, some Indians, who served as lower-caste indentured servants, were transported from Indian villages to Guyana, where they intermixed with the Guyanese and formed half of today's Guyanese population.
To date, however, Guyana has not made a successful nomination.
With , Guyana is the fourth-smallest country on mainland South America after Uruguay, Suriname, and French Guiana.
Similarly, the multiracial population increased by 37,788 persons, representing a 43.0% increase or annual growth rate of 3.2% from the base period of 1991 census.
In addition to its CARICOM membership, Guyana is a member of CONCACAF, the international football federation for North and Central America and the Caribbean.
However, most of the suicides were by Americans and not Guyanese.
The sugar industry, which accounts for 28% of all export earnings, is largely run by the company GuySuCo, which employs more people than any other industry.
In May 2008, President Bharrat Jagdeo was a signatory to the UNASUR Constitutive Treaty of the Union of South American Nations.
In 1978, Guyana received international notice when 918 members of the American cult, Peoples Temple, died in a mass murder/suicide.
Several initiatives are in place to improve energy access in the hinterland.
Guyana is in border disputes with both Suriname, which claims the area east of the left bank of the Corentyne River and the New River in southwestern Suriname, and Venezuela which claims the land west of the Essequibo River, once the Dutch colony of Essequibo as part of Venezuela's Guayana Essequiba.
Prior to the implementation of the VAT, it had been relatively easy to evade sales tax, and many businesses were in violation of tax code.
The rich natural history of Guyana was described by early explorers Sir Walter Raleigh and Charles Waterton and later by naturalists Sir David Attenborough and Gerald Durrell.
A high-profile management contract with the British company Severn Trent was cancelled by the government in February 2007.
General Elections were held on 28 November 2011, which resulted in a re-election of the People's Progressive Party (PPP) and installation of that party's presidential candidate Donald Ramotar as President.
By replacing several taxes with one flat tax rate, it will also be easier for government auditors to spot embezzlement.
The highest league in their club system is the GFF National Super League.
The proposed area and surrounds have some of Guyana's most diversified life zones with one of the highest levels of endemic species found in South America.
The Kaieteur Falls are the most spectacular feature of the park, falling a distance of 226&nbsp;metres.
The distribution pattern in the 2002 census was similar to those of the 1980 and 1991 censuses, but the share of the two main groups has declined.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly of Guyana.
The Kanuku Mountains area is in a pristine state and is home to more than four hundred species of birds and other animals.
The politics of Guyana takes place in a framework of a representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Guyana is the head of government, and of a multi-party system.
The A-level system, inherited from the British era, has all but disappeared and is offered only in a few schools.
North of the Rupununi River lies the Rupununi savannah, south of which lie the Kanuku Mountains.
The Konashen COCA forests are also home to countless species of insects, arachnids, and other invertebrates, many of which are still undiscovered and unnamed.
The production of balatá (natural latex) was once big business in Guyana.
On 16 May 2015, retired army general David A. Granger was sworn in as the eighth Executive President of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana.
In 1962 Venezuela for the first time officially claims as its own in the United Nations the territory located west of the Essequibo River, alleging vices of nullity and what is known in international law as acts contrary to good faith by the British government, along with a supposed compromise of some members of the Paris decision.
The PAHO/ WHO Global Health Report 2014 (using statistics of 2012) ranked the country as having the highest suicide rate in the world, with a mortality rate of 44.2 per 100,000 inhabitants.
According to the ''Oxford English Dictionary,'' Guyana is derived from an Indigenous Amerindian language and means "land of many waters".
It is a transitional arrangement to reach a final settlement of the border dispute, many defined as " an agreement to agree " and even invalidate the arbitration award of 1899, he led status quo is maintained.
; Umana Yana: An Amerindian benab, that is a national monument built in 1972,for a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned nations (It was rebuilt in 2016).
There are a total of  of railway, all dedicated to ore transport.
The Amerindian population rose by 22,097 people between 1991 and 2002.
After an exchange of gunfire, the Surinamese were driven from the triangle.
For example, the mineral industry is heavily invested in by the American company Reynolds Metals and the British-Australian Rio Tinto's Rio Tinto Alcan subsidiary; the Korean/Malaysian Barama Company has a large stake in the logging industry.
Simón Bolívar wrote to the British government warning against the Berbice and Demerara settlers settling on land which the Venezuelans, as assumed heirs of Spanish claims on the area dating to the sixteenth century, claimed was theirs.
He was quite successful, getting US$800&nbsp;million of debt written off by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), in addition to millions more from other industrial nations.
The two largest groups, the Indo-Guyanese and Afro-Guyanese, have experienced some racial tension.
The vast majority of the population speaks Guyanese Creole, an English-based creole with slight African and East Indian influence, as their native tongue.
There are two rainy seasons, the first from May to mid-August, the second from mid-November to mid-January.
At the mouth of the Essequibo are several large islands, including the  wide Shell Beach lies along the northwest coast, which is also a major breeding area for sea turtles (mainly leatherbacks) and other wildlife.
Most Guyanese Christians are either Protestants or Roman Catholics and include a mix of all races.
APNU-AFC, a multi-ethnic, multi-party coalition, won a majority, 33 of 65 seats in the National Assembly.
In August 1969 a patrol of the Guyana Defence Force found an unauthorised military camp and a partially completed airstrip inside the triangle, and documented evidence of the Surinamese intention to occupy the entire disputed area.
Those of African descent increased slightly from 30.8% to 32.3% during the first period (1980 and 1991) before falling to 30.2% in the 2002 census.
There is two international airports (Cheddi Jagan International Airport, Timehri and Eugene F. Correira International Airport, Ogle); along with about 90 airstrips, nine of which have paved runways.
However, the Guyanese economy has rebounded slightly and exhibited moderate economic growth since 1999, thanks to an expansion in the agricultural and mining sectors, a more favourable atmosphere for business initiatives, a more realistic exchange rate, fairly low inflation, and the continued support of international organisations.
The dossier was thus returned to Guyana for revision.
Jim Jones's bodyguards had earlier attacked people taking off at a small remote airstrip close to Jonestown, killing five people, including Leo Ryan, the only US congressman ever assassinated in the line of duty.
Historically, politics are a source of tension in the country, and violent riots have often broken out during elections.
It is also home to several endemic species including the greenheart tree.
The main economic activities in Guyana are agriculture (production of rice and Demerara sugar), bauxite mining, gold mining, timber, shrimp fishing and minerals.
Venezuela never has accepted the award by this treaty, and raised the issue again at the time of Guyana's independence.
Such incredible diversity of plants supports even more impressive diversity of animal life, recently documented by a biological survey organised by Conservation International.
A sizable minority are South Indian, largely of Tamil and Telugu descent.
The local climate is tropical and generally hot and humid, though moderated by northeast trade winds along the coast.
The number of Portuguese (4.3% of the population in 1891) has been declining constantly over the decades.
In 2012, Guyana received a $45 million reward from Norway for its rainforest protection efforts.
Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 67.39 years for both males and females in 2012.
Most of the balata bleeding in Guyana took place in the foothills of the Kanuku Mountains in the Rupununi.
This was prevalent under the former PPP/C regime who authorised the VAT to be equal to 50% of the value of the good.
In 1898, at Venezuela's request, an international arbitration tribunal was convened, and in 1899 they issued an award giving about 94% of the disputed territory to British Guiana.
On 11 May 2015, early general elections were held, resulting in a victory for A Partnership For National Unity-Alliance For Change (APNU-AFC) Coalition party.
Digicel is also present in Guyana since 2007 providing mobile service for its citizens
The country lacks a critical mass of expertise in many of the disciplines and activities on which it depends.
Many businesses were very opposed to VAT introduction because of the extra paperwork required; however, the Government has remained firm on the VAT.
In March and April 2007 Guyana co-hosted the Cricket World Cup 2007.
Early exploitation also took place in the North West District, but most of the trees in the area were destroyed by illicit bleeding methods that involved cutting down the trees rather than making incisions in them.
This issue is now governed by the Treaty of Geneva of 1966, which was signed by the Governments of Guyana, Great Britain and Venezuela, and Venezuela continues to claim Guayana Esequiba.
President Bharrat Jagdeo had made debt relief a foremost priority of his administration.
The Iwokrama rain forest, an area rich in biological diversity, has been described by Major General (Retired) Joseph Singh as "a flagship project for conservation."
The Guyana Defence Force (GDF) is the military service of Guyana.
The US State Department and the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), along with the British government, played a strong role in influencing political control in Guyana during this time.
Uses of balatá included the making of cricket balls, the temporary filling of troublesome tooth cavities, and the crafting of figurines and other decorative items (particularly by the Macushi people of the Kanuku mountains).
In 1831 the three separate colonies became a single British colony known as British Guiana.
Since its Independence in 1824 Venezuela has claimed the area of land to the west of the Essequibo River.
Events include Mashramani (Mash), Phagwah (Holi), and Deepavali (Diwali).
The Konashen Indigenous District of Southern Guyana houses the headwaters of the Essequibo River, Guyana's principal water source, and drains the Kassikaityu, Kamoa, Sipu and Chodikar rivers.
In 1899 an international tribunal ruled the land belonged to Great Britain.
Southern Guyana is host to some of the most pristine expanses of evergreen forests in the northern part of South America.
English is the official language of Guyana and is used for education, government, media, and services.
At the first international game of CWC 2007 at the stadium, Lasith Malinga of the Sri Lankan team took four wickets in four consecutive deliveries.
It is, however, included in the Caribbean Region due to its strong cultural, historical, and political ties with the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The four longest rivers are the Essequibo at  long, the Courantyne River at , the Berbice at , and the Demerara at .
The majority of the population, however, speak Guyanese Creole, an English-based creole language with slight Dutch, Arawakan and Caribbean influences.
In April 2005, two Dutch experts in conservation spent two weeks in Georgetown supervising architecture staff and students of the University of Guyana in a historic building survey of the selected area.
The regions are divided into 27 neighbourhood councils.
Some of Guyana's highest mountains are Mount Ayanganna (), Monte Caburaí () and Mount Roraima ( – the highest mountain in Guyana) on the Brazil-Guyana-Venezuela tripoint border, part of the Pakaraima range.
Although Guyana's health profile falls short in comparison with many of its Caribbean neighbours, there has been remarkable progress since 1988, and the Ministry of Health is working to upgrade conditions, procedures, and facilities.
The Guiana Shield region is little known and extremely rich biologically.
Many industries have a large foreign investment.
The legacy of British rule is reflected in the country's diverse population, which includes Indian, African, Amerindian, and multiracial groups.
In addition to being part of the Anglophone Caribbean, Guyana is one of the few Caribbean countries that is not an island in the West Indies.
These forests are home to more than a thousand species of trees.
It was governed as the plantation economy of British Guiana until independence in 1966, and officially became a republic within the British Commonwealth of Nations in 1970.
The three parties signed a Memorandum of Cooperation which outlines a plan for sustainable use of the Konashen COCA's biological resources, identifies threats to the area's biodiversity, and helps develop projects to increase awareness of the COCA as well as generate the income necessary to maintain its protected status.
In February 2004, the Government of Guyana issued a title to more than  of land in the Konashen Indigenous District declaring this land as the Konashen Community-Owned Conservation Area (COCA), to be managed by the Wai Wai.
Approximately three quarters of the west of the country are claimed by Venezuela, specifically 159,542 square kilometres, accounting for 74.21% of the territory, zone called by this as Guyana Essequiba.
More than 300 children were killed; the people were members of a group led by Jim Jones in Jonestown, the settlement which they had created.
