The church was richly decorated with mosaics throughout the centuries.
The Imperial Gate was the main entrance between the exo- and esonarthex.
Later his türbe hosted also 43 tombs of Ottoman princes.
As described by several Western visitors (such as the Córdoban nobleman Pero Tafur and the Florentine Cristoforo Buondelmonti), the church was in a dilapidated state, with several of its doors fallen from their hinges; Mehmed II ordered a renovation as well as the conversion.
Their eldest son Alexius Comnenus is represented on an adjacent pilaster.
A drawing by Fossati showed that the mosaic survived until 1849, and that Thomas Whittemore, founder of the Byzantine Institute of America who was granted permission to preserve the mosaics, assumed that it had been destroyed in the earthquake of 1894.
This process was not completed at once, and reports exist from the 17th century in which travellers note that they could still see Christian images in the former church.
This column goes by different names; the perspiring column, the wishing column, the sweating column or the crying column.
Of the whole dome's 40 ribs, the surviving north section contains 8 ribs, while the south section includes 6 ribs.
Empress Irene stands on the left side of the Virgin, wearing ceremonial garments and offering a document.
At the same time a new sultan's lodge and a new mihrab were built inside.
It was used by the participants in synods, they entered and left the meeting chamber through this door.
Originally part of a monumental front entrance, they now reside in an excavation pit adjacent to the museum's entrance after they were discovered in 1935 beneath the western courtyard by A. M. Schneider.
The first stage of work involved the structural stabilization and repair of the cracked roof, which was undertaken with the participation of the Turkish Ministry of Culture.
At the end of the reconstruction, the church's decorations were renovated, including the additions of paintings of four immense cherubs, a new depiction of Christ on the dome, burial cloth of Christ shown on Fridays, and on the apse a new depiction of the Virgin Mary holding Jesus between the apostles Peter and Paul.
(John 20:19; 20:26; 8:12) On each side of Christ's shoulders is a circular medallion: on His left the Archangel Gabriel, holding a staff, on His right His Mother Mary.
Emperor Theophilus (829–842) was strongly influenced by Islamic art, which forbids the representation of living beings.
Through the imperial charters of 1520 (AH 926) and 1547 (AH 954) shops and parts of the Grand Bazaar and other markets were added to the foundation.
In particular, much controversy rests upon whether the Islamic calligraphy on the dome of the cathedral should be removed, in order to permit the underlying Pantocrator mosaic of Christ as Master of the World, to be exhibited (assuming the mosaic still exists).
Famous in particular for its massive dome, it is considered the epitome of Byzantine architecture and is said to have "changed the history of architecture".
Moreover, the insertion of the windows in the dome structure lowers its weight.
Mary is sitting on a throne without a back, holding the Child Jesus on her lap.
Even though they were made specifically for Hagia Sophia, the columns show variations in size.
After the great earthquake of 25 October 989, which collapsed the Western dome arch, Emperor Basil II asked for the Armenian architect Trdat, creator of the cathedrals of Ani and Argina, to direct the repairs.
Writing in 440, Socrates of Constantinople claimed that the church was built by Constantius II, who was working on it in 346.
The first church on the site was known as the  (''Megálē Ekklēsíā'', "Great Church"), or in Latin "Magna Ecclesia", because of its larger dimensions in comparison to the contemporary churches in the City.
The church contained a large collection of holy relics and featured, among other things, a  silver iconostasis.
Other parts were decorated in a purely decorative style with geometric patterns.
It was rediscovered during the restorations of 1849 by Fossati.
It is believed that touching the moisture cures many illnesses.
Many of these items were shipped to Venice, whose Doge, Enrico Dandolo, had organized the invasion and sack of Constantinople after an agreement with Prince Alexios Angelos, the son of a deposed Byzantine emperor.
The Comnenus mosaic, also located on the eastern wall of the southern gallery, dates from 1122.
The Deësis mosaic (, "Entreaty") probably dates from 1261.
New cracks developed in the dome after the earthquake of October 1344, and several parts of the building collapsed on 19 May 1346; consequently, the church was closed until 1354, when repairs were undertaken by architects Astras and Peralta.
On her left side stands emperor Constantine in ceremonial attire, presenting a model of the city to Mary.
Priests continued to perform Christian rites until stopped by the invaders.
The portraits of the archangels Gabriel and Michael (largely destroyed) in the bema of the arch also date from the 9th century.
The medallions on both sides of the Virgin's head carry the monograms MP and ΘY, an abbreviation of "''Mētēr''" and "''Theou''", meaning "Mother of God".
Two huge marble lustration (ritual purification)  urns were brought from Pergamon during the reign of Sultan Murad III.
Eight years after his death, the mosaic was discovered in 1958 largely through the researches of Robert Van Nice.
These were inscribed with the names of Allah,  Muhammad, the first four caliphs Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali, and the two grandchildren of Muhammad: Hassan and Hussain, by the calligrapher Kazasker Mustafa İzzed Effendi (1801–1877).
The focal point of the Eastern Orthodox Church for nearly one thousand years, the building witnessed the excommunication of Patriarch Michael I Cerularius on the part of Humbert of Silva Candida, the papal envoy of Pope Leo IX in 1054, an act which is commonly considered the start of the Great Schism.
New gigantic circular-framed disks or medallions were hung on columns.
Restorers have attempted to maintain a balance between both Christian and Islamic cultures.
It remained a mosque until 1931, when it was closed to the public for four years.
The upper gallery is laid out in a horseshoe shape that encloses the nave until the apse.
From the date of its construction in 537 AD, and until 1453, it served as an Orthodox cathedral and seat of the Patriarch of Constantinople, except between 1204 and 1261, when it was converted by the Fourth Crusaders to a Roman Catholic cathedral under the Latin Empire of Constantinople.
It depicts Emperor Alexander in full regalia, holding a scroll in his right hand and a globus cruciger in his left.
Several mosaics are preserved in the upper gallery, an area traditionally reserved for the empress and her court.
Zonaras reconciles the two opinions, writing that Constantius had repaired the edifice consecrated by Eusebius of Nicomedia, after it had collapsed.
On either side of His head are the monograms ''IC'' and ''XC'', meaning ''Iēsous Khristos''.
Most of the missing images were located in the building's two tympana.
The exterior, clad in stucco, was tinted yellow and red during restorations in the 19th century at the direction of the Fossati architects.
Further digging was forsaken for fear of impinging on the integrity of the building.
The brothers consolidated the dome and vaults, straightened the columns, and revised the decoration of the exterior and the interior of the building.
The inscription next to him says: "Great emperor Constantine of the Saints".
Interior surfaces are sheathed with polychrome marbles, green and white with purple porphyry, and gold mosaics.
Christian iconographic mosaics can be uncovered, but often at the expense of important and historic Islamic art.
When the dome was erected, its weight caused the walls to lean outward because of the wet mortar underneath.
In fact, it was usual for them to sell mosaics stones – believed to be talismans – to the visitors.
Trapped in the church, congregants and refugees became spoils to be divided amongst the Ottoman invaders.
On her right side stands emperor Justinian I, offering a model of the Hagia Sophia.
The nave is covered by a central dome which at its maximum is  from floor level and rests on an arcade of 40 arched windows.
Moreover, Isidorus changed the dome type, erecting a ribbed dome with pendentives, whose diameter lay between 32.7 and 33.5&nbsp;m. Under Justinian's orders, eight Corinthian columns were disassembled from Baalbek, Lebanon, and shipped to Constantinople around 560.
Shortly after the city's defenses collapsed, pillagers made their way to the Hagia Sophia and battered down its doors.
During the Sack of Constantinople in 1204, the Latin Crusaders vandalized valuable items in every important Byzantine structure of the city, including the golden mosaics of the Hagia Sophia.
It was claimed to be one of the world's most outstanding monuments at the time.
One of the Ulama then climbed the pulpit and recited the Shahada.
The Virgin Mary is standing in the middle, depicted, as usual in Byzantine art, in a dark blue gown.
Although sometimes referred to as Sancta Sophia (as though it were named after Saint Sophia), ''sophia'' being the phonetic spelling in Latin of the Greek word for wisdom, its full name in Greek is , ''Naos tēs Hagias tou Theou Sophias'', "Shrine of the Holy Wisdom of God".
In the 19th century an Italian restoration team placed a cenotaph marker near the probable location, which is still visible today.
It was commissioned to mark the end of 57 years of Roman Catholic use and the return to the Orthodox faith.
The basilica with a wooden roof was built by architect Rufinus.
Nevertheless, the condition of the structure deteriorated, and the World Monuments Fund placed Hagia Sophia on 1996 World Monuments Watch, and again in 1998.
Apart from the mosaics, a large number of figurative decorations were added during the second half of the 9th century: an image of Christ in the central dome; Orthodox saints, prophets and Church Fathers in the tympana below; historical figures connected with this church, such as Patriarch Ignatius; some scenes from the gospel in the galleries.
The mosaics are set against the original golden background of the 6th century.
It is the third panel situated in the imperial enclosure of the upper galleries.
I am the light of the world".
Sultan Mahmud I ordered the restoration of the building in 1739 and added a ''medrese'' (a Koranic school, now the library of the museum), an ''Imaret'' (soup kitchen for distribution to the poor) and a library, and in 1740 a ''Şadirvan'' (fountain for ritual ablutions), thus transforming it into a ''külliye'', i.e.
In later stages figurative mosaics were added, which were destroyed during the iconoclastic controversy (726–843).
Hagia Sophia is one of the greatest surviving examples of Byzantine architecture.
Justinian chose physicist Isidore of Miletus and mathematician Anthemius of Tralles as architects; Anthemius, however, died within the first year of the endeavor.
The minarets were an Ottoman addition, and not part of the original church's Byzantine design.
These mosaics were believed to be a reconstruction of the mosaics of the 6th century that were previously destroyed during the iconoclastic era by the Byzantines of that time, as represented in the inaugural sermon by the patriarch Photios.
The Byzantine architecture of the Hagia Sophia served as inspiration for many other Ottoman mosques, such as the Blue Mosque, the Şehzade Mosque, the Süleymaniye Mosque, the Rüstem Pasha Mosque and the Kılıç Ali Paşa Mosque.
The weight of the dome remained a problem for most of the building's existence.
A tradition which is not older than the 7th – 8th century, reports that the edifice was built by Constantine the Great.
The building was later converted into an Ottoman mosque from 29 May 1453 until 1931.
They also renovated the minbar and mihrab.
They have been able to survive due to the very high and unreachable location.
Islamic features&mdash;such as the mihrab, minbar, and four minarets&mdash;were added.
The Byzantine mosaic above the portal depicts Christ and an unnamed Emperor.
(Νενίκηκά σε Σολομών).
Haghia Sophia is currently (2014) the second most visited museum in Turkey, attracting almost 3.3 million visitors annually.
It was duly cleaned by the Byzantine Institute's successor to Whittemore, Paul A. Underwood.
At that time, all religious pictures and statues were removed from the Hagia Sophia.
One of the minarets (at southwest) was built from red brick while the other three were built from white limestone and sandstone, of which the slender northeast column was erected by Sultan Bayezid II while the two larger minarets to the west were erected by Sultan Selim II and designed by the famous Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan.
In 1453, Constantinople was conquered by the Ottoman Turks under Sultan Mehmed II, who ordered this main church of Orthodox Christianity converted into a mosque.
The Imperial Gate mosaic is located in the tympanum above that gate, which was used only by the emperors when entering the church.
In the 16th century the sultan Suleiman the Magnificent (1520–1566) brought back two colossal candlesticks from his conquest of Hungary.
The text on the book reads as follows: "Peace be with you.
One of these collapsed after the earthquake of 1509, and around the middle of the 16th century they were both replaced by two diagonally opposite minarets built at the east and west corners of the edifice.
Present mosaics are from the post-iconoclastic period.
Basil II let artists paint on each of the four pendentives a giant six-winged Cherub.
He is offering a purse, as symbol of the donation he made to the church, while she is holding a scroll, symbol of the donations she made.
Columns and other marbles were brought from all over the empire, throughout the Mediterranean.
There is a more realistic expression in the portraits instead of an idealized representation.
Enrico Dandolo, the Doge of Venice who commanded the sack and invasion of the city by the Latin Crusaders in 1204, is buried inside the church, probably in the upper Eastern gallery.
Rising ground water had raised the level of humidity within the monument, creating an unstable environment for stone and paint.
The Emperor Alexander mosaic is not easy to find for the first-time visitor, located in the second floor in a dark corner of the ceiling.
The old chandeliers were replaced by new pendant ones.
The drawings of the Hagia Sophia mosaics are today kept in the Cantonal Archive of Ticino.
Following the building's conversion into a mosque in 1453, many of its mosaics were covered with plaster, due to Islam's ban on representational imagery.
During the reign of Selim II (1566–1574), the building started showing signs of fatigue and was extensively strengthened with the addition of structural supports to its exterior by the great Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan, who is also considered one of the world's first earthquake engineers.
The construction is described in the Byzantine historian Procopius' ''On Buildings'' (''Peri ktismatōn'', Latin: ''De aedificiis'').
The Child Christ sits on her lap, giving His blessing and holding a scroll in His left hand.
He is flanked by Constantine IX Monomachus and Empress Zoe, both in ceremonial costumes.
He gives His blessing with His right hand while holding a scroll in His left hand.
Inaugurated on 15 February 360 (during the reign of Constantius II) by the Arian bishop Eudoxius of Antioch, it was built next to the area where the imperial palace was being developed.
The extent of the damage required six years of repair and reconstruction; the church was re-opened on 13 May 994.
The main dome collapsed completely during a subsequent earthquake on 7 May 558, destroying the ambon, altar, and ciborium.
When the Sultan and his cohort entered the church, he insisted it should be at once transformed into a mosque.
One mosaic they documented is Christ Pantocrator in a circle, which would indicate it to be a ceiling mosaic, possibly even of the main dome which was later covered and painted over with Islamic calligraphy that expounds God as the light of the universe.
By that point, the church had fallen into a state of disrepair.
According to data released by the Turkish Culture and Tourism Ministry, Hagia Sophia was Turkey’s most visited tourist attraction in 2015.
The bells, altar, iconostasis, and sacrificial vessels and other relics were removed and the mosaics depicting Jesus, his Mother Mary, Christian saints and angels were also removed or plastered over.
Unlike most of the other mosaics in Hagia Sophia, which had been covered over by ordinary plaster, the Alexander mosaic was simply painted over and reflected the surrounding mosaic patterns and thus was well hidden.
A fire started during the tumult of the Nika Revolt and burned the second Hagia Sophia to the ground on 13–14 January 532.
At the northwest of the building there is a column with a hole in the middle covered by bronze plates.
The emperor, together with the Patriarch Menas, inaugurated the new basilica on 27 December 537 – 5 years and 10 months after construction start – with much pomp.
The bottom part of this mosaic is badly deteriorated.
A timekeeper's building and a new madrasah were built.
Justinian's basilica was at once the culminating architectural achievement of late antiquity and the first masterpiece of Byzantine architecture.
The carpets were removed and the marble floor decorations such as the Omphalion appeared for the first time in centuries, while the white plaster covering many of the mosaics was removed.
The best-preserved mosaics are located in the southern part of the gallery.
They either depicted the Virgin Mother, Jesus, saints, or emperors and empresses.
His son Mustafa I (1617–1618; 1622–1623) converted the baptistery into his türbe.
The marker is frequently mistaken by tourists as being a medieval marker of the actual tomb of the doge.
The number of treasures, relics and miracle-working, painted icons of the Hagia Sophia grew progressively richer into an amazing collection.
In 1317, emperor Andronicus II ordered four new buttresses (Πυραμὶδας, Greek:"Piramídas") to be built in the eastern and northern parts of the church, financing them with the inheritance of his deceased wife, Irene.
These caused the deformation of the piers which sustained the dome.
He is shown as a beardless youth, probably representing his appearance at his coronation aged seventeen.
He holds a purse, symbol of an imperial donation to the church.
The inscription over the head of the emperor says: "Constantine, pious emperor in Christ the God, king of the Romans, Monomachus".
Both churches acted together as the principal churches of the Byzantine Empire.
The Patriarch of Constantinople John Chrysostom came into a conflict with Empress Aelia Eudoxia, wife of the emperor Arcadius, and was sent into exile on 20 June 404.
It was inaugurated on 29 March 867 by Patriarch Photius and the emperors Michael III and Basil I.
He entrusted it to Isidorus the Younger, nephew of Isidore of Miletus, who used lighter materials and elevated the dome by "30 feet" (about ) – giving the building its current interior height of .
This reconstruction, giving the church its present 6th-century form, was completed in 562.
It remained the world's largest cathedral for nearly a thousand years, until Seville Cathedral was completed in 1520.
Since the early 2010s, several campaigns and government high officials, notably Turkey's deputy prime minister Bülent Arınç in November 2013, have been demanding that Hagia Sophia be converted into a mosque again.
When Isidore the Younger rebuilt the fallen cupola, he had to first build up the interior of the walls to make them vertical again.
In 1850 the architect Fossati built a new sultan's lodge or loge in a Neo-Byzantine style connected to the royal pavilion behind the mosque.
The mosaics however for their most part date to after the end of the Byzantine Iconoclasm of 800 AD.
The legend states that since St. Gregory the Miracle Worker appeared at the column in year 1200, the column is moist.
Another theory is that this mosaic were made for an earlier emperor and empress, with their heads changed into the present ones.
Unlike the original, this included 40 ribs and was slightly taller, in order to lower the lateral forces on the church walls.
Outside the main building, the minarets were repaired and altered so that they were of equal height.
Additionally, the architect raised the height of the rebuilt dome by approximately six metres so that the lateral forces would not be as strong and its weight would flow more easily down into the walls.
The original cupola collapsed entirely after the quake of 558; in 563 a new dome was built by Isidore the younger, a nephew of Isidore of Miletus.
The theories of Heron of Alexandria may have been utilized to address the challenges presented by building such an expansive dome over so large a space.
The idea of these columns being spoils from cities such as Rome and Ephesus is a later invention.
On July 1, 2016, a muezzin's call to prayer reverberated inside the Hagia Sofia for the first time in 85 years.
In this panel the Virgin Mary and John the Baptist (''Ioannes Prodromos''), both shown in three-quarters profile, are imploring the intercession of Christ Pantocrator for humanity on Judgment Day.
The dome of Hagia Sophia has spurred particular interest for many art historians, architects and engineers because of the innovative way the original architects envisioned it.
The Fossatis restored the mosaics of the two ''hexapteryga'' (singular , pr.
The current building was originally constructed as a church between 532 and 537 on the orders of the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I and was the third Church of the Holy Wisdom to occupy the site, the previous two having both been destroyed by rioters.
He erected again and reinforced the fallen dome arch, and rebuilt the west side of the dome with 15 dome ribs.
In his book ''De caerimoniis aulae Byzantinae'' ("Book of Ceremonies"), Emperor Constantine VII (913–919) wrote a detailed account of the ceremonies held in the Hagia Sophia by the emperor and the patriarch.
Justinian himself had overseen the completion of the greatest cathedral ever built up to that time, and it was to remain the largest cathedral for 1,000 years up until the completion of the cathedral in Seville in Spain.
Murad III had also two large alabaster Hellenistic urns transported from Pergamon and placed on two sides of the nave.
A second church was ordered by Theodosius II, who inaugurated it on 10 October 415.
Like other churches throughout Christendom, the basilica offered sanctuary from persecution to outlaws.
As in this case, the architects reproduced in paint damaged decorative mosaic patterns, sometimes redesigning them in the process.
The Byzantine poet Paul the Silentiary composed a long epic poem (still extant), known as ''Ekphrasis'', for the rededication of the basilica presided over by Patriarch Eutychius on 23 December 562.
Of these mosaics, one can still see the two archangels Gabriel and Michael in the spandrels of the bema.
The mosaics in the upper gallery were uncovered and cleaned, although many were re-covered "for protection against further damage".
Her feet rest on a pedestal.
In order to do that, parts of the Patriarchate at the south corner of the building were pulled down the previous year.
The WMF secured a series of grants from 1997 to 2002 for the restoration of the dome.
The names of each saint is given around the statues in Greek, in order to enable an identification for the visitor.
The Virgin and Child mosaic was the first of the post-iconoclastic mosaics.
The crash was due mainly to the too high bearing load and to the enormous shearing load of the dome, which was too flat.
He had a two-winged bronze doors with his monograms installed at the southern entrance of the church.
The octagonal mausoleum of their son Mehmed III (1595–1603) and his Valide was built next to it in 1608 / 1017 H by royal architect Dalgiç Mehmet Aĝa.
Its interior is decorated with mosaics and marble pillars and coverings of great artistic value.
In 726, the emperor Leo the Isaurian issued a series of edicts against the veneration of images, ordering the army to destroy all icons – ushering in the period of Byzantine iconoclasm.
They were placed on either side of the mihrab.
The empress is shown with plaited blond hair, rosy cheeks and grey eyes, revealing her Hungarian descent.
The edifice was built as a traditional Latin colonnaded basilica with galleries and a wooden roof.
They depict Saints John Chrysostom and Ignatius the Younger standing, clothed in white robes with crosses, and holding richly jeweled Holy Bibles.
The upper gallery contains runic graffiti presumed to be from the Varangian Guard.
The pendentives implement the transition from the circular base of the dome to the rectangular base below, restraining the lateral forces of the dome and allow its weight to flow downwards.
Since Eusebius was bishop of Constantinople from 339 to 341, and Constantine died in 337, it seems possible that the first church was erected by the latter.
A long ramp from the northern part of the outer narthex leads up to the upper gallery.
Both the pedestal and the throne are adorned with precious stones.
The most famous restoration of the Hagia Sophia was ordered by Sultan Abdülmecid and completed by eight hundred workers between 1847 and 1849, under the supervision of the Swiss-Italian architect brothers Gaspare and Giuseppe Fossati.
A round, green stone marks the spot where the throne of the empress stood.
This mosaic is situated in a high location on the half dome of the apse.
Based on style analysis, it has been dated to the late 9th or early 10th century.
