The Christian community were mostly Greek-Melkite Catholics.
Shabtai Levy, the Mayor of the city, and some other Jewish leaders urged Arabs not to leave.
Since the summer of 2008, night buses are operated by Egged in Haifa (line 200) and the Krayot suburbs (line 210).
The Tikotin Museum of Japanese Art is the only museum in the Middle East dedicated solely to Japanese art.
Mount Carmel and the Kishon River are also mentioned in the Bible.
Morris quotes British sources as stating that during the battles between 22 and 23 April 100 Arabs were killed and 100 wounded, but he adds that the total may have been higher.
To the west and east of Hadar are the Arab neighborhoods of Abbas and Khalisa, built in the 1960s and 70s.
Haifa's intercity bus connections are operated almost exclusively by the Egged bus company, which operates two terminals:
Haifa is situated on the Israeli Mediterranean Coastal Plain, the historic land bridge between Europe, Africa, and Asia, and the mouth of the Kishon River.
''Hefa'' or ''Hepha'' in Eusebius of Caesarea's 4th-century work, ''Onomasticon'' (''Onom.''
It is also home to the Bahá'í World Centre, a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a destination for Baha'i pilgrims.
The Haifa refinery processes 9&nbsp;million tons (66&nbsp;million barrels) of crude oil a year.
They participate in the Israeli League, the top level of Israeli ice hockey.
Under the Rashidun Caliphate, Haifa began to develop.
It lies about  north of Tel Aviv and is the major regional center of northern Israel.
The Haifa municipality had spent more than $350 million on roads and infrastructure, and the number of building permits had risen 83% in the previous two years.
gender segregated) lines.
As an industrial port city, Haifa has traditionally been a Labor party stronghold.
Following the Arab conquest in the 7th century, ''Haifa'' was used to refer to a site established on Tell es-Samak upon what were already the ruins of ''Sycaminon'' (''Shiqmona'').
Spring arrives in March when temperatures begin to increase.
Other academic institutions in Haifa are the Gordon College of Education and Sha'anan Religious Teachers' College, the WIZO Haifa Academy of Design and Education, and Tiltan College of Design.
According to the plan, the western section of the city's port will be torn down, and all port activity will be moved to the east.
Haifa is one of the few cities in Israel where buses operate on Shabbat.
The Haifa Tennis Club, near the southwest entrance to the city, is one of the largest in Israel.
In 1265, the army of Baibars the Mamluk captured Haifa, destroying its fortifications, which had been rebuilt by King Louis IX of France, as well as the majority of the city's homes to prevent the European Crusaders from returning.
The archaeological site of Shikmona is southwest of Bat Galim.
Haifa Bay is a center of heavy industry, petroleum refining and chemical processing.
Marked hiking paths traverse these areas and they provide habitat for wildlife such as wild boar, golden jackal, hyrax, Egyptian mongoose, owls and chameleons.
About the 3rd century CE, the city was first mentioned in Talmudic literature, as a Jewish fishing village and the home of Rabbi Avdimi and other Jewish scholars.
Two days later the downtown, controlled by a combination of local and foreign (ALA) Arab irregulars was assaulted by Jewish forces in Operation Bi'ur Hametz, by the Carmeli Brigade of the Haganah, commanded by Moshe Carmel.
The State-run Palestine Railways also built its main workshops in Haifa.
During the 1990s, Haifa hosted the Haifa Rock & Blues Festival featuring Bob Dylan, Nick Cave, Blur and PJ Harvey.
Bnei Zion Hospital (formerly Rothschild Hospital) and the Central Synagogue in Hadar Hacarmel date from this period.
The New Haifa Symphony Orchestra, established in 1950, has more than 5,000&nbsp;subscribers.
The lowest is the center of commerce and industry including the Port of Haifa.
Other hospitals in the city include the Italian Hospital, Elisha Hospital (100 beds), Horev Medical Center (36 beds) and Ramat Marpe (18 beds).
Haifa has 20 family health centers.
Together these areas form a contiguous urban area, home to nearly 600,000 residents, which makes up the inner core of the Haifa metropolitan area, the second- or third-most populous metropolitan area in Israel.
The Haifa underground railway system is called Carmelit.
In December 2012, GetTaxi, an app and taxi service which allows users to hail a cab using their smartphone without contacting the taxi station by identifying and summoning the closest taxi.
On 22 September, British troops were heading to Nazareth when a reconnaissance report was received indicating that the Turks were leaving Haifa.
Before 1948, Haifa's Municipality was fairly unusual as it developed cooperation between the mixed Arab and Jewish community in the city, with representatives of both groups involved in the city's management.
There are also share taxis that run along some bus routes but do not have an official schedule.
A branch of the Hejaz railway, known as the Jezreel Valley railway, was built between 1903 and 1905.
The opening of Ashdod as a port exacerbated this.
Two respected academic institutions, the University of Haifa and the Technion, are located in Haifa, in addition to the largest k-12 school in Israel, the Hebrew Reali School.
Haifa has developed in tiers, from the lower to the upper city on the Carmel.
During the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the neighborhoods of Haifa were sometimes contested.
Travel between Haifa and the center of the country is possible by road with Highway 2, the main highway along the coastal plain, beginning at Tel Aviv and ending at Haifa.
It will include a bicycle path, and possibly also a small bridge under which navy vessels will pass on their way to the sea.
''Matam'' (short for ''Merkaz Ta'asiyot Mada'' - Scientific Industries Center), the largest and oldest business park in Israel, is at the southern entrance to the city, hosting manufacturing and R&D facilities for a large number of Israeli and international hi-tech companies, such as Intel, IBM, Microsoft, Motorola, Google, Yahoo!, Elbit, CSR, Philips, and Amdocs.
The Central Jewish Colonisation Society in Romania purchased over  near Haifa.
In a separate room, the remains of `Abdu'l-Bahá were buried in November 1921.
It serves mainly tourists.
The largest hospital is the government-operated Rambam Hospital with 900 beds and 78,000 admissions in 2004.
In 2006, 27% of the Arab population was aged 14 and under, compared to 17% of the Jewish and other population groups.
Around the 6th century, ''Porphyreon'' or ''Porphyrea'' is mentioned in the writings of William of Tyre, and while it lies within the area covered by modern Haifa, it was a settlement situated south of Haifa-Sycaminon.
Under Byzantine rule, Haifa continued to grow but did not assume major importance.
, the city is a major seaport located on Israel's Mediterranean coastline in the Bay of Haifa covering .
In 2014, a new major plan for the city was proposed, under which extensive development of residential, business, and leisure areas will take place with the target of increasing the city's population by 60,000 by 2025.
According to historian Moshe Sharon, the new Haifa was established by Zahir in 1769.
A grotto on the top of Mount Carmel is known as the "Cave of Elijah", traditionally linked to the Prophet Elijah and his apprentice, Elisha.
The Congress Center hosts exhibitions, concerts and special events.
Haifa was also among the first towns to be fully electrified.
Many of Wadi Salib's historic Ottoman buildings have now been demolished, and in the 1990s a major section of the Old City was razed to make way for a new municipal center.
The middle level is on the slopes of Mount Carmel and consists of older residential neighborhoods, while the upper level consists of modern neighborhoods looking over the lower tiers.
A new life sciences industrial park containing five buildings with 85,000 square meters of space on a 31-duman (7.75 acre) site is being built adjacent to the Matam industrial park.
The city plays an important role in Israel's economy.
Haifa's development owed much to British plans to make it a central port and hub for Middle-East crude oil.
While there are general divisions between Arab and Jewish neighborhoods, there is an increasing trend for wealthy Arabs to move into affluent Jewish neighborhoods.
This synonymizing of the names is explained by Moshe Sharon who writes that the twin ancient settlements, which he calls ''Haifa-Sycaminon'', gradually expanded into one another, becoming a twin city known by the Greek names ''Sycaminon'' or ''Sycaminos Polis''.
After the war, Jewish immigrants were settled in new neighborhoods, among them Kiryat Hayim, Ramot Remez, Ramat Shaul, Kiryat Sprinzak, and Kiryat Eliezer.
Under the British Mandate, Haifa became an industrial port city.
Its nowadays unused twin 80-meter high cooling towers, built in the 1930s, were the tallest buildings built in the British Mandate period.
The Carmel Mountain has three main wadis: Lotem, Amik and Si’ach.
A wave of European Jews arrived at the end of the 19th century from Romania.
References to this city end with the Byzantine period.
Haifa has a professional basketball club, Maccabi Haifa.
British forces in Haifa redeployed on 21 April 1948, withdrawing from most of the city while still maintaining control over the port facilities.
Hadar houses two commercial centers (one in the port area, and one midway up the mountain) surrounded by some of the city's older neighborhoods.
The results of municipal elections decide on the makeup of the council, similarly to the Knesset elections.
In 1799, Napoleon Bonaparte conquered Haifa during his unsuccessful campaign to conquer Palestine and Syria, but soon had to withdraw; in the campaign's final proclamation, Napoleon took credit for having razed the fortifications of "Kaïffa" (as the name was spelled at the time) along with those of Gaza, Jaffa and Acre.
A 2007 report commissioned by the Haifa Municipality calls for the construction of more hotels, a ferry line between Haifa, Acre and Caesarea, development of the western anchorage of the port as a recreation and entertainment area, and an expansion of the local airport and port to accommodate international travel and cruise ships.
''Haifa al-'Atiqa'' (Arabic: "Ancient Haifa") is another name used by locals to refer to ''Tell es-Samak'', as it was the site of Haifa when it was a hamlet of 250 residents, before it was moved in 1764-5 to a new fortified site founded by Zahir al-Umar  to the east.
The Haifa Museum of Art houses a collection of modern and classical art, as well as displays on the history of Haifa.
A park will be developed on the border of the Kishon River, the refineries' cooling towers will be turned into a visitors' center, and bridges will lead from the port to the rest of the city.
Haifa has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate with hot, dry summers and cool, rainy winters (Köppen climate classification ''Csa'').
The arrival of the German Templers in 1868, who settled in what is now known as the German Colony of Haifa, was a turning point in Haifa's development.
After the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel on 14 May 1948 Haifa became the gateway for Jewish immigration into Israel.
In response Arab employees of the company killed 39 Jewish employees in what became known as the Haifa Oil Refinery massacre.
The Crusaders under Richard the Lionheart retook Haifa in 1191.
The city council is the legislative council in the city, and has the authority to pass auxiliary laws.
Some Christians believe it was named for Saint Peter, whose Aramaic name was ''Keiphah''.
Early Haifa is believed to have occupied the area which extends from the present-day Rambam Hospital to the Jewish Cemetery on Yafo Street.
Humidity tends to be high all year round, and rain usually occurs between September and May.
After al-Umar's death in 1775, the town remained under Ottoman rule until 1918, with the exception of two brief periods.
In 2009, positive net immigration into the city was shown for the first time in 15 years.
In 2004, there were a total of 177,478 hospital admissions.
The 12th council, which was elected in 2003, has 31 members, with the liberal Shinui-Greens ticket holding the most seats (6), and Likud coming second with 5.
Wadi Salib stretches across to Wadi Nisnas, the center of Arab life in Haifa today.
All port activity will be moved to the western side, and the area will be redeveloped.
The Palestine Electric Company inaugurated the Haifa Electrical Power Station already in 1925, opening the door to considerable industrialization.
The Bahá'í Faith in 1918 and today has its administrative and spiritual centre in the environs of Haifa.
It was a part of the Principality of Galilee within the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
The Haifa Educational Zoo at Gan HaEm park houses a small animal collection including Syrian brown bears, now extinct from Israel.
The Arab immigration on the other hand swelled by influx of Arabs, coming mainly from surrounding villages as well as Syrian Hauran.
Between 2005 and 2006, 86,037 visited the shrine.
Haifa was captured from the Ottomans in September 1918 by Indian horsemen of the British Army after overrunning Ottoman positions armed with spears and swords.
In addition, existing employment centers will be renovated, and new leisure areas and a large park will be built.
Another plan seeks to turn the western section of Haifa Port into a major tourism and nightlife center, as well as a functioning point of embarkation and arrival for sea travel.
:''The mass evacuation, prompted partly by fear, partly by orders of Arab leaders, left the Arab quarter of Haifa a ghost city ... By withdrawing Arab workers their leaders hoped to paralyze Haifa.''
This continues with 14% of Jews and others aged 60–74 and 10% over age 75, in comparison to 7% and just 2% respectively in the Arab population.
108, 31), is said to be another name for ''Sycaminus''.
66.6% were secular, compared to a national average of 43.7%.
Two prestigious Arab schools in Haifa are the Orthodox School, run by the Greek Orthodox church, and the Nazareth Nuns' School, a Catholic institution.
Furthermore, Highway 4 runs along the coast to the north of Haifa, as well as south, inland from Highway 2.
With a single track, six stations and two trains, it is listed in ''Guinness World Records'' as the world's shortest metro line.
The train tracks that currently bisect the city and separate the city's beach from the rest of Haifa will also be buried.
Control of Haifa was critical in the ensuing civil war, since it was the major industrial and oil refinery port in British Palestine.
In 2006, 2.9% of the Jews in the city were Haredi, compared to 7.5% on a national scale.
The population is heterogeneous.
Some historic buildings have been renovated and redeveloped, especially into nightclubs and theaters, such as the Palace of the Pasha, a Turkish bathhouse, and a Middle Eastern music and dance club, which has been converted into theaters and offices.
The last festival was held in 1995 with Sheryl Crow, Suede and Faith No More as headliners.
During the winter their schedule is limited to Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights, making them the only buses in Israel to operate on Friday night.
Following the Arab conquest of Palestine in the 630s-40s, Haifa was largely overlooked in favor of the port city of 'Akka.
Currently, some 40 hotels, mostly boutique hotels, are planned, have been approved, or are under construction.
Located on the northern slopes of Mount Carmel and around Haifa Bay, the city is split over three tiers.
Egged lines run during Saturday mornings from many neighborhoods to the Dado and Bat Galim beaches, and back in the afternoon.
Levy's two deputies were Arab (one Muslim, the other Christian), with the remainder of the council made up of four Jews and six Arabs.
Contemporaneous sources emphasized the Jewish leadership's attempt to stop the Arab exodus from the city and the Arab leadership as a motivating factor in the refugees' flight.
In addition, the ammonia depository tank in the Haifa bay industrial zone will be dismantled, and a new one built in an alternative location.
The Carmelit accommodates bicycles.
In addition, many prominent Arabs in the Israeli Communist Party, among them Tawfik Toubi, Emile Habibi, Zahi Karkabi, Bulus Farah and Emile Toma, were from Haifa.
It is home to Matam, one of the oldest and largest high-tech parks in the country; Haifa also owns the only underground rapid transit system located in Israel, known as The Carmelit.
Most of its Jewish and Arab residents are considered squatters and have been gradually evicted over the years.
Many of the decisions passed by the city council are results of recommendation made by the various municipal committees, which are committees where non-municipal organs meet with representatives from the city council.
The strong presence of dock workers and trade unions earned it the nickname 'Red Haifa.'
* HaMifratz Central Bus Station, adjacent to the Lev HaMifratz Railway Station
The inhabitants, Arabs and Jews, engaged in trade and maritime commerce.
The ultimate origin of the name ''Haifa'' remains unclear.
Prosperity ended in 1100 or 1101, when Haifa was besieged and blockaded by the Crusaders and then conquered after a fierce battle with its Jewish inhabitants and Fatimid garrison.
Tourism shrank when the Israeli Ministry of Tourism placed emphasis on developing Tiberias as a tourist centre.
Haifa also includes Druze and Bahá'í communities.
The magazine noted that "a massive head-to-toe regeneration is starting to have an impact; from scaffolding and cranes around town, to renovated façades and new smart places to eat".
The Haifa Cable Car gondola lift consists of six cabins and connects Bat Galim on the coast to the Stella Maris observation deck and monastery atop Mount Carmel.
Cruise ships operate from Haifa port primarily to destinations in the Eastern Mediterranean, Southern Europe and Black Sea.
According to the British district superintendent of police, "Every effort is being made by the Jews to persuade the Arab populace to stay and carry on with their normal lives, to get their shops and business open and to be assured that their lives and interests will be safe."
Greater cooperation was introduced under Hasan Bey Shukri, who adopted a positive and conciliatory attitude toward the city's Jews and gave them senior posts in the municipality.
Haifa is the center of liberal Arabic speaking culture, as it was under British colonial rule.
The Haifa Economic Corporation Ltd is developing two 1,000 square meter lots for office and commercial use.
The Haifa Hawks are an ice hockey team based out of the city of Haifa.
In 1940, the first Jewish mayor, Shabtai Levy, was elected.
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, described as Israel's MIT, was founded in 1912.
It was located at ''Tell el-Semak'', the site of ancient Sycaminum.
In the 3rd century CE, Haifa was known as a dye-making center.
The campus was designed by the architect of Brasília and United Nations Headquarters in New York City, Oscar Niemeyer.
Public spaces and a beach promenade will be developed, and commercial buildings will be renovated.
Today Hadar stretches from the port area near the bay, approximately halfway up Mount Carmel, around the German Colony, Wadi Nisnas and Wadi Salib.
The Jewish Haganah militia retaliated with a raid on the Arab village of Balad al-Shaykh, where many of the Arab refinery workers lived, in what became known as the Balad al-Shaykh massacre.
Haifa is also the only city in Israel to operate a Saturday bus service to the beaches during summer time.
Between 1994 and 2009, the city had a declining and aging population compared to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, as young people moved to the center of the country for education and jobs, while young families migrated to bedroom communities in the suburbs.
Bnai Zion Hospital and Carmel Hospital each have 400 beds.
The Hecht Museum, with important archeology and art collections, is on the campus of Haifa University.
The new village, the nucleus of modern Haifa, was originally named ''al-imara al-jadida'' (Arabic: "the new construction"), but locals called it ''Haifa al-Jadida'' (Arabic: "New Haifa") at first, and then simply ''Haifa''.
For much of their rule, the city was desolate in the Mamluk period between the 13th and 16th centuries.
86% of the students attended Hebrew-speaking schools and 14% attended Arab schools.
John Shecter, Olympic horse breeder and owner of triple cup champion Shergar was born here.
–07, Haifa had 70 elementary schools, 23 middle schools, 28 academic high schools and 8 vocational high schools.
From south-west to north-east, these stations are: Haifa Hof HaCarmel, Haifa Bat Galim, Haifa Merkaz HaShmona, Lev HaMifratz, Hutzot HaMifratz and Kiryat Haim.
Following their victory at the Battle of Hattin, Saladin's Ayyubid army captured Haifa in mid-July 1187 and the city's Crusader fortress was destroyed.
In 2014, it was announced that a technology-focused stock exchange would be established to compete with the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange.
''Haifa'' (or ''Haifah'') is mentioned by the mid-11th-century Persian chronicler Nasir Khusraw, and the 12th- and 13th-century Arab chroniclers, Muhammad al-Idrisi and Yaqut al-Hamawi.
The original building now houses Haifa's science museum.
The city has a  shoreline, of which  are beaches.
An active Arab cultural life has developed in the 21st century.
The new system officially opened on 16 August 2013 serving three lines.
* Haifa Hof HaCarmel Central Bus Station, adjacent to the Hof HaCarmel Railway Station
Hadar was Haifa's cultural center and marketplace throughout the 1920s and into the 1980s, nestled above and around the Haifa's Arab neighborhoods.
The Arab immigration mainly came as a result of prices and salary drop.
The first technological high school in Israel, Bosmat, was established in Haifa in 1933.
Since the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, the Haifa Municipality has governed the city.
In 2004, 49,000 people attended its concerts.
The Arabic speaking neighborhoods, which are mixed Muslim and Christian, are in the lowlands near the sea while Jewish neighborhoods are at higher elevation.
The city also has a nursing college and the P.E.T Practical Engineering School.
There were 5,133 pupils in municipal kindergartens, 20,081 in elementary schools, 7,911 in middle schools, 8,072 in academic high schools, 2,646 in vocational high schools, and 2,068 in comprehensive district high schools.
Haifa medical facilities have a total of 4,000 hospital beds.
Under mayor al-Haj, between 1920 and 1927, the city council had six Arab and two Jewish representatives, with the city run as a mixed municipality with overall Arab control.
Located in the Haifa district are the Ein Hod artists' colony, where over 90 artists and craftsmen have studios and exhibitions, and the Mount Carmel national park, with caves where Neanderthal and early Homo Sapiens remains were found.
Maccabi Haifa was recently promoted to Israeli Basketball Super League, the top division.
The principal Arabic theater servicing the northern Arab population is the al-Midan Theater.
All urban lines are run by Egged.
In the close vicinity of Haifa, on the Carmel, the Northern "Hai-Bar" ("wild life") operated by Israel's Parks and Reserves Authority for the purpose of breeding and reintroduction of species now extinct from Israel, such as Persian Fallow Deer.
Tel Aviv gained in status, while Haifa suffered a decline in the role as regional capital.
As the Jewish settlers had been city dwellers, they hired the former fellahin tenants to instruct them in agriculture.
The average temperature in summer is  and in winter, .
Over the next few decades the number of Jews increased steadily, due to immigration, especially from Europe.
After the British regrouped, an elite unit of Indian horsemen were sent to attack the Turkish positions on the flanks and overrun their artillery guns on Mount Carmel.
It is the largest k-12 school in Israel, with 4,000 students in 7 branches, all over the city.
Haifa Airport serves domestic flights to Tel Aviv and Eilat as well as international charters to Cyprus, Greece and Jordan.
The Templers built and operated a steam-based power station, opened factories and inaugurated carriage services to Acre, Nazareth and Tiberias, playing a key role in modernizing the city.
