He asserted that, because his "confidence in the League was absolute", his people were now being slaughtered.
Dejazmatch Beyene Merid
The speech made the emperor an icon for anti-fascists around the world, and ''Time'' named him "Man of the Year".
On 27 August 1942, Haile Selassie abolished the legal basis of slavery throughout the empire and imposed severe penalties, including death, for slave trading.
Benito Mussolini's Fascist regime was keen to avenge the military defeats Italy had suffered to Ethiopia in the First Italo-Abyssinian War, and to efface the failed attempt by "liberal" Italy to conquer the country, as epitomised by the defeat at Adwa.
His Ge'ez name '''Haile Selassie''' was given to him at his infant baptism and adopted again as part of his regnal name in 1930.
Between 1941 and 1959, Haile Selassie worked to establish the autocephaly of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church.
Some imperial loyalists believed that the emperor had in fact been assassinated, and this belief remains widely held to this day.
Tafari was named Dejazmach (literally "commander of the gate", roughly equivalent to "count") at the age of 13, on 1 November 1905.
To Ethiopians, Haile Selassie has been known by many names, including '''Janhoy''', '''Talaqu Meri''', and '''Abba Tekel'''.
He also left his home in exile, Fairfield House, Bath, to the City of Bath for the use of the Aged in 1959.
Princess Romanework married Dejazmatch Beyene Merid.
Eritrea was to have its own constitution, which would provide for ethnic, linguistic, and cultural balance, while Ethiopia was to manage its finances, defense, and foreign policy.
A blue plaque, commemorating his stay in Malvern, was unveiled on Saturday, 25 June 2011.
Nonetheless, the effort to depose the emperor had support among students and the educated classes.
Retitled ''The Hidden Hunger'', it was shown round the clock on Ethiopian television to coincide with the day that they finally summoned the nerve to seize the Emperor himself.
She pledged to rule justly through her Regent, Tafari.
Ultimately, Iyasu was deposed on the grounds of conversion to Islam.
Iyasu's reputation for scandalous behavior and a disrespectful attitude towards the nobles at the court of his grandfather, Menelik II, damaged his reputation.
The coup attempt lacked broad popular support, was denounced by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, and was unpopular with the army, air force and police.
A 1973 production of the ITV programme ''The Unknown Famine'' by Jonathan Dimbleby.
From Gibraltar, the exiles were transferred to an ordinary liner.
Haile Selassie made a solitary pilgrimage to the churches at Lalibela, at considerable risk of capture, before returning to his capital.
Although fluent in French, the working language of the League, Haile Selassie chose to deliver his historic speech in his native Amharic.
He reportedly told the Rastafari delegation (which included Mortimer Planno), "Tell the Brethren to be not dismayed, I personally will give my assistance in the matter of repatriation."
After his return to Ethiopia, he dispatched Archbishop Abuna Yesehaq Mandefro to the Caribbean to help draw Rastafari and other West Indians to the Ethiopian church and, according to some sources, denied his divinity.
Prince Ermias Sahle Selassie
The emperor's army was defeated and retreated in disarray.
In 1970 he visited Italy as a guest of President Giuseppe Saragat, and in Milan he met Giordano Dell'Amore, President of Italian Savings Banks Association.
Spliffs and chalices were openly smoked, causing "a haze of ganja smoke" to drift through the air.
Prior to Fairfield House, he briefly stayed at Warne's Hotel in Worthing and in Parkside, Wimbledon.
The coronation was by all accounts "a most splendid affair", and it was attended by royals and dignitaries from all over the world.
As the longest-serving head of state in power, he was often given precedence over other leaders at state events, such as the state funerals of John F. Kennedy and Charles de Gaulle, the summits of the Non-Aligned Movement, and the 1971 celebration of the 2,500 years of the Persian Empire.
On 5 May, Marshal Pietro Badoglio led Italian troops into Addis Ababa, and Mussolini declared Ethiopia an Italian province.
In 1961, the Jamaican government sent a delegation composed of both Rastafari and non-Rastafari leaders to Ethiopia to discuss the matter of repatriation, among other issues, with the emperor.
To guard against a public backlash in favour of Haile Selassie (who was still widely revered), they contrived to obtain a copy of ''The Unknown Famine'' which they intercut with images of Africa's grand old man presiding at a wedding feast in the grounds of his palace.
The movement to depose Iyasu preferred Tafari, as he attracted support from both progressive and conservative factions.
The "Oriental Dignity" of the Ethiopians and their "rich, picturesque court dress" were sensationalized in the media; among his entourage he even included a pride of lions, which he distributed as gifts to President Alexandre Millerand and Prime Minister Raymond Poincaré of France, to King George V of the United Kingdom, and to the Zoological Garden (''Jardin Zoologique'') of Paris.
In keeping with the principle of collective security, for which he was an outspoken proponent, he sent a contingent under General Mulugueta Bulli, known as the Kagnew Battalion, to take part in the Korean War by supporting the United Nations Command.
The war would continue for 30 years, as first Haile Selassie, then the Soviet-backed junta that succeeded him, attempted to retain Eritrea by force.
While he had fully approved of, and assured Ethiopia's participation in, UN-approved collective security operations, including Korea and Congo, Haile Selassie drew a distinction with the non-UN approved foreign intervention in Indochina, and consistently deplored it as needless suffering, calling for the Vietnam War to end on several occasions.
The introduction caused a great many Italian journalists in the galleries to erupt into jeering, heckling, and whistling.
He occupied the same territory as the empress rather than going off to a regional kingdom of the empire.
Initially his personal army was poorly equipped, his finances were limited, and he had little leverage to withstand the combined influence of the Empress, the Minister of War, or the provincial governors.
As part of the ceremony, a delegation from the Rastafari movement gave a short address and a drum recital.
This bred resentment among the peasant population.
The ''Dejazmatch'' paid homage to Empress Zewditu, but snubbed ''Ras'' Tafari.
In 2008 a full-length feature film, ''Man of the Millennium'', was produced by an Ethiopian film-maker Tikher Teferra Kidane of Exodus Films, in collaboration with an Alaskan TV station Tanana Valley TV and 4th Avenue Films.
Rather than canceling the radio appearance, he proceeded in much pain to complete the address, in which he linked Christianity and goodwill with the Covenant of the League of Nations, and asserted that "War is not the only means to stop war":
As these issues began to pile up, Haile Selassie left much of domestic governance to his Prime Minister, Aklilu Habte Wold, and concentrated more on foreign affairs.
Leaving the Holy Land, Haile Selassie and his entourage sailed for Gibraltar aboard the British cruiser HMS ''Capetown''.
In this period, the Crown Prince visited the Armenian monastery of Jerusalem.
Prince Sahle Selassie was married to Princess Mahisente Habte Mariam.
Haile Selassie appointed his cousin Ras Imru Haile Selassie as Prince Regent in his absence, departing with his family for French Somaliland on 2 May 1936.
His doctor, Asrat Woldeyes, denied that complications had occurred and rejected the government version of his death.
In his place, the daughter of Menelik II (the aunt of Iyasu) was named Empress Zewditu, while Tafari was elevated to the rank of ''Ras'' and was made heir apparent and Crown Prince.
He was accompanied by Seyum Mangasha and Hailu Tekle Haymanot who, like Tafari, were sons of generals who contributed to the victorious war against Italy a quarter century earlier at the Battle of Adwa.
While Tafari was the more visible of the two, Zewditu was far from an honorary ruler.
His two sons-in-law, Ras Desta Damtew and Dejazmach Beyene Merid, were both executed by the Italians.
The idea was instantly rejected by Eritrean political parties, as well as the UN.
While the living members of the royal family state that Romanework is the eldest daughter of Empress Menen, it has been asserted that Princess Romanework is actually the daughter of a previous union of the emperor with Woizero Altayech.
The emperor's daughter, Princess Romanework, wife of Dejazmach Beyene Merid, was herself taken into captivity with her children, and she died in Italy in 1941.
There remains some debate within the Rastafari movement whether Haile Selassie actually died in 1975.
In 1963, Haile Selassie presided over the formation of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), the precursor of the continent-wide African Union (AU).
Resistance by conservative elements at the Imperial Court and Parliament, and by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, made Haile Selassie's land reform proposals difficult to implement, and also damaged the standing of the government, costing Haile Selassie much of the goodwill he had once enjoyed.
On 2 December 1950, the UN General Assembly adopted Resolution 390 (V), establishing the federation of Eritrea (the former Italian colony) into Ethiopia.
The emperor and Kassa Haile Darge took morning walks together behind the high walls of the 14-room Georgian house.
Haile Selassie was an Ethiopian Orthodox Christian throughout his life.
Emissaries from the United States, Egypt, Turkey, Sweden, Belgium, and Japan were also present.
In addition to these efforts, Haile Selassie changed the Ethiopian church-state relationship by introducing taxation of church lands, and by restricting the legal privileges of the clergy, who had formerly been tried in their own courts for civil offenses.
In a 1967 recorded interview Haile Selassie appeared to deny his alleged divinity.
More of Tafari's khaki clad soldiers arrived and, with superiority of arms, decided the outcome in his favor.
As one historian noted, "Rarely can a tour have inspired so many anecdotes".
Tafari assumed the titular governorship of Selale in 1906, a realm of marginal importance, but one that enabled him to continue his studies.
Prince Asfaw Wossen was first married to Princess Wolete Israel Seyoum and then following their divorce to Princess Medferiashwork Abebe.
The new organization would establish its headquarters in Addis Ababa.
Finally, Jamaican authorities were obliged to request Ras Mortimer Planno, a well-known Rasta leader, to climb the steps, enter the plane, and negotiate the emperor's descent.
Gugsa Welle was killed in action.
He then returned into the plane, disappearing for several more minutes.
There, he adopted 40 Armenian orphans (አርባ ልጆች ''Arba Lijoch'', "forty children"), who had lost their parents in Ottoman massacres.
In 1966, Haile Selassie attempted to create a modern, progressive tax that included registration of land, which would significantly weaken the nobility.
In other words, she had the last word.
To guard against economic imperialism, Tafari required that all enterprises have at least partial local ownership.
She was also influential in the conversion of Bob Marley, who then became internationally recognized.
Outside of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie continued to enjoy enormous prestige and respect.
It is alleged that during his late teens, Haile Selassie was married to ''Woizero'' Altayech, and that from this union, his daughter Princess Romanework was born.
Prince Paul Wossen Seged Makonnen Duke of HarrarPrince Mikael MakonnenPrince Tefferi MakonnenPrince Dawit Makonnen (or Makonnen Makonnen)Prince Beede Mariam Makonnen
Princess Romanework
Haile Selassie's full title in office was "By the Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah, His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie I, King of Kings of Ethiopia, Elect of God".
Despite his centralization policies that had been made before World War II, Haile Selassie still found himself unable to push for all the programs he wanted.
Haile Selassie spent his exile years (1936–41) in Bath, England, in Fairfield House, which he bought.
In addition to the exposure of attempts by corrupt local officials to cover up the famine from the imperial government, the Kremlin's depiction of Haile Selassie's Ethiopia as backwards and inept (relative to the purported utopia of Marxism-Leninism) contributed to the popular uprising that led to its downfall and the rise of Mengistu Haile Mariam.
It is unlikely that he was actually killed.
Although it was long rumored that the empress was poisoned upon the defeat of her husband, or alternately that she died from shock upon hearing of the death of her estranged yet beloved husband, it has since been documented that the Empress succumbed to a flu-like fever and complications from diabetes.
Shortly thereafter, his father Ras Makonnen died at Kulibi, in 1906.
Ethiopia's position in the League of Nations did not dissuade the Italians from invading in 1935; the "collective security" envisaged by the League proved useless, and a scandal erupted when the Hoare-Laval Pact revealed that Ethiopia's League allies were scheming to appease Italy.
The last months of the emperor's life were spent in imprisonment, in the Grand Palace.
Conservatives agitated to redress this perceived insult to the dignity of the crown, leading to the rebellion of ''Ras'' Gugsa Welle.
On 23 November 1974, sixty former high officials of the imperial government were executed without trial.
The extent to which Tafari Makonnen contributed to the movement that would come to depose Iyasu V has been discussed extensively, particularly in Haile Selassie's own detailed account of the matter.
Bob Marley's posthumously released song "Iron Lion Zion" refers to Haile Selassie.
However, failing this, he and his retinue inspected schools, hospitals, factories, and churches.
However, on the previous day, the Ethiopian exiles had left French Somaliland aboard the British cruiser HMS ''Enterprise''.
On 11 January 1921, after avoiding capture for about five years, Iyasu was taken into custody by Gugsa Araya Selassie.
This calmed the public, but the promised 33% military wage hike was not substantial enough to pacify the army, which then mutinied, beginning in Asmara and spreading throughout the empire.
Ultimately, the Empress relented and, on 7 October 1928, she crowned Tafari as ''Negus'' (Amharic: "King").
The Imperial family disembarked at Haifa and then went on to Jerusalem.
Ras Makonnen served as a general in the First Italo–Ethiopian War, playing a key role at the Battle of Adwa; he too was paternally Oromo but maternally Amhara.
The executed included Haile Selassie's grandson and two former Prime Ministers.
General Aman Mikael Andom, a Protestant of Eritrean origin, served briefly as provisional head of state pending the return of Crown Prince Asfa Wossen, who was then receiving medical treatment abroad.
In 1964, Haile Selassie would initiate the concept of the United States of Africa, a proposition later taken up by Muammar Gaddafi.
From then on, as a result of Planno's actions, the Jamaican authorities were asked to ensure that Rastafari representatives were present at all state functions attended by the emperor, and Rastafari elders also ensured that they obtained a private audience with the emperor, where he reportedly told them that they should not emigrate to Ethiopia until they had first liberated the people of Jamaica.
Haile Selassie's royal line (through his father's mother) originated from the Amhara people, but he also had Oromo, and Gurage roots.
Prince Sahle Selassie
Once there, Haile Selassie and his retinue prepared to make their case at Geneva.
On 11 February 1917, the coronation for Zewditu took place.
The old man came in high dudgeon and, insultingly, with a large army.
On 28 August 1975, the state media reported that the "ex-monarch" Haile Selassie had died on 27 August of "respiratory failure" following complications from a prostate examination followed up by a prostate operation.
A UN plebiscite voted 46 to 10 to have Eritrea be federated with Ethiopia, which was later stipulated on 2 December 1950 in resolution 390 (V).
Balcha Safo's administration of Harar was ineffective, and so during the last illness of Menelik II, and the brief reign of Empress Taitu Bitul, Tafari was made governor of Harar in 1910 or 1911.
In the power arrangement that followed, Tafari accepted the role of Regent Plenipotentiary (''Balemulu 'Inderase'') and became the ''de facto'' ruler of the Ethiopian Empire (''Mangista Ityop'p'ya'').
The Derg, a committee of low-ranking military officers and enlisted men, set up in June to investigate the military's demands, took advantage of the government's disarray to depose Haile Selassie on 12 September 1974.
At the League of Nations in 1936, the Emperor condemned the use of chemical weapons by Italy against his people during the Second Italo–Ethiopian War.
Princess Zenebework
Planno re-emerged and announced to the crowd: "The Emperor has instructed me to tell you to be calm.
Eritrea would have its own parliament and administration and would be represented in what had been the Ethiopian parliament and would become the federal parliament.
A conquest of Ethiopia could also empower the cause of fascism and embolden its rhetoric of empire.
Princess Tenagnework
The emperor declared Eritrea the fourteenth province of Ethiopia in 1962.
Haile Selassie died on 27 August 1975 at the age of 83, following a coup d'état.
With him on his tour was a group that included ''Ras'' Seyum Mangasha of western Tigray Province; ''Ras'' Hailu Tekle Haymanot of Gojjam province; ''Ras'' Mulugeta Yeggazu of Illubabor Province; ''Ras'' Makonnen Endelkachew; and ''Blattengeta'' Heruy Welde Sellase.
Among those in attendance were George V's son the Duke of Gloucester, Marshal Franchet d'Esperey of France, and the Prince of Udine representing the King of Italy.
Haile Selassie again went on television to agree to the army's demands for still greater pay, and named Endelkachew Makonnen as his new Prime Minister.
Among the Rastafari movement, whose followers are estimated at between two and four million, Haile Selassie is revered as the returned messiah of the Bible, God incarnate.
After a stormy session of the council of state, it was agreed that because Addis Ababa could not be defended, the government would relocate to the southern town of Gore, and that in the interest of preserving the Imperial house, the emperor's wife Menen Asfaw and the rest of the imperial family should immediately depart for French Somaliland, and from there continue on to Jerusalem.
British author Evelyn Waugh was also present, penning a contemporary report on the event, and American travel lecturer Burton Holmes shot the only known film footage of the event.
Ethiopia became the target of renewed Italian imperialist designs in the 1930s.
1st Princess Wolete Israel Seyoum2nd Princess Medferiashwork Abebe
In a 1954 speech, the emperor spoke of Ethiopian participation in the Korean War as a redemption of the principles of collective security:
In early 1930, he raised an army and marched it from his governorate at Gondar towards Addis Ababa.
Only six nations in 1937 did not recognize Italy's occupation; they were China, New Zealand, the Soviet Union, the Republic of Spain, Mexico and the United States.
When Tafari consolidated his hold over the provinces, many of Menelik's appointees refused to abide by the new regulations.
Even so, the gesture of Balcha Safo empowered Empress Zewditu politically and she attempted to have Tafari tried for treason.
Although the region is infamous for recurrent crop failures and continuous food shortage and starvation risk, this episode was remarkably severe.
Haile Selassie was placed under house arrest briefly at the 4th Army Division in Addis Ababa, while most of his family was detained at the late Duke of Harar's residence in the north of the capital.
Haile Selassie was thus able to ascend to the imperial throne through his paternal grandmother, Woizero Tenagnework Sahle Selassie, who was an aunt of Emperor Menelik II and daughter of Negus Sahle Selassie of Shewa.
Princess Zenebework married Dejazmatch Haile Selassie Gugsa.
On 31 March 1930, Gugsa Welle was met by forces loyal to ''Negus'' Tafari and was defeated at the Battle of Anchem.
Human rights in Ethiopia under Selassie's regime were poor.
In 1948, Haile Selassie donated a piece of land at Shashamane, 250&nbsp;km south of Addis Ababa, for the use of people of African descent from the West Indies.
Mussolini, upon invading Ethiopia, had promptly declared his own "Italian Empire"; because the League of Nations afforded Haile Selassie the opportunity to address the assembly, Italy even withdrew its League delegation, on 12 May 1936.
On 5 May 1941, Haile Selassie entered Addis Ababa and personally addressed the Ethiopian people, five years to the day since his 1936 exile:
In 1992, the emperor's bones were found under a concrete slab on the palace grounds; some reports suggest that his remains were discovered beneath a latrine.
Student populations began to empathize with the peasantry and poor, and to advocate on their behalf.
On 4 October 1963, Haile Selassie addressed the General Assembly of the United Nations referring in his address to his earlier speech to the League of Nations:
On 18 January 1941, during the East African Campaign, Haile Selassie crossed the border between Sudan and Ethiopia near the village of Um Iddla.
Along with Modibo Keïta of Mali, the Ethiopian leader would later help successfully negotiate the Bamako Accords, which brought an end to the border conflict between Morocco and Algeria.
But, by November, the pace of invasion had slowed appreciably and Haile Selassie's northern armies were able to launch what was known as the "Christmas Offensive".
His official titles are ''Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah'' and ''King of Kings of Ethiopia and Elect of God'', and his traditional lineage is thought to be from Solomon and Sheba.
One western correspondent in Ethiopia at the time commented, "While it is not known what actually happened, there are strong indications that no efforts were made to save him.
Zewditu would govern while Tafari would administer.
In 1928, she granted him the throne of Shoa, elevating his title to ''Negus'' or "King".
This was due to a policy of destroying Eritrean villages that supported the rebels.
Iyasu V, or Lij Iyasu, was the designated but uncrowned Emperor of Ethiopia from 1913 to 1916.
Tafari's father was Ras Makonnen Woldemikael Gudessa, the governor of Harar.
Gugsa Welle was the husband of the empress and the ''Shum'' of Begemder Province.
Efforts to weaken unions also hurt his image.
The Italians would also come to employ chemical weapons extensively throughout the conflict, even targeting Red Cross field hospitals in violation of the Geneva Conventions.
This title reflects Ethiopian dynastic traditions, which hold that all monarchs must trace their lineage to Menelik I, who in the Ethiopian tradition was the offspring of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.
On 13 December 1960, while Haile Selassie was on a state visit to Brazil, his Imperial Guard forces staged an unsuccessful coup, briefly proclaiming Haile Selassie's eldest son Asfa Wossen as emperor.
For almost a decade thereafter, as Ethiopian courts attempted to sort out the circumstances of his death, his coffin rested in Bhata Church, near his great-uncle Menelik II's resting place.
His letter to Lord Meork, National Distress Fund, London said, "even though We are busy of helping our people who didn't recover from the crises of the war, We heard that your fertile and beautiful country is devastated by the unusually heavy rain, and your request for aid.
Dejazmatch Haile Selassie Guglsa
He was a member of the Solomonic Dynasty.
Tafari carried the burden of daily administration but, because his position was relatively weak, this was often an exercise in futility for him.
Tafari and his men surrounded them only to be surrounded themselves by the personal guard of Zewditu.
On 31 March 1936, he launched a counterattack against the Italians himself at the Battle of Maychew in southern Tigray.
Against that background, a group of dissident army officers instigated a creeping coup against the emperor's faltering regime.
In 1928, the authority of ''Ras'' Tafari Makonnen was challenged when ''Dejazmatch'' Balcha Safo went to Addis Ababa with a sizeable armed force.
The standard of the Lion of Judah was raised again.
Popular support, as well as the support of the police, remained with Tafari.
In return for two lions, the United Kingdom presented ''Ras'' Tafari with the imperial crown of Emperor Tewodros II for its safe return to Empress Zewditu.
The Ethiopian Church remained affiliated with the Alexandrian Church.
The primary goal of the trip to Europe was for Ethiopia to gain access to the sea.
The Soviet-backed Derg fell in 1991.
With the passing of Zewditu, Tafari himself rose to emperor and was proclaimed ''Neguse Negest ze-'Ityopp'ya'', "King of Kings of Ethiopia".
He also tried to improve relations between the state and ethnic groups, and granted autonomy to Afar lands that were difficult to control.
The emperor responded by announcing on national television a reduction in petrol prices and a freeze on the cost of basic commodities.
Still, his reforms to end feudalism were slow and weakened by the compromises he made with the entrenched aristocracy.
Iyasu's flirtation with Islam was considered treasonous among the Ethiopian Orthodox Christian leadership of the empire.
Haile Selassie contributed Ethiopian troops to the United Nations Operation in the Congo peacekeeping force during the 1960 Congo Crisis, to preserve Congolese integrity, per United Nations Security Council Resolution 143.
It was in this context that Haile Selassie walked into the hall of the League of Nations, introduced by the President of the Assembly as "His Imperial Majesty, the Emperor of Ethiopia" (''Sa Majesté Imperiale, l'Empereur d'Ethiopie'').
Finally, in 1959, Pope Kyrillos VI elevated the Abuna to Patriarch-Catholicos.
Crown Prince Asfaw Wossen
Another member of his entourage, Mulugeta Yeggazu, actually fought at Adwa as a young man.
Even with alterations, this law led to a revolt in Gojjam, which was repressed although enforcement of the tax was abandoned.
The United Nations conducted a lengthy inquiry regarding the status of Eritrea, with the superpowers each vying for a stake in the state's future.
Compared to the Ethiopians, the Italians had an advanced, modern military which included a large air force.
In September, a group of palace reactionaries including some courtiers of the empress, made a final bid to get rid of Tafari.
It was attached to the American 7th Infantry Division, and fought in a number of engagements including the Battle of Pork Chop Hill.
