The "ectoparasite" explanation of modern human nakedness is based on the principle that a hairless primate would harbor fewer parasites.
These are covered with thick plates of keratin and serve as protection against predators.
Coarse hair feels hard and wiry.
This is especially evident in men who develop a five o'clock shadow after having shaved their faces.
Other primates have sweat gland in their armpits that function as those of humans, and thus it is probable that human sweat glands evolved from a similar distribution, spreading to more areas of the body, rather than occurring through evolution of a new trait.
The eyelash is to humans, camels, horses, ostriches etc., what whiskers are to cats; they are used to sense when dirt, dust, or any other potentially harmful object is too close to the eye.
However, such anthropologists as Nina Jablonski oppositely argue about this hair texture.
The general hairlessness of humans in comparison to related species may be due to loss of functionality in the pseudogene KRTHAP1 (which helps produce keratin) in the human lineage about 240,000 years ago.
Aside from the mammary glands that produce a specialized sweat called milk, most mammals just have apocrine sweat glands on their armpits and loin.
A major problem with this theory, however, is that it does not explain why males are larger, hairier, and were more active in hunting than females.
The glands at the opening of the hair produce a fatty secretion that lubricates the hair.
Most common interest in hair is focused on hair growth, hair types and hair care, but hair is also an important biomaterial primarily composed of protein, notably keratin.
Another view is proposed by James Giles, who attempts to explain hairlessness as evolved from the relationship between mother and child, and as a consequence of bipedalism.
Males have more terminal hair, especially on the face, chest, abdomen, and back, and females have more vellus hair, which is less visible.
The opposite actions occur when the body is too warm; the arrector muscles make the hair lie flat on the skin which allows heat to leave.
Although hair provides protection against harmful UV radiation, since our hominin ancestors were bipedal, only our heads were exposed to the noonday sun.
Instead, the relatively sparse density of Afro-hair, combined with its springy coils actually results in an airy, almost sponge-like structure that in turn, Jablonski argues, more likely facilitates an increase in the circulation of cool air onto the scalp.
You can also try rolling a strand between your thumb and index finger.
braided damp hair).
Being knowledgeable of an individual's hair type is a good start to knowing how to take care of one's hair.
Hairstyle may be an indicator of group membership.
Another factor in human evolution that also occurred in the prehistoric past was a preferential selection for neoteny, particularly in females.
The halting of hair development at a juvenile stage, vellus hair, would also be consistent with the neoteny evident in humans, especially in females, and thus they could have occurred at the same time.
There is no evidence that sexual selection would proceed to such a drastic extent over a million years ago when a full, lush coat of hair would most likely indicate health and would therefore be more likely to be selected ''for'', not against, and not all human populations today have sexual dimorphism in body hair.
Such a pattern, again, does not seem to support human sexual aesthetics as being the sole or primary cause of this distribution.
Some Christian sects throughout history and up to modern times have also religiously proscribed the cutting of women's hair.
By contrast, among some Indian holy men, the hair is worn extremely long.
Cutting the hair also may be a sign of mourning.
Guard hairs give warnings that may trigger a recoiling reaction.
The body has different types of hair, including vellus hair and androgenic hair, each with its own type of cellular construction.
Then, ~150,000 years later (i.e.
This type of hair shrinks when wet and because it has fewer cuticle layers than other hair types it is more susceptible to damage.
Hair color and texture can be a sign of ethnic ancestry.
This theory, however, has significant holdings in today's cultural norms.
It is substantiated by Iyengar's (1998) findings that UV light can enter into straight human hair roots (and thus into the body through the skin) via the hair shaft.
Skin impression of the belly and lower tail of a pelycosaur, possibly ''Haptodus'' shows the basal synapsid stock bore transverse rows of rectangular scutes, similar to those of a modern crocodile.
Russian Orthodox Church requires all married women to wear headscarves inside the church; this tradition is often extended to all women, regardless of marital status.
Jablonski asserts head hair was evolutionarily advantageous for pre-humans to retain because it protected the scalp as they walked upright in the intense African (equatorial) UV light.
Each has specific characteristics that determine the length of the hair.
Sikhs have an obligation not to cut hair (a Sikh cutting hair becomes 'apostate' which means fallen from religion) and men keep it tied in a bun on the head, which is then covered appropriately using a turban.
Some hairs, such as eyelashes, are especially sensitive to the presence of potentially harmful matter.
During the English Civil War, the followers of Oliver Cromwell decided to crop their hair close to their head, as an act of defiance to the curls and ringlets of the king's men.
Most species evolved as the climate in Africa changed, to adjust their thermoregulation to the intense UV and sunlight at the equator, mostly by panting.
Epilation is the removal of the entire hair strand, including the part of the hair that has not yet left the follicle.
Instead, the distribution of Afro-hair is strongly skewed toward the equator.
This hairstyle was once worn among African Americans as a symbol of racial pride.
It is unclear to what degree other primates sweat in response to heat, however.
Hair has its origins in the common ancestor of mammals, the synapsids, about 300 million years ago.
It is not known whether the increased distribution of sweat glands occurred before, during, or after, the change in body hair, or even whether the two are related developments.
Hair is most noticeable on most people in a small number of areas, which are also the ones that are most commonly trimmed, plucked, or shaved.
The derivations of hair texture are not fully understood.
It was expected that dating the split of the ancestral human louse into two species, the head louse and the pubic louse, would date the loss of body hair in human ancestors.
A popular way to epilate hair is through waxing.
For instance, vellus hair is a juvenile characteristic.
In addition, paedomorphic characteristics in women are widely acknowledged as desirable by men.
Hence, they argue in favor of his suggestion that sexual selection may be responsible for such traits.
The human body, apart from areas of glabrous skin, is covered in follicles which produce thick terminal and fine vellus hair.
There is a trend in primates to have increased eccrine sweat glands over the general surface of the body.
It is not clear whether the change in body hair appearance occurred before or after the development of sweat glands.
Lush, wooded forests gave way to dry, grassland savannah; because of this, early humans were required to travel farther in search of food and water.
Specifically, the results of that study suggest that this phenomenon resembles the passage of light through fiber optic tubes (which do not function as effectively when kinked or sharply curved or coiled).
Attitudes towards different hair, such as hairstyles and hair removal, vary widely across different cultures and historical periods, but it is often used to indicate a person's personal beliefs or social position, such as their age, sex, or religion.
Hair in areas that have previously been waxed also is known to grow back finer and thinner, especially compared to hair that has been shaved with a razor.
Coarse hair has a more open cuticle than thin or medium hair causing it to be the most porous.
In women survival to such an advanced age is usually coupled with a decrease in fertility (see menopause), but in men fertility is retained beyond middle-age.
Curly hair that usually presents a definite "S" pattern and tends to combine thickness, fullness, body and/or frizziness.&nbsp;
In this sense, the trait may enhance comfort levels in intense equatorial climates more than straight hair (which, on the other hand, tends to naturally fall over the ears and neck to a degree that provides slightly enhanced comfort levels in cold climates relative to tightly coiled hair).
Its complex structure slides as the hair swells and is covered with a single molecular layer of lipid that makes the hair repel water.
However, early humans were able to compensate for the loss of warmth and protection provided by body hair with clothing, and no other mammal lost body hair to reduce parasite loads.
Another hypothesis for the thick body hair on humans proposes that Fisherian runaway sexual selection played a role (as well as in the selection of long head hair), (see types of hair and vellus hair), as well as a much larger role of testosterone in men.
Female art students known as the "cropheads" also adopted the style, notably at the Slade School in London, England.
An exceptionally well-preserved skull of ''Estemmenosuchus'', a therapsid from the Upper Permian, shows smooth, hairless skin with what appears to be glandular depressions, though as a semi-aquatic species it might not had been particularly useful to determine the integrument of terrestrial species.
Hair follows a specific growth cycle with three distinct and concurrent phases: anagen, catagen, and telogen phases.
There are various systems that people use to classify their curl patterns.
Hair growth begins inside the hair follicle.
According to this system there are four types of hair: straight, wavy, curly, kinky.
When the body is too cold, the arrector pili muscles found attached to hair follicles stand up, causing the hair in these follicles to do the same.
Multiple religions, both ancient and contemporary, require or advise one to allow their hair to become dreadlocks, though people also wear them for fashion.
Male pattern baldness is a sign of age, which may be concealed with a toupee, hats, or religious and cultural adornments.
Hair tends to be very soft, shiny, oily, poor at holding curls but difficult to damage.&nbsp;
This hair typing system is the most widely used system to classify hair.
The highly structural and organized cortex, or middle layer of the hair, is the primary source of mechanical strength and water uptake.
Depending on the desired length and overall health of the hair, periods without cutting or trimming the hair can vary.
Regular hairdressing in some cultures is considered a sign of wealth or status.
A further hypothesis is that human hair was reduced in response to ectoparasites.
In early modern China, the queue was a male hairstyle worn by the Manchus from central Manchuria and the Han Chinese during the Qing dynasty; hair on the front of the head was shaved off above the temples every ten days, mimicking male-pattern baldness,  and the rest of the hair braided into a long pigtail.
Early hominids likely possessed fur similar to other large apes, but about 2.5 million years ago they developed a greater distribution of sweat glands that enabled them to perspire over most of the body.
As 4a but with less visible (or no) curly patterning.
Certain Hindu sects also wear head scarves for religious reasons.
The more advanced therapsids could have had a combination of naked skin, whiskers, and scutes.
Hair provides thermal regulation and camouflage for many animals; for others it provides signals to other animals such as warnings, mating, or other communicative displays; and for some animals hair provides defensive functions and, rarely, even offensive protection.
Tightly coiled S-curls.
Depilation is the removal of hair from the surface of the skin.
Hair has definite "S" pattern and is usually receptive to a variety of styles.
People with longer hair will most often use scissors to cut their hair, whereas shorter hair is maintained using a trimmer.
The eyebrows provide moderate protection to the eyes from dirt, sweat and rain.
It is hard to damage and immensely difficult to curl this hair texture.
Distinct S-waves, some spiral curling.
The function of hair in other locations is debated.
People with straight hair have round hair fibers.
...&nbsp;from 2 to 4 inches (5 to 10 centimetres)
Another hypothesis is that humans use of fire caused, or initiated the reduction in human hair.
For men, Islam, Orthodox Judaism, Orthodox Christianity, Roman Catholicism, and other religious groups have at various times recommended or required the covering of the head and sections of the hair of men, and some have dictates relating to the cutting of men's facial and head hair.
Although drugs and medical procedures exist for the treatment of baldness, many balding men simply shave their heads.
During the appeal trial, they appeared in the dock wearing wigs.
Because the hair on the head is normally longer than other types of body hair, it is cut with scissors or clippers.
Hair exists in a variety of textures.
Horses and humans are two of the few animals capable of sweating on most of their body, yet horses are larger and still have fully developed fur.
Fine hair has a small circumference in relation to medium and coarse strands; coarse hair having the largest circumference.
Bulb of hair layers consist of fibrous connective tissue, glassy membrane, external root sheath, internal root sheath composed of epithelium stratum (Henle's layer) and granular stratum (Huxley's layer), cuticle, cortex and medulla of hair.
This hair type is usually voluminous, "climate dependent (humidity = frizz), and damage prone."
Long stylized bangs were very common for emos, scene kids and younger indie kids in the 2000s and early 2010s, among people of both genders.
However, inclinations towards deeming hair texture "adaptively trivial" may root in certain cultural value judgments more than objective logic.
White hair is a sign of age or genetics, which may be concealed with hair dye (not easily for some), although many prefer to assume it (especially if it is a poliosis characteristic of the person since childhood).
Global imports of hair in 2010 was worth $US 1.24 billion.
The flatter the hair shaft becomes, the curlier hair gets, because the shape allows more cysteines to become compacted together resulting in a bent shape that, with every additional disulfide bond, becomes curlier in form.
Thick strands whose shed strands usually are easily identified against most backgrounds;
However, while men develop longer, coarser, thicker, and darker terminal hair through sexual differentiation, women do not, leaving their vellus hair visible.
This suggests that humans had lost body hair (but retained head hair) and developed thick pubic hair prior to this date, were living in or close to the forest where gorillas lived, and acquired pubic lice from butchering gorillas or sleeping in their nests.
* Type 1 is straight hair, which reflects the most sheen and also the most resilient hair of all of the hair types.
Specifically, if hair texture were simply the result of adaptively arbitrary human aesthetic preferences, one would expect that the global distribution of the various hair textures would be fairly random.
This means the bonds present are directly in line with one another, resulting in straight hair.
Hair also has a sensory function, extending the sense of touch beyond the surface of the skin.
Eumelanin is the dominant pigment in brown hair, and black hair, while pheomelanin is dominant in red hair.
Strands are neither fine nor coarse; similar to hair found on many Caucasians.
Tightly coiled hair in its natural state may be worn in an Afro.
These hairs then form a heat-trapping layer above the epidermis.
...&nbsp;more than 4 inches (10 centimetres)
In prehistoric times, most individuals did not survive to adulthood, let alone reaching their fourth decade and therefore balding tends to act as a signal of maturity.
Most mammals have light skin that is covered by fur, and biologists believe that early human ancestors started out this way also.
Hair has great social significance for human beings.
A group of studies have recently shown that genetic patterns at the EDAR locus, a region of the modern human genome that contributes to hair texture variation among most individuals of East Asian descent, support the hypothesis that (East Asian) straight hair likely developed in this branch of the modern human lineage subsequent to the original expression of tightly coiled natural afro-hair.
Blond hair is the result of having little pigmentation in the hair strand.
When our ancestors adopted group-dwelling social arrangements roughly 1.8 mya, ectoparasite loads increased dramatically.
The diameter of human hair varies from .
The innermost region, the medulla, is not always present and is an open, unstructured region.
Straight (Fine/Thin)&nbsp;
Therefore, evidence of the time when human skin darkened has been used to date the loss of human body hair, assuming that the dark skin was needed after the fur was gone.
Sexual selection is the only theory thus far that explains the sexual dimorphism seen in the hair patterns of men and women.
This led to the Parliamentary faction being nicknamed Roundheads.
The eye reflexively closes as a result of this sensation.
As early humans diverged from their 'pre-chimpanzee like', rather the ancestral lineage shared with chimpanzees, they also became omnivorous in order to maximize calorie intake, an important distinction in a nutrient-scarce environment.
Sometime during the gradual process by which ''Homo erectus'' began a transition from furry skin to the naked skin expressed by Homo sapiens, hair texture putatively gradually changed from straight hair (the condition of most mammals, including humanity's closest cousins—chimpanzees) to Afro-textured hair or 'kinky' (i.e.
An individual's hair volume, as a result, can be thin, normal, or thick.
Humans are the only primate species that have undergone significant hair loss and of the approximately 5000 extant species of mammal, only a handful are effectively hairless.
Given that the coiled texture is the natural state of some African Americans' hair, or perceived as being more "African", this simple style is now often seen as a sign of self-acceptance and an affirmation that the beauty norms of the (eurocentric) dominant culture are not absolute.
The film ''Easy Rider'' (1969) includes the assumption that the two main characters could have their long hairs forcibly shaved with a rusty razor when jailed, symbolizing the intolerance of some conservative groups toward members of the counterculture.
Stubble typically appears to grow back thicker because the shaved hairs are blunted instead of tapered off at the end, although the hair never actually grows back thicker.
Three main aspects of hair texture are the curl pattern, volume, and consistency.
Z-patterned (tightly coiled, sharply angled)
Shaving is accomplished with bladed instruments, such as razors.
The signals from this sensory apparatus is interpreted in the neocortex, a chapter of the brain that expanded markedly in animals like ''Morganucodon'' and ''Hadrocodium''.
Additionally it is possible, and quite normal to have more than one kind of hair type, for instance having a mixture of both type 3a & 3b curls.
All natural hair colors are the result of two types of hair pigments.
The most known thermoregulatory hypothesis in modern paleoanthropology was proposed by Peter Wheeler (1984, 1985).
It is neither fine nor coarse.
They also play a key role in non-verbal communication by displaying emotions such as sadness, anger, surprise and excitement.
Common in Asian women.
Giles also connects romantic love to hairlessness.
This can be achieved through methods such as shaving.
around 50,000 years ago), sub-groups of this population began to expand our species' range to regions outside of, and (later) within, this continent (Tishkoff, 1996).
In the time of Confucius (5th century BCE), the Chinese grew out their hair and often tied it, as a symbol of filial piety.
Frizzy or very frizzy with thicker waves; often more resistant to styling.
As a result, humans evolved the ability to sweat: a process which was facilitated by the loss of body hair.
The rest of their body is covered in eccrine glands.
Straight but with a slight body wave adding some volume.
Malformed bones in the pelvic area were especially deadly for women because they interfered with the successful delivery of babies, leading to the death of both the mother and the infant during labor.
Several hypotheses explained hairlessness as a thermoregulatory adaptation to hot and dry savanna.
You can feel it, but it isn't stiff or rough.
To this end, it can be concluded that benefits stemming from the loss of human body hair must be great enough to outweigh the loss of these protective functions by nakedness.
Waxing is the ideal hair removal technique to keep an area hair-free for long periods of time.
Each strand of hair is made up of the medulla, cortex, and cuticle.
This new growth is called stubble.
In some mammals, such as hedgehogs and porcupines, the hairs have been modified into hard spines or quills.
The ''root of the hair'' ends in an enlargement, the ''hair bulb'', which is whiter in color and softer in texture than the shaft, and is lodged in a follicular involution of the epidermis called the hair follicle.
In humans with little body hair, the effect results in goose bumps.
While type A waves can easily alternate between straight and curly styles, type B and C Wavy hair is resistant to styling.
For some Sunni madhabs, the donning of a Kufi or Topi (cap) is a form of sunnah.
FIA hair classification
This points to a strong, long-term selective pressure that, in stark contrast to most other regions of the genomes of sub-Saharan groups, left little room for genetic variation at the determining loci.
Horses also sweat, and they are larger, hairier, and expend more energy running than human males, so there may not be any connection between the ability to sweat and the apparent hairlessness of humans.
On an individual basis, mutations in the gene HR can lead to complete hair loss, though this is not typical in humans.
A very round shaft allows for fewer disulfide bonds to be present in the hair strand.
Hair tends to be bone-straight and difficult to curl.
As 4a and 4b but with almost no defined curl pattern.
Humans kept the hair on our head which reflects harmful UV rays, but our body hair was reduced.
This process is repeated several times over the course of many months to a couple of years with hair regrowing less frequently until it finally stops; this is used as a more permanent solution to waxing or shaving.
Humans may also lose their hair as a result of hormonal imbalance due to drugs or pregnancy.
Hats and coats are still required while doing outdoor activities in cold weather to prevent frostbite and hypothermia, but the hair on the human body does help to keep the internal temperature regulated.
More recently, studies on terminal Permian russian coprolites may suggest that non-mammalian synapsids from that era had fur.
Hence, those with less pigmented skin survived and had children at higher rates because their skin allowed more UV light for the production of vitamin D.  Thus, the skin of those in the group that left the African continent and went far north gradually developed adaptations for relatively greater translucence compared to equatorial hues.
Historically, some ideas have been advanced to explain the apparent hairlessness of humans, as compared to other species.
Cut hair may be used in wigs.
Laser hair removal is a cosmetic method where a small laser beam pulses selective heat on dark target matter in the area that causes hair growth without harming the skin tissue.
Orthodox Judaism also commands the use of scarves and other head coverings for married women for modesty reasons.
It can grow on most external areas of the human body, except on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet (among other areas).
It is important to note that African Americans as a whole have a variety of hair textures, as they are not an ethnically homogeneous group, but an ad-hoc of different racial admixtures.
This is more effective in other mammals whose fur fluffs up to create air pockets between hairs that insulate the body from the cold.
This process is formally called piloerection, derived from the Latin words 'pilus' ('hair') and 'erectio' ('rising up'), but is more commonly known as 'having goose bumps' in English.
There are two million small, tubular glands and sweat glands that produce watery fluids that cool the body by evaporation.
