These houses are often self-sufficient as well.
The national team won the 2007 Caribbean Nations Cup.
The World Health Organization cites diarrheal diseases, HIV/AIDS, meningitis, and respiratory infections as common causes of death in Haiti.
Cities such as Jacmel, Jérémie, Les Cayes, and Port-de-Paix have airports that are accessible by smaller aircraft.
According to the UN Office of the Special Envoy for Haiti, as of March 2012, of Humanitarian funding committed or disbursed by bilateral and multilateral donors in 2010 and 2011, only 1% has been pledged to the Haitian Government
''Vive la différence'' has long been Haiti's national tourism slogan and its proximity to the United States, made Haiti a hot attraction until the Duvalier regime was ousted in 1986.
Stade Sylvio Cator is the multi-purpose stadium in Port-au-Prince, where it is currently used mostly for association football matches that fits a capacity of 10,000 people.
Originally inhabited by the indigenous Taíno people, Spain first discovered the island on 5 December 1492 during the first voyage of Christopher Columbus across the Atlantic.
The whites were vastly outnumbered by the tens of thousands of African slaves they had imported to work on their plantations, which were primarily devoted to the production of sugarcane.
The topic, however, has more than a passing reference for a country that, as Lord Anthony Gifford wrote, "was forced to pay compensation to the government of France."
Haiti's most important valley in terms of crops is the Plaine de l'Artibonite, which is oriented south of the Montagnes Noires.
The festival has generated a style of Carnival music.
Haiti averages approximately 350 people per square kilometer (~900 per sq mi.
The Chaîne de la Selle mountain range – an extension of the southern mountain chain of the Dominican Republic (the Sierra de Baoruco) – extends from the Massif de la Selle in the east to the Massif de la Hotte in the west.
The current defense force for Haiti is the Haitian National Police, which has a highly trained SWAT team, and works alongside the Haitian Coast Guard.
They form the staple diet, which consists of a lot of starch and is high in carbohydrates.
Papa Doc's son Jean-Claude Duvalier – also known as "Baby Doc" – led the country from 1971 until his ouster in 1986, when protests led him to seek exile in France.
The gates to these houses are barred at night, the house is locked; guard dogs patrol the yard.
The middle and upper classes live in Suburbs, or in the central part of the bigger cities in apartments, where there is urban planning.
Charity organizations, including Food for the Poor and Haitian Health Foundation, are building schools for children and providing necessary school supplies.
Afterward the sovereign nation of Haiti was established on 1 January 1804 the first independent nation of Latin America and the Caribbean, the second republic in the Americas, the only nation in the western hemisphere to have defeated three European superpowers (Britain, France and Spain), and the only nation in the world established as a result of a successful slave revolt.
There are two rainy seasons, April–June and October–November.
He stayed in power by enlisting an organization known as ''Tontons Macoutes'' ("Bogeymen"), which maintained order by terrorizing the populace and political opponents.
The country has yet to recover from the 2010 earthquake and a subsequent and massive Haiti cholera outbreak that was triggered when cholera-infected waste from a MINUSTAH peacekeeping station contaminated the country's main river, the Artibonite.
In addition, the newly arrived slaves added to the city's African population.
Millions of Haitians live abroad in the United States, Dominican Republic, Cuba, Canada (primarily Montreal), Bahamas, France, French Antilles, the Turks and Caicos, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, Venezuela, Brazil and French Guiana.
As a gateway to the Caribbean, Hispaniola became a haven for pirates during the early colonial period.
The sailors carried endemic Eurasian infectious diseases.
In Haiti, communications include the radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.
The richest 20% of households earn 64% of the country’s total income, while the poorest 20% makes do with just 1%.
The people had migrated over centuries into the Caribbean islands from South America.
Comprising 5% of the nation's population, mulattoes have retained their preeminence, evident in the political, economic, social and cultural hierarchy in Haiti.
In recent years, hydroelectric, solar and wind energy have been explored as possible sustainable energy sources.
One-quarter Haitian, Trujillo continued policies against the neighboring population for some time.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the National Assembly of Haiti.
Haiti's culture is greatly reflected in its paintings, music, and literature.
More than 200,000 people have climbed out of poverty.
Rice and beans in several differing ways are eaten throughout the country regardless of location, becoming a sort of national dish.
The vast majority of the business sector and individuals in Haiti will also accept US dollars, though at the outdoor markets gourdes may be preferred.
Once in power, he ordered the massacre of most whites.
Haiti also includes various offshore islands.
It is a refined music, with méringue as its basic rhythm.
Aristide vacated the presidency in February 1996.
The central region consists of two plains and two sets of mountain ranges.
Haiti is  in size and has an estimated 10.6 million people, making it the most populous country in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the second-most populous country in the Caribbean as a whole.
After US forces left in 1934, Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo used anti-Haitian sentiment as a nationalist tool.
The free people of color petitioned the colonial government to expand their rights.
But there are also smaller Haitian communities in many other countries, including Chile, Switzerland, Japan and Australia.
The United States and its allies allegedly poured tens of millions of dollars into unsuccessful efforts to slander Aristide as a drug trafficker, human rights violator, and heretical practitioner of Vodou.
Haiti's Ministry of Defense is the main body of their armed forces.
The United Nations states that in total US$13.34 billion has been earmarked for the crisis through 2020, though two years after the 2010 quake, less than half of that amount had actually been released, according to UN documents.
Such statistical estimations could be viewed with skepticism because the average Haitian and Haitian family spends more than that daily.
Some even have rooftop reservoirs for water, as the water supply is also unreliable.
Later in the revolution, the US provided support to black Haitian military forces, with the goal of reducing French influence in North America and the Caribbean.
In 2010, the government decided to stage the event in a different city outside Port-au-Prince every year in an attempt to decentralize the country.
In 1975, the first novel written entirely in Haitian Creole was published entitled ''Dezafi'' written by Franketienne describing a poetic picture of Haitian life.
'''Haiti''' (;  ;  ), officially the '''Republic of Haiti''' (; ), is a sovereign state in the Western Hemisphere (North America).
The slaves, along with free ''gens de couleur'' and allies, continued their fight for independence.
In 2012 and 2013, 150 HNP officers received specialized training funded by the US government, which also contributed to the infrastructure and communications support by upgrading radio capacity and constructing new police stations from the most violent-prone neighborhoods of Cité Soleil and Grande Ravine in Port-au-Prince to the new northern industrial park at Caracol.
Its westernmost point is known as Cap Carcasse.
Haiti is the most mountainous nation in the Caribbean and its highest point is Pic la Selle, at .
Presently, Brown University is cooperating with L'Hôpital Saint-Damien in Haiti to coordinate a pediatric health care curriculum.
The departments are further divided into 42 arrondissements, 145 communes and 571 communal sections.
In 1809, nearly 10,000 refugees from Saint-Domingue settled ''en masse'' in New Orleans.
The 2015 CIA Factbook, reported that around 80% of Haitians profess to being Catholics while Protestants made up about 16% of the population (Baptist 10%, Pentecostal 4%, Adventist 1%, other 1%).
Haitian Creole, which has recently undergone a standardization, is spoken by virtually the entire population of Haiti.
More than 80% of primary schools are privately managed by nongovernmental organizations, churches, communities, and for-profit operators, with minimal government oversight.
This implies that remittances are the life-blood of the Haitian economy.
Haiti's purchasing power parity GDP fell  8% in 2010 (from US$12.15 billion to US$11.18 billion) and the GDP per capita remained unchanged at PPP US$1,200.
Haiti is on the western part of Hispaniola, the second largest island in the Greater Antilles.
In an expression of the Theodore Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, the United States occupied the island in 1915.
Some men of color were admitted into the military.
Toussaint Louverture, a former slave and leader in the slave revolt, drove out the Spanish (from Santo Domingo) and the British invaders who threatened the colony.
To build an alliance with the ''gens de couleur'' and slaves, the French commissioners Sonthonax and Polverel abolished slavery in the colony.
A study team presented a hazard assessment of the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault system to the 18th Caribbean Geologic Conference in March 2008, noting the large strain.
The first recorded smallpox epidemic in the Americas erupted on Hispaniola in 1507.
A notable bust in recent years, led to the dismantlement of the largest kidnapping ring in the country with the use of an advanced software program developed by a Westpoint-trained Haitian official that proved to be so effective that it has led to its foreign advisers to make inquiries.
returned Aristide to the presidency with 92% of the vote.
The elected President, Leslie Manigat, was overthrown some months later in the June 1988 Haitian coup d'état.
According to CIA 2015 World Factbook, Haiti's literacy rate is now 60.7% (est.
Cuba has the longest.
For some it is because "it's none of your business," for others, they will simply exaggerate their poor situation in hopes that some type of financial aide will be gained or rendered to them".
The Spanish passed the Laws of Burgos, 1512–13, which forbade the maltreatment of natives, endorsed their conversion to Catholicism, and gave legal framework to ''.''
The ''Massif du Nord'' is an extension of the ''Cordillera Central'' in the Dominican Republic.
In 2004, a revolt began in northern Haiti.
Following the disputed 2000 election and accusations about President Aristide's rule, US aid to the Haitian government was cut off between 2001 and 2004.
Boniface Alexandre assumed interim authority.
The anchor of Christopher Columbus' largest ship, the ''Santa María'' now rests in the Musée du Panthéon National Haïtien (MUPANAH), in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
Political leaders in the United States, which was a new republic itself, reacted with ambivalence, at times providing aid to enable planters to put down the revolt.
Aristide spent years negotiating with the Convergence Démocratique on new elections, but the Convergence's inability to develop a sufficient electoral base made elections unattractive.
These vehicles for hire are often privately owned and extensively decorated.
There are also medical schools and law schools offered at both the University of Haiti and abroad.
General elections had been planned for January 2010, but were postponed due to the earthquake.
Navigator Christopher Columbus landed in Haiti on 5 December 1492, in an area that he named ''Môle Saint-Nicolas,'' and claimed the island for the Crown of Castile.
There is a chronic shortage of health care personnel and hospitals lack resources, a situation that became readily apparent after the January 2010 earthquake.
U.S. Marines were stationed in the country until 1934, a period of nineteen years.
The rebellion that began in 1791 was led by a former slave and the first black general of the French Army, Toussaint Louverture, whose military genius and political acumen transformed an entire society of slaves into an independent country.
In subsequent years, there was increasing violence and human rights abuses.
It runs from the southeast to the northwest.
The Prime Minister acts as head of government and is appointed by the President, chosen from the majority party in the National Assembly.
An article published in Haiti's ''Le Matin'' newspaper in September 2008 cited comments by geologist Patrick Charles to the effect that there was a high risk of major seismic activity in Port-au-Prince.
Foreign and Haitian NGOs play an important role in the sector, especially in rural and urban slum areas.
The January 2010 earthquake, was a major setback for education reform in Haiti as it diverted limited resources to survival.
According to the 2013 CIA World Factbook, the 2010 Haiti earthquake inflicted an estimated US$7.8 billion in damage and caused the country's GDP to contract.
In 1792, the French government sent three commissioners with troops to re-establish control.
Former US President Bill Clinton's foundation contributed US$250,000 to a recycling initiative for a sister-program of "Ranmase Lajan" or "Picking Up Money" by use of reverse vending machines.
As a result of a deep history and strong African ties, symbols take on great meaning within Haitian society.
In January 2010, following the earthquake, US President Barack Obama promised US$1.15 billion in assistance.
The country's customs essentially are a blend of cultural beliefs that derived from the various ethnic groups that inhabited the island of Hispaniola.
Haitians often use peppers and other strong flavorings.
This term is the French word for ball, as in a formal dance.
At the time of European encounter, the island of Hispaniola, of which Haiti occupies the western three-eighths, was one of many Caribbean islands inhabited by the Taíno Indians, speakers of an Arawakan language called Taino, which has been preserved in the Haitian Creole language.
In 2008 Haiti was again struck by tropical storms; Tropical Storm Fay, Hurricane Gustav, Hurricane Hanna and Hurricane Ike all produced heavy winds and rain.
On Christmas day, Columbus' flagship the ''Santa Maria'', ran aground north of what is now Limonade.
Minority religions in Haiti include Islam, Bahá'í Faith, Judaism, and Buddhism.
In January 1914, British, German and US military forces entered Haiti, ostensibly to protect their citizens from civil unrest at the time.
Artists frequently paint in fables.
Youth attend parties at nightclubs called ''discos'', (pronounced "deece-ko"), and attend ''Bal''.
The former Haitian Armed Forces were demobilized in 1995, however, efforts to reconstitute it are currently underway.
In December 1990, a former Catholic priest, Jean-Bertrand Aristide was elected President in the Haitian general election.
The Plaine du Cul-de-Sac is a natural depression that harbors the country's saline lakes, such as Trou Caïman and Haiti's largest lake, Étang Saumatre.
In 2013, Haiti called for European nations to pay reparations for slavery and establish an official commission for the settlement of past wrong-doings.
The French captured Louverture, transporting him to France for trial.
Haiti's economy was severely impacted by the 2010 Haiti earthquake which occurred on 12 January 2010, killing over 300,000 and displacing 1.5 million residents.
They established a separate social class.
Frequent subjects in Haitian art include big, delectable foods, lush landscapes, market activities, jungle animals, rituals, dances, and gods.
Haiti has two main highways that run from one end of the country to the other.
More than 50,000 French troops died in an attempt to retake the colony, including 18 generals.
These have become national symbols of Haiti and tourist attractions.
The rainfall pattern is varied, with rain heavier in some of the lowlands and on the northern and eastern slopes of the mountains.
The island of Tortuga (Île de la Tortue) is located off the coast of northern Haiti.
Haiti had no recorded music until 1937 when Jazz Guignard was recorded non-commercially.
Blacks outnumbered whites by about ten-to-one.
''The World Factbook'' reports a shortage of skilled labor, widespread unemployment and underemployment, saying "more than two-thirds of the labor force do not have formal jobs."
The natives were brought to these sites to work in specific plantations or industries.
Upon successful graduation of secondary school, students may continue into higher education.
Haiti ranked 145 of 182 countries in the 2010 United Nations Human Development Index, with 57.3% of the population being deprived in at least three of the HDI's poverty measures.
The American Colonization Society (ACS) encouraged free blacks in the United States to emigrate to Haiti.
Haiti ranked last among North American countries in the World Economic Forum's Network Readiness Index (NRI) an indicator for determining the development level of a country's information and communication technologies.
Many reformers have advocated the creation of a free, public and universal education system for all primary school-age students in Haiti.
Michel Martelly, the previous president, was elected in the 2011 general election.
Food or water-borne diseases include bacterial and protozoal diarrhea, typhoid fever and hepatitis A and E; common vector-borne diseases are dengue fever and malaria; water-contact diseases include leptospirosis.
In September of the following year, Aristide was overthrown by the military in the 1991 Haitian coup d'état.
The incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in Haiti is more than ten times as high as in the rest of Latin America.
Île à Vache (Cow Island), a lush island with many beautiful sights, is located off the tip of southwestern Haiti.
Most people living in Haiti are at high risk for major infectious diseases.
The name Haïti was restored by Haitian revolutionary Jean-Jacques Dessalines as the official name of independent Saint-Domingue, as a tribute to the Amerindian predecessors.
In English, the rules for the pronunciation is often disregarded, thus the spelling ''Haiti'' is used and pronounced as ''"Hay''-ti".
Haiti is also known internationally for its rum; Rhum Barbancourt is the most popular alcoholic beverage in Haiti, and it is regarded highly by international standards.
Struggling to revive the agricultural economy to produce commodity crops, Boyer passed the Code Rural, which denied peasant laborers the right to leave the land, enter the towns, or start farms or shops of their own.
Due to the racial caste system instituted in colonial Haiti, Haitian mulattoes became the nation's social elite and racially privileged.
France, the United States and other Western countries have repeatedly intervened in Haitian politics since the country's founding, sometimes at the request of one party or another.
Dessalines at first offered protection to the white planters and others.
To develop it into sugarcane plantations, the French imported thousands of slaves from Africa.
Most modern Haitians are descendants of former black African slaves, including Mulattoes who are of multiracial admixture.
Haitian footballer Joe Gaetjens played for the United States national team in the 1950 FIFA World Cup, scoring the winning goal in the 1–0 upset of England.
The state of Illinois and city of Chicago declared du Sable the founder of Chicago on 26 October 1968.
Since the religious syncretism between Catholicism and Vodou, it is difficult to estimate the number of Vodouists in Haiti.
This mountain range harbors Pic la Selle, the highest point in Haiti at .
Most people have no transportation or access to Haitian hospitals.
Haiti relies heavily on an oil alliance with Petrocaribe for much of its energy requirements.
Deforestation has resulted in much of the soil being released from the upper catchments.
A 2007 earthquake hazard study, noted that the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault zone could be at the end of its seismic cycle and concluded that a worst-case forecast would involve a 7.2&nbsp;Mw earthquake, similar in size to the 1692 Jamaica earthquake.
Though similar to other cooking styles in the region, it carries a uniqueness native to the country, many visitors to the island have mixed reviews of Haitian cuisine.
The enforced payment to France reduced Haiti's economy for years.
They doubled the city's population.
''Compas (konpa)'' (also known as ''compas direct'' in French, or ''konpa dirèk'' in creole) is a complex, ever-changing music that arose from African rhythms and European ballroom dancing, mixed with Haiti's bourgeois culture.
Haiti's new government was not supported by other republics.
The exact number of deaths due to the Haitian revolution is unknown.
Haitian cuisine originates from several culinary styles from the various historical ethnic groups that populated the western portion of the island of Hispaniola.
After almost four years of recession, the economy grew by 1.5% in 2005.
The election had been boycotted by the opposition, then organized into the Convergence Démocratique, over a dispute in the May legislative elections.
1 (National Highway One), originates in Port-au-Prince, winding through the coastal towns of Montrouis and Gonaïves, before reaching its terminus at the northern port Cap-Haïtien.
The commission recommended completely redoing the vote after auditing a random sample of about 13,000 ballots.
The name Haïti (or ''Hayti'') comes from the indigenous Taíno language which was the native name given to the entire island of Hispaniola to mean, "land of high mountains."
Rural areas, with better access to agricultural products, have a larger variety of choices.
The "tap tap" name comes from the sound of passengers tapping on the metal bus body to indicate they want off.
Under pressure, President Boyer agreed to a treaty by which France formally recognized the independence of the nation in exchange for a payment of 150 million francs (reduced to 90 million in 1838).
The southern highway, Route Nationale No.
Recently there have been mass vaccination campaigns claiming to vaccinate as many as 91% of a target population against specific diseases (measles and rubella in this case).
Haiti is the only country in the Western Hemisphere to undergo a successful slave revolution, but a long history of oppression by dictatorsincluding François Duvalier and his son Jean-Claude Duvalierhas markedly affected the nation.
Carnival week is traditionally a time of all-night parties.
Together they helped secure an end to the occupation in 1934.
The world's most prominent governments did not overtly oppose such appeals, nor did they support them; an unnamed analyst "close to the Haitian government" quoted in several media sources including ''The New York Times'' is reported to have said: "Aristide could have 15 passports and he's still not going to come back to Haiti&nbsp;... France and the United States are standing in the way."
The International Red Cross reports that seven out of ten Haitians live on less than US$2 a day, however, stated below "such statistical estimations should be looked upon very skeptically because of the fact that the average Haitian and Haitian family has to and does spend a lot more than that daily.
In July 1825, King Charles X of France, during a period of "restoration" for the monarchy, sent a fleet to reconquer the island.
Haiti exports crops such as mangoes, cacao, coffee, papayas, mahogany nuts, spinach, and watercress.
On 4 April 2011, the Provisional Electoral Council announced preliminary results indicating that Martelly had won the presidential election.
''The World Factbook'' also states that "remittances are the primary source of foreign exchange, equaling one-fifth (20%) of GDP and representing more than five times the earnings from exports in 2012".
Half of all Haitians work in the agricultural sector.
Haiti is subject to periodic droughts and floods, made more severe by deforestation.
In the uncertain years of revolution, the United States played both sides off against each other, with its traders supplying both the French and the rebels.
After a period of disorder, in September 1957 Dr. François Duvalier was elected President of Haiti.
This was the country's most severe earthquake in over 200 years.
The decorations are a typically Haitian form of art.
Haiti is the third largest country in the Caribbean behind Cuba and the Dominican Republic (the latter shares a  border with Haiti).
According to a 2008 study examining the frequency of the Duffy antigen receptor for Chemokines (DARC) Single Nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), (75%) of Haitian women sampled exhibited the CC genotype (absent among women of European ancestry) at levels comparable to US African-Americans (73%), but more than Jamaican females (63%).
They also originated in Central and South America.
Consequently Haitian cuisine is often moderately spicy.
Similarly, some media outlets alleged that millions were stolen by former president Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
