The many streams, rivers and canals are crossed by some 2,500 bridges, more than London, Amsterdam and Venice put together.
The biker's service in Saint Michael's Church attracts tens of thousands of bikers.
Hamburg's license plate prefix was "HH" (Hansestadt Hamburg; English: Hanseatic City of Hamburg) between 1906 and 1945 and from 1956, rather than the single letter normally used for large cities since the federal registration reform in 1956, such as B for Berlin or M for Munich.
Further The Hamburg Players e. V. English Language Theatre Group, The Hamburg Exiles Rugby Club, The Hamburger Cricket Verein e. V., The Morris Minor Register of Hamburg.
Hamburg was destroyed and occupied several times.
Most deported persons perished in the Holocaust.
Many companies operating in E-Commerce have moved into HafenCity or started there.
The boroughs are not independent municipalities: their power is limited and subordinate to the Senate of Hamburg.
The HVV was the first organisation of this kind worldwide.
World Cup events in cycling, the UCI ProTour competition EuroEyes Cyclassics, and the triathlon ITU World Cup event ''Hamburg City Man'' are also held in here.
The quarters Hamburg-Altstadt ("old town") and Neustadt ("new town") are the historical origin of Hamburg.
''Hafengeburtstag'' is a funfair to honour the birthday of the port of Hamburg with a party and a ship parade.
Hamburg is on the southern point of the Jutland Peninsula, between Continental Europe to the south and Scandinavia to the north, with the North Sea to the west and the Baltic Sea to the north-east.
Inserted into the pavement in front of their former houses, the blocks draw attention to the victims of Nazi persecution.
St. Pauli's home games take place at the Millerntor-Stadion.
About 8,600 died in the largest German epidemic of the late 19th century, and the last major cholera epidemic in a major city of the Western world.
The club has grown immensely in the last several years and includes at least one youth team, three men's, and two women's teams.
The ''Hamburger DOM'' is northern Germany's biggest fun fair, held three times a year.
The city is the seat of Germany's oldest bank, the Berenberg Bank, M.M.Warburg & CO and HSH Nordbank.
There is also a thriving 400-year-old Anglican church community worshiping at ''St Thomas Becket Church''.
The system had approximately 160,000 students in 245 primary schools and 195 secondary schools in 2006.
There are six ferry lines along the River Elbe, operated by ''HADAG'', that fall under the aegis of the HVV.
The first bishop, Ansgar, became known as the Apostle of the North.
The Elbe Philharmonic Hall ''(Elbphilharmonie)'', expected to be completed by December 2016, will house concerts in a building on top of an old warehouse, designed by the Swiss architects ''Herzog & de Meuron''.
Seven universities are private, like the Bucerius Law School  and the Hamburg School of Business Administration.
It destroyed three churches, the town hall, and many other buildings, killing 51 people and leaving an estimated 20,000 homeless.
The raids, codenamed Operation Gomorrah by the RAF, killed at least 42,600 civilians; the precise number is not known.
The most recent success for the team was the EHF Champions League win in 2013.
In 2009, more than 2,500 "stumbling blocks" ''(Stolpersteine)'' were laid, engraved with the names of deported and murdered citizens.
Hamburg has a vibrant psychedelic trance community, with record labels such as Spirit Zone.
The origin of the ''Hamma'' term remains uncertain, as does the exact location of the castle.
The biggest parks are the ''Stadtpark'', the Ohlsdorf Cemetery and Planten un Blomen.
Since 1897, the seat of the government has been the Hamburg Rathaus, with the office of the mayor, the meeting room for the Senate and the floor for the Hamburg Parliament.
Hamburg Airport is the oldest airport in Germany still in operation.
Hamburg has 54 hospitals.
The Laeiszhalle also houses a third orchestra, the Hamburger Symphoniker.
Upon the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, the Free Imperial City of Hamburg was not incorporated into a larger administrative area while retaining special privileges (mediatised), but became a sovereign state with the official title of the ''Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg''.
The city is a notable tourist destination for both domestic and overseas visitors; it ranked 16th in the world for livability in 2015.
There is also the smaller Hamburg Finkenwerder Airport, used only as a company airport for Airbus.
Hamburg was applying for 2024 Olympic Games.
Hamburg has nurtured a number of pop musicians.
There are also the coal-fired Wedel and Moorburg Power Stations, and the fuel-cell power plant in the HafenCity quarter.
Some of the boroughs and quarters have been rearranged several times.
The area of Reeperbahn in the quarter St. Pauli is Europe's largest red light district and home of strip clubs, brothels, bars and nightclubs.
Other first-league teams include VT Aurubis Hamburg (Volleyball), Hamburger Polo Club, and Hamburg Blue Devils (American Football).
Hamburg is the birthplace of Johannes Brahms, who spent his formative early years in the city, and the birthplace and home of the famous waltz composer Oscar Fetrás, who wrote the well-known "Mondnacht auf der Alster" waltz.
Hamburg was the departure port for many Germans and Eastern Europeans to emigrate to the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
850  within the Grand Lodge of British Freemasons of Germany under the United Grand Lodges of Germany  works in Hamburg, and has a diverse expat membership.
During the Second World War, Hamburg suffered a series of Allied air raids which devastated much of the city and the harbour.
The buses run frequently during working hours, with buses on some so-called MetroBus routes as often as every 2 minutes.
The ''Alter Botanischer Garten Hamburg'' is a historic botanical garden, located in the ''Planten un Blomen'' park, which now consists primarily of greenhouses.
By the end of 1942 the ''Jüdischer Religionsverband in Hamburg'' was dissolved as an independent legal entity and its remaining assets and staff were assumed by the Reichsvereinigung der Juden in Deutschland (District Northwest).
The neighbourhoods of Neuenfelde, Cranz, Francop and Finkenwerder are part of the ''Altes Land'' (old land) region, the largest contiguous fruit-producing region in Central Europe.
The Chilehaus, a brick expressionist office building built in 1922 and designed by architect Fritz Höger, is shaped like an ocean liner.
Identical twins Bill Kaulitz and Tom Kaulitz from the rock band Tokio Hotel live and maintain a recording studio in Hamburg, where they recorded their second and third albums, Zimmer 483 and Humanoid.
In 1189, by imperial charter, Frederick I "Barbarossa" granted Hamburg the status of an Imperial Free City and tax-free access up the Lower Elbe into the North Sea.
''Alsterwasser'' (in reference to the city's river, the Alster) is the local name for a type of shandy, a concoction of equal parts of beer and carbonated lemonade (''Zitronenlimonade''), the lemonade being added to the beer.
Hamburg has for centuries been a commercial centre of Northern Europe, and is the most important banking city of Northern Germany.
Like elsewhere in Germany, Standard German is spoken in Hamburg, but as typical for northern Germany, the original language of Hamburg is Low German, usually referred to as ''Hamborger Platt'' (German ''Hamburger Platt'') or ''Hamborgsch''.
The quarters have no governing bodies of their own.
It takes place every year in summer in Wilhelmsburg.
There were 898,050 women and 856,132 men in Hamburg.
Neugraben-Fischbek has Hamburg's highest elevation, the Hasselbrack at  AMSL.
In 1270, the solicitor of the senate of Hamburg, ''Jordan von Boitzenburg'', wrote the first description of civil, criminal and procedural law for a city in Germany in the German language, the ''Ordeelbook'' (''Ordeel'': sentence).
''Hamburg-Nord'' contains the quarters Alsterdorf, Barmbek-Nord, Barmbek-Süd, Dulsberg, Eppendorf, Fuhlsbüttel, Groß Borstel, Hoheluft-Ost, Hohenfelde, Langenhorn, Ohlsdorf with Ohlsdorf cemetery, Uhlenhorst and Winterhude.
This district increases the city centre by about 40%, with restaurants and apartments.
Hamburg hosts many top teams such as Uhlenhorster Hockey Club, Harvesterhuder Hockey Club and Club An Der Alster.
Christmas markets in December are held at the Hamburg Rathaus square, among other places.
In 2008, the boroughs were Hamburg-Mitte, Altona, Eimsbüttel, Hamburg-Nord, Wandsbek, Bergedorf and Harburg.
Hamburg also hosts equestrian events at ''Reitstadion Klein Flottbek'' (Deutsches Derby in jumping and dressage) and ''Horner Rennbahn'' (Deutsches Derby flat racing).
In 2007, HSV Handball won the European Cupwinners Cup.
Many toponyms and street names reflect Low Saxon vocabulary, partially even in Low Saxon spelling, which is not standardised, and to some part in forms adapted to Standard German.
There are 181 localities (German: ''Ortsteile'').
HSV is a six-time German champion, a three-time German cup winner and triumphed in the European Cup in 1983, and has played in the group stages of the Champions League twice: in 2000/2001 and in 2006/2007.
There are several mosques, including the Ahmadiyya run Fazle Omar Mosque, which is the oldest in the city, the Islamic Centre Hamburg, and a Jewish community.
Hamburg had the greatest concentration of Jews in Germany.
After German reunification, Hamburg recovered the eastern portion of its hinterland, becoming by far the fastest-growing port in Europe.
It is bordered to the north, separated by the customs channel to Hamburg's city center, west and south by the Elbe and to the east, bounded by the upper harbor, Rothenburgsort.
The sixth ''Festival of Cultures'' was held in September 2008, celebrating multi-cultural life.
The HSV is the oldest team of the Bundesliga, playing in the league since its beginning in 1963.
There is ''Bratkartoffeln'' (pan-fried potato slices), ''Finkenwerder Scholle'' (Low Saxon ''Finkwarder Scholl'', pan-fried plaice), ''Pannfisch'' (pan-fried fish with mustard sauce), ''Rote Grütze'' (Low Saxon ''Rode Grütt'', related to Danish ''rødgrød'', a type of summer pudding made mostly from berries and usually served with cream, like Danish ''rødgrød med fløde'') and ''Labskaus'' (a mixture of corned beef, mashed potatoes and beetroot, a cousin of the Norwegian ''lapskaus'' and Liverpool's lobscouse, all offshoots off an old-time one-pot meal that used to be the main component of the common sailor's humdrum diet on the high seas).
The Queen Mary 2 has docked regularly since 2004, and there were six departures planned from 2010 onwards.
The city is situated on the river Elbe.
Before the 1871 Unification of Germany, it was a fully sovereign state.
The team participates in the Deutsch Lacrosse Verein.
About one million civilians were evacuated in the aftermath of the raids.
Except at the four bigger stations of the city, Hauptbahnhof, Dammtor, Altona and Harburg regional trains do not stop inside the city.
Regular sports events—some open to pro and amateur participants—are the cycling competition EuroEyes Cyclassics, the Hamburg Marathon, the biggest marathon in Germany after Berlin, the tennis tournament Hamburg Masters and equestrian events like the Deutsches Derby.
It rose on rocky terrain in a marsh between the River Alster and the River Elbe as a defence against Slavic incursion, and acquired the name ''Hammaburg'', ''burg'' meaning castle or fort.
In addition, FC St. Pauli was a second division football club that came in second place in the 2009/2010 season and qualified to play alongside Hamburger SV in the first division for the first time since the 2001–02 season.
'''Hamburg''' (; , local pronunciation ; Low German/Low Saxon: ''Hamborg'' ), officially ''Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg''  ('''Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg'''), is the second largest city in Germany and the eighth largest city in the European Union.
In 2010 UEFA held the final of the UEFA Europa League in the arena.
For every 1,000 males, there were 1,049 females.
Hamburg has entered the European Green Capital Award scheme, and was awarded the title of European Green Capital for 2011.
''Eimsbüttel'' is split into nine quarters: Eidelstedt, Eimsbüttel, Harvestehude, Hoheluft-West, Lokstedt, Niendorf, Rotherbaum, Schnelsen and Stellingen.
On 31 December 2006, there were 1,754,182 people registered as living in Hamburg (up by 6.2% from 1,652,363 in 1990) in an area of .
György Ligeti and Alfred Schnittke taught at the Hochschule für Musik und Theater Hamburg.
Valdemar II of Denmark raided and occupied Hamburg in 1201 and in 1214.
Besides these, there are many more big and small parks.
The average household size was 1.9.
Russian forces under General Bennigsen finally freed the city in 1814.
The Hamburg Warriors are one of Germany's top lacrosse clubs.
The S-Bahn (heavy railway system) comprises six lines and the U-Bahn four lines – ''U-Bahn'' is short for ''Untergrundbahn'' (underground railway).
The city was a major centre for heavy metal music in the 1980s.
It has become a media and industrial centre, with plants and facilities belonging to ''Airbus'', ''Blohm + Voss'' and ''Aurubis''.
A Hamburg saying, referring to its anglophile nature, is: "Wenn es in London anfängt zu regnen, spannen die Hamburger den Schirm auf."
Hamburg is made up of seven boroughs (German: ''Bezirke'') and subdivided into 104 quarters (German: ''Stadtteile'').
There are 33 public libraries in Hamburg proper.
There are also several minority sports clubs, including four cricket clubs.
The ''Hamburg Messe and Congress'' offers a venue for trade shows, such ''hanseboot'', an international boat show, or ''Du und deine Welt'', a large consumer products show.
Some of them are street festivals, such as the gay pride ''Hamburg Pride'' festival or the Alster fair, held at the ''Binnenalster''.
From 1640 to 1864, Altona was under the administration of the Danish monarchy.
This is considered the first constitution of Hamburg.
From 2001 until 2010, the mayor of Hamburg was Ole von Beust, who governed in Germany's first statewide "black-green" coalition, consisting of the conservative CDU and the alternative GAL, which are Hamburg's regional wing of the Alliance '90/The Greens party.
The park and its buildings were designed by Fritz Schumacher in the 1910s.
Hamburg is home to one of the oldest international schools in Germany, the International School of Hamburg.
Jacobi'') and St. Catherine's covered with copper plates, and the Heinrich-Hertz-Turm, the radio and television tower (no longer publicly accessible).
Although situated  up the Elbe, it is considered a sea port due to its ability to handle large ocean-going vessels.
At least 42,900 people are thought to have perished in the Neuengamme concentration camp (about  outside the city in the marshlands), mostly from epidemics and in the bombing of Kriegsmarine evacuation vessels by the Royal Air Force at the end of the war.
On 7 March 2011 Olaf Scholz (SPD) became mayor.
On some routes regional trains of Germany's major railway company Deutsche Bahn AG and the regional ''metronom'' trains may be used with an HVV ticket.
The second airport is Hamburg-Finkenwerder (IATA: XFW, ICAO: EDHI).
But due to economic support from the former club president/sponsor Andreas Rudolf the club was allowed the license in the last minute.
Most foreigners are European, especially from the United Kingdom (171,000 overnight stays), Switzerland (about 143,000 overnight stays), Austria (about 137,000 overnight stays) and the Netherlands (about 80,000 overnight stays).
The quarters are Altenwerder, Cranz, Eißendorf, Francop, Gut Moor, Harburg, Hausbruch, Heimfeld, Langenbek, Marmstorf, Moorburg, Neuenfelde, Neugraben-Fischbek, Neuland, Rönneburg, Sinstorf and Wilstorf.
Media businesses employ over 70,000 people.
It is the second biggest Airbus plant, after Toulouse, and the third biggest aviation manufacturing plant after Seattle and Toulouse; the plant houses the final assembly lines for A318, A319, A320, A321 and A380 aircraft.
The coldest are December, January, and February, with low temperatures of .
In 1265, an allegedly forged letter was presented to or by the Rath of Hamburg.
The University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, with about 1,450 beds, houses a large medical school.
The Köhlbrandbrücke, Freihafen Elbbrücken, and Lombardsbrücke and Kennedybrücke dividing Binnenalster from Aussenalster are important roadways.
The AKN railway connects satellite towns in Schleswig-Holstein to the city.
The radio and television broadcaster ''Norddeutscher Rundfunk'' and publishers such as ''Gruner + Jahr'' and ''Spiegel-Verlag'' are pillars of the important media industry in Hamburg.
Some of Germany's largest publishing companies, Axel Springer AG, Gruner + Jahr, Bauer Media Group are located in the city.
Thousands of people perished in these densely populated working class boroughs.
In 2010 Hamburg was voted "greenest city of Europe" by the EU commission.
The International School of Hamburg serves school children.
Besides Hamburg owns the famous harness racing track "Trabrennbahn Bahrenfeld".The Hamburg Marathon is the biggest marathon in Germany after Berlin's.
Heavy industry includes the making of steel, aluminium, copper and shipyards such as Blohm + Voss.
The Internationales Maritimes Museum Hamburg opened in the HafenCity quarter in 2008.
In the Third Reich (1933–1945), Hamburg was a ''Gau'' from 1934 until 1945.
The ''Botanischer Garten Hamburg'' is a modern botanical garden maintained by the University of Hamburg.
Public transport by rail, bus and ship is organised by the ''Hamburger Verkehrsverbund'' ("Hamburg transit authority") (HVV).
Prior to the group's initial recording and widespread fame, Hamburg provided residency and performing venues for the Beatles from 1960 to 1962.
In 1842, about a quarter of the inner city was destroyed in the "Great Fire".
The largest group from outside Europe comes from the United States (129,000 overnight stays).
On special weekday night lines the intervals can be 30 minutes or longer, on normal days (Monday-Friday) the normal buses stop running at night.
Hamburg is the nation's field hockey capital and dominates the men's as well as the women's Bundesliga.
This charter, along with Hamburg's proximity to the main trade routes of the North Sea and Baltic Sea, quickly made it a major port in Northern Europe.
Original Hamburg dishes are ''Birnen, Bohnen und Speck'' (green beans cooked with pears and bacon), ''Aalsuppe'' (Hamburgisch ''Oolsupp'') is often mistaken to be German for "eel soup" (''Aal''/''Ool'' translated ‘eel’), but the name probably comes from the Low Saxon ''allns'' , meaning "all", "everything and the kitchen sink", not necessarily eel.
The many parks are distributed over the whole city, which makes Hamburg a very verdant city.
The city centre is around the Binnenalster ("Inner Alster") and Außenalster ("Outer Alster"), both formed by damming the River Alster to create lakes.
''Bergedorf'' consists of the quarters Allermöhe, Altengamme, Bergedorf—the centre of the former independent town, Billwerder, Curslack, Kirchwerder, Lohbrügge, Moorfleet, Neuengamme, Neuallermöhe, Ochsenwerder, Reitbrook, Spadenland and Tatenberg.
Ordinary bread rolls tend to be oval-shaped and of the French bread variety.
Looking rather like a flattened croissant, it is similar in preparation but includes a cinnamon and sugar filling, often with raisins or brown sugar streusel.
The metropolitan area of the Hamburg region (Hamburg Metropolitan Region) is home to about 4.3 million, living on .
Hamburg was one of the locations for the James Bond series film ''Tomorrow Never Dies''.
These were all directed to Ghettos in Nazi-occupied Europe or to concentration camps.
The Inner German border — only  east of Hamburg — separated the city from most of its hinterland and reduced Hamburg's global trade.
In 2014 Hamburg celebrated a birthday of park culture, where many parks were reconstructed and cleaned up.
Altona was an independent city until 1937.
Two years later, Hamburg was united with Bremen as the Bishopric of Hamburg-Bremen.
The 2007 gross domestic product (GDP) totaled €85.9 billion.
In 1030, King Mieszko II Lambert of Poland burned down the city.
The borough administrator is elected by the Borough Council and thereafter requires confirmation and appointment by Hamburg's Senate.
The English Theatre of Hamburg near U3 Mundsburg station was established in 1976 and is the oldest professional English-speaking theatre in Germany, and has exclusively English native-speaking actors in its company.
''Wandsbek'' is divided into the quarters Bergstedt, Bramfeld, Duvenstedt, Eilbek, Farmsen-Berne, Hummelsbüttel, Jenfeld, Lemsahl-Mellingstedt, Marienthal, Poppenbüttel, Rahlstedt, Sasel, Steilshoop, Tonndorf, Volksdorf, Wandsbek, Wellingsbüttel and Wohldorf-Ohlstedt.
Six universities are public, including the largest, the University of Hamburg (Universität Hamburg) with the University Medical Centre of Hamburg-Eppendorf, the University of Music and Theatre, the Hamburg University of Applied Sciences, the HafenCity University Hamburg and the Hamburg University of Technology.
All of these are now moribund due to the influences of Standard German used by education and media.
The Internet and telecommunications company HanseNet, which sells DSL Internet access under the Alice brand, has its headquarters in Hamburg.
The tower is  high.
In 2005, the average visitor spent two nights in Hamburg.
While mainly used by citizens and dock workers, they can also be used for sightseeing tours.
The name and food, "hamburger", has entered all English-speaking countries, and derivative words in non-English speaking countries.
Hamburg has an oceanic climate (''Cfb''), influenced by its proximity to the coast and marine air masses that originate over the Atlantic Ocean.
It is about  from the city centre and is a nonpublic airport for the Airbus plant.
Many national newspapers and magazines such as ''Der Spiegel'' and ''Die Zeit'' are produced in Hamburg, as well as some special-interest newspapers such as ''Financial Times Deutschland''.
Volksparkstadion was used as a site for the 2006 World Cup.
The urban organization is regulated by the Constitution of Hamburg and several laws.
(MetroBuses run all around the clock, every day at the year at least every half-hour.)
The Norddeutscher Rundfunk which includes the television station NDR Fernsehen is based in Hamburg, as are the commercial television station ''Hamburg 1'', the Christian television station ''Bibel TV'' and the civil media outlet ''Tide TV''.
Hamburg has architecturally significant buildings in a wide range of styles and only a few skyscrapers.
The city had 5,663 physicians in private practice and 456 pharmacies in 2010.
Two ''museum ships'' near Landungsbrücken bear witness to the freight ship (''Cap San Diego'') and cargo sailing ship era (''Rickmer Rickmers'').
Hamburg has more than 40 theatres, 60 museums and 100 music venues and clubs.
Seventeen universities are located in Hamburg, with about 70,000 university students in total, including 9,000 resident aliens.
More than 8,552 taxable companies (average size 3.16 employees) were engaged in the culture sector, which includes music, performing arts and literature.
The film ''A Most Wanted Man'' was set in and filmed in Hamburg.
Its orchestra is the Philharmoniker Hamburg.
From 2001 to 2007, the overnight stays in the city increased by 55.2% (Berlin +52.7%, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania +33%).
After the Second World War, Hamburg formed part of the British Zone of Occupation; it became a state of the then Federal Republic of Germany in 1949.
Furthermore, the Anglo-Hanseatic Lodge No.
Ten mass transit rail lines across the city are the backbone of public transport.
From 1960 to 1962, the Beatles launched their career by playing in various music clubs in the city.
There are German hip hop acts, such as Fünf Sterne deluxe, Samy Deluxe, Beginner and Fettes Brot.
Moreover, every year there are the famous water-light-concerts in the ''Planten un Blomen'' park from May to early October.
The city has a relatively high employment rate, at 88 percent of the working-age population, employed in over 120,000 businesses.The average income of employees was €30,937.
In 2005, more than 18 million people visited concerts, exhibitions, theatres, cinemas, museums, and cultural events.
On 20 January 2016 however, their license was removed due to violations following the continued economic struggles.
It is the second smallest German state by area.
