The keys on each manual have a lightweight action, which allows players to perform rapid passages more easily than on a piano.
A drawbar is a metal slider that controls the volume of a particular sound component, in a similar way to a fader on an audio mixing board.
An updated version, the VK-8, which appeared in 2002, also provided emulations of other vintage keyboards and provided a connector for a Leslie.
Winston Wright was regarded in the music scene of Jamaica as one of the best organ players, and used the Hammond when performing live with Toots and the Maytals, as well as playing it on sessions with Lee "Scratch" Perry, Jimmy Cliff and Gregory Isaacs.
The sound of a tonewheel Hammond can also be emulated using modern software such as Native Instruments B4.
Various models have been produced, most of which use sliding drawbars to create a variety of sounds.
Spinet organs included the Romance series, manufactured between 1977 and 1983.
In 1959, Hammond introduced the A-100 series.
In 1936, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) filed a complaint claiming that the Hammond Company made "false and misleading" claims in advertisements for its organ, including that the Hammond could produce "the entire range of tone coloring of a pipe organ".
In 1938, the FTC ordered Hammond to "cease and desist" a number of advertising claims, including that its instrument was equivalent to a $10,000 pipe organ.
The Hammond was a key instrument in progressive rock music.
However, the instrument did gradually become popular with jazz players.
It quickly became popular with professional jazz musicians in organ trios, a small group centred on the Hammond organ.
To cater more specifically to the church market, Hammond introduced the Concert Model E in July 1937, which included a full 32-note pedalboard and four electric switches known as toe pistons, allowing various sounds to be selected by the feet.
Organ trios were hired by jazz club owners, who found that organ trios were a much cheaper alternative to hiring a big band.
This weight, combined with that of a Leslie speaker, makes the instrument cumbersome and difficult to move between venues.
British organist James Taylor said the Hammond "became popular in the UK when people such as Booker T & The MGs and artists on the Stax Records label came over to London and played gigs."
His trio format, composed of organ, guitar and drums, became internationally famous following an appearance at the Newport Jazz Festival in 1957.
This briefly cuts power to the generators, causing them to run at a slower pace and generate a lower pitch for a short time.
In the 1960s, Hammond started making transistor organs.
The Hammond organ has also been emulated in software.
The company has a dedicated Church Advisory Team that provides a consultancy so that churches can choose the most appropriate instrument.
Some drawbar settings have become well known and associated with certain musicians.
While attorneys for Hammond argued that the test listeners were wrong or guessed nearly half the time, witnesses for the FTC claimed that Hammond employees had unfairly manipulated the Skinner organ to sound more like the Hammond.
The invention was unveiled to the public in April 1935 and the first model, the Model A, was made available in June of that year.
Around two million Hammond organs have been manufactured, and it has been described as one of the most successful organs.
It makes you feel good&nbsp;...
His brother Duane specifically requested he play the instrument when forming the Allman Brothers Band, and he was presented with a brand new B-3 and Leslie 122RV upon joining.
Hammond organs may have a console or pedal switch for controlling the rotation speed of a Leslie rotating speaker cabinet that is connected to the organ.
When a key is pressed on the organ, it completes a circuit of nine electrical switches, which are linked to the drawbars.
The XK-3 is part of a modular system that allows an integrated lower manual and pedals to be added.
Emerson first found commercial success with the Nice, with whom he used and abused an L-100, putting knives in the instrument, setting fire to it, playing it upside down, or riding it across stage in the manner of a horse.
This creates a characteristic sound because of the constantly changing pitch shifts that result from the Doppler effect created by the moving sound sources.
The Hammond Concert models E, RT, RT-2, RT-3 and D-100 had 32-note American Guild of Organists (AGO) pedalboards going up to the G above middle C as the top note.
A number of distinctive Hammond organ features are not usually found on other keyboards like the piano or synthesizer.
''Keyboard Magazine'' Stephen Fortner praised the single manual SK1, indicated that it gave an accurate sound throughout the range of drawbar settings, and said the organ sound was "fat, warm, utterly authentic".
Hammond-Suzuki acquired the rights to Leslie in 1992; the company currently markets a variety of speakers under this name.
Other prominent Hammond organists in progressive rock include the Zombies' and Argent's Rod Argent, Yes's Tony Kaye and Rick Wakeman, Focus's Thijs van Leer, Uriah Heep's Ken Hensley, Pink Floyd's Rick Wright, Kansas's Steve Walsh, and Genesis's Tony Banks.
In the US, Hammond manufactures a number of dedicated console organs, including the B-3mk2 and the C-3mk2, and the A-405, a Chapel Console Organ.
Presets can be changed by rerouting the associated color-coded wires on the rear of the organ.
The organ was originally marketed and sold by the Hammond Organ Company to churches as a lower-cost alternative to the wind-driven pipe organ, or instead of a piano.
He continued to play the instrument in this manner alongside other keyboards in Emerson, Lake and Palmer.
Before a Hammond organ can produce sound, the motor that drives the tonewheels must come up to speed.
A review of the New B-3 by Hugh Robjohns called it "a true replica of an original B-3&nbsp;... in terms of the look and layout, and the actual sound."
The sound on a tonewheel Hammond organ is varied through the manipulation of drawbars.
Hammond introduced their first integrated circuit (IC) model, the Concorde, in 1971.
Jimmy Smith began to play Hammond regularly in the 1950s, particularly in his sessions for the Blue Note label between 1956 and 1963.
Author Frank Moriarty considers Allman's Hammond playing a vital ingredient of the band's sound.
However, as the Great Depression continued into the 1930s, sales of the bridge table declined and he decided to look elsewhere for a commercially successful product.
The original Hammond organ was never designed to be transported regularly.
Originally, key click was considered a design defect and Hammond worked to eliminate or at least reduce it with equalization filters.
Some spinet models have flip tabs for presets situated above the manuals.
The New B-3 is constructed to appear like the original B-3, and the designers attempted to retain the subtle nuances of the familiar B-3 sound.
Hammond's New B3 contains similar switches to emulate this effect, though it is a digital instrument.
The Leslie system is an integrated speaker/amplifier combination in which sound is emitted by a rotating horn over a stationary treble compression driver, and a rotating baffle beneath a stationary bass woofer.
Fisher went on to play the organ lines on Procol Harum's A Whiter Shade Of Pale, which topped the UK charts in the summer of 1967.
As well as clocks, his early inventions included 3D glasses and an automatic bridge table shuffler.
The L-100 was particularly popular in the UK and sold well, with several notable British musicians using it instead of a B-3 or C-3.
Steve Winwood started his musical career with the Spencer Davis Group playing guitar and piano, but he switched to Hammond when he hired one to record "Gimme Some Lovin'".
And they objected when it was eliminated."
The cabinet carried a balanced mono signal along with the necessary mains power directly from the organ, using a six-pin cable.
On most models, starting a Hammond organ involves two switches.
It included the same manuals as the M, but increased the pedalboard size to 13 notes, stretching a full octave, and included a number of presets.
In 1954, the B-3 and C-3 models were introduced with the additional harmonic percussion feature.
Ska and reggae music made frequent use of the Hammond throughout the 1960s and '70s.
There is no difference in volume regardless of how heavily the key is pressed, so overall volume is controlled by a pedal (also known as a "swell" or "expression" pedal).
The first attempts to electronically copy a Hammond appeared in the 1970s, including the Roland VK-1 and VK-9, the Yamaha YP45D and the Crumar Organiser.
The Hammond organ was perceived as outdated by the late 1970s, particularly in the UK, where it was often used to perform pop songs in social clubs.
I think it's bigger now than ever."
The variation in the magnetic field induces a small alternating current (AC) at a particular frequency, which represents a signal similar to a sine wave.
Advertisements tended to show families centered around the instrument, often with a child playing it, as an attempt to show the organ as a center-point of home life and to encourage children to learn music.
This has led to a Hammond organ module with all controls and features of the original instrument in the Logic Pro audio production suite.
After the FTC's decision, Hammond claimed that the hearings had vindicated his company's assertions that the organ produced "real", "fine", and "beautiful" music, phrases which were each cited in the FTC's original complaint but not included in the "cease and desist" order.
A key ingredient to the Hammond organ's success was the use of dealerships and a sense of community.
The Nord C2D was Clavia's first organ with real drawbars.
One of the first performers to use the Hammond organ was Ethel Smith, who was known as the "first lady of the Hammond Organ".
The sound of the Hammond has appeared in hip-hop music, albeit mostly via samples.
When selected, this feature plays a decaying second- or third-harmonic overtone when a key is pressed.
The instrument was not initially favored by classical organ purists, because the tones of two notes an octave apart were in exact synchronization, as opposed to the slight variation present on a pipe organ.
Hammond designed it as the company's flagship product, in response to market competition and to replace the B-3.
The tone cabinet was originally the only method of adding reverb to a Hammond organ; reverb was not fitted to older organs.
It did not sound like a B-3.
Consequently, there has been a demand for a more portable, reliable way of generating the same sound.
The most distinctive effect occurs as the speaker rotation speed changes.
Jazz musicians continued to use Hammond organs into the 21st century.
The only guaranteed frequency for a Hammond's tuning is concert A at 440&nbsp;Hz.
Some Hammond organs have an audible pop or click when a key is pressed.
It was effectively a self-contained version of the B-3/C-3, with an internal power amplifier and speakers.
The M series was replaced by the M-100 series in 1961, which used a numbering system to identify the body style and finish as used on earlier console series.
Deep Purple's Jon Lord became inspired to play the Hammond after hearing Jimmy Smith's "Walk on the Wild Side".
Jimmy Smith's use of the Hammond B-3, with its additional harmonic percussion feature, inspired a generation of organ players, and its use became more widespread in the 1960s and 1970s in rhythm and blues, rock and reggae, as well as being an important instrument in progressive rock.
The most prominent emulator in this field has been the Native Instruments B4 series, which has been praised for its attention to detail and choice of features.
Outside of the United States, they were manufactured in greater numbers than the consoles, and hence were more widely used.
Most Hammond organs have two 61-note (5-octave) manuals.
While each individual drawbar generates a relatively pure sound similar to a flute or electronic oscillator, more complex sounds can be created by mixing the drawbars in varying amounts.
Booker T Jones is cited as being the bridge from rhythm and blues to rock.
On April 24, 1934, Hammond filed  for an "electrical musical instrument", which was personally delivered to the patent office by Hanert, explaining that they could start production immediately and it would be good for local employment in Chicago.
In contrast to piano and pipe organ keys, Hammond keys have a flat-front profile, commonly referred to as "waterfall" style.
Several dedicated organ dealers set up business in the United States and there was a bi-monthly newsletter, ''The Hammond Times'', mailed out to subscribers.
This organ was later acquired by Joey DeFrancesco.
Emagic (now part of Apple) has also produced a software emulation, the EVB3.
Punk and New Wave bands tended to prefer second-hand combo organs from the 1960s, or use no keyboards at all.
Spinet organs contained a built-in power amplifier and loudspeakers, and so did not require a tone cabinet.
To cut costs, Hammond made a pedalboard with only 25 notes, instead of the standard 32 on church organs, and it quickly became a ''de facto'' standard.
However, the sound of tonewheel crosstalk is now considered part of the signature of the Hammond organ, to the extent that modern digital clones explicitly emulate it.
The other drawbars generate various other harmonics and  subharmonics of the note.
When Fisher asked if he could play it, McLagan told him "They're yelling out for Hammond players; why don't you go out and buy one for yourself?"
Until 1975, Hammond organs generated sound by creating an electric current from rotating a metal tonewheel near an electromagnetic pickup, and then strengthening the signal with an amplifier so that it can drive a speaker cabinet.
In 1979, a Japanese offshoot, Nihon Hammond, introduced the X-5, a portable solid-state clone of the B-3.
The instrument was bulky, because the alternators had to be large enough to generate high voltage for a loud enough signal.
Although nominally a Japanese company, founder Manji Suzuki was a fan of the instrument and retained several former Hammond Organ Company staff for research and development, and ensured that production would partially remain in the United States.
Since Hammond was not a musician, he asked the company's assistant treasurer, W. L. Lahey, to help him achieve the desired organ sound.
This model numbering scheme was used for several other series of console and spinet organs that subsequently appeared.
Electronic and digital keyboards that imitate the sound of the Hammond are often referred to as "clonewheel organs".
Rather than produce harmonics that are exact multiples of the fundamental as in equal temperament, it uses the nearest-available frequencies generated by the tonewheels.
Leslie initially tried to sell his invention to Hammond, but Laurens Hammond was unimpressed and declined to purchase it.
Other than the T-100 series models, all other T-Series models included a built-in rotating Leslie speaker and some included an analog drum machine, while the T-500 also included a built-in cassette recorder.
Keith Emerson was inspired to take up the Hammond by hearing McDuff's arrangement of "Rock Candy".
For example, A-105 was "Tudor styling in light oak or walnut," while the A-143 was "warm cherry finish, Early American styling".
The most commercially successful tone cabinets were probably the PR series, particularly the 40-watt PR40.
It contained the same internals as the AB or BC, but covered on the front and sides by "modesty panels" to allow for modesty while playing in a skirt, often a consideration when a church organ was placed in front of the congregation.
In 2002, Hammond-Suzuki relaunched the B-3 as the 'New B-3', a re-creation of the original electromechanical instrument using contemporary electronics and a digital tonewheel simulator.
Several different types of M series instruments were produced between 1948 and 1964; they contained two 44-note manuals with one set of drawbars each, and a 12-note pedalboard.
The position of the drawbars, combined with the switches selected by the key pressed, determines which tonewheels are allowed to sound.
Fats Waller and Count Basie also started using the Hammond.
The "Start" switch is then released, whereupon the organ is ready to generate sound.
The organ is commonly used with, and associated with, the Leslie speaker.
He gathered pieces from a second-hand piano he had purchased for $15 and combined it with a tonewheel generator in a similar form to the telharmonium, albeit much shorter and more compact.
The Hammond organ's technology derives from the Telharmonium, an instrument created in 1897 by Thaddeus Cahill.
Allman recalls the instrument was cumbersome to transport, particularly on flights of stairs, which often required the whole band's assistance.
It included a chorus generator, in which a second tonewheel system added slightly sharp or flat tones to the overall sound of each note.
Banks later claimed he only used the Hammond because a piano was impractical to transport to gigs.
The X-66 contained just 12 tonewheels, and used electronics for frequency division.
The cabinet was made deeper to accommodate this.
Diversi, founded by former Hammond-Suzuki sales rep Tom Tuson in 2003, has specialised in Hammond clones, and featured a notable endorsement from Joey DeFrancesco.
There are a lot of studios that have had a B-3 or C-3 sitting away in there since the 70s."
The XK-1c model was introduced in early 2014, which is simply an organ-only version of the SK1.
This was followed by the H-100 series, with a redesigned tonewheel generator and various other additional features.
The labeling of the drawbar derives from the stop system in pipe organs, in which the physical length of the pipe corresponds to the pitch produced.
The first organ that bridged the gap between tonewheel and transistor was the X-66, introduced in May 1967.
The Hammond name was purchased by the Suzuki Musical Instrument Corporation, which proceeded to manufacture digital simulations of the most popular tonewheel organs.
Production of the old Model A cases stopped, but the older model continued to be available as the AB until October 1938.
Many players prefer to play the Hammond through a rotating speaker cabinet known, after several name changes, as a Leslie speaker, after its inventor Donald J. Leslie.
Crosstalk or ''leakage'' occurs when the instrument's magnetic pickups receive the signal from rotating metal tonewheels other than those selected by the organist.
RT-2 and RT-3 models subsequently appeared in line with the B-2/C-2 and B-3/C-3 respectively.
The new company produced their own brand of portable organs, including the XB-2, XB-3 and XB-5.
The H-100 and E-series consoles and L-100 and T-100 spinet organs, however, had a self-starting motor that required only a single "On" switch.
For all its subsequent success with professional musicians, the original company did not target its products at that market, principally because Hammond did not think there was enough money in it.
However, it was considered expensive at $9,795 and it sold poorly.
Console models included the 8000 Aurora (1976) and 8000M Aurora (1977), which contained drawbars and a built-in rotating speaker.
Gregg Allman became interested in the Hammond after Mike Finnigan had introduced him to Jimmy Smith's music, and started to write material with it.
As well as faithful reissues of the original 122 speaker, the company announced in 2013 that they would start manufacturing a standalone Leslie simulator in a stomp box.
The Korg CX-3 (single manual) and BX-3 (dual manual) were the first lightweight organs to produce a comparable sound to the original.
The T series, produced from 1968 to 1975, was the last of the tonewheel spinet organs.
It was an economy version, with various cost cutting changes so the organ could retail for under $1000.
A significant use is the Beastie Boys' 1992 single "So What'cha Want", which features a Hammond mixed into the foreground (the instrument was recorded live rather than being sampled).
It contained separate "vibrato bass" and "vibrato treble" in an attempt to simulate a Leslie speaker.
During the auditory tests, sustained tones and excerpts from musical works were played on the electric and pipe organs while a group of musicians and laymen attempted to distinguish between the instruments.
By the start of the 1920s he had designed a spring-driven clock, which provided enough sales for him to start his own business, the Hammond Clock Company, in 1928.
From here, the sound is sent to the main amplifier, and on to the audio speakers.
He modified his Hammond so it could be played through a Marshall stack to get a growling, overdriven sound, which became known as his trademark and he is strongly identified with it.
The most popular Leslies were the 122, which accepted a balanced signal suitable for console organs, and the 147, which accepted an unbalanced signal and could be used for spinet organs with a suitable adapter.
The various models available were the BV and CV (vibrato only) and BCV and DV (vibrato and chorus).
The instrument underwent a brief renaissance in the 1980s with the mod revival movement.
Modern Hammond-Suzuki models use waterfall keys.
The model E was replaced by the model RT in 1949, which retained the full size pedalboard, but otherwise was internally identical to the B and C models.
It has been estimated that the Hammond Organ Company produced about two million instruments in its lifetime; these have been described as "probably the most successful electronic organs ever made".
A very popular setting is 888000000 (i.e., with the drawbars labelled "16'", "51/3'" and "8'" fully pulled out), and has been identified as the "classic" Jimmy Smith sound.
The instrument project nearly stalled after a breakdown in negotiations between Japanese and United States staff, the latter of whom insisted on manufacturing the case in the United States and designing the organ to identical specifications to the original.
The B-2 and C-2, introduced in 1949, allowed vibrato to be enabled or disabled on each manual separately.
Van der Graaf Generator's Hugh Banton modified his Hammond E-100 extensively with customised electronics, including the ability to put effects such as distortion on one manual but not the other, and rewiring the motor.
He eschewed a bass player, and played all the bass parts himself using the pedals, generally using a walking bassline on the pedals in combination with percussive left hand chords.
Vibrato / chorus can be selected for each manual independently.
The modifications created, in Banton's own words, "unimaginable sonic chaos."
When pushed all the way in, the volume is decreased to zero.
Hammond console organs come with a wooden pedalboard played with the feet, for bass notes.
The Hammond organ solved this problem by using an amplifier.
The expression pedal, based on a cheaper design, was not as sophisticated as on the other organs.
The Leslie company was sold to CBS in 1965 and was finally bought by Hammond in 1980.
The tasteful application of the different Leslie speed sound effects to Hammond organ playing is a distinctive part of the characteristic Hammond sound.
The model C did not contain the chorus generator, but had space in the cabinet for it to be fitted.
The M model was produced from 1948 to 1951, the M-2 from 1951 to 1955, and the M-3 from 1955 to 1964.
Unfortunately, the organ was not particularly well made, and suffered a reputation for being unreliable.
It is possible to create a pitch bend on the Hammond organ by turning the "Run" switch off and on again.
Other groups started taking advantage of cheaper and more portable synthesizers that were starting to come onto the market.
Hammond was inspired to create the tonewheel or "phonic wheel" by listening to the moving gears of his electric clocks and the tones produced by them.
The authorized loudspeaker enclosure to use with a console organ was the Hammond Tone Cabinet, which housed an external amplifier and speaker in a cabinet.
The '''Hammond organ''' is an electric organ, invented by Laurens Hammond and John M. Hanert and first manufactured in 1935.
Barbara Dennerlein has received critical acclaim for her performances on the Hammond, particularly her use of the bass pedals, and has modified the instrument to include samplers triggered by the pedals.
The RT-2, RT-3 and D-100 also contained a separate solo pedal system that had its own volume control and various other features.
Every tonewheel is connected to a synchronous motor via a system of gears, which ensures that each note remains at a constant relative pitch to every other.
Joey DeFrancesco embraced the instrument during the 1990s, and later collaborated with Jimmy Smith.
Over 1,750 churches purchased a Hammond organ in the first three years of manufacturing, and by the end of the 1930s over 200 instruments were being made each month.
The company has since released the XK-3, a single-manual organ using the same digital tonewheel technology as the New B-3.
Medeski says musicians "were inspired when they heard Jimmy Smith's records."
Hammond modified their interface connectors to be "Leslie-proof", but Leslie quickly engineered a workaround.
Console organs have one octave of reverse colored keys (naturals are black, sharps and flats are white) to the left of each manual, with each key activating a preset; the far left key (C), also known as the cancel key, de-activates all presets, and results in no sound coming from that manual.
Hammond-Suzuki continues to manufacture a variety of organs for both professional players and churches.
The best known vibrato and chorus system consists of six settings, V1, V2, V3, C1, C2 and C3 (i.e., 3 vibrato and 3 chorus), which can be selected via a rotary switch.
Then in 1989, the name was purchased by the Suzuki Musical Instrument Corporationj, who rebranded the company as Hammond-Suzuki.
