Along with the Youth council for the Test Valley District, youthExpress.
The county also includes several market towns: Alton, Andover, Bishop's Waltham, Lymington, New Milton, Petersfield, Ringwood, Romsey and Whitchurch.
The forest is protected as a national park, limiting development and agricultural use to protect the landscape and wildlife.
The New Forest area is a National Park, and tourism is a significant economic segment in this area, with 7.5&nbsp;million visitors in 1992.
The Hampshire County Youth Orchestra (with its associated chamber orchestra and string orchestra) is based at Thornden Hall.
Butser Hill near Petersfield is the second highest point at 271 metres (889&nbsp;ft) and lies in the South Downs National Park.
The county was recorded in the Domesday Book divided into 44 hundreds.
'''Population'''- Total ()- Density- Admin.
From the 12th century the ports grew in importance, fuelled by trade with the continent, wool and cloth manufacture in the county, and the fishing industry, and a shipbuilding industry was established.
* Basingstoke – 90,171 (town), 152,573 (borough)
From 1889 until 1959, the administrative county was named the ''County of Southampton'' and has also been known as ''Southamptonshire''.
Countless commercial radio stations cover the area, and BBC Radio Solent looks after the majority of the county, while BBC Surrey can be heard in the north east.
Southampton, meanwhile, won the FA Cup in 1976, reached 3 other finals (1900, 1902, and 2003) and spent 27 unbroken years in England's top division between 1978 and 2005.
The Romans invaded Britain again in 43 CE, and Hampshire was incorporated into the Roman province of Britannia very quickly.
The Farnborough Airshow is a popular international event, held biennially.
Hampshire has a higher average annual temperature than the UK average at , average rainfall at  per year, and holds higher than average sunshine totals of around 1,750 hours of sunshine per year.
In the north and centre of the county the substrate is the rocks of the Chalk Group, which form the Hampshire Downs and the South Downs.
* Suella Fernandes (C)
The Hampshire County Youth Choir is based in Winchester, and has had successful tours of Canada and Italy in recent years.
Farnborough College of Technology awards University of Surrey-accredited degrees.
* Ranil Jayawardena (C)
A large area of the downs is now protected from further agricultural damage by the East Hampshire Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
Julius Caesar invaded southeastern England briefly in 55 and again in 54 BCE, but he never reached Hampshire.
play in the Southern Football League Division One South and West.
Hampshire has a considerably higher than national average employment in high-tech industries, but average levels in knowledge-based industry.
Hampshire lies outside the green belt area of restricted development around London, but has good railway and motorway links to the capital, and in common with the rest of the south-east has seen the growth of dormitory towns since the 1960s.
The River Test has a growing number of otters, although other areas of the county have quite low numbers.
Southampton was known in Old English as ''Hamtun'', roughly meaning "village-town", so its surrounding area or ''scīr'' became known as ''Hamtunscīr''.
* Gosport – 69,348 (town), 77,000 (borough)
The first inhabitants came overland from Europe; these were anatomically and behaviourally modern humans, Mesolithic hunter-gatherers.
There was a fortification near Southampton called Clausentum, part of the Saxon Shore forts, traditionally seen as defences against maritime raids by Germanic tribes.
For most of the next three centuries, southern Britain enjoyed relative peace.
Hampshire's county town is Winchester, a historic city that was once the capital of the ancient kingdom of Wessex and of England until the Norman conquest of England.
Geographically inside the Hampshire LEA are twenty four independent schools, Southampton has three and Portsmouth has four.
Hampshire County Cricket Club today is a successful first-class team, captained by James Adams.
Aldershot remains one of the British Army's main permanent camps.
Hampshire has a long maritime history and two of Europe's largest ports, Portsmouth and Southampton, lie on its coast.
The southern boundary is the coastline of the English Channel and the Solent, facing the Isle of Wight.
The three cities are all university cities, Southampton being home to the University of Southampton and Southampton Solent University (formerly Southampton Institute), Portsmouth to the University of Portsmouth, and Winchester to the University of Winchester (formerly known as University College Winchester; King Alfred's College).The northeast of the county houses the Blackwater Valley conurbation, which includes the towns of Farnborough, Aldershot, Blackwater and Yateley and borders both Berkshire and Surrey.
* Flick Drummond (C)
Over several thousand years, the climate got progressively warmer, and sea levels rose; the English Channel, which started out as a river, was a major inlet by 8000 BCE, although Britain was still connected to Europe by a land bridge across the North Sea until 6500 BCE.
The construction of the Twyford Down cutting near Winchester caused major controversy by cutting through a series of ancient trackways (the Dongas) and other features of archaeological significance.
Austen lived most of her life in Hampshire, where her father was rector of Steventon, Hampshire, and wrote all of her novels in the county.
The counties of Isle of Wight and Southampton in Virginia reflect the origins of some of the earliest Jamestown settlers.
* Aldershot – 58,120
It is not recorded whether the people of Hampshire played any role in Boudicca's rebellion of 60-61 CE, but there is evidence of burning in Winchester dated to around this period.
Hampshire also has its own County Youth Council (HCYC) and is an independent youth-run organisation.
Hampshire's tourist attractions include many seaside resorts and two national parks: the New Forest and the South Downs (together covering some 45% of the county).
The boundary was changed again in 1992, when South Tidworth was transferred to Wiltshire.
* Caroline Nokes (C)
#Basingstoke and Deane
Agriculture had arrived in southern Britain by 4000 BCE, and with it a neolithic culture.
Evidence of early Anglo-Saxon settlement has been found at Clausentum and on the Thames at Dorchester, dated to the fifth century, and by the seventh century, the population of Hampshire was predominantly English-speaking.
Hampshire has a milder climate than most areas of the British Isles, being in the far south with the climate stabilising effect of the sea, but protected against the more extreme weather of the Atlantic coast.
It is maintained that by this period the people of Britain predominantly spoke a Celtic language, and their culture shared much in common with the Celts described by classical writers.
Aldershot, Portsmouth, and Farnborough have strong military associations with the Army, Royal Navy, and Royal Air Force respectively.
* George Hollingbery (C)
There are four universities, namely the University of Southampton, Southampton Solent University, the University of Portsmouth and the University of Winchester (which also had a small campus in Basingstoke until 2011).
96.7% White1.3% S. Asian 0.8% Mixed  1.2% Other
The maritime docks have traditionally been large employers in these maritime-urban cities, though again mechanisation has forced diversification of the urban-maritime economy.
Hampshire has several association football teams, including Premier League side Southampton F.C., League Two side Portsmouth F.C.
Over several centuries a series of castles and forts were constructed along the coast of the Solent to defend the harbours at Southampton and Portsmouth.
At the 2013 local elections for Hampshire County Council, the Conservative Party had a 37.51% share of the votes, the Liberal Democrats had 21.71%, the UK Independence Party had 24.61% and Labour 10%.
Hampshire County Councilhttp://www.hampshire.gov.uk
Erosion of the weak rock and sea level change flooding the low land has carved several large estuaries and rias, notably the  long Southampton Water and the large convoluted Portsmouth Harbour.
The downland supports a calcareous grassland habitat, important for wild flowers and insects.
The county also contains two national parks; the first covering the New Forest, and therefore governance of this area is carried out by a national park authority as well as the New Forest District Council, the second the newer national park for the South Downs which covers the chalk downlands from Winchester eastwards which embraces a large number of local council areas across three counties, Hampshire, West and East Sussex.
* Kit Malthouse (C)
The Romans officially withdrew from Britain in 410 CE.
Many rural areas of Hampshire have traditionally been reliant on agriculture, particularly dairy farming, although the significance of agriculture as a rural employer and rural wealth creator has declined since the first half of the 20th century and agriculture currently employs 1.32% of the rural population.
King Alfred proclaimed himself "King of England" in 886; but it was not until 927 that Athelstan of Wessex officially controlled the whole of England.
'''Hampshire''' (, ; abbreviated '''Hants''', archaically known as the '''County of Southampton''') is a county on the southern coast of England in the United Kingdom.
The National Motor Museum is located in the New Forest adjacent to Beaulieu Palace House.
The Conservatives represent a mix of rural and urban areas: Aldershot, Basingstoke, East Hampshire, Fareham, Gosport, Havant, Meon Valley, North East Hampshire, North West Hampshire, New Forest East, New Forest West, Portsmouth North, Romsey and Southampton North and Winchester.
In 2003 the county had a total of 31&nbsp;million day visits, and 4.2&nbsp;million longer stays.
Due to Hampshire's long association with pigs and boars, natives of the county have been known as ''Hampshire hogs'' since the 18th century.
In the 2015 general election every Hampshire seat except Southampton Test (Labour) was won by the Conservatives.
There are 14 further education colleges within the Hampshire LEA, including 6 graded as 'outstanding' by Ofsted: Alton College, Brockenhurst College, Farnborough College of Technology, Farnborough Sixth Form College, Peter Symonds College, Queen Mary's College, and South Downs College
Southampton Airport, with an accompanying main line railway station, is an international airport situated in the Borough of Eastleigh, close to Swaythling in the city of Southampton.
The Itchen and Test are trout rivers that flow from the chalk through wooded valleys into Southampton Water.
The main county ground is the Rose Bowl in West End, which has hosted several one day internationals and which, following redevelopment, hosted its first test match in 2011.
University journalism students also broadcast bulletins for local areas – such as Winol in Winchester.
Hampshire has wildlife typical of the island of Great Britain.
The Isle of Wight became a full ceremonial county in 1974.
Hampshire's county flower is the Dog Rose.
Hampshire's geology falls into two categories.
It meets once a month around Hampshire and aims to give the young people of Hampshire a voice.
was formed almost immediately, and started life in Division 3 of the Isthmian League.
Hampshire is the home of many orchestras, bands, and groups.
The Isle of Wight lies off the coast of Hampshire where the non-resistant rock has been eroded away, forming the Solent.
The ''Basingstoke Gazette'' is published three times a week, and there are a number of other papers that publish on a weekly basis.
Musician Laura Marling hails originally from Hampshire.
The M3 motorway connects the county to London.
At its greatest size in 1890, Hampshire was the fifth largest county in England.
The county town of Hampshire is Winchester, the former capital city of England.
Hampshire's relatively safe waters have allowed the county to develop as one of the busiest sailing areas in the country, with many yacht clubs and several manufacturers on the Solent.
''For the complete list of settlements see List of places in Hampshire.''
It also has numerous district and borough youth councils including Basingstoke's "Basingstoke & Deane Youth Council".
It is also around this period that the administrative region of "Hampshire" seems to appear; the name is attested as "Hamtunscir" in 755, and Albany Major suggested that the traditional western and northern borders of Hampshire may even go back to the very earliest conquests of Cerdic, legendary founder of Wessex, at the very beginning of the sixth century.
The school system in Hampshire (including Southampton and Portsmouth) is comprehensive.
#Portsmouth (Unitary)
The region is believed to have been continuously occupied since the end of the last Ice Age about 12,000 BCE.
Hampshire is notable for housing the birthplaces of the Royal Navy, British Army, and Royal Air Force.
One distinguishing feature is that Hampshire has a large free roaming herd of red deer, including more than 6,500 stags during busy seasons.
* Havant – 45,435 (town), 115,300 (borough)
Southampton has been host to many famous ships, including the ''Mayflower'' and the ''Titanic'', the latter being staffed largely by natives of Southampton.
These include the Roman Portchester Castle which overlooks Portsmouth Harbour, and a series of forts built by Henry VIII including Hurst Castle, situated on a sand spit at the mouth of the Solent, Calshot Castle on another spit at the mouth of Southampton Water, and Netley Castle.
Farnborough is a major centre for the Aviation industry.
Hampshire has literary connections, being the birthplace of authors including Jane Austen, and Charles Dickens, and the residence of others, such as Charles Kingsley.
By 1523 at the latest, the population of Southampton had outstripped that of Winchester.
The New Forest is known for its ponies, which have free rein over much of the area.
Bashley Gosport and AFC Totton play in the Southern Football League Premier Division and Sholing F.C.
* Waterlooville – 63,558
By the Roman conquest, the oppidum at Venta, modern-day Winchester, was the de facto regional administrative centre; Winchester was however of secondary importance to the Roman-style town of Calleva, modern Silchester, built further north by a dominant Belgic polity known as the Atrebates in the 50s BCE.
The urban cities of Southampton and Portsmouth are both significant urban ports, with Southampton handling a large proportion of the national container freight and Portsmouth housing a large Royal Navy base.
By the Norman conquest, London had overtaken Winchester as the largest city in England, thanks in part to Alfred the Great's investments in infrastructure, and after the Norman Conquest King William I made it his capital.
There is a "Museum of the Iron Age" in Andover.
Basingstoke Town, Farnborough and Havant & Waterlooville play in the Conference South.
The port cities of Southampton and Portsmouth were split off as independent unitary authorities in 1997, although they are still included in Hampshire for ceremonial purposes.
A statue in Winchester celebrates the powerful King Alfred, who repulsed the Vikings and stabilised the region in the 9th century.
* Penny Mordaunt (C)
The highest village in Hampshire at between 235-240m above sea level is Ashmansworth, located between Andover and Newbury.
Thruxton Circuit, in the north of the county, is Hampshire's premier motor racing circuit.
Wessex gradually expanded westwards into Brythonic Dorset and Somerset in the seventh century.
ITV news covers the county as part of ITV Meridian, though both BBC London and ITV London can be received in northern and eastern parts of the county.
Other important roads include the A27, A3, A31, A34, A36 and A303.
The centre of political power moved away from Hampshire, although Winchester remained a city of importance: it was the proximity of the New Forest to Winchester that made it such a prized royal hunting forest; indeed King William Rufus was famously killed in suspicious circumstances while hunting there.
* Royston Smith (C)
'''Area'''- Total- Admin.
Ranked 9th3,769&nbsp;km² (1,455&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi) Ranked 7th3,679&nbsp;km² (1,420&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi)
became members of the Football League in 1932 but never progressed beyond the Third Division, and on 25 March 1992 went into liquidation and were forced to resign from the league.
Members of Parliament
The county is famed as home of writers Jane Austen and Charles Dickens, as well as the birthplace of engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
The hills dip steeply forming a scarp onto the Thames valley to the north, and dip gently to the south.
The New Forest has a mosaic of heathland, grassland, coniferous and deciduous woodland habitats that host diverse wildlife.
Notable sites from this period include Bouldnor Cliff.
Selborne was the home of Gilbert White; his house is now a museum, which also includes The Oates Collection, dedicated to the explorer Lawrence Oates.
Few Hampshire schools have sixth forms, which varies by district council.
It is bordered by Dorset to the west, Wiltshire to the north-west, Berkshire to the north, Surrey to the north-east, and West Sussex to the east.
Southampton City Council, which is a separate Unitary Authority, has 28 Labour, 16 Conservative, 2 Councillors Against the Cuts and 2 Liberal Democrat councillors.
and Winchester City F.C.
Records are unreliable for the next two hundred years, but in this time southern Britain went from being Brythonic to being English and Hampshire emerged as the centre of what was to become the most powerful kingdom in Britain, the Kingdom of Wessex.
* Desmond Swayne (C)
Notable sites from this period include Hengistbury Head (now technically in Dorset), which was a major port.
* Eastleigh – 52,894 (town), 116,177 (borough)
Hampshire is the most populous ceremonial county in the United Kingdom (excluding the metropolitan counties) with almost half of the county's population living within the South Hampshire conurbation which includes the cities of Southampton and Portsmouth.
Hampshire is divided into eighteen parliamentary constituencies.
It was probably around this period that the first recorded invasion of Britain took place, as southern Britain was largely conquered by warrior-elites from Belgic tribes of northeastern Gaul - whether these two events are linked to the decline of hillforts is unknown.
The M27 motorway serves a bypass for the major conurbations and as a link to other settlements on the south coast.
#Southampton (Unitary)
Cross-channel and cross-Solent ferries link the county to the Isle of Wight, the Channel Islands and continental Europe.
These low, flat lands support heathland and woodland habitats, a large area of which forms part of the New Forest.
* Gerald Howarth (C)
39% are employed by large firms, compared with a national average of 42%.
Portsmouth and Winchester have the biggest job densities in the whole county, and therefore there is a high level of commuting into the cities from towns such as Hook, or even Micheldever.
* Alan Whitehead (L)
These are high hills with steep slopes where they border the clays to the south.
The old name was recorded in the Domesday book as ''Hantescire'', and it is from this spelling that the modern abbreviation "Hants" derives.
The county's news is covered on BBC TV by BBC South Today from its studios in Southampton.
* Portsmouth – 207,100
25.21% of the population work in the public sector.
'''Cities and towns by population size:''' (2001 census)
Portsmouth City Council, also a UA, has 25 Liberal Democrat, 12 Conservative and 5 Labour councillors.
Hampshire is the largest county in South East England and remains the third largest shire county in the United Kingdom despite losing more land than any other English county in all contemporary boundary changes.
A new football club, Aldershot Town F.C.
Apart from a shared police force there are now no formal administrative links between the Isle of Wight and Hampshire, though many organisations still combine Hampshire and the Isle of Wight.
Hampshire also has a number of Non League football teams.
Hampshire takes its name from the settlement that is now the city of Southampton.
* Winchester – 41,420 (city), 116,600 (district)
* Petersfield-14,974 (town)
The City Museum in Winchester covers the Iron Age and Roman periods, the Middle Ages, and the Victorian period over three floors.
There are reports of wild boar across the county.
In the very late Bronze Age, fortified hilltop settlements known as hillforts began to appear in large numbers in many parts of Britain including Hampshire, and these became more and more important in the early and middle Iron Age; many of these are still visible in the landscape today and can be visited, notably Danebury Rings, the subject of a major study by archaeologist Barry Cunliffe.
Fareham, Gosport and Havant have grown into a conurbation that stretches along the coast between the two main cities.
Portsmouth VA, appropriately enough, is home to one of the US Navy's main dockyards, the Norfolk (formerly Gosport) Naval Yard.
The highest point in the county is Pilot Hill, which reaches a height of 286&nbsp;m (938&nbsp;ft), and lies on the border with West Berkshire.
Portsmouth won the FA Cup in 1939 and 2008 and Football League title twice, in 1949 and 1950, but have spent much of the last 50&nbsp;years outside the top division, including three seasons in the Fourth Division, which they are currently competing in (the lowest division in senior football).
At this time Britain was still attached to the European continent and was predominantly covered with deciduous woodland.
Nestled in a valley on the downs is Selborne, and the countryside surrounding the village was the location of Gilbert White's pioneering observations on natural history.
have traditionally been fierce rivals.
Hampshire have also been captained by former Australian leg-spinner Shane Warne.
The sport of windsurfing was invented at Hayling Island, which is to the south east of the county.
Venta became the capital of the administrative polity of the Belgae, which included most of Hampshire and Wiltshire and reached as far as Bath.
In 2010 fourteen of these were represented by Conservative Members of Parliament (MPs), two by the Liberal Democrats and two by Labour.
In 2008 Aldershot Town were crowned the Conference Premier champions and were promoted into the Football League, however they lost their Football League status after the 2012–13 season which saw them finish bottom of the football league.
The larger South Hampshire metropolitan area has a population of 1,547,000.
and Southampton F.C.
Hampshire has few monuments to show from these early periods, although nearby Stonehenge was built in several phases at some time between 3100 BCE and 2200 BCE.
Southampton has the highest number of total jobs and commuting both into and out of the city is high.
Hillforts largely declined in importance in the second half of the second century BCE, with many being abandoned.
Southampton and Portsmouth support daily newspapers; the ''Southern Daily Echo'' and ''Portsmouth News''.
The Liberal Democrats held Portsmouth South and Eastleigh.
Hampshire was the departure point of some of those later to settle on the east coast of what is now the United States, in the 17th century, giving its name in particular to the state of New Hampshire.
He was also a great scholar, who commissioned the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, a powerful tool in the development of the English identity.
Restoration of the Itchen Navigation, linking Southampton and Winchester, primarily as a wildlife corridor, began in 2008.
Hampshire also has many visual art connections, claiming the painter John Everett Millais as a native, and the cities and countryside have been the subject of paintings by L. S. Lowry and J. M. W. Turner.
* Farnborough – 57,147
and Conference Premier sides Aldershot Town F.C.
It now has an overall area of , and measures about  east–west and  north–south.
In the south, along the coast is the "Hampshire Basin", an area of relatively non-resistant Eocene and Oligocene clays and gravels which are protected from sea erosion by the Isle of Purbeck, Dorset, and the Isle of Wight.
