Some are publicly funded, but the region also has a number of private and for-profit colleges.
Old Dominion University, founded as the Norfolk Division of the College of William and Mary in 1930, became an independent institution in 1962 and now offers degrees in 68 undergraduate and 95 (60 masters/35 doctoral) graduate degree programs.
Each MSA is listed by its counties, then cities, in alphabetical order and not by size.''
* Kaplan Arena at William & Mary Hall in Williamsburg (seating 10,175)
Area residents also can receive independent stations, such as WSKY broadcasting on channel 4 from the Outer Banks of North Carolina, WGBS-LD broadcasting on channel 11 from Hampton, and WTPC 21, a TBN affiliate out of Virginia Beach.
* Southampton County and the City of Franklin are not in the MSA.
The Admirals play at Norfolk Scope Arena, seating 8,725 or 13,800 festival seating, which opened in 1971.
* Portsmouth Pavilion in Portsmouth (seating 7,500)
The Hampton Roads area consists of nine independent cities (which are not part of any county).
In Dr. Goodwin's words: "Williamsburg is Jamestown continued, and Yorktown is Williamsburg vindicated."
All five military services' operating forces are there, as well as several major command headquarters: Hampton Roads is a chief rendezvous of the United States Navy, and the area is home to the Allied Command Transformation, which is the only major military command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on U.S. soil.
Beginning in 1917, as the United States became involved in World War I under President Woodrow Wilson, formerly rural Sewell's Point became the site of what grew to become the largest Naval Base in the world which was established by the United States Navy and is now known as the Naval Station Norfolk.
The publication is published four times a year and covers the City of Suffolk.
Commercial vehicles, except for tour buses, are prohibited.
Newmarket North Mall is now NetCenter, a business center (the Sears store remains).
* Lake Matoaka Amphitheatre at The College of William & Mary in Williamsburg (seating 1,700)
Newport News Park is located in the northern part of the city of Newport News.
The Rockefeller family bequeathed Bassett Hall to Colonial Williamsburg in 1979.
Coliseum Mall, in Hampton, has been redeveloped as Peninsula Town Center in a new style, in step with the latest commercial real estate trend: the nationwide establishment of "lifestyle centers".
Suffolk Publications also produces Virginia-Carolina Boomers, a regional guide for Boomers in the area, which comes out twice a year.
The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge (in Suffolk and Chesapeake) is accessed from U.S. Route 17 in Chesapeake.
The new JANAF Shopping Center, located in Norfolk, featured acres of free parking and dozens of stores.
WUND 2(UNC-TV/PBS member station), broadcasting out of Edenton, NC, serves as another PBS affiliate for the area.
Hampton Roads has hosted many professional wrestling events throughout the years.
In addition, plenty of well known acts have come from the area.
Many clubs, venues, and festivals exist within the region, all playing host to a wide variety of musical styles.
Localities around the state may belong to more than one Planning District, as their constituents may have interests which cross over individual planning district boundaries.
The Virginia Beach–Norfolk–Newport News, VA–NC MSA has a population of over 1.7&nbsp;million, making it the 37th-largest metropolitan area in the United States.
The Hampton Roads Bridge–Tunnel (HRBT) and the Monitor–Merrimac Memorial Bridge–Tunnel (MMMBT) are major harbor crossings of the Hampton Roads Beltway interstate, which links the large population centers of Hampton Roads.
Because the region's east-west boundaries (now the City of Virginia Beach and James City County) have not changed since 1607, the Partnership felt justified in labeling Hampton Roads "America's First Region".
In 1957, the Hampton Roads Bridge–Tunnel was the first bridge–tunnel complex in the world, to be followed by the area's much longer Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel in 1963.
It is located on Mercury Boulevard at the intersection of LaSalle Blvd, near the AF Base.
This helps visitors mentally return to the past, and there are often views of wildlife and waterfowl.
The region is notable in that it has 2 types of public transport services via ferries.
Local routes serving Williamsburg, James City County, and upper York County is operated by Williamsburg Area Transport.
Virginia is also the most populous state without a major team playing within its borders, though its northern reaches are served by the Washington clubs—two of which, the NHL's Capitals and NFL's Redskins, have their operational headquarters and practice facilities in Virginia.
ORF had 3,703,664 passengers take off or land at its facility and 68,778,934 pounds of cargo were processed through its facilities.
Additional malls which have closed include Mercury Mall in Hampton (converted to Mercury Plaza Shopping Center in the mid-1980s, then completely torn down in 2001), and Tower Mall in Portsmouth (Built in the early 1970s, then torn down in 2001).
Transportation within Hampton Roads is served by a regional bus service, Hampton Roads Transit.
The publication is published eight times a year and covers all of Hampton Roads and the Eastern Shore of Virginia.
In addition, the Middle Peninsula counties of Gloucester and Mathews, while not part of the geographical Hampton Roads area, are included in the vast metropolitan region's population.
The area is most often associated with the larger American South.
Weather and daylight permitting, passengers usually see Jamestown Island much as the first colonists may have approached it.
In 1963, Virginia Beach and Princess Anne County merged, retaining the name Virginia Beach.
Robert Cray and Ruth Brown are both prominent blues and R&B artists.
In the 1960s, the first astronauts of Project Mercury trained at the NASA facility adjacent to Hampton's Langley Air Force Base.
This is North America's oldest surfing contest, and features combined cash prizes of $40,000.
This he accomplished by 1907.
The main activities were The College of William & Mary and Eastern State Hospital, each historic institutions in their own right.
NASA-Langley, on the northeast edge of Hampton near Poquoson, is the home of a variety of aeronautics research, including several one-of-a-kind wind tunnels.
The harbor of Hampton Roads is an important highway of commerce, especially for the cities of Norfolk, Portsmouth, and Newport News.
The wavy white central band with three crests suggests past, present, and future.
The result of their combined efforts was the creation of Colonial Williamsburg, which included a restoration of the Wren Building at The College of William & Mary and a change of much of the downtown Williamsburg area into a  Historic Area of restored and replica buildings and surrounds to celebrate the patriots and the early history of America.
BAE Systems, formerly known as NORSHIPCO, operates from sites in the City of Norfolk.
Coliseum Mall drew so much traffic from Interstate 64, that a towering flyover was built at the Mercury Boulevard and Coliseum Drive intersection, to accommodate eastbound mall traffic, from the Mercury Boulevard interchange.
Other major east-west routes are U.S. Route 58, U.S. Route 60, and U.S. Route 460.
Most Hampton Roads localities are served by Cox Cable which provides LNC 5, a local 24-hour cable news television network.
Hampton Roads previously hosted a successful franchise in the American Basketball Association, although it was never a full-time home for that team.
Also in 1963, Norfolk County and the City of South Norfolk merged to create the city of Chesapeake.
* Mathews County is in the MSA but not the HRPDC.
For a width of  the Federal government during 1902 through 1905 increased its minimum depth at low water from , and the channel has now been dredged to a depth of  in some places.
Technology-focused ECPI University has campuses in Virginia Beach and Newport News while ITT Technical Institute has a campus in Norfolk.
The Contemporary Art Center of Virginia located in Virginia Beach features the significant art of our time.
The Hampton Roads designated market area (DMA) is the 42nd largest in the U.S. with 712,790 homes (0.64% of the total U.S.).
The region also has amusement parks which attract tourists and locals alike.
In 1998, a flag representing the Hampton Roads region was adopted.
Access to the open ocean from Norfolk Naval Shipyard (in Portsmouth), Naval Station Norfolk, Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek – Fort Story, and Newport News Shipbuilding (where all U.S. nuclear aircraft carriers have been built) do not pass under any bridges.
As of the 2010 census, the total population of this Combined Statistical Area was 1,779,243, with a 2013 estimate of 1,810,266, a growth of 1.74%.
In 2007, the Hampton Roads Transportation Authority (HRTA) was formed under a controversial state law to levy various additional taxes, fees, and tolls to generate funding for major regional transportation projects, including a long-sought but costly third crossing of the harbor of Hampton Roads.
Norfolk State University is the largest majority black university in Virginia and offers degrees in a wide variety of liberal arts.
* Hampton Coliseum in Hampton (seating 13,800)
Norfolk is served by a variety of radio stations on the FM and AM dials, with towers located around the Hampton Roads area.
Although Virginia Beach had passed Norfolk as the state's largest city by 1990, it was not made the first primary city of the MSA until 2010.
The third point of the Historic Triangle of Colonial Virginia is Yorktown where General Cornwallis surrendered to George Washington in 1781, ending the American Revolution.
First Landing State Park and False Cape State Park are both located in coastal areas in Virginia Beach.
It comprised the independent cities of Norfolk, Portsmouth and South Norfolk and the counties of Norfolk and Princess Anne.
It has dozens of restored and recreated buildings and reenactors.
There are over  of trails in the Newport News Park complex.
''Coastal Virginia Magazine'' was formerly known as ''Hampton Roads Magazine''.
Over time, the entire region has come to be known as "Hampton Roads", a label more specific than its other moniker, "Tidewater Virginia", which could, by implication, include other areas of tidal land in eastern Virginia.
It is located a short distance up the James River.
The area is steeped in 400 years of American history, with hundreds of historical sites and attractions that draw visitors from around the world each year.
The Virginia Living Museum, first established in 1966, combines the elements of a native wildlife park, science museum, aquarium, botanical preserve, and planetarium.
The Hampton Roads MSA, with a population of about 1.7&nbsp;million, is the seventh largest metropolitan area in the Southeastern United States after Washington-Baltimore-Arlington, DC-MD-VA-WVA-PA MSA, Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach, FL MSA, Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA MSA, Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL MSA, Orlando-Kissimmee, FL MSA, and Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC MSA.
Regent University, a private university founded by Christian Evangelist and Leader Pat Robertson, has historically focused on graduate education but is attempting to establish an undergraduate program as well.
In 1699, the first capital of Virginia was moved to Middle Plantation at the suggestion of students from the College of William & Mary (established 1693).
This includes the large military presence, but also NASA and facilities of the Departments of Energy, Transportation, Commerce and Veterans Affairs.
It is one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world.
A high-speed rail connection at Richmond to both the Northeast Corridor and the Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor are also under study.
The Biblical Art Gallery at Ivy Farms Baptist Church is Virginia's largest collection of pre-1900s religious art.
The early administrative center of the new colony was known as Elizabeth Cittie, named for Princess Elizabeth, the daughter of King James I, and formally designated by the Virginia Company in 1619.
As separate parks, they provide miniature golf, go-karts, water slides, pools, climbing wall, paintball area, and kiddie rides.
The Norfolk Nighthawks were a charter member of the Arena Football League's minor league, af2.
People who have grown up in the Hampton Roads area have a unique Tidewater accent which sounds different from a stereotypical Southern accent.
While the harbor and its tributaries were (and still are) important transportation conduits, at the same time they presented obstacles to land-based commerce and travel.
The blue upper panel refers to the sea and sky, recalling the first European settlers at Jamestown in 1607, the first battle between ironclad ships in 1862, the importance of shipbuilding and ship repair in the area, as well as maritime commerce, fishing, recreational boating, and the major military and government installations around the area’s shores.
In 1959, one of the largest on the east coast of the USA was opened at the northeast corner of Military Highway and Virginia Beach Boulevard on property which had formally been used as an airfield.
The museum's collection includes, weapons, vehicles, artifacts, uniforms and posters from various periods of American history.
Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport, located in Newport News, and Norfolk International Airport, in Norfolk, both cater to passengers from Hampton Roads.
In Norfolk, Military Circle Mall on Military Highway was built across Virginia Beach Boulevard from the large JANAF Shopping Center with its own high-rise hotel right in the center.
The facility is toll-free.
The Hampton Coliseum has also hosted many events, including ''RAW'', in April 1998, August 2005, May 2007, January 2008, and July 2011, as well as ''SmackDown!''
Hampton University, a private HBCU university, has a long history serving Hampton.
It is little surprise therefore that the Hampton Roads region's economic base is largely port-related, including shipbuilding, ship repair, naval installations, cargo transfer and storage, and manufacturing related to the processing of imports and exports.
Goodwin of Bruton Parish Church initially had wanted merely to save his historic church building.
Norfolk State and Hampton, both historically black institutions, compete in the Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference.
It carries State Route 31.
Ironically, the harbor and its tributary waterways were (and still are) both important transportation conduits and obstacles to other land-based commerce and travel.
Almost 80% of the region's economy is derived from federal sources.
In addition to the city's historic past, quite a few buildings of antiquity from the 18th century were still extant, although time was taking a toll by the early 20th century.
* Ferguson Center for the Arts in Newport News (seating 1,725 and 453 in 2 separate concert halls)
In the late-1960s, a new type of shopping center came to Hampton Roads: the Indoor Shopping Mall.
For a long time, the indoor shopping malls were seen as largely competitive with small shopping centers and traditional downtown type areas.
Tommy Newsom is another famous jazz musician.
Later the entrance from Chesapeake Bay was equipped with new fortifications (Fort Monroe and Fort Wool), much of the building work being supervised by a young military engineer Robert E. Lee.
Since 1989, Hampton Roads has been the mid-Atlantic leader in U.S. waterborne foreign commerce and is ranked second nationally behind the Port of South Louisiana based on export tonnage.
Virginia Beach serves as home to two soccer teams, the Hampton Roads Piranhas, a men's team in the USL Premier Development League, and a women's team by the same name in the W-League.
NASA's Langley Research Center, located on the Peninsula adjacent to Langley Air Force Base in Hampton, is home to scientific and aerospace technology research.
The Virginia Beach Sportsplex, seating 11,541 and opened in 1999, contains the central training site for the U.S. women's national field hockey team.
The Mariners' Museum Library and Archive, now located in the Trible Library at Christopher Newport University, consists of over 78,000 books, 800,000 photographs, films and negatives, and over one million archival pieces, making it the largest maritime library in the Western Hemisphere.
As conceived by student Andrew Wall and embellished by the selection committee, his flag is highly symbolic:
These crossings are the Hampton Roads Bridge-Tunnel between Phoebus in Hampton and Willoughby Spit in Norfolk and the Monitor-Merrimac Memorial Bridge-Tunnel between Newport News and Suffolk.
Ella Fitzgerald is the most recognizable jazz musician from the area.
As with Hampton, both of these names remain in use today.
Seven airlines provide nonstop services to twenty five destinations.
The Airport experienced a 4th year of record, double-digit growth through 2011, making it one of the fastest growing airports in the country.
''Suffolk Living Magazine'' is another of the region's city and lifestyle magazines.
The original Downtown Tunnel in conjunction with the Berkley Bridge were considered a single bridge and tunnel complex when completed in 1952, perhaps stimulating the innovative bridge-tunnel design using man-made islands when the Hampton Roads Bridge-Tunnel was planned, first opening in 1957.
It served briefly in World War II and later in the Korean and Gulf Wars.
He later served in Rochester, New York for many years.
The Virginia War Museum covers American military history.
Five incorporated towns reside in the metro area including Claremont in Surry County, Dendron in Surry County, Smithfield in Isle of Wight County, Surry, Surry County's seat, and Windsor in Isle of Wight County.
There has also been a light rail study in the Hampton – Newport News areas.
Passing under bridges was considered a potential threat to the U.S. fleet.
The word '''Hampton''' honors one of the founders of the Virginia Company of London and a great supporter of the colonization of Virginia, Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton.
The Suffolk-Nansemond Museum is in the restored Seaboard and Virginian Railway passenger train station in Suffolk.
The term '''Roads''' (short for roadstead) indicates the safety of a port; as applied to a body of water, it is "a partly sheltered area of water near a shore in which vessels may ride at anchor".
Naval Weapons Station Yorktown, which includes Cheatham Annex, and a former Seabee base which became Camp Peary.
The Downing-Gross Cultural Arts Center in SE Newport News contains a community-based art gallery, as well as arts classrooms and the Ella Fitzgerald Theater.
There are two large visitor centers, battlefield drives, and a waterfront area.
The Hampton Roads Beltway extends  on a long loop through the region, crossing the harbor on two toll-free bridge-tunnel facilities.
Associated with the ports' military role are almost 50,000 federal civilian employees.
During the American Civil War (1861–1865), the historic Battle of Hampton Roads between the first American ironclad warships, the  and the CSS ''Virginia'', took place off Sewell's Point in 1862.
This was followed by the Monitor–Merrimac Memorial Bridge–Tunnel in 1992.
* Busch Gardens Williamsburg is a major theme park located near Williamsburg in James City County.
The permanent collection at the museum totals about 32,000 objects, equally divided between works of art and three-dimensional objects.
Vowels have a longer pronunciation than in a regular southern accent.
Bryant & Stratton College has campuses in Virginia Beach Town Center and Peninsula Town Center.
Norfolk's Eastern Virginia Medical School, founded as a community medical school by the surrounding jurisdictions in 1973, is noted for its research into reproductive medicine and is located in the region's major medical complex in the Ghent district.
Atlantic University, associated with the Edgar Cayce organization's Association for Research and Enlightenment (ARE), offers instruction in New Age subjects and an M.A.
When speaking of communities of Hampton Roads, virtually all sources (including the three discussed in the following paragraphs) include the seven major cities, two smaller ones, and three counties within those two subregions.
Area residents also have options for training for technical professions.
Backed by retired military personnel, the name JANAF was an acronym for Joint Army Navy Air Force.
The area also has two Division III programs, one in each subregion—the Virginia Wesleyan Marlins on the border of Virginia Beach and Norfolk,  and the Christopher Newport University Captains in Newport News.
The coal loading facilities in the Port of Hampton Roads are able to load in excess of 65 million tons annually, giving the port the largest, most efficient and modern coal loading facilities in the world.
The Syms-Eaton Academy was later renamed Hampton Academy and in 1852 became part of the public school system, thus Hampton High School lays claim to being the oldest public school in the United States.
Twice in the 20th century, families of mostly African American heritage were displaced in entire communities when land along the northern side of the Peninsula primarily in York County west of Yorktown was taken in large tracts for military use during World War I and World War II, creating the present-day U.S.
Booker T. Washington was among the freedmen who attended the local school, which evolved into the present-day Hampton University.
Currently, Virginia Beach's Lynnhaven Mall is the region's largest shopping center with nearly 180 stores, and is one of the region's biggest tourist draws, with the Virginia Beach Oceanfront, Colonial Williamsburg, Busch Gardens Williamsburg: The Old Country and MacArthur Center.
A cleric of modest means, he sought support and financing from a number of sources before successfully drawing the interests and major financial support of Standard Oil heir and philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr. and his wife Abby Aldrich Rockefeller.
Busch Gardens Williamsburg and Water Country USA are the major theme parks in Williamsburg.
''Hampton Roads Times'' serves as an online magazine for the region.
In 1983, the '''Newport News–Hampton Metropolitan Statistical Area''', comprising the cities of Newport News, Hampton, Poquoson, Suffolk and Williamsburg, and the counties of Gloucester, James City and York, was combined with the Norfolk–Virginia Beach–Portsmouth MSA and renamed the '''Norfolk–Virginia Beach–Newport News MSA'''.
Other references to the Earl include the area to the north across the bay (in what is now the Eastern Shore) which became known as Northampton, and an area south of the James River which became Southampton.
As passengers cross, they can walk about the boat or go up to an enclosed viewing level with restrooms.
Huntington Ingalls Industries (formerly Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company), was created in 2008 as a spinoff of Northrop Grumman Newport News and is the world's largest shipyard.
The airport is located near Chesapeake Bay, along the city limits of Norfolk and Virginia Beach.
Creating and maintaining adequate infrastructure has long been a major challenge.
in Transpersonal Studies.
The 350th anniversary celebration at Jamestown Festival Park in 1957 was so popular, tourism has been continuously increasing ever since.
ODU joined Conference USA, an FBS football conference, as a full FBS member in 2015.
Since 2000, Nauticus has been home to the battleship USS ''Wisconsin'', one of the last battleships to be built in the United States.
The design of the flag was created by a contest.
The area also has a number of higher education options for area residents.
Due to a peculiarity in the drawing of the Virginia-North Carolina border, Knott's Island in that county is connected to Virginia by land, but is only accessible to other parts of North Carolina across waterways via a ferry system.
The Art Institute of Virginia Beach offers programs in the media arts, design and culinary arts fields.
The Hampton Roads area is also home to at least one professional wrestling promotion, Vanguard Championship Wrestling, which holds events throughout the region, and has a weekly television show on the local Fox affiliate.
President Theodore Roosevelt arrived by water in the harbor of Hampton Roads, as did other notable persons such as Mark Twain and Henry Huttleston Rogers, who both arrived aboard the latter's steam yacht ''Kanawha''.
NASA Langley Research Center is in Hampton, the original training ground for the Mercury Seven, Gemini, and Apollo Astronauts.
On the collegiate level, four Division I programs—two on the Southside and two on the Peninsula—field teams in many sports, including football, basketball, and baseball; three currently play football in the second-tier FCS, while ODU recently moved up to the FBS football.
It unveiled the new brand before 800 people at the annual meeting of the Hampton Roads Chamber of Commerce on December 13, 2006.
There are also twenty to thirty musical acts based in the region that perform throughout Hampton Roads and its surrounding areas on a "full-time" basis.
While Southampton is adjacent to Surry, Isle of Wight, and the City of Suffolk, the Census Bureau does not consider it part of the metro area.
The battle was inconclusive, but Union forces later took control of Hampton Roads, Norfolk, and the lower James River, though they were thwarted from venturing further upstream by a strong Confederate battery at Drewry's Bluff.
In addition, the area has two other major tunnels, plus several drawbridges on key highway corridors.
Local features including Mercury Boulevard and a succession of astronaut-name bridges over the Hampton creek commemorate this fact.
The Combined Statistical Area includes four additional counties in North Carolina, pushing the regional population to over 1.8 million residents, the 32nd largest CSA in the country.
The North American Sand Soccer Championships, a beach soccer tournament, is held annually on the beach in Virginia Beach.
The area consists of ten independent cities and seven counties.
(The VGN's former coal facility at Sewell's Point has been gone since the 1960s, and the property is now part of the expansive Norfolk Navy Base).
The Hampton Coliseum, seating 10,761 to 13,800 festival seating, hosts the annual Virginia Duals wrestling events, and the annual Hampton Jazz Festival.
Connecting buses are available between the Norfolk and Newport News stations and from both stations to Virginia Beach.
The College of William and Mary in Williamsburg was founded in 1693 and has served as the second oldest institution of higher education in the United States.
The Hampton Roads Planning District Commission (HRPDC) currently includes 16 cities and counties in Virginia, and represents over 1.6&nbsp;million people.
Many prominent rap and hip hop artists come from the area including Chad Hugo, Clipse, Magoo, Missy Elliott, Nicole Wray, Pharrell Williams, Quan, Teddy Riley, and Timbaland.
Replacing Jamestown at the end of the 17th century, Williamsburg had been capital of the Colony and the new State of Virginia from 1699 to 1780.
For example, as defined for federal economic purposes, the Hampton Roads metropolitan statistical area (MSA) includes two counties in northeastern North Carolina and two counties in Virginia's Middle Peninsula.
The Gallery at Military Circle
Also in the 1970s, Tower Mall was built in Portsmouth, but was torn down and turned into the Victory Crossing shopping development.
The town at the center of Elizabeth Cittie became known as '''Hampton''', and a nearby waterway was designated Hampton Creek (also known as Hampton River).
