Within four years, the dynasty's authority had collapsed in the face of rebellion.
For example, since the wood phase was believed to promote the fire phase, medicinal ingredients associated with the wood phase could be used to heal an organ associated with the fire phase.
His rival claimant to the throne, Zhizhi Chanyu (r.&nbsp;56–36 BC), was killed by Chen Tang and Gan Yanshou (甘延壽/甘延寿) at the Battle of Zhizhi, in modern Taraz, Kazakhstan.
In the early Western Han, a wealthy salt or iron industrialist, whether a semi-autonomous king or wealthy merchant, could boast funds that rivaled the imperial treasury and amass a peasant workforce of over a thousand.
He and his troops confronted Dou Wu and his retainers at the palace gate where each side shouted accusations of treason against the other.
Although the use of the graduated scale and grid reference for maps was not thoroughly described until the published work of Pei Xiu (224–271 AD), there is evidence that in the early 2nd century AD, cartographer Zhang Heng was the first to use scales and grids for maps.
Wang Mang initiated a series of major reforms that were ultimately unsuccessful.
Instead, punishments were commonly monetary fines, periods of forced hard labor for convicts, and the penalty of death by beheading.
Buddhism first entered China during the Eastern Han and was first mentioned in 65 AD.
Apart from the passing of noble titles or ranks, inheritance practices did not involve primogeniture; each son received an equal share of the family property.
From the reign of Emperor Wu onward, the Chinese court officially sponsored Confucianism in education and court politics, synthesized with the cosmology of later scholars such as Dong Zhongshu.
The Yellow Turbans and Five-Pecks-of-Rice adherents belonged to two different hierarchical Daoist religious societies led by faith healers Zhang Jue (d.&nbsp;184 AD) and Zhang Lu (d.&nbsp;216 AD), respectively.
In Han government, the emperor was the supreme judge and lawgiver, the commander-in-chief of the armed forces and sole designator of official nominees appointed to the top posts in central and local administrations; those who earned a 600-bushel salary-rank or higher.
Negative numbers were also used by the Greek mathematician Diophantus in about 275 AD, but were not widely accepted in Europe until the 16th century AD.
In 167 AD, the Grand Commandant Dou Wu (d.&nbsp;168 AD) convinced his son-in-law, Emperor Huan, to release them.
To pay for his military campaigns and colonial expansion, Emperor Wu nationalized several private industries.
These reforms included outlawing slavery, nationalizing land to equally distribute between households, and introducing new currencies, a change which debased the value of coinage.
This kept many peasants away from their farms and denied the government a significant portion of its land tax revenue.
Junks featured a square-ended bow and stern, a flat-bottomed hull or carvel-shaped hull with no keel or sternpost, and solid transverse bulkheads in the place of structural ribs found in Western vessels.
Subsequent reigns were increasingly marked by eunuch intervention in court politics and their involvement in the violent power struggles of the imperial consort clans.
The Imperial Counselor's chief duty was to conduct disciplinary procedures for officials.
The poll tax stimulated a money economy that necessitated the minting of over 28,000,000,000 coins from 118 BC to 5 AD, an average of 220,000,000 coins a year.
Han-era Daoists assembled into small groups of hermits who attempted to achieve immortality through breathing exercises, sexual techniques and use of medical elixirs.
The odometer cart, invented during Han, measured journey lengths, using mechanical figures banging drums and gongs to indicate each distance traveled.
From 26 until 36 AD, Emperor Guangwu had to wage war against other regional warlords who claimed the title of emperor; when these warlords were defeated, China reunified under the Han.
The minimum age for the military draft was reduced to twenty after Emperor Zhao's (r.&nbsp;87–74 BC) reign.
Unlike the original ideology espoused by Confucius, or Kongzi (551–479 BC), Han Confucianism in Emperor Wu's reign was the creation of Dong Zhongshu (179–104 BC).
This decision was reversed in 186 BC by his widow Grand Empress Dowager Lü Zhi (d. 180 BC), who abolished private minting.
Afterward, Emperor Huan employed eunuchs to depose Liang Ji, who was then forced to commit suicide.
When central authority collapsed after 189 AD, wealthy landowners, members of the aristocracy/nobility, and regional military-governors relied upon their retainers to act as their own personal troops (''buqu'' 部曲).
He was the top civil and military leader of the commandery and handled defense, lawsuits, seasonal instructions to farmers and recommendations of nominees for office sent annually to the capital in a quota system first established by Emperor Wu.
Emperor Wu accepted this, despite continuing Xiongnu raids.
The coinage issued by the central government mint in 119 BC remained the standard coinage of China until the Tang dynasty (618–907 AD).
Wealthy folk could afford silk robes, skirts, socks, and mittens, coats made of badger or fox fur, duck plumes, and slippers with inlaid leather, pearls, and silk lining.
The administration of each kingdom was very similar to that of the central government.
The ''wuzhu'' became China's standard coin until the Tang dynasty (618–907 AD).
A marquess's Chancellor was ranked as the equivalent of a county Prefect.
On occasion, the court forcibly moved peasant farmers to new frontier settlements, along with government-owned slaves and convicts who performed hard labor.
Ban Chao (d.&nbsp;AD 102) enlisted the aid of the Kushan Empire, occupying the area of modern India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan, to subdue Kashgar and its ally Sogdiana.
After 92 AD, the palace eunuchs increasingly involved themselves in court politics, engaging in violent power struggles between the various consort clans of the empresses and empresses dowager, causing the Han's ultimate downfall.
Spanning over four centuries, the Han period is considered a golden age in Chinese history.
The Nanyang Commandery Administrator Du Shi (d.&nbsp;38 AD) created a waterwheel-powered reciprocator that worked the bellows for the smelting of iron.
In 121 BC, Han forces expelled the Xiongnu from a vast territory spanning the Hexi Corridor to Lop Nur.
The flood dislodged thousands of peasant farmers, many of whom joined roving bandit and rebel groups such as the Red Eyebrows to survive.
It had three plowshares, a seed box for the drills, a tool which turned down the soil and could sow roughly 45,730 m2 (11.3 acres) of land in a single day.
When surgery was performed by the physician Hua Tuo (d.&nbsp;208 AD), he used anesthesia to numb his patients' pain and prescribed a rubbing ointment that allegedly sped the process of healing surgical wounds.
They also thought that the illumination of the Moon and planets was caused by sunlight, that lunar eclipses occurred when the Earth obstructed sunlight falling onto the Moon, and that a solar eclipse occurred when the Moon obstructed sunlight from reaching the Earth.
Medical physicians, pig breeders, and butchers had a fairly high social status, while occultist diviners, runners, and messengers had low status.
Early Han punishments of torturous mutilation were borrowed from Qin law.
The three-legged iron seed drill, invented by the 2nd century BC, enabled farmers to carefully plant crops in rows instead of casting seeds out by hand.
Using a water clock, waterwheel and a series of gears, the Court Astronomer Zhang Heng (78–139 AD) was able to mechanically rotate his metal-ringed armillary sphere.
China's first known Buddhist temple, the White Horse Temple, was constructed outside the wall of the capital, Luoyang, during Emperor Ming's reign.
Despite this promise, and against protest and revolts from the nobility, Wang Mang claimed on 10 January that the divine Mandate of Heaven called for the end of the Han dynasty and the beginning of his own: the Xin dynasty (9–23 AD).
State-registered merchants, who were forced by law to wear white-colored clothes and pay high commercial taxes, were considered by the gentry as social parasites with a contemptible status.
The year of training was served in one of three branches of the armed forces: infantry, cavalry or navy.
Over ten Han-era underground tombs have been found, many of them featuring archways, vaulted chambers, and domed roofs.
After Yuan died, Cao killed Yuan Shao's son Yuan Tan (173–205 AD), who had fought with his brothers over the family inheritance.
Domesticated animals that were also eaten included chickens, Mandarin ducks, geese, cows, sheep, pigs, camels and dogs (various types were bred specifically for food, while most were used as pets).
A Magistrate maintained law and order in his county, registered the populace for taxation, mobilized commoners for annual corvée duties, repaired schools and supervised public works.
Under Guangwu's rule the Han Empire was restored.
Negative numbers are used in the Bakhshali manuscript of ancient India, but its exact date of compilation is unknown.
Following Huan's death, Dou Wu and the Grand Tutor Chen Fan (陳蕃) (d.&nbsp;168 AD) attempted a coup d'état against the eunuchs Hou Lan (d.&nbsp;172 AD), Cao Jie (d.&nbsp;181 AD), and Wang Fu (王甫).
The small landowner-cultivators formed the majority of the Han tax base; this revenue was threatened during the latter half of Eastern Han when many peasants fell into debt and were forced to work as farming tenants for wealthy landlords.
The highest government officials could be enfeoffed as marquesses.
The ''junk'' design was developed and realized during Han.
The Minister Coachman (''Taipu'' 太僕) was responsible for the maintenance of imperial stables, horses, carriages and coach-houses for the emperor and his palace attendants, as well as the supply of horses for the armed forces.
Emperor Gengshi's brother Liu Xiu, known posthumously as Emperor Guangwu (r.&nbsp;25–57 AD), after distinguishing himself at the Battle of Kunyang in 23 AD, was urged to succeed Gengshi as emperor.
When this plot failed in 133 BC, Emperor Wu launched a series of massive military invasions into Xiongnu territory.
Han-era mathematical achievements include solving problems with right-angle triangles, square roots, cube roots, and matrix methods, finding more accurate approximations for pi, providing mathematical proof of the Pythagorean theorem, use of the decimal fraction, Gaussian elimination to solve linear equations, and continued fractions to find the roots of equations.
The head of a large county of about 10,000 households was called a Prefect, while the heads of smaller counties were called Chiefs, and both could be referred to as Magistrates.
Though Han wooden structures decayed, some Han-dynasty ruins made of brick, stone, and rammed earth remain intact.
Zhang Rang had previously fled with Emperor Shao (r.&nbsp;189 AD) and his brother Liu Xie—the future Emperor Xian of Han (r. 189–220 AD).
The '''Han dynasty''' () was the second imperial dynasty of China (206 BC–220 AD), preceded by the Qin dynasty (221–206 BC) and succeeded by the Three Kingdoms period (220–280 AD).
The Minister of Ceremonies (''Taichang'' 太常) was the chief official in charge of religious rites, rituals, prayers and the maintenance of ancestral temples and altars.
If the emperor rejected a court conference decision, he risked alienating his high ministers.
Illness was viewed as a sign that ''qi'' or "vital energy" channels leading to a certain organ had been disrupted.
Moreover, Han ships were the first in the world to be steered using a rudder at the stern, in contrast to the simpler steering oar used for riverine transport,  allowing them to sail on the high seas.
Han Chinese astronomers made star catalogues and detailed records of comets that appeared in the night sky, including recording the 12 BC appearance of the comet now known as Halley's comet.
Mathematics were essential in drafting the astronomical calendar, a lunisolar calendar that used the Sun and Moon as time-markers throughout the year.
Emperor Xian fled from Chang'an in 195 AD to the ruins of Luoyang.
The Han dynasty was a unique period in the development of premodern Chinese science and technology, comparable to the level of scientific and technological growth during the Song dynasty (960–1279).
The courtyard house is the most common type of home portrayed in Han artwork.
Han-era medical physicians believed that the human body was subject to the same forces of nature that governed the greater universe, namely the cosmological cycles of yin and yang and the five phases.
Theoretically, there were no limits to his power.
However, when his title was changed to Minister of Works in 8 BC, his chief duty became oversight of public works projects.
The Minister of Finance (''Da sinong'' 大司農) was the treasurer for the official bureaucracy and the armed forces who handled tax revenues and set standards for units of measurement.
Families throughout Han China made ritual sacrifices of animals and food to deities, spirits, and ancestors at temples and shrines, in the belief that these items could be utilized by those in the spiritual realm.
Aside from the landowner's land tax paid in a portion of their crop yield, the poll tax and property taxes were paid in coin cash.
He could appoint officials below the salary-rank of 600 bushels.
However, there is no sufficient evidence for the watermill in China until about the 5th century.
The general Ma Yuan created the world's first known raised-relief map from rice in the 1st century AD.
Similar tiles have been found in the Chengdu area of Sichuan province in south-central China.
A Confucian-based education was also made available at commandery-level schools and private schools opened in small towns, where teachers earned respectable incomes from tuition payments.
Han dynasty poetry was dominated by the ''fu'' genre, which achieved its greatest prominence during the reign of Emperor Wu.
Some important texts were created and studied by scholars.
The Grand Commandant, whose title was changed to Grand Marshal in 119 BC before reverting to Grand Commandant in 51 AD, was the irregularly posted commander of the military and then regent during the Western Han period.
As observed in Han miniature tomb models, but not in literary sources, the crank handle was used to operate the fans of winnowing machines that separated grain from chaff.
This date could be revised if the tomb of Qin Shi Huang is excavated and the account in the ''Records of the Grand Historian'' concerning a model map of the empire is proven to be true.
Borehole drilling and derricks were used to lift brine to iron pans where it was distilled into salt.
Their rebellion was crushed by Han general Ma Yuan (d.&nbsp;AD 49) in a campaign from AD 42–43.
Around 180 AD, Ding created a manually operated rotary fan used for air conditioning within palace buildings.
By 110 BC Emperor Wu also interfered with the profitable trade in grain when he eliminated speculation by selling government-stored grain at a lower price than demanded by merchants.
Holders of the rank immediately below, that of ordinary marquess, received a pension, but had no territorial rule.
From Han literary sources, it is known that wooden-trestle beam bridges, arch bridges, simple suspension bridges, and floating pontoon bridges existed in Han China.
Three Han mathematical treatises still exist.
Much to the interest of the ruler, Dong's synthesis justified the imperial system of government within the natural order of the universe.
Gulf of Thailand and South China Sea), where a Greek sailor had visited.
Whereas the physician Zhang Zhongjing (c.&nbsp;150–c.&nbsp;219 AD) is known to have written the ''Shanghan lun'' ("Dissertation on Typhoid Fever"), it is thought that both he and Hua Tuo collaborated in compiling the ''Shennong Ben Cao Jing'' medical texxt.
He escorted them safely back to the capital and was made Minister of Works, taking control of Luoyang and forcing Yuan Shao to flee.
The Yellow River split into two new branches: one emptying to the north and the other to the south of the Shandong Peninsula, though Han engineers managed to dam the southern branch by 70 AD.
Nevertheless, some Han literary sources provide crucial information.
In the beginning of the Han, Emperor Gaozu closed the government mint in favor of private minting of coins.
After negotiations, the ''heqin'' agreement in 198 BC nominally held the leaders of the Xiongnu and the Han as equal partners in a royal marriage alliance, but the Han were forced to send large amounts of tribute items such as silk clothes, food, and wine to the Xiongnu.
Kingdoms—roughly the size of commanderies—were ruled exclusively by the emperor's male relatives as semi-autonomous fiefdoms.
The Han-era Chinese sailed in a variety of ships differing from those of previous eras, such as the tower ship.
Merchants were required to pay a higher rate of 240 coins.
Important Buddhist canons were translated into Chinese during the 2nd century AD, including the ''Sutra of Forty-two Chapters'', ''Perfection of Wisdom'', ''Shurangama Sutra'', and ''Pratyutpanna Sutra''.
The liquor monopoly lasted only from 98 to 81 BC, and the salt and iron monopolies were eventually abolished in early Eastern Han.
Each organ of the body was associated with a particular phase.
Zhang Lu's rebellion, in modern northern Sichuan and southern Shaanxi, was not quelled until 215 AD.
Architectural historian Robert L. Thorp points out the scarcity of Han-era archaeological remains, and claims that often unreliable Han-era literary and artistic sources are used by historians for clues about lost Han architecture.
After several insurrections by Han kings—the largest being the Rebellion of the Seven States in 154 BC—the imperial court enacted a series of reforms beginning in 145 BC limiting the size and power of these kingdoms and dividing their former territories into new centrally controlled commanderies.
Emperor Zhang's (r.&nbsp;75–88 AD) reign came to be viewed by later Eastern Han scholars as the high point of the dynastic house.
With these reforms, kings were reduced to being nominal heads of their fiefs, gaining a personal income from only a portion of the taxes collected in their kingdom.
These are the ''Book on Numbers and Computation'' (''Suan shu shu'' 算數書), the ''Arithmetical Classic of the Gnomon and the Circular Paths of Heaven'' (''Zhou bi suan jing'' 周髀算經) and the ''Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art'' (''Jiu zhang suan shu'' 九章算術).
The naval conquest of Nanyue in 111 BC expanded the Han realm into what are now modern Guangdong, Guangxi, and northern Vietnam.
Wang promised to relinquish his control to Liu Ying once he came of age.
Philosophical works written by Yang Xiong (53 BC – 18 AD), Huan Tan (43 BC – 28 AD), Wang Chong (27–100 AD), and Wang Fu (78–163 AD) questioned whether human nature was innately good or evil and posed challenges to Dong's universal order.
The heavy moldboard iron plow, also invented during the Han dynasty, required only one man to control it, two oxen to pull it.
Unlike the practice in later dynasties, the father usually sent his adult married sons away with their portions of the family fortune.
These monopolies included salt, iron, and liquor production, as well as bronze-coin currency.
This device was able to detect the exact cardinal or ordinal direction of earthquakes from hundreds of kilometers away.
The era from his reign until the fall of Han is known as the Eastern Han dynasty () or the Later Han dynasty () (25–220 AD).
During the widespread rebellion against Wang Mang, the state of Goguryeo was free to raid Han's Korean commanderies; Han did not reaffirm its control over the region until AD 30.
The Minister of the Household (''Guang lu xun'' 光祿勳) was in charge of the emperor's security within the palace grounds, external imperial parks and wherever the emperor made an outing by chariot.
Kings were no longer able to appoint their own staff; this duty was assumed by the imperial court.
They repelled a joint Xiongnu-Qiang invasion of this northwestern territory in 111 BC.
This was in revenge for Dou's purging of the clan of his natural mother—Consort Liang—and then concealing her identity from him.
Han-era astronomers adopted a geocentric model of the universe, theorizing that it was shaped like a sphere surrounding the earth in the center.
Yuan Shao challenged Cao Cao for control over the emperor.
Students from the Imperial University organized a widespread student protest against the eunuchs of Emperor Huan's court.
To placate his prominent commanders from the war with Chu, Emperor Gaozu enfeoffed some of them as kings.
While suspects were jailed, convicted criminals were never imprisoned.
Wealthy landowners, such as nobles and officials, often provided lodging for retainers who provided valuable work or duties, sometimes including fighting bandits or riding into battle.
Emperor Wu even enacted laws which banned registered merchants from owning land, yet powerful merchants were able to avoid registration and own large tracts of land.
The assault culminated in 119 BC at the Battle of Mobei, where the Han commanders Huo Qubing (d.&nbsp;117 BC) and Wei Qing (d.&nbsp;106 BC) forced the Xiongnu court to flee north of the Gobi Desert.
Dong was killed by his adopted son Lü Bu (d.&nbsp;198 AD) in a plot hatched by Wang Yun (d. 192 AD).
A different distribution of the remainder could be specified in a will, but it is unclear how common this was.
Women were exempt from the annual corvée labor duties, but often engaged in a range of income-earning occupations aside from their domestic chores of cooking and cleaning.
The chain pump was first mentioned in China by the philosopher Wang Chong in his 1st-century-AD ''Balanced Discourse''.
It was founded by the rebel leader Liu Bang, known posthumously as Emperor Gaozu of Han, and briefly interrupted by the Xin dynasty (9–23 AD) of the former regent Wang Mang.
Even before Han's expansion into Central Asia, diplomat Zhang Qian's travels from 139 to 125 BC had established Chinese contacts with many surrounding civilizations.
Modern archaeology has led to the discovery of Han artwork portraying inventions which were otherwise absent in Han literary sources.
This system switched the positions of furrows and ridges between growing seasons.
During the turbulent reign of Wang Mang, Han lost control over the Tarim Basin, which was conquered by the Northern Xiongnu in AD 63 and used as a base to invade Han's Hexi Corridor in Gansu.
A Roman embassy of Emperor Marcus Aurelius (r.&nbsp;161–180 AD) is recorded in the ''Weilüe'' and ''Hou Hanshu'' to have reached the court of Emperor Huan of Han (r.&nbsp;AD 146–168) in AD 166, yet Rafe de Crespigny asserts that this was most likely a group of Roman merchants.
The most common staple crops consumed during Han were wheat, barley, foxtail millet, proso millet, rice, and beans.
The consequent loss of government revenue was compensated for by increasing property taxes.
Several days later, a messenger arrived bearing news that an earthquake had struck in Longxi Commandery (in modern Gansu Province), the direction the device had indicated, which forced the officials at court to admit the efficacy of Zhang's device.
Although the Yellow Turbans were defeated, many generals appointed during the crisis never disbanded their assembled militia forces and used these troops to amass power outside of the collapsing imperial authority.
The Han government enacted reforms in order to keep small landowner-cultivators out of debt and on their own farms.
When Ping died on 3 February 6 AD, Ruzi Ying (d. 25 AD) was chosen as the heir and Wang Mang was appointed to serve as acting emperor for the child.
One of the Han's greatest mathematical advancements was the world's first use of negative numbers.
However, a court conference the following year convinced the majority that a limited engagement at Mayi involving the assassination of the Chanyu would throw the Xiongnu realm into chaos and benefit the Han.
He presided over the Han government but shared power with both the nobility and appointed ministers who came largely from the scholarly gentry class.
However, in 145 BC, after several insurrections by the kings, Emperor Jing removed the kings' rights to appoint officials whose salaries were higher than 400 bushels.
Some of the earliest Han maps discovered were ink-penned silk maps found amongst the Mawangdui Silk Texts in a 2nd-century-BC tomb.
The Reformists, however, overturned these policies, favoring a cautious, non-expansionary approach to foreign policy, frugal budget reform, and lower tax-rates imposed on private entrepreneurs.
Thus, Han-era physicians prescribed medicine that was believed to counteract this imbalance.
Monumental stone pillar-gates, twenty-nine of which survive from the Han period, formed entrances of walled enclosures at shrine and tomb sites.
Dong was a scholar and minor official who aggregated the ethical Confucian ideas of ritual, filial piety, and harmonious relationships with five phases and yin-yang cosmologies.
Palace eunuchs imprisoned the official Li Ying (李膺) and his associates from the Imperial University on a dubious charge of treason.
The year of active service was served either on the frontier, in a king's court or under the Minister of the Guards in the capital.
Conscripted soldiers underwent one year of training and one year of service as non-professional soldiers.
On September 25 both palaces were breached and approximately two thousand eunuchs were killed.
Despite the tribute and a negotiation between Laoshang Chanyu (r.&nbsp;174–160 BC) and Emperor Wen (r.&nbsp;180–157 BC) to reopen border markets, many of the ''Chanyu's'' Xiongnu subordinates chose not to obey the treaty and periodically raided Han territories south of the Great Wall for additional goods.
Waterwheels were also used to power chain pumps that lifted water to raised irrigation ditches.
Monogamous marriages were also normal, although nobles and high officials were wealthy enough to afford and support concubines as additional lovers.
He shared similar duties with the Chancellor, such as receiving annual provincial reports.
Acting as a judge in lawsuits was one of many duties of the county magistrate and Administrators of commanderies.
China's first imperial dynasty was the Qin dynasty (221–206 BC).
Under certain conditions dictated by custom, not law, both men and women were able to divorce their spouses and remarry.
During the Eastern Han, conscription could be avoided if one paid a commutable tax.
The ultimate Han victory in these wars eventually forced the Xiongnu to accept vassal status as Han tributaries.
As mentioned by Huan Tan in about 20 AD, they were used to turn gears that lifted iron trip hammers, and were used in pounding, threshing and polishing grain.
Kings became nominal heads of their fiefs and collected a portion of tax revenues as their personal incomes.
The ruins of rammed-earth walls that once surrounded the capitals Chang'an and Luoyang still stand, along with their drainage systems of brick arches, ditches, and ceramic water pipes.
Imperial authority was also seriously challenged by large Daoist religious societies which instigated the Yellow Turban Rebellion and the Five Pecks of Rice Rebellion.
Liquor was another profitable private industry nationalized by the central government in 98 BC.
He created central government monopolies administered largely by former merchants.
Chang'an was chosen as the new capital of the reunified empire under Han.
Its followers believed that the sage-philosopher Laozi (fl.&nbsp;6th century BC) was a holy prophet who would offer salvation and good health if his devout followers would confess their sins, ban the worship of unclean gods who accepted meat sacrifices and chant sections of the ''Daodejing''.
After the Northern Xiongnu fled into the Ili River valley in AD 91, the nomadic Xianbei occupied the area from the borders of the Buyeo Kingdom in Manchuria to the Ili River of the Wusun people.
To eliminate the influence of such private entrepreneurs, Emperor Wu nationalized the salt and iron industries in 117 BC and allowed many of the former industrialists to become officials administering the monopolies.
During this time, a succession of her male relatives held the title of regent.
By the end of his reign, he controlled Manchuria, Mongolia, and the Tarim Basin, subjugating over twenty states east of Samarkand.
Although others disagreed with his model, Wang Chong accurately described the water cycle of the evaporation of water into clouds.
This policy endured until the fall of the Qing dynasty in AD 1911.
In AD 91, the office of Protector General of the Western Regions was reinstated when it was bestowed on Ban Chao.
However, Emperor Zhang later reinstated the Sifen calendar.
