All other players must remain behind the free-throw line until execution and the defending field players must keep a distance of three meters.
Goal attempts by these players are typically made by jumping high and shooting over the defenders.
They physically exchange their positions approximately every 10 minutes (long exchange), and change sides every five minutes (short exchange).
These typically are fast players who excel at ball control and wide jumps from the outside of the goal perimeter in order to get into a better shooting angle at the goal.
;Throw-in: The team which did not touch the ball last is awarded a throw-in when the ball fully crosses the side line or touches the ceiling.
If the attacking team does not make sufficient progress (eventually releasing a shot on goal), the referees can call '''passive play''' (since about 1995, the referee gives a passive warning some time before the actual call by holding one hand up in the air, signalling that the attacking team should release a shot soon), turning control over to the other team.
The chance of success is very high, as the throwing player is unhindered in his scoring attempt.
The International Amateur Handball Federation was formed in 1928, and the International Handball Federation was formed in 1946.
The sport is most popular in continental Europe, whose countries have won all medals but one in men's world championships since 1938, and all women's titles until 2013, when Brazil broke the series.
The first written set of team handball rules was published in 1906 by the Danish gym teacher, lieutenant and Olympic medalist Holger Nielsen from Ordrup grammar school north of Copenhagen.
They may be substituted by a regular field player if their team elects to use this scheme in order to outnumber the defending players.
Any player entering or leaving the play must cross the substitution line which is part of the side line and extends  from the middle line to the team's side.
An exchange takes place over the substitution line.
Actions directed mainly at the opponent and not the ball (such as reaching around, holding, pushing, tripping, and jumping into opponent) as well as contact from the side, from behind a player or impeding the opponent's counterattack are all considered illegal and are subject to penalty.
Handball is an Olympic sport played during the Summer Olympics.
(In particular, being awarded a free throw while being on warning for passive play will not reset the warning, whereas a shot on goal will.)
A player can get only one warning before receiving a two-minute suspension.
If the suspended player protests further, does not walk straight off the field to the bench, or if the referee deems the tempo deliberately slow, the player can be given an additional two-minute suspension.
The signal for warning or disqualification is accompanied by a yellow or red card, respectively.
Field players are allowed to touch the ball with any part of their bodies above and including the knee.
It is awarded also when the referees have interrupted a legitimate scoring chance for any reason.
:Modern handball introduced the "fast throw-off" concept; i.e., the play will be immediately restarted by the referees as soon as the executing team fulfills its requirements.
On a turnover, they immediately sprint forward and receive the ball halfway to the other goal.
Women's team handball was added at the 1976 Summer Olympics.
For instance, any contact from behind during a fast break is now being treated with a red card.
A player who is disqualified may be substituted with another player after the two-minute penalty is served.
The positions are always denoted from the view of the respective goalkeeper, so that a defender on the right opposes an attacker on the left.
One player is only permitted two two-minute suspensions; after the third time, they will be shown the red card.
The goalkeeper resumes the play with a throw from anywhere within the goal area.
Before that, it was one per half.
If necessary, a second net may be clasped to the back of the net on the inside.
;Goalkeeper-throw: If the ball crosses the outer goal line without interference from the defending team or when deflected by the defending team's goalkeeper, or when the attacking team violates the D-zone as described above, a goalkeeper-throw is awarded to the defending team.
A shot on goal or an infringement leading to a yellow card or two-minute penalty will mark the start of a new attack, causing the hand to be taken down; but a shot blocked by the defense or a normal free throw will not.
* No attacking or defending players other than the defending goalkeeper are allowed to touch the floor of the goal area (within six metres of the goal).
The referees may call ''timeout'' according to their sole discretion; typical reasons are injuries, suspensions, or court cleaning.
After the dribble is picked up, the player has the right to another three seconds or three steps.
Team officials, substitutes, and suspended players must wait within this area.
The team handball game of today was codified at the end of the 19th century in northern Europe—primarily in Denmark, Germany, Norway and Sweden.
From this position, the chance of success is naturally very high.
If either goalkeeper deflects the ball over the outer goal line, their team stays in possession of the ball, in contrast to other sports like football.
* Left and right backcourt.
In the ''third wave'', the attackers use standardised attack patterns usually involving crossing and passing between the back court players who either try to pass the ball through a gap to their pivot, take a jumping shot from the backcourt at the goal, or lure the defence away from a wingman.
After referees award the ball to the opponents for whatever reason, the player currently in possession of the ball has to lay it down quickly, or else face a two-minute suspension.
The modern set of rules was published in 1917 in Germany, and had several revisions since.
Outside of one long edge of the playing field to both sides of the middle line are the substitution areas for each team.
The sport is usually played indoors, but outdoor variants exist in the forms of field handball and Czech handball (which were more common in the past) and beach handball.
However, they are allowed to stand immediately outside their own goal area even when the distance is less than three meters.
Their judgements are final and can be appealed against only if not in compliance with the rules.
Very fast teams will also try a 3–3 formation which is close to a switching man-to-man style.
If a player without the ball contacts the ground inside the goal perimeter, or the line surrounding the perimeter, he must take the most direct path out of it.
The referees are obliged to make their decisions "on the basis of their observations of facts".
It takes places from the spot where the interruption was caused, as long as this spot is outside of the free-throw line of the opposing team.
Outside of own D-zone, the goalkeeper is treated as a current field player, and has to follow field players' rules; holding or tackling an opponent player outside the area results in a direct disqualification.
This usually happens after certain events such as scored goals, off-court balls, turnovers and timeouts.
Each team consists of seven players on court and seven substitute players on the bench.
They must then either shoot, pass, or dribble the ball.
Only the goalkeepers are allowed to move freely within the goal perimeter, although they may not cross the goal perimeter line while carrying or dribbling the ball.
A red card results in an ejection from the game and a two-minute penalty for the team.
However, should a player cross the zone in an attempt to gain an advantage (e.g., better position) their team cedes the ball.
Therefore, carrying is completely prohibited, and results in a turnover.
Sometimes the execution must wait for a whistle blow by the referee.
* Pivot (left and right, if applicable).
The sport re-emerged onto the world stage as team handball for the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich.
The IHF defines 18 hand signals for quick visual communication with players and officials.
Execution requires the thrower to place one foot on the nearest outer line to the cause.
A handball match is led by two equal referees.
This must be fastened in such a way that a ball thrown into the goal does not leave or pass the goal under normal circumstances.
Handball is played on a court , with a goal in the centre of each end.
Opponent of the pivot.
The goalkeepers may participate in the normal play of their teammates.
The formations vary greatly from country to country, and reflect each country's style of play.
The thrower steps with one foot behind the  line with only the defending goalkeeper between him and the goal.
Penalties are given to players, in progressive format, for fouls that require more punishment than just a free-throw.
Men's handball was first played at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin as outdoors, and the next time at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich as indoors, and has been an Olympic sport since.
This field player becomes the designated goalkeeper on the court; and must wear some vest or bib to be identified as such.
The referees are supported by a ''scorekeeper'' and a ''timekeeper'' who attend to formal things such as keeping track of goals and suspensions, or starting and stopping the clock, respectively.
This right may only be invoked by team in ball possession.
Men's field handball was played at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin.
It is also played on Mediterranean games.
Substitution of players can be done in any number and at any time during game play.
6–0 is sometimes known as "flat defense", and all other formations are usually called "offensive defense".
All of these special throws require the thrower to obtain a certain position, and pose restrictions on the positions of all other players.
The goalkeeper resumes the play with a throw from within the zone ("goalkeeper throw").
Sometimes, the offense uses formations with two Pivot players.
An official is anybody who is neither player nor substitute.
However, if a free throw is awarded and the half or game ends, a direct throw at the goal is typically attempted, which occasionally goes in.
Depending on their positions, one is called ''field referee'' and the other ''goal referee''.
Due to its popularity in the region, the Eastern European countries that refined the event became the dominant force in the sport when it was reintroduced.
The goals are surrounded by a near-semicircular area, called the zone or the crease, defined by a line six meters from the goal.
The third wave evolves into the normal offensive play when all defenders not only reach the zone, but gain their accustomed positions.
A throw-off occurs at the beginning of each period and after the opposing team scores a goal.
The modern set of rules was published on 29 October 1917 by Max Heiser, Karl Schelenz, and Erich Konigh from Germany.
A coach or official can also be penalized progressively.
The thrower must await the whistle blow of the referee.
Penalty throws should trigger a timeout only for lengthy delays, such as a change of the goalkeeper.
;Seven-meter throw: A seven-meter throw is awarded when a clear chance of scoring is illegally prevented anywhere on the court by an opposing team player, official, or spectator.
The colors on both goals must be the same.
Each line on the court is part of the area it encompasses.
The goals are surrounded by a  zone where only the defending goalkeeper is allowed; goals must be scored by throwing the ball from outside the zone or while "jumping" into it.
Since 2012, representatives can call up to 3 team timeouts (up to twice per half), and may address the scorekeeper, timekeeper, and referees (before that, it was once per half); overtime and shootouts are considered extensions of the second half.
The three sides of the beams visible from the playing field must be painted alternatingly in two contrasting colors which both have to contrast against the background.
A player may receive a red card directly for particularly rough penalties.
The first international games were played under these rules, between Germany and Belgium for men in 1925 and between Germany and Austria for women in 1930.
The referees also use whistle blows to indicate infractions or to restart the play.
The thrower must touch the middle line with one foot, and all the other offensive players must stay in their half until the referee restarts the game.
;First wave: ''First wave'' attacks are characterised by the absence of defending players around their goal perimeter.
If a decision must be reached in a particular match (e.g., in a tournament) and it ends in a draw after regular time, there are at maximum two overtimes, each consisting of two straight 5-minute periods with a one-minute break in between.
The referees position themselves in such a way that the team players are confined between them.
The first international games were played under these rules for men in 1925 and for women in 1930.
Opponent of the center backcourt, may also be set against another specific backcourt player.
;Second wave: If the first wave is not successful and some defending players have gained their positions around the zone, the second wave comes into play: the remaining players advance with quick passes to locally outnumber the retreating defenders.
Women's team handball was added at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal.
Handball events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins.
Should these not decide the game either, the winning team is determined in a penalty shootout (best-of-five rounds; if still tied, extra rounds afterwards until won by one team).
Taking more than three steps at any time is considered travelling, and results in a turnover.
A shot or pass in the goal area is valid if completed ''before touching the floor''.
The ball must then be passed or shot, as further holding or dribbling will result in a ''double dribble'' turnover and a free throw for the other team.
However, not all of the following positions may be occupied depending on the formation or potential suspensions.
Since 2012, teams can call 3 ''team timeouts'' per game (up to two per half), which last one minute each.
They also keep an eye on the benches and notify the referees on substitution errors.
The International Handball Federation was formed in 1946, and  has 197 member federations.
The rules are laid out in the IHF's set of rules.
However, the court players may catch and touch the ball in the air within it as long as the player starts his jump outside the zone and releases the ball before he lands (landing inside the perimeter is allowed in this case as long as the ball has been released).
A player who is in possession of the ball may stand stationary for only three seconds, and may take only three steps.
It is also played during the Pan American Games, All-Africa Games, and Asian Games.
Many teams leverage this rule to score easy goals before the opposition has time to form a stable defense line.
The area always lies to the same side as the team's own goal.
Thus, it is usually advantageous to have tall players with a powerful shot for these positions.
The latter is another benefit for fast playing teams.
Such attacks typically occur after an intercepted pass or a steal, and if the defending team can switch fast to offence.
Exceptions are the 3:2:1 defense and n+m formation (e.g.
Teams usually try to occupy the left position with a right-handed player and vice versa.
A dashed near-semicircular line nine metres from the goal marks the free-throw line.
One of the recent samples is the €10 Greek Handball commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics.
That shirt has to be equal in colour and form to the goalkeeper's shirt, to avoid confusion.
Second wave attacks became much more important with the "fast throw-off" rule.
Some teams then substitute specialised offence players.
Handball teams are usually organised as clubs.
For example, an attacking player may catch a pass while launching inside the goal area, and then shoot or pass before touching the floor.
At half-time, teams switch sides of the court as well as benches.
The opponents of the left and right backcourts.
Since the 1995 world championship in Iceland, the competition has been every two years.
By the 19th century, there existed similar games of ''håndbold'' from Denmark, ''házená'' in the Czech Republic, ''hádzaná'' in Slovakia, ''gandbol'' in Ukraine, and ''torball'' in Germany.
Other offensive infractions that result in a turnover include charging and setting an illegal screen.
Some national bodies allow games with only a single referee in special cases like illness on short notice.
Typically the referee will give a warning yellow card for an illegal action; but, if the contact was particularly dangerous, like striking the opponent in the head, neck or throat, the referee can forego the warning for an immediate two-minute suspension.
A prior notification of the referees is not necessary.
Any infraction that prevents a clear scoring opportunity will result in a seven-meter penalty shot.
On the coin, the modern athlete directs the ball in his hands towards his target, while in the background the ancient athlete is just about to throw a ball, in a game known as cheirosphaira, in a representation taken from a black-figure pottery vase of the Archaic period.
There are a lot of variations in defensive formations.
Free-throws are the equivalent to free-kicks in association football; however, conceding them is typically not seen as poor sportsmanship for the defending side, and in itself, they carry no major disadvantages.
The usual formations of the defense are 6–0, when all the defense players line up between the  and  lines to form a wall; the 5–1, when one of the players cruises outside the  perimeter, usually targeting the center forwards while the other 5 line up on the  line; and the less common 4–2 when there are two such defenders out front.
After 1919 these rules were improved by Karl Schelenz.
A player may dribble as many times as they want (though, since passing is faster, it is the preferred method of attack), as long as during each dribble the hand contacts only the top of the ball.
By July 2009, the IHF listed 166 member federations - approximately 795,000 teams and 19 million players.
Body contact is permitted by the defenders trying to stop the attackers from approaching the goal.
Modern handball is played on a court , with a goal in the center of each end.
Neither official is allowed to enter the playing court without the permission of the referees.
The defending players must keep a distance of at least three meters from the thrower until the ball leaves his hand.
5+1), where m players defend some offensive player in man coverage (instead of the usual zone coverage).
During the next several decades, indoor handball flourished and evolved in the Scandinavian countries.
* Back center (left and right).
Each team is allowed to have a maximum of four team officials seated on the benches.
;Third wave: The time during which the second wave may be successful is very short, as then the defenders closed the gaps around the zone.
A red-carded player has to leave the playing area completely.
There are records of handball-like games in medieval France, and among the Inuit in Greenland, in the Middle Ages.
In a penalty shot, throwing the ball against the head of a goalkeeper who is not moving is punished by a direct disqualification ("red card").
These positions automatically switch on ball turnover.
The game was codified at the end of the 19th century in northern Europe and Germany.
The game is fast and high-scoring: professional teams now typically score between 20 and 35 goals each, though lower scores were not uncommon until a few decades ago.
Should the referees disagree on any occasion, a decision is made on mutual agreement during a short timeout; or, in case of punishments, the more severe of the two comes into effect.
The areas usually contain the benches as seating opportunities.
Other officials typically include physicians or managers.
It must be cleared by the referees.
Similarly, violation of the zone by a defending player is penalized only if they do so in order to gain an advantage in defending.
''Doubling'' occurs when a diving attacking player passes to another diving team-mate.
In 1926, the Congress of the International Amateur Athletics Federation nominated a committee to draw up international rules for field handball.
One official must be the designated representative who is usually the team manager.
The women's world championship has been played since 1957.
If one player manages to step up to the perimeter or catches the ball at this spot, he becomes unstoppable by legal defensive means.
;Free-throw: A free-throw restarts the play after an interruption by the referees.
The goalkeeper must keep a distance of , which is marked by a short tick on the floor.
;Throw-off: A throw-off takes place from the center of the court.
The IHF also organizes women's and men's junior world championships.
However, this implies that these players must play in the defence should the opposing team be able to switch quickly to offence.
This area is delineated by two quarter circles with a radius of six metres around the far corners of each goal post and a connecting line parallel to the goal line.
The goal posts and the crossbar must be made out of the same material (e.g., wood or aluminium) and feature a quadratic cross section with sides of .
This player tends to intermingle with the defence, setting picks and attempting to disrupt the defence's formation.
The most recent commemorative coin featuring handball is the British 50 pence coin, part of the series of coins commemorating the London 2012 Olympic Games.
There is evidence of ancient Roman women playing a version of handball called ''expulsim ludere''.
Only the defending goalkeeper is allowed inside this zone.
The matchup drew 44,189 spectators to Commerzbank Arena in Frankfurt, exceeding the previous record of 36,651 set at Copenhagen's Parken Stadium during the 2011 Danish Cup final.
Notable scoring opportunities can occur when attacking players jump into the goal area.
During half-time, substitution areas are swapped.
Thus, these positions are commonly held by quick players.
If the ball crosses the outer goal line, a throw-in is awarded only if the defending field players touched the ball last.
Goalkeepers are allowed outside the goal area, but are not allowed to cross the goal area boundary with the ball in their hands.
* Centre backcourt.
Carrying the ball into the six-meter zone results either in ball possession by the goalkeeper (by attacker) or turnover (by defender).
If it were not for this rule, it would be easy for an attacking team to stall the game indefinitely, as it is difficult to intercept a pass without at the same time conceding dangerous openings towards the goal.
