Examples of this include the «quasi-bifaces» that sometimes appear in strata from the Gravettian, Solutrean and Magdalenian periods in France and Spain, the crude bifacial pieces of the Lupemban culture (9000&nbsp;B.&nbsp;C.) or the pyriform tools found near Sagua La Grande in Cuba.
They are also known in Mousterian industries.
However, this type of wear was reworked by means of a '''secondary working''' as discussed above.
In addition, their adaptability makes them effective in an enormous variety of tasks, from the most heavy duty such as digging in soil, felling trees or breaking bones to the most delicate such as cutting ligaments, slicing meat or perforating a variety of materials.
In addition, and given their mass, they may also be used as a lithic core to obtain flakes that could be used as knives or transformed for specialized uses through retouching.
The axis of symmetry that divides a biface in two is called the ''morphological axis'' and the ''main face'' is usually the most regular and better worked.
Equally the artisan may concentrate the most effort in the manufacture so that the quality or suitability of the raw material is less important.
Map showing the approximate distribution of those cultures using bifaces during the Middle Pleistocene (Acheulean)
For this reason it is misleading to think of them simply as ''axes'', they could have been used for digging, cutting, scraping, chopping, piercing, hammering etc.
In this way more effort is invested in obtaining a good foundation, but time is saved on shaping the stone, that is the effort is focussed on the start of the operational chain.
The resulting artefact is usually easily recognizable as they are large and have irregular edges, as the removed flakes leave behind pronounced percussion bulbs and compression rings.
Taking this into account, the following is to be considered a guide, based on traditional concepts, strongly influenced by the so-called ''«Bordes method»'' (a basically morphological classification system used by some schools, which is possibly now out-dated) that may be useful for general use.
Contemporary experiments in knapping have demonstrated the relative ease with which a hand axe can be made, which could go some way in explaining their success.
He defined eight variants, including an elongated form (L/m > 1.6) and another that is more irregular that has been called ''Subcordiform''.
It could be thought that this is a mistake or an error.
The detailed study of the manufacture of a subpopulation of hand axes belonging to a given lithic industry will allow a precise description to be made regarding the manufacturing process and permit statistical comparison with other groups of hand axe.
''Elongated bifaces''
This heel acts as a handle as it is easy to grip»'' (this idea has not been completely discarded, but as it has not been scientifically proven it is not commonly used).
Evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller follows on their example and has said that hand axes have characteristics which make them suitable for being subject to sexual selection forces, such as  that they were made for over a million years throughout Africa, Europe and Asia, they were made in large numbers, and most were impractical for utilitarian use.
Hand axes are mainly made of flint, but  rhyolites,  phonolites,  quartzites and other rather coarse rocks were used as well.
Later Mousterian hand axes were produced with a soft billet of antler or wood and are much thinner, more symmetrical and have a straight border.
There are no studies that allow comparison as to whether the use of a soft hammer increases the yield per unit weight of raw material, or regarding the difference in energy use between the two hammer types.
There is very little evidence of impact damage in most handaxes.
In both cases a variety of objects are found, triangular, oval and other leafpoint, there are also invasive hand axes and unifaces.
File:Biface Silex Venerque MHNT PRE .2009.0.194.1 Fond.jpg|A biface found in Venerque, France.
Image:Ateriense Punta foliácea.png|Aterian leafpoint piece
Juan Vilanova i Piera published similar works in Spain during the 19th Century and this work was continued by José Pérez de Barradas and Casiano del Prado at the start of the 20th Century.
Hand axes are most commonly made from rounded pebbles or nodules, but many are also made from a large flake.
He has also identified that the point of another hand axe has been used as a drill that was turned clockwise.
The discovery in 1998 of an  oval hand axe of excellent workmanship in the Sima de los Huesos in the Atapuerca Mountains mixed in with the fossil remains of ''Homo heidelbergensis'' reignited this controversy.
However a thrown hand axe would not usually have penetrated deeply enough to cause very serious injuries.
The archaeological records that he handled led Leroi-Gourhan to be surprised by the rapid progress towards symmetry and balance.
* '''Partial bifaces''': The cortex is present on the base and central part of the tool.
Other collections were made by aficionados, whose interests were not scientific, so that they only collected the best, those objects they considered to be the most outstanding, abandoning the humbler elements that were sometimes the key to interpreting an archaeological site.
Marek Kohn and Steven Mithen have independently arrived at the explanation that symmetric hand axes have been favored by sexual selection as fitness indicators.
* '''Macroscopic traces of use''': Microscopes are not the only tools that provide clues to a hand axe's use, some were used with such force that marks were left that are clearly visible.
They are usually associated with periods of highly developed tool making such as the end of the Acheulean (e.g.
There are hand axes where the cortex is unrecognizable due to the complete working that it has undergone, which has eliminated any vestige of the original cortex.
All these measurements allow a number of morphological and technical ratios to be established (for example, the relationship between the weight and the length of the cutting edges, or the relationship between the hammer used to form the piece and the angle obtained etc.
This type of study is termed exploratory data analysis.
Image:Pieza foliacea bifacial-1.png|Stillbay leafpoint piece
The word ''«biface»'', was used for the first time in 1920 by the French antiquarian André Vayson de Pradenne.
Studies in the 1990s at Boxgrove, in which a butcher attempted to cut up a carcass with a hand axe, revealed that the hand axe was perfect for getting at bone marrow.
The American Nicholas Toth reached similar conclusions for pieces from the Spanish archaeological site in Ambrona (Soria); Analysis carried out by the Spaniard Manuel Domínguez-Rodrigo and co-workers on the primitive Acheulean site in Peninj (Tanzania) on a series of tools dated as 1.5 m years old shows clear microwear produced by plant phytoliths, suggesting that the hand axes were used to work wood.
This will minimize the initial effort but will result in a greater effort at the end of the operational chain.
* '''Elongation index''': which separates common bifaces from the ''short'' (and, occasionally, from the ''elongated'').
* '''Hand axes with a cutting edge around the whole circumference''': The whole circumference of these utensils is knapped to a cutting edge, although there may still be residual areas of cortex on either face, without them affecting the cutting edge's effectiveness.
In all cases it must be small, leaving cutting edges on both sides.
A tool may even have been recycled later, this has led François Bordes to note that hand axes ''«are sometimes found in the Upper Palaeolithic.
Given that this is the only lithic remains from this section of the site (that was possibly a cemetery), combined with the piece's qualities has meant that it received special treatment, it was even baptized Excalibur and it became a ''star item''.
Remains of their activities have also been excavated in Spain at sites in the Guadix-Baza basin and near Atapuerca.
* '''Cross sectional or planar index''': which divides the ''thick'' bifaces from the ''flat'' ones and is only used on certain types.
Some early examples of hand axes, date back to 1.6mya in the later Oldowan (Mode I), called the "developed Oldowan" by Mary Leakey, but these hand axes became more abundant in mode II Acheulean industries that appear in what is now Southern Ethiopia around 1.4 million years ago, although some of the best examples come from 1.2 million year old deposits in Olduvai Gorge.
This allows easier manipulation and fewer knaps are required to finish the tool, it is also easier to obtain straight edges.
Working with a soft hammer allows a knapper greater control of the knapping and also there is less waste of the raw material allowing the production of longer, sharper, more uniform edges that will increase the working life of a tool.
'''ALMOND-SHAPED'''
'''The Cross section''' is taken across a hand axe's central area or near to the apex.
* '''Hand axes formed with a hard hammer and with edges also modified using a hard hammer''' have a more balanced appearance as the modification consists of a second (or third) series of blows to make the piece more uniform and provide a better finish.
''Almond-shaped bifaces ''
In summary, despite the recognition of hand axes by many typological schools and under different archaeological paradigms, and despite being easily recognisable (at least the most typical examples), it is almost impossible to easily define them as a distinct set or sub-set.
He says that a single design persisting across such a span of time and space cannot be explained by cultural imitation and draws a parallel between bowerbirds' bowers (built to attract potential mates and used only during courtship) and Pleistocene hominids' hand axes.
This does not mean that all hand axes are perfectly symmetrical.
The hand axes arising from this methodology have a more ''classical'' profile with either a more symmetrical  ''«almond»'' or ''«oval»'' shape and with a lower proportion of the cortex of the original core.
This classification is sufficiently trustworthy when dealing with ''classic hand axes'', which are, precisely, those that can be defined and catalogued using a system that measures dimensions and mathematical rations, while disregarding nearly all subjective criteria.
The modern day villages along the Sepik river in New Guinea continue to use tools that are virtually identical to hand axes to clear parts of the forest.
In order to study the use of individual items it is necessary to look for traces of wear such as pseudo-retouches, breakage or wear, including areas that are polished.
Up until that time their origins were thought to be natural or supernatural (they were called ''«Thunderstones»'' because popular tradition held that they had fallen from the sky during storms or were formed inside the earth by a lightning strike and then appeared at the surface; in fact they are still used in some rural areas as an amulet to protect against storms).
He calls hand axe building a "genetically inherited propensity to construct a certain type of object."
By 1.8 mya early man was present in Europe, as shown by the discovery of skulls and Oldowan tools from that time in Dmanisi, Georgia.
In addition, as hand axes can be recycled, resharpened and even remade throughout their lives, they could have been used for many different tasks during their working life.
They do not require as much planning as other types of object, generally made from flakes, that are less striking but without a doubt more sophisticated.
: the Micoquien) or the Mousterian.
These are dated to about 2.6 mya.
There are other indexes, beyond those that Bordes insists must be applied to what he called classic bifaces.
The biface is characteristic of the end of the Acheulean and was developed during the Riss-Würm interglacial period.Micoquien bifaces are very similar to lanceate ones, they are almond-shaped (2.75  1.6) and thick (m/e Both lanceate and Micoquian bifaces are usually associated together, in fact it is possible that reiterated sharpening of a lanceate biface gave rise to a Micoquian biface.
The overall area that is not knapped may extend to up to 2/3 of a tool's length.
However, there are a number of problems that need to be overcome in carrying out this type of analysis: the first resides in the difficulty in observing the larger pieces using a microscope, this has meant that despite the millions of known pieces, very few have been thoroughly studied.
Tony Baker suggested that the hand axe was not a tool, but a core from which flakes had been removed and used as tools (flake core theory).
Gabriel de Mortillet was already emphasising the importance of the presence or absence of the cortex around the edge of a utensil in the 19th century:  ''«Even on some of the best worked pieces it is common to see, sometimes on the base but more often on the side, a small area that has not been worked, that is uncut.
Having said this, the degree of separation between the phases is not certain, as the work could have been carried out in one operation.
Notwithstanding this it is necessary to note tools characteristics: type of flake, heel, knap direction.
'''The Edges''': In morphological terms a hand axes edge's can be convex, rectilinear or concave, in addition they can be more or less even.
Apart from these generalities, which are common to all carved archaeological pieces, hand axes need a technical analysis of their manufacture and a morphological analysis.
It is therefore necessary to start either working with a hard hammer or with a flake as a core as its edge will be fragile (flat, smooth pebbles are also useful).
This fact does not imply that these tools cannot be classified along with biface hand axes and it is also no indication of their age, the presence of uniface hand axes is not an indicator of chronology.
Its technical name (biface) comes from the fact that the archetypical model is a generally bifacial Lithic flake with an almond-shaped (amygdaloidal) morphology.
As André Leroi-Gourhan explained, it is important to ask what was understood of art in such distant times, above all taking into account the different psychologies of non-modern humans and ourselves.
pages 306-307; Hayden, Carol ''et al'', Jeske, etc.
The following types of cross section are commonly seen: triangular (sub-triangular and backed triangular), rhombic (rhomboidal and backed rhomboidal), trapezium (trapezoid and backed trapezoidal), pentagon (pentagonal and backed pentagonal), polygonal, biconvex or lenticular (sub lenticular) etc.
'''Cortex''': this refers to the natural external cortex or ''rind'' of the tool stone (pebble, rock, nodule, flake or slab of stone) that due to erosion and the physical-chemical alterations of weathering is different from the stone's interior.
Other visible marks can be left as the scars left by retouching, on occasions it is possible to distinguish them from marks left by the initial manufacture.
The publications of John Frere, in Britain, and more importantly of Boucher de Perthes, in France, throughout the 19th Century described pieces that were balanced, full of symmetry and crafted with a surprising formal purity.
It was therefore realised that such tools could only have been made by intelligent, even numinous minds with a certain aesthetic:
The most common hand axes have a pointed end and rounded base, which gives them their characteristic shape, and both faces have been knapped to remove the natural cortex, at least partially.
The most characteristic and common shape that a hand axe has is a pointed area at one end, cutting edges along its side and a rounded base (this includes hand axes with a lanceolate and amygdaloidal morphology as well as others from the same family).
Many people originally denied that modern day humans evolved from inferior beings.
Hand axes dating from the lower Palaeolithic have been found on the Asian continent, on the Indian subcontinent and in the Middle East (to the south of Parallel 40° N), but they were absent from the area to the east of the 90° E meridian.
It is usually composed of flint or chert.
In North America, hand axes make up one of the dominant tool industries, starting from the terminal Pleistocene and continuing throughout the Holocene.
If there have been a number of implements used it is essential to discover the order they were used in and the result obtained by each one.
Obsidian, natural volcanic glass, shatters easily and was rarely used.
This hand axe came from the famous archaeological site at Clacton-on-Sea (all of these site are located in the east of England).
In the ''Almond-shaped bifaces '' (along with the elongation index) it distinguishes between the amygdaloidal bifaces (thick) and the cordiform bifaces (flat).
* Hand axes found in Africa come from both the Aterian culture of North Africa and the Stillbay culture from the east of the continent.
Their presence, which is quite normal in the Perigordian I, is often due, in other levels, to the collection of Mousterian or Acheulean tools.»''.
It is the same in Dutch where the expression used is 'vuistbijl' which literally means «fist axe» and the same occurs in other languages.
The use of a soft hammer requires greater use of force by the flintknapper and a steeper learning curve although it offers more flakes for less raw material.
This type of manufacturing style is generally an indication of the age when a tool was made but it cannot be taken as an indicator of chronology unless a tool is accompanied by other archaeological data that provide a context and allows the age of the tool to be estimated.
'''Amygdaloidal'''They are the most common biface in this group, they are defined by their almond shape, symmetrical tendency and metric indices common to this category.
Each type of tool could have been used for a number of different tasks.
Chopping wood and removing tree bark
Hand axe should also not be identified with axe, which has unfortunately been somewhat over-used in lithic typology to describe a wide variety of stone tools, particularly at a time when the true use of the items being described was not understood.
However, flint is surrounded by a limestone cortex that is soft and unsuitable for the manufacture of stone tools.
H. G. Wells proposed in 1899 that hand axes were used as missile weapons to hunt prey – an interpretation supported by Professor William H. Calvin of University of Washington, in Seattle who has suggested that some of the rounder examples of Acheulean hand axes were used as hunting projectiles or as «killer frisbees» meant to be thrown at a herd of animals at a water hole so as to stun one of them.
In addition, as tools they are not very demanding in terms of maintenance nor in the choice of raw materials, any rock will suffice so long as it supports a conchoidal fracture.
A hand axe has a long blade with different curves and angles, some will be sharper and others more resistant, it will also have points, notches etc.
Both these cases relate to Mousterian cultures, although they are relatively late and have their own style, at the end of the so-called African ''Middle Stone Age''.
Hand axes and bifacial items are not exclusive to the Lower Palaeolithic period in the Old World, they appear throughout the world and in many different prehistorical epochs, without necessarily implying an ancient origin.
The hand axes obtained in this way are usually balanced, symmetrical and sometimes they are even relatively smooth.
* '''Microwear analysis''': The use-wear analysis of Palaeolithic hand axes has been carried out on findings from emblematic sites across nearly all of Western Europe.
Stated more formally, the idealised model combines a series of well defined properties, but ''none of these properties are necessary or sufficient'' to characterize any item as a hand axe.
The apogee of hand axe manufacture took place in a wide area of the Old World, especially during the Riss glaciation, in a cultural complex that can almost be described as being ''cosmopolitan'' and which is known as the '''Acheulean'''.
Hand axes should be considered as nothing more than another of the many signs of the intellectual development of primitive humans.
Digging for tubers, animals, water
It is currently thought that the Micoquien was not a separate culture from the Acheulean, but one of its final phases, and that Micoquian bifaces may be one of the few types of biface that can be used as a chronological marker, that is a so-called ''index fossil''.
The latter means that if the base is short they are virtually identical at the terminal end, sometimes making it difficult to decide how to orient the piece.In practice they are equal to the ovoid tools in all their dimensional ratios, except that the elliptical bifaces are usually more elongated (L/m > 1.6) and their maximum width (m) is nearer to their mid length.Bordes explained that elliptical bifaces are found throughout the Acheulean and into the Mousterian, with the only difference being that the finishing became more careful and balanced over time.
It is not always the case that the retouching had the objective of reducing an edge's irregularities or deformities, in fact, it has been shown that in some cases the retouching was carried out to sharpen an edge that had been blunted by use or a point that had deteriorated.
The triangular bifaces were initially defined by Henri Breuil as flat based, globular and covered with cortex, with two straight edges, converging at an acute apical zone.François Bordes later redefined the definition, making it more narrow (op.
They are rare and at the same time spectacular for their aesthetics.
They generally have a regular biconvex cross-section and the intersection of the two faces forms an edge with an acute angle, usually of around 30°.
Furthermore, hand axes can be good handicaps in Amotz Zahavi's handicap principle theory: the learning costs are high, there are risks of injury, they require physical strength, hand-eye coordination, planning, patience, pain tolerance, and resistance to infection from cuts and bruises when making or using such a hand axe.
The main advantage of using a soft hammer rather than a hard one is that a flintknapper is able to remove broader, thinner flakes with barely developed heels, which allows a cutting edge to be maintained or even improved for the minimal amount of raw material wastage.
The raw material is an important factor to be taken into account, not just because of the result that can be obtained by working it, but also in order to understand the economy of prehistoric humans and their movements.
Hand axes were used in a variety of heavy physical tasks.
Older hand axes were produced by direct percussion with a stone hammer and can be distinguished by their thickness and a sinuous border.
A soft hammer is not suitable for all types of percussion platform and it cannot be used on certain types of raw material, both need to be suitable for this technique.
This area can be at the base, side or oblique.
'''Lithic reduction''' is the process by which a hand axe is manufactured.
Most early European sites yield "mode 1" or Oldowan assemblages.
These are simple typological conventions that allow specialists to better understand each other.
The use of hand axes survived during the Middle Palaeolithic in a much smaller area, being especially important during the Mousterian, up to the middle of the Last glacial period.
Many partially worked hand axes simply do not require further work in order to be effective tools, they can be considered to be simple hand axes.
'''The Terminal Zone''' of a hand axe is, generally, the narrowest part opposite the base.
cit., 1961: pages 58–59).
If their manufactured form is shallow, they are difficult to distinguish from discoid cores of centripetal extraction, or if they are ''simple bifaces'' they look like simple flakes that have been retouched or chopping tools made from flakes.It is common that this type of biface arises from the continuous resharpening of the active region of a longer biface, that slowly becomes shorter, like a pencil.
Firstly, symmetry has been achieved after millennia of technological perfecting, so it is not surprising that the oldest pieces are slightly asymmetrical.
This phase is commonly thought of as being the most important in the fabrication of a hand axe, although it is not always the case, as has been discussed for hand axes made from flakes or a suitable tool stone.
'''The Proximal End''' or base of a hand axe is opposite the terminal end (and is usually broader and thicker), it can be described as follows: ''reserved'', partially or totally worked, but not cut; or ''cut'', with a rounded (polygonal), flat or pointed end.
Their name, obviously, is due to their ''«similar shape to the blade of a lance»'' and it was also coined by Boucher de Perthes (''«lance axe»'') and it quickly became popular.Bordes defined a lanceate biface as elongated (L/m > 1.6) with rectilinear or slightly convex edges, extremely acute apex and rounded base (2.75 They are usually balanced, well finished, with perfectly straightened edges formed by careful grinding.
Further, simple bifaces may have been created from a suitable tool stone but they rarely show evidence of retouching.
It is characteristic of the lower Acheulean and middle Palaeolithic (Mousterian) periods.
However, new archaeological evidence from Baise, China shows that there were also hand axes in eastern Asia.
As a source for flake tools
(that is, tools made from specialized flakes).
The Micoquian biface receives its name from the French cave of '''La Micoque''' in the community of Les Eyzies-de-Tayac (in the Dordogne), which also gave its name to a period at the end of the Acheulean, the Micoquien.
Apart from their shape, which gives them their name (''amygdala'' in Latin means almond), they are bifaces of regular length (1.3 Amygdaloidal bifaces are nearly identical to cordiform bifaces, except that the latter are thick and the former are flat.
The links examined in this type of study start with the extraction methods of the raw material, then include the actual manufacture of the item, its use, maintenance throughout its working life and finally its disposal.
The modification is often called retouching and is sometimes carried out using invasive retouching or using softer, marginal, shallow blows that are only applied to the most marked irregularities leaving scale-like marks.
''Triangular bifaces'' (the most regular)or ''sub triangular'' (for the irregular ones)
In the Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania), the places where the raw materials are most readily available are some ten kilometres from the nearest settlements.
When describing the morphology of a hand axe it is also important to note whether the whole perimeter of the tool has been formed into a working edge of only selected areas.
not pointed) and lastly some hand axes have terminal ends that are transversal to the piece's morphological axis these are cleaver or spatulate hand axes.
The pioneers of the study of Palaeolithic tools first suggested that bifaces were used as axes or at least for use in hard physical activities.
Only some of these attributes are necessary for a positive identification, although an object may lack others.
The index is calculated using '''L/m''' and the thresholds are:
The earliest Acheulean sites in Europe only appear around 0.5 mya.
It appears that the findings at Sagua La Grande have been misinterpreted perhaps from a misunderstanding of the concept or due to contamination of the Spanish language by English.
For this reason an unnatural and classical concept of symmetry is not always visible in real archaeological pieces.
Notwithstanding all this, for practical reasons the profiles' of hand axes can be classified into the following categories:
The shape of this type of hand axe is similar to that of the core as the irregularities formed during knapping are not corrected, in fact, the notches obtained were exploited in the production sequence.
This means that although it was possible to manufacture a hand axe using a soft hammer it is reasonable to suppose that there was an initial phase to prepare a ''blank'' followed by one or more phases of retouching to finish the piece.
Keeley, basing his observations on various archaeological sites in England, has proposed that in base settlements where it was possible to predict future actions and where there was a greater control on routine activities, the preferred tools were racloirs, backed knives, scrapers, punches, etc.
File:Miorcani flint.jpg|A hand axe made of Miorcani flint from the Cenomanian chalky marl layer of the Moldavian Plateau.
In fact, according to today's definitions a hand axe is not always a bifacial item and there are many bifacial items that are not hand axes at all.
In the same way there are other terms used to describe a hand axe's morphology (or that of any other worked lithic object) that refer to purely technical concepts.
These other indexes apply to the other types of bifaces (partial bifaces, bifaces with an unworked base, or cleaver, spatulate, Abbevillean, nucleiform bifaces etc.
Manufacturing a hand axe from a flake is actually easier than from a pebble, it is also quicker as flakes are more likely to be closer to the desired shape.
As explained above, the word ''biface'' refers to something different in English than ''biface'' in French or ''bifaz'' in Spanish, which could lead to many misunderstandings.
What seems clear in this controversy is that, basically, a hand axe can be interpreted as a sign of intelligence.
The cordiform bifaces were common in both the Acheulean and the Mousterian.
A hammerstone was the most common percussive tool used during the Acheulean.
Other theories suggest the shape is part tradition and partly a by-product of the way it is manufactured.
However, the general impression of these tools has been too rigid as the first definitions of hand axes were based on ''ideal pieces'' (or ''classic'') that were of such perfect shape that they caught the attention of non-experts.
It is notable that in Europe, and particularly in France and England, the oldest hand axes only appear after the Beestonian Glaciation&ndash;Mindel Glaciation, approximately 750,000 years ago, during the so-called ''Cromerian complex'', although they became more widely produced during the Abbevillian tradition (Abbevillian is an obsolete name for a tradition now seen as part of the Oldowan, it is also applied to distinguish certain crudely worked bifaces).
In the same book, Keeley states that a number of the hand axes studied were used as knives to cut meat (such as hand axes from Hoxne and Caddington).
It is therefore not very useful as an indicator of chronology (in order for it to be considered as a marker it has to be accompanied by other complementary and independent archaeological data.
If the item is in a good condition is possible to submit it to use-wear analysis, which is discussed in more detail below.
They are highly characteristic of the latter stages of the Acheulean – or the Micoquian, as it is known – and of the Mousterian in the Acheulean Tradition (they are closely related to the Micoquian bifaces described below)).A biface with a lanceate profile that is more coarsely worked and irregular, possibly due to a lack of finishing it is usually called a ''«ficron style biface»'' from the French term.
The modification of edges with a hard hammer was carried out from the beginning of the Acheulean and persisted into the Musterian.
In the case of chert, quartz or quartzite, this alteration is basically mechanical and apart from the colour and the wear it has the same characteristics as the interior in terms of (hardness, toughness etc.).
All of this combined in one piece and, given the right circumstances, it is possible to make use of loose flakes.
Lionel Balout has stated ''«the term should be rejected as a erroneous interpretation of these objects that are not "axes"»''.
Its most common shape is pointed, more or less acute or oval, some hand axes have terminal ends that are rounded or polygonal (i.e.
However, caution must be exercised as manufacturing with a soft hammer should not be used as the sole method for dating any strata.
In the opinion of Professor Luis Benito del Rey of the University of Salamanca: ''«The term "biface" should be reserved for items from before the Würm II-III interstadial»'', although he also admits that certain later objects could ''exceptionally'' be called bifaces (Benito del Rey, op.
* '''Base-rounding index''': allows classic bifaces to be separated into three families (''triangular'', ''almond-shaped'' and ''oval''): it is established using the '''L/a''' ratio that provides the following separation thresholds:
In some cases this reconstruction is easily identifiable and was carried out using techniques such as the "coup de tranchet" (''trinchet blow'' in French), or simply with scale or scalariform retouches that alter an edge's symmetry and line.
For example, the Folsom point and Clovis point traditions (collectively known as the fluted points) are associated with Paleo Indians, some of the first people to colonize the new world (see Models of migration to the New World).
They were described very early on: Boucher de Perthes published a definition in 1857 which has been little changed since then.Bordes stated that ovoid bifaces are similar to discoid one but more elongated (1.3 It has been suggested that ovoid bifaces appeared in the middle of the Acheulean, although they cannot be used for dating purposes and along with the amygdaloids they are the most common type of biface among the Acheulean cultures of the Old World.
Hand axes were the first prehistoric tools to be recognized as such: the first published representation of a hand axe was drawn by John Frere and appeared in a British publication in 1800.
