If dogs had eaten off those plates, they'd have washed them."
Aaron (then age 39) hit 40 home runs in 392 at-bats, ending the 1973 season one home run short of the record.
and had such a dominant year that one sportswriter was prompted to say, "Henry Aaron led the league in everything except hotel accommodations."
'''Henry Louis "Hank" Aaron''' (born February 5, 1934), nicknamed '''"Hammer"''', or '''"Hammerin' Hank"''', is a retired American Major League Baseball (MLB) right fielder.
Jewelry and two BMW vehicles were stolen.
Statues of Aaron stand outside the front entrance of both Turner Field and Miller Park.
Aaron also owns Mini, Land Rover, Toyota, Hyundai and Honda dealerships throughout Georgia, as part of the Hank Aaron Automotive Group.
That year, he also played in his last and 24th All-Star Game (25th All-Star Game selection); he lined out to Dave Concepción as a pinch-hitter in the second inning.
In 1957, Aaron won his only NL MVP Award, as he had his first brush with the triple crown.
Aaron's time with the Braves did not come without problems.
While cannons were fired in celebration, two college students  sprinted onto the field and jogged alongside Aaron for part of his circuit around the bases, temporarily startling him.
The Braves moved from Milwaukee to Atlanta after the 1965 season.
That same year, Aaron met his future wife, Barbara Lucas.
On July 31, 1969, Aaron hit his 537th home run, passing Mickey Mantle's total; this moved Aaron into third place on the career home run list, after Willie Mays and Babe Ruth.
Aaron appeared briefly in the Negro American League and in minor league baseball before starting his major league career.
While on the Bears, Aaron earned $3 per game ($ today), which was a dollar more than he got while on the Athletics.
The 1952 season proved to be very beneficial for Aaron.
His family could not afford baseball equipment, so he practiced by hitting bottle caps with sticks.
The award is given annually to the baseball hitters voted the most effective in each respective league.
Aaron now owns Hank Aaron BMW of south Atlanta in Union City, Georgia, where he gives an autographed baseball with every car sold.
The next day, Aaron made his first spring training start for the Braves' major league team, playing in left field and hitting a home run.
Former Braves minor league player and sportswriter Pat Jordan said, "Aaron gave Geraghty much of the credit for his own swift rise to stardom."
In that announcement, Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig also announced that Aaron would be playing a major role in the management of Braves, forming programs through major league baseball that will encourage the influx of minorities into baseball.
His teammates are at home plate.
Aaron hit his 755th and final home run on July 20, 1976, at Milwaukee County Stadium off Dick Drago of the California Angels, which stood as the MLB career home run record until it was broken in 2007 by Barry Bonds.
He was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1982.
He was one of the first African Americans to play in the league.
Braves management wanted him to break the record in Atlanta, and were therefore going to have Aaron sit out the first three games of the season.
Aaron hit .314 with 27 home runs and 106 RBI, in 1955.
He played 21 seasons for the Milwaukee/Atlanta Braves in the National League (NL) and 2 seasons for the Milwaukee Brewers in the American League (AL), from 1954 through 1976.
The Braves were able to speak to the draft board, making the case that Aaron could be the player to integrate the Southern Association the following season with the Atlanta Crackers.
Aaron is in second place in home runs (755) and at-bats (12,364), and in third place in games played (3,298).
Years later, Aaron remembered:
After this, Aaron returned to school to finish his secondary education, attending the Josephine Allen Institute, a private high school in Alabama.
In 1999, MLB created the Hank Aaron Award, to commemorate the 25th anniversary of Aaron's surpassing of Babe Ruth's career home run mark of 714 home runs and to honor Aaron's contributions to baseball.
When Aaron traveled around Jacksonville, Florida, and the surrounding areas, he was often separated from his team because of Jim Crow laws.
Playing off the intense interest in their perceived rivalry, Aaron and Bonds made a television commercial that aired during Super Bowl XLI, shortly before the start of the 2007 baseball season, in which Aaron jokingly tried to persuade Bonds to retire before breaking the record.
In 1958, Aaron's wife noted that during the offseason he liked "to sit and watch those shooting westerns."
Aaron resides near Atlanta.
Aaron received an outpouring of public support in response to the bigotry.
When the city of Atlanta was converting the 1996 Olympic Stadium into a new baseball stadium, many local residents hoped the stadium would be named for Hank Aaron.
In the same game, Eddie Mathews hit two home runs, the first of a record 863 home runs the pair would hit as teammates.
Aaron hit his first major league home run on April 23, also off Raschi.
Aaron established the record for most seasons with thirty or more home runs in the National League.
Lucy says in the August 11 strip, "Hank Aaron is a great player...but you!
Two days later, one of the children succumbed.
The fireworks are going.
Milwaukee went on to win the World Series against the New York Yankees, the defending champions.
Aaron dedicated the new exhibit "Hank Aaron-Chasing the Dream" at the Baseball Hall of Fame on April 25, 2009.
The Braves purchased Aaron from the Clowns for $10,000,  which GM John Quinn thought a steal as he stated that he felt that Aaron was a $100,000 property.
But Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn ruled that he had to play two games in the first series.
The book's title is a play on his nickname, "The Hammer" or "Hammerin' Hank", and the title of the folk song "If I Had a Hammer".
Playing in the infield, Aaron continued to develop as a ballplayer and made the Northern League's All-Star team.
The trade re-united Aaron with former teammate Del Crandall, who was now managing the Brewers.
As the 1974 season began, Aaron's pursuit of the record caused a small controversy.
: "We had breakfast while we were waiting for the rain to stop, and I can still envision sitting with the Clowns in a restaurant behind Griffith Stadium and hearing them break all the plates in the kitchen after we finished eating.
The award honors the best overall offensive performer in the American and National League.
On January 8, 2001, Hank Aaron was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Bill Clinton.
That ball is gonna be-eee... Outta here!
Aaron attended Central High School as a freshman and a sophomore.
Aaron was born in Mobile, Alabama, to Herbert Aaron, Sr. and Estella (Pritchett) Aaron.
In 2001, a recreational trail in Milwaukee connecting Miller Park with Lake Michigan along the Menomonee River was dedicated as the "Hank Aaron State Trail".
As Bonds began to close in on the record during the 2007 season, Aaron let it be known that, although he recognized Bonds' achievements, he would not be present when Bonds broke the record.
In 1953, the Braves promoted him to the Jacksonville Braves, their Class-A affiliate in the South Atlantic League.
Henry Aaron is coming around third.
He's sittin' on 714.
Over the course of his record-breaking 23-year career, Aaron had a batting average of .305 with 163 hits a season, while hitting an average of just over 32 home runs a year and knocking home 99 runs batted in (RBIs) a year.
He broke his habit of hitting cross-handed and adopted the standard hitting technique.
In his last two seasons, he was primarily a designated hitter.
The 1950s were a period of racial segregation in parts of the United States, especially the southeastern portion of the country.
The night they met, Lucas decided to attend the Braves' game.
''Sports Illustrated'' pointedly summarized the racist vitriol that Aaron was forced to endure:"Is this to be the year in which Aaron, at the age of thirty-nine, takes a moon walk above one of the most hallowed individual records in American sport...?
The Howe Sports Bureau credits Aaron with a .366 batting average in 26 official Negro league games, with 5 home runs, 33 runs batted in (RBI), 41 hits, and 9 stolen bases.
Braves' public relations director Don Davidson, observing Aaron's quiet, reserved nature, began referring to him publicly as "Hank" in order to suggest more accessibility.
During this time, he picked up the nickname 'pork chops' because it "was the only thing I knew to order off the menu."
Later that year, he ranked fifth on ''The Sporting News'' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and was elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.
He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2002.
On May 17, Aaron collected his 3,000th hit, in a game against the Cincinnati Reds, the team against which he played his first game.
By the end of the season, he had performed so well that the league made him the unanimous choice for Rookie of the Year.
By the time Aaron retired, he and his brother held the record for most career home runs by a pair of siblings (768).
Aaron did his part by hitting .393 with three homers and seven RBI.
At this point, Aaron was known to family and friends primarily as "Henry."
Aaron had seven siblings, including Tommie Aaron, who later played in MLB with him.
At the end of the 1973 season, Aaron received a plaque from the US Postal Service for receiving more mail (930,000 pieces) than any person excluding politicians.
Hank founded the Hank Aaron Rookie League program.
Aaron had not played well at second base, but Owen had noted that Aaron could catch fly balls and throw the ball well from the outfield to the infield.
Hank Aaron was a member in the Boy Scouts of America.
Over the next 122 games, Aaron batted .280 with thirteen homers before he suffered a fractured ankle on September 5.
This All-Star Game, like the first one he played in 1955, was before a home crowd at Milwaukee County Stadium.
He won the NL Player of the Month award in May 1958 and June 1967.
The board appears to have been convinced, as Aaron was not drafted.
Aaron holds the MLB records for the most career runs batted in (RBI) (2,297), extra base hits (1,477), and total bases (6,856).
The Braves opened the season on the road in Cincinnati with a three-game series against the Cincinnati Reds.
He was named a 2010 Georgia Trustee by the Georgia Historical Society, in conjunction with the Governor of Georgia, to recognize accomplishments and community service that reflect the ideals of the founding body of Trustees, which governed the Georgia colony from 1732 to 1752.
Since his retirement, Aaron has held front office roles with the Atlanta Braves.
After the 1976 season, Aaron rejoined the Braves as an executive.
On August 1, 1982, he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, having received votes on 97.8 percent of the ballots, second only to Ty Cobb, who had received votes on 98.2% of the ballot in the inaugural 1936 Hall of Fame election.
He then changed his number to 44, which would turn out to look like a "lucky number" for the slugger.
Aaron played the vast majority of his MLB games in right field, though he appeared at several other infield and outfield positions.
In most circumstances, the team was responsible for arranging housing and meals for its players, but Aaron often had to make his own arrangements.
Aaron singled, doubled, and hit a home run in the game.
Mickey Owen, the team's manager, helped Aaron with his batting stance.
In 1963, Aaron nearly won the triple crown.
On December 15, 1957, his wife gave birth to twins.
Here's the pitch by Downing.
Tommie Aaron, one of his brothers, also went on to play Major League Baseball.
He won the league's Most Valuable Player Award.
In 1999, ''The Sporting News'' ranked Aaron fifth on its "100 Greatest Baseball Players" list.
During the next several years, Aaron had some of his best games and best seasons as a major league player.
This led Hank Aaron to a major league contract, signed on the final day of spring training, and a Braves uniform with the number five.
When the stadium was instead named Turner Field (after Atlanta Braves owner Ted Turner), a section of Capitol Avenue running past the stadium was renamed Hank Aaron Drive.
Aaron finished the season with 673 home runs.
Newspaper cartoonist Charles Schulz created a series of ''Peanuts'' strips printed in August 1973 in which Snoopy attempts to break the Ruth record, only to be besieged with hate mail.
During his rookie year, his other well-known nicknames, "Hammerin' Hank" (by teammates) and "Bad Henry" (by opposing pitchers) are reported to have arisen.
What a horrible sound.
Aaron would hit 44 home runs in four different seasons, and he hit his record-breaking 715th career home run off Dodgers pitcher Al Downing, who coincidentally also wore number 44.
Aaron was an NL All-Star for 20 seasons and an AL All-Star for 1 season, from 1955 through 1975.
Aaron received the Order of the Rising Sun, Gold Rays with Rosette in January 2016.
Thirty days later, after Aaron decided not to retire, the Braves traded him to the Milwaukee Brewers for Roger Alexander and Dave May.
He batted .322, placing third, and led the league in home runs and runs batted in.
On January 21, 2007, Major League Baseball announced the sale of the Atlanta Braves.
In a later interview with Atlanta sportscasting personality Chris Dimino, Aaron made it clear that his reluctance to attend any celebration of a new home run record was based upon his personal conviction that baseball is not about breaking records, but simply playing to the best of one's potential.
He started play as a , , shortstop,  and earned $200 per month.
Aaron is also in the top five for career hits (3,771) and runs (2,174).
In 1999, MLB introduced the Hank Aaron Award to recognize the top offensive players in each league.
During his days in Atlanta, Aaron reached a number of milestones; he was only the eighth player ever to hit 500 career home runs, with his 500th coming against Mike McCormick of the San Francisco Giants on July 14, 1968—exactly one year after former Milwaukee Braves teammate Eddie Mathews had hit his 500th.
He was a Gold Glove winner for three seasons.
In addition, Aaron hit for a .336 batting average.
Aaron is on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service.
The game was also broadcast nationally on NBC.
During his junior year, Aaron first joined the Pritchett Athletics, followed by the Mobile Black Bears, an independent Negro league team.
On September 23, 1957, Aaron hit a two-run game-ending home run in Milwaukee, clinching the pennant for the Braves and being carried off the field by his teammates.
The Braves' manager, Ben Geraghty, tried his best to help Aaron on and off the field.
On July 13, Aaron hit a home run in the All-Star Game (played at Detroit's Tiger Stadium) for the first time.
He led the Braves to another pennant, but this time they lost a seven-game World Series to the Yankees.
On October 2, 1974, Aaron hit his 733rd and final home run as a Braves player.
During his stay in Puerto Rico, Owen also helped Aaron to transition from second baseman to outfielder.
His boyhood idol was baseball star Jackie Robinson.
Although he was on the roster of its farm club, Milwaukee manager Charley Grimm later stated, "From the start, he did so well I knew we were going to have to carry him."
In July 2000 and again in July 2002, Aaron threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, played at Turner Field and Miller Park, respectively.
On March 13, 1954, Milwaukee Braves left fielder Bobby Thomson fractured his ankle while sliding into second base during a spring training game.
And it is a great moment for all of us, and particularly for Henry Aaron.
The cars were later recovered.
As a result of his standout play with the Indianapolis Clowns, Aaron received two offers from MLB teams via telegram, one from the New York Giants and the other from the Boston Braves.
Hank Aaron was on hand for the dedication.
In April 1997, a new baseball facility for the AA Mobile Bay Bears constructed in Aaron's hometown of Mobile, Alabama was named Hank Aaron Stadium.
Aaron was then named the Braves' vice president and director of player development.
If you break Babe Ruth's record, it'll be a disgrace!"
...And for the first time in a long time, that poker face in Aaron shows the tremendous strain and relief of what it must have been like to live with for the past several months."
The stint in Puerto Rico also allowed Aaron to avoid being drafted into military service.
It was the first major award to be introduced in more than thirty years and had the distinction of being the first award named after a player who was still alive.
The stadium's street number is 755, after Aaron's total number of home runs.
He was the recipient of death threats during the 1973–1974 offseason and a large assortment of hate mail from people who did not want to see Aaron break Ruth's nearly sacrosanct home run record.
He received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, from President George W. Bush in June 2002.
: "I had the Giants' contract in my hand.
Lewis Grizzard, then sports editor of the ''Atlanta Journal'', reported receiving numerous phone calls calling journalists "nigger lovers" for covering Aaron's chase.
During the 2006 season, San Francisco Giants slugger Barry Bonds passed Babe Ruth and moved into second place on the all-time home run list, attracting growing media coverage as he drew closer to Aaron's record.
He had seven siblings.
Aaron spent the winter of 1953 playing in Puerto Rico.
And listen to this crowd!"
Babe Ruth's widow, Claire Hodgson, even denounced the racism and declared that her husband would have enthusiastically cheered Aaron's attempt at the record.
Since December 1980, he has served as senior vice president and assistant to the Braves' president.
On April 13, Aaron made his major league debut and was hitless in five at-bats against the Cincinnati Reds' left-hander Joe Nuxhall.
The Braves returned to Atlanta, and on April 8, 1974, a crowd of 53,775 people showed up for the game—a Braves attendance record.
During his minor league experience, he was very homesick and faced constant racism, but his brother, Herbert Jr., told him not to give up the opportunity.
Aaron also knocked in the 2,000th run of his career and hit a home run in the first All-Star game played in Atlanta.
On May 1, 1975, Aaron broke baseball's all-time RBI record, previously held by Ruth with 2,213.
As the year came to a close, Aaron broke Stan Musial's major league record for total bases (6,134).
Even as a kid, the irony of it hit me: here we were in the capital in the land of freedom and equality, and they had to destroy the plates that had touched the forks that had been in the mouths of black men.
That's the only thing that kept Willie Mays and me from being teammates&nbsp;– fifty dollars."
Like most high schools they did not have organized baseball, and so he played outfield and third base for the Mobile Black Bears, a semipro team.
He played late in Negro league history; by his final MLB season, Aaron was the last Negro league baseball player on a major league roster.
He played two out of three, tying Babe Ruth's record in his very first at bat—on his first swing of the season—off Reds pitcher Jack Billingham, but did not hit another home run in the series.
While with the Clowns he experienced some overt racism.
At age 37, he hit a career-high 47 home runs during the season (along with a career-high .669 slugging percentage) and finished third in MVP voting for the sixth time.
On April 27, 1971, Aaron hit his 600th career home run, the third major league player ever to do so.
In 1958, Aaron hit .326, with 30 home runs and 95 RBIs.
At the time of his retirement, Aaron held most of the game's key career power hitting records.
Though the Korean War was over, people were still being drafted.
In 1970, Aaron reached two more career milestones.
Aaron held the MLB record for career home runs for 33 years, and he still holds several MLB offensive records.
They were also the first siblings to appear in a League Championship Series as teammates.
Meanwhile, Dodgers broadcaster Vin Scully addressed the racial tension&nbsp;— or apparent lack thereof&nbsp;— in his call of the home run: "What a marvelous moment for baseball; what a marvelous moment for Atlanta and the state of Georgia; what a marvelous moment for the country and the world.
The threats extended to those providing positive press coverage of Aaron.
Although Dodgers outfielder Bill Buckner nearly went over the outfield wall trying to catch it, the ball landed in the Braves' bullpen, where relief pitcher Tom House caught it.
Aaron was born and raised in and around Mobile, Alabama.
Despite that, he again finished third in the MVP voting.
In that season, Aaron became the third player to steal 30 bases and hit 30 home runs in a single season.
He hit 24 or more home runs every year from 1955 through 1973, and is one of only two players to hit 30 or more home runs in a season at least fifteen times.
There is also a statue of him as an eighteen-year-old shortstop outside Carson Park in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, where he played his first season in the Braves' minor league system.
On April 15, Aaron collected his first major league hit, a double off Cardinals' pitcher Vic Raschi.
He hit his 40th home run of the season against the Giants' Jerry Johnson on August 10, which established a National League record for most seasons with 40 or more home runs (seven).
On October 6, Aaron and Lucas married.
After the game, Aaron stated that his only fear was that he might not live to see the 1974 season.
During the strike-shortened season of 1972, Aaron tied and then surpassed Willie Mays for second place on the career home run list.
He led the league with 44 home runs and 130 RBI and finished third in batting average.
After Bonds hit his record-breaking 756th home run on August 7, 2007, Aaron made a surprise appearance on the JumboTron video screen at AT&T Park in San Francisco to congratulate Bonds on his accomplishment:Aaron lives in the Atlanta area.
While he was born in a section of Mobile referred to as "Down the Bay", he spent most of his youth in Toulminville.
A very youthful Craig Sager actually interviewed Aaron between third and home for a television station, WXLT (now WWSB-Channel 40) in Sarasota.
Aaron finished third in the MVP race and he received his first of three Gold Glove Awards.
