It is believed that his refusal to bring the war to Rome itself was due to a lack of commitment from Carthage of men, money, and materiel&nbsp;— principally siege equipment.
These Hannibal surmounted with ingenuity, such as when he used vinegar and fire to break through a rockfall.
Its precise vocalization remains a matter of debate.
In 210&nbsp;BC, Hannibal again proved his superiority in tactics by inflicting a severe defeat at Herdonia (modern Ordona) in Apulia upon a proconsular army and, in 208&nbsp;BC, destroyed a Roman force engaged in the siege of Locri.
Hannibal quartered his troops for the winter with the Gauls, whose support for him had abated.
As a result of this victory, many parts of Italy joined Hannibal's cause.
It is plausible to suggest that Hannibal engendered the greatest fear Rome had towards an enemy.
However, Hannibal slowly began losing ground—inadequately supported by his Italian allies, abandoned by his government (either because of jealousy or simply because Carthage was overstretched), and unable to match Rome's resources.
According to Polybius, he arrived in Italy accompanied by 20,000 foot soldiers, 4,000 horsemen, and only a few elephants.
By Livy's account, the crossing was accomplished in the face of huge difficulties.
Varro was in command on the first day, a man of reckless and hubristic nature (according to Livy) and determined to defeat Hannibal.
Hannibal also secured an alliance with newly appointed Hieronymus of Syracuse.
Nevertheless, Polybius spent a long period as a hostage in Italy and relied heavily on Roman sources, so there remains the possibility that he reproduced elements of Roman propaganda.
It is often argued that, if Hannibal had received proper material reinforcements from Carthage, he might have succeeded with a direct attack upon Rome.
With the failure of his brother Mago in Liguria (205–203&nbsp;BC) and of his own negotiations with Phillip V, the last hope of recovering his ascendancy in Italy was lost.
According to the historian Livy, the Romans feared Hannibal's military genius, and during Hannibal's march against Rome in 211&nbsp;BC
Hannibal constantly sought reinforcements from either Iberia or North Africa.
Hannibal ravaged Apulia but was unable to bring Fabius to battle, so he decided to march through Samnium to Campania, one of the richest and most fertile provinces of Italy, hoping that the devastation would draw Fabius into battle.
Masinissa (Numidia) was to be independent.
Hannibal's perilous march brought him into the Roman territory and frustrated the attempts of the enemy to fight out the main issue on foreign ground.
Hannibal marched boldly around Flaminius' left flank, unable to draw him into battle by mere devastation, and effectively cut him off from Rome (thus executing the first recorded turning movement in military history).
The authors add an apocryphal story of how Hannibal planned and supervised the building of the new royal capital Artaxata.
Rome reacted to this apparent violation of the treaty and demanded justice from Carthage.
They eventually found him on the left bank of the Aufidus River, and encamped six miles (10&nbsp;km) away.
There Hannibal had an opportunity to show his masterful military skill at the Trebia in December of the same year, after wearing down the superior Roman infantry, when he cut it to pieces with a surprise attack and ambush from the flanks.
But with the loss of Tarentum in 209&nbsp;BC and the gradual reconquest by the Romans of Samnium and Lucania, his hold on south Italy was almost lost.
As a result, the Roman army was hemmed in with no means of escape.
However, only a few of the Italian city-states defected to him that he had expected to gain as allies.
Instead, he had to content himself with subduing the fortresses that still held out against him, and the only other notable event of 216&nbsp;BC was the defection of certain Italian territories, including Capua, the second largest city of Italy, which Hannibal made his new base.
Barca (, BRQ) was the surname of his aristocratic family, meaning "shining" or "lightning".
Hannibal's name was recorded in Carthaginian sources as ḤNBʻL (in Punic:).
What Hannibal achieved in extricating his army was, as Adrian Goldsworthy puts it, "a classic of ancient generalship, finding its way into nearly every historical narrative of the war and being used by later military manuals".
There was a Carthaginian Senate, but the real power was with the inner "Council of 30 Nobles" and the board of judges from ruling families known as the "Hundred and Four".
His sudden appearance among the Gauls of the Po Valley, moreover, enabled him to detach those tribes from their new allegiance to the Romans before the Romans could take steps to check the rebellion.
The only alternative route to central Italy lay at the mouth of the Arno.
Hannibal's army numbered 38,000 infantry, 8,000 cavalry, and 38 elephants, almost none of which would survive the harsh conditions of the Alps.
After Carthage's defeat in the First Punic War, Hamilcar set out to improve his family's and Carthage's fortunes.
His father Hamilcar Barca was the leading Carthaginian commander during the First Punic War.
According to the tradition, Hannibal's oath took place in the town of Peñíscola, today part of the Valencian Community, Spain.
Hannibal outmaneuvered the natives who had tried to prevent his crossing, then evaded a Roman force marching from the Mediterranean coast by turning inland up the valley of the Rhône.
Hannibal, by skillful maneuvers, was in position to head him off, for he lay on the direct road between Placentia and Arminum, by which Sempronius would have to march to reinforce Scipio.
Plutarch states that Hannibal was questioned by Scipio as to who was the greatest general, and Hannibal replied either Alexander or Pyrrhus, then himself, or, according to another version of the event, Pyrrhus, Scipio, then himself.
Recent numismatic evidence suggests that Hannibal's army may have passed within sight of the Matterhorn.
Hannibal thereupon went into voluntary exile.
Hannibal soon saw that the king's army was no match for the Romans.
On his return home, laden with many spoils, a coalition of Spanish tribes, led by the Carpetani, attacked, and Hannibal won his first major battlefield success and showed off his tactical skills at the battle of the River Tagus.
Hannibal had now disposed of the only field force that could check his advance upon Rome, but he realized that, without siege engines, he could not hope to take the capital.
Sulpicius Blitho records it under 181&nbsp;BC.
Fabius closely followed Hannibal's path of destruction, yet still refused to let himself be drawn out of the defensive.
But Carthage then made a terrible blunder.
In his first few years in Italy, he won three dramatic victories—the Trebia, Lake Trasimene, and Cannae, in which he distinguished himself for his ability to determine his and his opponent's strengths and weaknesses, and to play the battle to his strengths and the enemy's weaknesses—and won over many allies of Rome.
The works of Roman writers such as Livy, Frontinus, and Juvenal show a grudging admiration for Hannibal.
Indeed, the breadth of his vision gave rise to his grand strategy of conquering Rome by opening a northern front and subduing allied city-states on the peninsula, rather than by attacking Rome directly.
Polybius claims that Hannibal's men marched for four days and three nights, "through a land that was under water", suffering terribly from fatigue and enforced want of sleep.
In his ''Annales'', Titus Pomponius Atticus reports it occurred in 183&nbsp;BC, and Livy implies the same.
It says volumes, too, for their political maturity and respect for constitutional forms that the complicated machinery of government continued to function even amidst disaster—there are few states in the ancient world in which a general who had lost a battle like Cannae would have dared to remain, let alone would have continued to be treated respectfully as head of state.
According to Polybius, Hannibal much later said that when he came upon his father and begged to go with him, Hamilcar agreed and demanded that he swear that as long as he lived he would never be a friend of Rome.
Carthaginian political will was embodied in the ruling oligarchy.
Hannibal's military genius was not enough to really disturb the Roman political process and the collective political and military capacity of the Roman people.
In view of Hannibal's great popularity, the Carthaginian government did not repudiate Hannibal's actions, and the war he sought was declared at the end of the year.
Scipio and Carthage had worked out a peace plan, which was approved by Rome.
Hannibal reportedly entered Gaul with 40,000 foot soldiers and 12,000 horsemen.
Hannibal's chief cavalry commander Maharbal led the mobile Numidian cavalry on the right, and they shattered the Roman cavalry opposing them.
He was born in what is present day Tunisia.
Gnaeus Servilius and Gaius Flaminius (the new consuls of Rome) were expecting Hannibal to advance on Rome, and they took their armies to block the eastern and western routes that Hannibal could use.
Indeed, Fabius received the surname "Cunctator" ("the Delayer") because of his policy of not meeting Hannibal in open battle but through guerilla, scorched earth tactics.
He replied, "I have seen during my life many old fools; but this one beats them all."
Scipio was severely injured, his life only saved by the bravery of his son who rode back onto the field to rescue his fallen father.
He advised equipping a fleet and landing a body of troops in the south of Italy, offering to take command himself.
Hannibal's father went about the conquest of Hispania.
He had not expected Hannibal to make an attempt to cross the Alps, since the Romans were prepared to fight the war in the Iberian Peninsula.
This praise has earned him a strong reputation in the modern world, and he was regarded as a great strategist by Napoleon and others.
In 190&nbsp;BC, he was placed in command of a Seleucid fleet but was defeated in the battle of the Eurymedon.
Meanwhile, Hannibal, recalled from Italy by the Carthaginian Senate, had returned with his army.
Among the dead were Roman Consul Lucius Aemilius Paullus, as well as two consuls for the preceding year, two quaestors, twenty-nine out of the forty-eight military tribunes, and an additional eighty senators (at a time when the Roman Senate was composed of no more than 300 men, this constituted 25%–30% of the governing body).
During the war there are no reports of revolutions among the Roman citizens, no factions with the Senate desiring peace, no pro-Carthaginian Roman turncoats, no coups.
The war in Italy settled into a strategic stalemate.
He preferred to exploit his victory by entering into central and southern Italy and encouraging a general revolt against the sovereign power.
These two bodies came from the wealthy, commercial families of Carthage.
As a result, Hannibal fought no more major battles in Italy for the rest of the war.
(Polybius, the surviving ancient account closest in time to Hannibal's campaign, reports that the route was already debated.)
So he laid siege to the city, which fell after eight months.
Hannibal departed New Carthage in late spring of 218&nbsp;BC.
Scipio retreated across the Trebia to camp at Placentia with his army mostly intact.
The victory was minor, but it encouraged the Gauls and Ligurians to join the Carthaginian cause, whose troops bolstered his army back to around 40,000 men.
The Romans and allied legions resolved to confront Hannibal and marched southward to Apulia.
George S. Patton believed himself a reincarnation of Hannibal as well as of many other people, including a Roman legionary and a Napoleonic soldier.
In the spring of 217&nbsp;BC, Hannibal decided to find a more reliable base of operations farther south.
He left a detachment of 20,000 troops to garrison the newly conquered region.
Hamilcar held Hannibal over the fire roaring in the chamber and made him swear that he would never be a friend of Rome.
In light of Hamilcar Barca's cognomen, historians refer to Hamilcar's family as the Barcids.
to express their fear or anxiety.
On hearing, however, of his brother's defeat and death at the battle of the Metaurus, he retired to Calabria, where he maintained himself for the ensuing years.
Hannibal's troops who were lost in combat were replaced with less well-trained and motivated mercenaries from Italy or Gaul.
In the meantime, the Romans hoped to gain success through sheer strength and weight of numbers, and they raised a new army of unprecedented size, estimated by some to be as large as 100,000 men, but more likely around 50-80,000.
During this time, he lived at the Seleucid court, where he acted as military advisor to Antiochus III the Great in his war against Rome.
Meanwhile, Hannibal had defeated Fulvius at the battle of Herdonia in Apulia, but lost Tarentum the following year.
Hannibal was his given name.
From the start, he seems to have calculated that he would have to operate without aid from Hispania.
The Roman legions forced their way through Hannibal's weak center, but the Libyan mercenaries on the wings, swung around by the movement, menaced their flanks.
Hannibal went on to serve Prusias in this war.
The task was daunting, to say the least.
Here they knelt and swept the temple-floors with their dishevelled hair and lifted up their hands to heaven in piteous entreaty to the gods that they would deliver the City of Rome out of the hands of the enemy and preserve its mothers and children from injury and outrage."
The commercial interests of the Carthaginian oligarchy dictated the reinforcement and supply of Iberia rather than Hannibal throughout the campaign.
Seven years after the victory of Zama, the Romans, alarmed by Carthage's renewed prosperity, demanded Hannibal's surrender.
Its long-suffering citizens had captured a stranded Roman fleet in the Gulf of Tunis and stripped it of supplies, an action that aggravated the faltering negotiations.
An undeniable proof of Rome's confidence is demonstrated by the fact that after the Cannae disaster she was left virtually defenseless, but the Senate still chose not to withdraw a single garrison from an overseas province to strengthen the city.
This may not be true but as Lazenby states, "could well be, exemplifying as it does not only the supreme confidence felt by the Romans in ultimate victory, but also the way in which something like normal life continued.
He had several sisters and two brothers, Hasdrubal and Mago.
Philip, who attempted to exploit Rome's preoccupation in Italy to conquer Illyria, now found himself under attack from several sides at once and was quickly subdued by Rome and her Greek allies.
The fired rockfall event is mentioned only by Livy; Polybius is mute on the subject and there is no evidence of carbonized rock at the only two-tier rockfall in the Western Alps, located below the Col de la Traversette (Mahaney, 2008).
Yet a different picture is sometimes revealed.
This area was practically one huge marsh, and happened to be overflowing more than usual during this particular season.
When Hannibal's successes had brought about the death of two Roman consuls, he vainly searched for the body of Gaius Flaminius Nepos on the shores of Lake Trasimene, held ceremonial rituals in recognition of Lucius Aemilius Paullus, and sent Marcellus' ashes back to his family in Rome.
He succeeded, through prompt decision and speedy movement, in transporting his army to Italy by sea in time to meet Hannibal.
Despite this, Flaminius remained passively encamped at Arretium.
According to Cicero, while at the court of Antiochus, Hannibal attended a lecture by Phormio, a philosopher, that ranged through many topics.
After he assumed command, Hannibal spent two years consolidating his holdings and completing the conquest of Hispania, south of the Ebro.
Shortly thereafter, the Romans pacified Sicily and entered into an alliance with the Aetolian League to counter Philip V of Macedon.
In his first campaign, Hannibal attacked and stormed the Olcades' strongest centre, Alithia, which promptly led to their surrender, and brought Punic power close to the River Tagus.
However, there is debate as to whether the cognomen Barca (meaning "thunderbolt") was applied to Hamilcar alone or was hereditary within his family.
At the same time, Hannibal tried to break the allegiance of Rome's allies by proving that Flaminius was powerless to protect them.
There Hannibal destroyed Flaminius' army in the waters or on the adjoining slopes, killing Flaminius as well (see Battle of Lake Trasimene).
His exact route over the Alps has been the source of scholarly dispute ever since.
The Celts were amassing forces to invade farther south in Italy, presumably with Carthaginian backing.
Another story, according to Aulus Gellius, is that when Antiochus III showed off the gigantic and elaborately equipped army he had created to invade Greece to Hannibal, he asked him if they would be enough for the Roman Republic, to which Hannibal replied, "I think all this will be enough, yes, quite enough, for the Romans, even though they are most avaricious."
In English, his clan are sometimes collectively known as the Barcids.
Hannibal also went on to defeat Eumenes in two other battles on land until the Romans interfered and threatened Bithynia into giving up Hannibal.
His arrival immediately restored the predominance of the war party, which placed him in command of a combined force of African levies and his mercenaries from Italy.
The last major battle of the Second Punic War resulted in a loss of respect for Hannibal by his fellow Carthaginians.
Hannibal was now determined to carry the war into the heart of Italy by a rapid march through Hispania and southern Gaul.
There is even an account of him at a very young age begging his father to take him to an overseas war.
Hannibal recognized that he still needed to cross the Pyrenees, the Alps, and many significant rivers.
Carthage at the time was in such a poor state that its navy was unable to transport his army; instead, Hamilcar had to march it towards the Pillars of Hercules and then cross the Strait of Gibraltar.
He enacted political and financial reforms to enable the payment of the war indemnity imposed by Rome; however, Hannibal's reforms were unpopular with members of the Carthaginian aristocracy and in Rome, and he fled into voluntary exile.
Despite mutual admiration, negotiations floundered due to Roman allegations of "Punic Faith," referring to the breach of protocols that ended the First Punic War by the Carthaginian attack on Saguntum, and a Carthaginan attack on a stranded Roman fleet.
At the Pyrenees, he released 11,000 Iberian troops who showed reluctance to leave their homeland.
After leaving a record of his expedition engraved in Punic and Greek upon bronze tablets in the temple of Juno at Crotona, he sailed back to Africa.
As with Greek and Roman practice, patronymics were a common part of Carthaginian nomenclature, so that Hannibal would also have been known as "Hannibal son of Hamilcar".
His attack of Saguntum had presented the oligarchy with a choice of war with Rome or loss of prestige in Iberia.
In the story, Hannibal's father took him up and brought him to a sacrificial chamber.
Indeed, throughout the war Roman aristocrats ferociously competed with each other for positions of command to fight against Rome's most dangerous enemy.
Most of the sources available to historians about Hannibal are from Romans.
Nevertheless, they grimly refused to admit the possibility of defeat and rejected all overtures for peace; they even refused to accept the ransom of prisoners after Cannae.
According to the military historian Theodore Ayrault Dodge,
Count Alfred von Schlieffen developed his eponymously titled "Schlieffen Plan" (1905/1906) from his military studies, with a particularly heavy emphasis on the envelopment technique which Hannibal employed to surround and destroy the Roman army in the battle of Cannae.
Other sources report that Hannibal told his father, "I swear so soon as age will permit...I will use fire and steel to arrest the destiny of Rome."
Fortified by both Hannibal and the supplies, the Carthaginians rebuffed the treaty and Roman protests.
According to Livy, the land occupied by Hannibal's army outside Rome in 211&nbsp;BC was sold at the very time of its occupation and for the same price.
His flight ended in the court of Bithynia, where he achieved an outstanding naval victory against a fleet from Pergamon.
Hanno had been instrumental in denying Hannibal's requested reinforcements following the battle at Cannae.
The oligarchy, always jealous of him, had even charged him with having betrayed the interests of his country while in Italy, for neglecting to take Rome when he might have done so.
The conditions of defeat were such that Carthage could no longer battle for Mediterranean supremacy.
Hannibal knew that this route was full of difficulties, but it remained the surest and certainly the quickest way to central Italy.
He arrived in Etruria in the spring of 217&nbsp;BC and decided to lure the main Roman army under Flaminius into a pitched battle by devastating the region that Flaminius had been sent to protect.
He then captured Clastidium, from which he drew large amounts of supplies for his men.
'''Hannibal''' (247&nbsp;– between 183 and 181&nbsp;BC), fully '''Hannibal&nbsp;Barca''', was a Punic military commander from Carthage, generally considered one of the greatest military commanders in history.
This famous Latin phrase became a common expression that is often still used when a client arrives through the door or when one is faced with calamity.
Carthage could keep its African territory but would lose its overseas empire.
Before dying, he left behind a letter declaring, "Let us relieve the Romans from the anxiety they have so long experienced, since they think it tries their patience too much to wait for an old man's death".
He maintained this post for eight years until 221&nbsp;BC.
Hannibal's forces moved through the Po Valley and were engaged in the Battle of Ticinus.
He also used citizen support to change the term of office in the Hundred and Four from life to a year, with a term limit of two years.
His younger brothers were Mago and Hasdrubal, and he was brother-in-law to Hasdrubal the Fair.
His brothers-in-law were Hasdrubal the Fair and the Numidian king Naravas.
In contrast, the Romans suffered only 2,500 casualties.
Upon the assassination of Hasdrubal in 221&nbsp;BC, Hannibal was proclaimed commander-in-chief by the army and confirmed in his appointment by the Carthaginian government.
The most influential modern theories favor either a march up the valley of the Drôme and a crossing of the main range to the south of the modern highway over the Col de Montgenèvre or a march farther north up the valleys of the Isère and Arc crossing the main range near the present Col de Mont Cenis or the Little St Bernard Pass.
In 207&nbsp;BC, he succeeded in making his way again into Apulia, where he waited to concert measures for a combined march upon Rome with his brother Hasdrubal Barca.
The Romans followed up their success by attacking Antiochus in Anatolia and the Seleucid Empire was decisively defeated at the battle of Magnesia in 190&nbsp;BC by Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus.
Carthage lost approximately 20,000 troops with an additional 15,000 wounded.
The Romans even built statues of the Carthaginian in the very streets of Rome to advertise their defeat of such a worthy adversary.
Hannibal occupied much of Italy for 15 years but was unable to march on Rome.
The combination of these events marked the end to Hannibal's success in Italy.
Additionally, he would have to contend with opposition from the Gauls, whose territory he passed through.
In 203&nbsp;BC, Hannibal was recalled from Italy by the war party in Carthage.
The decisive battle of Zama soon followed; the defeat removed Hannibal's air of invincibility.
The precise year and cause of Hannibal's death are unknown.
Therefore, the Romans preemptively invaded the Po region in 225&nbsp;BC.
This two-pronged attack caused the Carthaginian formation to collapse.
This makes the battle one of the most catastrophic defeats in the history of Ancient Rome, and one of the bloodiest battles in all of human history (in terms of the number of lives lost within a single day).
Some historians say that the elephants routed the Carthaginian cavalry and not the Romans, whilst others suggest that it was actually a tactical retreat planned by Hannibal.
Hannibal became such a figure of terror that whenever disaster struck, the Roman Senators would exclaim "''Hannibal ante portas''" ("Hannibal is at the gates!")
Livy, a Roman scholar, gives a depiction of the young Carthaginian: "No sooner had he arrived...the old soldiers fancied they saw Hamilcar in his youth given back to them; the same bright look; the same fire in his eye, the same trick of countenance and features.
In fact, they were reinforced and the campaigns there maintained until victory was secured; beginning first in Sicily under the direction of Claudius Marcellus, and later in Hispania under Scipio Africanus.
With their foremost general defeated, the Carthaginians had no choice but to surrender.
Never was one and the same spirit more skillful to meet opposition, to obey, or to command."
On this occasion, the two armies were combined into one, the consuls having to alternate their command on a daily basis.
Hasdrubal also endeavoured to consolidate Carthaginian power through diplomatic relationships with native tribes.
Hannibal lived during a period of great tension in the Mediterranean Basin, when the Roman Republic established its supremacy over other great powers such as ancient Carthage and the Hellenistic kingdoms of Macedonia, Syracuse, and the Seleucid Empire.
The Romans then mounted two sieges of Capua, which fell in 211&nbsp;BC, and completed their conquest of Syracuse and destruction of the Carthaginian army in Sicily.
With a small detachment still positioned in Gaul, Scipio made an attempt to intercept Hannibal.
He was still a child when his sisters married, and his brothers-in-law were close associates during his father's struggles in the Mercenary War and the Punic conquest of the Iberian Peninsula.
This eliminated the Roman numerical advantage by shrinking the combat area.
An enemy counter-invasion of North Africa forced him to return to Carthage, where he was decisively defeated by Scipio Africanus at the Battle of Zama.
When his father drowned in battle, Hannibal's brother-in-law Hasdrubal the Fair succeeded to his command of the army with Hannibal serving as an officer under him.
He crossed without opposition over both the Apennines (during which he lost his right eye because of conjunctivitis) and the seemingly impassable Arno, but he lost a large part of his force in the marshy lowlands of the Arno.
It is thus equivalent to the Arabic name ''Barq'' or the Hebrew name Barak or the ancient Greek epithet ''keraunos'', which was commonly given to military commanders in the Hellenistic period.
Hannibal's Iberian and Gallic heavy cavalry, led by Hanno on the left, defeated the Roman heavy cavalry, and then both the Carthaginian heavy cavalry and the Numidians attacked the legions from behind.
One of his most famous achievements was at the outbreak of the Second Punic War, when he marched an army which included war elephants from Iberia over the Pyrenees and the Alps into Italy.
