The ''Neues Theater'' (New Theatre) is the Boulevard Theatre of Hanover.
Some other big markets are of course the ''Christmas Markets of the City of Hanover'' in the Old Town and city centre and the Lister Meile.
The museum also hosts several touring exhibitions during the year.
It offers many international and national connections.
The beginning of industrialization in Germany led to trade in iron and silver from the northern Harz Mountains, which increased the city's importance.
In the district of Anderten is the ''European Cheese Centre'', the only Cheese Experience Centre in Europe.
The German spelling (with a double n) is becoming more popular in English; recent editions of encyclopaedias prefer the German spelling, and the local government uses the German spelling on English websites.
As an important railroad and road junction and production center, Hanover was a major target for strategic bombing during World War II, including the Oil Campaign.
Jointly with a factory of German tire and automobile parts manufacturer Continental AG, they have a coal-burning power plant.
Today Hanover is a Vice-President City of Mayors for Peace, an international mayoral organisation mobilising cities and citizens worldwide to abolish and eliminate nuclear weapons by the year 2020.
The Great Garden hosts every year the ''International Fireworks Competition'', and the ''International Festival Weeks Herrenhausen'' with lots of music and cabaret.
Today there are three more Fencing Clubs in Hanover.
Each year Hanover hosts more than 60 international and national exhibitions.
Hanover and its area is served by Hanover/Langenhagen International Airport (IATA code: HAJ; ICAO code: EDDV)
In October 1938, 484 Hanoverian Jews of Polish origin were expelled to Poland, including the Grynszpan family.
The ''Old Town Flea Market'' is the oldest flea market in Germany  and the ''Market for Art and Trade'' has a high reputation.
The ''Hanover Zoo'' is one of the most spectacular and best zoos in Europe.
Her descendants, however, bore her husband's titular name of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.
The new Canadian-themed area, Yukon Bay, opened in 2010.
At the centre of the Nouveau Jardin is Europe's highest garden fountain.
It is one of the most notable art museums in Germany.
Textiles from all over the world can be visited in the ''Museum for textile art''.
In 1827, the personal union of the United Kingdom and Hanover ended because William IV's heir in the United Kingdom was female (Queen Victoria).
The traditional English spelling is still used in historical contexts, especially when referring to the British House of Hanover.
In 2014 the city was home to 34,198 businesses, of which 9,342 were registered in the German Trade Register and 24,856 counted as small businesses.
Of the approximately 4,800 Jews who had lived in Hannover in 1938, fewer than 100 were still in the city when troops of the United States Army arrived on 10 April 1945 to occupy Hanover at the end of the war.
TUI AG has its HQ in Hanover.
Furthermore, the museum shows the famous works of the French artist Niki de Saint-Phalle.
The ''Lower Saxony State Museum'' is the largest museum in Hanover.
The ''Kunstverein Hannover'' (Art Society Hanover) shows contemporary art and was established in 1832 as one of the first art societies in Germany.
Thanks to the lake ''Maschsee'', the rivers ''Ihme'' and ''Leine'' and to the channel ''Mittellandkanal'' Hanover hosts sailing schools, yacht schools, waterski clubs, rowing clubs, canoe clubs and paddle clubs.
Hanover also hosts Food Festivals, for example the ''Wine Festival'' and the ''Gourmet Festival''.
The Hannover Indians are the local ice hockey team.
The city's central station, Hannover Hauptbahnhof, is a hub of the German high-speed ICE network.
Semi-Salic law, which required succession by the male line if possible, forbade the accession of Queen Victoria in Hanover.
The ''Maschsee Festival'' takes place around the Maschsee Lake.
It is the largest Volksfest of its kind in Northern Germany.
The collection of the works of Wilhelm Busch and the extensive collection of cartoons and critical graphics is this museum unique in Germany.
Today, a memorial at the Opera Square is a reminder of the persecution of the Jews in Hanover.
Some points of interest are the ''Tropical House'', the ''Cactus House'', the ''Canary House'' and the ''Orchid House'', which hosts one of the world's biggest collection of orchids, and free-flying birds and butterflies.
It is the starting point of the Hanover-Würzburg high-speed rail line and also the central hub for the Hanover S-Bahn.
The most popular ones are the ''Great Ground'' and the ''Nouveau Jardin''.
They play in the third tier.
The ''KUBUS'' is a forum for contemporary art.
In 2010 the Hanover Zoo had over 1.6 million visitors.
Their home games were played in the traditional ''Eilenriedestadium'' till they moved to the HDI Arena due to DFL directives.
It is located in the ''Künstlerhaus'' (House of artists).
Thus, Hanover passed to William IV's brother, Ernest Augustufs, and remained a kingdom until 1866, when it was annexed by Prussia during the Austro-Prussian war.
At off-peak hours you are allowed to take your bike on a tram or bus.
One of Germanys most successful dragon boat teams, the All Sports Team Hannover, which has won since its foundation in year 2000 more than 100 medals on national and international competitions, is doing practising on the Maschsee in the heart of Hannover.
It was connected to the Hanseatic League city of Bremen by the Leine, and was situated near the southern edge of the wide North German Plain and north-west of the Harz mountains, so that east-west traffic such as mule trains passed through it.
It consists of more than 260 rides and inns, five large beer tents and a big entertainment programme.
The city of Hanover became the capital of the Prussian Province of Hanover.
The ''State Gallery'' shows the European Art from the 11th to the 20th century, the ''Nature Department'' shows the zoology, geology, botanic, geology and a ''Vivarium'' with fishes, insects, reptiles and amphibians.
Cycle paths are very common in the city centre.
The Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles Transporter (VWN) factory at Hannover-Stöcken is the biggest employer in the region and operates a huge plant at the northern edge of town adjoining the Mittellandkanal and Motorway A2.
Some other important sport events are the ''Lower Saxony Beach Volleyball Tournament'', the international horse show ''German Classics'' and the international ice hockey tournament ''Nations Cup''.
The most popular ones are the ''CeBIT'', the ''Hanover Fair'', the ''Domotex'', the ''Ligna'', the ''IAA Nutzfahrzeuge'' and the ''Agritechnica''.
The ''Theater am Aegi'' is Hanover's big theatre for musicals, shows and guest performances.
The ''Berggarten'' is an important European botanical garden.
The ''Mausoleum'' of the Guelphs is also located in the Berggarten.
Two important sights on the fairground are the ''Hermes Tower'' (88.8 metres high) and the ''EXPO Roof'', the largest wooden roof in the world.
Hanover was founded in medieval times on the east bank of the River Leine.
The city is also a major crossing point of railway lines and highways (Autobahnen), connecting European main lines in both the east-west (Berlin–Ruhr area) and north-south (Hamburg–Munich, etc.)
''das Hohe Ufer'').
Outside the city centre is the ''EXPO-Park'', the former site of EXPO 2000.
The roads are B 3, B 6 and B 65, called Westschnellweg (B6 on the northern part, B3 on the southern part), Messeschnellweg (B3, becomes A37 near Burgdorf, crosses A2, becomes B3 again, changes to B6 at ''Seelhorster Kreuz'', then passes the Hanover fairground as B6 and becomes A37 again before merging into A7) and Südschnellweg (starts out as B65, becomes B3/B6/B65 upon crossing ''Westschnellweg'', then becomes B65 again at ''Seelhorster Kreuz'').
The Hanover fairground, due to numerous extensions, especially for the Expo 2000, is the largest in the world.
It was recaptured by Anglo-German forces led by Ferdinand of Brunswick the following year.
The ''Museum for Energy History'' describes the 150 years old history of the application of energy.
Its original name ''Honovere'' may mean "high (river)bank", though this is debated (cf.
It features artists from around the world.
It is now the capital of the ''Land'' of Lower Saxony.
Like the Great Garden, the Berggarten also consists of several parts, for example the ''Paradies'' and the ''Prairie Garden''.
Near the Old Town is the district of Calenberger Neustadt where the Catholic Basilica Minor of ''St.
In 1636 George, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, ruler of the Brunswick-Lüneburg principality of Calenberg, moved his residence to Hanover.
In 1887 Hanover's Emile Berliner invented the record and the gramophone.
Some leading art events in Hanover are the ''Long Night of the museums'' and the ''Zinnober Kunstvolkslauf'' which features all the galleries in Hanover.
Many of the Exhibition Centre's halls are architectural highlights.
Since 2007 the historic ''Leibniz Letters'', which can be viewed in the ''Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library'', are on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register.
The last British monarch who ruled in Hanover was William IV.
After the war, the Aegidienkirche was not rebuilt and its ruins were left as a war memorial.
The ''Carnival Procession'' is around  long and consists of 3.000 participants, around 30 festival vehicles and around 20 bands and takes place every year.
Around 2 million people visit this fun fair every year.
''Arminia Hannover'' is another very traditional soccer team in Hanover that has played in the first league for years and plays now in the ''Niedersachsen-West Liga'' (Lower Saxony League West).
Some points of interest are the ''Planet M.'', the former ''German Pavillon'', some nations' vacant pavilions, the ''Expowale'', the ''EXPO-Plaza'' and the ''EXPO-Gardens'' (Parc Agricole, EXPO-Park South and the Gardens of change).
The University of Veterinary Medicine Hanover also maintains its own botanical garden specializing in medicinal and poisonous plants, the Heil- und Giftpflanzengarten der Tierärztlichen Hochschule Hannover.
It was in Hanover on 9 November 1938 that the synagogue, designed in 1870 by Edwin Oppler in neo-romantic style, was burnt by the Nazis.
Three kings of Great Britain, or the United Kingdom, were concurrently also Electoral Princes of Hanover.
Hanover was in the British zone of occupation of Germany, and became part of the new state (Land) of Lower Saxony in 1946.
The ''Hannover Grizzlies'' are the local American Football Team.
The ''Schulbiologiezentrum Hannover'' maintains practical biology schools in four locations (Botanischer Schulgarten Burg, Freiluftschule Burg, Zooschule Hannover, and Botanischer Schulgarten Linden).
The museum hosts exhibitions from  classical modernist art to contemporary art.
The focus is put on the classical modernist art with the collection of ''Kurt Schwitters'', works of German expressionism, and French cubism, the cabinet of abstracts, the graphics and the department of photography and media.
The ''Sprengel Museum'' shows the art of the 20th century.
In the centre are the large Marktkirche (Church St. Georgii et Jacobi, preaching venue of the bishop of the Lutheran Landeskirche Hannovers) and the ''Old Town Hall''.
Hanover also hosts a huge number of congresses and symposiums like ''International Symposium on Society and Resource Management''
Through the ''Marstall Gate'' you arrive at the bank of the river ''Leine'', where the world-famous ''Nanas'' of Niki de Saint-Phalle are located.
The ''Hannover Marathon'' is the biggest running event in Hanover with more than 11.000 participants and usually around 200.000 spectators.
The focus is on seven sectors, which stand for sustainable economic growth: Automotive, Energy Solutions, Information and Communications Technology, Life Sciences, Optical Technologies, Creative Industries and Production Engineering.
The most important Cabaret-Event is the ''Kleines Fest im Großen Garten'' (Little Festival in the Great Garden) which is the most successful Cabaret Festival in Germany.
Around 40 theatres are located in Hanover.
One major global reinsurance company is Hannover Re, whose headquarters are east of the city centre.
The Schnellweg ''(en: expressway)'' system, a number of Bundesstraße roads, forms a structure loosely resembling a large ring road together with A2 and A7.
Some other important running events are the ''Gilde Stadtstaffel'' (relay), the ''Sport-Check Nachtlauf'' (night-running), the ''Herrenhäuser Team-Challenge'', the ''Hannoversche Firmenlauf'' (company running) and the ''Silvesterlauf'' (sylvester running).
Hanover hosts also an important international cycle race: The ''Nacht von Hannover'' (night of Hanover).
Continental AG, founded in Hanover in 1871, is one of the city's major companies, as is Sennheiser.
The historic ''Garden Theatre'' ''inter alia'' hosted the musicals of the German rock musician Heinz Rudolf Kunze.
But Hanover is not only one of the most important Exhibition Cities in the world, it is also one of the German capitals for marksmen.
The English pronunciation , with stress on the first syllable and a reduced second syllable, is applied to both the German and English spellings, which is different from German pronunciation , with stress on the second syllable and a long second vowel.
The museum is named after August Kestner and exhibits 6,000 years of applied art in four areas: Ancient cultures, ancient Egypt, applied art and a valuable collection of historic coins.
In the district of Groß-Buchholz the 282-metre-high ''Telemax'' is located, which is the tallest building in Lower Saxony and the highest television tower in Northern Germany.
Many regattas take place during the year.
The Hannover Korbjäger are the city's top basketball team.
The palace itself, however, was largely destroyed by Allied bombing but is currently under reconstruction.
As a male-line descendant of George I, Queen Victoria was herself a member of the House of Hanover.
Some points of interest are the ''Grotto'' (the interior was designed by the French artist Niki de Saint-Phalle), the ''Gallery Building'', the ''Orangerie'' and the two pavilions by Remy de la Fosse.
After Napoleon imposed the Convention of Artlenburg (Convention of the Elbe) on July 5, 1803, about 35,000 French soldiers occupied Hanover.
Inside the building are four scale models of the city.
Since 2001 it has been part of the Hanover district (''Region Hannover''), which is a municipal body made up from the former district (''Landkreis Hannover'') and city of Hanover (note: although both ''Region'' and ''Landkreis'' are translated as ''district'' they are not the same).
The Legion later played an important role in the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.
Since 2008 a take-over is in progress: the Schaeffler Group from Herzogenaurach (Bavaria) holds the majority of the stock but were required due to the financial crisis to deposit the options as securities at banks.
However, Poland refused to accept them, leaving them stranded at the border with thousands of other Polish-Jewish deportees, fed only intermittently by the Polish Red Cross and Jewish welfare organisations.
The ''Great Garden'' is an important European baroque garden.
Some smaller areas are Australia, the wooded area for wolves, and the so-called swimming area with many seabirds.
The Congress of Vienna in 1815 elevated the electorate to the Kingdom of Hanover.
The ''Primeval Department'' shows the primeval history of Lower Saxony and the ''Folklore Department'' shows the cultures from all over the world.
In 1842 the first horse railway was inaugurated, and from 1893 an electric tram was installed.
The ''EXPOseeum'' is the museum of the world-exhibition "EXPO 2000 Hannover".
Nearby is the old royal sports hall, now called the ''Ballhof'' theatre.
The highlight of this fun fair is the  long ''Parade of the Marksmen'' with more than 12.000 participants from all over the world, among them around 5.000 marksmen, 128 bands and more than 70 wagons, carriages and big festival vehicles.
Near the entrance to the Berggarten is the historic ''Library Pavillon''.
When he learned of what was happening, he drove to the German embassy in Paris and shot the German diplomat Eduard Ernst vom Rath, who died shortly afterwards.
Hanover-based teams dominated the German Rugby scene for a long time.
It was the only German arm to fly against France throughout the entire Napoleonic wars.
Hanover was thus a gateway to the Rhine, Ruhr and Saar river valleys, their industrial areas which grew up to the southwest and the plains regions to the east and north, for overland traffic skirting the Harz between the Low Countries and Saxony or Thuringia.
The Great Garden consists of several parts.
The zoo received the Park Scout Award for the fourth year running in 2009/10, placing it among the best zoos in Germany.
''Head of the river Leine'' on the river ''Leine'' is one of the biggest rowing regattas in Hanover.
This resulted in a great number of soldiers from Hanover eventually emigrating to Great Britain, where the King's German Legion was formed.
Thus the principality was upgraded to the Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg, colloquially known as the Electorate of Hanover after Calenberg's capital (see also: House of Hanover).
Its electors would later become monarchs of Great Britain (and from 1801, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland).
In fact, during the reigns of the final three joint rulers (1760–1837), there was only one short visit, by George IV in 1821.
Every year Hanover hosts the Schützenfest Hannover, the world's largest marksmen's festival, and the Oktoberfest Hannover, the second largest such festival in Germany.
Another tourist sight in Anderten is the ''Hindenburg Lock'', which was the biggest lock in Europe at the time of its construction in 1928.
A worldwide unique diagonal/arch elevator goes up the large dome to an observation deck.
Another point of interest is the ''Old Town''.
It provides 496,000 square metres of covered indoor space, 58,000 square metres of open-air space, 27 halls and pavilions.
Modern art is also the main topic of the ''Kunsthalle Faust'', the ''Nord/LB Art Gellery'' and of the ''Foro Artistico / Eisfabrik''.
Nearby are the ''Leibniz House'', the ''Nolte House'', and the ''Beguine Tower''.
The landmark of this Fun Fair is the biggest transportable Ferris Wheel in the world ( high).
Residential areas were also targeted, and more than 6,000 civilians were killed by the Allied bombing raids.
A very nice quarter of the Old Town is the ''Kreuz-Church-Quarter'' around the ''Kreuz Church'' with many nice little lanes.
After 1937 the Lord Mayor and the state commissioners of Hanover were members of the NSDAP (Nazi party).
The ''Schützenfest Hannover'' is the largest Marksmen's Fun Fair in the world and takes place once a year (late June to early July) (2014 - July 4th to the 13th).
A large Jewish population then existed in Hanover.
The French army defeated the Hanoverian Army of Observation, leading to the city's occupation as part of the Invasion of Hanover.
A total of 2,400 people were deported, and very few survived.
Clemens'', the ''Reformed Church'' and the Lutheran Neustädter Hof- und Stadtkirche St. Johannis are located.
With more than 4,000 members, the ''Kestnergesellschaft'' is the largest art society in Germany.
Hanover could be inherited only by male heirs.
The landmark of Hanover is the New Town Hall (''Neues Rathaus'').
Forced labourers were sometimes used from the Hannover-Misburg subcamp of the Neuengamme concentration camp.
Some important theatre-events are the ''Tanztheater International'', the ''Long Night of the Theatres'', the ''Festival Theaterformen'' and the ''International Competition for Choreographs''.
Hanover is home to many insurance companies, many of which operate only in Germany.
Hanover also hosts annual commercial trade fairs such as the Hanover Fair and the CeBIT.
Some other important events are the ''Calenberger Cabaret Weeks'', the ''Hanover Cabaret Festival'' and the ''Wintervariety''.
The fairground can be reached by the ''Exponale'', one of the largest pedestrian bridges in Europe.
the theatre ''Die Hinterbühne'', the ''Rampenlich Variety'' and the revue-stage ''TAK''.
Hanover's industry, however, the new connection with Prussia meant an improvement in business.
The ''Kestner-Museum'' is located in the ''House of 5.000 windows''.
Hannoverimpuls is a joint business development company from the city and region of Hannover.
In September 1941, through the "Action Lauterbacher" plan, a ghettoisation of the remaining Hanoverian Jewish families began.
It features mostly exhibitions and projects of famous and important artists from Hanover.
The water polo team ''WASPO W98'' plays in the first division.
The first German Fencing Club was founded in Hanover in 1862.
Each year around 2 million visitors come to enjoy live music, comedy, cabaret and much more.
Hanover has an extensive Stadtbahn and bus system, operated by üstra.
In 2000, Hanover hosted the world fair Expo 2000.
The ''Opera House'', the ''Schauspielhaus'' (Play House), the ''Ballhofeins'', the ''Ballhofzwei'' and the ''Cumberlandsche Galerie'' belong to the ''Lower Saxony State Theatre''.
During the war seven concentration camps were constructed in Hanover, in which many Jews were confined.
Hanover is of national importance because of its universities and medical school, its international airport and its large zoo.
The ''Museum of veterinary medicine'' is unique in Germany.
The lake ''Maschsee'' hosts the ''International Dragon Boat Races'' and the ''Canoe　Polo-Tournament''.
Home matches are played in the ''Rudolf-Kalweit-Stadium''.
From 1868 to 1946 Hanover was the capital of the Prussian Province of Hanover and also of the Hanover administrative region until that was abolished in 2005.
The ''Tiergarten'' (literally the "animals' garden") in the district of Kirchrode is a large forest originally used for deer and other game for the king's table.
The All Sports Team has received the award "Team of the Year 2013" in Lower Saxony
Carpets and objects from the orient can be visited in the ''Oriental Carpet Museum''.
They are part of the ''Mile of Sculptures'', which starts from Trammplatz, leads along the river bank, crosses Königsworther Square, and ends at the entrance of the Georgengarten.
This so-called ''Red Thread'' marks out a walk that starts at the Tourist Information Office and ends on the Ernst-August-Square in front of the central station.
Hanover is a centre for Water sports.
They play their home games at the ''IGS Linden''.
The 36 most important sights of the city centre are connected with a -long red line, which is painted on the pavement.
''DRC Hannover'' plays in the first division, and ''SV Odin von 1905'' as well as ''SG 78/08 Hannover'' play in the second division.
The zoo consists of several theme areas: Sambesi, Meyers Farm, Gorilla-Mountain, Jungle-Palace, and Mullewapp.
A cabinet of coins is the ''Münzkabinett der TUI-AG''.
A range of programmes supports companies from the key industries in their expansion plans in Hannover or abroad.
Some other famous cabaret-stages are the ''Variety Marlene'', the ''Uhu-Theatre''.
During the Seven Years' War, the Battle of Hastenbeck was fought near the city on 26 July 1757.
