In 1937 the Nazi Party removed this privilege through the Greater Hamburg Act after the ''Senat'' of Lübeck did not permit Adolf Hitler to speak in Lübeck during his election campaign.
On joining the Hanseatic League, Reval was a Danish fief, but was sold, with the rest of northern Estonia, to the Teutonic Order in 1346.
Joined the 10-year Rostock Peace Treaty in 1283, which was the predecessor of the federation of Wendish towns (1293 onwards).
From 1240, it became a vassal of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, being fully integrated into the Grand Duchy in 1307.
He held the speech in Bad Schwartau, a small village on the outskirts of Lübeck.
These trading posts became significant enclaves.
"third part"): the Wendish and Saxon Drittel, the Westphalian and Prussian Drittel as well as the Gothlandian, Livonian and Swedish Drittel.
In England this happened in Boston, Bristol, Bishop's Lynn (now King's Lynn, which features the sole remaining Hanseatic warehouse in England), Hull, Ipswich, Norwich, Yarmouth (now Great Yarmouth), and York.
DDG Hansa was a major German shipping company from 1881 until its bankruptcy in 1980.
Not every community sent an own envoy, delegates were often entitled to represent a set of communities.
Nuremberg in Franconia developed an overland route to sell formerly Hansa-monopolised products from Frankfurt via Nuremberg and Leipzig to Poland and Russia, trading Flemish cloth and French wine in exchange for grain and furs from the east.
The very existence of the League and its privileges and monopolies created economic and social tensions that often crept over into rivalry between League members.
Hull also joined and Boston, Lincolnshire was considering an application in early 2013.
The Hanseatic cities came to the aid of one another, and commercial ships often had to be used to carry soldiers and their arms.
The Livonian Confederation incorporated modern-day Estonia and parts of Latvia and had its own Hanseatic parliament (diet); all of its major towns became members of the Hanseatic League.
The principal city and linchpin remained Lübeck; with the first general Diet of the Hansa held there in 1356, the Hanseatic League acquired an official structure.
The rising Swedish Empire had taken control of much of the Baltic Sea.
Capital of the Rhine-Westphalian and Netherlands Circle until after the Anglo-Hanseatic War (1470–74), when the city was prosecuted with temporarily trade sanctions () for some years in 1475 for having supported England, and Dortmund was made capital of the Circle.
In short, the century-long monopolization of sea navigation and trade by the Hanseatic League ensured that the Renaissance would arrive in Northern Germany long before the rest of Europe.
Origin, Destination
The economic crises of the late 15th century did not spare the Hansa.
Later they established their own trading station in Novgorod, known as Peterhof, which was further up river in the first half of the 13th century.
Sailing east, Visby merchants established a trading post at Novgorod called Gutagard (also known as Gotenhof) in 1080.
Despite this, the organization was not a state, nor can it be called a confederation of city-states; only a very small number of the cities within the league enjoyed autonomy and liberties comparable to those of a free imperial city.
Bruges was one of the principal Kontore of the League until the 15th century, when the seaway to the city silted up; trade from Antwerp benefiting from Bruges's loss.
The Bishopric of Dorpat gained increasing autonomy within the Terra Mariana.
The law provided that they had to appeal in all legal matters to Lübeck's city council.
The "Queen of the Hansa", Lübeck, where traders were required to trans-ship goods between the North Sea and the Baltic, gained imperial privileges to become a free imperial city in 1227, as its potential trading partner Hamburg had in 1189.
The refusal of the Hansa to offer reciprocal arrangements to their English counterparts exacerbated the tension.
"Drittel meeting") to work out common positions which could then be presented at a Tagfahrt.
Gotland, Livonia, Sweden
In 1229, German merchants at Novgorod were granted certain privileges that made their position more secure.
This area was a source of timber, wax, amber, resins, and furs, along with rye and wheat brought down on barges from the hinterland to port markets.
The League primarily traded timber, furs, resin (or tar), flax, honey, wheat, and rye from the east to Flanders and England with cloth (and, increasingly, manufactured goods) going in the other direction.
King Edward I granted a ''Carta Mercatoria'' in 1303.
Much of the drive for this co-operation came from the fragmented nature of existing territorial government, which failed to provide security for trade.
The latter include twelve Russian cities, most notably Novgorod, which was a major Russian trade partner of the Hansa in the Middle Ages.
For Lübeck in particular, this anachronistic tie to a glorious past remained especially important in the 20th century.
In 1560, administration of Bryggen was placed under Norwegian administration.
Skåne (Scania) was Danish until ceded to Sweden by the 1658 Treaty of Roskilde, during the Second Northern War.
Elbing had originally been part of the territory of the Old Prussians, until the 1230s when it became part of the State of the Teutonic Order.
Goslar was a fief of Saxony until 1280.
It was on the entrance of the land route to Hamburg, but this land route could be bypassed by sea travel around Denmark and through the Kattegat.
It was captured by the Teutonic Order in 1241 and liberated by a Lithuanian prince, becoming a ''de facto'' sovereign republic by the 14th century.
From 1339 to the 17th century, Griefswald was a member of the ''Vierstädtebund'' with Stralsund, Demmin and Anklam.
In 1356, during a Hanseatic meeting in preparation of the first Tagfahrt, the league confirmed this statute.
The Bergen Kontor continued until 1754; of all the ''Kontore'', only its buildings, the Bryggen, survive.
In the Dutch–Hanseatic War (1438–41), the merchants of Amsterdam sought and eventually won free access to the Baltic and broke the Hansa monopoly.
Lübeck became a base for merchants from Saxony and Westphalia trading eastward and northward.
This favourable treaty was the high-water mark of Hanseatic power.
The headquarters of the New Hansa is in Lübeck, Germany.
Ducal Prussia was a German principality that was a fief of the Polish crown until gaining its independence in the 1660 Treaty of Oliva.
It was very loosely associated with Hansa, and paid no membership fees, nor sent representatives to League meetings.
The lack of customs borders on the River Vistula after 1466 helped to gradually increase Polish grain exports, transported to the sea down the Vistula, from 10,000 tons per year in the late 15th century to over 200,000 tons in the 17th century.
It is the only surviving League building in England.
The merchants from the respective Drittel would then each choose two Ältermänner and six members of the Eighteen Men's Council (''Achtzehnmännerrat'') to administer the kontor for a set period of time.
The Stalhof kontor, as a special case, had a Hanseatic and an English ''Ältermann''.
After the EU enlargement to the East in May 2004 there were some experts who wrote about the resurrection of the Baltic Hansa.
Chief city (''Vorort'')
Hansa societies worked to remove restrictions to trade for their members.
In 1266, Henry III of England granted the Lübeck and Hamburg Hansa a charter for operations in England, and the Cologne Hansa joined them in 1282 to form the most powerful Hanseatic colony in London.
In addition to the major Kontors, individual Hanseatic ports had a representative merchant and warehouse.
Before the foundation of the League in 1356 the word ''Hanse'' did not occur in the Baltic language.
Joined the 10-year Rostock Peace Treaty in 1283, which was the predecessor of the federation of Wendish towns (1293 onwards).
The "new Hanse" fosters and develops business links, tourism and cultural exchange.
Brandenburg was raised to an Electorate in 1356.
If consensus could not be established on a certain issue, it was found instead in the appointment of a number of league members who were then empowered to work out a compromise.
Starting with trade in coarse woollen fabrics, the Hanseatic League had the effect of bringing both commerce and industry to northern Germany.
Skåne was Danish until ceded to Sweden by the 1658 Treaty of Roskilde, during the Second Northern War.
It stretched from the Baltic to the North Sea and inland during the Late Middle Ages and early modern period (c. 15th to 19th centuries).
From 1339 to the 17th century, Stralsund was a member of the ''Vierstädtebund'' with Greifswald, Demmin and Anklam.
German colonists in the 12th and 13th centuries settled in numerous cities on and near the east Baltic coast, such as Elbing (Elbląg), Thorn (Toruń), Reval (Tallinn), Riga, and Dorpat (Tartu), which became members of the Hanseatic League, and some of which still retain many Hansa buildings and bear the style of their Hanseatic days.
During the Livonian War (1558–83), Dorpat fell under the rule of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, with the 1581 Treaty of Drohiczyn definitively ceding Livonia to the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth until the city was captured by Sweden in the Polish–Swedish War (1621–1625).
The Antwerp Kontor closed in 1593, followed by the London Kontor in 1598.
Subsequently, he referred to Lübeck as "the small city close to Bad Schwartau."
The gigantic ''Adler von Lübeck'' warship, which was constructed for military use against Sweden during the Northern Seven Years' War (1563–70), but never put to military use, epitomized the vain attempts of Lübeck to uphold its long-privileged commercial position in a changed economic and political climate.
The Dutch merchants aggressively challenged the Hansa and met with much success.
Cologne also was called "Electorate of Cologne" (German: Kurfürstentum Köln or Kurköln).
The Tagfahrt or Hansetag were the only central institutions of the Hanseatic league.
Elector Frederick II caused all the Brandenburg cities to leave the League in 1442.
It adopted Magdeburg town law and 5000 Poles and 3500 Germans lived within the city proper in the 15th century; Poles steadily rose in the ranks of guild memberships reaching 41% of guild members in 1500.
The city was renamed Kaliningrad in 1946 after East Prussia was divided between the People's Republic of Poland and the Soviet Union at the Potsdam Conference.
Decisions and actions of the Hanseatic League were the consequence of a consensus-based procedure.
", with Lübeck named "Hanseatic City" (Rostock's football team is named F.C.
The Hansa-dominated maritime grain trade made Poland one of the main areas of its activity, helping Danzig to become the Hansa's largest city.
Lübeck's location on the Baltic provided access for trade with Scandinavia and Kievan Rus', putting it in direct competition with the Scandinavians who had previously controlled most of the Baltic trade routes.
Main office was located in House of Perkūnas from 1441 till 1532.
On the other hand, Hanseatic merchants could also come from settlements without German town law—the premise for league membership was birth to German parents, subjection to German law, and a commercial education.
Joined the 10-year Rostock Peace Treaty in 1283, which was the predecessor of the federation of Wendish towns (1293 onwards).
Most foreign cities confined the Hansa traders to certain trading areas and to their own trading posts.
The Bruges Kontor moved to Antwerp and the Hansa attempted to pioneer new routes.
Joined the 10-year Rostock Peace Treaty in 1283, which was the predecessor of the federation of Wendish towns (1293 onwards); since the 14th century gradually adopted the role of a chief city for the Pomeranian Hanseatic towns to its east
Danzig, a trading partner of Amsterdam, attempted to forestall the decision.
First, most of the Hansa cities either started as independent cities or gained independence through the collective bargaining power of the League, though such independence remained limited.
The member cities took responsibility for their own protection.
Consulates continued however, providing communication during the Napoleonic Wars, and the Hanseatic interest was only sold in 1853.
Antwerp became a major Kontor of the League, particularly after the seaway to Bruges silted up in the 15th century, leading to its fortunes waning in Antwerp's favour, despite Antwerp's refusal to grant special privileges to the League's merchants.
In the 12th and 13th centuries, Pskov adhered to the Novgorod Republic.
The Hansa sold ships everywhere in Europe, including Italy.
They seldom interacted with the local inhabitants, except when doing business.
Capital of the Prussian, Livonian and Swedish (or East Baltic) Circle.
London merchants persuaded Elizabeth I to rescind the League's privileges on 13 January 1598; while the Steelyard was re-established by James I, the advantage never returned.
It dominated Baltic maritime trade (c. 1400–1800) along the coast of Northern Europe.
For example, in 1157 the merchants of the Hansa in Cologne convinced Henry II, King of England, to free them from all tolls in London and allow them to trade at fairs throughout England.
In 1597, Queen Elizabeth I of England expelled the League from London and the Steelyard closed the following year.
Königsberg was the capital of the Teutonic Order, becoming the capital of Ducal Prussia on the Order's secularisation in 1466.
Hamburg and Bremen continue to style themselves officially as "Free Hanseatic Cities.
Holstein, Saxony, Mecklenburg, Pomerania, Brandenburg
The individual cities which made up the League had also started to put self-interest before their common Hanseatic interests.
Danzig had been first a part of the Duchy of Pomerelia, a fief of the Polish Crown, with Polish-Kashubian population, then part of the State of the Teutonic Order from 1308 until 1457.
Consensus-building on local and Tagfahrt levels followed the Low Saxon tradition of ''Einung'', where consensus was defined as absence of protest: after a discussion, the proposals which gained sufficient support were dictated aloud to the scribe and passed as binding ''Rezess'' if the attendees did not object; those favouring alternative proposals unlikely to get sufficient support were obliged to remain silent during this procedure.
In 1241, Lübeck, which had access to the Baltic and North Sea fishing grounds, formed an alliance—a precursor to the League—with Hamburg, another trading city that controlled access to salt-trade routes from Lüneburg.
It was razed by accidental fire in 1476.
The Hansa profited from the Nuremberg trade by allowing Nurembergers to settle in Hansa towns, which the Franconians exploited by taking over trade with Sweden as well.
A major economic advantage for the Hansa was its control of the shipbuilding market, mainly in Lübeck and in Danzig.
Rügen was a fief of the Danish crown to 1325.
In the 15th century, tensions between the Prussian region and the "Wendish" cities (Lübeck and its eastern neighbours) increased.
After the Livonian War (1558–83), northern Estonia became a part of the Swedish Empire.
The Treaty of Utrecht, sealing the peace, led to the League purchasing the Steelyard outright in 1475, with Edward having renewed the League's privileges without insisting on reciprocal rights for English merchants in the Baltic.
Capital of the Saxon, Thuringian and Brandenburg Circle
During the Livonian War (1558–83), Riga became a Free imperial city until the 1581 Treaty of Drohiczyn ceded Livonia to the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth until the city was captured by Sweden in the Polish–Swedish War (1621–1625).
At the start of the 16th century, the League found itself in a weaker position than it had known for many years.
In 2006 King's Lynn became the first English member of the newly formed modern Hanseatic League.
From 1339 to the 17th century, Demmin was a member of the ''Vierstädtebund'' with Stralsund, Greifswald and Anklam.
Kraków, then the capital of Poland, had a loose association with Hansa.
Over the next 50 years the Hansa itself emerged with formal agreements for confederation and co-operation covering the west and east trade routes.
However the League proved unable to prevent the growing mercantile competition, and so a long decline commenced.
Another similarity involved the cities' strategic locations along trade routes.
Toruń was part of the State of the Teutonic Order from 1233 until 1466.
The member communities then chose envoys (''Ratssendeboten'') to represent their local consensus on the issue at the ''Tagfahrt''.
However, with the division in Drittel, the members of the respective subdivisions frequently held ''Dritteltage'' (lit.
After the Second Peace of Thorn (1466), Royal Prussia including Gdańsk was part of the Kingdom of Poland.
This division was however not adopted by the depots (''Kontore''), who for their purposes (like Ältermänner elections) grouped the league members in different ways (e.g., the division adopted by the Stahlhof in London in 1554 grouped the league members into Dritteln, whereby Lübeck merchants represented the Wendish, Pomeranian Saxon and several Westphalian towns, Cologne merchants represented the Cleves, Mark, Berg and Dutch towns, while Danzig merchants represented the Prussian and Livonian towns).
When the Dutch started to become competitors of the Hansa in shipbuilding, the Hansa tried to stop the flow of shipbuilding technology from Hansa towns to Holland.
The legacy of the Hansa is remembered today in several names:  the German airline Lufthansa (i.e., "Air Hansa"); F.C.
Denmark had regained control over its own trade, the ''Kontor'' in Novgorod had closed, and the ''Kontor'' in Bruges had become effectively moribund.
German cities achieved domination of trade in the Baltic with striking speed during the 13th century, and Lübeck became a central node in the seaborne trade that linked the areas around the North and Baltic Seas.
The current President of the Hanseatic League of New Time is Bernd Saxe, Mayor of Lübeck.
Dutch freight costs were much lower than those of the Hansa, and the Hansa were excluded as middlemen.
In 1285 at Kalmar, the League agreed with Magnus III, King of Sweden, that Gotland be joined with Sweden.
Finally, the political authority of the German princes had started to grow—and so to constrain the independence of action which the merchants and Hanseatic towns had once enjoyed.
The same refinement of products out of cottage industry occurred in other fields, ''e.g.''
The league served to advance and defend the common interests of its heterogeneous members: commercial ambitions such as enhancement of trade, and political ambitions such as ensuring maximum independence from the noble territorial rulers.
The hegemony of Lübeck peaked during the 15th century.
Stralsund joined the 10-year Rostock Peace Treaty in 1283, which was the predecessor of the federation of Wendish towns (1293 onwards).
As an essential part of protecting their investment in the ships and their cargoes, the League trained pilots and erected lighthouses.
Westphalian-Prussian
Dutch ships sailed to Danzig to take grain from the city directly, to the dismay of Lübeck.
The Hanseatic free cities owed allegiance directly to the Holy Roman Emperor, without any intermediate family tie of obligation to the local nobility.
In June 1669 the last Hanseday was held in the town of Lübeck by the last remaining Hanse members, amongst others Cologne.
After the Second Peace of Thorn (1466), Royal Prussia, including Toruń, was part of the Kingdom of Poland.
To that end, member communities from different regions were pooled into three circles (''Drittel'', lit.
This league is open to all former Hanseatic League members and cities that once hosted a Hanseatic ''kontor''.
The League had a fluid structure, but its members shared some characteristics.
File:Carta Marina.jpeg|''Carta marina'' of the Baltic Sea region (1539)
The Steelyard was destroyed in 1469 and Edward IV exempted Cologne merchants, leading to the Anglo-Hanseatic War (1470–74).
In 1398 traders guild with close ties to Hanseatic league appeared in Kaunas.
After the Second Peace of Thorn (1466), Royal Prussia, including Elbląg was part of the Kingdom of Poland.
Hansa Rostock in memory of the city's trading past.)
Most were granted Lübeck law (''Lübisches Recht''), after the league's most prominent town.
Despite its collapse, several cities still maintained the link to the Hanseatic League.
The members of the Hanseatic League were Low German merchants, whose towns were, with the exception of Dinant, where these merchants held citizenship.
Nevertheless, its eventual rivals emerged in the form of the territorial states, whether new or revived, and not just in the west: Poland triumphed over the Teutonic Knights in 1466; Ivan III, Grand Prince of Moscow, ended the entrepreneurial independence of Hansa's Novgorod Kontor in 1478 – it closed completely and finally in 1494.
In 1470, Visby's status was rescinded by the League, with Lübeck razing the city's churches in May 1525.
When Bruges, Antwerp and Holland all became part of the Duchy of Burgundy they actively tried to take over the monopoly of trade from the Hansa, and the staples market from Bruges was transferred to Amsterdam.
etching, wood carving, armour production, engraving of metals, and wood-turning.
Hansa Rostock; the Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Groningen, in the Netherlands; the Hanze oil production platform (also in the Netherlands); the Hansa Brewery in Bergen; the Hansabank in the Baltic states (now known as Swedbank); and the Hanse Sail in Rostock.
The Hansa also waged a vigorous campaign against pirates.
The League also wielded power abroad.
When pressed by the king of Poland–Lithuania, Danzig remained neutral and would not allow ships running for Poland into its territory.
Many locals, merchant and noble alike, envied the power of the League and tried to diminish it.
The Prussian Quartier cities of Thorn, Elbing, Königsberg and Riga and Dorpat also signed.
The Dutch regarded Amsterdam's grain trade as the mother of all trades (''Moedernegotie'').
In 1557 and 1579 revised agreements spelled out the duties of towns and some progress was made.
The London ''Kontor'', established in 1320, stood west of London Bridge near Upper Thames Street, the site now occupied by Cannon Street station.
Metal ore (principally copper and iron) and herring came southwards from Sweden.
Not all towns with Low German merchant  communities were members of the league (e.g., Emden, Memel (today: Klaipėda), Viborg (today: Vyborg) and Narva never joined).
For example, in London the local merchants exerted continuing pressure for the revocation of privileges.
''Ältermann'', lit.
Well before the term ''Hanse'' appeared in a document in 1267, merchants in different cities began to form guilds, or ''Hansa'', with the intention of trading with towns overseas, especially in the economically less-developed eastern Baltic.
As trade increased newer and finer woollen and linen fabrics, and even silks, were manufactured in Northern Germany.
The division into Drittel was gradually adopted and institutionalized by the league in general (see table).
The dominant language of trade was Middle Low German, a dialect with significant impact for countries involved in the trade, particularly the larger Scandinavian languages, Estonian, and Latvian.
The League attempted to deal with some of these issues: it created the post of Syndic in 1556 and elected Heinrich Sudermann as a permanent official with legal training, who worked to protect and extend the diplomatic agreements of the member towns.
After Cologne was excluded after the Anglo-Hanseatic War (1470–74), Dortmund was made capital of the Rhine-Westphalian and Netherlands Circle.
The Hanseatic kontors each had their own treasury, court and seal.
The Nuremberger merchant Albrecht Moldenhauer was influential in developing the trade with Sweden and Norway, and his sons Wolf Moldenhauer and Burghard Moldenhauer established themselves in Bergen and Stockholm, becoming leaders of the Hanseatic activities locally.
The first reference to it as the Steelyard (''der Stahlhof'') occurs in 1422.
Drittel (1356–1554)
The Hanseatic Warehouse was constructed in 1475 as part of the Treaty of Utrecht, allowing the League to establish a trading depot in Lynn for the first time.
Initially unsuccessful, Hanseatic towns in 1368 allied in the Confederation of Cologne, sacked Copenhagen and Helsingborg, and forced Valdemar IV, King of Denmark, and his son-in-law Haakon VI, King of Norway, to grant the League 15% of the profits from Danish trade in the subsequent peace treaty of Stralsund in 1370, thus gaining an effective trade and economic monopoly in Scandinavia.
The League was created to protect the guilds' economic interests and diplomatic privileges in their affiliated cities and countries, as well as along the trade routes the merchants visited.
Merchants from northern Germany also stayed in the early period of the Gotlander settlement.
After several naval wars between Burgundy and the Hanseatic fleets, Amsterdam gained the position of leading port for Polish and Baltic grain from the late 15th century onwards.
From 1339 to the 17th century, Anklam was a member of the ''Vierstädtebund'' with Stralsund, Greifswald and Demmin.
By the late 16th century, the League had imploded and could no longer deal with its own internal struggles, the social and political changes that accompanied the Protestant Reformation; the rise of Dutch and English merchants, and the incursion of the Ottoman Empire upon its trade routes and upon the Holy Roman Empire itself.
Gothlandian-Livonian-Swedish
Assemblies of the Hanseatic towns met irregularly in Lübeck for a ''Hansetag'' (Hanseatic Diet), from 1356 onwards, but many towns chose not to attend nor to send representatives and decisions were not binding on individual cities.
The towns raised their own armies, with each guild required to provide levies when needed.
Bryggen was one of the principal Kontore of the League.
