Searching for them, Hanuman reaches Patala, the gates of which are guarded by a young creature called Makardhwaja (known also as Makar-Dhwaja or Magar Dhwaja), who is part reptile and part Vanara.
Meanwhile, Hanuman encountered Vasuki The King of Naglok.
He claimed to have visions where he met face to face with Hanuman.
After the victory of Rama over Ravana, Hanuman went to the Himalayas.
According to legend, Hanuman is one of the four people to have heard the Bhagwad Gita from Krishna and seen his Vishvarupa (universal) form, the other three being Arjuna, Sanjaya and Barbarika, son of Ghatotkacha and also Bhishma at the time of his death.
As per this, Hanuman is the son of Shiva and Mohini, where Mohini is the female form of Vishnu.
Indra blessed him that the Vajra weapon will no longer be effective on him and his body would become stronger than Vajra.
In the ''Ramayana'' Hanuman changes shape several times.
As soon as he left the flag, the chariot began to burn and turned into ashes.
Krishna smiled and placed his divine discus beneath the bridge, and this time Hanuman could no longer break it.Vishnu then appeared before them both after originally coming in the form of a tortoise, chiding Arjuna for his vanity and Hanuman for making Arjuna feel incompetent.
Surya gave him two siddhis of yoga namely "laghima" and "garima", to be able to attain the smallest or to attain the biggest form.
From Shiva he obtained the boons of longevity, scriptural wisdom and ability to cross the ocean.
Lord Hanuman always used to Naman, Smaran and Keerthanam of Lord Sri Rama.
The weapons are a parashu, a Khanda, a chakra, a dhaalam, a gada (mace), a trishula, a kumbha, a Katar, a plate filled with blood and again a big gada.
Several texts also present him as an incarnation of Shiva.
Unlike in Indian adaptations, he is not a celibate, and meets the mermaid Suvannamaccha while on a mission for Rama.
However, when Hanuman is unable to uproot these lingams, Rama orders them to worshipped permanently.
Upset over the attack, Hanuman's father figure Vayu deva (the deity of air) went into seclusion, withdrawing air along with him.
A  tall monolithic green granite ''murti'' of Sri Panchamukha Hanuman has been installed in Thiruvallur, also in Tamil Nadu.
Removes fear of enemies and confers victory.
When Maharishi Valmiki visited him to show him his own version of the Ramayana, he saw Hanuman's version and became very disappointed.
Hanuman reaches Lanka through Air jump and marvels at its beauty.
However, the twentieth-century linguist Murray Emeneau, specializing in Dravidian languages, debunked this theory,  pointing out that the word ''mandi'', as attested in Sangam literature, can refer only to a female monkey, and therefore, the word ''ana-mandi'' makes no semantic sense.
The celibacy or ''brahmacharya'' aspect of Hanuman is not mentioned in the original Ramayana.
A time when he changed shape was  while he searches for the kidnapped Sita in Ravana's palaces on Lanka, he contracts himself to the size of a cat, so that he will not be detected by the enemy.
As a child, believing the sun to be a ripe mango, Hanuman pursued it in order to eat it.
* ''Sakala Guna Nidhaanam'', the one who is the repository of all the virtues and good qualities.
Vayu also blessed him with more speed than he himself had.
Not wanting to waste any time, Hanuman thanks the mountain, touches it briefly, and presses on.
Vayu, the Hindu deity of the wind, delivered the falling pudding to the outstretched hands of Anjana, who consumed it.
As a result, he received some sacred pudding (payasam) to be shared by his three wives, leading to the births of Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Shatrughna.
As he was crossing over Ayodhya, Bharat, Rama's young brother, saw him and assumed that some Rakshasa was taking this mountain to attack Ayodhya.
One legend is that Indra, the king of the gods, struck Hanuman's jaw during his childhood (see below).
Hanuman came to be regarded as an avatar of the god Shiva by the 10th century CE (this development possibly started as early as in the 8th century CE).
Seeing Hanuman come up to him, an emotionally overwhelmed Rama embraces him warmly, declaring that he could never adequately honour or repay Hanuman for the help and services he received from the noble Vanara.
Hanuman then learned all of the latter's knowledge.
Hanuman, incognito, refuses.
After killing Simhika, a rakshasi, he reaches Lanka.
Hanuman's choice of Surya as his teacher is said to signify Surya as a ''Karma Saakshi'', an eternal witness of all deeds.
Another story of Hanuman's origins is derived from the Vishnu Purana and Naradeya Purana.
When Hanuman then requested Surya to quote his "guru-dakshina" (teacher's fee), the latter refused, saying that the pleasure of teaching one as dedicated as him was the fee in itself.
Taken aback, many of those present demand to know why he is destroying the precious gift.
Hanuman thrashed Rahu and went to take the sun in his mouth.
Hanuman then recollects his own powers, enlarges his body, and flies across the ocean.
* ''Raghupati Priya Bhaktam'', the one who is the dearest of all devotees to Rama.
The Jain text ''Paumacariya'' also mentions that Hanuman married Lankasundari, the daughter of Lanka's chief defender Bajramukha.
Sushena then identifies and administers the herb, and Lakshmana is saved.
Ultimately, he joins Rama in the war against Ravana and performs several heroic deeds.
Hanuman is worshiped also to get rid or win over demons (like daitya, danava), demi-gods (like Yaksha, kinnara, Gandharvas, Nāga-Nāginī), evil spirits (like Bhutam, Preta, Pishacha, Churela, Vetala, Brahmrakshasa) and other powerful negative energies (like Dakini, Shakini, Kakini, Kamini), which find their mention in Hinduism.
At a grand ceremony in his court, all his friends and allies take turns being honoured at the throne.
His first words to them are such that Rama says to Lakshmana that none could speak the way the brahmin did unless he or she had mastered the Vedas.
The access to the cave temple is through stairs starting from bottom of the mountain to its top.
Matsyaraja's birth is explained as follows: a fish (''matsya'') was impregnated by the drops of Hanuman's sweat, while he was bathing in the ocean.
In Thailand culture, Hanuman appears wearing crown on his head and armor to protect him from demons.
Ahiravana, brother of Ravana, had taken Lord Rama and Lakshmana to netherworld as captive, and the only way to kill him was to extinguish five lamps burning in different directions, all at the same instant.
Hanuman picked one up and it was Raghunandan's.
He kills many rakshasas, including Jambumali and Aksha Kumar.
Hanuman couldn't understand.
By divine ordinance, a kite snatched a fragment of that pudding and dropped it while flying over the forest where Anjana was engaged in worship.
Vishwakarma blessed him that Hanuman would be protected from all his creations in the form of objects or weapons.
As the pain was unbearable, Shani asked Hanuman to release him, promising that he would moderate the malefic effects of his influence on any person who prayed to Hanuman.
As a result, people worship Hanuman to get rid of the adverse effects that Shani inflicts on people's lives.
According to another theory, the name "Hanuman" derives from the proto-Dravidian word for male monkey (''ana-mandi''), which was later Sanskritized to "Hanuman" (see historical development below).
Narada, infatuated with a princess, went to his lord Vishnu, to make him look like Vishnu, so that the princess would garland him at swayamvara (husband-choosing ceremony).
When Hanuman asked Valmiki the cause of his sorrow, the sage said that his version, which he had created very laboriously, was no match for the splendour of Hanuman's, and would therefore go ignored.
The body of Hanuman was created by the great Lord Shiva as a main weapon.
However, the baby remains uninjured while the rock is shattered.
According to ''Parasara Samhita'', Hanuman married Suvarchala, the daughter of Surya (the Sun god).
Sita, however, insists that Hanuman deserved honour more than anyone else, and Sita gives him a necklace of precious stones adorning her neck.
With his brother Lakshmana, Rama is searching for his wife Sita who had been abducted by Ravana.
The Thai Hanuman was adapted from the origin of Ramakien in the Hindu Hanuman.
The Sundara Kanda, the fifth book in the Ramayana, focuses on the adventures of Hanuman.
The five faces depict these five forms.
In the hymn "The Thousand Names of Hanuman" (''Hanumansahasranam Stotra''), Shani is one of the names of Hanuman; and in some regions of India, Hanuman is depicted sporting an iron whip like that of Shani.
* Ablest sentence maker.
Hanuman landed and explained to Bharat that he was moving the mountain to save his own brother, Lakshmana.
Sugriva and his vanaras, most notably Hanuman, help Rama defeat Raavana and reunite with Sita.
* ''Vaanarayoothamukhyam'', the one who is the chief of vanara army (appears in Ram Raksha Stotra).
Another theory says the name derives from the Sanskrit words ''Han'' ("killed" or "destroyed") and ''maana'' (pride); the name implies "one whose pride was destroyed".
Kamadeva also blessed him that the appeal of sex will not be effective on him.
* ''Jitendriyam'', the one who has complete control of his senses (appears in Ram Raksha Stotra)
The curse is highlighted in Kishkindha Kanda and he was relieved from the curse by the end of Kishkindha Kanda when Jambavantha reminds Hanuman of his abilities and encourages him to go and find Sita and in Sundara Kanda he used his Supernatural powers at his best.
In Jain texts, Hanuman is depicted as the 17th of 24 Kamadevas, the one who is ultimately handsome.
She was redeemed from this curse on giving birth to a son.
* ''Gyaaninaam Agraganyam'', the one who is considered foremost among knowledgeable beings.
In Hinduism, Hanuman is one of the few persons — human or divine — who cannot be adversely affected by Shani, the astrological personification of the planet Saturn.
Hanuman assumed Panchamukhi or five-faced form to kill Ahiravana, a powerful rakshasa black-magician and practitioner of the dark arts during the Ramayana war.
* ''Manojavam'', the one who is swift as mind (appears in Ram Raksha Stotra)
(''Anjaneya'', which means "son of Anjana", is another name of Hanuman).
* ''Danujvana Krushanum'', the one who is the destroyer of forces of demons.
Yama, the God of Death blessed him healthy life and free from his weapon ''danda'', thus death would not come to him.
Realising he is no ordinary monkey, he inquires as to Hanuman's identity, which is then revealed.
The orientalist F. E. Pargiter (1852-1927) theorized that Hanuman was a proto-Dravidian deity, and the name "Hanuman" was a Sanskritization of the Old Tamil word ''Aan-mandhi'' or ''An-manti'' ("male monkey").
Hanuman approaches the two brothers in the guise of a brahmin.
Hanuman enters Patala.
In this version, Hanuman is not celibate.
Wards off the troubles caused by bad influences of the planets and confers all eight types prosperity (''Ashta Aishwarya'').
When Hanuman introduces himself to Makardhwaja, the latter asks his blessings.
Hearing this Hanuman with the ring quickly went to meet his Lord at the Sarayu River .Many of Rama's entourage, including Sugriva, decided to depart with him.
He offers to carry her back to Rama, but she refuses his offer, saying it would be an insult to Rama as his honour is at stake.
Rama embraces Hanuman, declaring him as dear to him as his own brother.
Hanuman was also called "langra veer"; ''langra'' in Hindi means limping and ''veer'' means "brave".
Bhima, unaware of his identity, tells him to move it out of the way.
Later on, he takes on the size of a mountain, blazing with radiance, to show his true power to Sita.
Hanuman insisted, whereupon Surya asked him to help his (Surya's) spiritual son Sugriva.
This development might have been a result of the Shavite attempts to insert their ishta devata (cherished deity) in the Vaishnavite texts, which were gaining popularity.
Ravana then orders Hanuman's tail be lit afire.
Hanuman then rescues Rama and Lakshmana.
Linguistic variations of "Hanuman" include ''Hanumat'', Anuman (Tamil), Hanumantha(Kannada), Hanumanthudu (Telugu), Anoman (Indonesian), Andoman (Malay) and Hunlaman (Lao).
Mahiravana keeps them as offerings to his deity.
In addition, the Thai Hanuman was derived from the Lopburi monkey in Thailand.
* ''Shreeraamadootam'', the one who is the messenger of Rama (appears in Ram Raksha Stotra).
Another tradition says that Anjana and her husband Kesari prayed Shiva for a child.
As one of the Chiranjivi he is also mentioned in several other texts, including ''Mahabharata'', the various Puranas and some Jain texts.
The non-Indian versions of Ramayana, such as the Thai ''Ramakien'', mention that Hanuman had relationships with multiple women, including Svayamprabha, Benjakaya (Vibhisana's daughter), Suvannamaccha and even Ravana's wife Mandodari.
This is in contrast to the story of Ayyappa and is still a point of discussion.
Brahma gave Hanuman a boon that would protect him from the irrevocable Brahma's curse.
The works of Tulsidas played an important role in increasing the popularity of Hanuman worship in North India.
By Shiva's direction, Vayu transferred his male energy to Anjana's womb.
From Brahma he obtained the power of inducing fear in enemies, of destroying fear in friends, to be able to change his form at will and to be able to easily travel wherever he wished.
But during the great battle between Karna and Arjuna, even Hanuman failed to stabilize the chariot of Arjuna and Krishna praised Karna for this feat.
He points out to Lakshmana that his accent is captivating, adding that even an enemy with sword drawn would be moved.
In response, Hanuman tears his chest open, and everyone is stunned to see Rama and Sita literally in his heart.
This enraged Indra, who responded by throwing the Vajra (thunderbolt) at Hanuman, which struck his jaw.
Maharishi Valmiki was so taken aback that he said he would take another birth to sing the glory of Hanuman which he had understated in his version.
As an act of penitence, Hanuman decided to help Arjuna by stabilizing and strengthening his chariot during the imminent great battle.
Hanuman then instructs Makardhwaja to rule Patala with justice and wisdom.
He also informs Ravana that Rama would be willing to forgive him if he returns Sita honourably.
The place where he meditated on this five-faced form of Hanuman is now known as Panchamukhi, wherein a temple for him has been built.
Unaware of this, Narada went to the princess, who burst into laughter at the sight of his ape-like face before all the king's court.
Hanuman too is saddened at the possible failure of his mission, until the other vanaras and the wise bear Jambavantha begin to extol his virtues.
Ravana, upon learning that Kalanemi has been slain by Hanuman, summons Surya to rise before its appointed time because the physician Sushena had said that Lakshmana would perish if untreated by daybreak.
Afterwards, Rama asks Hanuman to crown Makardhwaja king of Patala.
Hanuman, in another interpretation, is the incarnation or reflection of Shiva himself.
But Vishnu told him not to repent as the curse would act as a boon, for it would lead to the birth of Hanuman, an avatar of Shiva, without whose help Rama (Vishnu's avatar) could not kill Ravana.
The name thus means "one with prominent or disfigured jaw".
Kalanemi, in the guise of a sage, deceives Hanuman, but Hanuman uncovers his plot with the help of an apsara, whom he rescues from her accursed state as a crocodile.
Mainak explains that Lord Vayu had once saved him from Indra's Vajra.
Pleased by his persistence, Surya agreed.
* ''Bajrang Bali'', "the strong one (''bali''), who had limbs (''anga'') as hard as a vajra (''bajra'')"; this name is widely used in rural North India.
During the Pandavas' exile, he appears disguised as a weak and aged monkey to Bhima in order to subdue his arrogance.
Narasimha is the Lion-Man avatar of Lord Vishnu, who took the form to protect his devotee Prahlad from his evil father, Hiranyakashipu.
The 17th century Odia work ''Rasavinoda'' by Dinakrishnadasa goes on to mention that the three gods – Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva – combined to take to the form of Hanuman.
So his name is also Bala Bramhachari.
He then let Hanuman know about this and asked him to go and get it.
* ''Maarutatulyavegam'', the one who has a speed equal to the wind God (appears in Ram Raksha Stotra)
Again, he turns his body microscopically small to enter Lanka before killing Lankini, the she-demon guarding the gates of Lanka.
Varaha is another Lord Vishnu avatar, he took this form and dug up land, Hanuman may have had this face whilst collecting the Sanjeev mountain.
The baby is raised in Hanuruha, his great uncle's island kingdom, from which Hanuman gets his name.
The incident that led to this was an earlier encounter between Hanuman and Arjuna, wherein Hanuman appeared as a small talking monkey before Arjuna at Rameshwaram, where Rama had built the great bridge to cross over to Lanka to rescue Sita.
Rahu, a Vedic planet corresponding to an eclipse, was at that time seeking out the sun as well, and he clashed with Hanuman.
Hanuman did not stop this arrow as it had Rama's name written on it, and it injured his leg.
Hanuman is also considered to be the brother of Bhima, on the basis of their having the same father, Vayu.
* Possessing faultless speech and facial features.
According to these versions of the Ramayana, Macchanu is son of Hanuman borne by Suvannamaccha, daughter of Ravana.
Brahma also said: "Nobody will be able to kill you with any weapon in war."
Narada, unable to bear the humiliation, cursed Vishnu, that Vishnu would one day be dependent upon a vanara.
In their search for Sita, a group of Vanaras reaches the southern seashore.
At this, a few mock Hanuman, saying his reverence and love for Rama and Sita could not possibly be as deep as he implies.
He also begged (yachanam) Sri Rama to bless him the undivided love.
"Ram Raksha Strotam", the Sanskrit Strota, a Shield of Rama has lines devoted to Hanuman, saying, "Whoever reads this will be protected by Hanuman."
Hanuman, however, requested from Rama that he will remain on earth as long as Rama's name was venerated by people.
When Anjana and Kesari worshiped Shiva for a son, Shiva asked Vayu to place the energy inside Anjana's womb.
This also signifies vigilance and control over the five directions - north, south, east, west and the upward direction/zenith.
According in Thai myth, Hanuman was created by Lord Shiva.
''Paumacariya'' (also known as ''Pauma Chariu'' or ''Padmacharit''), the Jain version of Ramayana written by Vimalasuri, mentions Hanuman as a Vidyadhara (a supernatural being), who is the son of Pavangati and Anjana Sundari.
Another legend says that a demigod named Matsyaraja (also known as Makardhwaja or Matsyagarbha) claimed to be his son.
Sri Hanuman (Original)
Chitrakoot in Central India is claimed to be the resting place of Hanuman.
Sita accorded Hanuman that desire, and granted that his image would be installed at various public places, so he could listen to people chanting Rama's name.
This theory was also supported by other scholars, including linguist Suniti Kumar Chatterji.
Bhima then tries to move the tail himself but he is unable, despite his great strength.
He notes that there is no defect in the brahmin's countenance, eyes, forehead, brows, or any limb.
But Hanuman declined the offer, preferring to fly on his own, and he continued his journey with his injured leg.
In gratitude, Shani promised that those who prayed to Hanuman would be rescued from Shani's painful effects.
Anjana  performed intense prayers lasting 12 long years to Shiva to get a child.
According to him, the ''Ramayana'' may have been influenced by older tribal ballads.
He fell back down to the earth and became unconscious.
The ''Narada Purana'' describes Hanuman as a master of vocal music, and as an embodiment of the combined power of Shiva and Vishnu.
Though immune to the effects of this weapon Hanuman, out of respect to Brahma, allows himself be bound.
After, the battle of Kurukshetra was over, Krishna asked Arjuna, that today you step down the chariot before me.
A divine place where Chakleswar Mahadev situated.
Hanuman meets Rama during the latter's 14-year exile.
There he scripted a version of the Ramayana on the Himalayan mountains using his nails, recording every detail of Rama's deeds.
In ''Ramkien'', Hanuman is a devoted soldier of Rama, and a very strong monkey that could kill millions of King Toskaka's Demon armies.
The ''Brahma Purana'' mentions that the vanaras built several Shiva lingams in Kishkindha.
At this point, Hanuman released Shani.
In the Ramayana, Hanuman is said to have rescued Shani from the clutches of Ravana.
However, other scholars believe that Hanuman is not mentioned in the Vedic mythology: the "Vrsakapi" of Rigveda refers to another deity or is a common name for the monkeys.
This face removes all blemishes of sin and confers purity of mind.
Shiva assured safety of Hanuman with a band that would protect him for life.
After meeting Sita, Hanuman begins to wreak havoc, gradually destroying the palaces and properties of Lanka.
The word "Vrsakapi" or "Vrishakapi", later used as an epithet for Hanuman, is mentioned in the ''Rigveda'' (X:86).
Vishnu instead bestowed him with the face of a vanara.
* ''Sankata Mochana'', the one who liberates (''moca'') from dangers (''sankata'')
He traps Surya in his armpits and then resumes his search for the precious herb, but, when he finds himself unable to identify which herb it is, he lifts the entire mountain and delivers it to the battlefield in Lanka.
His characterization as a lifelong brahmachari (celibate) was another important development during this period.
Also he enlarges & immediately afterwards contracts his body to out-wit Surasa, the she-demon, who blocked his path while crossing the sea to reach Lanka.
Enraged, Ravana orders Hanuman's execution, whereupon Ravana's brother Vibhishana intervenes, pointing out that it is against the rules of engagement to kill a messenger.
Lord Rama, then with his arrow, spurred a stream of water on the tip of mountain and asked Hanuman to rest there with water of the stream falling on his tail to cool down burning sensation in his tail.
