Harmonica players who amplify their instrument with microphones and tube amplifiers, such as blues harp players, also have a range of techniques that exploit properties of the microphone and the amplifier, such as changing the way the hands are cupped around the instrument and the microphone or rhythmically breathing or chanting into the microphone while playing.
Unlike conventional harmonicas, blowing and drawing produce the same notes because its tuning is closer to the note layout of a typical Asian tremolo harmonica or the Polyphonias.
He had such success that eventually his brother and some relatives also started to make harmonicas.
The harmonica was developed in Europe in the early part of the 19th century.
blow: |G |B |D |G |B |D |G |B |D |G |
Also held in August each year is the Bean Blossom Harmonica Contest.
Each hole is the same interval (here, a perfect fifth) from its key of C counterpart; on the diatonic scale, a  G is a perfect fifth from C. The interval between keys can be used to find the note layout of any standard diatonic.
This device is used by folk musicians, one-man bands and singer-songwriters such as Woody Guthrie, Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Brian Jones and Mick Jagger of the Rolling Stones, John Lennon (mostly in Beatles songs), Bruce Springsteen, Billy Joel, Tom Harmon, Eddie Vedder, Beck, Ryan Adams, Steve Forbert, Ray LaMontagne, Donovan, Benny Gallagher (of the Scottish pop-folk duo Gallagher and Lyle), the English folk singer Ralph McTell and the blues singers Jimmy Reed and John Hammond Jr..
Williamson extended his influence on the young British blues rockers in the 1960s, recording with Eric Clapton and the Yardbirds and appearing on live British television.
This gives a quick pitch-alternating technique that is slightly more than vibrato and achieves the same aural effect on sustained notes, albeit by using two different tones instead of varying the amplitude of one.
Musicians who are primarily known as singers or performers on another instrument who also have recorded and performed harmonica solos include Bob Dylan, Bruce Springsteen, Sting, Donovan, Taj Mahal, Mick Jagger and Brian Jones (of the Rolling Stones), Huey Lewis (of Huey Lewis and the News), John Mayall, Paul Jones (of Manfred Mann and The Blues Band), Tom Petty and Scott Thurston (of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers), Peter Green (of Fleetwood Mac), Ronnie Wood (of Faces), Roger Daltrey (of the Who), Ray Davies (of the The Kinks), Steven Tyler (of Aerosmith), Robert Plant (of Led Zeppelin), Bono (of U2), Rick Davies (of Supertramp), and Richard "Magic Dick" Salwitz (of the J. Geils Band).
Eventually he became the first to mass-produce them.
Sly Stone played harmonica on Sly and the Family Stone's top 40 hit "I Want to Take You Higher".
Many others followed in Germany and also nearby in what would later become Czechoslovakia.
One of the early innovators of this approach was Marion "Little Walter" Jacobs, who played the harmonica near a "Bullet" microphone marketed for use by radio taxi dispatchers.
Stevie Wonder learned to play the harmonica at age 5 and plays the instrument on many of his recordings.
The first jazz or traditional music recordings of harmonicas were made in the U.S. in the mid-1920s.
Players still dip harmonicas in water for the way it affects tone and ease of bending notes.
Jason Ricci and Carlos del Junco are starting to integrate it in a more blues or rock oriented music.
Harmonica combs were traditionally made from wood but now are usually made from plastic (ABS) or metal (including titanium for high-end instruments).
A harmonica holder clamps the harmonica between two metal brackets, which are attached to a curved loop of metal that rests on the shoulders.
The pitch pipe is a simple specialty harmonica that provides a reference pitch to singers and other instruments.
In the 1990s, harmonica players from Hong Kong began to participate in international harmonica competitions, including the World Harmonica Festival in Germany and the Asia Pacific Harmonica Festival.
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
Harmonica Orchestra.
An exception to this is the recent Hohner XB-40, which valves are placed not to isolate single reeds but rather to isolate entire chambers from being active.
Its 11-hole mouthpiece can slide along the front of the harmonica, which gives numerous chord choices and voicings (seven triads, three 6th chords, seven 7th chords, and seven 9th chords, for a total of 24 chords).
These consist of a single large comb with blow-only reed-plates on the top and bottom.
In the 2000s, the Hong Kong Harmonica Association (H.K.H.A.)
In 1830, Christan Messner, a cloth maker and weaver from Trossingen, copied a harmonica his neighbour had brought from Vienna.
Using just the basic notes on the instrument would mean playing in a specific mode for each position.
Modern wooden-combed harmonicas are less prone to swelling and contracting.
In Hong Kong, Schools Music Festival is held every year for school students to compete in different music classes.
This technique can be accomplished in a number of ways.
-----------------------------
From these two basic types, a few modern designs have been created, such as the Hohner CBH-2016 chromatic and the Suzuki Overdrive diatonic, which have complex covers that allow for specific functions not usually available in the traditional design.
If the plates are bolted to the comb, the reed plates can be replaced individually.
Typically each hole has two reeds for each note, tuned to one octave of each other.
Belgian player Jean "Toots" Thielemans was a well-known master of jazz chromatic harmonica, as well as a champion whistler, who has been recorded on many notable songs in film and television, such as the theme from ''Sesame Street'', and the score from the Academy Award winning film ''Midnight Cowboy''.
In October 2012, it was revealed that a Beloit, Wisconsin, investment corporation, R&R Opportunities, had bought the assets of Harrison Harmonicas and that a feasibility study was under way to assess the possibilities of continued production of the Harrison B-Radical harmonica.
It was constructed out of borosilicate glass, the reeds were interchangeable and the screws were brass.
Recordings known at the time as "race records", intended for the black market of the southern states, included solo recordings by DeFord Bailey and duo recordings with a guitarist (Hammie Nixon, Walter Horton, or Sonny Terry).
In 1898, the harmonica was brought to Japan, where the Tremolo harmonica was the most popular instrument.
The Suzuki SSCH-56 Compact Chord harmonica is a 48-chord harmonica built in a 14-hole chromatic harmonica enclosure.
The vibrato might also be achieved via rapid glottal (vocal fold) opening and closing, especially on draws (inhalation) simultaneous to bending, or without bending.
It is laid out in four-note clusters, each sounding a different chord on inhaling or exhaling.
There are eight kinds of orchestral melody harmonica; the most common are the '''horn''' harmonicas often found in East Asia.
A harmonica is played by using the mouth (lips and tongue) to direct air into or out of one or more holes along a mouthpiece.
Blues and folk players refer to the instrument with a range of less common names, including ''hand reed,'' ''Mississippi saxophone,'' ''licking stick,'' ''pocket sax,'' ''toe pickle,'' ''tin sandwich,'' ''ten-holed tin-can tongue twister,'' ''blues burger,'' ''harpoon,'' ''moothie,'' and ''French harp''.
The advantage of this is that it fills out the lower octave.
If, as on most modern harmonicas, a reed is affixed above or below its slot rather than in the plane of the slot, it responds more easily to air flowing in the direction that initially would push it into the slot, i.e., as a ''closing reed''.
In the 1980s, numbers of harmonica students steadily decreased.
The only recent American contender in the harmonica market was Harrison Harmonicas, which folded in July 2011.
Billy Joel famously plays the harmonica, in addition to the piano, on his signature song, "Piano Man", which includes the harmonica throughout the piece.
In addition to other attractive prizes awarded to the top 3 winners in each division, the first-place winner of the Adult Division is invited to perform on the main stage of the Bean Blossom Blues Fest later that evening in front of a crowd of several thousand.
New designs were still developed in the 20th century, including the chromatic harmonica, first made by Hohner in 1924, the bass harmonica, and the chord harmonica.
Irish traditional music stylists include John and Pip Murphy, Noel Battle, Austin Berry, James Conway, Andy Irvine, Mick Kinsella, Brendan Power, Joel Bernstein, Don Meade, Paul Moran, Tom Byrne, Pat Casey and Rick Epping.
The glass harmonica has the word "harmonica" in its name, but it is not related to free-reed instruments.
Kratt Company in 1952.
Harmonica players (especially blues players) have developed terminology around different "positions," which can be confusing to other musicians, for example the slang terminology for the most common positions (1st being 'straight', 2nd being 'cross', 3rd being 'slant', etc.
In particular, a wooden comb can absorb moisture from the player's breath and contact with the tongue.
Some experimental and rare harmonicas also have had the reed plates held in place by tension, such as the WWII era all-American models.
In the 1970s, the Haletone Harmonica Orchestra (曉彤口琴隊) was set up at Wong Tai Sin Community Centre.
There are many types of harmonica, including diatonic, chromatic, tremolo, octave, orchestral, and bass versions.
Owing to competition between the harmonica factories in Trossingen and Klingenthal, machines were invented to punch the covers for the reeds.
John Lennon played harmonica on early Beatles hits (such as "Love Me Do", "Please Please Me", "I'll Get You" and "I Should Have Known Better" and in later songs (such as "Being for the Benefit of Mr.
Other diatonic harmonicas include octave harmonicas.
'''Harmonica coupling or coupled harmonica'''
Free-reed instruments like the Chinese sheng were fairly common throughout East Asia for centuries.
There are two types of cover plates: traditional open designs of stamped metal or plastic, which are simply there to be held; and enclosed designs (such as the Hohner Meisterklasse and Super 64, Suzuki Promaster and SCX), which offer a louder tonal quality.
Models of harmonica racks vary widely by quality and ease of use, and it quite often takes experimenting with more than one model of harmonica rack to find one that feels suitable for each individual player.
Since the 1950s, many blues harmonica players have amplified their instrument with microphones and tube amplifiers.
By the 1980s, though, as living standards improved, many instruments once beyond the budgets of most Taiwanese started to become more accessible and popular in preference to the harmonica.
Harmonicas were in short supply in the United States during World War II.
Right-pointing arrows indicate a sharp bend.
He cupped his hands around the instrument, tightening the air around the harp, giving it a powerful, distorted sound, somewhat reminiscent of a saxophone.
The chord harmonica has up to 48 chords: major, seventh, minor, augmented and diminished for ensemble playing.
Using a full blues band, he became a popular act in the South, with his daily broadcasts on the ''King Biscuit Time'' show, originating live from Helena, Arkansas.
The contest is held in Yellow Pine about  outside of Boise, Idaho and is called the Yellow Pine Harmonica Contest.
Many pulmonary rehabilitation programs  therefore have begun to incorporate the harmonica.
This obviates the need for cupping and waving the hands around the instrument during play.
The only difference between some early pitch-pipes and harmonicas is the name of the instrument, which reflected the maker's target audience.
Indeed, the similarities between harmonicas and so-called "diatonic" accordions or melodeons is such that in German the name for the former is "Mundharmonika" and the latter "Handharmonika," which translate as "mouth harmonica" and "hand harmonica."
For example, a Bb harmonica can be coupled above a C harmonica.
Depending on the country, "diatonic harmonica" may mean either the tremolo harmonica (in East Asia) or blues harp (In Europe and North America).
The "wail" of the blues harp typically requires bending.
In addition to playing the diatonic harmonica in its original key, it is also possible to play it in other keys by playing in other "positions" using different keynotes.
Seydel is still in business.)
He used a mass-produced wooden comb that he had made by machine-cutting firms.
As well, tube amplifiers produce a natural distortion when played at higher volumes, which adds body and fullness to the sound.
But the harmonica still represented a toy instrument in those years and was associated with the poor.
There are also other chord harmonicas, such as the Chordomonica (which operates similar to a chromatic harmonica), and the junior chord harmonicas (which typically provide six chords).
The first three holes play a major chord on blow and draw, with and without the slide.
In 1913, Shōgo Kawaguchi (川口章吾), known in Japan as the "Father of the harmonica", devised an alternate tuning, which is more suited to playing Japanese folk tunes.
Diatonic harmonicas were designed primarily for playing German and other European folk music and have succeeded well in those styles.
Much effort is devoted by serious players to restoring wood combs and sealing leaks.
The electric harmonica has been said to have been invented by Richard Smith, of Harmonix Harmonicas, as he is the inventor and holder of worldwide patents for placing a microphone inside the instrument.
During World War II, the War Department allotted a rationed supply of brass to Kratt's factory so they could continue to produce harmonicas that the Red Cross distributed to American troops overseas to boost morale.
Strictly speaking, "diatonic" denotes any harmonica designed to play in a single key—though the standard "Richter-tuned" diatonic can play other keys by forcing its reeds to play tones that are not part of its basic scale.
Australian player Brian Cain otherwise known as Indiana Phoenix mixes a range of playing techniques with modern equipment developed by playing with traditional acoustic guitar players to heavy rock and metal bands.
The choice of these is personal; because they project sound, they determine the tonal quality of the harmonica.
By the late 19th century, harmonica production was a big business, having evolved into mass production.
John Popper of Blues Traveler uses a customized microphone that encapsulates several of these effects into one handheld unit, as opposed to several units in sequence.
From France Yvonnick Prene plays jazz on chromatic harmonica.
Various types of wood and treatments have been devised to reduce the degree of this problem.
In 1931, Hiderō Satō (佐藤秀廊) announced the development of a minor key harmonica.
Some boutique amplifiers, however, are built from the ground up with characteristics that are optimal for amplified harmonica.
Local players such as Lau Mok (劉牧) and Fung On (馮安) promoted the chromatic harmonica.
Frontiersmen Wyatt Earp and Billy the Kid played the instrument, and it became a fixture of the American musical landscape.
Levy explored and pioneered the over blow technique in the early seventies, which enables the diatonic harmonica to play full chromatic scales across three octaves, while retaining the particular sound of the harp.
For example, when a draw note is played, the valve on the blow reed-slot is sucked shut, preventing air from leaking through the inactive blow reed.
The World Harmonica Festival is held in the autumn every four years in Trossingen, Germany, home of the Hohner harmonica company.
In the 21st century, radical new designs have been developed and are still being introduced into the market, such as the Suzuki Overdrive, Hohner XB-40, and the ill-fated Harrison B-Radical.
Alec Rice Miller, better known as Sonny Boy Williamson II, was one of the important harmonicists of this era.
Behind each hole is a chamber containing at least one reed.
He also helped to popularize the cross-harp technique, which became an important blues harmonica technique.
Peter Doherty of the Libertines and Babyshambles has also been known to use a harmonica especially during songs such as Albion and Killamangiro, and most notably his UK chart No.2 single Can't Stand Me Now.
The first glass diatonic harmonica (diatonic harmonica made of glass) was created by Geoff Stengel in 2009.
The glass harmonica is a musical instrument formed from a nested set of graduated glass cups mounted sideways on an axle.
In Nashville, P. T. Gazell has an influential style, as does Charlie McCoy, an American music harmonicist.
Initial diatonic harmonica tunings were major key only.
The basic parts of the harmonica are the comb, reed plates and cover plates.
Overblowing is used by Howard Levy, Frédéric Yonnet, Adam Gussow, and Chris Michalek.
However, less expensive models often have only one reed per note.
An important technique in performance is bending: causing a drop in pitch by making embouchure adjustments.
In the 1970s, Howard Levy developed the '''over bending''' technique (also known as "overblowing" and "overdrawing".)
Tuning may involve changing a reed's length, the weight near its free end, or the stiffness near its fixed end.
Some time before Hohner began manufacturing harmonicas in 1857, he shipped some to relatives who had emigrated to the United States.
In addition to the 19 notes readily available on the diatonic harmonica, players can play other notes by adjusting their embouchure and forcing the reed to resonate at a different pitch.
Performers include French harmonicist Nikki Gadout, Germans Steve Baker and  Johnny Müller (who played the title melody of the Winnetou-movies) and German-Italian Willi Burger.
Each of the glass cups is tuned to a different note, and they are arranged in a scalar order.
The reed plate is a grouping of several reeds in a single housing.
Harmonicas were heard on a handful of recordings in the early 1900s, generally labeled as a "mouth organ".
The most common way is to change how the harmonica is held.
Cover plates cover the reed plates and are usually made of metal, though wood and plastic have also been used.
An even more serious problem with wood combs, especially in chromatic harmonicas (with their thin dividers between chambers), is that the combs shrink over time.
American Larry Adler was one of the first harmonica players to perform major works written for the instrument by the composers Ralph Vaughan Williams, Malcolm Arnold, Darius Milhaud and Arthur Benjamin.
However, in the traditional slider-based chromatic harmonica, it is essential to the functioning of the instrument because it provides a groove for the slide.
Singing Cockles and Mussels alive alive oh
By 1868, he began supplying the United States.
In 1857, Matthias Hohner, a clockmaker from Trossingen, started producing harmonicas.
These have all twelve chromatic notes laid out on the same row.
A number (sometimes inside a circle) appears below each note in otherwise conventional sheet music, and indicates which number hole to play.
The comb is the main body of the instrument, which contains the air chambers that cover the reeds.
This provides a unique wavering or warbling sound created by the two reeds being slightly out of tune with each other and the difference in their subsequent waveforms interacting with each other (its beat).
Richter tuning, invented by Joseph Richter (who also is credited with inventing the blow and draw mechanism), was created in 1826 and was eventually adopted nearly universally.
A harmonica reed is a flat elongated spring typically made of brass, stainless steel, or bronze, which is secured at one end over a slot that serves as an airway.
This is a new technique of harmonica playing developed by William Price  in which two ten-hole diatonic harmonicas tuned a full step apart are coupled together by simply bolting one on top of the other using the bolt holes the manufacturer uses to attach the covers.
During this time, Finn Haakon Magnus, a Danish-American factory worker and entrepreneur, developed and perfected the molded plastic harmonica.
It is also during those years that musicians started experimenting with new techniques such as tongue-blocking, hand effects and the most important innovation of all, the second position, or cross-harp.
This tuning is also suited to local music throughout East Asia, and harmonicas using the tuning became popular in the region.
They are typically found in chromatic harmonicas, chord harmonicas and many octave-tuned harmonicas.
amplification for the guitar, harp, double bass, and a crude PA system for the vocals.
By 1855, there were at least three harmonica-making businesses: C. A. Seydel Söhne, Christian Messner & Co., and Württ.
The HarpArm is a magnetic harmonica holder that attaches to standard straight or boom microphone stands.
Windsavers are used when two reeds share a cell and leakage through the nonplaying reed would be significant.
One was Magnus Harmonica Corporation, whose founder Finn Magnus is credited with the development of plastic harmonica reeds.
Orchestral harmonicas are primarily designed for use in ensemble playing.
The mouthpiece is placed between the air chambers of the instrument and the player's mouth.
Most harmonicas are constructed with the reed plates screwed or bolted to the comb or each other.
Some modern and experimental comb designs are complex in the way that they direct the air.
Comb material was assumed to have an effect on the tone of the harp.
A young harmonicist named Marion "Little Walter" Jacobs revolutionized the instrument by playing it with a microphone (typically a "Bullet" microphone marketed for use by radio taxi dispatchers) cupped in his hands with the harmonica into a tube amplifier, giving it a "punchy" midrange sound that can be heard above radio static, or an electric guitar).
Reeds are pre-tuned to individual pitches.
In Scandinavian languages, an accordion is simply called "harmonika," whereas a harmonica is a "mundharmonika" (mouth harmonica).
The harmonica's versatility brought it to the attention of classical music during the 1930s.
-----------------------------
His colorful solos used the full register of his instrument and some chromatic harmonicas.
''Windsavers'' are one-way valves made from thin strips of plastic, knit paper, leather or Teflon glued to the reed plate.
One version mimics the layout of a piano or mallet instrument, with the natural notes of a C diatonic scale in the lower reed plate and the sharps and flats in the upper reed plate in groups of two and three holes with gaps in between like the black keys of a piano (thus there is no E#/Fb hole or B#/Cb hole on the upper reed plate).
Harmonikafabrik Ch.
After about 30 years, the Japanese developed scale tuning and semitone harmonicas that could play Japanese folk songs.
The concertina, diatonic and chromatic accordions and the melodica are all free-reed instruments that developed alongside the harmonica.
This difference in response to air direction makes it possible to include both a ''blow reed'' and a ''draw reed'' in the same air chamber and to play them separately without relying on flaps of plastic or leather (valves, wind-savers) to block the nonplaying reed.
Another technique, seldom used to its full potential, is altering the size of the mouth cavity to emphasize certain natural overtones.
An up or down arrow beneath the number indicates whether to blow or draw.
Howlin' Wolf's early recordings demonstrate great skill, particularly at blowing powerful riffs with the instrument.
Comb shrinkage can lead to cracks in the combs, because the comb is held immobile by nails, resulting in disabling leakage.
Learning to play a musical instrument also offers motivation in addition to the exercise component.
The 1960s and 1970s saw the harmonica become less prominent, as the overdriven electric lead guitar became the dominant instrument for solos in blues rock.
In the past, they were referred to as horn harmonicas.
It is possible to bend isolated reeds, as on chromatic and other harmonica models with wind-savers, but also to both lower, and raise (''overbend'', ''overblow'', ''overdraw'') the pitch produced by pairs of reeds in the same chamber, as on a diatonic or other unvalved harmonica.
Major companies are now found in Germany (Seydel, Bushman, Hohner – the dominant manufacturer in the world), Japan (Suzuki, Tombo – the manufacturer of the popular Lee Oskar harmonica, and Yamaha also made harmonicas until the 1970s), China (Huang, Johnson, Leo Shi, Suzuki, Hohner, Swan, AXL), and Brazil (Hering, Bends).
During the 1950s, chromatic harmonica became popular in Hong Kong, and players such as Larry Adler and John Sebastian Sr. were invited to perform.
The United States had two significant harmonica manufacturers, and both were based in Union, New Jersey.
Richard "Magic Dick" Salwitz, Billy Branch, John Popper, Tom Ball, "Dirty" Patrick Walsh, Paul Nebenzahl, Big Dave Perea, Joe Filisko, Miles Ryan, Paul Orta, Nuwki Nu and others are keeping the harmonica tradition alive.
Individual tremolo harmonica players from China moved to Hong Kong and established numerous harmonica organizations such as The Chinese Y.M.C.A.
The '''harmonica''', also known as a '''French harp''' or '''mouth organ''', is a free reed wind instrument used worldwide in many musical genres, notably in blues, American folk music, classical music, jazz, country, and rock and roll.
A few brands still use the traditional method of nailing the reed plates to the comb.
Harmonicas are available in a variety of types, the  best known Harmonica models are listed here.
The distinguishing feature of the tremolo-tuned harmonica's is that it has two reeds per note, with one slightly sharp and the other slightly flat.
Chicago harmonica player James Cotton specialized in slow, magnificent note-bends.
This can be integral with the comb (the diatonic harmonicas; the Hohner Chrometta); part of the cover (as in Hohner's CX-12); or may be a separate unit, secured by screws, which is typical of chromatics.
This pattern is repeated starting on hole 5, a whole step higher; and again starting on hole 9, for a total of 48 chords.
The chromatic harmonica gradually became the main instrument used by the Chinese Y.M.C.A.
Many harmonica players still prefer tube amplifiers to solid-state, owing to the perceived difference in tone generated by the vacuum tubes.
A curved arrow indicates bend notes—slightly to the left for a half step flat, and longer to the left to indicate a whole step flat.
Contemporary harmonicists Howard Levy, Jason Ricci, Carlos del Junco and Chris "Buddha" Michalek have pushed the envelope of the instrument.
The Asia Pacific Harmonica Festival is held regularly; in 2008 it was hosted by China.
All of the color was hand mixed using different oxides and borosilicate glass.
