They behaved like savages.
Three days later, it was announced that he had won the 2005 Nobel Prize in Literature.
A bandit act, an act of blatant state terrorism, demonstrating absolute contempt for the conception of international law."
In 1947 and 1948, he played Romeo and Macbeth in productions directed by Brearley.
Among his provocative political statements, Pinter called Prime Minister Tony Blair a "deluded idiot" and compared the administration of President George W. Bush to Nazi Germany.
His best-known plays include ''The Birthday Party'' (1957), ''The Homecoming'' (1964), and ''Betrayal'' (1978), each of which he adapted for the screen.
A memorial cricket match at Lord's Cricket Ground between the Gaieties Cricket Club and the Lord's Taverners, followed by performances of Pinter's poems and excerpts from his plays, took place on 27 September 2009.
His screenplays ''The Proust Screenplay'' (1972), ''Victory'' (1982), and ''The Dreaming Child'' (1997) and his unpublished screenplay ''The Tragedy of King Lear'' (2000) have not been filmed.
They raped nurses and teachers, slaughtered doctors, in the most brutal manner.
Pinter's first play, ''The Room'', written and first performed in 1957, was a student production at the University of Bristol, directed by his good friend, actor Henry Woolf, who also originated the role of Mr. Kidd (which he reprised in 2001 and 2007).
A section of Pinter's ''Proust Screenplay'' was, however, released as the 1984 film ''Swann in Love'' (''Un amour de Swann''), directed by Volker Schlöndorff, and it was also adapted by Michael Bakewell as a two-hour radio drama broadcast on BBC Radio 3 in 1995, before Pinter and director Di Trevis collaborated to adapt it for the 2000 National Theatre production.
After experiencing the deaths of first his mother (1992) and then his father (1997), again merging the personal and the political, Pinter wrote the poems "Death" (1997) and "The Disappeared" (1998).
Such plays begin with an apparently innocent situation that becomes both threatening and "absurd" as Pinter's characters behave in ways often perceived as inexplicable by his audiences and one another.
The friends he made in those days—most particularly Henry Woolf, Michael (Mick) Goldstein and Morris (Moishe) Wernick—have always been a vital part of the emotional texture of his life."
''The Collection'' premièred at the Aldwych Theatre in 1962, and ''The Dwarfs'', adapted from Pinter's then unpublished novel of the same title, was first broadcast on radio in 1960, then adapted for the stage (also at the Arts Theatre Club) in a double bill with ''The Lover'', which was then televised on Associated Rediffusion in 1963; and ''Tea Party'', a play that Pinter developed from his 1963 short story, first broadcast on BBC TV in 1965.
Among over 35 plays that Pinter directed were ''Next of Kin'' (1974), by John Hopkins; ''Blithe Spirit'' (1976),  by Noël Coward; ''The Innocents'' (1976), by William Archibald; ''Circe and Bravo'' (1986), by Donald Freed; ''Taking Sides'' (1995), by Ronald Harwood; and ''Twelve Angry Men'' (1996), by Reginald Rose.
Pinter was born on 10 October 1930, in Hackney, east London, the only child of English parents of Jewish Eastern European ancestry: his father, Hyman "Jack" Pinter (1902–1997) was a ladies' tailor; his mother, Frances (née Moskowitz; 1904–1992), a housewife.
On 26 December 2008, when ''No Man's Land'' reopened at the Duke of York's, the actors paid tribute to Pinter from the stage, with Michael Gambon reading Hirst's monologue about his "photograph album" from Act Two that Pinter had asked him to read at his funeral, ending with a standing ovation from the audience, many of whom were in tears:
Some of this later poetry included "The 'Special Relationship'", "Laughter", and "The Watcher".
In 1952 he began acting in regional English repertory productions; from 1953 to 1954, he worked for the Donald Wolfit Company, at the King's Theatre, Hammersmith, performing eight roles.
In response, the audience shouted ''No'' in unison, urging him to keep writing.
Later plays such as ''No Man's Land'' (1975) and ''Betrayal'' (1978) became known as "memory plays".
Sarah Lyall notes in her 2007 interview with Pinter in ''The New York Times'' that his "latest work, a slim pamphlet called "Six Poems for A.," comprises poems written over 32 years, with "A" of course being Lady Antonia.
In all, Pinter played over 20 roles under that name.
These characters' deceptively smooth exteriors mask their extreme viciousness.
The example of Pinter's stalwart opposition to what he termed "the modes of thinking of those in power"—the "brick wall" of the "minds" perpetuating the "status quo"—infused the "vast political pessimism" that some academic critics may perceive in his artistic work, its "drowning landscape" of harsh contemporary realities, with some residual "hope for restoring the dignity of man."
According to Billington, under Brearley's instruction, "Pinter shone at English, wrote for the school magazine and discovered a gift for acting."
According to Billington, "If the notion of male loyalty, competitive rivalry and fear of betrayal forms a constant thread in Pinter's work from ''The Dwarfs'' onwards, its origins can be found in his teenage Hackney years.
It was then not produced often until the 1980s, and it has been revived more frequently since 2000, including the West End Trafalgar Studios production in 2007.
Pinter himself and later critics generally credited Hobson as bolstering him and perhaps even rescuing his career.
In 1964, ''The Birthday Party'' was revived both on television (with Pinter himself in the role of Goldberg) and on stage (directed by Pinter at the Aldwych Theatre) and was well received.
Never more than now."
After the Academy notified Pinter of his award, he had planned to travel to Stockholm to present his Nobel Lecture in person.
It is tempting but inaccurate to equate the comic power inversions of the social behavior in ''Celebration'' with lasting change in larger political structures", according to Grimes, for whom the play indicates Pinter's pessimism about the possibility of changing the status quo.
After that, "Life in Hanover Terrace gradually became impossible", and Pinter moved out of their house on 28 April 1975, five days after the première of ''No Man's Land''.
Michael Billington wrote that Pinter saw Daniel's name change as "a largely pragmatic move on Daniel's part designed to keep the press&nbsp;... at bay."
Pinter discovered his social potential as a student at Hackney Downs School, a London grammar school, between 1944 and 1948.
During this period, Pinter also wrote the radio play ''A Slight Ache'', first broadcast on the BBC Third Programme in 1959 and then adapted to the stage and performed at the Arts Theatre Club in 1961.
A major influence on Pinter was his inspirational English teacher Joseph Brearley, who directed him in school plays and with whom he took long walks, talking about literature.
Another memorial celebration, held in the Olivier Theatre, at the Royal National Theatre, in London, on the evening of 7 June 2009, consisted of excerpts and readings from Pinter's writings by nearly three dozen actors, many of whom were his friends and associates, including: Eileen Atkins, David Bradley, Colin Firth, Henry Goodman, Sheila Hancock, Alan Rickman, Penelope Wilton, Susan Wooldridge, and Henry Woolf; and a troupe of students from the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, directed by Ian Rickson.
Harold Pinter earned a reputation for being notoriously pugnacious, enigmatic, taciturn, terse, prickly, explosive and forbidding.
His second play, ''The Birthday Party'', closed after eight performances, but was enthusiastically reviewed by critic Harold Hobson.
Revivals in 2008 included the 40th-anniversary production of the American première of ''The Homecoming'' on Broadway, directed by Daniel J. Sullivan.
During that period, he also performed occasional roles in his own and others' works for radio, TV, and film, as he continued to do throughout his career.
On its surface the play may appear to have fewer overtly political resonances than some of the plays from the 1980s and 1990s; but its central male characters, brothers named Lambert and Matt, are members of the elite (like the men in charge in ''Party Time''), who describe themselves as "peaceful strategy consultants because we don't carry guns."
The first of the poems was written in Paris, where she and Mr. Pinter traveled soon after they met.
Pinter told Gussow in 1988, "I've lived that line all my damn life.
In 2001 Pinter joined the International Committee to Defend Slobodan Milošević (ICDSM), which appealed for a fair trial and for the freedom of Slobodan Milošević, signing a related "Artists' Appeal for Milošević" in 2004.
''Celebration'' evokes familiar Pinteresque political contexts: "The ritzy loudmouths in 'Celebration'&nbsp;... and the quieter working-class mumblers of 'The Room'&nbsp;... have everything in common beneath the surface".
In its première in the National Theatre's two-part production of ''Sketches'', despite undergoing chemotherapy at the time, Pinter played the ruthless Minister willing to murder little children for the benefit of "The State".
More than three decades later the two are rarely apart, and Mr. Pinter turns soft, even cozy, when he talks about his wife."
Pinter and Merchant had both met Fraser in 1969, when all three worked together on a National Gallery programme about Mary, Queen of Scots; several years later, on 8–9 January 1975, Pinter and Fraser became romantically involved.
Vivien Merchant died of acute alcoholism in the first week of October 1982, at the age of 53.
In October 1989 Pinter recalled: "I was in English rep as an actor for about 12 years.
But, in his early work especially, they are often seen as disruptive influences on some pure and Platonic ideal of male friendship: one of the most crucial of all Pinter's lost Edens."
He was considered to have been one of the most influential modern British dramatists, Along with the 1967 Tony Award for Best Play for ''The Homecoming'' and several other American awards and award nominations, he and his plays received many awards in the UK and elsewhere throughout the world.
Because of a two-week delay in Merchant's signing the divorce papers, however, the reception had to precede the actual ceremony, originally scheduled to occur on his 50th birthday.
Pinter received over 50 awards, prizes, and other honours, including the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2005 and the French Légion d'honneur in 2007.
I've never been able to write a happy play, but I've been able to enjoy a happy life.
In 2009, English PEN established the PEN Pinter Prize, which is awarded annually to a British writer or a writer resident in Britain who, in the words of Pinter's Nobel speech, casts an 'unflinching, unswerving' gaze upon the world, and shows a 'fierce intellectual determination&nbsp;... to define the real truth of our lives and our societies'.
Following a three-year period of creative drought in the early 1980s after his marriage to Antonia Fraser and the death of Vivien Merchant, Pinter's plays tended to become shorter and more overtly political, serving as critiques of oppression, torture, and other abuses of human rights, linked by the apparent "invulnerability of power."
Billington observes that "The break-up with Vivien and the new life with Antonia was to have a profound effect on Pinter's personality and his work," though he adds that Fraser herself did not claim to have influence over Pinter or his writing.
He directed almost 50 productions of his own and others' plays for stage, film, and television, including 10 productions of works by Simon Gray: the stage and/or film premières of ''Butley'' (stage, 1971; film, 1974), ''Otherwise Engaged'' (1975), ''The Rear Column'' (stage, 1978; TV, 1980), ''Close of Play'' (NT, 1979), ''Quartermaine's Terms'' (1981), ''Life Support'' (1997), ''The Late Middle Classes'' (1999), and ''The Old Masters'' (2004).
I think you can see that in his work after ''No Man's Land'' 1975, which was a very bleak play."
He was chairman of the Gaieties Cricket Club, a supporter of Yorkshire Cricket Club, and devoted a section of his official website to the sport.
Pinter's last stage play, ''Celebration'' (2000), is a social satire set in an opulent restaurant, which lampoons The Ivy, a fashionable venue in London's West End theatre district, and its patrons who "have just come from performances of either the ballet or the opera.
'''Harold Pinter'''  (; 10 October 1930&nbsp;– 24 December 2008) was a Nobel Prize-winning English playwright, screenwriter, director and actor.
Pinter's unpublished manuscripts and letters to and from him are held in the Harold Pinter Archive in the Modern Literary Manuscripts division of the British Library.
Pinter's last filmed screenplay was an adaptation of the 1970 Tony Award-winning play ''Sleuth'', by Anthony Shaffer, which was commissioned by Jude Law, one of the film's producers.
Scholars agree that Pinter's dramatic rendering of power relations results from this scrutiny.
He was fined for refusing National service as a conscientious objector.
Most of issue number 28 of Craig Raine's Arts Tri-Quarterly ''Areté'' was devoted to pieces remembering Pinter, beginning with Pinter's 1987 unpublished love poem dedicated "To Antonia" and his poem "Paris", written in 1975 (the year in which he and Fraser began living together), followed by brief memoirs by some of Pinter's associates and friends, including Patrick Marber, Nina Raine, Tom Stoppard, Peter Nichols, Susanna Gross, Richard Eyre, and David Hare.
The production ran for only nine performances, as part of the 50th-anniversary celebration season of the Royal Court Theatre; it sold out within minutes of the opening of the box office and tickets commanded large sums from ticket resellers.
His early works were described by critics as "comedy of menace".
He was a sprinter and a keen cricket player, acting in school plays and writing poetry.
On his appointment, Pinter commented: "I was a student at Central in 1950–51.
Indeed, she told Billington that "other people such as Peggy Ashcroft, among others had a shaping influence on Pinter's politics" and attributed changes in his writing and political views to a change from "an unhappy, complicated personal life&nbsp;... to a happy, uncomplicated personal life", so that "a side of Harold which had always been there was somehow released.
''Mountain Language'' (1988) is about the Turkish suppression of the Kurdish language.
In October and November 2006, Sheffield Theatres hosted Pinter: A Celebration.
One performance was filmed and broadcast on BBC Four on 21 June 2007, and also screened later, as part of the memorial PEN Tribute to Pinter, in New York, on 2 May 2009.
His first overtly political one-act play is ''One for the Road'' (1984).
In September 2011, British Theatre owners, Ambassador Theatre Group (ATG) announced it was renaming its ''Comedy Theatre'', Panton Street, London to become ''The Harold Pinter Theatre''.
Later Pinter continued to campaign against the Iraq War and on behalf of other political causes that he supported.
In response, Pinter praised France's opposition to the war in Iraq.
A reclusive gifted musician and writer, Daniel changed his surname from Pinter to Brand, the maiden name of his maternal grandmother, before Pinter and Fraser became romantically involved; while according to Fraser, his father couldn't understand it, she says that she could: "Pinter is such a distinctive name that he must have got tired of being asked, 'Any relation?
Diane Abbott, the Member of Parliament for Hackney North & Stoke Newington proposed an early day motion in the House of Commons to support a residents' campaign to restore the Clapton Cinematograph Theatre, established in Lower Clapton Road in 1910, and to turn it into a memorial to Pinter "to honour this Hackney boy turned literary great."
He was very active in the antiwar movement in the United Kingdom, speaking at rallies held by the Stop the War Coalition and frequently criticising American aggression, as when he asked rhetorically, in his acceptance speech for the Wilfred Owen Award for Poetry on 18 March 2007: "What would Wilfred Owen make of the invasion of Iraq?
In that interview Pinter "acknowledged that his plays—full of infidelity, cruelty, inhumanity, the lot—seem at odds with his domestic contentment.
Pinter called the US invasion of Iraq "an arbitrary military action inspired by a series of lies upon lies and gross manipulation of the media and therefore of the public", and condemned the British government for its cooperation.
In 1995, he accepted the David Cohen Prize, in recognition of a lifetime of literary achievement.
At the age of 12, Pinter began writing poetry, and in spring 1947, his poetry was first published in the ''Hackney Downs School Magazine''.
Smaller collections of Pinter manuscripts are in the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, the University of Texas at Austin; The Lilly Library, Indiana University at Bloomington; the Mandeville Special Collections Library, Geisel Library, at the University of California, San Diego; the British Film Institute, in London; and the Margaret Herrick Library, Pickford Center for Motion Picture Study, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Beverly Hills, California.
In 1997 he became a BAFTA Fellow.
The Nobel Prize Awards Ceremony  and related events throughout Scandinavia took place in December 2005.
Pinter's career as a playwright began with a production of ''The Room'' in 1957.
Their son, Daniel, was born in 1958.
It has since been released as a DVD.
Pinter acknowledges the influence of Samuel Beckett, particularly on his early work; they became friends, sending each other drafts of their works in progress for comments.
On 16 June 2009, Antonia Fraser officially opened a commemorative room at the Hackney Empire.
For seven years, from 1962 to 1969, Pinter was engaged in a clandestine affair with BBC-TV presenter and journalist Joan Bakewell, which inspired his 1978 play ''Betrayal'', and also throughout that period and beyond he had an affair with an American socialite, whom he nicknamed "Cleopatra".
Yet, as the Waiter's often comically unbelievable reminiscences about his grandfather demonstrate in ''Celebration'', Pinter's final stage plays also extend some expressionistic aspects of his earlier "memory plays", while harking back to his "comedies of menace", as illustrated in the characters and in the Waiter's final speech:
Through the early 1970s, Merchant appeared in many of Pinter's works, including ''The Homecoming'' on stage (1965) and screen (1973), but the marriage was turbulent.
Pinter adores women, enjoys flirting with them, worships their resilience and strength.
This relationship was another secret he kept from both his wife and Bakewell.
One wall of his study was dominated by a portrait of himself as a young man playing cricket, which was described by Sarah Lyall, writing in ''The New York Times'': "The painted Mr. Pinter, poised to swing his bat, has a wicked glint in his eye; testosterone all but flies off the canvas."
Billington states that the "life-and-death intensity of daily experience" before and during the Blitz left Pinter with profound memories "of loneliness, bewilderment, separation and loss: themes that are in all his works."
Seitz responded, "Let me tell you something.
In mid-August 1977, after Pinter and Fraser had spent two years living in borrowed and rented quarters, they moved into her former family home in Holland Park, where Pinter began writing ''Betrayal''.
He registered as a conscientious objector, was brought to trial twice, and was ultimately fined for refusing to serve.
He appeared as an actor in productions of his own work on radio and film.
A Call by Jews in Britain", published in ''The Times'' on 6 July 2006, and he was a patron of the Palestine Festival of Literature.
After the Frasers' divorce had become final in 1977 and the Pinters' in 1980, Pinter married Fraser on 27 November 1980.
On 18 March 2007, BBC Radio 3 broadcast a new radio production of ''The Homecoming'', directed by Thea Sharrock and produced by Martin J. Smith, with Pinter performing the role of Max (for the first time; he had previously played Lenny on stage in 1964).
In February and March 2007, a 50th anniversary of ''The Dumb Waiter'', was produced at the Trafalgar Studios.
The first production of ''The Caretaker'', at the Arts Theatre Club, in London, in 1960, established Pinter's theatrical reputation.
His commissioned screenplays of others' works for the films ''The Handmaid's Tale'' (1990), ''The Remains of the Day'' (1990), and ''Lolita'' (1997), remain unpublished and in the case of the latter two films, uncredited, though several scenes from or aspects of his scripts were used in these finished films.
So I've risen from the dead."
Pinter's "political theater dramatizes the interplay and conflict of the opposing poles of involvement and disengagement."
Pinter's lecture has been widely distributed by print and online media and has provoked much commentary and debate, with some commentators accusing Pinter of "anti-Americanism".
Working as both a screenwriter and as a playwright, Pinter composed a script called ''The Compartment'' (1966), for a trilogy of films to be contributed by Samuel Beckett, Eugène Ionesco, and Pinter, of which only Beckett's film, titled ''Film'', was actually produced.
A few months ago a Contra force attacked the parish.
In "A Play and Its Politics", a 1985 interview with Nicholas Hern, Pinter described his earlier plays retrospectively from the perspective of the politics of power and the dynamics of oppression.
Please demand that the US government withdraw its support from this shocking terrorist activity."
He directed nearly 50 productions for stage, theatre and screen.
In 1940 and 1941, after the Blitz, Pinter was evacuated from their house in London to Cornwall and Reading.
He was an officer in International PEN, travelling with American playwright Arthur Miller to Turkey in 1985 on a mission co-sponsored with a Helsinki Watch committee to investigate and protest against the torture of imprisoned writers.
In a review published in 1958, borrowing from the subtitle of ''The Lunatic View: A Comedy of Menace'', a play by David Campton, critic Irving Wardle called Pinter's early plays "comedy of menace"—a label that people have applied repeatedly to his work.
From 1954 until 1959, Pinter acted under the stage name David Baron.
In 1996, he received  a Laurence Olivier Special Award for lifetime achievement in the theatre.
I enjoyed my time there very much and I am delighted to become president of a remarkable institution."
At its end, Pinter's widow, Antonia Fraser, stepped forward to his grave and quoted from Horatio's speech after the death of Hamlet: "Goodnight, sweet prince, / And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest."
Like his plays of the 1980s, ''The Hothouse'' concerns authoritarianism and the abuses of power politics, but it is also a comedy, like his earlier comedies of menace.
David Edgar, writing in ''The Guardian'', defended Pinter against what he termed Pinter's "being berated by the belligerati" like Johann Hari, who felt that he did not "deserve" to win the Nobel Prize.
Subsequently, he continued training at the Central School of Speech and Drama and worked in repertory theatre in Ireland and England.
Along with the international symposium on Pinter: Passion, Poetry, Politics, curated by Billington, the 2006 Europe Theatre Prize theatrical events celebrating Pinter included new productions (in French) of ''Precisely'' (1983), ''One for the Road'' (1984), ''Mountain Language'' (1988), ''The New World Order'' (1991), ''Party Time'' (1991), and ''Press Conference'' (2002) (French versions by Jean Pavans); and ''Pinter Plays, Poetry & Prose'', an evening of dramatic readings, directed by Alan Stanford, of the Gate Theatre, Dublin.
In 1985 Pinter stated that whereas his earlier plays presented metaphors for power and powerlessness, the later ones present literal realities of power and its abuse.
On 18 January 2007, French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin presented Pinter with France's highest civil honour, the Légion d'honneur, at a ceremony at the French Embassy in London.
It was part of the 5th Annual PEN World Voices Festival of International Literature, taking place in New York City.
He died from liver cancer on 24 December 2008.
Pinter's notable film and television roles included the corrupt lawyer Saul Abrahams, opposite Peter O'Toole, in BBC TV's ''Rogue Male'' (1976), a remake of the 1941 film noir ''Man Hunt'', released on DVD in 2002; and a drunk Irish journalist in ''Langrishe, Go Down'' (starring Judi Dench and Jeremy Irons) distributed on BBC Two in 1978 and released in movie theatres in 2002.
''A Night Out'' (1960) was broadcast to a large audience on Associated British Corporation's television show ''Armchair Theatre'', after being transmitted on BBC Radio 3, also in 1960.
Pinter's experiences in Turkey and his knowledge of the Turkish suppression of the Kurdish language inspired his 1988 play ''Mountain Language.''
After hiding the relationship from Merchant for two and a half months, on 21 March 1975, Pinter finally told her "I've met somebody".
From 9 to 25 January 2003, the Manitoba Theatre Centre, in Manitoba, Canada, held a nearly month-long ''PinterFest'', in which over 130 performances of twelve of Pinter's plays were performed by a dozen different theatre companies.
"Money remains in the service of entrenched power, and the brothers in the play are 'strategy consultants' whose jobs involve force and violence&nbsp;...
Pinter adapted it as a screenplay for television in 1992, directing that production, first broadcast in the UK on Channel 4 on 17 November 1992.
M. de Villepin concluded: "The poet stands still and observes what doesn't deserve other men's attention.
In June 2006, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) hosted a celebration of Pinter's films curated by his friend, the playwright David Hare.
Howard Panter, Joint CEO and Creative Director of ATG told the BBC, "The work of Pinter has become an integral part of the history of the Comedy Theatre.
Some of Pinter's later plays, including ''Party Time'' (1991), ''Moonlight'' (1993), ''Ashes to Ashes'' (1996), and ''Celebration'' (2000), draw upon some features of his "memory" dramaturgy in their focus on the past in the present, but they have personal and political resonances and other tonal differences from these earlier memory plays.
On 2 May 2009, a free public memorial tribute was held at The Graduate Center of The City University of New York.
These gilded, foul-mouthed souls are just as myopic when it comes to their own table mates (and for that matter, their food), with conversations that usually connect only on the surface, if there."
And McCarthyism&nbsp;... A profound hypocrisy.
His presidency of the school was brief; he died just two weeks after the graduation ceremony, on 24 December 2008.
Yet, he had been an early member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and also had supported the British Anti-Apartheid Movement (1959–1994), participating in British artists' refusal to permit professional productions of their work in South Africa in 1963 and in subsequent related campaigns.
In an additional sold-out benefit performance at the Public Theater, co-hosted by playwrights Tony Kushner and Tom Stoppard, the prisoner's letters were read by ten guest performers: Mandy Patinkin, Kevin Kline, Olympia Dukakis, Lily Rabe, Linda Emond, Josh Hamilton, Stephen Spinella, Lou Reed, Laurie Anderson, and Philip Seymour Hoffman.
Pinter was the author of 29 plays and 15 dramatic sketches and the co-author of two works for stage and radio.
I'm using a lot of energy more specifically about political states of affairs, which I think are very, very worrying as things stand."
By the time Peter Hall's London production of ''The Homecoming'' (1964) reached Broadway in 1967, Pinter had become a celebrity playwright, and the play garnered four Tony Awards, among other awards.
Beginning in late 1948, Pinter attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art for two terms, but hating the school, missed most of his classes, feigned a nervous breakdown, and dropped out in 1949.
Pinter's family home in London is described by his official biographer Michael Billington as "a solid, red-brick, three-storey villa just off the noisy, bustling, traffic-ridden thoroughfare of the Lower Clapton Road".
"Partly through the school and partly through the social life of Hackney Boys' Club&nbsp;... he formed an almost sacerdotal belief in the power of male friendship.
The historian Geoffrey Alderman, author of the official history of Hackney Downs School, expressed his own "Jewish View" of Harold Pinter: "Whatever his merit as a writer, actor and director, on an ethical plane Harold Pinter seems to me to have been intensely flawed, and his moral compass deeply fractured."
Pinter's aversion to any censorship by "the authorities" is epitomised in Petey's line at the end of ''The Birthday Party''.
On 13 October 2005, the Swedish Academy announced that it had decided to award the Nobel Prize in Literature for that year to Pinter, who "in his plays uncovers the precipice under everyday prattle and forces entry into oppression's closed rooms".
In an interview with Pinter in 2006, conducted by critic Michael Billington as part of the cultural programme of the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy, Pinter confirmed that he would continue to write poetry but not plays.
Its selection instigated some public controversy and criticism relating both to characteristics of Pinter's work and to his politics.
Critical accounts often quote Hobson:
Several of those productions starred Alan Bates (1934–2003), who originated the stage and screen roles of not only Butley but also Mick in Pinter's first major commercial success, ''The Caretaker'' (stage, 1960; film, 1964); and in Pinter's double-bill produced at the Lyric Hammersmith in 1984, he played Nicolas in ''One for the Road'' and the cab driver in ''Victoria Station''.
Billington writes that Pinter "did everything possible to support" her and regretted that he ultimately became estranged from their son, Daniel, after their separation, Pinter's remarriage, and Merchant's death.
As the broken-down and reconstituted Stanley is being carted off by the figures of authority Goldberg and McCann, Petey calls after him, "Stan, don't let them tell you what to do!"
Pinter strongly opposed the 1991 Gulf War, the 1999 NATO bombing campaign in Yugoslavia during the Kosovo War, the United States' 2001 War in Afghanistan, and the 2003 Invasion of Iraq.
The ceremony was attended by many notable theatre people, including Tom Stoppard, but not by Pinter's son, Daniel Brand.
Some scholars and critics challenge the validity of Pinter's critiques of what he terms "the modes of thinking of those in power" or dissent from his retrospective viewpoints on his own work.
It featured productions of seven of Pinter's plays: ''The Caretaker'', ''Voices'', ''No Man's Land'', ''Family Voices'', ''Tea Party'', ''The Room'', ''One for the Road'', and ''The Dumb Waiter''; and films (most his screenplays; some in which Pinter appears as an actor).
Productions during the Festival included: ''The Hothouse'', ''Night School'', ''The Lover'', ''The Dumb Waiter'', ''The Homecoming'', ''The Birthday Party'', ''Monologue'', ''One for the Road'', ''The Caretaker'', ''Ashes to Ashes'', ''Celebration'', and ''No Man's Land''.
In her own contemporaneous diary entry dated 15 January 1993, Fraser described herself more as Pinter's  literary midwife.
Despite frail health after being diagnosed with oesophageal cancer in December 2001, Pinter continued to act on stage and screen, last performing the title role of Samuel Beckett's one-act monologue ''Krapp's Last Tape'', for the 50th anniversary season of the Royal Court Theatre, in October 2006.
Pinter's blunt political statements, and the award of the Nobel Prize in Literature, elicited strong criticism and even, at times, provoked ridicule and personal attacks.
The production was described by Billington as "a staggeringly confident debut which attracted the attention of a young producer, Michael Codron, who decided to present Pinter's next play, ''The Birthday Party'', at the Lyric Hammersmith, in 1958."
His style has entered the English language as an adjective, "Pinteresque", although Pinter himself disliked the term and found it meaningless.
From 1951 to 1952, he toured Ireland with the Anew McMaster repertory company, playing over a dozen roles.
We have lived in peace.
In 1985, Pinter recalled that his early act of conscientious objection resulted from being "terribly disturbed as a young man by the Cold War.
However, he told interviewers that, if he had been old enough at the time, he would have fought against the Nazis in World War II.
Fraser told Billington that Daniel "was very nice to me at a time when it would have been only too easy for him to have turned on me&nbsp;... simply because he had been the sole focus of his father's love and now manifestly wasn't."
Still unreconciled at the time of his father's death, Daniel Brand did not attend Pinter's funeral.
On the Monday before Christmas 2008, Pinter was admitted to Hammersmith Hospital, where he died on Christmas Eve from liver cancer.
Initially, ''Betrayal'' was thought to be a response to his later affair with historian Antonia Fraser, the wife of Hugh Fraser, and Pinter's "marital crack-up".
Pinter believed an aunt's erroneous view that the family was Sephardic and had fled the Spanish Inquisition; thus, for his early poems, Pinter used the pseudonym ''Pinta'' and at other times used variations such as ''da Pinto''.
In October 2008, the Central School of Speech and Drama announced that Pinter had agreed to become its president and awarded him an honorary fellowship at its graduation ceremony.
In 1950, his poetry was first published outside of the school magazine in ''Poetry London'', some of it under the pseudonym "Harold Pinta".
He was also an active member of the Cuba Solidarity Campaign, an organisation that "campaigns in the UK against the US blockade of Cuba".
They destroyed everything: the school, the health centre, the cultural centre.
As Alderman points out, for example, Pinter signed the mission statement of Jews for Justice for Palestinians in 2005 and its full-page advertisement, "What Is Israel Doing?
Pinter wrote it in three days.
Just before this hiatus, in 1979, Pinter re-discovered his manuscript of ''The Hothouse'', which he had written in 1958 but had set aside; he revised it and then directed its first production himself at Hampstead Theatre in London, in 1980.
The inaugural winners of the prize were Tony Harrison and the Burmese poet and comedian Maung Thura (a.k.a.
Pinter played the major role of Roote in a 1995 revival at the Minerva Theatre, Chichester.
It was projected on three large screens at the Swedish Academy on the evening of 7 December 2005, and transmitted on More 4 that same evening in the UK.
