More than 750 slaves were rescued in the Combahee River Raid.
She refused, and as he ran away, the overseer threw a two-pound weight at him.
Larson points out that the two shared an unusually strong bond, and argues that Tubman – knowing the pain of a child separated from her mother – would never have intentionally caused a free family to be split apart.
Her boss said she was "not worth a sixpence" and returned her to Brodess, who tried unsuccessfully to sell her.
Her mother Rit (who may have had a white father) was a cook for the Brodess family.
During the 20th century, people of all races sang it as a spiritual to pay tribute to Tubman or to various struggles for freedom.
Tubman's friends and supporters from the days of abolition, meanwhile, raised funds to support her.
She did sing a version of "Go Down Moses" to signal to her refugees along the path to freedom—she changed the tempo to indicate that it was either safe or too dangerous to proceed.
The Preston area near Poplar Neck in Caroline County contained a substantial Quaker community, and was probably an important first stop during Tubman's escape.
His widow, Eliza, began working to sell the family's slaves.
Rit struggled to keep her family together as slavery threatened to tear it apart.
This informal but well-organized system was composed of free and enslaved blacks, white abolitionists, and other activists.
Given her familiarity with the woods and marshes of the region, Tubman during the day likely hid in these locales.
In Tubman's time, the chapel was known as Bethel Chapel, and was initially part of the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church, prior to a change in 1856.
The raid failed; Brown was convicted of treason and hanged in December.
She was frustrated by the new rule but was the guest of honor nonetheless when the Harriet Tubman Home for the Aged celebrated its opening on June 23, 1908.
She, meanwhile, claimed to have had a prophetic vision of meeting Brown before their encounter.
In the north, however, the song "Go Down Moses" was openly sung by Black regiments during the Civil War.
She had to check the muskrat traps in nearby marshes, even after contracting measles.
She carried the scars for the rest of her life.
Finally, Brodess and "the Georgia man" came toward the slave quarters to seize the child, where Rit told them, "You are after my son; but the first man that comes into my house, I will split his head open."
Still, the dedication ceremony was a powerful tribute to her memory, and Booker T. Washington delivered the keynote address.
Facing accumulated debts (including payments for her property in Auburn), Tubman fell prey in 1873 to a swindle involving gold transfer.
In the fall of 1851, Tubman returned to Dorchester County for the first time since her escape, this time to find her husband, John.
As Confederate troops raced to the scene, steamboats packed full of slaves took off toward Beaufort.
(The federal government offered $25,000 for the capture of each of John Wilkes Booth's co-conspirators in Lincoln's assassination.)
Catherine Clinton suggests that the US$40,000 figure may have been a combined total of the various bounties offered around the region.
This wave of activism kindled a new wave of admiration for Tubman among the press in the United States.
When night fell, the family hid her in a cart and took her to the next friendly house.
Tubman met with General David Hunter, a strong supporter of abolition.
The city commemorated her life with a plaque on the courthouse.
Shortly after acquiring the Auburn property, Tubman went back to Maryland and returned with her "niece," an eight-year-old light-skinned black girl named Margaret.
For years, she took in relatives and boarders, offering a safe place for black Americans seeking a better life in the north.
In his third autobiography, Douglass wrote: "On one occasion I had eleven fugitives at the same time under my roof, and it was necessary for them to remain with me until I could collect sufficient money to get them on to Canada.
At some point in the late 1890s, she underwent brain surgery at Boston's Massachusetts General Hospital.
At the turn of the 20th century, Tubman became heavily involved with the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church in Auburn.
Lew instructed the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to expedite the redesign process, though the new bill will not enter circulation until after 2020.
Brodess then hired her out again.
They married around 1808 and, according to court records, they had nine children together: Linah, Mariah Ritty, Soph, Robert, Minty (Harriet), Ben, Rachel, Henry, and Moses.
As an illiterate child, she had been told Bible stories by her mother.
The injury caused dizziness, pain, and spells of hypersomnia, which occurred throughout her life.
Although little is known about him or their time together, the union was complicated because of her slave status.
Two weeks later, she posted a runaway notice in the Cambridge ''Democrat'', offering a reward of up to 100 dollars for each slave returned.
By the late 1850s, they began to suspect a northern white abolitionist was secretly enticing their slaves away.
When night fell, Bowley sailed the family on a log canoe  to Baltimore, where they met with Tubman, who brought the family to Philadelphia.
"First of March I began to pray, 'Oh Lord, if you ain't never going to change that man's heart, kill him, Lord, and take him out of the way.'"
Criticized by modern biographers for its artistic license and highly subjective point of view, the book nevertheless remains an important source of information and perspective on Tubman's life.
Clinton presents evidence of strong physical similarities, which Alice herself acknowledged.
Traveling by night and in extreme secrecy, Tubman (or "Moses", as she was called) "never lost a passenger".
Tubman was busy during this time, giving talks to abolitionist audiences and tending to her relatives.
In Wilmington, Quaker Thomas Garrett would secure transportation to William Still's office or the homes of other Underground Railroad operators in the greater Philadelphia area.
When it appeared as though a sale was being concluded, "I changed my prayer," she said.
Kate Larson records the year as 1822, based on a midwife payment and several other historical documents, including her runaway advertisement, while Jean Humez says "the best current evidence suggests that Tubman was born in 1820, but it might have been a year or two later."
Surrounded by friends and family members, Harriet Tubman died of pneumonia in 1913.
Their fates remain unknown.
She described her actions during and after the Civil War, and used the sacrifices of countless women throughout modern history as evidence of women's equality to men.
In 1849, Tubman became ill again, which diminished her value as a slave.
"I was a stranger in a strange land," she said later.
Kessiah's husband, a free black man named John Bowley, made the winning bid for his wife.
The chapel, in St. Catharines, Ontario, was a focus of Harriet Tubman's years in the city, when she lived nearby, in what was a major terminus of the Underground Railroad and center of abolitionist work.
When she was five or six years old, Brodess hired her out as a nursemaid to a woman named "Miss Susan".
A journey of nearly 90 miles (145 kilometers), her traveling by foot would have taken between five days and three weeks.
She sang a coded song to Mary, a trusted fellow slave, that was a farewell.
Suppressing her anger, she found some slaves who wanted to escape and led them to Philadelphia.
Once they had left, Tubman's brothers had second thoughts.
She later helped abolitionist John Brown recruit men for his raid on Harpers Ferry, and in the post-war era was an active participant in the struggle for women's suffrage.
She described the battle by saying: "And then we saw the lightning, and that was the guns; and then we heard the thunder, and that was the big guns; and then we heard the rain falling, and that was the drops of blood falling; and when we came to get the crops, it was dead men that we reaped."
She crossed into Pennsylvania with a feeling of relief and awe, and recalled the experience years later:
Although she never advocated violence against whites, she agreed with his course of direct action and supported his goals.
"God won't let master Lincoln beat the South till he does ''the right thing''," she said.
These episodes were alarming to her family, who were unable to wake her when she fell asleep suddenly and without warning.
One of the people Tubman took in was a Civil War veteran named Nelson Davis.
She used spirituals as coded messages, warning fellow travelers of danger or to signal a clear path.
As enacted, the legislation authorized establishment of the Harriet Tubman National Historical Park in Cayuga County, New York, pending the acquisition of lands, and created the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Historical Park in Maryland.
Tubman had been hired out to Dr. Anthony Thompson, who owned a large plantation in an area called Poplar Neck in neighboring Caroline County; it is likely her brothers labored for Thompson as well.
She worked odd jobs and saved money.
Slaveholders in the region, meanwhile, never knew that "Minty", the petite, five-foot-tall, disabled slave who had run away years before and never come back, was behind so many slave escapes in their community.
Larson suggests this happened right after the wedding, and Clinton suggests that it coincided with Tubman's plans to escape from slavery.
Tubman went to Baltimore, where her brother-in-law Tom Tubman hid her until the sale.
She later recounted a particular day when she was lashed five times before breakfast.
Tubman was devout, and when she began experiencing visions and vivid dreams, she interpreted them as revelations from God.
Her constant humanitarian work for her family and former slaves, meanwhile, kept her in a state of constant poverty, and her difficulties in obtaining a government pension were especially taxing for her.
She became a fixture in the camps, particularly in Port Royal, South Carolina, assisting fugitives.
Early in her life, she suffered a severe head wound when hit by a heavy metal weight.
In 1944, the United States Maritime Commission launched the ''SS Harriet Tubman'', its first Liberty ship ever named for a black woman.
Later she recognized a fellow train passenger as another former master; she snatched a nearby newspaper and pretended to read.
Like other Underground Railroad conductors, Tubman used various methods of communication specific to her own needs.
Contrary to current popular belief, there were no common "codes" used by conductors.
When word of the plan was leaked to the government, Brown put the scheme on hold and began raising funds for its eventual resumption.
Edward Brodess tried to sell her, but could not find a buyer.
Tubman once disguised herself with a bonnet and carried two live chickens to give the appearance of running errands.
She spoke later of her acute childhood homesickness, comparing herself to "the boy on the Swanee River", an allusion to Stephen Foster's song "Old Folks at Home".
As Tubman aged, the seizures, headaches, and suffering from her childhood head trauma continued to plague her.
Catherine Clinton suggests that anger over the 1857 Dred Scott decision may have prompted Tubman to return to the U.S.
Over eleven years, Tubman returned repeatedly to the Eastern Shore of Maryland, rescuing some 70 slaves in about thirteen expeditions, including her three other brothers, Henry, Ben, and Robert, their wives and some of their children.
They offered this treasure – worth about US$5,000, they claimed – for US$2,000 in cash.
The two men went back, forcing Tubman to return with them.
In her later years, Tubman worked to promote the cause of women's suffrage.
In 1868, in an effort to drum up support for Tubman's claim for a Civil War military pension, a former abolitionist named Salley Holley wrote an article claiming US$40,000 "was not too great a reward for Maryland slaveholders to offer for her".
Tubman's mother was assigned to "the big house" and had scarce time for her family; consequently, as a child Tubman took care of a younger brother and baby, as was typical in large families.
The Confederacy surrendered in April 1865; after donating several more months of service, Tubman headed home to Auburn, New York.
Rit was owned by Mary Pattison Brodess (and later her son Edward).
In 2014 the asteroid (241528) Tubman was named after Harriet Tubman.
Such blended marriages – free people of color marrying enslaved people – were not uncommon on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, where by this time, half the black population was free.
She found ways to resist, running away for five days, wearing layers of clothing as protection against beatings, and fighting back.
Tubman hoped to offer her own expertise and skills to the Union cause, too, and soon she joined a group of Boston and Philadelphia abolitionists heading to the Hilton Head District in South Carolina.
One admirer of Tubman said: "She always came in the winter, when the nights are long and dark, and people who have homes stay in them."
Tubman served as a nurse in Port Royal, preparing remedies from local plants and aiding soldiers suffering from dysentery.
He cursed at her and grabbed her, but she resisted and he summoned two other passengers for help.
They considered that John Brown himself had come to the Eastern Shore to lure slaves away before his ill-fated raid on Harper's Ferry in October 1859.
They spent the next 20 years together, and in 1874 they adopted a baby girl named Gertie.
Returning to the U.S. meant that escaped slaves were at risk of being returned to the south under the Fugitive Slave Law, and Tubman's siblings expressed reservations.
She became so ill that Cook sent her back to Brodess, where her mother nursed her back to health.
One admirer, Sarah Hopkins Bradford, wrote an authorized biography entitled ''Scenes in the Life of Harriet Tubman''.
Despite her years of service, she had never received a regular salary and was for years denied compensation.
The children were drugged with paregoric to keep them quiet while slave patrols rode by.
As a child in Dorchester County, Maryland, Tubman was beaten by masters to whom she was hired out.
Tubman likely worked with abolitionist Thomas Garrett, a Quaker working in Wilmington, Delaware.
This religious perspective informed her actions throughout her life.
At first, she received government rations for her work, but newly freed blacks thought she was getting special treatment.
The lawyer discovered that a former owner had issued instructions that Rit, like her husband, would be manumitted at the age of 45.
When the National Federation of Afro-American Women was founded in 1896, Tubman was the keynote speaker at its first meeting.
When the raid on Harpers Ferry took place on October 16, Tubman was not present.
Her faith in the divine also provided immediate assistance.
When a trader from Georgia approached Brodess about buying Rit's youngest son, Moses, she hid him for a month, aided by other slaves and free blacks in the community.
John, meanwhile, had married another woman named Caroline.
From there, she probably took a common route for fleeing slaves – northeast along the Choptank River, through Delaware and then north into Pennsylvania.
In December 1851, Tubman guided an unidentified group of 11 fugitives, possibly including the Bowleys and several others she had helped rescue earlier, northward.
While a popular legend persists about a reward of US$40,000 for Tubman's capture, this is a manufactured figure.
Like Tubman, he spoke of being called by God, and trusted the divine to protect him from the wrath of slaveholders.
Bradford's biographies were followed by Earl Conrad's ''Harriet Tubman: Negro Soldier and Abolitionist''.
"My father, my mother, my brothers, and sisters, and friends were in Maryland.
Tubman later worked with Colonel Robert Gould Shaw at the assault on Fort Wagner, reportedly serving him his last meal.
Never one to waste a trip, Tubman gathered another group, including the Ennalls family, ready and willing to take the risks of the journey north.
Tubman also carried a revolver, and was not afraid to use it.
She rejected the teachings of the New Testament that urged slaves to be obedient and found guidance in the Old Testament tales of deliverance.
In March 2013, President Barack Obama signed a proclamation creating Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Monument on the Eastern Shore.
Suddenly finding herself walking toward a former owner in Dorchester County, she yanked the strings holding the birds' legs, and their agitation allowed her to avoid eye contact.
They safely reached the home of David and Martha Wright in Auburn, New York, on December 28, 1860.
Tubman told the tale of one man who insisted he was going to go back to the plantation when morale got low among a group of fugitive slaves.
A New York newspaper described her as "ill and penniless", prompting supporters to offer a new round of donations.
Tubman at first prepared to storm their house and make a scene, but then decided he was not worth the trouble.
She rendered assistance to men with smallpox; that she did not contract the disease herself started more rumors that she was blessed by God.
When an early biography of Tubman was being prepared in 1868, Douglass wrote a letter to honor her.
She was a devout Christian and experienced strange visions and vivid dreams, which she ascribed to premonitions from God.
But even when they were both free, the area became hostile to their presence.
Her knowledge of support networks and resources in the border states of Pennsylvania, Maryland and Delaware was invaluable to Brown and his planners.
There is great confusion about the identity of Margaret's parents, although Tubman indicated they were free blacks.
Her group, working under the orders of Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton, mapped the unfamiliar terrain and reconnoitered its inhabitants.
Several historical markers—two federal, one provincial, and one civic—surround the active chapel, as well as a bust of Tubman.
They insisted that they knew a relative of Tubman's, and she took them into her home, where they stayed for several days.
There is evidence to suggest that Tubman and her group stopped at the home of abolitionist and former slave Frederick Douglass.
In 1903, she donated a parcel of real estate she owned to the church, under the instruction that it be made into a home for "aged and indigent colored people".
She also provided specific instructions to 50 to 60 additional fugitives who escaped to the north.
Despite the best efforts of the slaveholders, Tubman was never captured, and neither were the fugitives she guided.
She inspired generations of African Americans struggling for equality and civil rights; she was praised by leaders across the political spectrum.
Thomas Garrett once said of her, "I never met with any person of any color who had more confidence in the voice of God, as spoken direct to her soul."
As with many slaves in the United States, neither the exact year nor place of Araminta's birth is known, and historians differ as to the best estimate.
She borrowed the money from a wealthy friend named Anthony Shimer, and arranged to receive the gold late one night.
She later worked alongside Colonel James Montgomery, and provided him with key intelligence that aided the capture of Jacksonville, Florida.
Some historians believe she was in New York at the time, ill with fever related to her childhood head injury.
Tubman did not receive a pension for her service in the Civil War until 1899.
Modesty, Tubman's maternal grandmother, arrived in the United States on a slave ship from Africa; no information is available about her other ancestors.
He began working in Auburn as a bricklayer, and they soon fell in love.
But I was free, and ''they'' should be free."
It, too, was published as a way to help alleviate Tubman's poverty.
Later that year, Tubman became the first woman to lead an armed assault during the Civil War.
Since the mother's status dictated that of children, any children born to Harriet and John would be enslaved.
After she died in 1913, she became an icon of American courage and freedom.
Although it showed pride for her many achievements, its use of dialect ("I nebber run my train off de track"), apparently chosen for its authenticity, has been criticized for undermining her stature as an American patriot and dedicated humanitarian.
When the American Civil War broke out in 1861, Tubman saw a Union victory as a key step toward the abolition of slavery.
She renewed her support for a defeat of the Confederacy, and before long she was leading a band of scouts through the land around Port Royal.
Tubman spent her remaining years in Auburn, tending to her family and other people in need.
It was the largest number I ever had at any one time, and I had some difficulty in providing so many with food and shelter...." The number of travelers and the time of the visit make it likely that this was Tubman's group.
Her journeys into the land of slavery put her at tremendous risk, and she used a variety of subterfuges to avoid detection.
Harriet Tubman, widely known and well-respected while she was alive, became an American icon in the years after she died.
Once she had made contact with escaping slaves, they left town on Saturday evenings, since newspapers would not print runaway notices until Monday morning.
Because the Fugitive Slave Law had made the northern United States a more dangerous place for escaped slaves to remain, many escaped slaves began migrating to Southern Ontario.
The 132-page volume was published in 1869, and brought Tubman some US$1,200 in revenue.
Now I wanted to make a rule that nobody should come in unless they didn't have no money at all."
Born a slave in Dorchester County, Maryland, Tubman was beaten and whipped by her various masters as a child.
Since Tubman was known to be illiterate, the man ignored her.
Several highly dramatized versions of Tubman's life had been written for children, and many more came later, but Conrad wrote in an academic style to document the historical importance of her work for scholars and the nation's memory.
She adopted her mother's name, possibly as part of a religious conversion, or to honor another relative.
Angry at him for trying to sell her and for continuing to enslave her relatives, Tubman began to pray for her owner, asking God to make him change his ways.
As these events transpired, other white passengers cursed Tubman and shouted for the conductor to kick her off the train.
Dozens of schools were named in her honor, and both the Harriet Tubman Home in Auburn and the Harriet Tubman Museum in Cambridge serve as monuments to her life.
Subsequently, in December 2014, authorization for a national historical park designation was incorporated in the 2015 National Defense Authorization Act.
In 1978, the United States Postal Service issued a stamp in honor of Tubman which made her the first African-American woman to be honored on a US Postage stamp.
Soon afterward, Tubman escaped again, this time without her brothers.
Tubman had to travel by night, guided by the North Star, and trying to avoid slave catchers eager to collect rewards for fugitive slaves.
At an early stop, the lady of the house ordered Tubman to sweep the yard so as to seem to be working for the family.
The circumstances of this expedition remain clouded in mystery.
Two men, one named Stevenson and the other John Thomas, claimed to have in their possession a cache of gold smuggled out of South Carolina.
Her father, Ben, had purchased Rit, her mother, in 1855 from Eliza Brodess for 20 dollars.
She traveled to the Eastern Shore and led them north to St. Catharines, Ontario, where a community of former slaves (including Tubman's brothers, other relatives, and many friends) had gathered.
She was active in the women's suffrage movement until illness overtook her and she had to be admitted to a home for elderly African Americans that she had helped to establish years earlier.
Conrad had experienced great difficulty in finding a publisher – the search took four years – and endured disdain and contempt for his efforts to construct a more objective, detailed account of Tubman's life for adults.
The latter was created from within the authorized boundary of the national monument, while permitting later additional acquisitions.
Tubman aided him in this effort, and with more detailed plans for the assault.
