The hartebeest has preorbital glands (glands near the eyes) with a central duct, that secrete a dark sticky fluid in Coke's and Lichtenstein's hartebeest, and a colourless fluid in the Lelwel hartebeest.
b. caama'' and ''A.
It is native to Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Hartebeest inhabit dry savannas, open plains and wooded grasslands, often moving into more arid places after rainfall.
A study correlated the size of hartebeest species to habitat productivity and rainfall.
Both sexes of all subspecies have horns, with those of females being more slender.
Drastic population decrease since the 1980s has confined most individuals to protected areas inside and outside its range.
The western hartebeest is a pale sandy-brown, but the front of the legs are darker.
b. caama''''' (Saint-Hilaire, 1803) : Known as the red hartebeest or Cape hartebeest.
Often the mortality rate of male juveniles is high, as they have to face the aggression of territorial adult males and are also deprived of good forage by them.
There are three common cross-breeds between the subspecies:
The genus ''Alcelaphus'' emerged about 4.4 million years ago in a clade whose other members were ''Damalops'', ''Numidocapra'', ''Rabaticeras'', ''Megalotragus'', ''Oreonagor'', and ''Connochaetes''.
The first use of the word "hartebeest" in South African literature was in Dutch colonial administrator Jan van Riebeeck's journal ''Daghregister'' in 1660.
South of the Sahara, common parasites include ''Loewioestrus variolosus'', ''Gedoelstia cristata'' and ''G.
The Swayne's hartebeest is smaller than the Tora hartebeest, but both have a shorter forehead and similar appearance.
The diploid number of chromosomes in the hartebeest is 40.
b. lelwel''''' (Heuglin, 1877) : Known as the Lelwel hartebeest.
Coat colour varies by the subspecies, from the sandy brown of the western hartebeest to the chocolate brown of the Swayne's hartebeest.
The shoulders and upper part of the legs are black.
Nowadays it occurs in much lower numbers mainly in protected areas of these countries.
Analysis of skull structure supports partition into three major divisions: ''A.
Each hartebeest subspecies is listed under a different conservation status by the IUCN.
Females in the Nairobi National Park (Kenya) have individual home ranges stretching over , which are not particularly associated with any one female group.
Coke's hartebeest is reddish to tawny in the upper parts, but has relatively lighter legs and rump.
The Bubal hartebeest was declared extinct by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in 1994.
* The '''red hartebeest''' is listed as Least Concern.
The degree of sexual dimorphism varies by subspecies.
Nematodes, cestodes, paramphistomes; and the roundworm ''Setaria labiatopapillosa'' have also been isolated from the hartebeest.
The same study found ''A.
Fights are rarely serious, but can be fatal if they are.
Horns can reach lengths of ; the maximum horn length is , recorded from a Namibian red hartebeest.
The study considered hartebeest meat to be healthy, as the ratio of polyunsaturated to saturated fatty acids was 0.78, slightly more than the recommended 0.7.
Between seasons, they mainly feed on the culms of grasses.
The muzzle is designed so as to derive maximum nutrition from even a frugal diet.
The horns of Swayne's hartebeest are thin and shaped like parentheses, curving upward and then backward.
This species has been greatly affected by habitat destruction, and about 42,000 Coke's hartebeest occur today in Mara, Serengeti National Park, and Tarangire National Park in Tanzania and Tsavo East National Park in Kenya.
These parasites regularly alternate between hartebeest and gazelles or wildebeest.
b. swaynei''''' (Sclater, 1892) : Known as Swayne's hartebeest.
Both sexes of all subspecies have horns, with those of females being more slender.
''Jasminum kerstingii'' is part of the hartebeest's diet at the start of the rainy season.
In 2000, a study scrutinised two major populations of the Swayne's hartebeest, from the Senkele Wildlife Sanctuary and the Nechisar National Park, for mitochondrial (D-loop) and nuclear (microsatellite) variability in an attempt to estimate the levels of genetic variation between the populations and within the subspecies.
Inhabits the miombo woodlands of eastern and southern Africa.
The study concluded that these major events throughout the hartebeest's evolution are strongly related to climatic factors, and that there had been successive bursts of radiation from a more permanent population—a refugium—in eastern Africa; this could be vital to understanding the evolutionary history of not only the hartebeest but also other mammals of the African savanna.
The thin long legs of the hartebeest provide for a quick escape in an open habitat; if attacked, the formidable horns are used to ward off the predator.
b. major'' division), ''A.
The eastern lineage gave rise to the Coke's, Swayne's, Tora and Lelwel hartebeest; and from the western lineage evolved the Bubal and western hartebeest.
Black markings can be observed on the chin, the back of the neck, shoulders, hips and legs; these are in sharp contrast with the broad white patches that mark its flanks and lower rump.
Fossils of the red hartebeest have been found in Elandsfontein, Cornelia (Free State) and Florisbad in South Africa, as well as in Kabwe in Zambia.
The horns of the Tora hartebeest are particularly thin and spread out sideways, diverging more than in any other subspecies.
Gregarious, the species forms herds of up to 300 individuals.
Males are 8% heavier than females in Swayne's and Lichtenstein's hartebeest, and 23% heavier in the red hartebeest.
The scientific name of the hartebeest is ''Alcelaphus buselaphus''.
Pictorial as well as epigraphic evidence from Egypt suggests that in the Upper Palaeolithic age, Egyptians hunted hartebeest and domesticated them.
The hartebeest uses defecation as an olfactory and visual display.
* The Jackson's hartebeest does not have a clear taxonomic status.
Vrba dissolved the new genus in 1997 after reconsideration.
Fewer than 70,000 individuals are left.
Horns can reach lengths of .
The horns of the red and the Lelwel hartebeest are similar to those of the western hartebeest, but appear V-shaped when viewed from the front.
The males may fight fiercely for dominance, following which the dominant male smells the female's genitalia, and follows her if she is in oestrus.
b. swaynei'') and ''A.
It was extinct in Tunisia by the late 19th century.
They have been reported from altitudes on Mount Kenya up to .
It is probably extinct in Gambia.
Hartebeest are primarily grazers, and their diets consist mostly of grasses.
The other distinctive features of the hartebeest are its long legs (often with black markings), short neck, and pointed ears.
Formerly occurred in southern Angola; northern and eastern savannahs of Namibia; central, southern and southwestern Botswana; Northern Cape, Eastern Cape, Western Cape, Free State, Northwest and Gauteng provinces and western KwaZulu-Natal of South Africa.
However, moving herds are not so cohesive, and tend to disperse frequently.
A resident male defends his territory and will fight if provoked.
These two taxa are phylogenetically close, having diverged only 0.2 million years ago.
It has been eliminated from most of its range, including the southwestern savannas and Boucle du Baoulé National Park in Mali; southwestern Niger; southern Senegal; Gambia; Ivory Coast; Burkina Faso.
Births usually peak in the dry season, and take place in thickets – unlike the wildebeest, which give birth in groups on the plains.
Formerly found in northern and northeastern Democratic Republic of the Congo; southeastern and southwestern Sudan; and the northwestern extreme of Tanzania.
Its face is black save for the chocolate band below the eyes.
lichtensteinii'' diverged earliest.
Formerly occurred widely in Mali, Niger, Senegal, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Nigeria, southwestern Chad, Cameroon, western Central African Republic and Benin.
* The '''Bubal hartebeest''' has been declared extinct since 1994.
In 1931, a red hartebeest in Gobabis (southwestern Africa) was infected with long, thin worms.
An MtDNA analysis could find no evidence to support a separate genus for Lichtenstein's hartebeest.
*The '''western hartebeest''' is listed as Near Threatened.
In addition to this, it can derive nutritious food even from tall senile grasses.
These were named ''Longistrongylus meyeri'' after their collector, T. Meyer.
Mating in hartebeest takes place throughout the year with one or two peaks, and depends upon the subspecies and local factors.
It was formerly distributed mainly in the Central African Republic, Ethiopia, northern and northeastern Democratic Republic of Congo and southern Sudan.
The latter two species can cause serious diseases such as encephalitis.
b. major''''' (Blyth, 1869) : Known as the western hartebeest.
It was probably hunted in Egypt, which affected the numbers in the Levant, and disconnected it from its main population in Africa.
Inhabiting dry savannas and wooded grasslands, hartebeest often move to more arid places after rainfall.
Apart from its long face, the large chest and the sharply sloping back differentiate the hartebeest from other antelopes.
Eight subspecies are identified, of which two – ''A.
It occurs in Ethiopia, in a small area to the east of Omo River and north of Lake Turkana, stretching north-east of Lake Chew Bahir to near Lake Chamo.
The population is decreasing, and 70% of the population lives in protected areas.
b. lichtensteinii''''' (Peters, 1849) : Known as Lichtenstein's hartebeest.
The members of a herd can be divided into four groups: territorial adult males, non-territorial adult males, young males, and the females with their young.
The male marks the border of his territory through defecation.
However, parasites are not always harmful – 252 larvae were found in the head of one Zambian individual without any pathogenicity.
The northern lineage further diverged into eastern and western lineages, nearly 0.4 million years ago, most probably as a result of the expanding central African rainforest belt and subsequent contraction of savannah habitats during a period of global warming.
The hartebeest in Senkele have to compete with the livestock of the Oromo people.
The opponents drop onto their knees and, after giving a hammer-like blow, begin wrestling, their horns interlocking.
Restricted to the southern Rift Valley in Ethiopia.
b. major'' to be the most divergent, having branched off before the lineage split to give a combined ''caama/lichtensteinii'' lineage and another that gave rise to the remaining extant subspecies.
* ''Alcelaphus lelwel x swaynei'' : Also known as the Neumann's hartebeest, named after traveller and hunter Arthur Henry Neumann.
The Lelwel hartebeest is a reddish tan.
The tail,  long, ends in a black tuft.
However, from the beginning of the Neolithic age, hunting became less common and consequently the remains of the hartebeest from this period in Egypt, where it is now extinct, are rare.
b. lichtensteinii'' – have been considered to be independent species.
Several parasites have been isolated from the hartebeest.
*The '''Lelwel hartebeest''' is listed as Endangered, and numbers have declined greatly since the 1980s, when its population was over 285,000.
The Swayne's hartebeest is a rich chocolate brown with fine spots of white that are actually the white tips of its hairs.
b. buselaphus''''' (Pallas, 1766) : Known as the Bubal hartebeest or northern hartebeest.
The large Lelwel hartebeest has dark stripes on the front of its legs.
Births usually peak in the dry season.
The hartebeest has much lower food intake than the other members of Alcelaphini.
The long thin muzzle of the hartebeest assists in feeding on leaf blades of short grasses and nibbling off leaf sheaths from grass stems.
The study advocated in situ conservation of the Swayne's hartebeest and a renewed attempt at its translocation in order to conserve genetic diversity and increase its population size in both the protected areas.
Lichtenstein's hartebeest is reddish brown, though the flanks are a lighter tan and the rump whitish.
Larger numbers gather in places with abundant grass.
It has a particularly elongated forehead and oddly shaped horns, short neck, and pointed ears.
Herds are generally sedentary, and tend to migrate only under adverse conditions such as natural calamities.
Most of the population nowadays is found in Chad in the Salamat region and the Zakouma National Park (Chad), the National Park population benefiting from improved protection and seeing an increase in population since the 1980s; Manovo-Gounda St. Floris National Park and Bamingui-Bangoran National Park and Biosphere Reserve in the Central African Republic, where the populations have been falling; Rumanyika Orugundu Game Reserve and Ibanda Game Reserve in Tanzania; and Murchison Falls National Park in Uganda.
Another study concluded that the length of the breeding season is a good predictor of dimorphism in pedicle (the bony structures from which the horns grow) height and skull weight, and the best predictor of the horn circumference.
It also showed the tribe Alcelaphini to be monophyletic, and discovered close affinity between the ''Alcelaphus'' and the sassabies (genus ''Damaliscus'')—both genetically and morphologically.
Hartebeest are popular game and trophy animals as they are prominently visible and hence easy to hunt.
The wildebeest have more specialised skull and horn features than the hartebeest.
b. cokii'' and ''A.
The species as a whole is classified as Least Concern by the IUCN.
The hartebeest was formerly widespread in Africa, but populations have undergone drastic decline due to habitat destruction, hunting, human settlement, and competition with livestock for food.
Another name for the hartebeest is ''kongoni'', a Swahili word.
It was formerly distributed throughout the western Kenyan highlands, between Lake Victoria and Mount Kenya, but is now believed to be restricted to the Lambwe Valley (south-west Kenya) and Laikipia and nearby regions of west-central Kenya.
They are primarily grazers, with their diets consisting mainly of grasses.
b. tora '' divisions.
Females fight for dominance over the herd.
It was declared extinct in 1994 by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
They are possibly extinct in Sudan due to excessive hunting and agricultural expansion, but may still exist in smaller numbers in Eritrea and Ethiopia.
In large herds, females often mate with several males.
*'''Lichtenstein's hartebeest''' is listed as Least Concern, and occurs in protected areas such as the Selous Game Reserve and in the wild in southern and western Tanzania and Zambia.
This hybrid is lighter in colour and larger than Coke's hartebeest.
b. cokii''''' (Günther, 1884): Known as Coke's hartebeest or kongoni.
The hartebeest shares several physical traits with the sassabies (genus ''Damaliscus''), such as an elongated and narrow face, the shape of the horns, the pelage texture and colour, and the terminal tuft of the tail.
He wrote: "''Meester Pieter ein hart-beest geschooten hadde'' (Master Pieter van Meerhoff had shot one hartebeest)".
b. tora''''' (Gray, 1873) : Known as the Tora hartebeest.
In a study of grass selectivity among the wildebeest, zebra, and the Coke's hartebeest, the hartebeest showed the highest selectivity.
In a study on the effect of place and sex on carcass characteristics, the average carcass weight of the male red hartebeest was  and that of females was .
Generally calm in nature, hartebeest can be ferocious when provoked.
First described by German zoologist Peter Simon Pallas in 1766, it is classified in the genus ''Alcelaphus'' and placed in the family Bovidae.
Its present status is unclear, though locals have reported small numbers from these areas.
The ''African Antelope Database'' (1998) treats it as synonymous to the Lelwel hartebeest.
Active mainly during daytime, the hartebeest grazes in the early morning and late afternoon, and rests in shade around noon.
Major re-introductions have taken place in these countries.
The calf is weaned at four months, but young males stay with their mothers for two and a half years, longer than in other Alcelaphini.
Reproduction varies by the subspecies and local factors.
From Lake Baringo to Mount Kenya, the Jackson's hartebeest significantly resembles the Lelwel hartebeest, whereas from Lake Victoria to the southern part of the Rift Valley it tends to be more like the Coke's hartebeest.
A study in the Nazinga Game Ranch in Burkina Faso found that the hartebeest's skull structure eased the acquisition and chewing of highly fibrous foods.
Gregarious animals, hartebeest form herds of 20 to 300 individuals.
The horns grow in a wide "V" shape, unlike the wide bracket shape of Swayne's hartebeest and the narrow "V" of Lelwel hartebeest, curving backward and slightly inward.
b. lelwel'' and ''A.
A reintroduced population is flourishing in the Malolotja Nature Reserve (Swaziland), outside its range.
Hartebeest are remarkably alert and cautious animals with highly developed brains.
She had analysed the skull characters of living and extinct species of antelope to make a cladogram, and argued that a wide skull linked Lichtenstein's hartebeest with ''Connochaetes''.
The results showed a remarkable differentiation between the two populations; that from the Senkele Wildlife Sanctuary showed more genetic diversity than the one from the Nechisar National Park.
''Kongoni'' is often used to refer in particular to one of its subspecies—Coke's hartebeest.
The southern lineage gave rise to Lichtenstein's and red hartebeest.
This population of the hartebeest was originally limited to the open country of the southernmost regions of the southern Levant.
The Lichtenstein's hartebeest has thick parallel ringed horns, with a flat base.
Generally short and shiny, the coat varies in colour according to subspecies.
b. buselaphus'' division (nominate, also including ''A.
The chin has a hint of black and the tail ends in a black tuft.
The earliest fossil record dates back to nearly 0.7 million years ago.
While the populations of the red hartebeest are on the rise, those of the Tora hartebeest, already Critically Endangered, are falling.
This is considered to be a cross between the Lelwel hartebeest and Swayne's hartebeest.
She may eventually stand still and allow the male to mount her.
Mating takes place in the territories defended by a single male, mostly in open areas.
The red hartebeest is a reddish-brown, with a dark face.
Additionally, the Swayne hartebeest populations were compared with a large red hartebeest population, and both subspecies were found to have a high degree of genetic variation.
The red hartebeest is known to move across large areas, and females roam home ranges of over , with male territories  in size.
Hybrids between the Lelwel and Tora hartebeest have been reported in eastern Sudan and western Ethiopia, in a stretch southward from the Blue Nile to about 9° N latitude.
Juveniles tend to be more vocal than adults, and produce a quacking call when alarmed or pursued.
A large antelope with a particularly elongated forehead and oddly shaped horns, the hartebeest stands just over  at the shoulder, and has a typical head-and-body length of .
These adaptations of the hartebeest enable the animal to feed well even in the dry season, which is usually a difficult period for grazers.
Coke's hartebeest is moderately large, with a shorter forehead and longer tail in comparison to the other subspecies.
The weight ranges from .
It is regarded as a hybrid between the Lelwel and Coke's hartebeest.
Both males and females reach sexual maturity at one to two years of age.
Zoologists such as Jonathan Kingdon and Theodor Haltenorth considered it to be a subspecies of ''A.
In Israel, hartebeest remains have been found in northern Negev, Shephelah, Sharon Plain and Tel Lachish.
The total population in 2008 was less than 600, of which the mature specimens numbered within 250.
The '''hartebeest''' (), also known as '''kongoni''', is an African antelope, first described by the German zoologist Peter Simon Pallas in 1766.
In 1963, a congregation of 10,000 animals was recorded on the plains near Sekoma Pan in Botswana.
The name was given by the Boers, based on the resemblance of the antelope to deer.
Its populations are very low and on the decline.
b. tora'' division (also including ''A.
Apart from its long face, the large chest and the sharply sloping back differentiate the hartebeest from other antelopes.
The lifespan is 11 to 20 years in the wild and up to 19 years in captivity.
An analysis using phylogeographic patterns within hartebeest populations suggested a possible origin of ''Alcelaphus'' in eastern Africa.
Both males and females reach sexual maturity at one to two years of age.
A study in the Nechisar National Park during 2009 and 2010 found a considerable increase in the livestock of the Oromos (49.9% and 56.5% increase during 2006 and 2010, respectively), illegal resource exploitation, and habitat loss as major threats to the Swayne's hartebeest populations there.
In 1979, palaeontologist Elisabeth Vrba supported ''Sigmoceros'' as a separate genus for Lichtenstein's hartebeest, a kind of hartebeest, as she assumed it was related to ''Connochaetes'' (wildebeest).
However, this finding was not replicated by Alan W. Gentry of the Natural History Museum, who classified it as an independent species of ''Alcelaphus''.
A large antelope, the hartebeest stands just over  at the shoulder, and has a typical head-and-body length of .
In one study, the highest dimorphism was found in skull weight.
