According to the census of 2012, the population was 2,106,146 The city has an average life expectancy of 76.81 years at birth.
The name combines ''San Cristóbal'', patron saint of Havana.
Another notable rise is the hill to the west that is occupied by the University of Havana and the Prince's Castle.
Many buildings have fallen in ruin but a number are being restored.
The Edificio Focsa (1956) represents Havana's economic dominance at the time.
In the 1980s there were plans for a Metro system in Havana similar to Moscow's, as a result of the Soviet Union influence in Cuba at the time.
The port also supports a considerable fishing industry.
There are also sculptural pieces by Giuseppe Moretti, representing allegories depicting benevolence, education, music and theatre.
Hundreds of thousands of Chinese workers were brought in by Spanish settlers from Guangdong, Fujian, Hong Kong, and Macau via Manila, Philippines starting in the mid-19th century to replace or work alongside African slaves.
It contained 400 apartments, garages, a school, a supermarket, and restaurant on the top floor.
A noteworthy elevation is the 200-foot-high (60-metre) limestone ridge that slopes up from the east and culminates in the heights of La Cabaña and El Morro, the sites of colonial fortifications overlooking the eastern bay.
However, contrary to events in Europe, Havana's communist régime continued during the 1990s.
The government placed special emphasis on cultural activities, many of which are free or involve only a minimal charge.
Vedado is today Havana's financial district, the main banks, airline companies offices, shops, most businesses headquarters, numerous high-rise apartments and hotels, are located in the area.
Though there was an uptick in small businesses in 2011, many have since gone out of business, due to lack of business and income on the part of the local residents, whose salaries average $20 per month.
Roman Catholics form the largest religious group in Havana.
Havana began as a trading port, and suffered regular attacks by buccaneers, pirates, and French corsairs.
Soon after the Revolution, the university, as well as all other educational institutions, were nationalized.
Havana city borders are contiguous with the Mayabeque Province on the south and east and to Artemisa Province on the west, since former La Habana Province (rural) was abolished in 2010.
The city has several large sports stadiums, the largest one is the Estadio Latinoamericano.
The restoration of Old Havana offered a number of new attractions, including a museum to house relics of the Cuban revolution.
• '''Harvard Public Health''';  Review/Summer 2002 : The Cuban Paradox "Because its access to traditional sources of financing is seriously hindered by the sanctions, which until recently included all food and medicine, Cuba has received little foreign and humanitarian aid to maintain the vitality of its national programs"
Starting from the 1980s, the city's population is growing slowly as a result of balanced development policies, low birth rate, its relatively high rate of emigration abroad, and controlled domestic migration.
Havana lies on the northern coast of Cuba, south of the Florida Keys, where the Gulf of Mexico joins the Atlantic Ocean.
The British immediately opened up trade with their North American and Caribbean colonies, causing a rapid transformation of Cuban society.
;Omnibus Metropolitanos
The museum was the Presidential Palace in the capital; today, its displays and documents outline Cuba's history from the beginning of the ''neo-colonial period''.
In May 2015, Havana was officially recognized as one of the New7Wonders Cities together with Vigan, Doha, La Paz, Durban, Beirut, and Kuala Lumpur.
The neo-classical mansion of the ''Countess of Revilla de Camargo'', today it is the Museum of Decorative Arts ''(Museo de Artes Decorativas)'', known as the ''"small French Palace of Havana"'' built between 1924 and 1927, it was designed in Paris inspired in French Renaissance.
Admission to sporting events is generally free, and impromptu games are played in neighborhoods throughout the city.
There are few mestizos in contrast to many other Latin American countries, because the Native Indian population was virtually wiped out by Eurasian diseases in colonial times.
The city was captured by the British during the Seven Years' War.
Many patients are from Latin America, although medical treatment for retinitis pigmentosa, often known as night blindness, has attracted many patients from Europe and North America.
With this, Cuba became the fifth country in the world to have a railroad, and the first Spanish-speaking country.
The strengthening of the U.S. embargo contributed to these problems."
Kropp Co., Milwaukee, WI, between 1921 and 1939 promoting tourism in Havana, Cuba, can be found in the  University of Houston Digital Library, Havana, Cuba, The Summer Land of the World, Digital Collection.
The thousands of ships gathered in the city's bay also fueled Havana's agriculture and manufacture, since they had to be supplied with food, water, and other products needed to traverse the ocean.
Havana achieved the title of being the Latin American city with the biggest middle class population per-capita, simultaneously accompanied by gambling and corruption where gangsters and stars were known to mix socially.
This was the tallest concrete structure in the world at the time (using no steel frame) and the ultimate symbol of luxury and excess.
Under the ''Cuban Ministry of Culture'', it occupies two locations in the vicinity of Havana's ''Paseo del Prado'', these are the ''Palace of Fine Arts'', devoted to Cuban art and the ''Palace of the Asturian Center'', dedicated to universal art.
Many high-rise office buildings, and apartment complexes, along with some hotels built in the 1950s dramatically altered the skyline.
Havana, by far the leading cultural centre of the country, offers a wide variety of features that range from museums, palaces, public squares, avenues, churches, fortresses (including the largest fortified complex in the Americas dating from the 16th through 18th centuries), ballet and from art and musical festivals to exhibitions of technology.
Many believed that Havana's Soviet-backed régime would soon vanish, as happened to the Soviet satellite states of Eastern Europe.
Its branches in some cases occupy buildings that were in pre-revolutionary times the offices of Cuban or foreign banks.
;Art Deco and Eclectic
The city of Havana was founded by the Spanish in the 16th century and due to its strategic location it served as a springboard for the Spanish conquest of the continent becoming a stopping point for the treasure-laden Spanish galleons on the crossing between the New World and the Old World.
* White: 58.4%, (Mainly Spanish descent Galician, Asturian and Canarian were most common)
The city extends mostly westward and southward from the bay, which is entered through a narrow inlet and which divides into three main harbours: Marimelena, Guanabacoa, and Atarés.
Alejo Carpentier called Old Havana the place "de las columnas" (of the columns).
However, an early map of Cuba drawn in 1514 places the town at the mouth of this river.
Note: Some of the city's municipalities are also twinned to small cities or districts of other big cities, for details see their respective articles.
A pamphlet published by E.C.
The National Theater includes two main theatre stages, the ''Avellaneda Auditorium'' and the ''Covarrubias Auditorium'', as well as a smaller theatre workshop space on the ninth floor.
The stops are usually , with frequent buses in peak hours, about every 10&nbsp;minutes.
In total, Havana has around 50 museums, including the National Museum of Music; the Museum of Dance and Rum; the Cigar Museum; the Napoleonic, Colonial and Oricha Museums; the Museum of Anthropology; the Ernest Hemingway Museum; the José Martí Monument; the Aircraft Museum (Museo del Aire).
"The resultant lack of food and medicines to Cuba contributed to the worst epidemic of neurological disease this century."
The National Museum of Fine Arts (''Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes'') is a Fine Arts museum that exhibits Cuban and International art collections.
Such attacks convinced the Spanish Crown to fund the construction of the first fortresses in the main cities — not only to counteract the pirates and corsairs, but also to exert more control over commerce with the West Indies, and to limit the extensive ''contrabando'' (black market) that had arisen due to the trade restrictions imposed by the ''Casa de Contratación'' of Seville (the crown-controlled trading house that held a monopoly on New World trade).
Glories of its rich history; the Italian tenor Enrico Caruso sang, the Russian ballerina Anna Pavlova danced, and the French Sarah Bernhardt acted.
During the 18th century Havana was the most important of the Spanish ports because it had facilities where ships could be refitted and, by 1740, it had become Spain's largest and most active shipyard and only drydock in the New World.
A third Havana is that of the more affluent residential and industrial districts that spread out mostly to the west.
They are nominated directly by citizens in open meetings within each election district.
Construction began on what was to become the Fortress of San Carlos de la Cabaña, the third biggest Spanish fortification in the New World after Fort San Cristobal (the biggest) and Fort San Felipe del Morro both in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
In the late 1990s Vedado, located along the atlantic waterfront, started to represent the principal commercial area.
The Karl Marx Theater with its large auditorium have a seating capacity of 5,500 spectators, is generally used for concerts and other events, it is also one of the venues for the annual Havana Film Festival.
Riches were brought from the colonialists into and through Havana as it was a key transshipment point between the new world and old world.
Miramar, located west of Vedado along the coast, remains Havana's exclusive area; mansions, foreign embassies, diplomatic residences, upscale shops, and facilities for wealthy foreigners are common in the area.
Throughout the century, Havana was enriched by the construction of additional cultural facilities, such as the Tacon Teatre, one of the most luxurious in the world.
The ''Metrobus'' serves the inner-city urban area, with a maximum distance of .
One of these is the Palacio de los Capitanes Generales, where Spanish governors once lived.
Less than a year after Havana was seized, the Peace of Paris was signed by the three warring powers thus ending the Seven Years' War.
An interurban line built in 1917 runs from Casablanca (across the harbor from Old Havana) to Hershey and on to Matanzas.
Famous architects such as Walter Gropius, Richard Neutra and Oscar Niemeyer all passed through the city, while strong influences can be seen in Havana at this time from Le Corbusier and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe.
Tourism is now Havana and Cuba's primary economic source.
In 1649 a very fatal epidemic brought from Cartagena in Colombia, affected a third of the population of Havana.
Contemporary Havana can essentially be described as three cities in one: Old Havana, Vedado and the newer suburban districts.
Santo Trafficante, Jr. took the roulette wheel at the Sans Souci Casino, Meyer Lansky directed the Hotel Habana Riviera, with Lucky Luciano at the Hotel Nacional Casino.
This whole neighborhood is littered with set back well-proportioned buildings.
As typical of Cuba, Havana also features a tropical climate.
New buildings were constructed from the most abundant materials of the island, mainly wood, combining various Iberian architectural styles, as well as borrowing profusely from Canarian characteristics.
File:Gran Teatro de la Habana interior 2.jpg|García Lorca Hall at the Great Theatre
Although the harbours of Cienfuegos and Matanzas, in particular, have been developed under the revolutionary government, Havana remains Cuba's primary port facility; 50% of Cuban imports and exports pass through Havana.
The peak of Neoclassicism came with the construction of the Vedado district (begun in 1859).
The current mayor is Marta Hernández from the Communist Party of Cuba (PCC).
Some of the suburban exclusivity was lost after the revolution, many of the suburban homes having been nationalized by the Cuban government to serve as schools, hospitals, and government offices.
The generic term "slum" is seldom used in Cuba, substandard housing is described: housing type, housing conditions, building materials, and settlement type.
"The two determining factors underlying the crisis are well known.
Havana's ''Museo del Automobil'' has an impressive collection of vehicles dating back to a 1905 Cadillac.
The town that became Havana  finally originated adjacent to what was then called ''Puerto de Carenas'' (literally, "Careening Bay"), in 1519.
The ''Capitolio Nacional'' building marks the beginning of Centro Habana, a working-class neighborhood.
The quality of this natural bay, which now hosts Havana's harbor, warranted this change of location.
it also has a minor basilica (Nuestra Señora de la Caridad) and two national shrines, Jesús Nazareno del Rescate and San Lázaro (El Rincón).
Administration of the health care system for the nation is centred largely in Havana.
Outside the city, higher hills rise on the west and east.
The ''Edificio Bacardi'' (1930) is thought to be the best example of Art-deco architecture in the city and first tall Art Deco building as well, followed by the Hotel Nacional de Cuba (1930) and ''The Lopez Serrano'' building built in 1932 by Ricardo Mira inspired by the Rockefeller Center in New York City.
There is a population of several thousand North African teen and pre-teen refugees.
The sluggish Almendares River traverses the city from south to north, entering the Straits of Florida a few miles west of the bay.
Before the revolution the Chinese population counted to over 200,000, today, Chinese ancestors could count up to 100,000.
The traditional sugar industry, upon which the island's economy has been based for three centuries, is centred elsewhere on the island and controls some three-fourths of the export economy.
The airport is Cuba's main international and domestic gateway, it connects Havana with the rest of the Caribbean, North, Central and South America, Europe and one destination in Africa.
The Museum of the Revolution ''(Museo de la Revolución)'', designed in Havana by Cuban architect Carlos Maruri, and the Belgian Paul Belau, who came up with an eclectic design, harmoniously combines Spanish, French and German architectural elements.
At the time, Havana became an exotic capital of appeal and numerous activities ranging from marinas, grand prix car racing, musical shows and parks.
File:Grand National Theatre, Havana Cuba 1920.jpg|Grand National Theatre at the Palace of the Galician c.1920
This division has one of the most used and largest urban bus fleets in the country, its fleet is made up of mostly new Chinese Yutong buses, but as well older Busscar buses.
The beauty of Old Havana City attracts millions of tourists each year who enjoy its rich old culture and folk music.
The main railway stations are: Central Rail Station, La Coubre Rail Station, Casablanca Station, and Estación de Tulipán.
Soviet subsidies ended, representing billions of dollars which the Soviet Union had given the Cuban government.
After the revolution of 1959, the new régime under Fidel Castro promised to improve social services, public housing, and official buildings.
During this period Havana became known as the Paris of the Antilles.
• '''Pan American Health organization'''; Health Situation Analysis and Trends Summary  Regional Core Health Data System - Country Profile: CUBA
The Havana Riviera Hotel (1957) designed by Irving Feldman, a twenty-one-story edifice, when it opened, the Riviera was the largest purpose-built casino-hotel in Cuba or anywhere in the world, outside Las Vegas (the Havana Hilton (1958) surpassed its size a year later).
As a result, Havana was the most heavily fortified city in the Americas.
Havana's theaters featured the most distinguished actors of the age, and prosperity among the burgeoning middle-class led to expensive new classical mansions being erected.
• '''American Association for World Health''';  Online.
According to ''Instituto Nacional de Vivienda'' (National Housing Institute) official figures, in 2001, 64% of Havana's 586,768 units were considered in "good" condition, up from 50% in 1990.
Examples of the latter are Habana Libre (1958), which before the revolution was the Havana Hilton Hotel and La Rampa movie theater (1955).
This is considered the most important neoclassical residential building in Cuba and typifies the design of many houses of this period with portales of neoclassical columns facing open spaces or courtyards.
His influence has left a huge mark on Havana although many of his ideas were cut short by the great depression in 1929.
A severe economic downturn occurred after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
The narrow streets of Old Havana contain many buildings, accounting for perhaps as many as one-third of the approximately 3,000 buildings found in Old Havana.
The city is also served by Playa Baracoa Airport which is small airport to the west of city used for some domestic flights, primarily Aerogaviota.
In the 17th century it was one of the main shipbuilding centers.
Over 9% of Havana's population live in ''cuartería'' (''solares, ciudadela''), 3.3% in shanty towns, and 0.3% in refugee shelters.
Among these is Marianao, one of the newer parts of the city, dating mainly from the 1920s.
The FFCC connects Havana with all the provinces of Cuba.
Electrical blackouts occurred, prompting the national government in 1986 to allocate the equivalent of $25,000,000 to modernize the electrical system.
'''Havana''' (; Spanish: ''La Habana'', ) is the capital city, largest city, province, major port, and leading commercial centre of Cuba.
Shortly after the founding of Cuba's first cities, the island served as little more than a base for the ''Conquista'' of other lands.
Apartment buildings to accommodate the new middle class, as well as mansions for the Cuban tycoons, were built at a fast pace.
The University of Havana is located in Vedado.
Social clubs at the beaches provide facilities for water sports and include restaurants and dance halls.
* Havana was host to the 1992 IAAF World Cup in Athletics.
The Central Railway Terminal (1912), and the Museum of the Revolution (1920) are example of Eclectic architecture.
The Cuban government controls the movement of people into Havana on the grounds that the Havana metropolitan area (home to nearly 20% of the country's population) is overstretched in terms of land use, water, electricity, transportation, and other elements of the urban infrastructure.
In spring 2015, the largest open-air art exhibition ever in Cuba took in front of the basilica on the Plaza San Francisco de Asis: Over 8 weeks the United Buddy Bears visited Havana.
Old Havana is the ancient city formed from the port, the official center and the Plaza de Armas.
The city is the center of the Cuban government, and home to various ministries, headquarters of businesses and over 90 diplomatic offices.
Other food-processing industries are also important, along with shipbuilding, vehicle manufacturing, production of alcoholic beverages (particularly rum), textiles, and tobacco products, particularly the world-famous Habanos cigars.
Havana agglomeration grew rapidly during the first half of the 20th century reaching 1 million inhabitants in the 1943 census.
The Havana cathedral (1748–1777) dominating the Plaza de la Catedral (1749) is the best example of Cuban Baroque.
The Jewish community in Havana has reduced after the Revolution from once having embraced more than 15,000 Jews, many of whom had fled Nazi persecution and subsequently left Cuba to Miami or moved to Israel after Castro took to power in 1959.
File:Banrarra Afro-Cuban dance troupe 3, Havana Jan 2014, image by Marjorie Kaufman.jpg|Banrarra Afro-Cuban dance troupe
* Black: 15.2%, (brought by Spanish colonists from Sub-Saharan Africa)
Modernism, therefore, transformed much of the city and should be noted for its individual buildings of high quality rather than its larger key buildings.
Havana is one of the three Metropolitan sees on the island (the others being Camaguëy and Santiago), with two suffragan bishoprics: Mananzas and Pinar del Río.
The city attracts over a million tourists annually, the Official Census for Havana reports that in 2010 the city was visited by 1,176,627 international tourists, a 20.0% increase from 2005.
The neighborhood was booming with Chinese restaurants, laundries, banks, pharmacies, theaters and several Chinese-language newspapers, the neighborhood comprised 44 square blocks during its prime.
The city is also noted for its history, culture, architecture and monuments.
The fare is CUP 0.20¢ (city residents) or CUC $1 (foreigners).
The city has long been a popular attraction for tourists.
In 1837, the first railroad was constructed, a  stretch between Havana and Bejucal, which was used for transporting sugar from the valley of Guinness to the harbor.
The city was built in baroque and neoclassic style.
Because of the city and country's low birth rate and high life expectancy, its age structure is similar to a developed country, with Havana having an even higher proportion of elderly than the country as a whole.
File:Ballet Nacional de Cuba.jpg|Ballet Nacional de Cuba performing at the Great Theatre
It was developed extensively between 1930 and 1960, when Havana developed as a major destination for U.S. tourists; high-rise hotels, casinos, restaurants, and upscale commercial establishments, many reflecting the art deco style.
The heart of Barrio Chino is on ''el Cuchillo de Zanja'' (or The Zanja Canal).
The district has two paifang, a large one located on ''Calle Dragones'', the People's Republic of China donated the materials in the late 1990s, it has a well defined written welcoming sign in Chinese and Spanish.
Old Havana, (''La Habana Vieja'' in Spanish), contains the core of the original city of Havana, with more than 2,000&nbsp;hectares it exhibits almost all the Western architectural styles seen in the New World.
The national government does not have an official definition of poverty.
The Cuban National Ballet School with 4,350 students is one of the largest ballet schools in the world and the most prestigious ballet school in Cuba.
The Cuban press showed the construction project and the course route, linking municipalities and neighborhoods in the capital.
There are also museums of Natural Sciences, the City, Archeology, Gold-and-Silverwork, Perfume, Pharmaceuticals, Sports, Numismatics, and Weapons.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Cuba re-emphasized tourism as a major industry leading to its recovery.
The sinking of the U.S. battleship ''Maine'' in Havana's harbor in 1898 was the immediate cause of the Spanish–American War.
Voters elect delegates to Municipal Assemblies in competitive elections.
In the 1930s, organized crime characters were not unaware of Havana's nightclub and casino life, and they made their inroads in the city.
In the second half of the 18th century, sugar and coffee production increased rapidly, which became essential in the development of Havana's most prominent architectural style.
The ''Omnibus Metropolitanos'' (OM), known as the Metrobus feeder line, connects the adjacent towns and cities in the metropolitan area with the city center, with a maximum distance of .
Its artistic heritage is made up of over 45,000 pieces.
Facing Havana's ''Central Park'' is the baroque Great Theatre of Havana, a prominent theatre built in 1837.
Accessed ''6 October 2006''.
The Museum has ten permanent exhibit halls.
Havana expanded greatly in the 17th century.
Banking as well is also under state control, and the National Bank of Cuba, headquartered in Havana, is the control center of the Cuban economy.
The city extends mostly westward and southward from the bay, which is entered through a narrow inlet and which divides into three main harbours: Marimelena, Guanabacoa and Atarés.
Water, electricity, and sewage service are administered in this fashion.
People living in slums have access to the same education, health care, job opportunities and social security as those who live in formerly privileged neighbourhoods.
File:Bride sitting on a bench with Cubans.jpg|Wedding photoshoot in Havana
Its fleet have been modernized, but formerly in 2006 were known as "camellos" (camels).
File:Havana - Cuba - 3992.jpg| Payret Cinema
The International School of Havana is located in the Miramar neighborhood.
In February 2007 the New York Times estimated that there were about 1,500 known Jews living in Havana.
Among them are prominent porcelain articles from the factories in Sèvres and Chantilly, France; Meissen, Germany; and Wedgwood, England, as well as Chinese from the Qianlong Emperor period and Japanese from the Imari.
Electricity is supplied by generators that are fueled with oil.
In Old Havana, effort has also gone into rebuilding for tourist purposes, and a number of streets and squares have been rehabilitated.
File:1920 Centro Asturiano1.jpg|Museum of Fine Arts at the Palace of the Asturian c.1920
;Colonial and Baroque
Nevertheless, Havana's infant mortality rate in 2009 was 4.9 per 1,000 live births, 5.12 in the country as a whole, which is lower than many developed nations, and the lowest in the developing world.
The city is moving forward with their renovations, with most of the major plazas (Plaza Vieja, Plaza de la Catedral, Plaza de San Francisco and Plaza de Armas) and major tourist streets (Obispo and Mercaderes) near completion.
File:Tour Bus, Habana.jpg|Sight-seeing bus
But Old Havana is a large city, and the restoration efforts concentrate in all on less than 10% of its area.
All attempts to found a city on Cuba's south coast failed.
Other important theatres in the city includes the National Theater of Cuba, housed in a huge modern building located in Plaza de la Revolucion, decorated with works by Cuban artists.
In 2000 the Union de Ferrocarriles de Cuba bought French first class airconditioned coaches.
The sluggish Almendares River traverses the city from south to north, entering the Straits of Florida a few miles west of the bay.
Some 20% were in "fair" condition and 16% in "poor" condition.
Between 1915 and 1930, Havana hosted more tourists than any other location in the Caribbean.
The museum houses one of the largest collections of paintings and sculpture from Latin America and is the largest in the Caribbean region.
By 1966-1968, the Cuban government had nationalized all privately owned business entities in Cuba, down to "certain kinds of small retail forms of commerce" (law No.
He embraced and connected the city's road networks while accentuating prominent landmarks.
