Catholic and Mormon missionaries were also active in the kingdom, but they converted a minority of the Native Hawaiian population.
The sale price of single family homes in Hawaii was the highest of any U.S. city in 2010, just above that of the Silicon Valley area of California ().
Another Hawaiian word, ''aikāne'', referred to same-sex relationships.
In the Hawaii Admission Act that granted Hawaiian statehood, the federal government recognized ''Hawaii'' as the official state name.
Since statehood in 1959, tourism has been the largest industry, contributing 24.3% of the gross state product (GSP) in 1997, despite efforts to diversify.
Research from the National Association of Realtors places the 2010 median sale price of a single family home in Honolulu, Hawaii, at  and the U.S. median sales price at .
Seeds yielded  million in 2012, supporting 1,400 workers.
Some key customs and etiquette in Hawaii are as follows: when visiting a home, it is considered good manners to bring a small gift for one's host (for example, a dessert).
Hawaii has the highest rates of private school attendance in the nation.
This law makes Hawaii less competitive than West Coast ports as a shopping destination for tourists from countries with much higher taxes like Japan, even though prices for Asian-manufactured goods should be cheaper because Hawaii is much closer than mainland states to Asia.
Saint Stephen Diocesan Center is a seminary of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Honolulu.
The sovereignty movement considers Hawaii to be an illegally occupied nation.
During the 2011-2012 school year, Hawaii public and charter schools had an enrollment of 181,213, while private schools had 37,695.
Some of these cultural influences, including the popularity (in greatly modified form) of ''lūau'' and ''hula'', are strong enough to affect the wider United States.
The number of same-sex couple households in 2010 was 3,239; a 35.45% increase of figures from a decade earlier.
Hawaii was admitted as a U.S. state on August 21, 1959.
The state has a lower population density than Ohio and Illinois.
The average projected lifespan of people born in Hawaii in 2000 is 79.8 years; 77.1 years if male, 82.5 if female—longer than the average lifespan of any other U.S. state.
It has four of the largest independent schools; Iolani School, Kamehameha Schools, Mid-Pacific Institute and Punahou School.
Controversy ensued in the following years as the Queen tried to regain her throne.
Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 30,068; migration within the country produced a net loss of 13,112 people.
If de Villalobos' crew spotted Hawaii, Gaetano would be considered the first European to see the islands.
''Māhū'' people, who often traversed gender as defined by Western standards, were a respected group of pre-colonization people who were widely known in society as healers.
The Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project aims to add elevated passenger rail on Oahu to relieve highway congestion.
As of 2006, there were a total of eleven Pūnana Leo preschools, with locations on five of the islands.
English (General American) and Hawaiian are listed as Hawaii's "official languages" in the state's 1978 constitution.
Hawaii Creole English, locally referred to as "Pidgin", is the native language of many native residents and is a second language for many others.
Mark Takai represented the 1st congressional district in the House, representing southeastern Oahu, including central Honolulu, before passing away July 20, 2016.
State Senator Sam Slom says state taxes are comparatively higher than other states because the state government handles education, health care, and social services that are usually handled at a county or municipal level in most other states.
Instead, those cargo ships must proceed directly to the West Coast, where distributors break bulk and transport the Hawaiian-bound, Asian-manufactured goods back across the ocean by U.S.-flagged ships and increasing the length of the voyage by more than 50%.
All local governments are generally administered at the county level.
It was named after three native Hawaiian members of a trapping party who went missing in that area.
The Department of Education is divided into seven districts; four on Oahu and one for each of the other three counties.
, all three other seats are held by Democrats.
They departed without the ship's boat.
The Northwest Hawaiian Islands is a group of nine small, older islands to the northwest of Kauai that extend from Nihoa to Kure Atoll; these are remnants of once much larger volcanic mountains.
The administration of President Grover Cleveland commissioned the Blount Report, which concluded that the removal of Liliuokalani had been illegal.
Protests and legal problems over environmental impact statements ended the service, though the company operating Superferry has expressed a wish to recommence ferry services in the future.
He was the third Hawaii-born candidate to seek the nomination of a major party and the first presidential nominee from Hawaii.
There are over 80,000 Indigenous Hawaiians—5.9% of the population.
by ocean currents) and wings (i.e.
Significant numbers of European immigrants and their descendants also speak their native languages; the most numerous are German, Portuguese, Italian and French.
While traditional Hawaiian culture remains as vestiges in modern Hawaiian society, there are re-enactments of the ceremonies and traditions throughout the islands.
However, the Constitution of Massachusetts formally changed the ''Province of Massachusetts Bay''  to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in 1780, and in the 1819 the Territory of Arkansaw was created but was later admitted to statehood as State of Arkansas.
The state's gross output for 2003 was billion; per capita income for Hawaii residents in 2014 was .
The OR&L was important for moving troops and goods during World War II.
Hawaiian consumers ultimately bear the expense of transporting goods imposed by the Jones Act.
Over 120,000 (8.8%) of Hispanic and Latino Americans live in Hawaii.
Ancient Hawaii was a caste-based society, much like that of Hindus in India.
Hawaii home values were the highest of all states, including California with a median home value of .
Plantation owners and capitalists, who maintained control through financial institutions such as the Big Five, found territorial status convenient because they remained able to import cheap, foreign labor.
Local chiefs, called alii, ruled their settlements, and launched wars to extend their influence and defend their communities from predatory rivals.
In 2003, according to state government data, there were over 6.4 million visitors, with expenditures of over $10 billion, to the Hawaiian Islands.
The cuisine of Hawaii is a fusion of many foods brought by immigrants to the Hawaiian Islands, including the earliest Polynesians and Native Hawaiian cuisine, and American, Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, Korean, Polynesian and Portuguese origins.
This highly-inefficient system of shipping Hawaii's consumer cargo comes at a very hefty price for the average Hawaiian citizen, and makes the cost of living in Hawaii much, much higher than it would otherwise be.
Native Hawaiians had no resistance to Eurasian diseases, such as influenza, smallpox and measles.
Until air passenger services began in the 1920s, private boats were the sole means of traveling between the islands.
The largest is the University of Hawaii System, which consists of: the research university at Mānoa, two comprehensive campuses at Hilo and West Oahu, and seven community colleges.
This includes a natural increase of 48,111 (96,028 births minus 47,917 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 16,956 people into the state.
A 2012 poll by Gallup found that Hawaii had the largest proportion of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) adults in the U.S., at 5.1%, comprising an estimated adult LGBT population of 53,966 individuals.
Interest in Hawaiian increased significantly in the late 20th century.
The center of population of Hawaii is located between the two islands of O'ahu and Moloka'i.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation, Internal Revenue Service and the Secret Service maintain their offices there; the building is also the site of the federal District Court for the District of Hawaii and the United States Attorney for the District of Hawaii.
* Judaism: 10,000 (0.8%)
A sign language for the deaf, based on the Hawaiian language, has been in use in the islands since the early 1800s.
He met with three annexationists: Lorrin A. Thurston, Francis March Hatch and William Ansel Kinney.
Large numbers of Native Hawaiians have moved to Las Vegas, which has been called the "ninth island" of Hawaii.
The first 153 Japanese immigrants arrived in Hawaii on June 19, 1868.
Only Oahu has federal highways, and is the only area outside the contiguous 48 states to have signed Interstate highways.
Hawaiian music has had an enormous impact on the music of other Polynesian islands; according to Peter Manuel, the influence of Hawaiian music a "unifying factor in the development of modern Pacific musics".
Hawaii has had a long history of queer identities.
In the 1950s, the power of the plantation owners was broken by the descendants of immigrant laborers, who were born in the incorporated U.S. territory and were U.S. citizens.
This may have unbalanced the results that reported in August 2005 that of 282 schools across the state, 185 failed to reach federal minimum performance standards in mathematics and reading.
While some online stores offer free shipping on orders to Hawaii, many merchants exclude Hawaii, Alaska, Puerto Rico and certain other U.S. territories.
Proponents of universal health care elsewhere in the U.S. sometimes use Hawaii as a model for proposed federal and state health care plans.
The new majority voted for the Democratic Party of Hawaii, which dominated territorial and state politics for more than 40 years.
The referendum asked voters to choose between accepting the Act and remaining a U.S. territory.
In the 1990s, a group of chefs developed Hawaii regional cuisine as a contemporary fusion cuisine.
On January 14, 1893, a group of mostly Euro-American business leaders and residents formed the Committee of Safety to stage a coup d'état against the kingdom and seek annexation by the United States.
In 1970, the Census Bureau reported Hawaii's population was 38.8% white and 57.7% Asian and Pacific Islander.
It is written as a symbol similar to the apostrophe or left-hanging (opening) single quotation mark.
Diacritics were not used because the document, drafted in 1949, predates the use of the okina () and the kahakō in modern Hawaiian orthography.
the U.S. military reported it had 42,371 personnel on the islands.
The first native controlled public charter school was the Kanu O Ka Aina New Century Charter School.
In 1790, Kīlauea exploded; it was the deadliest eruption known to have occurred in the modern era in what is now the United States.
In this manuscript, the island of Maui is named ''La Desgraciada'' (The Unfortunate Island), and what appears to be Hawaii Island is named ''La Mesa'' (The Table).
As of the 2000 Census, 73.44% of Hawaii residents aged five and older exclusively speak English at home.
The Hawaiian language has about 2,000 native speakers, less than 0.1% of the total population.
Congress conducted an independent investigation, and on February 26, 1894, submitted the Morgan Report, which found all parties, including Minister Stevens—with the exception of the Queen—"not guilty" and not responsible for the coup.
Hawaii is the southernmost U.S. state and the second westernmost after Alaska.
The first wave arrived between 1903 and 1924; the second wave began in 1965 after President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 which removed racial and national barriers and resulted in significantly altering the demographic mix in the U.S.
Hawaiian Airlines, Mokulele Airlines and go!
Independent and charter schools can select their students, while the public schools are open to all students in their district.
Article XV, Section 4 specifies that "Hawaiian shall be required for public acts and transactions only as provided by law".
Kalawao County has no elected government, and as mentioned above there are no local school districts and instead all local public education is administered at the state level by the Hawaii Department of Education.
Like other regions with desirable weather throughout the year, such as areas of California, Arizona and Florida, Hawaii's residents can be considered to be subject to a "Sunshine tax".
This isolation, in combination with the diverse environment (including extreme altitudes, tropical climates, and arid shorelines), produced an array of endemic flora and fauna.
Official government publications, department and office titles, and the Seal of Hawaii use the traditional spelling with no symbols for glottal stops or vowel length.
Hawaiian is a Polynesian member of the Austronesian language family.
Depending on the interpretation, Gaetano's reports describe an encounter with either Hawaii or the Marshall Islands.
With the help of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs, specially designated immersion schools in which all subjects would be taught in Hawaiian were established.
After William McKinley won the 1896 U.S. presidential election, advocates pressed to annex the Republic of Hawaii.
Island Air and Pacific Wings serve smaller airports.
The major holidays are the most popular times for outsiders to visit, especially in the winter months.
Hawaii has more endangered species and has lost a higher percentage of its endemic species than any other U.S. state.
* Buddhism: 110,000 (9%)
On June 27, 1959, a referendum asked residents of Hawaii to vote on the statehood bill; 94.3% voted in favor of statehood and 5.7% opposed it.
Seaflite operated hydrofoils between the major islands in the mid-1970s.
In 2004, John Kerry won the state's four electoral votes by a margin of nine percentage points with 54% of the vote.
Policy decisions are made by the fourteen-member state Board of Education, which sets policy and hires the superintendent of schools, who oversees the state Department of Education.
Pacific Buddhist Academy, the second Buddhist high school in the U.S. and first such school in Hawaii, was founded in 2003.
Syntax and grammar follow distinctive rules different from those of General American English.
The multi-racial population outnumbers the non-Hispanic white population by about 10,000 people.
The five largest European ancestries in Hawaii are German (7.4%), Irish (5.2%), English (4.6%), Portuguese (4.3%) and Italian (2.7%).
The act excluded Palmyra Atoll from statehood; it had been part of the Kingdom and Territory of Hawaii.
The Hawaii International Film Festival is the premier film festival for Pacific rim cinema.
After riots broke out, the United States and Britain landed troops on the islands to restore order.
According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Hawaii had the fourth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 7.18%.
A somewhat divisive political issue arose in 1978 when the Constitution of the State of Hawaii added Hawaiian as a second official state language.
The monument covers roughly  of reefs, atolls, and shallow and deep sea out to  offshore in the Pacific Ocean—an area larger than all of the national parks in the U.S. combined.
The average Japanese stays only 5 days while other Asians spend over 9.5 days and spend 25% more.
The Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument was proclaimed by President George W. Bush on June 15, 2006.
In 1820, the first American missionaries arrived to preach Christianity and teach the Hawaiians Western ways.
Such immigration and labor practices were prohibited in many states.
Spanish archives contain a chart that depicts islands at the same latitude as Hawaii but with a longitude ten degrees east of the islands.
According to journals written by Captain Cook's crew, it is widely believed that many ''alii'' engaged in ''aikāne'' relationships.
Narrow, winding roads and congestion in populated places can slow traffic.
Snow rarely falls on Haleakalā.
The state does not observe daylight saving time.
Hawaii comprises five counties: the City and County of Honolulu, Hawaii County, Maui County, Kauai County, and Kalawao County.
Cook published the islands' location and rendered the native name as ''Owyhee''.
Hawaiian mythology comprises the legends, historical tales, and sayings of the ancient Hawaiian people.
The Hawaiian archipelago is located  southwest of the continental United States.
In 1893, Queen Liliuokalani announced plans for a new constitution.
Hawaiian magazines include ''Hana Hou!
Hawaii hosts numerous cultural events.
According to linguists Pukui and Elbert, "elsewhere in Polynesia, Hawaii or a cognate is the name of the underworld or of the ancestral home, but in Hawaii, the name has no meaning".
One endemic plant, ''Brighamia'', now requires hand-pollination because its natural pollinator is presumed to be extinct.
, Hawaii had an estimated population of 1,431,603; an increase of 12,042 from the previous year and an increase of 71,302 (5.24%) since 2010.
After attaining statehood, Hawaii quickly modernized through construction and a rapidly growing tourism economy.
The lieutenant governor acts as the Secretary of State.
The governor is the only state public official elected statewide; all others are appointed by the governor.
HCE speakers use some Hawaiian words without those words being considered archaic.
, a large proportion of Hawaii's population have Asian ancestry—especially Filipino, Japanese and Chinese.
The U.S. government first demanded that Queen Liliuokalani be reinstated, but the Provisional Government refused.
Some attend colleges and universities on the mainland or other countries, and the rest attend an institution of higher learning in Hawaii.
The third-largest religious group includes all non-denominational churches, with 128 congregations and 32,000 members.
Summer highs usually reach around  during the day and  at night.
How would you know if he was going to be the warrior that would protect you at all costs, if he wasn't your lover?"
Based on archaeological evidence, the earliest habitation of the Hawaiian Islands dates to around 300 CE, probably by Polynesian settlers from the Marquesas Islands.
The Hawaii Superferry operated between Oahu and Maui between December 2007 and March 2009, with additional routes planned for other islands.
According to the 2008 American Community Survey, 74.6% of Hawaii's residents over the age of five speak only English at home.
The only incorporated area in the state is Honolulu County, a consolidated city–county that governs the entire island of Oahu.
His seat is currently vacant.
The governor and lieutenant governor oversee twenty agencies and departments from offices in the State Capitol.
The history of the islands is marked by a slow, steady growth in population and the size of the chiefdoms, which grew to encompass whole islands.
Later, state programs promoted Hawaiian culture.
There are also substantial cultural similarities between the various groups, especially in terms of social organization, childrearing, horticulture, building and textile technologies.
The largest denominations by number of adherents were the Catholic Church with 249,619 adherents in 2010 and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 68,128 adherents in 2009.
In 1900, Hawaii was granted self-governance and retained Iolani Palace as the territorial capitol building.
The state of Hawaii derives its name from the name of its largest island, Hawaii.
However, this would effectively make the second leg of the voyage between Hawaii and the mainland a domestic route between two American ports.
Hawaii was an independent republic from 1894 until August 12, 1898, when it officially became a territory of the United States.
Hawaii is the only U.S. state located in Oceania and the only one composed entirely of islands.
HCE speakers have modified the meanings of some English words.
Because of the hotspot's location, all currently active land volcanoes are located on the southern half of Hawaii Island.
Hawaii Island has the third-highest point among the world's islands.
They assigned to the Hawaiian phonemes letters from the Latin alphabet.
Up to 5,405 warriors and their families marching on Kīlauea were killed by the eruption.
This spelling lives on in Owyhee County, Idaho.
Currently Norwegian Cruise Lines and Princess Cruises provide passenger cruise ship services between the larger islands.
After Cook's visit and the publication of several books relating his voyages, the Hawaiian islands attracted  many European visitors: explorers, traders, and eventually whalers, who found the islands to be a convenient harbor and source of supplies.
His sister, Queen Liliuokalani, succeeded him; she was the last monarch of Hawaii.
The first Japanese current-government-approved immigrants arrived on February 9, 1885, after Kalākaua's petition to Emperor Meiji when Kalākaua visited Japan in 1881.
On the flanks of the volcanoes, slope instability has generated damaging earthquakes and related tsunamis, particularly in 1868 and 1975.
Eager to gain full voting rights, Hawaii's residents actively campaigned for statehood.
The movement generally views both the overthrow and annexation as illegal, with the Apology Resolution passed by US Congress in 1993 cited as a major impetus by the movement for Hawaiian sovereignty.
On September 29, 2015 the Department of the Interior announced a procedure to recognize a Native Hawaiian government.
Hawaii is the 8th-smallest and the 11th-least populous, but the 13th-most densely populated of the fifty U.S. states.
Tourism is an important part of the Hawaiian economy.
Hawaii's record low temperature is  observed in May1979 on the summit of Mauna Kea.
In 2013, Hawaii became the fifteenth U.S. state to legalize same-sex marriage; a University of Hawaii researcher said the law may boost tourism by $217 million.
use jets to provide services between the large airports in Honolulu, Līhue, Kahului, Kona and Hilo.
At one time Hawaii had a network of railroads on each of the larger islands that transported farm commodities and passengers.
He established the House of Kamehameha, a dynasty that ruled the kingdom until 1872.
Heavy regulation of insurance companies helps reduce the cost to employers.
Hawaii's diverse natural scenery, warm tropical climate, abundance of public beaches, oceanic surroundings, and active volcanoes make it a popular destination for tourists, surfers, biologists, and volcanologists.
In 1874, the election was contested within the legislature between Kalākaua and Emma, Queen Consort of Kamehameha IV.
Missionaries from each major group administered to the leper colony at Kalaupapa on Molokai, which was established in 1866 and operated well into the 20th century.
After Kamehameha II inherited the throne in 1819, American Protestant missionaries to Hawaii converted many Hawaiians to Christianity.
Roughly 75% of foreign-born residents originate in Asia.
Their music is largely religious in nature, and includes chanting and dance music.
The lexicon of HCE derives mainly from English but also uses words that have derived from Hawaiian, Chinese, Japanese, Portuguese, Ilocano and Tagalog.
Hawaii has a ''de facto'' population of over 1.4million, due in part to a large number of military personnel and tourist residents.
Despite several attempts to become a state, Hawaii remained a territory for sixty years.
10% Native Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders; Two or more races may include some of the remainder
Puerto Rican immigration to Hawaii began in 1899 when Puerto Rico's sugar industry was devastated by two hurricanes, causing a worldwide shortage of sugar and a huge demand for sugar from Hawaii.
The history of Hawaii's economy can be traced through a succession of dominant industries; sandalwood, whaling, sugarcane, pineapple, military, tourism and education.
Thus, parties are usually in the form of potlucks.
Private schools educated over 17% of students in Hawaii that school year, nearly three times the approximate national average of 6%.
