Ergotamine is useful if given 1–2 hours before an attack.
Dilation of these extracranial blood vessels activates the pain receptors in the surrounding nerves, causing a headache.
* Systemic disease (HIV infection, malignancy)
It is important to distinguish between the two because the treatments are different.
Brain bleed (subarachnoid hemorrhage, hemorrhage into mass lesion, vascular malformation), pituitary apoplexy, mass (especially in posterior fossa)
One recommended diagnostic approach is as follows.
Arteriovenous malformation, collagen vascular disease, intracranial mass lesion
* temporal arteritis: inflammatory disease of arteries common in the elderly (average age 70) with fever, headache, weight loss, jaw claudication, tender vessels by the temples, polymyalgia rheumatica
Headache in people older than 60 with suspected temporal arteritis
Migraines are currently thought to be caused by dysfunction of the nerves in the brain.
Certain "red flags" or warning signs indicate a secondary headache may be dangerous.
The first four of these are classified as primary headaches, groups 5-12 as secondary headaches, cranial neuralgia, central and primary facial pain and other headaches for the last two groups.
There are a number of different classification systems for headaches.
There are more than 200 types of headaches.
The most well-recognized is that of the International Headache Society.
How it may work is still being looked into.
People with neurological findings on exam, such as weakness, also need further workup.
MRI of head with or without contrast
Pial arteries, rather than pial veins are responsible for pain production.
It occurs in migraines, tension-type headaches, and cluster headaches.
Neuroimaging, lumbar puncture if computed tomography is negative
Children who have headaches will not necessarily have headaches as adults.
Medication overuse headache may occur in those using excessive painkillers for headaches, paradoxically causing worsening headaches.
Hypnic headaches are usually in older women.
If the symptoms described by the person sound dangerous, further testing with neuroimaging and/or lumbar puncture may be necessary.
The diagnostic approach to headache in children is similar to that of adults.
A lumbar puncture is necessary to look for infection or blood in the spinal fluid.
CT or MRI without contrast
Lithium can also be useful.
In general, children suffer from the same types of headaches as adults do, but their symptoms may be slightly different.
Secondary headaches, according to the same classification system, can also be due to the injury of any of the facial structures including teeth, jaws, or temporomandibular joint.
Secondary headaches are classified based on their etiology and not on their symptoms.
* hemicrania continua: continuous unilateral pain with episodes of severe pain.
Another study found the following factors independently each increase the chance of migraine over tension type headache: nausea, photophobia, phonophobia, exacerbation by physical activity, unilateral, throbbing quality, chocolate as headache trigger, cheese as headache trigger.
Approximately 1% of Emergency Department visits for children are for headache.
Although the ICHD-2 is the most complete headache classification there is and it includes frequency in the diagnostic criteria of some types of headaches (primarily primary headaches), it does not specifically code frequency or severity which are left at the discretion of the examiner.
One review article found that if 4–5 of the POUND characteristics are present, migraine is 24 times as likely a diagnosis than tension type headache (likelihood ratio 24).
Approximately 64–77% of people have a headache at some point in their lives.
Some measures can help prevent headaches in children.
Brain bleeds (intracranial hemorrhage, subdural hematoma, epidural hematoma), post-traumatic headache
Most old, chronic headaches do not require neuroimaging.
Most of these headaches are not dangerous.
Cluster headaches are relatively rare (1–3 in 10,000 people) and are more common in men than women.
Tension headaches are thought to be caused by activation of peripheral nerves in the head and neck muscles
Headaches caused by psychiatric disorders such as somatization or psychotic disorders are also classified as secondary headaches.
Secondary headaches are caused by an underlying disease, like an infection, head injury, vascular disorders, brain bleed or tumors.
Primary headaches are more difficult to understand than secondary headaches.
Change in personality, consciousness, or mental status
During each year, on average, 46–53% of people have headaches.
These headaches are thought to be due to lower pressure in the head during sex.
May also have tenderness in temples and/or jaw claudication.
Cancer can metastasize, or travel through the blood or lymph to other sites in the body.
Drinking plenty of water throughout the day, avoiding caffeine, getting enough and regular sleep, eating balanced meals at the proper times, and reducing stress and excess of activities may prevent headaches.
Neuroimaging, blood tests for collagen vascular diseases
MRI of head with or without contrast
Increased intracranial pressure pushes on the eyes (from inside the brain) and causes papilledema.
Headaches may be caused by problems elsewhere in the head or neck.
However, young children may not be able to verbalize pain well.
Just as in adults, most headaches are benign, but when head pain is accompanied with other symptoms such as speech problems, muscle weakness, and loss of vision, a more serious underlying cause may exist: hydrocephalus, meningitis, encephalitis, abscess, hemorrhage, tumor, blood clots, or head trauma.
Mass, subdural hematoma, medication overuse
In those with chronic headaches the long term use of opioids appears to result in greater harm than benefit.
Tension headaches are the most common affecting about 1.6&nbsp;billion people (21.8% of the population) followed by migraine headaches which affect about 848 million (11.7%).
* Onset sudden (thunderclap headache)
Most of these headaches are not dangerous.
Focal neurological signs indicate something is pushing against nerves in the brain responsible for one part of the body
Some of these are not harmful, such as cervicogenic headache (pain arising from the neck muscles).
Only approximately 1–5% of people who seek emergency treatment for headaches have a serious underlying cause.
While primary headaches may cause significant daily pain and disability, they are not dangerous.
The vascular theory is no longer accepted.
Primary headaches are benign, recurrent headaches not caused by underlying disease or structural problems.
Neuroimaging, lumbar puncture
Triptans are not helpful in tension-type headaches unless the person also has migraines.
Triptans, medications which treat migraines, block serotonin receptors and constrict blood vessels.
Very sudden onset headache (thunderclap headache)
People who are more susceptible to experience migraines without headache are those who have a family history of migraines, women, and women who are experiencing hormonal changes or are taking birth control pills or are prescribed hormone replacement therapy.
Only 4–6.9% of kids with a headache have a serious cause.
They have different characteristics.
Cluster headaches affect approximately three times as many men as women.
If the CT scan does not show a bleed, a lumbar puncture should be done to look for blood in the CSF, as the CT scan can be falsely negative and subarachnoid hemorrhages can be fatal.
Temporal arteritis is an inflammation of vessels close to the temples in older people, which decreases blood flow to the brain and causes pain.
* Onset after age 40 years
Most people with tension headaches have "episodic" tension headaches that come and go.
More serious causes of secondary headaches include:
In these cases, the headache evaluation may include CT scan or MRI in order to look for possible structural disorders of the central nervous system.
Pituitary apoplexy (bleeding or impaired blood supply to the pituitary gland at the base of the brain) is often accompanied by double vision or visual field defects, since the pituitary gland is right next to the optic chiasm (eye nerves).
Other very rare types of primary headaches include:
Treatment of secondary headaches involves treating the underlying cause.
* Post-ictal headaches: Headaches that happen after a convulsion or other type of seizure, as part of the period after the seizure (the post-ictal state)
Approximately 12–18% of people in the world have migraines.
There is also an increased risk of depression in those with severe headaches.
* primary stabbing headache: recurrent episodes of stabbing "ice pick pain" or "jabs and jolts" for 1 second to several minutes without autonomic symptoms (tearing, red eye, nasal congestion).
If a young child is fussy, they may have a headache.
A lumbar puncture is a procedure in which cerebral spinal fluid is removed from the spine with a needle.
Migraines may also not have auras.
Neuroimaging, lumbar puncture if neuroimaging is negative
While mobile electronic diaries for smartphones are becoming increasingly common, a recent review found most are developed with a lack of evidence base and scientific expertise.
Also, according to the same classification, stabbing headaches and headaches due to cough, exertion and sexual activity (sexual headache) are classified as primary headaches.
The National Migraine Center has free headache diaries to download at their website.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (diagnostic test for temporal arteritis), neuroimaging
If a person has the characteristic symptoms of a migraine, neuroimaging is not needed as it is very unlikely the person has an intracranial abnormality.
The brain itself is not sensitive to pain, because it lacks pain receptors.
The most common type of headache seen in pediatric Emergency Rooms is headache caused by a cold (28.5%).
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is best for brain tumors and problems in the posterior fossa, or back of the brain.
* ruptured aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, intraparenchymal hemorrhage (headache only)
A "new headache" can be a headache that has started recently, or a chronic headache that has changed character.
Some people think headaches are caused by the activation of sensory nerves which release peptides, such as serotonin, causing inflammation in arteries, dura and  meninges and also cause some vasodilation.
Mass lesion, subarachnoid hemorrhage
Other headaches diagnosed in the Emergency Department include post-traumatic headache (20%), headache related to a problem with a ventriculoperitoneal shunt (a device put into the brain to remove excess CSF and reduce pressure in the brain) (11.5%) and migraine (8.5%).
Meningitis, encephalitis (inflammation of the brain tissue), Lyme disease, collagen vascular disease
Electroencephalography (EEG) is not useful for headache diagnosis.
Coughing and exertion increases the intra cranial pressure, which may cause a vessel to burst, causing a subarachnoid hemorrhage.
This classification is accepted by the WHO.
HIV/AIDS, intracranial infections and systemic infections may also cause secondary headaches.
Headaches are broadly classified as "primary" or "secondary".
CT of head without contrast, Computed Tomography Angiography of head and neck with contrast, Magnetic Resonance Angiography of head and neck with and without contrast, MRI of head without contrast
* primary cough headache: starts suddenly and lasts for several minutes after coughing, sneezing or straining (anything that may increase pressure in the head).
In Europe and North America, 5–9% of men experience migraines, while 12–25% of women experience migraines.
Headaches caused by cranial or cervical vascular disorders such as ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack, non-traumatic intracranial hemorrhage, vascular malformations or arteritis are also defined as secondary headaches.
If accompanied by nausea and vomiting, parenteral (through a needle in the skin) triptans and antiemetics can be given.
The most common types of primary headaches are migraines and tension-type headaches.
Mild to moderate headaches should first be treated with NSAIDs, like ibuprofen, and/or acetaminophen.
The top, one-digit diagnostic level includes 14 headache groups.
Primary headaches usually first start when people are between 20 and 40 years old .
In this case, primary headaches are those that do not show organic or structural etiology.
The mnemonic 'POUND' helps distinguish between migraines and tension type headaches.
In general, people complaining of their "first" or "worst" headache warrant imaging and further workup.
Overall, they show that acupuncture is probably not helpful for tension-type headaches.
Frequent headaches can affect relationships and employment.
New onset headache in a person with possible HIV or cancer
In another study of people with chronic daily headache, 75% did not have chronic daily headaches two years later, and 88% did not have chronic daily headaches eight years later.
As a brain mass gets larger, or a subdural hematoma (blood outside the vessels underneath the dura) it pushes more on surrounding structures causing pain.
Several complementary and alternative strategies can help with migraines.
The most common serious headaches found in children include brain bleeds (subdural hematoma, epidural hematoma), brain abscesses, meningitis and ventriculoperitoneal shunt malfunction.
People with progressively worsening headache also warrant imaging, as they may have a mass or a bleed that is gradually growing, pressing on surrounding structures and causing worsening pain.
In most cases, a CT scan should be done first.
However, several areas of the head and neck do have pain receptors and can thus sense pain.
It is important to realize that headaches that begin during orgasm may be due to a subarachnoid hemorrhage, so serious causes must be ruled out first.
These headaches can be treated with indomethacin.
When children complain of headaches, many parents are concerned about a brain tumor.
If the person has neurological findings, such as weakness, on exam, neuroimaging may be considered.
Verapamil is recommended as first line treatment.
They affect only 1–3 per thousand people in the world.
Medication overuse headaches worsen with more medication taken over time.
They present with sudden onset explosive pain around one eye and are accompanied by autonomic symptoms (tearing, runny nose and red eye).
Neuroimaging, lumbar puncture, serology (diagnostic blood tests for infections)
Temporal arteritis, mass in brain
One of the first published attempts was in 1951.
There may be an aura (visual symptoms, numbness or tingling) 30–60 minutes before the headache, warning the person of a headache.
* subarachnoid hemorrhage (acute, severe headache, stiff neck WITHOUT fever)
* Previous headache history (first, worst, or different headache)
Moreover, the ICHD-2 includes a category that contains all the headaches that cannot be classified.
Currently, most specialists think migraines are due to a primary problem with the nerves in the brain.
90% of all headaches are primary headaches.
Auras are thought to be caused by a wave of increased activity of neurons in the cerebral cortex (a part of the brain) known as cortical spreading depression followed by a period of depressed activity.
A mass lesion already increases intracranial pressure, so an additional increase in intracranial pressure from coughing etc.
For chronic, unexplained headaches, keeping a headache diary can be useful for tracking symptoms and identifying triggers, such as association with menstrual cycle, exercise and food.
If only 2 POUND characteristics are present, tension type headaches are 60% more likely (likelihood ratio 0.41).
Neuroimaging of brain, skull, and possibly cervical spine
Severe headache following head trauma
ICHD-2 classifies headaches that are caused by the ingestion of a certain substance or by its withdrawal as secondary headaches as well.
Cluster headaches involve overactivation of the trigeminal nerve and hypothalamus in the brain, but the exact cause is unknown.
The first step to diagnosing a headache is to determine if the headache is old or new.
If any urgent red flags are present such as visual loss, new seizures, new weakness, new confusion, further workup with imaging and possibly a lumbar puncture should be done (see red flags section for more details).
The NIH system of classification is more succinct and only describes five categories of headaches.
'''Headache''' is the symptom of pain anywhere in the region of the head or neck.
More than 90% of headaches are primary headaches.
Treatment of a headache depends on the underlying cause, but commonly involves pain medication.
Peripheral neuromodulation has tentative benefits in primary headaches including cluster headaches and chronic migraine.
Headaches often result from traction to or irritation of the meninges and blood vessels.
If 3 characteristics of POUND are present, migraine is 3 times more likely a diagnosis than tension type headache (likelihood ratio 3).
For people with shorter bouts, a short course of prednisone (10 days) can be helpful.
The nociceptors may be stimulated by head trauma or tumors and cause headaches.
* Neurologic symptoms or signs
Studies evaluating acupuncture for tension-type headaches have been mixed.
The ICHD-2 classification puts cranial neuralgias and other types of neuralgia in a different category.
For example, if the person also has depression, an antidepressant is a good choice.
Other signs of systemic illness indicates infection.
Medications such as propranolol and diltiazem can also be helpful.
Only 3.3% of adults have chronic tension headaches, with headaches for more than 15 days in a month.
Abortive therapies for migraines may be oral, if the migraine is mild to moderate, or may require stronger medicine given intravenously or intramuscularly.
If the headache is sudden onset (thunderclap headache), a computed tomography test to look for a brain bleed (subarachnoid hemorrhage) should be done.
Moderate to severe attacks should be treated first with an oral triptan, a medication which mimics serotonin (an agonist) and causes mild vasoconstriction.
About half of adults have a headache in a given year.
The first version of the classification, ICHD-1, was published in 1988.
If there is jaw claudication and scalp tenderness in an older person, a temporal artery biopsy to look for temporal arteritis should be performed and immediate treatment should be started.
Headaches increasing in frequency and severity
A lumbar puncture can also evaluate the pressure in the spinal column, which can be useful for people with idiopathic intracranial hypertension (usually young, obese women who have increased intracranial pressure), or other causes of increased intracranial pressure.
The third edition of the International Headache Classification was published in 2013 in a beta version ahead of the final version.
Headaches can occur as a result of many conditions whether serious or not.
For chronic tension type headaches, amitriptyline is the only medication proven to help.
Temporomandibular jaw pain (chronic pain in the jaw joint), and cervicogenic headache (headache caused by pain in muscles of the neck) are also possible diagnoses.
They may be treated with lithium.
brain mass, benign intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri), meningitis
Other classification systems exist.
CT or MRI without contrast
The ICHD-2 system of classification includes the headaches associated with homeostasis disorders in the category of secondary headaches.
Headaches are most thoroughly classified by the International Headache Society's International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD), which published the second edition in 2004.
On physical exam, the person will have a red eye and a fixed, mid dilated pupil.
This vascular theory, which was developed in the 20th century by Wolff, suggested that the aura in migraines is caused by constriction of intracranial vessels (vessels inside the brain), and the headache itself is caused by rebound dilation of extracranial vessels (vessels just outside the brain).
Headache triggered by cough, exertion or while engaged in sexual intercourse
