While also being the leading symbol of the nation, the president in this system acts mostly as a prime minister, since the incumbent must be a member of the legislature at the time of the election, answer question sessions in Parliament, avoid motions of no confidence, etc.
::'''Example 4 (semi-presidential republic):''' According to Chapter 4, Article 84 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation:
Election usually is the constitutional way to choose the head of state of a republic, and some monarchies, either directly through popular election, indirectly by members of the legislature or of a special college of electors (such as the Electoral College in the United States), or as an exclusive prerogative.
There is debate as to whether Samoa is/was an elective monarchy or an aristocratic republic, given the comparative ambiguity of the title ''O le Ao o le Malo'' and the nature of the head of state's office.
Another complication exists with South Africa, in which the President is in fact elected by the National Assembly (legislature) and is thus similar, in principle, to a head of government in a parliamentary system but is also, in addition, recognized as the head of state.
In presidential systems the head of state is the actual, de facto chief executive officer.
However, he or she has no access to documentation and all access to ministers goes through the Department of the Taoiseach.
In some countries where there is no resident head of state, such as Andorra, a local representative is appointed.
The President of the Russian Federation shall be the guarantor of the Constitution of the Russian Federation and of human and civil rights and freedoms.
In some monarchies there may be liberty for the incumbent, or some body convening after his or her demise, to choose from eligible members of the ruling house, often limited to legitimate descendants of the dynasty's founder.
::'''Example 1 (parliamentary non-executive republic):''' Article 13.2.2. of the Constitution of Ireland states:
During the Chinese Cultural Revolution, following the downfall of Liu Shaoqi, who was Chairman of the People's Republic of China, no successor was named, so the duties of the head of state were transferred collectively to the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.
Great Britain would later claim a break of the old principle for the Quadruple Alliance in 1718.
If the Emir, declines to approve the draft law, he shall return it a long with the reasons for such declination to the Council within a period of three months from the date of referral.''
::'''Example 7 (presidential republic):''' Chapter IV, Section 1, Article 66 of the Constitution of the Republic of Korea states:
This did not happen and the presidency, having been damaged by three late nineteenth and early twentieth century assassinations (Lincoln, Garfield and McKinley) and one impeachment (Johnson), reasserted its political dominance by the early twentieth century through such figures as Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson.
In most parliamentary systems, this is often done on the advice of the head of government.
So, Italy had a de facto parliamentarian system, but a de jure "presidential" system.
After Italian unification, the Pope remains head of state of Vatican City.
(Leopold's decision proved highly controversial.
::'''Example 4 (parliamentary republic):''' Title II, Article 87 of the Constitution of Italy states:
The authority of the Government is exercised by the Minister of Defense on behalf of the Government, and subordinate to the Minister is the Chief of General Staff who holds the highest level of command within the military.
::'''Example 1 (non-executive parliamentary monarchy):''' Chapter 1, Article 4 of the Swedish ''Riksdag Act'' provides that:
::::''The Emir may, be a decree, declare Martial Laws in the country in the event of exceptional cases specified by the law; and in such cases, he may take all urgent necessary measures to counter any threat that undermine the safety of the State, the integrity of its territories or the security of its people and interests or obstruct the organs of the State from performing their duties.
::::''XXIV - render, each year, accounts to the National Congress concerning the previous fiscal year, within sixty days of the opening of the legislative session''.
Martial laws shall be declared for a limited period and the same shall not be extended unless approved by Al-Shoura Council.''
:::''The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States.''
Cabinet members are appointed and dismissed at the sole discretion of the prime minister.
The former king brought this issue, along with property ownership issues, before the European Court of Human Rights for alleged violations of the European Convention on Human Rights, but lost with respect to the name issue.
Some states have fixed term legislatures, with no option of bringing forward elections (e.g.
the title ''Sardar-i-Riyasat'' was used in Kashmir after its accession to India, and the Palestine Liberation Organization leader, Yasser Arafat, was styled the first "President of the Palestinian National Authority" in 1994.
For example, in the United States the Vice-President acts when the President is incapacitated, and in the United Kingdom the Queen's powers may be delegated to Counselors of State when she is abroad or unavailable.
:::''The Emir is the head of State.
::'''Example 2 (semi-presidential republic):''' Title II, Article 12, first sentence of the French Constitution of 1958 states:
Weimar Germany, for example, in its constitution provided for a popularly elected president with theoretically dominant executive powers that were intended to be exercised only in emergencies, and a cabinet appointed by him from the Reichstag, which was expected, in normal circumstances, to be answerable to the Reichstag.
In 2008, the same office was restyled as "President of the State of Palestine".
In reality, numerous variants exist to the position of a head of state within a parliamentary system.
A foreign power can establishing a branch of their own dynasty, or one friendly to their interests.
:::''Every law shall require the sanction of the Reigning Prince to attain legal force.''
Since antiquity, various dynasties or individual rulers have claimed the right to rule by divine authority, such as the Mandate of Heaven and the divine right of kings.
In military dictatorships, or governments which have arisen from coups d'état, the position of commander-in-chief is obvious, as all authority in such a government derives from the application of military force; occasionally a power vacuum created by war is filled by a head of state stepping beyond his or her normal constitutional role, as King Albert I of Belgium did during World War I.
Sometimes religion is affected; under the Act of Settlement 1701 all Roman Catholics and all persons who have married Roman Catholics are ineligible to be the British monarch and are skipped in the order of succession.
This system is known as a "presidential system" and sometimes called the "imperial model", because the executive officials of the government are answerable solely and exclusively to a presiding, acting head of state, and is selected by and on occasion dismissed by the head of state without reference to the legislature.
:::''(1) The Sovereign in right of New Zealand is the head of State of New Zealand, and shall be known by the royal style and titles proclaimed from time to time.''
Historically, at the time of the League of Nations (1920-1946) and the founding of the United Nations (1945), India's head of state was the monarch of the United Kingdom, ruling directly or indirectly as Emperor of India through the Viceroy and Governor-General of India.
This usually means that the heir to the throne is known well in advance of becoming monarch to ensure a smooth succession.
:::''The President is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, shall preside over the Supreme Council of Defense established by law, and shall make declarations of war as have been agreed by Parliament of Italy.
Belgium) there can even be a practice to attribute the adjective "royal" on demand based on existence for a given number of years.
Furthermore, the Bishop of Urgell is ''ex officio'' one of the two Co-Princes of Andorra.
Thomas Hobbes in his ''Leviathan'' (1651) used the term ''Sovereign''.
Thus in March 1979 Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, who kept absolute power (until his overthrow in 2011 referred to as  "Guide of the Revolution"), after ten years as combined Head of State and Head of government of the Libyan ''Jamahiriya'' ("state of the masses"), styled Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, formally transferred both qualities to the General secretaries of the General People's Congress (comparable to a Speaker) respectively to a Prime Minister, in political reality both were his creatures.
::'''Example 6 (semi-presidential republic):''' Title II, Chapter I, Article 120 of the Constitution of Portugal states:
Hence their states' governments are not referred to by the traditional parliamentary model head of state styles of ''His/Her Majesty's Government'' or ''His/Her Excellency's Government''.
:::''The President of the State shall sign every Law, other than a Law relating to its powers.''
In this case the debate centers on the suitability of the individual for office, not a judgement on them when appointed, and does not involve the power to reject or approve proposed cabinet members ''en bloc'', so it is not accountability in the sense understood in a parliamentary system.
Contemporary international law on precedence, built upon the universally admitted principles since 1815, derives from the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations (in particular, articles 13, 16.1 and Appendix iii).
In some systems a female may rule as monarch only when the male line dating back to a common ancestor is exhausted.
The said Council shall be constituted by an Emiri Resolution, which will also determine the functions thereof.''
'''Below follows a list of examples from different countries of general provisions in law, which either designate an office as head of state or define its general purpose.'''
Whenever a head of state is not available for any reason, constitutional provisions may allow the role to fall temporarily to an assigned person or collective body.
An example of a governor-general departing from constitutional convention by acting unilaterally (that is, without direction from ministers, parliament, or the monarch) occurred in 1926, when Canada's governor general refused the head of government's formal advice requesting a dissolution of parliament and a general election.
::::(d) remit the whole or a part of a punishment imposed on a person for an offence or of a penalty or forfeiture on account of an offence.''
The  was drawn up under the Allied occupation that followed World War II and was intended to replace the previous militaristic and quasi-absolute monarchy system with a form of liberal democracy parliamentary system.
Each co-prince is represented in Andorra by a delegate, though these persons hold no formal title.
In accordance with the procedure established by the Constitution of the Russian Federation, he (she) shall adopt measures to protect the sovereignty of the Russian Federation, its independence and State integrity, and shall ensure the coordinated functioning and interaction of State government bodies.''
In some parliamentary systems, and in some presidential systems, however, the head of state may do so on their own initiative.
A head of state has some or all of the roles listed below, often depending on the constitutional category (above), and does not necessarily regularly exercise the most power or influence of governance.
This may be the swearing in at the inauguration of a president of a republic, or the coronation of a monarch.
::::''V - veto bills, wholly or in part;''
:::''The President of the Republic shall be Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
The Emir may in compelling circumstances order the suspension of this law for the period that he deems necessary to serve the higher interests of the country.
Sometimes, however, primogeniture can operate through the female line.
::'''Example 10 (presidential republic):''' Section 87 (Second Division, Chapter 1) of the Constitution of Argentina provides that:
This accountability and legitimacy requires that someone be chosen who has a majority support in the legislature (or, at least, not a majority opposition - a subtle but important difference).
The head of state may also dismiss office-holders.
The monarchies who survived through this era were the ones who were willing to subject themselves to constitutional limitations.
At home, heads of state are expected to render luster to various occasions by their presence, such as by attending artistic or sports performances or competitions (often in a theatrical honor box, on a platform, on the front row, at the honours table), expositions, national day celebrations, dedication events, military parades and war remembrances, prominent funerals, visiting different parts of the country and people from different walks of life, and at times performing symbolic acts such as cutting a ribbon, groundbreaking, ship christening, laying the first stone.
the annual State Opening of Parliament with the Speech from the Throne in Britain.
Some constitutions or fundamental laws provide for a head of state who is not only in theory but in practice chief executive, operating separately from, and independent from, the legislature.
:::''The King is Commander-in-Chief of the land and naval forces of the Realm.
In the majority of states, whether republics or monarchies, executive authority is vested, at least notionally, in the head of state.
Today, the Speaker of the Riksdag appoints (following a vote in the Riksdag) the prime minister and terminates his or her commission following a vote of no confidence or voluntary resignation.
:::''The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic, assisted by the Ministers of State.''
Some parliamentary republics (like South Africa, Botswana and Suriname) have fused the roles of the head of state with the head of government (like in a presidential system), while having the sole executive officer, often called a president, being dependent on the Parliament's confidence to rule (like in a parliamentary system).
The role and functions of the office of a head of state may range from being purely ceremonial figurehead to one that wields autocratic executive power, for the nature of the position of a head of state is for each state to decide.
Judging that his responsibility to the nation by virtue of his coronation oath required him to act, he believed that his government's decision to fight rather than surrender was mistaken and would damage Belgium.
However, the elected civilian presidents were effectively figureheads with real political power being exercised by the chief of the Panamanian Defense Forces.
In some states, such as the United Kingdom, Belgium and Ireland, the head of state is, in fact, formally considered a tier of the legislature.
These forces may not be increased or reduced without the consent of the Storting.
The position of head of state can be established in different ways, and with different sources of legitimacy.
For example, Nikita Khrushchev never headed the Supreme Soviet but was First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (party leader) and Chairman of the Council of Ministers (head of government).
The Constitutional Council shall be consulted with regard to such measures.Parliament shall sit as of right.The National Assembly shall not be dissolved during the exercise of such emergency powers.After thirty days of the exercise of such emergency powers, the matter may be referred to the Constitutional Council by the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, sixty Members of the National Assembly or sixty Senators, so as to decide if the conditions laid down in paragraph one still apply.
::::XIV - appoint, after approval by the Senate, the Justices of the Supreme Federal Court and those of the superior courts, the Governors of the territories, the Attorney-General of the Republic, the President and the Directors of the Central Bank and other civil servants, when established by law;
They assume a host role during a state visit, and the programme may feature playing of the national anthems by a military band, inspection of military troops, official exchange of gifts, and attending a state dinner at the official residence of the host.
::'''Example 1 (parliamentary monarchy):''' Article III, Section 15 of the Constitution Act, 1867, a part of the Constitution of Canada, states:
Serious violations of certain fundamental treaty obligations is sometimes considered a valid reason for the relevant international community to depose a head of state, as the United Nations Security Council or certain alliances may do.
They may have authority to veto a bill until the houses of the legislature have reconsidered it, and approved it a second time; reserve a bill to be signed later, or suspend it indefinitely (generally in states with royal prerogative; this power is rarely used); refer a bill to the courts to test its constitutionality; refer a bill to the people in a referendum.
In contrast, the only contact the President of Ireland has with the Irish government is through a formal briefing session given by the taoiseach (head of government) to the president.
Another example occurred when, in the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, the Governor-General unexpectedly dismissed the Prime Minister in order to break a stalemate between the House of Representatives and Senate over money bills.
This can take the form of supreme divine authority above the state's, granting a tool for political influence to a priesthood.
::'''Example 2 (executive monarchy):''' Articles 69 & 70 of the Constitution of Qatar:
The Pope also had the sole right to determine the precedence of all others.
This was the outcome of the Russo-Swedish War from 1741 to 1743 where the Russian Empress made the imposition of her relative Adolf Frederick as the heir to the Swedish Throne, to succeed Frederick I who lacked legitimate issue, as a peace condition.
However, in most parliamentary systems, the head of state cannot refuse to sign a bill, and, in granting a bill their assent, indicate that it was passed in accordance with the correct procedures.
Dictators often use democratic titles, though some proclaim themselves monarchs.
:::''The Prime Minister is appointed by the President with the consent of the National Assembly.''
::::''a) shall announce elections to the State Duma in accordance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal law;''
:::''The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America.''
Some monarchs even claimed divine ancestry, such as Egyptian pharaohs and Sapa Incas, who claimed descent from their respective sun gods and often sought to maintain this bloodline by practicing incestuous marriage.
In these and in revolutionary regimes, the head of state, and often executive ministers whose offices are legally civilian, will frequently appear in military uniform.
Other Commonwealth realms that are now constituted with a governor-general as the viceregal representative of Elizabeth II are: Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Belize, Grenada, Jamaica, New Zealand, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
The most extreme non-executive republican Head of State is the President of Israel, which holds no reserve powers whatsowever.
This is generally the only time a head of state of a stable, democratic country will appear dressed in such a manner, as statesmen and public are eager to assert the primacy of (civilian, elected) politics over the armed forces.
For example, under the 1848 constitution of the Kingdom of Italy, the ''Statuto Albertino''—the parliamentary approval to the government appointed by the king—was customary, but not required by law.
The head of state is often designated the high contracting party in international treaties on behalf of the state; signs them either personally or has them signed in his/her name by ministers (government members or diplomats); subsequent ratification, when necessary, may rest with the legislature.
Most countries require that all bills passed by the house or houses of the legislature be signed into law by the head of state.
::'''Example 5 (parliamentary republic):''' Article 67 of the Iraqi constitution of 2005 states:
Some of the characteristics of a presidential system (i.e., a strong dominant political figure with an executive answerable to them, not the legislature) can also be found among absolute monarchies, parliamentary monarchies and single party (e.g.
::'''Example 5 (presidential republic):''' Article 1, Section 7 of the United States Constitution states:
The Olympic Charter (rule 55.3) of the International Olympic Committee states that the Olympic summer and winter games shall be opened by the head of state of the host nation, by uttering a single formulaic phrase as determined by the charter.
:::''The King appoints and dismisses his ministers.The Federal Government offers its resignation to the King if the House of Representatives, by an absolute majority of its members, adopts a motion of no confidence proposing a successor to the prime minister for appointment by the King or proposes a successor to the prime minister for appointment by the King within three days of the rejection of a motion of confidence.
There are also several methods of head of state succession in the event of the removal, disability or death of an incumbent head of state.
In 1980, Sweden, by rewriting its 1810 Act of Succession, became the first European monarchy to declare equal (full cognatic) primogeniture, meaning that the eldest child of the monarch, whether female or male, ascends to the throne.
This principle was first challenged by a Protestant ruler, Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden and was later maintained by his country at the Congress of Westphalia.
In the Commonwealth realms, other than the United Kingdom, a governor-general (''governor general'' in Canada) is appointed by the sovereign, on the advice of the relevant prime minister, as a representative and to exercise almost all the Royal Prerogative according to established constitutional authority.
::'''Example 2 (parliamentary republic):''' Article 59 (1) of the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany states:
:::''Subject to the limitations laid down in this Constitution Act the King shall have the supreme authority in all the affairs of the Realm, and he shall exercise such supreme authority through the Ministers.''
Examples of heads of state in parliamentary systems using greater powers than usual, either because of ambiguous constitutions or unprecedented national emergencies, include the decision by King Léopold III of the Belgians to surrender on behalf of his state to the invading German army in 1940, against the will of his government.
In a letter informing the monarch after the event, the Governor General said: "I have to await the verdict of history to prove my having adopted a wrong course, and this I do with an easy conscience that, right or wrong, I have acted in the interests of Canada and implicated no one else in my decision."
:::''The President of the Russian Federation:''
File:Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes.jpg|Frontispiece of Thomas Hobbes' ''Leviathan (1651)''
:::''The President of the People's Republic of China receives foreign diplomatic representatives on behalf of the People's Republic of China and, in pursuance of decisions of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, appoints and recalls plenipotentiary representatives abroad, and ratifies and abrogates treaties and important agreements concluded with foreign states.''
Primogeniture, in which the eldest child of the monarch is first in line to become monarch, is the most common system in hereditary monarchy.
::'''Example 6 (presidential republic):''' Article 84 of the Brazilian Constitution provides that:
However, since the governor-general performs almost all national regal functions, the governor-general has occasionally been referred to as head of state in political and media discussion.
:::''(2) The Governor-General appointed by the Sovereign is the Sovereign's representative in New Zealand.''
In monarchies (e.g.
Examples of parliamentary systems in which the head of state is notional chief executive include Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Germany, India, Italy, Norway, Spain and the United Kingdom.
::::''XI - upon the opening of the legislative session, send a government message and plan to the National Congress, describing the state of the nation and requesting the actions he deems necessary;''
Any draft law passed by the Council shall be referred to the Emir for ratification.''
In 1959, when former British crown colony Singapore gained self-government, it adopted the Malay style ''Yang di-Pertuan Negara'' (literally means "head of state" in Malay) for its governor (the actual head of state remained the British monarch).
In a monarchy, this is usually a regent or collegial regency (council).
The idea, sometimes regulated by law, is to use these portraits to make the public aware of the symbolic connection to the government, a practice that dates back to medieval times.
Communist) regimes, but in most cases of dictatorship, their stated constitutional models are applied in name only and not in political theory or practice.
::'''Example 2 (parliamentary absentee monarchy):''' Article 2 of the New Zealand Constitution Act 1986 states:
Other countries evolve into something akin to a semi-presidential system or indeed a full presidential system.
In parliamentary systems like the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Federal Republic of Germany, for example, the monarch and the president are recognized as their respective heads of state, while the prime minister and the chancellor are recognized as the heads of government.
::'''Example 3 (parliamentary republic):''' Chapter II, Article 87, 4th section of the Constitution of Italy states:
::'''Example 2 (parliamentary monarchy):''' Article 25 of the Constitution of Norway states:
Similarly the original powers given to the Greek President under the 1974 Hellenic Republic constitution moved Greece closer to the French semi-presidential model.
In a monarchy, the monarch is generally understood to be the head of state.
The division of theocratic power can be disputed, as happened between the Pope and Holy Roman Emperor in the investiture conflict when the temporal power sought to control key clergy nominations in order to guarantee popular support, and thereby his own legitamcy, by incorporating the formal ceremony of unction during coronation.
In Hinduism, certain dynasties adopted a title expressing their positions as "servant" of a patron deity of the state, but in the sense of a viceroy under an absentee god-king, ruling "in the name of" the patron god(ess), such as Patmanabha Dasa (servant of Vishnu) in the case of the Maharaja of Travancore.
On occasions when multiple heads of state or their representatives meet, precedence is by the host usually determined in alphabetical order (in whatever language the host determines, although French has for much of the 19th and 20th centuries been the ''lingua franca'' of diplomacy) or by date of accession.
The second and last incumbent of the office, Yusof bin Ishak, kept the style at the 31 August 1963 unilateral declaration of independence and after the 16 September 1963 accession to Malaysia as a state (so now as a constituent part of the federation, a non-sovereign level).
The signing of a bill into law is formally known as ''promulgation''.
The Pope, head of state of Vatican City, is chosen by previously appointed cardinals under 80 years of age from among themselves in a papal conclave.
:::''The formal opening of a Riksdag session takes place at a special meeting of the Chamber held no later than the third day of the session.
He also proclaimed himself president for life (Indonesian: ''Presiden Seumur Hidup Panglima Tertinggi''; "''panglima''" meaning "commander or martial figurehead", "''tertinggi''" meaning "highest"; roughly translated to English as "Supreme Commander of the Revolution").
It is notable that some presidential systems, while not providing for collective executive accountability to the legislature, may require legislative approval for individuals prior to their assumption of cabinet office and empower the legislature to remove a president from office (for example, in the United States of America).
* In Germany, the Basic Law of the Federal Republic vests this authority in the Minister of Defence in normal peace-time (article 65a), and that command authority is transferred to the Federal Chancellor when a State of Defence is invoked (article 115b): something which has never happened so far.
Although several models or patterns exist, there are many idiosyncrasies in different states which preclude tidy classifications.
:::''The President of the Republic shall be Head of State.''
After World War II, Belgium voted in a referendum to allow him back on the throne, but because of the ongoing controversy he ultimately abdicated.)
::::''XXIII - submit to the National Congress the pluriannual plan, the bill of budgetary directives and the budget proposals set forth in this Constitution;''
:::''2) Treaties by which territory of the State would be ceded, State property alienated, sovereign rights or prerogatives of the State affected, a new burden imposed on the Principality or its citizens, or an obligation assumed that would limit the rights of the citizens of Liechtenstein shall require the assent of Parliament to attain legal force.''
This is not the same as the use of force to ''maintain'' power, as is practiced by authoritarian or totalitarian rulers.
If the Head of State is unable to attend, the Speaker declares the session open.''
A head of state is often empowered to summon and dissolve the country's legislature.
Of course, a head of state position will cease to exist if the state itself does.
In Carthage there were two supreme magistrates, styled kings or suffetes (judges).
:::''The Emir is the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces.
The President of the Russian Federation shall be the Head of State.''
Some monarchical states call this procedure ''Royal Assent''.
Hence, even after Constantine II ceased to be ''King of the Hellenes'', it is still common to refer to the deposed king and his family as if they were still on the throne, as many European royal courts and households do in guest lists at royal weddings, as in Sweden in 2010, Britain in 2011 and Luxembourg in 2012.
However, there are provisions in the Vienna Convention that a diplomatic agent of lesser rank, such as a Chargé d'affaires, is accredited to the minister of foreign affairs (or equivalent).
Before primogeniture was enshrined in European law and tradition, kings would often secure the succession by having their successor (usually their eldest son) crowned during their own lifetime, so for a time there would be two kings in coregency – a senior king and a junior king.
Head of state is the highest-ranking constitutional position in a sovereign state.
The Aga Khans, a unique dynasty of temporal/religious leadership, leading an offshoot of Shia Islam in Central and South Asia, once ranking among British India's princely states, continue to the present day.
Such decree-laws shall be submitted to Al-Shoura Council at its first meeting; and the Council may within a maximum period of forty days from the date of submission and with a two-thirds majority of its Members reject any of these decree-laws or request amendment thereof to be effected within a specified period of time; such decree-laws shall cease to have the power of law from the date of their rejection by the Council or where the period for effecting the amendments have expired.''
In the Italian constitution provides that after the period sent the President of the Republic takes the title President Emeritus of the Italian Republic is also a senator for life, and enjoys immunity, flight status and official residences certain privileges.
In Ancient Rome, during the Principate, the title  ('divine') was conferred (notably posthumously) on the emperor, a symbolic, legitimating element in establishing a de facto dynasty.
In Uganda, Idi Amin the military leader after the coup of 25 January 1971 was formally styled ''military head of state'' till 21 February 1971, only from then on regular (but unconstitutional, not elected) president.
Where a head of government has lost support in the legislature, some heads of state may refuse a dissolution, where one is requested, thereby forcing the head of government's resignation.
Before the enactment of the modern French constitution, Charles de Gaulle described the role he envisaged for the French presidency by stating the head of state should embody "the spirit of the nation" for the nation itself and the world and embody "a certain idea about France" ().
In the United States, the unwritten convention calls for the heads of the executive departments to resign on their own initiative when called to do so.
Even in presidential systems the head of state often formally reports to the legislature on the present national status, e.g.
:::''The President of the Republic shall have the exclusive power to:
In Australia the present Queen is generally assumed to be head of state, since the governor-general and the state governors are defined as her "representatives".
In Canada, these head of state powers belong to the monarch as part of the Royal Prerogative, but the Governor General has been permitted to exercise them since 1947 and has done so since the 1970s.
::'''Example 2 (parliamentary absentee monarchy):''' Under Chapter II, Section 61 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900:
:::'''Article 70'''
In a constitutional monarchy or non-executive presidency, the head of state may de jure hold ultimate authority over the armed forces but will only normally, as per either written law or unwritten convention, exercise their authority on the advice of their responsible ministers: meaning that the de facto ultimate decision making on military maneuvers is made elsewhere.
:::''The executive power shall be exercised by the President of the Republic and the Government.''
In exceptional situations, such as war, occupation, revolution or a coup d'état, constitutional institutions, including the symbolically crucial head of state, may be reduced to a figurehead or be suspended in favor of an emergency office (such as the original Roman Dictator) or eliminated by a new "provisionary" regime, such as a collective of the junta type, or removed by an occupying force, such as a military governor (an early example being the Spartan Harmost).
:::''The executive power of the union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or indirectly through the officers subordinate to him in accordance to the Constitution.''
However, in republics with a presidential system (as in the United States and Brazil) or certain parliamentary republics (as in South Africa and Botswana), their presidents are recognized as being both heads of state and heads of government.
By tradition, deposed monarchs who have not freely abdicated continue to use their monarchical titles as a courtesy for the rest of their lives.
Under parliamentary systems the executive authority is exercised by the head of state, but in practice is done so on the advice of the cabinet of ministers.
This situation was later changed: the Head of State of the PRC is now the President of the People's Republic of China.
