Echocardiography can be conducted by a probe on the chest ("transthoracic") or by a probe in the esophagus ("transoesophageal").
Doctors that specialise in the heart are called cardiologists.
An instigating cause is investigated for, such as a heart attack, medication, or metabolic problem.
Each sound consists of two components, reflecting the slight difference in time as the two valves close.
The stroke volume is normally measured using an echocardiogram and can be influenced by the size of the heart, physical and mental condition of the individual, sex, contractility, duration of contraction, preload and afterload.
The pulmonary valve lies between the right heart and the pulmonary trunk.
Calcium ions also combine with the regulatory protein troponin C in the troponin complex to enable contraction of the cardiac muscle, and separate from the protein to allow relaxation.
The normal sinus rhythm of the heart, giving the resting heart rate, is influenced a number of factors.
Treatment of heart disease includes primary and secondary prevention to prevent the occurrence or worsening of symptoms and atherosclerosis.
Norepinephrine binds to the beta–1 receptor.
It was thought that the heart was examined by Anubis and a variety of deities during the ''Weighing of the Heart'' ceremony.
This coordination ensures blood is pumped efficiently to the body.
The potassium and calcium only start to move out of and into the cell once it has a sufficiently high charge, and so are called voltage-gated.
Two endocardial tubes form here that fuse to form a primitive heart tube known as the tubular heart.
Coronary artery disease is also known as ischemic heart disease, is caused by atherosclerosis – a build-up of plaque along the inner walls of the arteries which narrows them, reducing the blood flow to the heart.
To this day, the Nahua consider the Sun to be a heart-soul (''tona-tiuh''): "round, hot, pulsating".
The heart receives blood low in oxygen from the systemic circulation, which enters the right atrium from the superior and inferior venae cavae and passes to the right ventricle.
The left atrium receives oxygenated blood back from the lungs via one of the four pulmonary veins.
As they are almost entirely muscle, they are high in protein.
The levels of electrolytes including calcium, potassium, and sodium can also influence the speed and regularity of the heart rate; low blood oxygen, low blood pressure and dehydration may increase it.
Commonly harvested veins include the saphenous veins or the internal mammary artery.
Primitive fish have a four-chambered heart, but the chambers are arranged sequentially so that this primitive heart is quite unlike the four-chambered hearts of mammals and birds.
The blood pressure is taken, using either a manual or automatic sphygmomanometer or using a more invasive measurement from within the artery.
As the heart chambers contract, so do the papillary muscles.
Within seconds after birth, a flap of tissue known as the septum primum that previously acted as a valve closes the foramen ovale and establishes the typical cardiac circulation pattern.
Nonetheless, in at least some species of amphibian, the spongy nature of the ventricle does seem to maintain more of a separation between the bloodstreams.
Fasting lipids and fasting blood glucose (or an HbA1c level) are often ordered to evaluate a person's cholesterol and diabetes status, respectively.
It is generally a chronic condition, associated with age, that progresses gradually.
Medications may also be given to help better control concurrent diabetes.
It does this by branching into smaller arteries - diagonal and septal branches.
As a result, there may be less need for a finer division between the two bloodstreams than in lungfish or other tetrapods.
The intercalated discs allow the cells to act as a syncytium and enable the contractions that pump blood through the heart and into the major arteries.
The left vessel joins with this third vessel, and travels along the pulmonary artery and left atrium, ending in the inferior tracheobronchial node.
As the ventricles reach systole, blood will be pumped into the pulmonary artery (right ventricle) or aorta (left ventricle).
congenital aortic stenosis) or disease relating to blood vessels or blood flow from the heart (such as a patent ductus arteriosus or aortic coarctation).
As the ventricles relax, the aortic and pulmonary valves will close in response to decreased pressure.
The walls of the right ventricle are lined with trabeculae carneae, ridges of cardiac muscle covered by endocardium.
The heart is cone-shaped, with its base positioned upwards and tapering down to the apex.
This distinction is visible also on the surface of the heart as the coronary sulcus.
The ''ib'' or metaphysical heart was believed to be formed from one drop of blood from the child's mother's heart, taken at conception.
If the heart is unable to pump sufficient blood, it may accumulate throughout the body, causing breathlessness in the lungs (pulmonary congestion; pulmonary edema), swelling (edema) of the feet or other gravity-dependent areas, decrease exercise tolerance, or cause other clinical signs such as an enlarged liver, cardiac murmurs, or a raised jugular venous pressure.
If the heart weighed more than the feather of Maat, which symbolized the ideal standard of behavior.
Erasistratos (304–250 BCE) noted the heart as a pump, causing dilation of blood vessels, and noted that arteries and veins both radiate from the heart, becoming progressively smaller with distance, although he believed they were filled with air and not blood.
The notion of "Cupid's arrows" is ancient, due to Ovid, but while Ovid describes Cupid as wounding his victims with his arrows, it is not made explicit that it is the ''heart'' that is wounded.
Systole refers to contraction of the atria or ventricles of the heart.
They are often included in dishes with other offal, for example in the pan-Ottoman kokoretsi.
The left ventricle pumps blood to the body through the aortic valve and into the aorta.
The most common form of human sacrifice practiced by the Aztecs was heart-extraction.
Other invasive procedures such as cardiac catheterisation can also play a role.
There are five prominent features on the ECG: the P wave (atrial depolarisation), the QRS complex (ventricular depolarisation) and the T wave (ventricular repolarisation).
As of March 2000, more than 55,000 heart transplantations have been performed worldwide.
The heart did not pump blood around, the heart's motion sucked blood in during diastole and the blood moved by the pulsation of the arteries themselves.
This causes the cell to have a negative resting charge and is called repolarization.
Abnormal conduction can cause a delay or unusual order of contraction of the heart muscle.
Signals that travel along these nerves arise from two paired cardiovascular centres in the medulla oblongata.
Heart murmurs are abnormal heart sounds which can be either pathological or benign.
The cardiac output is normalized to body size through body surface area and is called the cardiac index.
When the ventricle relaxes blood flows back into the ventricle from the artery and this flow of blood fills the pocket-like valve, pressing against the cusps which close to seal the valve.
The heart is located in the middle compartment of the chest.
The upper part of the heart is the attachment point for several large blood vessels - the venae cavae,  aorta and pulmonary trunk.
This may result from infective causes (such as glandular fever, cytomegalovirus, coxsackievirus, tuberculosis or Q fever), systemic disorders such as amyloidosis or sarcoidosis, tumours, high uric acid levels, and other causes.
The cardiac examination includes inspection, feeling the chest with the hands (palpation) and listening with a stethoscope (auscultation).
The ventricles are separated from each other by the interventricular septum, visible on the surface of the heart as the anterior longitudinal sulcus and the posterior interventricular sulcus.
Harvey's book completely describes the systemic circulation and the mechanical force of the heart, leading to an overhaul of the Galenic doctrines.
The American surgeon Norman Shumway has been credited for his efforts to improve transplantation techniques, along with pioneers Richard Lower, Vladimir Demikhov and Adrian Kantrowitz.
The double system allows blood to circulate to and from lungs which deliver oxygenated blood directly to the heart.
Chicken hearts are considered to be giblets, and are often grilled on skewers: Japanese ''hāto yakitori'', Brazilian ''churrasco de coração'', Indonesian chicken heart satay.
Heart disease is diagnosed by the taking of a medical history, a cardiac examination, and further investigations, including blood tests, echocardiograms, ECGs and imaging.
In the wall of the right atrium is an oval-shaped depression known as the fossa ovalis, which is a remnant of an opening in the fetal heart known as the foramen ovale.
When the right atrium contracts, the blood is pumped through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle.
In a healthy heart blood flows one way through the heart due to heart valves, which prevent backflow.
Because this operation involves the heart tissue, a machine is used so that blood can bypass the heart during the operation.
The upper part of the heart is located at the level of the third costal cartilage.
The identification of the heart as the seat of emotions in particular is due to the Roman physician Galen, who also located the seat of the passions in the liver, and the seat of reason in the brain.
An echocardiogram is an ultrasound of the heart used to measure the heart's function, assess for valve disease, and look for any abnormalities.
Testing when exercising can be used to provoke an abnormality, or an ECG can be worn for a longer period such as a 24-hour Holter monitor if a suspected rhythm abnormality is not present at the time of assessment.
This tradition influenced the development of the medieval Christian devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the parallel worship of Immaculate Heart of Mary, made popular by John Eudes.
Blood vessels and nerves reach the cardiac muscle from the epicardium.
From here it is pumped into the pulmonary circulation, through the lungs where it receives oxygen and gives off carbon dioxide.
The hearts of beef, pork, and mutton can generally be interchanged in recipes.
In his manuscript, al-Nafis wrote that blood passes through the pulmonary circulation instead of moving from the right to the left ventricle as previously believed by Galen.
The absence of such a division in living amphibian species may be partly due to the amount of respiration that occurs through the skin; thus, the blood returned to the heart through the venae cavae is already partially oxygenated.
Galen believed the arterial blood was created by venous blood passing from the left ventricle to the right through 'pores' between the ventricles.
The expression of a broken heart is a cross-cultural reference to grief for a lost one or to unfulfilled romantic love.
They are also useful for evaluating the aorta, the major blood vessel which leaves the heart.
Aristotle considered the heart to be organ responsible for creating blood; Plato considered the heart as the source of circulating blood and Hippocrates noted blood circulating cyclically from the body through the heart to the lungs.
When the sinoatrial cells are resting, they have a negative charge on their membranes.
This states that the force of contraction is directly proportional to the initial length of muscle fiber, meaning a ventricle will contract more forcefully, the more it is stretched.
The right atrium receives blood almost continuously from the body's two major veins, the superior and inferior venae cavae.
The coronary sinus is a large vein that drains into the right atrium, and receives most of the venous drainage of the heart.
Similarly, while the sinus venosus is present as a vestigial structure in some reptiles and birds, it is otherwise absorbed into the right atrium and is no longer distinguishable.
Other examples include atropine for slow rhythms, and amiodarone for irregular rhythms.
It involves assessment of signs that may be visible on a person's hands (such as splinter haemorrhages), joints and other areas.
This can be a result of a disease process, such as heart block, or congenital, such as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
''Hrd'' may be a cognate of the word for heart in Greek, Latin, and English.
In Egyptian religion, the heart was the key to the afterlife.
It receives blood from the great cardiac vein (receiving the left atrium and both ventricles), the posterior cardiac vein (draining the back of the left ventricle), the middle cardiac vein (draining the bottom of the left and right ventricles), and small cardiac veins.
The atria and ventricles work in concert, so in systole when the ventricles are contracting, the atria are relaxed and collecting blood.
These agents can be a result of changes within the body, or be given as drugs as part of treatment for a medical disorder, or as a form of life support, particularly in intensive care units.
Capillary blood, now deoxygenated, travels into venules and veins that ultimately collect in the superior and inferior vena cavae, and into the right heart.
It is also known as the bicuspid valve due to its having two cusps, an anterior and a posterior cusp.
Otto Frank (1865–1944) was a German physiologist; among his many published works are detailed studies of this important heart relationship.
These enclose the pericardial cavity which contains the  pericardial fluid that lubricates the surface of the heart.
A test for brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) can be used to evaluate for the presence of heart failure, and rises when there is increased demand on the left ventricle.
Heart disease is a major cause of death, accounting for an average of 30% of all deaths in 2008, globally.
Another way of dealing with toughness is to julienne the meat, as in Chinese stir-fried heart.
They are generally much smaller than the contractile cells and have few myofibrils which gives them limited contractibility.
This is done by taking blood vessels harvested from another part of the body.
The heart is associated with the small intestine, tongue, governs the six organs and five viscera, and belongs to fire in the five elements.
Other causes may be incidentally detected on a cardiac examination.
This inflammation affects the ability of the heart to pump effectively.
The human heart is situated in the middle mediastinum, at the level of thoracic vertebrae T5-T8.
In Catholicism, there has been a long tradition of veneration of the heart, stemming from worship of the wounds of Jesus Christ which gained prominence from the mid sixteenth century.
These vessels then travel into the atrioventricular groove, and receive a third vessel which drains the section of the left ventricle sitting on the diaphragm.
Animal hearts are widely consumed as food.
The action potential then spreads to nearby cells.
This relatively simpler pattern is found in cartilaginous fish and in the ray-finned fish.
The first heart sound S1, is the sound created by the closing of the atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction and is normally described as "lub".
Risk factors include: smoking, being overweight, little exercise, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and poorly controlled diabetes, among others.
Heart valve repair or valve replacement are options for diseases of the heart valves.
Such medications are not the only way of treating diseases of heart rate or rhythm.
In this operation, one or more arteries surrounding the heart that have become narrowed are bypassed.
Michael Servetus wrote in ''Christianismi Restitutio'' (1553) that blood flows from one side of the heart to the other via the lungs.
In the capillaries, oxygen and nutrients from blood are supplied to body cells for metabolism, and exchanged for carbon dioxide and waste products.
An ECG is a bedside test and involves the placement of ten leads on the body.
These structures form the anatomical basis of the electrocardiogram, whose inventor, Willem Einthoven, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology in 1924.
The pericardium surrounds the heart.
Abnormalities in the normal sinus rhythm of the heart can prevent the heart from effectively pumping blood, and are generally identified by ECG.
His work was later translated into Latin by Andrea Alpago.
The pacemaker cells make up 1% of cells and form the conduction system of the heart.
The heart in arthropods is typically a muscular tube that runs the length of the body, under the back and from the base of the head.
The blood collects in the right atrium.
The strength of heart muscle contractions controls the stroke volume.
It is continuous with the endothelium of the veins and arteries of the heart, and is joined to the myocardium with a thin layer of connective tissue.
This is calculated by multiplying the stroke volume (SV) by the beats per minute of the heart rate (HR).
The semilunar aortic valve is at the base of the aorta and also is not attached to papillary muscles.
These nerves form a network of nerves that lies over the heart called the cardiac plexus.
There is no difference in female and male heart rates before birth.
It usually then travels in front of the ascending aorta and then ends in a brachiocephalic node.
In reptiles, the heart is usually situated around the middle of the thorax, and in snakes, usually between the junction of the upper first and second third.
The ions move from areas where they are concentrated to where they are not.
Of these more than three quarters are a result of coronary artery disease and stroke.
One example of a murmur is Still's murmur, which presents a musical sound in children, has no symptoms and disappears in adolescence.
In most reptilian species, there appears to be little, if any, mixing between the bloodstreams, so the aorta receives, essentially, only oxygenated blood.
In the Peruvian ''anticuchos de corazón'', barbecued beef hearts are grilled after being tenderized through long marination in a spice and vinegar mixture.
Additional heart sounds may also be present and these give rise to gallop rhythms.
Using surface electrodes on the body, it is possible to record the electrical activity of the heart.
There is an ear-shaped structure in the upper right atrium called the right atrial appendage, or auricle, and another in the upper left atrium, the left atrial appendage.
This includes recommendations to cease smoking, decrease alcohol consumption, increase exercise, and make modifications to their diet to decrease the consumption of fats and sugars.
"Negative" inotropes decrease the force of contraction and include calcium channel blockers.
This can compress the heart and adversely affect the function of the heart.
The second heart sound, S2, is the sound of the semilunar valves closing during ventricular diastole and is described as "dub".
These disorders are often diagnosed on an echocardiogram.
The left circumflex supplies the back and underneath of the left ventricle.
In Egyptian cuisine, they can be used, finely chopped, as part of stuffing for chicken.
A normal heart has two hearts sounds - additional heart sounds or heart murmurs may also be able to be heard and may point to disease.
The first chamber is the sinus venosus, which collects deoxygenated blood, from the body, through the hepatic and cardinal veins.
The cardiovascular centres in the brainstem that control the sympathetic and parasympathetic influences to the heart through the vagus nerve and sympathetic trunk.
This may be blood from a traumatic injury or fluid from an effusion.
The sinoatrial node is found in the upper part of the right atrium near to the junction with the superior vena cava.
Blood provides the body with oxygen and nutrients, as well as assists in the removal of metabolic wastes.
From here, blood flows into the atrium and then to the powerful muscular ventricle where the main pumping action will take place.
The left ventricle is much thicker as compared with the right, due to the greater force needed to pump blood to the entire body.
Sometimes abnormalities are suspected, but not immediately visible on the ECG.
The muscle cells make up the bulk (99%) of cells in the atria and ventricles.
The majority of cardiovascular disease is noncommunicable and related to lifestyle and other factors, becoming more prevalent with ageing.
Any elevation of the jugular venous pulse is noted.
The vagus nerve of the parasympathetic nervous system acts to decrease the heart rate, and nerves from the sympathetic trunk act to increase the heart rate.
As these pass by alveoli carbon dioxide is exchanged for oxygen.
Diagnosis of heart disease is often done by the taking of a medical history, listening to the heart-sounds with a stethoscope, ECG, and ultrasound.
This allows for some degree of separation between the de-oxygenated bloodstream destined for the lungs and the oxygenated stream that is delivered to the rest of the body.
This has three cusps which are not attached to any papillary muscles.
The ventral aorta delivers blood to the gills where it is oxygenated and flows, through the dorsal aorta, into the rest of the body.
In other insects such as earthworms, the circulatory system is not used to transport oxygen and so is much reduced, having no veins or arteries and consisting of a two connected tubes.
Heart murmurs are abnormal heart sounds which can be either related to disease or benign, and there are several kinds.
An important part of the concept of the soul in Ancient Egyptian religion was thought to be the heart, or ''ib''.
The normal resting heart rate is called the sinus rhythm, created and sustained by the sinoatrial node, a group of pacemaking cells found in the wall of the right atrium.
The papillary muscles extend from the walls of the heart to valves by cartilaginous connections called chordae tendinae.
There is significant variation between people in the anatomy of the arteries that supply the heart  The arteries divide at their furtherst reaches into smaller branches that join together at the edges of each arterial distribution.
Testing for the MB form of creatine kinase provides information about the heart's blood supply, but is used less frequently because it is less specific and sensitive.
Many of these drugs have additional protective benefits, by decreasing the sympathetic tone on the heart that occurs with the pain, or by dilating blood vessels (GTN).
Preload refers to the filling pressure of the atria at the end of diastole, when they are at their fullest.
The superior vena cava drains blood from above the diaphragm and empties into the upper back part of the right atrium.
These cardiovascular centres receive input from a series of receptors including  baroreceptors, sensing stretch the stretching of blood vessels and chemoreceptors, sensing the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood and its pH.
It arises from the lower part of the interventricular septum and crosses the interior space of the right ventricle to connect with the inferior papillary muscle.
An adult heart has a mass of 250–350 grams (9–12&nbsp;oz).
Cardiomyopathy can cause the heart to become enlarged (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), constrict the outflow tracts of the heart (restrictive cardiomyopathy), or cause the heart to dilate and impact the efficiency of its beating (dilated cardiomyopathy).
It is made up of a lining of simple squamous epithelium, and covers heart chambers and valves.
However, as the atrial baroreceptors increase their rate of firing and as they stretch due to the increased blood pressure, the cardiac center responds by increasing sympathetic stimulation and inhibiting parasympathetic stimulation to increase heart rate.
The ventricle is incompletely separated into two halves by a wall (septum), with a considerable gap near the pulmonary artery and aortic openings.
These contractile cells are connected by intercalated discs which allow a rapid response to impulses of action potential from the pacemaker cells.
In Chinese medicine, the heart is seen as the center of 神 ''shén'' "spirit, consciousness".
The inferior vena cava drains the blood from below the diaphragm and empties into the back part of the atrium below the opening for the superior vena cava.
In the adult fish, the four chambers are not arranged in a straight row but, instead form an S-shape with the latter two chambers lying above the former two.
Conduction system of the heart
Blood collects in the right and left atrium continuously.
The left atrium is connected to the left ventricle by the mitral valve.
These tests are considered biomarkers because they are highly specific for cardiac disease.
A main factor is how long it takes the ventricles to fill—if the ventricles contract faster, then there is less time to fill and the preload will be less.
It was conceived as surviving death in the nether world, where it gave evidence for, or against, its possessor.
