For example, the algorithm used by the Framingham Heart Study adds together criteria mainly from physical examination.
It can be simplistically described as a failure of the pump function of the heart.
No system of diagnostic criteria has been agreed on as the gold standard for heart failure.
These are the highest readmission rates for both patient categories.
As underdeveloped countries have become more affluent, there has also been an increase in the incidence of diabetes, hypertension and obesity, which have in turn raised the incidence of heart failure.
Echocardiography is commonly used to support a clinical diagnosis of heart failure.
Second-line drugs for CHF do not confer a mortality benefit.
Heart failure can result from a variety of conditions.
Whilst left-sided heart failure will reduce cardiac output to the systemic circulation, the initial symptoms often manifest due to effects on the pulmonary circulation.
The heart failure survival score is a score calculated using a combination of clinical predictors and the VO2 max from the cardiopulmonary exercise test.
The ACC staging system is useful in that Stage A encompasses "pre-heart failure" – a stage where intervention with treatment can presumably prevent progression to overt symptoms.
This shifts the balance of forces in favor of interstitial fluid formation as the increased pressure forces additional fluid out of the blood, into the tissue.
In heart failure this mechanism fails, as the ventricle is loaded with blood to the point where heart muscle contraction becomes less efficient.
Failure of the left side of the heart causes blood to back up  (be congested) into the lungs, causing respiratory symptoms as well as fatigue due to insufficient supply of oxygenated blood.
The term "congestive heart failure"  is often used, as one of the common symptoms is congestion, that is, build-up of too much fluid in tissues and veins.
SV is a mathematical term amenable to manipulation of many variables.
This reduces spare capacity for ventilation, causes stiffening of the lungs and reduces the efficiency of gas exchange by increasing the distance between the air and the blood.
Various measures are often used to assess the progress of patients being treated for heart failure.
Additionally, infiltrative disorders such as amyloidosis and connective tissue diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus have similar consequences.
The general effect is one of reduced cardiac output and increased strain on the heart.
Chest pain, including angina, does not typically occur due to heart failure.
In 2011, non-hypertensive congestive heart failure was one of the ten most expensive conditions seen during inpatient hospitalizations in the U.S., with aggregate inpatient hospital costs of more than $10.5 billion.
Though it can occur in isolated left- or right-sided heart failure, it is more common in biventricular failure because pleural veins drain into both the systemic and pulmonary venous systems.
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents (beta blockers) also form part of the first line of treatment, adding to the improvement in symptoms and mortality provided by ACE-I/ARB.
A person's risk of developing heart failure is inversely related to their level of physical activity.
This regimen has been shown to reduce mortality in people with moderate heart failure.
According to a meta-analysis comparing BNP and N-terminal pro-BNP (NTproBNP) in the diagnosis of heart failure, BNP is a better indicator for heart failure and left ventricular systolic dysfunction.
ACC Stage B would correspond to NYHA Class I. ACC Stage C corresponds to NYHA Class II and III, while ACC Stage D overlaps with NYHA Class IV.
In a person who is compensated, this may show cardiomegaly (visible enlargement of the heart), quantified as the ''cardiothoracic ratio'' (proportion of the heart size to the chest).
If a person with a failure of one ventricle lives long enough, it will tend to progress to failure of both ventricles.
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction occurs when the ejection fraction is less than 40%.
''Backward'' failure of the right ventricle leads to congestion of systemic capillaries.
This translates to the loss of one's cardiac reserve, or the ability of the heart to work harder during strenuous physical activity.
By the Framingham criteria, diagnosis of congestive heart failure (heart failure with impaired pumping capability) requires the simultaneous presence of at least 2 of the following major criteria or 1 major criterion in conjunction with 2 of the following minor criteria.
Heart murmurs may indicate the presence of valvular heart disease, either as a cause (e.g.
''Functional'' classification generally relies on the New York Heart Association functional classification.
A ventricular assist device or occasionally a heart transplant may be recommended in those with severe disease despite all other measures.
Enlargement of the ventricles can also occur and contributes to the enlargement and spherical shape of the failing heart.
This can result in weakness, increased fatigueability and decreased peak strength – all contributing to exercise intolerance.
Another symptom of heart failure is paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea: a sudden nighttime attack of severe breathlessness, usually several hours after going to sleep.
It is estimated that one in five adults at age 40 will develop heart failure during their remaining lifetime and about half of people who develop heart failure die within 5 years of diagnosis.
Heart failure is caused by any condition which reduces the efficiency of the heart muscle, through damage or overloading.
In general, this is caused by dysfunction or destruction of cardiac myocytes or their molecular components.
Mechanical effects may also contribute.
In congenital diseases such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the molecular structure of individual myocytes is affected.
As a result, coronary catheterization may be used to identify possibilities for revascularisation through percutaneous coronary intervention or bypass surgery.
This includes NSAIDS, a number of anesthetic agents such as ketamine, thiazolidinediones, a number of cancer medications, salbutamol, tamsulosin among others.
Minor criteria are acceptable only if they can not be attributed to another medical condition such as pulmonary hypertension, chronic lung disease, cirrhosis, ascites, or the nephrotic syndrome.
This claim has since been withdrawn.
In developed countries, the mean age of patients with heart failure is 75 years old.
There are two main types of heart failure: ''heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunction'' and ''heart failure with normal ejection fraction'' depending on whether the ability of the left ventricle to contract is affected, or the heart's ability to relax.
There are several other exceptions to a simple left-right division of heart failure symptoms.
when the walls stiffen).
Cardiac arrest and asystole refer to situations in which there is ''no'' cardiac output at all.
However, in the majority of cases, either no primary cause is found or treatment of the primary cause does not restore normal heart function.
Heart failure caused by systolic dysfunction is more readily recognized.
However, they are exquisitely sensitive to increases in heart rate, and sudden bouts of tachycardia (which can be caused simply by physiological responses to exertion, fever, or dehydration, or by pathological tachyarrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response) may result in flash pulmonary edema.
Notably, congestive heart failure was not among the top ten conditions with the most 30-day readmissions among the privately insured.
If the ejection fraction is not diminished (HFpEF), the benefits of beta blockers is more modest; a decrease in mortality has been observed but reduction in hospital admission for uncontrolled symptoms has not been observed.
* whether the problem is primarily increased venous back pressure (preload), or failure to supply adequate arterial perfusion (afterload).
This causes inadequate filling of the ventricle and therefore results in an inadequate stroke volume (SV).
On the left side of the heart, the increased pressure is transmitted to the pulmonary vasculature, and the resultant hydrostatic pressure favors extravasation of fluid into the lung parenchyma, causing pulmonary edema.
The shortness of breath is usually worse with exercise, while lying down, and may wake the person at night.
In people who are intolerant of ACE-I and ARBs or who have significant kidney dysfunction, the use of combined hydralazine and a long-acting nitrate, such as isosorbide dinitrate, is an effective alternate strategy.
* Class II: slight, mild limitation of activity; the patient is comfortable at rest or with mild exertion.
As the left ventricle distends, the intraventricular septum bows into the right ventricle, decreasing the capacity of the right ventricle.
The term "acute" is used to mean rapid onset, and "chronic" refers to long duration.
Compromise of left ventricular ''forward'' function may result in symptoms of poor systemic circulation such as dizziness, confusion and cool extremities at rest.
* whether the abnormality is due to insufficient contraction (systolic dysfunction), or due to insufficient relaxation of the heart (diastolic dysfunction), or to both.
In right-sided heart failure, this commonly starts in the ankles where venous pressure is high due to the effects of gravity (although if the patient is bed-ridden, fluid accumulation may begin in the sacral region.)
Treatments include lifestyle and pharmacological modalities, and occasionally various forms of device therapy and rarely cardiac transplantation.
+ = some importance; ++ = intermediate importance; +++ = great importance.
The most common mechanism of damage is ischemia causing infarction and scar formation.
* Increased sympathetic stimulation also causes the posterior pituitary to secrete vasopressin (also known as antidiuretic hormone or ADH), which causes fluid retention at the kidneys.
Its narrow therapeutic window, a high degree of toxicity, and the failure of multiple trials to show a mortality benefit have reduced its role in clinical practice.
This is similar to the risks with a number of types of cancer.
Treatment depends on the severity and cause of the disease.
The result is that patients commonly present with both sets of signs and symptoms.
This may contribute to the increased stiffness and thus decrease the ability to relax during diastole.
Sometimes, depending on the cause, an implanted device such as a pacemaker or an implantable cardiac defibrillator may be recommended.
Since the heart has to work harder to meet the normal metabolic demands, it is incapable of meeting the metabolic demands of the body during exercise.
The patient may be completely asymptomatic at rest.
''Backward'' failure of the left ventricle causes congestion of the lungs' blood vessels, and so the symptoms are predominantly respiratory in nature.
In the United Kingdom the disease is the reason for 5% of emergency hospital admissions.
Echocardiography can also identify valvular heart disease and assess the state of the pericardium (the connective tissue sac surrounding the heart).
Heart failure has been known since ancient times with the Ebers papyrus commenting on it around 1550 BCE.
The mortality benefits of beta blockers in people with systolic dysfunction who also have atrial fibrillation (AF) is more limited than in those who do not have AF.
Rales or crackles, heard initially in the lung bases, and when severe, throughout the lung fields suggest the development of pulmonary edema (fluid in the alveoli).
The increased peripheral resistance and greater blood volume place further strain on the heart and accelerates the process of damage to the myocardium.
This modality uses ultrasound to determine the stroke volume (SV, the amount of blood in the heart that exits the ventricles with each beat), the end-diastolic volume (EDV, the total amount of blood at the end of diastole), and the SV in proportion to the EDV, a value known as the ''ejection fraction'' (EF).
In those with heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunction, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors  or angiotensin receptor blockers along with beta blockers are recommended.
* the degree of coexisting illness: i.e.
This entails ensuring that airway, breathing, and circulation are adequate.
It is now used in only a small number of people with refractory symptoms, who are in atrial fibrillation and/or who have chronic low blood pressure.
Although some people survive many years, progressive disease is associated with an overall annual mortality rate of 10%.
The inclusion of regular physical conditioning as part of a cardiac rehabilitation program can significantly improve quality of life and reduce the risk of hospital admission for worsening symptoms however there is no evidence for a reduction in mortality rates as a result of exercise.
In people with chronic stable mild heart failure, treatment commonly consists of lifestyle modifications such as stopping smoking, physical exercise, and dietary changes, as well as medications.
Chronic heart failure is a long-term condition, usually kept stable by the treatment of symptoms.
heart failure/systemic hypertension, heart failure/pulmonary hypertension, heart failure/diabetes, heart failure/kidney failure, etc.
Vasoconstriction and fluid retention produce an increased hydrostatic pressure in the capillaries.
The severity of disease is usually graded by the degree of problems with exercise.
In groups of symptomatic patients, a diagnostic odds ratio of 27 for BNP compares with a sensitivity of 85% and specificity of 84% in detecting heart failure.
Without urgent treatment, these result in sudden death.
"Cardiac asthma" or wheezing may occur.
This is transmitted to the atrium.
In developed countries, around 2% of adults have heart failure and in those over the age of 65, this increases to 6–10%.
Major criteria include an enlarged heart on a chest x-ray, an S3 gallop (a third heart sound), acute pulmonary edema, episodes of waking up from sleep gasping for air, crackles on lung auscultation, central venous pressure of more than 16&nbsp;cm  at the right atrium, jugular vein distension, positive abdominojugular test, and weight loss of more than 4.5&nbsp;kg in 5 days in response to treatment (sometimes classified as a minor criterion).
Some theories invoke mechanisms that are mediated by neurohormonal activation.
However, the extent to which these results can be extrapolated to a general population is unclear due to the small number of participants in the cited studies.
Approximately 18 of every 1000 persons will experience an ischemic stroke during the first year after diagnosis of HF.
The left side of the heart is responsible for receiving oxygen-rich blood from the lungs and pumping it forward to the systemic circulation (the rest of the body except for the pulmonary circulation).
A reduced stroke volume may occur as a result of a failure of systole, diastole or both.
In developing countries, two to three percent of the population have heart failure, but in those 70 to 80 years old, it occurs in 20–30 percent.
Treatment of the underlying cause is usually the first approach in treating heart failure.
Other well recognized factors that may worsen CHF include the following: anemia and hyperthyroidism which place additional strain on the heart muscle, excessive fluid or salt intake, and medication that causes fluid retention such as NSAIDs and thiazolidinediones.
Heart failure caused by diastolic dysfunction is generally described as the backward failure of the ventricle to adequately relax and typically denotes a stiffer ventricular wall.
Diastolic dysfunction may not manifest itself except in physiologic extremes if systolic function is preserved.
In many new immigrants to the U.S., the high prevalence of heart failure has largely been attributed to lack of preventive health care or substandard treatment.
Diuretics are useful for preventing fluid retention.
It is characterized by a decreased ejection fraction (less than 45%).
In 2011, congestive heart failure was the most common reason for hospitalization for adults aged 85 years and older, and the second most common for adults aged 65–84 years.
This increases the blood volume and blood pressure.
Cyanosis which suggests severe low blood oxygen, is a late sign of extremely severe pulmonary edema.
With the exception of heart failure caused by reversible conditions, the condition usually worsens with time.
In the same year, Medicaid patients were readmitted at a rate of 30.4 per 100 admissions, and uninsured patients were readmitted at a rate of 16.8 per 100 admissions.
* Stage B: a structural heart disorder but no symptoms at any stage.
The "stiffness" and contractility of the ventricular walls in diastole was first described by Pierre-Simon Laplace.
Adequate rate control (usually with a pharmacological agent that slows down AV conduction such as a calcium channel blocker or a beta-blocker) is, therefore, of key importance to preventing acute decompensation.
Physical examination may reveal pitting peripheral edema, ascites, and liver enlargement.
The heart of a person with heart failure may have a reduced force of contraction due to overloading of the ventricle.
* Class I: no limitation is experienced in any activities; there are no symptoms from ordinary activities.
In acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF), the immediate goal is to re-establish adequate perfusion and oxygen delivery to end organs.
Echocardiography can also help determine if acute myocardial ischemia is the precipitating cause, and may manifest as regional wall motion abnormalities on echo.
This is a common problem in old age as a result of cardiovascular disease, but it can happen at any age, even in fetuses.
* Stage C: previous or current symptoms of heart failure in the context of an underlying structural heart problem, but managed with medical treatment.
The decision to anticoagulate people with HF, typically with left ventricular ejection fractions  35 from the CPX test.
If the right ventricular pressure is increased, a parasternal heave may be present, signifying the compensatory increase in contraction strength.
The strength of ventricular contraction is attenuated and inadequate for creating an adequate stroke volume, resulting in inadequate cardiac output.
The symptoms of heart failure are largely determined by which side of the heart fails.
Normally, the EF should be between 50% and 70%; in systolic heart failure, it drops below 40%.
An elevated B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a specific test indicative of heart failure.
Heart failure is much higher in African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans and recent immigrants from the eastern bloc countries like Russia.
There are several terms which are closely related to heart failure, and may be the cause of heart failure, but should not be confused with it.
Although widely used, evidence on their efficacy and safety is limited, with the exception of spironolactone antagonists.
The increase in ventricular volume also causes a reduction in stroke volume due to mechanical and inefficient contraction of the heart.
Heart damage can predispose a person to develop heart failure later in life and has many causes including systemic viral infections (e.g., HIV), chemotherapeutic agents such as daunorubicin and trastuzumab, and abuse of drugs such as alcohol and methamphetamine.
ACC Stage A does not have a corresponding NYHA class.
The paper was retracted by the journal in 2013 because two of the cited studies contained duplicate data that could not be verified, and the data have since been lost.
On echocardiogram, this is manifest by abnormal wall motion (hypokinesia) or absent wall motion (akinesia).
In AAs who are symptomatic, hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate (H+I) can be added to ACE-I or ARBs.
* the side of the heart involved (left heart failure versus right heart failure).
Right heart failure compromises pulmonary flow to the lungs.
Heart failure is the leading cause of hospitalization in people older than 65.
Jugular venous pressure is frequently assessed as a marker of fluid status, which can be accentuated by eliciting hepatojugular reflux.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy involves enlargement and ''thickening'' of the heart muscle.
It may also occur in the abdominal cavity, where the fluid build-up is called ascites.
As the heart works harder to meet normal metabolic demands, the amount cardiac output can increase in times of increased oxygen demand (e.g., exercise) is reduced.
Dullness of the lung fields to finger percussion and reduced breath sounds at the bases of the lung may suggest the development of a pleural effusion (fluid collection between the lung and the chest wall).
In the United States, heart failure affects 5.8 million people, and each year 550,000 new cases are diagnosed.
In left ventricular failure, there may be evidence of vascular redistribution ("upper lobe blood diversion" or "cephalization"), Kerley lines, cuffing of the areas around the bronchi, and interstitial edema.
The treatment of anemia significantly improves quality of life for those with heart failure, often with a reduction in severity of the NYHA classification, and also improves mortality rates.
Diuretics have been a mainstay of treatment for treatment of fluid accumulation, and include diuretics classes such as loop diuretics, thiazide-like diuretic, and potassium-sparing diuretic.
As such, it can be caused by a wide number of conditions, including myocardial infarction (in which the heart muscle is starved of oxygen and dies), hypertension (which increases the force of contraction needed to pump blood) and amyloidosis (in which misfolded proteins are deposited in the heart muscle, causing it to stiffen).
Immediate treatments usually involve some combination of vasodilators such as nitroglycerin, diuretics such as furosemide, and possibly noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV).
This most commonly results from an intercurrent illness (such as pneumonia), myocardial infarction (a heart attack), abnormal heart rhythms, uncontrolled hypertension, or a patient's failure to maintain a fluid restriction, diet, or medication.
aortic stenosis) or as a result (e.g.
Because the ventricle is inadequately emptied, ventricular end-diastolic pressure and volumes increase.
The consequences of this are dyspnea (shortness of breath), orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Men have a higher incidence of heart failure, but the overall prevalence rate is similar in both sexes since women survive longer after the onset of heart failure.
For example, left ventricular failure allows pulmonary edema and pulmonary hypertension to occur, which increase stress on the right ventricle.
Myocardial infarction ("Heart attack") refers to heart muscle damage due to insufficient blood supply, usually as a result of a blocked coronary artery.
In people with markedly reduced ejection fraction, the use of an aldosterone antagonist, in addition to beta blockers and ACE-I, can improve symptoms and reduce mortality.
In systolic dysfunction, the ejection fraction is decreased, leaving an abnormally elevated volume of blood in the left ventricle.
Anemia is an independent factor in mortality in people with chronic heart failure.
This center in the brain increases sympathetic activity, releasing catecholamines into the blood stream.
Additionally, BNP can be used to differentiate between causes of dyspnea due to heart failure from other causes of dyspnea.
infection, alcohol ingestion, anemia, thyrotoxicosis, arrhythmia, hypertension).
* Heart failure also limits the kidneys' ability to dispose of sodium and water, which further increases edema.
This helps restore blood pressure but also increases the total peripheral resistance, increasing the workload of the heart.
In diastolic dysfunction, the end-diastolic ventricular pressure will be high.
An electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) may be used to identify arrhythmias, ischemic heart disease, right and left ventricular hypertrophy, and presence of conduction delay or abnormalities (e.g.
A limited ability to exercise is also a common feature.
In tropical countries, the most common cause of HF is valvular heart disease or some type of cardiomyopathy.
mitral regurgitation) of the heart failure.
In these cases, behavioral, medical and device treatment strategies exist which can provide significant improvement in outcomes, including the relief of symptoms, exercise tolerance, and a decrease in the likelihood of hospitalization or death.
In severe cardiomyopathy, the effects of decreased cardiac output and poor perfusion become more apparent, and patients will manifest with cold and clammy extremities, cyanosis, claudication, generalized weakness, dizziness, and fainting.
Right ventricular failure is not as deleterious to the other side, but neither is it harmless.
Significant liver congestion may result in impaired liver function (congestive hepatopathy), and jaundice and even coagulopathy (problems of decreased or increased blood clotting) may occur.
After myocardial infarction, dead myocytes are replaced by scar tissue, deleteriously affecting the function of the myocardium.
Home visits and regular monitoring at heart failure clinics reduce the need for hospitalization and improve life expectancy.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommends measuring brain natriuretic peptide followed by ultrasound of the heart if positive.
High-output heart failure can occur when there is an increased cardiac output.
* Arterial blood pressure falls.
It is given as a percentage with the normal range being between 50 and 75%.
In considering therapeutic options, it is important to first exclude reversible causes, including thyroid disease, anemia, chronic tachycardia, alcohol abuse, hypertension and dysfunction of one or more heart valves.
This is due to reduced ability to cross-link actin and myosin filaments in over-stretched heart muscle.
Echocardiography may also aid in deciding what treatments will help the patient, such as medication, insertion of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator or cardiac resynchronization therapy.
However, the main mechanism by which left-sided heart failure causes right-sided heart failure is actually not well understood.
Exercise should be encouraged and tailored to suit individual capabilities.
A common finding in those with heart failure is an increased heart rate, stimulated by increased sympathetic activity in order to maintain an adequate cardiac output.
