Deathcore bands include Whitechapel, Suicide Silence, Despised Icon and Carnifex.
During the late sixties, many psychedelic singers such as Arthur Brown, began to create outlandish, theatrical and often macabre performances; which in itself became incredibly influential to many metal acts.
By the late 1970s, however, metal bands were employing a wide variety of tempos.
The 1970 releases by Black Sabbath (''Black Sabbath'' and ''Paranoid'') and Deep Purple (''In Rock'') were crucial in this regard.
Critics disagree over who can be thought of as the first heavy metal band.
Attending live concerts in particular has been called the “holiest of heavy metal communions”.
Several attempts have been made to map the complex world of underground metal, most notably by the editors of AllMusic, as well as critic Garry Sharpe-Young.
By early 2003, the movement's popularity was on the wane, though several nu metal acts such as Korn or Limp Bizkit retained substantial followings.
The article stated that the term only fueled "misperceptions of rock & roll bigots who still assume that five bands as different as Ratt, Extreme, Anthrax, Danzig and Mother Love Bone" sound the same.
with roots in blues rock and psychedelic rock.
Budgie brought the new metal sound into a power trio context.
Nobody wants to be the weird kid; you just somehow end up being the weird kid.
Rock historian Clinton Walker writes, "Calling AC/DC a heavy metal band in the seventies was as inaccurate as it is today....
Early in the next decade, California's Kyuss and Sleep, inspired by the earlier doom metal bands, spearheaded the rise of stoner metal, while Seattle's Earth helped develop the drone metal subgenre.
Sales of heavy metal records declined sharply in the late 1970s in the face of punk, disco, and more mainstream rock.
The movement began in the United States, with Bay Area thrash metal being the leading scene.
During the mid-1970s, Judas Priest helped spur the genre's evolution by discarding much of its blues influence; Motörhead introduced a punk rock sensibility and an increasing emphasis on speed.
Nu metal gained mainstream success through heavy MTV rotation and Ozzy Osbourne's 1996 introduction of Ozzfest, which led the media to talk of a resurgence of heavy metal.
Satanic themes are common in black metal, though many bands take inspiration from ancient paganism, promoting a return to supposed pre-Christian values.
Many metal artists benefited from the exposure they received on MTV, which began airing in 1981—sales often soared if a band's videos screened on the channel.
At the hearing, the PMRC alleged that the song was about sadomasochism and rape; Snider stated that the song was about his bandmate's throat surgery.
However, the metal audience had begun to factionalize, with those in many underground metal scenes favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular style as "light metal" or "hair metal".
Metallica's self-titled 1991 album topped the ''Billboard'' chart, as the band established international following.
It's kind of like that, but with metal you have all the weird kids in one place".
The electric guitar and the sonic power that it projects through amplification has historically been the key element in heavy metal.
Metal historian Ian Christe describes what the components of the term mean in "hippiespeak": "heavy" is roughly synonymous with "potent" or "profound," and "metal" designates a certain type of mood, grinding and weighted as with metal.
Music critics have often deemed metal lyrics juvenile and banal, and others have objected to what they see as advocacy of misogyny and the occult.
Heavy metal songs also use longer rhythmic figures such as whole note- or dotted quarter note-length chords in slow-tempo power ballads.
In 1986, Ozzy Osbourne was sued because of the lyrics of his song ''Suicide Solution''.
Based on the clubs of L.A.'s Sunset Strip, bands such as Quiet Riot, Ratt, Mötley Crüe, and W.A.S.P.
Low-register guitar riffs are typically overlaid with shredding leads.
The essence of metal drumming is creating a loud, constant beat for the band using the "trifecta of speed, power, and precision".
These rhythmic figures are usually performed with a staccato attack created by using a palm-muted technique on the rhythm guitar.
Thrash metal concerts have two elements that are not part of the other metal genres: moshing and stage diving, which "...were imported from the punk/hardcore subculture."
The death metal movement in both North America and Europe adopted and emphasized the elements of blasphemy and diabolism employed by such acts.
''Classic Rock'' magazine described the downer rock culture revolving around the use of Quaaludes and the drinking of wine.
Although a number of metal musicians cite classical composers as inspiration, classical and metal are rooted in different cultural traditions and practices—classical in the art music tradition, metal in the popular music tradition.
Those closer to the music's blues roots or placing greater emphasis on melody are now commonly ascribed the latter label.
Death metal vocals are typically bleak, involving guttural "death growls", high-pitched screaming, the "death rasp", and other uncommon techniques.
Though Judas Priest did not have a top 40 album in the United States until 1980, for many it was the definitive post-Sabbath heavy metal band; its twin-guitar attack, featuring rapid tempos and a non-bluesy, more cleanly metallic sound, was a major influence on later acts.
Black Sabbath plagued with infighting and substance abuse, while facing fierce competition with their opening band, the Los Angeles band Van Halen.
That same month, another Cream-rooted trio led by Leslie West released ''Mountain'', an album filled with heavy blues rock guitar and roaring vocals.
Since the mid-1990s popular styles have further expanded the definition of the genre.
One exception is nu metal bands, which tend to omit guitar solos With rhythm guitar parts, the "heavy crunch sound in heavy metal...is created by palm muting" the strings with the picking hand and using distortion.
British music papers such as the ''NME'' and ''Sounds'' took notice, with ''Sounds'' writer Geoff Barton christening the movement the "New Wave of British Heavy Metal".
Iron Butterfly's debut album, released in early 1968, was titled ''Heavy''.
A lawsuit against Osbourne was filed by the parents of John McCollum, a depressed teenager who committed suicide allegedly after listening to Osbourne's song.
Metal fans also "appropriated elements from the S&M community (chains, metal studs, skulls, leather and crosses)."
Complementing the deep, aggressive vocal style are downtuned, highly distorted guitars and extremely fast percussion, often with rapid double bass drumming and "wall of sound"–style blast beats.
Meanwhile, new bands such as New York's Winger and New Jersey's Skid Row sustained the popularity of the glam metal style.
Objections were raised to metal's adoption of visual spectacle and other trappings of commercial artifice, but the main offense was its perceived musical and lyrical vacuity: reviewing a Black Sabbath album in the early 1970s, leading critic Robert Christgau described it as "dull and decadent...dim-witted, amoral exploitation."
Metal artists have had to defend their lyrics in front of the U.S. Senate and in court.
''New York Times'' critic Jon Pareles writes, "In the taxonomy of popular music, heavy metal is a major subspecies of hard-rock—the breed with less syncopation, less blues, more showmanship and more brute force."
In his book ''Metalheads'', psychologist Jeffrey Arnett refers to heavy metal concerts as "the sensory equivalent of war."
With the major labels fixated on punk, many newer British heavy metal bands were inspired by the movement's aggressive, high-energy sound and "lo-fi", do it yourself ethos.
Deathcore features characteristics such as death metal riffs, hardcore punk breakdowns, death growling, "pig squeal"-sounding vocals, and screaming.
Between 1983 and 1984, heavy metal went from an 8 percent to a 20 percent share of all recordings sold in the U.S. Several major professional magazines devoted to the genre were launched, including ''Kerrang!''
The late 1990s saw new bands form such as the Los Angeles–based Goatsnake, with a classic stoner/doom sound, and Sunn O))), which crosses lines between doom, drone, and dark ambient metal—the ''New York Times'' has compared their sound to an "Indian raga in the middle of an earthquake".
Burroughs' next novel, ''Nova Express'' (1964), develops the theme, using ''heavy metal'' as a metaphor for addictive drugs: "With their diseases and orgasm drugs and their sexless parasite life forms—Heavy Metal People of Uranus wrapped in cool blue mist of vaporized bank notes—And The Insect People of Minraud with metal music".
These bands also built audiences via constant touring and increasingly elaborate stage shows.
Glam metal fell out of favor due not only to the success of grunge, but also because of the growing popularity of the more aggressive sound typified by Metallica and the post-thrash groove metal of Pantera and White Zombie.
The Kinks played a major role in popularising this sound with their 1964 hit "You Really Got Me".
These two bands, along with Death and Obituary, were leaders of the major death metal scene that emerged in Florida in the mid-1980s.
One of the most influential bands in forging the merger of genres was the British power trio Cream, who derived a massive, heavy sound from unison riffing between guitarist Eric Clapton and bassist Jack Bruce, as well as Ginger Baker's double bass drumming.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Swedish death metal became notable and melodic forms of death metal were created.
Many subgenres of heavy metal developed outside of the commercial mainstream during the 1980s such as crossover thrash.
While this prompted a backlash among some long-time fans, Metallica remained one of the most successful bands in the world into the new century.
Musician and filmmaker Rob Zombie observes, "Most of the kids who come to my shows seem like really imaginative kids with a lot of creative energy they don't know what to do with" and that metal is "outsider music for outsiders.
Another typical characteristic is the use of extended range seven, eight, and nine-string guitars.
In the 2000s decade, metal tempos range from slow ballad tempos (quarter note = 60 beats per minute) to extremely fast blast beat tempos (quarter note = 350 beats per minute).
Dubbed "nu metal", bands such as Slipknot, Linkin Park, Limp Bizkit, Papa Roach, P.O.D., Korn and Disturbed incorporated elements ranging from death metal to hip hop, often including DJs and rap-style vocals.
The similarly styled Swedish band Europe became international stars with ''The Final Countdown'' (1986).
The 1991 release of ''Forest of Equilibrium'', the debut album by UK band Cathedral, helped spark a new wave of doom metal.
Closely related to power metal is progressive metal, which adopts the complex compositional approach of bands like Rush and King Crimson.
In a review of Sir Lord Baltimore's ''Kingdom Come'' in the May 1971 ''Creem'', Saunders wrote, "Sir Lord Baltimore seems to have down pat most all the best heavy metal tricks in the book".
Many power metal bands such as Florida's Kamelot, Finnish groups Nightwish, Stratovarius and Sonata Arctica, Italy's Rhapsody of Fire, and Russia's Catharsis feature a keyboard-based "symphonic" sound, sometimes employing orchestras and opera singers.
Lyrics often express nihilistic views or deal with social issues using visceral, gory language.
Also in the 2010s, a metal style called "djent" developed as a spinoff of standard progressive metal.
Doom metal traces its roots to the lyrical themes and musical approach of early Black Sabbath.
Deathcore incorporates elements of death metal, hardcore punk and metalcore.
The group was one of the first to be identified with the "alternative metal" trend that would come to the fore in the next decade.
The heavy metal guitar sound comes from a combined use of high volumes and heavy distortion.
Some bands in the Scandinavian black metal scene became associated with considerable violence in the early 1990s, with Mayhem and Burzum linked to church burnings.
In the early 1990s, thrash achieved breakout success, challenging and redefining the metal mainstream.
In July, Zeppelin and a power trio with a Cream-inspired, but cruder sound, Grand Funk Railroad, played the Atlanta Pop Festival.
That January, the San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a cover of Eddie Cochran's classic "Summertime Blues", from their debut album ''Vincebus Eruptum'', that many consider the first true heavy metal recording.
Florida's Death and the Bay Area's Possessed are recognized as seminal bands in the style.
Though less commercially successful, other NWOBHM bands such as Venom and Diamond Head would have a significant influence on metal's development.
The phrase has been used for centuries in chemistry and metallurgy, where the periodic table organizes elements of both light and heavy metals (e.g., uranium).
Motörhead, founded in 1975, was the first important band to straddle the punk/metal divide.
The 1983 ''Rolling Stone'' encyclopedia entry begins, "Australian heavy-metal band AC/DC".
This style emerged in the United States in the early and mid-1980s, with innovators such as Queensrÿche, Fates Warning, and Dream Theater.
The NWOBHM band Venom was also an important progenitor.
In the study of heavy metal chord structures, it has been concluded that "...heavy metal music has proved to be far more complicated" than other music researchers had realized.
Sorrow'', released in December, featured "proto heavy metal" songs such as "Old Man Going" and "I See You".
Deriving from the genre's roots in blues music, sex is another important topic—a thread running from Led Zeppelin's suggestive lyrics to the more explicit references of glam and nu metal bands.
During the 1980s, the Parents Music Resource Center petitioned the U.S. Congress to regulate the popular music industry due to what the group asserted were objectionable lyrics, particularly those in heavy metal songs.
The rhythm in metal songs is emphatic, with deliberate stresses.
The word "heavy" in this sense was a basic element of beatnik and later countercultural slang, and references to "heavy music"—typically slower, more amplified variations of standard pop fare—were already common by the mid-1960s.
Metal remained popular in the 2000s, particularly in continental Europe.
Some bands feature the bass as a lead instrument, an approach popularized by Metallica's Cliff Burton with his heavy emphasis on bass guitar solos and use of chords while playing bass in the early 1980s.
Other early documented uses of the phrase are from reviews by critic Mike Saunders.
Even though Slayer did not receive substantial media exposure, their music played a key role in the development of extreme metal.
Megadeth's ''Countdown to Extinction'' (1992) debuted at number two, Anthrax and Slayer cracked the top 10, and albums by regional bands such as Testament and Sepultura entered the top 100.
In January 1970 Lucian K. Truscott IV reviewing ''Led Zeppelin II'' for the Village Voice described the sound as "heavy" and made comparisons with Blue Cheer and Vanilla Fudge.
Heavy metal songs often make extensive use of pedal point as a harmonic basis.
Reviewing the album, ''Rolling Stone'' declared, "as much as any band in existence, Jane's Addiction is the true heir to Led Zeppelin".
A few commentators—mainly American—argue for other groups including Iron Butterfly, Steppenwolf or Blue Cheer.
In the 2000s, an extreme metal fusion genre known as deathcore emerged.
Keyboard instruments are sometimes used to enhance the fullness of the sound.
With grunts, moans and subliterary lyrics, it celebrates...a party without limits....
Traditional heavy metal tends to employ modal scales, in particular the Aeolian and Phrygian modes.
While heavy metal was growing in popularity, most critics were not enamored of the music.
Hendrix's virtuosic technique would be emulated by many metal guitarists and the album's most successful single, "Purple Haze", is identified by some as the first heavy metal hit.
Through the decade, ''heavy metal'' was used by certain critics as a virtually automatic putdown.
Power metal has built a strong fanbase in Japan and South America, where bands like Brazil's Angra and Argentina's Rata Blanca are popular.
Morbid Angel adopted neo-fascist imagery.
Weinstein makes the case that in the same way that melody is the main element of pop and rhythm is the main focus of house music, powerful sound, timbre, and volume are the key elements of metal.
By the late 1980s, Norwegian bands such as Mayhem and Burzum were heading a second wave.
The bass plays a "...more important role in heavy metal than in any other genre of rock."
Doom emphasizes melody, melancholy tempos, and a sepulchral mood relative to many other varieties of metal.
The issue is not only one of shifting definitions, but also a persistent distinction between musical style and audience identification: Ian Christe describes how the band "became the stepping-stone that led huge numbers of hard rock fans into heavy metal perdition".
By 1992, black metal scenes had begun to emerge in areas outside Scandinavia, including Germany, France, and Poland.
With the release of their chart-topping ''Appetite for Destruction'' (1987), they "recharged and almost single-handedly sustained the Sunset Strip sleaze system for several years".
Underground scenes produced an array of more aggressive styles: thrash metal broke into the mainstream with bands such as Metallica, Megadeth, Slayer, and Anthrax, while other extreme subgenres of metal such as death metal and black metal remain subcultural phenomena.
A 1977 review of a Motörhead concert noted how "excessive volume in particular figured into the band's impact."
In this counterculture period MC5, who began as part of the Detroit garage rock scene, developed a raw distorted style that has been seen as a major influence on the future sound of both heavy metal and later punk music.
Deep Purple had fluctuated between styles in its early years, but by 1969 vocalist Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore had led the band toward the developing heavy metal style.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s decade, Norway's Dimmu Borgir brought black metal closer to the mainstream, as did Cradle of Filth.
The typical band lineup includes a drummer, a bassist, a rhythm guitarist, a lead guitarist, and a singer, who may or may not be an instrumentalist.
Where the blues rock drumming style started out largely as simple shuffle beats on small kits, drummers began using a more muscular, complex, and amplified approach to match and be heard against the increasingly loud guitar.
On the other side of the Atlantic, the trend-setting group was Grand Funk Railroad, described as "the most commercially successful American heavy-metal band from 1970 until they disbanded in 1976, they established the Seventies success formula: continuous touring".
This is the new soul music, the synthesis of white blues and heavy metal rock."
According to former Gorgoroth vocalist Gaahl, "Black Metal was never meant to reach an audience.... We had a common enemy which was, of course, Christianity, socialism and everything that democracy stands for."
The album was certified 16x Platinum by the RIAA.
The first use of "heavy metal" in a song lyric is in reference to a motorcycle in the Steppenwolf song "Born to Be Wild", also released that year: "I like smoke and lightning/Heavy metal thunder/Racin' with the wind/And the feelin' that I'm under."
The mix of the progressive and power metal sounds is typified by New Jersey's Symphony X, whose guitarist Michael Romeo is among the most recognized of latter-day shredders.
In an article written for ''Grove Music Online'', Walser stated that the "1980s brought on ...the widespread adaptation of chord progressions and virtuosic practices from 18th-century European models, especially Bach and Antonio Vivaldi, by influential guitarists such as Ritchie Blackmore, Marty Friedman, Jason Becker, Uli Jon Roth, Eddie Van Halen, Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen".
The tritone, an interval spanning three whole tones—such as C and F#—was a forbidden dissonance in medieval ecclesiastical singing, which led monks to call it ''diabolus in musica''—"the devil in music".
Weinstein observes that the wide array of sonic effects available to metal drummers enables the "rhythmic pattern to take on a complexity within its elemental drive and insistency".
Both groups have been credited with inspiring the subgenre's name, the latter via its 1984 demo ''Death Metal'' and the song "Death Metal", from its 1985 debut album ''Seven Churches'' (1985).
New bands such as L.A.'s Warrant and acts from the East Coast like Poison and Cinderella became major draws, while Mötley Crüe and Ratt remained very popular.
For example, the 1983 ''Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll'' includes this passage: "known for its aggressive blues-based hard-rock style, Aerosmith was the top American heavy-metal band of the mid-Seventies".
The first heavy metal bands such as Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple attracted large audiences, though they were often derided by critics, a status common throughout the history of the genre.
A few new, unambiguously metal bands had commercial success during the first half of the decade—Pantera's ''Far Beyond Driven'' topped the ''Billboard'' chart in 1994—but, "In the dull eyes of the mainstream, metal was dead".
The lead role of the guitar in heavy metal often collides with the traditional "frontman" or bandleader role of the vocalist, creating a musical tension as the two "contend for dominance" in a spirit of "affectionate rivalry".
Bands like The Rolling Stones and The Yardbirds developed blues rock by recording covers of many classic blues songs, often speeding up the tempos.
While the case attracted a great deal of media attention, it was ultimately dismissed.
Bands in Seattle's grunge scene such as Soundgarden, credited as making a "place for heavy metal in alternative rock", and Alice in Chains were at the center of the alternative metal movement.
In 1987, MTV launched a show, ''Headbanger's Ball'', devoted exclusively to heavy metal videos.
In 1970, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple scored major UK chart hits with "Paranoid" and "Black Night", respectively.
In countries such as Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon, and Malaysia, there have been incidents of heavy metal musicians and fans being arrested and incarcerated.
The prominent role of the bass is also key to the metal sound, and the interplay of bass and guitar is a central element.
Established continental metal bands that placed multiple albums in the top 20 of the German charts between 2003 and 2008, including Finnish band Children of Bodom, Norwegian act Dimmu Borgir, Germany's Blind Guardian and Sweden's HammerFall.
An early use of the term in modern popular culture was by countercultural writer William S. Burroughs.
Mathcore's main defining quality is the use of odd time signatures, and has been described to possess rhythmic comparability to free jazz.
American blues music was a major influence on the early British rockers of the era.
While the metal fan-base is largely young, white, male, and blue-collar, the group is "tolerant of those outside its core demographic base who follow its codes of dress, appearance, and behavior".
Brief, abrupt, and detached rhythmic cells are joined into rhythmic phrases with a distinctive, often jerky texture.
They were a rock 'n' roll band that just happened to be heavy enough for metal".
In relation to the gender composition of heavy metal bands, it has been said that "heavy metal performers are almost exclusively male" "...at least until the mid-1980s"  apart from "...exceptions such as Girlschool."
In many heavy metal songs, the main groove is characterized by short, two-note or three-note rhythmic figures—generally made up of 8th or 16th notes.
Though less commercially successful than the rest of the Big Four, Slayer released one of the genre's definitive records: ''Reign in Blood'' (1986) was credited for incorporating heavier guitar timbres, and for including explicit depictions of death, suffering, violence and occult into thrash metal's lyricism.
The Pretty Things' rock opera ''S.F.
Bathory inspired the Viking metal and folk metal movements and Immortal brought blast beats to the fore.
One major exception to this rule was Deicide's Glen Benton, who branded an inverted cross on his forehead and wore armor on stage.
Metallica brought the sound into the top 40 of the ''Billboard'' album chart in 1986 with ''Master of Puppets'', the genre's first platinum record.
By the mid-1980s, glam metal was a dominant presence on the U.S. charts, music television, and the arena concert circuit.
According to Robert Walser, heavy metal harmonic relationships are "...often quite complex" and the harmonic analysis done by metal players and teachers is "...often very sophisticated."
That same year, two other British bands released debut albums in a heavy metal mode: Uriah Heep with ''Very 'Eavy...
She argues that the loudness is designed to "sweep the listener into the sound" and to provide a "shot of youthful vitality."
Most power chords are also played with a consistent finger arrangement that can be slid easily up and down the fretboard.
(in 1981) and ''Metal Hammer'' (in 1984), as well as a host of fan journals.
An example is Walser's linkage of heavy metal music with the ideologies and even some of the performance practices of nineteenth-century Romanticism.
Like Jane's Addiction, many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal fall under the umbrella term "alternative metal".
Metalcore, a hybrid of extreme metal and hardcore punk, emerged as a commercial force in the mid-2000s decade.
A characteristic metal drumming technique is the cymbal choke, which consists of striking a cymbal and then immediately silencing it by grabbing it with the other hand (or, in some cases, the same striking hand), producing a burst of sound.
Vocalists similarly modified their technique and increased their reliance on amplification, often becoming more stylized and dramatic.
Bloodrock released their self-titled debut album, containing a collection of heavy guitar riffs, gruff style vocals and sadistic and macabre lyrics.
Two primary body movements that substitute for dancing: headbanging and an arm thrust that is both a sign of appreciation and a rhythmic gesture.
Growing commercial hype around death metal generated a backlash; beginning in Norway, much of the Scandinavian metal underground shifted to support a black metal scene that resisted being co-opted by the commercial metal industry.
Harmonically speaking, this means the genre typically incorporates modal chord progressions such as the Aeolian progressions I-VI-VII, I-VII-(VI), or I-VI-IV-VII and Phrygian progressions implying the relation between I and ♭II (I-♭II-I, I-♭II-III, or I-♭II-VII for example).
In August, the group—now itself dubbed Mountain—played an hour-long set at the Woodstock Festival.
In contrast to their glam metal contemporaries in L.A., they were seen as much more raw and dangerous.
Other bands, with a more consistently heavy, "purely" metal sound, would prove equally important in codifying the genre.
The album ''Reckless & Relentless'' by British band Asking Alexandria (which sold 31,000 copies in its first week), and The Devil Wears Prada's 2011 album ''Dead Throne'' (which sold 32,400 in its first week) reached up to number 9 and 10, respectively, on the ''Billboard'' 200 chart.
Metal drumming "requires an exceptional amount of endurance", and drummers have to develop "considerable speed, coordination, and dexterity...to play the intricate patterns" used in metal.
According to scholars David Hatch and Stephen Millward, Black Sabbath, and the numerous metal bands that they inspired, have concentrated lyrically "on dark and depressing subject matter to an extent hitherto unprecedented in any form of pop music".
Following the lead set by Judas Priest and Motörhead, they toughened up the sound, reduced its blues elements, and emphasized increasingly fast tempos.
The metal scene has been characterized as a "subculture of alienation", with its own code of authenticity.
Kurt Bachmann of Believer has stated that "If done correctly, metal and classical fit quite well together.
Their first two LPs, ''Fresh Cream'' (1966) and ''Disraeli Gears'' (1967), are regarded as essential prototypes for the future style.
Mastodon, which plays in a progressive/sludge style, has inspired claims of a metal revival in the United States, dubbed by some critics the "New Wave of American Heavy Metal".
Originally adopted from the hippie subculture, by the 1980s and 1990s heavy metal hair "symbolised the hate, angst and disenchantment of a generation that seemingly never felt at home", according to journalist Nader Rahman.
Pioneered by the heavy metal act X Japan in the late 1980s, bands in the Japanese movement known as visual kei—which includes many nonmetal groups—emphasize elaborate costumes, hair, and makeup.
Slayer attracted a following among far-right skinheads, and accusations of promoting violence and Nazi themes have dogged the band.
Blackmore, who had emerged as a virtuoso soloist with Deep Purple's ''Machine Head'' (1972), quit the group in 1975 to form Rainbow.
Led Zeppelin defined central aspects of the emerging genre, with Page's highly distorted guitar style and singer Robert Plant's dramatic, wailing vocals.
In January 1969, Led Zeppelin's self-titled debut album was released and reached number 10 on the ''Billboard'' album chart.
Alternative metal artists, though they did not represent a cohesive scene, were united by their willingness to experiment with the metal genre and their rejection of glam metal aesthetics (with the stagecraft of Marilyn Manson and White Zombie—also identified with alt-metal—significant, if partial, exceptions).
