Magnets are made of heavy metals such as manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel, niobium, bismuth, praseodymium, neodymium, gadolinium, and dysprosium.
Niche uses of heavy metals with high atomic numbers occur in diagnostic imaging, electron microscopy, and nuclear science.
Zinc is added to the mix and, being more reactive than gold, displaces the gold: 2Au(CN)2 + Zn → K2Zn(CN)4 + 2 Au.
Headlight reflectors rely on the excellent reflectivity of a thin film of rhodium.
Lithophiles or chalcophiles (Au is a siderophile)
Of the two dozen elements that have been used in the world's monetised coinage only two, carbon and aluminium, are not heavy metals.
An average 70&nbsp;kg human body is about 0.01% heavy metals (~7&nbsp;g, the weight of two dried peas), 2% light metals (~1.4&nbsp;kg, the weight of a bottle of wine) and nearly 98% nonmetals (mostly water).
Platinum, for example, comprises approximately 1 part per billion of the crust whereas its concentration in the core is thought to be nearly 6,000 times higher.
Copper and lead are therefore used, for example, as roofing materials; zinc acts as an anti-corrosion agent in galvanised steel; and tin serves a similar purpose on steel cans.
Light metals (~20%) and nonmetals (~75%) make up the other 95% of the crust.
Heavy metals are relatively scarce in the Earth's crust but are present in many aspects of modern life.
Despite its questionable meaning, references to the term ''heavy metal'' appear regularly in scientific literature.
Main occurrence (or source)
The Earth's crust is made of approximately 5% of heavy metals by weight, with iron comprising 95% of this quantity.
'''Produced mainly by commercial mining''' (informally classified by economic significance)
The term later became associated with elements of high atomic weight or high atomic number.
Ingesting more than 0.5 grams of iron can induce cardiac collapse; such overdoses most commonly occur in children and may result in death within 24 hours.
Potential sources of heavy metal poisoning include mining and industrial wastes, agricultural runoff, occupational exposure, and contact with lead-based paints.
Nickel carbonyl (Ni2(CO)4), at 30 parts per million, can cause respiratory failure, brain damage and death.
Typical uses of heavy metals can be broadly grouped into the following categories.
In 1997, Stephen Hawkes, a chemistry professor writing in the context of fifty years' experience with the term, said it applied to "metals with insoluble sulfides and hydroxides, whose salts produce colored solutions in water and whose complexes are usually colored".
Some are, while certain others are toxic only if taken in excess or encountered in certain forms.
The same problem may occur with atomic weight based definitions.
While it is relatively easy to distinguish a heavy metal such as tungsten from a lighter metal such as sodium, a few heavy metals such as zinc, mercury, and lead have some of the characteristics of lighter metals, and lighter metals such as beryllium, scandium, and titanium have some of the characteristics of heavier metals.
Heavy metals have been used in batteries for over 200 years, at least since Volta invented his copper and silver voltaic pile in 1800.
Gold, a siderophile, is most commonly recovered by dissolving the ores in which it is found in a cyanide solution.
The strength or durability of heavy metals such as chromium, iron, nickel, copper, zinc, molybdenum, tin, tungsten, and lead, as well as their alloys, makes them useful for the manufacture of artefacts such as tools, machinery, appliances, utensils, pipes, railroad tracks, buildings and bridges, automobiles, locks, furniture, ships, planes, coinage and jewellery.
The distinction between the class A metals and the other two categories is sharp.
The chalcophile platinum group metals (PGM) mainly occur in small (mixed) quantities with other chalcophile ores.
There is a partial reflection of one of the three gem-like chunks in one of the faces of the cube.
Physical properties
In contrast, there is no such path in the r-process.
This suggestion was ignored; the new elements came to be recognised as metals, and the term metalloid was then used to refer to nonmetallic elements and, later, elements that were hard to describe as either metals or nonmetals.
Concentrations of heavy metals below the crust are generally higher, with most being found in the largely iron-silicon-nickel core.
In the s-process ("s" stands for "slow"), singular captures are separated by years or decades, allowing the less stable nuclei to beta decay, while in the r-process ("rapid"), captures happen faster than nuclei can decay.
Recent examples of heavy metal contamination and health risks include the occurrence of Minamata disease, in Japan (1932–1968; lawsuits ongoing as at 2016); the Bento Rodrigues dam disaster in Brazil, and high levels of lead in drinking water supplied to the residents of Flint, Michigan, in the north-east of the United States.
Different countries and refineries may use different processes, including those that differ from the brief outlines listed here.
Abundance in Earth's crust
The comparison should be treated with caution since the terms light metal and heavy metal are not always consistently defined.
Heavy metals or their compounds can be found in electronic components, electrodes, and wiring and solar panels where they may be used as either conductors, semiconductors, or insulators.
Tellurium is added to copper and steel alloys to improve their machinability; and to lead to make it harder and more acid-resistant.
They are usually found in (insoluble) sulfide minerals.
Antimony, arsenic, germanium and tellurium are commonly recognised as metalloids; selenium less commonly so.
Physical and chemical characterisations of heavy metals need to be treated with caution as the metals involved are not aways consistently defined.
Mostly form coloured solutions in water
In fly fishing, sinking fly lines have a PVC coating embedded with tungsten powder, so that they sink at the required rate.
A density of more than 5&nbsp;g/cm3 is sometimes quoted as a commonly used criterion and is used in the body of this article.
Generally insoluble
Fluorescent lighting relies on mercury vapour for its operation.
The named metals have densities of 0.534 to 4.54&nbsp;g/cm3.
Metalloids meeting the applicable criteria–arsenic and antimony for example—are sometimes counted as heavy metals,  particularly in environmental chemistry, as is the case here.
Examples include scandium (too light); vanadium to zinc (biological processes); and rhodium, indium, and osmium (too rare).
Include macronutrients (Na, Mg, K, Ca)
'''Heavy metals''' are generally defined as metals with relatively high densities, atomic weights, or atomic numbers.
A few other non-essential heavy metals have one or more toxic forms.
Periodic table location
Heavy metals are used in lighting, lasers, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs).
Tungsten hammers were so dense that they penetrated too deeply into the turf.
Tend to be soft, easily cut or bent
Light metals had densities of 0.860–5.0&nbsp;g/cm3; heavy metals 5.308–22.000.
In military ordnance, tungsten or uranium is used in armour plating and armour piercing projectiles, as well as in nuclear weapons to increase efficiency (by reflecting neutrons and momentarily delaying the expansion of reacting materials).
These are iron and copper (oxygen and electron transport); cobalt (complex syntheses and cell metabolism); zinc (hydroxylation); vanadium and manganese (enzyme regulation or functioning); chromium (glucose utilisation); nickel (cell growth); arsenic (metabolic growth in some animals and possibly in humans) and selenium (antioxidant functioning and hormone production.
In diagnostic imaging, heavy metals such as cobalt or tungsten make up the anode materials found in x-ray tubes.
Neodymium magnets are the strongest type of permanent magnet commercially available.
Bismuth compounds can cause liver damage if taken in excess; insoluble uranium compounds, in addition to the dangerous radiation they emit, can cause permanent kidney damage.
From 1809 onwards, light metals, such as magnesium, aluminium, and titanium, were discovered, as well as less well-known heavy metals like gallium, thallium, and hafnium.
Chromium, arsenic, cadmium, mercury, and lead have the greatest potential to cause harm on account of their extensive use, the toxicity of some of their combined or elemental forms, and their widespread distribution in the environment.
File:Cadmium-crystal_bar.jpg|Cadmium barand 1&nbsp;cm3 cube|alt=A more or less smooth silvery finger of cadmium with some slightly angled faces plus a dull cube
Selected heavy metals are used as catalysts in fuel processing (rhenium, for example), synthetic rubber and fibre production (bismuth), emission control devices (palladium), and in self-cleaning ovens (where cerium oxide in the walls of such ovens helps oxidise carbon-based cooking residues).
Imbibing a gram or more of copper sulfate (Cu(SO4)2) can be fatal; survivors may be left with major organ damage.
Most found in Groups 1 and 2
Despite their overall scarcity, heavy metals can become concentrated in economically extractable quantities as a result of mountain building, erosion, or other geological processes.
Heavy metals can degrade air, water, and soil quality, and subsequently cause health issues in plants, animals, and people, when they become concentrated as a result of industrial activities.
In period 6, tungsten is required by some bacteria for metabolic processes.
In track and field sport, steel balls used in the hammer throw and shot put events are filled with lead in order to attain the minimum weight required under international rules.
Radium occurs in quantities too small to be economically mined and is instead obtained from spent nuclear fuels.
Atomic numbers of heavy metals are generally given as greater than 20 (calcium); sometimes this is capped at 92 (uranium).
Chemical properties
It does not readily form compounds with either oxygen or sulfur.
Other metals sometimes classified or treated as "heavy" metals, such as beryllium (density 1.8 gm/cm3), aluminium (2.7 gm/cm3), calcium (1.55 gm/cm3), and barium (3.6 gm/cm3) are here treated as light metals and, in general, are not further considered.
The earliest known metals—common metals such as iron, copper, and tin, and precious metals such as silver, gold, and platinum—are heavy metals.
Iron may be the most common as it accounts for 90% of all refined metals.
Vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) is carcinogenic in animals and, when inhaled, causes DNA damage.
The s-process stops at bismuth due to the short half-lives of the next two elements, polonium, and astatine, which decay to bismuth or lead.
Nearly all found between Groups 2 and 17 or 18
Heavier heavy metals are not usually formed this way since fusion reactions involving such nuclei would consume rather than release energy.
Lithophile heavy metals are mainly f-block elements and the more reactive of the d-block elements.
Borderline metals largely comprise the lighter transition and post-transition metals (plus arsenic and antimony).
Exposure to osmium tetroxide (OsO4) may cause permanent eye damage and can lead to respiratory failure and death.
Definitions based on atomic number have been criticised for including metals with low densities.
Heavy metals condense in planets as a result of stellar evolution and destruction processes.
At the time of the Earth's formation, and as the most noble (inert) of metals, gold sank into the core due to its tendency to form high-density metallic alloys.
The winning of heavy metals from their ores is a complex function of ore type, the chemical properties of the metals involved, and the economics of various extraction methods.
Tattoo inks may contain heavy metals, such as chromium, cobalt, nickel, and copper.
Because denser materials absorb more radioactive emissions than lighter ones, heavy metals are useful for radiation shielding and to focus radiation beams in linear accelerators and radiotherapy applications.
These nuclei capture neutrons and form indium-116, which is unstable, and decays to form tin-116, and so on.
Being denser than the lithophiles, hence sinking lower into the crust at the time of its solidification, the chalcophiles tend to be less abundant than the lithophiles.
When gravitational attraction causes this matter to coalesce and collapse new stars and planets are formed.
Platinum, osmium, copper, ruthenium, and other heavy metals, including arsenic, are used in anti-cancer treatments, or have shown potential.
Mostly form colourless solutions in water
In underwater diving, lead is used as a ballast; in handicap horse racing each horse must carry a specified lead weight, based on factors including past performance, so as to equalize the chances of the various competitors.
Some general physical and chemical properties of light and heavy metals are summarised in the table.
Copper, zinc, silver, gold, or mercury are used in antiseptic formulations; small amounts of some heavy metals are used to control algal growth in, for example, cooling towers.
Chalcophile heavy metals are mainly the less reactive d-block elements, and period 4–6 p-block metals and metalloids.
The United States Pharmacopeia includes a test for heavy metals that involves precipitating metallic impurities as their coloured sulfides."
The lanthanides satisfy Hawkes' three-part description; the status of the actinides is not completely settled.
Hafnium oxide, an insulator, is used as a voltage controller in microchips; tantalum oxide, another insulator, is used in capacitors in mobile phones.
'''Produced mainly by artificial transmutation''' (informally classified by stability)
A density of more than 5&nbsp;g/cm3 is sometimes mentioned as a common heavy metal defining factor and, in the absence of a unanimous definition, is used to populate this list and (unless otherwise stated) guide the remainder of the article.
These five elements have a strong affinity for sulfur; in the human body they usually bind, via thiol groups (–SH), to enzymes responsible for controlling the speed of metabolic reactions.
Atomic weight definitions can range from greater than sodium (atomic weight 22.98); greater than 40 (excluding s- and f-block metals, hence starting with scandium); or more than 200, i.e.
Compared to other metals, PGM are expensive due to their scarcity and high production costs.
In astronomy, however, a heavy element is any element heavier than hydrogen and helium.
from mercury onwards.
There is also a one-third sized version of the finger and three roughly hewn gem-like chunks of chromium, as well as the cube.
Extremely insoluble
A few non-essential heavy metals have also been observed to have biological effects.
Antimony (anti-protozoal), bismuth (anti-ulcer), gold (anti-arthritic), and iron (anti-malarial) are also important in medicine.
This is chemically refined to obtain the individual metals in their pure forms.
Depending on their intended use as fertilisers or biocides, agrochemicals may contain heavy metals such as chromium, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, arsenic, cadmium, mercury, or lead.
Rather, they are largely synthesised (from elements with a lower atomic number) by neutron capture, with the two main modes of this repetitive capture being the s-process and the r-process.
Heavy metals essential for life can be toxic if taken in excess; some have notably toxic forms.
Other heavy metals noted for their potentially hazardous nature, usually as toxic environmental pollutants, include manganese (central nervous system damage); cobalt and nickel (carcinogens); copper, zinc, selenium and silver (endocrine disruption, congenital disorders, or general toxic effects in fish, plants, birds, or other aquatic organisms); tin, as organotin (central nervous system damage); antimony (a suspected carcinogen); and thallium (central nervous system damage).
They are key components of, for example, car door locks, starter motors, fuel pumps, and power windows.
A frequently cited proposal to use these classification categories instead of the more evocative name ''heavy metal'' has not been widely adopted.
Cisplatin (PtCl2(NH3)2), which is an important drug used to kill cancer cells, is also a kidney and nerve poison.
File:Lead electrolytic and 1cm3 cube.jpg|Oxidised leadnodules and 1&nbsp;cm3 cube|alt=Three, dark broccoli shaped clumps of oxidised lead with grossly distended buds, and a cube of lead which has a dull silvery appearance.
These metals otherwise occur in the crust, in small quantities, chiefly as chalcophiles (less so in their native form).
These seven elements do occur naturally but in amounts too small for economically viable extraction.
Chromium (in its hexavalent form) and arsenic are carcinogens; cadmium causes a degenerative bone disease; and mercury and lead damage the central nervous system.
Gallium, germanium (a metalloid), indium, and most lanthanides can stimulate metabolism, and titanium promotes growth in plants (though it is not always considered a heavy metal).
Along with this finding, the heavy metal status of some metals is occasionally challenged on the grounds that they are too light, or are involved in biological processes, or rarely constitute environmental hazards.
Trace amounts of some heavy metals, mostly in period 4, are required for certain biological processes.
The counterparts to the heavy metals, the ''light metals'', are alluded to by The Minerals, Metals and Materials Society as including "aluminium, magnesium, beryllium, titanium, lithium, and other reactive metals."
Molybdenum powder is used in circuit board inks.
The gold forms a dicyanoaurate(I), for example: 2 Au + H2O +½ O2 + KCN → 2 KAu(CN)2 + 2 KOH.
More than five milligrams of selenium is highly toxic; this is roughly ten times the 0.45 milligram recommended maximum daily intake; long-term poisoning can have paralytic effects.
Platinum may be the most ubiquitous given it is said to be found in, or used to produce, 20% of all consumer goods.
In this scheme, class A metal ions prefer oxygen donors; class B ions prefer nitrogen or sulfur donors; and borderline or ambivalent ions show either class A or B characteristics, depending on the circumstances.
The biocidal effects of some heavy metals have been known since antiquity.
File:Chromium_crystals_and_1cm3_cube.jpg|Chromium crystalsand 1&nbsp;cm3 cube|alt=A silvery finger of chromium irregularly encrusted with diamond-like chunks of chromium of varying size.
Some uses of heavy metals, including in sport, mechanical engineering, military ordnance, and nuclear science, take advantage of their relatively high densities.
For example, rubidium in group (column) 1 of the periodic table has an atomic number of 37 but a density of only 1.532&nbsp;g/cm3, which is below the threshold figure used by other authors.
The definitions surveyed in this article encompass up to 92 elements; only mercury, lead and bismuth meet all of them.
The r-process is so fast it can skip this zone of instability and go on to create heavier elements such as thorium and uranium.
Gold, silver, and platinum are used in jewellery as are (for example) nickel, copper, indium, and cobalt in colored gold.
Hexavalent chromium, for example, is highly toxic as are mercury vapour and many mercury compounds.
Light structural metals like beryllium, scandium, and titanium have some of the characteristics of heavy metals, such as higher melting points; post-transition heavy metals like zinc, cadmium, and lead have some of the characteristics of light metals, such as being relatively soft, and having lower melting points; and forming mainly colourless complexes.
The ores involved need to be smelted, roasted, and then leached with sulfuric acid to produce a residue of PGM.
Include micronutrients (V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Mo)
Other heavy metals, like cadmium, mercury, and lead, are notably toxic.
In metallurgy, for example, a heavy metal may be defined on the basis of density, whereas in physics the distinguishing criterion might be atomic number, while a chemist would likely be more concerned with chemical behaviour.
They are used in, for example, golf clubs, cars, antiseptics, self-cleaning ovens, plastics, solar panels, mobile phones, and particle accelerators.
These properties make it relatively easy to distinguish a light metal like sodium from a heavy metal like tungsten, but the differences become less clear at the boundaries.
They are also used as alloying additives for enhancing the properties of other metals.
Soluble to insoluble
In period 5, molybdenum is required for the catalysis of redox reactions; cadmium is used by some marine diatoms for the same purpose; and tin may be required for growth in a few species.
Selenium (density 4.8&nbsp;g/cm3) is also included in the list.
+Properties of light and heavy metals
File:Arsen 1a.jpg|Arsenic, sealed in acontainer to stop tarnishing|alt=Two dull silver clusters of crystalline shards
Thermal expansivity
It is sometimes used interchangeably with the term ''heavy element''.
Class A metals, which tend to have low electronegativity and form bonds with large ionic character, are the alkali and alkaline earths, aluminium, the group 3 metals, and the lanthanides and actinides.. Class B metals, which tend to have higher electronegativity and form bonds with considerable covalent character, are mainly the heavier transition and post-transition metals.
Some other (less) noble heavy metals—molybdenum, rhenium, the platinum group metals (ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum), germanium, and tin—can be counted as siderophiles but only in terms of their primary occurrence in the Earth (core, mantle and crust), rather the crust.
Promethium, lanthanum, and mercury are further examples found in, respectively, atomic, nickel-metal hydride, and button cell batteries.
In mechanical engineering, heavy metals are used for ballast in boats, aeroplanes, and motor vehicles; or in balance weights on wheels and crankshafts, gyroscopes, and propellers, and centrifugal clutches, in situations requiring maximum weight in minimum space (for example in watch movements).
Common sources of heavy metals in this context include mining and industrial wastes; vehicle emissions; lead-acid batteries; fertilisers; paints; and treated woods; aging water supply infrastructure; and microplastics floating in the world's oceans.
Home electrical systems, for the most part, are wired with copper wire for its good conducting properties.
They have a strong affinity for oxygen and mostly exist as relatively low density silicate minerals.
Therefore, the s-process takes a more or less clear path: for example, stable cadmium-110 nuclei are successively bombarded by free neutrons inside a star until they form cadmium-115 nuclei which are unstable and decay to form indium-115 (which is nearly stable, with a half-life  times the age of the universe).
Criteria based on chemical behaviour or periodic table position have been used or suggested.
In biochemistry, heavy metals are sometimes defined—on the basis of the Lewis acid (electronic pair acceptor) behaviour of their ions in aqueous solution—as class B and borderline metals.
Flat panel displays incorporate a thin film of electrically conducting indium tin oxide.
Most are quite hard
Kidney failure and fatalities have been recorded arising from the ingestion of germanium dietary supplements (~15 to 300&nbsp;g in total consumed over a period of two months to three years).
Periods 5 and 6 contain fewer essential heavy metals, consistent with the general pattern that heavier elements tend to be less abundant and that scarcer elements are less likely to be nutritionally essential.
In 2002, Scottish toxicologist John Duffus reviewed the definitions used over the previous 60 years and concluded they were so diverse as to effectively render the term meaningless.
Stars lose much of their mass when it is ejected late in their lifetimes, and sometimes thereafter as a result of a neutron star merger, thereby increasing the abundance of elements heavier than helium in the interstellar medium.
It falls marginally short of the density criterion and is less commonly recognised as a metalloid but has a waterborne chemistry similar in some respects to that of arsenic and antimony.
Despite this lack of agreement the term (plural or singular) is widely used in science.
In nuclear science, nuclei of heavy metals such as chromium, iron, or zinc are sometimes fired at other heavy metal targets to produce superheavy elements; heavy metals are also employed as spallation targets for the production of neutrons or radioisotopes such as astatine (using lead, bismuth, thorium, or uranium in the latter case).
More specific definitions have been published but none of these have been widely accepted.
Copper, zinc, tin, and lead are mechanically weaker metals but have useful corrosion prevention properties.
Other uses depend on specific characteristics of heavy metals: their physical properties of density, strength, or durability; or their biological role as nutrients or poisons; or specific atomic properties.
Heavy metals are primarily found as lithophiles (rock-loving) or chalcophiles (ore-loving).
On the basis of the metals he had seen referred to as heavy metals, he suggested it would useful to define them as (in general) all the metals in periodic table columns 3 to 16 that are in row 4 or greater, in other words, the transition metals and post-transition metals.
Indium salts are toxic if more than few milligrams are ingested and will affect the kidneys, liver, and heart.
Less-toxic heavy metals, such as copper, tin, tungsten, and bismuth, and probably manganese (as well as boron, a metalloid), have replaced lead and antimony in the green bullets used by some armies and in some recreational shooting munitions.
Silver and gold are used in electrical and electronic devices, particularly in contact switches, as a result of their high electrical conductivity and capacity to resist or minimise the formation of impurities on their surfaces.
For example, in discussing the history of nuclear chemistry, Magee notes that the actinides were once thought to represent a new heavy element transition group whereas Seaborg and co-workers, "favoured&nbsp;... a heavy metal rare-earth like series&nbsp;...".
In addition, the physical properties of hardness and tensile strength can vary widely depending on purity, grain size and pre-treatment.
Examples of such atomic properties include: partly filled d- or f- orbitals (in many of the transition, lanthanide, and actinide heavy metals) that enable the formation of coloured compounds; the capacity of most heavy metal ions (such as platinum, cerium or bismuth) to exist in different oxidation states and therefore act as catalysts; poorly overlapping 3d or 4f orbitals (in iron, cobalt, and nickel, or the lanthanide heavy metals from europium through thulium) that give rise to magnetic effects; and high atomic numbers and electron densities that underpin their nuclear science applications.
Astatine is predicted to be a metal.
The semiconductors cadmium telluride and gallium arsenide are used to make solar panels.
Ruthenium(IV) oxide coated titanium anodes are used for the industrial production of chlorine.
On the other hand, gold is a siderophile, or (iron-loving) element.
Soluble to insoluble
Doubts have been raised about the safety (or green credentials) of tungsten.
Their low densities challenged conventional wisdom and it was proposed to refer to them as ''metalloids'' (meaning "resembling metals in form or appearance").
The workability and corrosion resistance of iron and chromium are increased by adding gadolinium; the creep resistance of nickel is improved with the addition of thorium.
