For ''Roméo et Juliette'', Berlioz turned, of course, to Shakespeare's ''Romeo and Juliet''.
As a result, he began to travel to other countries more often.
''Les Troyens'' was dropped by the Paris Opéra with the excuse that it was too expensive to stage; it was replaced by Wagner's ''Tannhäuser''.
Planning out his action with great care, Berlioz purchased phials of strychnine and laudanum to use as poisons in the event of a pistol jamming.
Unusually for a late Berlioz work, it appears to have remained popular long after his death.
Berlioz paid for four servants to look after her on a permanent basis and visited her almost daily.
He therefore made an effort to leave the city as often as possible, making frequent trips into the surrounding country.
Despite these grim prospects, Berlioz saw the work through to its completion in 1858.
Almost from the founding, Berlioz was a key member of the editorial board of the ''Gazette'' as well as a contributor, and acted as editor on several occasions while the owner was otherwise engaged.
These were members of a secret society of Italian patriots based in France with the aim of creating a unified Italy.
''Les Troyens'' proved to be a very personal work for Berlioz, as it paid homage to his first literary love, whom he still cherished&nbsp;– even after his discoveries of Shakespeare and Goethe.
Prone to violent impulses, Berlioz began flooding Smithson's hotel room with love letters which both confused and terrified her.
He became proficient at guitar, flageolet and flute.
At one point, Robert Schumann was motivated to publish a detailed rebuttal of one of Fétis' attacks on Berlioz's Symphonie fantastique in his own Neue Zeitschrift für Musik journal.
Meanwhile, Harriet's health was declining due to alcohol abuse and she suffered a series of strokes that left her an invalid.
This is most evident in the thematic aspects of his music, particularly ''Harold en Italie'' (1834), a work inspired by Lord Byron's ''Childe Harold''.
On his return to Paris, the recently completed ''La damnation de Faust'' was premiered at the Opéra-Comique, but after two performances, the run was discontinued and the work was a popular failure (perhaps owing to its halfway status between opera and cantata), despite receiving generally favourable critical reviews.
He also composed around 50 songs.
He composed a work entitled the ''Shepherd's Farewell'' and performed it in two concerts under the guise of it being by a composer named Pierre Ducré.
One year later, according to Hallé, his movements were much more economical, enabling him to control more nuance in the music.
At times, it was as if he himself was actually experiencing the Romantic tales of Byron in person; consorting with brigands, corsairs, and peasants.
The reason for this interest in the prize was not just academic recognition.
The internet was also a factor in the celebrations, with the comprehensive hberlioz.com site (which has been online since 1997) being an easily available source of information to anyone interested in the composer.
His journalistic abilities became essential for him to make a living and he survived as a witty critic, emphasizing the importance of drama and expressiveness in musical entertainment.
This enabled him not only to perform his music to a wider audience, but also to increase his influence across Europe&nbsp;– for example, his orchestration was studied by many Russian composers.
After learning this, Berlioz burnt a large number of documents and other mementos which he had accumulated during his life, keeping only a conducting baton given to him by Mendelssohn and a guitar given to him by Paganini.
Its writers included Alexandre Dumas, Honoré de Balzac and George Sand.
The books which Berlioz has become acclaimed for were compiled from his journal articles.
In 1850 he became head librarian at the Paris Conservatoire, the only official post he would ever hold, and a valuable source of income.
He also submitted a fugue to the Prix de Rome, but was eliminated in the primary round.
The ''Catholic Encyclopedia,'' for its part, claims Berlioz as a Catholic, but appears to concede that he did not remain faithful to Catholicism.
During one of these trips, while Berlioz enjoyed an afternoon of sailing, he encountered a group of Carbonari.
After resigning, an act which should have raised his spirits given how much he detested his job, his disillusionment became even stronger.
During a visit to Baden-Baden, Edouard Bénazet commissioned a new opera from Berlioz, but due to the illness that opera was never written.
He also began working as a chorus singer at a vaudeville theatre to contribute towards an income.
By the time he had reached Genoa, he "left his disguise in the side pocket of the carriage".
He sent a letter to the Academy in Rome, requesting that he be allowed to return.
''Roméo et Juliette'' may have been the first.
Upon his return to Rome, Berlioz posed for a portrait painting by Émile Signol (completed in April 1832), which Berlioz did not consider to be a good likeness of himself.
As his fourth cantata for submittal to the Prix de Rome neared completion, the July Revolution began.
In 1840, the ''Grande symphonie funèbre et triomphale'' was commissioned to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the July Revolution of 1830.
Berlioz often stated in his letters that he was an agnostic.
Berlioz was not a child prodigy, unlike some other famous composers of the time; he began studying music at age 12, writing small compositions and arrangements.
Other Russian composers he knew or at least had met include Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov, Vladimir Stasov, and Tchaikovsky.
Later that year Berlioz finished composing the song cycle ''Les nuits d'été'' for piano and voices (later to be orchestrated).
It is famous for its innovations in the form of the programmatic symphony.
The ''Gazette'' wasn't even unanimous in its praise of Berlioz's music, although it always recognised him as an important and serious composer to be respected.
Béatrice was sung by Madame Charton-Demeur.
He composed the ''Messe solennelle''.
The intestinal pains had been gradually increasing, and had now spread to his stomach, and whole days were passed in agony.
His last words were reputed to be "Enfin, on va jouer ma musique" ("At last, they are going to play my music").
During the middle of the 1830s the ''Gazette'' was considered an intellectual journal, strongly supporting the progressive arts and Romanticism in general, and opposing anything which it considers as debasing this.
Despite Berlioz not understanding spoken English and Harriet not knowing any French, on 3 October 1833, they got married in a civil ceremony at the British Embassy with Liszt as one of the witnesses.
In early 1855 ''Le retour à la vie'' was revised and renamed ''Lélio''.
He began with more enthusiasm than mastery, and was not formally trained, but through perseverance his skills improved.
For his magnum opus, the monumental opera ''Les Troyens'', Berlioz turned to Virgil's epic poem ''The Aeneid''.
The 'Berlioz 2003' celebrations, organised by French academic institutions, also had a prominent website, listing events, publications and gatherings the domain of which has now lapsed.
Perhaps as a result of this reading and seeing himself as an archetypical tragic hero, Berlioz began to weave personal references into his music.
Despite his prominent position in musical criticism, he did not use his articles to promote his own works.
In 1864 Berlioz was made ''Officier de la Légion d'honneur''.
Amélie requested that they end their relationship, which Berlioz did, to his despair.
Back in Paris, Berlioz began to compose the concert overture ''Le carnaval romain'', based on music from ''Benvenuto Cellini''.
Shakespeare for Berlioz represented the summit of poetic utterance, with the bard's veracity of dramatic expression and freedom from formal constraints resounding in the composer's spirit.
By now he had composed several works including ''Estelle et Némorin'' and ''Le passage de la mer Rouge'' (The Crossing of the Red Sea)&nbsp;– both now lost;– the latter of which convinced Le Sueur to take Berlioz on as one of his private pupils.
In August 1868, he made his last trip to Grenoble where he lived with his sister and her family.
Similarly, his conducting technique as described by contemporary sources appears to set the groundwork for the clarity and precision favoured in the French School of conducting right up to the present, exemplified by such figures as Pierre Monteux, Désiré-Émile Inghelbrecht, Paul Paray, Charles Munch, André Cluytens, Pierre Boulez and Charles Dutoit.
As Wagner here implies, Berlioz himself was indifferent to the idea of what was called "la musique du passé" (music of the past), and clearly influenced both Liszt and Wagner (and other forward-looking composers) although he increasingly began to dislike many of their works.
The onset of an intestinal illness which would plague Berlioz for the rest of his life had now become apparent to him.
In 1823, he wrote his first article—a letter to the journal ''Le corsaire'' defending Spontini's ''La vestale''.
This allowed him to focus on writing the "dramatic symphony" ''Roméo et Juliette'' for voices, chorus and orchestra.
This composer was of course a fictional construct by Berlioz.
The work had had extensive rehearsals for many months, and despite problems Berlioz found in making the musicians play as delicately as he would like, and even discovering that the orchestra pit was too small before the premiere, the work was a success.
Though the performances were in English, of which Berlioz knew virtually none, he was still able to grasp the grandeur and sublimity of Shakespeare's language along with the richness of the plays' dramatic design.
''Les Troyens'' was the first opera performed at the newly built Opéra Bastille in Paris on 17 March 1990 in a production claimed to be complete, but lacking the ballets.
He followed the rest of the 1827 season closely, until the company moved to the Salle Favart, and began learning the plays from pocket translations on sale.
"Now that I have heard that terrifying giant Beethoven", he wrote, "I know exactly where my musical art stands; the question is to take it from there and push it further."
Berlioz later recalled that his "intention was to write a series of orchestral scenes, in which the solo viola would be involved as a more or less active participant with the orchestra while retaining its own character.
Berlioz soon met a young woman named Amélie at Montmartre Cemetery, and though she was only 24, they developed a close relationship despite a 35-year age difference.
The performance was held in the open air on 28 July, conducted by Berlioz himself, at the Place de la Bastille.
He even stole a pair of double-barrelled pistols from the Academy to kill them with, saving a single shot for himself.
Time and again through the years, Berlioz would distill the favorite image of a play and distill it into musical terms.
In his last opera, the comic opera ''Béatrice et Bénédict'', Berlioz prepared a libretto based loosely on Shakespeare's ''Much Ado About Nothing''.
This request was accepted, and he prepared for his trip back.
He learned harmony from textbooks alone—he was not formally trained.
While Berlioz is best known as a composer, he was also a prolific writer, and supported himself for many years by writing musical criticism, utilising a bold, vigorous style, at times imperious and sarcastic.
Berlioz later claimed to have burnt the score, but it was re-discovered in 1991.
The next day he sent Berlioz a gift of 20,000 francs, the generosity of which left Berlioz uncharacteristically lost for words.
Berlioz arrived back in France in 1848, only to be informed that his father had died shortly after his return.
Berlioz not only influenced Wagner through his orchestration and breaking of conventional forms, but also in his use of the idée fixe in the ''Symphonie fantastique'' which foreshadows the leitmotif.
He was to spend much effort and money in the following decades trying to have it performed successfully.
Invited by Mayor Jean Vendre during three days of festivities for the inauguration of a statue of Napoleon, he presided at a music festival.
After the 1830s, Berlioz found it increasingly difficult to achieve recognition for his music in France.
To Berlioz this was an ideal opportunity.
For ''La damnation de Faust'', Berlioz drew on Goethe's ''Faust''; for ''Harold en Italie'', he drew on Byron's ''Childe Harold''; for ''Benvenuto Cellini'', he drew on Cellini's own autobiography.
Despite protests from French and Italian composers, by the end of the first season Habeneck and the orchestra had also performed the Fifth Symphony, the Third Piano Concerto, the Violin Concerto as well as other works.
Many parts of the ''Mémoires'' (1870) were originally published in the ''Journal des débats'', as well as ''Le monde illustré''.
The story behind this work relates to Berlioz himself and can be considered somewhat autobiographical.
He visited Pompeii, Naples, Milan, Tivoli, Florence, Turin and Genoa.
In addition to the ''Symphonie fantastique'', some other orchestral works of Berlioz currently in the standard orchestral repertoire include his "légende dramatique" ''La damnation de Faust'' and "symphonie dramatique" ''Roméo et Juliette'' (both large-scale works for mixed voices and orchestra), and his concertante symphony (for viola and orchestra) ''Harold en Italie'', several concert overtures also remain enduringly popular, such as ''Le Corsaire'' and ''Le Carnaval romain''.
The work, which Berlioz never saw staged in its entirety during his life, is now a part of the international repertoire, if still something of a rarity.
Louis was an agnostic, with a liberal outlook; his mother, Marie-Antoinette, was a devout Roman Catholic.
After arriving in Nice (at that time, part of Italy), he reconsidered the entire plan, deciding it to be inappropriate and foolish.
Not only would it give him a large annual salary (between 6000 and 12,000 francs), but it would also give him a platform from which to perform his own music, and the music of fellow progressives.
During his stay in Italy, he received a letter from the mother of his fiancée, Camille Moke, informing him that she had called off their engagement.
The first performances of ''Béatrice et Bénédict'' were held at Baden-Baden on 9 and 11 August.
In Saint Petersburg, Berlioz experienced a special pleasure at performing with the "first-rate" orchestra of the Saint Petersburg Conservatory.
These included the works of Thomas Moore, Sir Walter Scott and Lord Byron.
In a letter written to his son, he said that having lived with her for so long, it was his duty to do so.
Richard Pohl, the German critic in Schumann's musical journal, the ''Neue Zeitschrift für Musik'', called Berlioz "the true pathbreaker".
Around this time, Berlioz decided to conduct most of his own concerts, tired as he was of conductors who did not understand his music.
Berlioz also heard two operas by Gaspare Spontini, a composer who influenced him through their friendship, and whom he later championed when working as a critic.
During his lifetime, Berlioz was as famous a conductor as he was as a composer.
Commemorations of Berlioz include the 2000-seat Opera Berlioz at the Corum arts centre in Montpellier, Berlioz Point in Antarctica and asteroid 69288 Berlioz.
Nowadays it is among the most popular of his overtures.
He also immersed himself in Chateaubriand, E. T. A. Hoffmann, James Fenimore Cooper and his compatriots Victor Hugo, Alfred de Vigny, Alfred de Musset and Gérard de Nerval.
He described Shakespeare and Goethe in an 1828 letter as "the silent confidants of my suffering; they hold the key to my life."
In 1828 Berlioz heard Beethoven's third and fifth symphonies performed at the Paris Conservatoire&nbsp;– an experience that he found overwhelming.
He also met Heinrich Marschner in Hanover, Wagner in Dresden and Giacomo Meyerbeer in Berlin.
There was also a site maintained by the Association nationale Hector Berlioz.
The same year ''Roméo'' premiered, Berlioz was appointed ''Conservateur Adjoint'' (Deputy Librarian) Paris Conservatoire Library.
He found the city distasteful, writing, "Rome is the most stupid and prosaic city I know; it is no place for anyone with head or heart."
An hour before the performance, a sudden storm created the worst rain in Paris for 50 years, meaning the performance was almost deserted.
In December he began a tour in Germany which continued until the middle of next year.
In London he also learnt that he knew far more English than he had supposed, although still did not understand half of what was said in conversation.
From then on, he conducted at many different occasions, but mainly during grand tours of various countries where he was paid handsomely for visiting.
Most of his family and friends had died, including his two surviving sisters.
His opinion of Wagner's music is contained in an essay in his "The Art of Music."
He created an elaborate plan, going so far as to purchase a dress, wig and hat with a veil (with which he was to disguise himself as a woman in order to gain entry to their home).
These secrets, Berlioz suggested in the text of ''Roméo et Juliette'' the playwright took with him to heaven.
He immediately traveled to Nice to recuperate in the Mediterranean climate, but slipped on some rocks by the sea shore, possibly due to a stroke, and had to return to Paris, where he lived as an invalid.
He was able to hear Beethoven's works through the performances of the ''Société des Concerts du Conservatoire'', an orchestra founded by François Antoine Habeneck and his colleagues to promote modern orchestral music.
''Les soirées de l’orchestre'' (Evenings with the Orchestra) (1852), a scathing satire of provincial musical life in 19th century France, and the ''Treatise on Instrumentation'', a pedagogic work, were both serialised originally in the ''Gazette musicale''.
He returned to Paris in 1868, exhausted, with his health damaged due to the Russian winter.
Although neglected in France for much of the 19th century, the music of Berlioz has often been cited as extremely influential in the development of the symphonic form, instrumentation, and the depiction in music of programmatic and literary ideas, features central to musical Romanticism.
Madame Charton-Demeur sang the role of Didon.
This led to two intense infatuations.
In March 1821, Berlioz left high school in Grenoble, and in late September, at age 18, he was sent to Paris to study medicine, a field for which he had no interest and, later, outright disgust after viewing a human corpse being dissected.
In 1847, during a seven-month visit to England, he was appointed conductor at the London Drury Lane Theatre by its then-musical director, the popular French musician Louis Antoine Jullien.
Berlioz had a keen affection for literature, and many of his best compositions are inspired by literary works.
He was considered extremely progressive for his day, and he, Wagner, and Liszt have been called the "Great Trinity of Progress" of 19th-century Romanticism.
Instead her daughter was to marry Camille Pleyel (son of Ignaz Pleyel), a rich piano manufacturer.
At this time, Berlioz also met playwright Ernest Legouvé who became a lifelong friend.
He also arranged the French national anthem ''La Marseillaise'' and composed an overture to Shakespeare's ''The Tempest'', which was the first of his pieces to play at the Paris Opéra.
Berlioz made significant contributions to the modern orchestra with his ''Treatise on Instrumentation''.
"I dashed off the final pages of my orchestral score to the sound of stray bullets coming over the roofs and pattering on the wall outside my window.
He quoted from them for the rest of his life and would associate any personal upheaval with its Shakespearian counterpart.
Later came ''The Tempest'', ''King Lear'', a funeral march for the final scene in ''Hamlet'', the love scene for ''Les Troyens'' (which, some claim, Berlioz took from ''The Merchant of Venice''), and ''Béatrice and Benedict''.
The work survives only in fragments; the overture has been much recorded and is sometimes played in concert.
The following year he began but later abandoned the composition of a new opera, ''La nonne sanglante''; some fragments survive.
A few days after the performance, Berlioz and Harriet were finally introduced and entered into a relationship.
On 22 August, Berlioz heard from a friend that Amélie, who had been suffering from poor health, had died at the age of 26.
Berlioz met Franz Liszt who was also attending the concert.
He was surrounded by friends at the time.
In 1834, virtuoso violinist and composer Niccolò Paganini commissioned Berlioz to compose a viola concerto, intending to premiere it as soloist.
The inaugural concert, on 9 March 1828, featured the French premiere of the ''Eroica'' Symphony.
During his stay in England, the February Revolution broke out in France.
His father, Louis Berlioz, a respected provincial physician and scholar who is widely credited for first experimenting with and recording the use of acupuncture in Europe, was responsible for much of the young Berlioz's education.
Later that year or in 1825, he began to compose the opera ''Les francs-juges'', which was completed the following year but went unperformed.
He later added Honoré de Balzac, Gustave Flaubert and Théophile Gautier to his list of favorites; he also used Gautier's poems as texts for his song cycle ''Les nuits d'été''.
He also read Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's ''Faust'' for the first time (in French translation), which would become the inspiration for ''Huit scènes de Faust'' (his Opus 1), much later re-developed as ''La damnation de Faust''.
On Berlioz's return to Paris, a concert including ''Symphonie fantastique'' (which had been extensively revised in Italy) and ''Le retour à la vie'' was performed, with Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Heinrich Heine, Niccolò Paganini, Franz Liszt, Frédéric Chopin, George Sand, Alfred de Vigny, Théophile Gautier, Jules Janin, Harriet Smithson and others in the audience.
He began composition of his ''Te Deum''.
Berlioz appears to have been innately Romantic, this characteristic manifesting itself in his love affairs, adoration of great romantic literature, as well as Shakespeare and Beethoven, and his weeping at passages by Virgil (by age twelve he had learned to read Virgil in Latin and translate it into French under his father's tutelage).
From then on, he devoted himself to composition.
One was to Smithson, which would result in a disastrous marriage.
He also busied himself judging entrants for the Prix de Rome&nbsp;– arguing successfully for the eventual winner, the 21-year-old Jules Massenet.
During a short visit to London, Berlioz had a long conversation with Wagner over dinner.
This left Berlioz heavily in debt to the tune of 5000 to 6000 francs.
On 11 September of that year, he attended a production by a traveling English theatre company at the Odéon theatre with the Irish-born actress Harriet Smithson playing Ophelia and Juliet in the Shakespeare plays ''Hamlet'' and ''Romeo and Juliet''.
He understood at once that the symphony was a dramatic form to an extent that he had not previously realized, and that in Beethoven he saw a way to the dramatic manner in which he desired to compose.
Newspaper articles reported his colourful life with zeal, very many festivals dedicated to the composer were held, readings of his books and a one-hour French television dramatised biography all helped to create a lot of exposure to the composer's life and music&nbsp;– far more than the previous centenary anniversary.
Berlioz's joke "If the Emperor of Russia wants me, then I am up for sale" was taken seriously.
While his career as a critic and writer provided him with a comfortable income, and he had an obvious talent for writing, he came to detest the amount of time spent attending performances to review, as it severely limited his free time to promote his own works and produce more compositions.
Shakespeare served as a model for French Romanticism, with Hugo extolling Shakespeare as a challenge to French classicism and the model for the new Romantic theater.
There was also opposition from Luigi Cherubini, who was at the time the music director of the Paris Conservatoire.
All three inspired Berlioz to compose works based on theirs.
By now, Berlioz was a lonely man.
An example of the amount of work he produced is indicated in his producing over one-hundred articles for the ''Gazette'' between 1833 and 1837.
Their marriage turned out a disaster as both were prone to violent personality clashes and outbursts of temper.
Berlioz initially began conducting due to frustrations over the inability of other conductors&nbsp;– more used to performing older and simpler music&nbsp;– to master his advanced and progressive works, with their extended melodies and rhythmic complexity.
The performances were the first since the disastrous premiere of 1838.
Shortly afterwards, the ''Te Deum'' received its premiere with Berlioz conducting.
As for ''Les Troyens'', in 1860 the Théâtre Lyrique in Paris had agreed to stage it, only to reject it the following year.
"I was finishing my cantata when the revolution broke out," he recorded in his ''Mémoires''.
He immediately became infatuated with both actress and playwright.
''L'enfance du Christ'' was completed later that year and was well-received upon its premiere.
This is a conservative estimate, as not all of his submissions were signed.
However, a new decree issued by the revolutionary government forced him to change his mind.
For the opening of Stanley Kubrick's film adaptation of The Shining (1980) by Stephen King, composer Wendy Carlos re-interpreted the "Dies Irae" section of Berlioz's Symphonie Fantastique using a Moog Synthesizer.
The opera was planned around five acts, similar in size to the grand opera of Meyerbeer.
Prominent Berlioz conductor Colin Davis had already been in the process of recording much of Berlioz's music on the LSO Live label, and has continued this project to this date with a ''L'enfance du Christ'' recording issued in 2007.
Despite his parents' disapproval, in 1824 he formally abandoned his medical studies to pursue a career in music.
Simultaneous with Berlioz's discovery of Shakespeare was his immersion in the texts of true Romanticism.
In Leipzig he met Felix Mendelssohn and Robert Schumann, the latter of whom had written an enthusiastic article on the ''Symphonie fantastique''.
Berlioz accepted the offer, and signed the contract for the position.
This was later remedied by a concert performance a month later, and Wagner voiced his approval of the work.
He also came into contact with Beethoven's string quartets and piano sonatas, and recognised the importance of these immediately.
Marie Recio, Berlioz's wife, died unexpectedly of a stroke at the age of 48, on 13 June 1862.
He returned to Paris in November 1832.
Berlioz would go on to find instrumental music to be far more penetrating in expression and articulation than vocal setting.
