common financial interests) and the promise of above high returns.
Following the Madoff case, the SEC adopted reforms in December 2009 that required hedge funds managed by registered investment advisers to have their assets in the custody of a qualified custodian and subjected them to an audit requirement.
First, the increase in traded volume may have been reducing the market anomalies that are a source of hedge fund performance.
In June 2011, the hedge funds with the greatest AUM was Bridgewater Associates (US$58.9&nbsp;billion), Man Group (US$39.2&nbsp;billion), Paulson & Co. (US$35.1&nbsp;billion), Brevan Howard (US$31&nbsp;billion), and Och-Ziff (US$29.4&nbsp;billion).
This back office support allows fund managers to concentrate on trades.
In the United Kingdom, where 80% of Europe's hedge funds are based, hedge fund managers are required to be authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA).
Investors in hedge funds are, in most countries, required to be qualified investors who are assumed to be aware of the investment risks, and accept these risks because of the potential returns relative to those risks.
At the end of that year, the 241 largest hedge fund firms in the United States collectively held $1.335 trillion.
and investment consultancy Hennessee Group.
This prevents managers from receiving fees for volatile performance, though a manager will sometimes close a fund that has suffered serious losses and start a new fund, rather than attempting to recover the losses over a number of years without performance fee.
Within directional strategies, there are a number of sub-strategies.
Most funds use an independent accounting firm to audit the assets of the fund, provide tax services and perform a complete audit of the fund's financial statements.
Administrators also process subscriptions and redemptions, and perform various shareholder services.
Risk arbitrage typically involves buying and selling the stocks of two or more merging companies to take advantage of market discrepancies between acquisition price and stock price.
Special situations are events that impact the value of a company's stock, including the restructuring of a company or corporate transactions including spin-offs, share-buy-backs, security issuance/repurchase, asset sales, or other catalyst-oriented situations.
Hedge fund administrators are responsible for operations, accounting, and valuation services.
To make the index liquid, these terms must include provisions for redemptions that some managers may consider too onerous to be acceptable.
Non-investable indices are indicative in nature, and aim to represent the performance of some database of hedge funds using some measure such as mean, median or weighted mean from a hedge fund database.
Hedge funds purchasing distressed debt may prevent those companies from going bankrupt, as such an acquisition deters foreclosure by banks.
Some types of funds, including hedge funds, are perceived as having a greater appetite for risk, with the intention of maximizing returns, subject to the risk tolerance of investors and the fund manager.
To take advantage of special situations the hedge fund manager must identify an upcoming event that will increase or decrease the value of the company's equity and equity-related instruments.
Unlike management fees and performance fees, redemption fees are usually kept by the fund.
Management fees for hedge funds are designed to cover the operating costs of the manager, whereas the performance fee provides the manager's profits.
The global hedge fund industry has over $2 trillion in assets, and this does not take into account the full effect of leverage, which by definition is market exposure in excess of the amount invested.
Corporate transactional events generally fit into three categories: distressed securities, risk arbitrage, and special situations.
Management fees are calculated as a percentage of the fund's net asset value and typically range from 1% to 4% per annum, with 2% being standard.
The Cayman Islands was the leading location for offshore funds, accounting for 34% of the total number of global hedge funds.
There is a debate over whether alpha (the manager's skill element in performance) has been diluted by the expansion of the hedge fund industry.
The elements contributing to a hedge fund strategy include: the hedge fund's approach to the market; the particular instrument used; the market sector the fund specializes in (e.g.
Funds using a "short bias" strategy take advantage of declining equity prices using short positions.
The increased interest was due to the aligned-interest compensation structure (i.e.
However, regulations passed in the United States and Europe after the financial crisis of 2007–08 were intended to increase government oversight of hedge funds and eliminate certain regulatory gaps.
According to a report by the Hennessee Group, hedge funds were approximately one-third less volatile than the S&P 500 between 1993 and 2010.
Renaissance argued that basket options were "extremely important because they gave the hedge fund the ability to increase its returns by borrowing more and to protect against model and programming failures."
New performance measures have been introduced that attempt to address some of theoretical concerns with traditional indicators, including: modified Sharpe ratios; the Omega ratio introduced by Keating and Shadwick in 2002; Alternative Investments Risk Adjusted Performance (AIRAP) published by Sharma in 2004; and Kappa developed by Kaplan and Knowles in 2004.
While "hedging" can be a way of reducing the risk of an investment, hedge funds, like all other investment types, are not immune to risk.
(Funds do not tend to report compensation.
An investor in a hedge fund usually has direct access to the investment adviser of the fund, and may enjoy more personalized reporting than investors in retail investment funds.
However, the fund's investors are subject to tax in their own jurisdictions on any increase in the value of their investments.
Second, the remuneration model is attracting more managers, which may dilute the talent available in the industry.
In June 2015 Forbes listed George Soros of Quantum Group of Funds, Ray Dalio of Bridgewater Associates - the world's largest hedge fund firm in 2015 with  US$155 billion assets under management compared to US$122 billion under assets in 2011,Steven A. Cohen of Point72 Asset Management - formerly known as S.A.C.
New York City and the Gold Coast area of Connecticut are the leading locations for US hedge fund managers.
Hedge fund managers with at least US$100&nbsp;million in assets under management are required to file publicly quarterly reports disclosing ownership of registered equity securities and are subject to public disclosure if they own more than 5% of the class of any registered equity security.
Much of the data available in consolidated databases is self-reported and unverified.
In an attempt to address this problem, clone indices have been created in an attempt to replicate the statistical properties of hedge funds without being directly based on their returns data.
A "hard" hurdle is calculated only on returns above the hurdle rate.
*Credit long / short: the same as long / short equity but in credit markets instead of equity markets.
The other factor reducing the attractiveness of hedge funds in a diversified portfolio is that they tend to under-perform during equity bear markets, just when an investor needs part of their portfolio to add value.
A "soft" hurdle means the performance fee is calculated on all the fund's returns if the hurdle rate is cleared.
Hedge fund management firms are usually owned by their portfolio managers, who are therefore entitled to any profits that the business makes.
Registered advisers must report their business practices and disciplinary history to the SEC and to their investors.
The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 required a fund with more than 499 investors to register with the SEC.
A distributor is an underwriter, broker, dealer, or other person who participates in the distribution of securities.
However, the 2008 financial crisis caused many hedge funds to restrict investor withdrawals and their popularity and AUM totals declined.
Of the 1,226 people on the ''Forbes'' World's Billionaires list for 2012, 36 of the financiers listed "derived significant chunks" of their wealth from hedge fund management.
Hedge funds employing leverage are likely to engage in extensive risk management practices.
On the other hand,  U.S. hedge funds are exempt from many of the standard registration and reporting requirements because they only accept accredited investors.
The distributor is also responsible for marketing the fund to potential investors.
In the mid-2000s, Kirk Wright of International Management Associates was accused of mail fraud and other securities violations which allegedly defrauded clients of close to US$180 million.
While global macro strategies have a large amount of flexibility due to their ability to use leverage to take large positions in diverse investments in multiple markets, the timing of the implementation of the strategies is important in order to generate attractive, risk-adjusted returns.
Over time, the types and nature of the hedging concepts expanded, as did the different types of investment vehicles.
In stressed market conditions, investors might suddenly withdraw large sums, resulting in forced asset sales.
This model is then used to construct an investable portfolio of those assets.
One estimate is that the average hedge fund returned 11.4% per year, representing a 6.7% return above overall market performance before fees, based on performance data from 8,400 hedge funds.
US hedge funds aimed at US-based, taxable investors are generally structured as limited partnerships or limited liability companies.
Many funds disclose their holdings, strategy, and historic performance relative to market indices, giving investors some idea of how their money is being allocated, although individual holdings are not always disclosed.
Collectively, the top 25 hedge fund managers regularly earn more than all 500 of the chief executives in the S&P 500.
A '''hedge fund''' is an investment fund that pools capital from a limited number of accredited individuals or institutional investors and invests in a variety of assets, often with complex portfolio-construction and risk-management techniques.
As management fees are intended to cover the firm's operating costs, performance fees (and any excess management fees) are generally distributed to the firm's owners as profits.
The U.S.'s Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act was passed in July 2010 and requires SEC registration of advisers who manage private funds with more than US$150 million in assets.
The legal structure of a specific hedge fund, in particular its domicile and the type of legal entity in use, is usually determined by the tax expectations of the fund's investors.
Capital Advisors, John Paulson of Paulson & Co. whose hedge funds as of December 2015 had $19 billion assets under management, compared to $18 billion in September 2013 and $36 billion in early 2011.
Managers will have an additional incentive to increase risk oversight when their own capital is invested in the fund.
Funds that use quantitative and Financial signal processing techniques for equity trading are described as using a "quantitative directional" strategy.
In South Africa, investment fund managers must be approved by, and register with, the Financial Services Board (FSB).
The extensive use of leverage can lead to forced liquidations in a crisis, particularly for hedge funds that invest at least in part in illiquid investments.
Hedge funds fail regularly, and numerous hedge funds failed during the financial crisis.
In 2010, regulations were enacted in the US and European Union, which introduced additional hedge fund reporting requirements.
The fund is managed by an investment manager in the form of an organization or company that is legally and financially distinct from the hedge fund and its portfolio of assets.
Hedge funds using a global macro investing strategy take sizable positions in share, bond or currency markets in anticipation of global macroeconomic events in order to generate a risk-adjusted return.
Limited partnerships and other flow-through taxation structures assure that investors in hedge funds are not subject to both entity-level and personal-level taxation.
Systemic risk refers to the risk of instability across the entire financial system, as opposed to within a single company.
Although they aim to be representative, non-investable indices suffer from a lengthy and largely unavoidable list of biases.
The year-end audit is often performed in accordance with either US generally accepted accounting principles (US GAAP) or international financial reporting standards (IFRS), depending on where the fund is established.
Hedge funds ideally produce returns relatively uncorrelated with market indices.
*Fixed income arbitrage: exploit pricing inefficiencies between related fixed income securities.
Despite these benefits, some investors complained that the practice was abused and not always transparent.
Two reasons are given.
Today, hedge funds engage in a diverse range of markets and strategies and employ a wide variety of financial instruments and risk management techniques.
The Internal Revenue Service began investigating Renaissance Technologies in 2009 and Levin criticized the IRS for taking six years to investigate the company.
As an alternative legal structure, offshore funds may be formed as an open-ended unit trust using an unincorporated mutual fund structure.
Organizations such as the National Bureau of Economic Research and the European Central Bank have charged that hedge funds pose systemic risks to the financial sector, and following the failure of hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998 there was widespread concern about the potential for systemic risk if a hedge fund failure led to the failure of its counterparties.
Offshore funds that invest in the US typically pay withholding taxes on certain types of investment income but not US capital gains tax.
Side pockets were widely used by hedge funds during the 2008 financial crisis amidst a flood of withdrawal requests.
Within global macro strategies, there are further sub-strategies including "systematic diversified", in which the fund trades in diversified markets, or "systematic currency", in which the fund trades in currency markets.
Some US funds voluntarily employ external auditors, thereby offering a greater degree of transparency.
This means that investable indices do not represent the total universe of hedge funds.
The Act also exempted hedge funds from mandatory registration with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) when selling to accredited investors with a minimum of US$5&nbsp;million in investment assets.
Many hedge funds are established in offshore financial centers to avoid adverse tax consequences for its foreign and tax-exempt investors.
This means that hedge funds have a potentially quite valuable role in investment portfolios as diversifiers, reducing overall portfolio risk.
They are usually expressed as an annual percentage, but calculated and paid monthly or quarterly.
A side pocket is a mechanism whereby a fund compartmentalizes assets that are relatively illiquid or difficult to value reliably.
There are a variety of market approaches to different asset classes, including equity, fixed income, commodity, and currency.
Many managers of offshore funds permit the participation of tax-exempt US investors, such as pensions funds, institutional endowments and charitable trusts.
The result from this second optimization was an allocation of 74% to hedge funds.
Distressed securities include such events as restructurings, recapitalizations, and bankruptcies.
Investors are often drawn to hedge funds by the possibility of realizing significant returns, or hedging against volatility in the market.
Another is that between January 2000 and December 2009 the hedge funds outperformed other investments were significantly less volatile, with stocks falling 2.62% per year over the decade and hedge funds rising 6.54%.
In addition, investors, particularly institutional investors, are encouraging further developments in hedge fund risk management, both through internal practices and external regulatory requirements.
These basket options will now be labeled as listed transactions that must be declared on tax returns and a failure to do would result in a penalty.
Instruments used include: equities, fixed income, futures, options and swaps.
Liquidity refers to the degree to which an asset can be bought and sold or converted to cash; similar to private equity funds, hedge funds employ a lock-up period during which an investor cannot remove money.
Early hedge funds sought to hedge specific investments against general market fluctuations by shorting the market, hence the name.
A fund may employ a single strategy or multiple strategies for flexibility, for risk management, or for diversification.
Hedge fund managers often invest money of their own in the fund they manage, which serves to align their own interests with those of the investors in the fund.
It is administered by a professional management firm, and often structured as a limited partnership, limited liability company, or similar vehicle.
A hedge fund's value is calculated as a share of the fund's net asset value, meaning that increases and decreases in the value of the fund's investment assets (and fund expenses) are directly reflected in the amount an investor can later withdraw.
*Volatility arbitrage: exploit the change in implied volatility instead of the change in price.
Using basket options Renaissance avoided "more than $6 billion in taxes over more than a decade."
A distressed securities investment strategy involves investing in the bonds or loans of companies facing bankruptcy or severe financial distress, when these bonds or loans are being traded at a discount to their value.
In December 2008, Bernard Madoff was arrested for running a US$50 billion Ponzi scheme which was incorrectly described as a hedge fund, and several feeder hedge funds, of which the largest was Fairfield Sentry, channeled money to it.
While hedge funds have existed for many decades, and become increasingly popular, growing to be one of the world's largest asset management classes by 2014, according to a report by Hedge Fund Research, published in October 2015, hedge fund industry assets shrank "by $95 billion to 2.87 trillion in the third quarter, making 2015 their worst year since 2008.
Managers of hedge funds use particular trading strategies and instruments with the specific aim of reducing market risks to produce risk-adjusted returns, which are consistent with investors' desired level of risk.
A hedge fund typically pays its investment manager an annual management fee (for example 1% of the assets of the fund), and a performance fee (for example 20% of the increase in the fund's net asset value during the year).
Hedge fund managers pursuing the distressed debt investment strategy aim to capitalize on depressed bond prices.
In December 2004, the SEC began requiring hedge fund advisers, managing more than US$25&nbsp;million and with more than 14 investors, to register with the SEC under the Investment Advisers Act.
However, there are three reasons why one might not wish to allocate a high proportion of assets into hedge funds.
Several studies have suggested that hedge funds are sufficiently diversifying to merit inclusion in investor portfolios, but this is disputed for example by Mark Kritzman who performed a mean-variance optimization calculation on an opportunity set that consisted of a stock index fund, a bond index fund, and ten hypothetical hedge funds.
In contrast to the funds themselves, investment managers are primarily located onshore.
Performance fee rates have fallen since the start of the credit crunch.
Top hedge fund managers earn what has been termed "extraordinary" amounts of money, with the highest-grossing getting up to $4 billion per year.
CTAs trade in commodities (such as gold) and financial instruments, including stock indices.
Hedge funds are most often open-ended and allow additions or withdrawals by their investors (generally on a monthly or quarterly basis).
Some hedge funds have several billion dollars of assets under management (AUM).
, 61% of worldwide investment in hedge funds comes from institutional sources.
Many hedge funds also fall under the jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and are subject to rules and provisions of the 1922 Commodity Exchange Act  which prohibits fraud and manipulation.
The Investment Advisers Act of 1940 contained anti-fraud provisions that regulated hedge fund managers and advisers,  created limits for the number and types of investors, and prohibited public offerings.
AUM totals rebounded and in April 2011 were estimated at almost $2 trillion.
Another common perception of hedge funds is that their managers are not subject to as much regulatory oversight and/or registration requirements as other financial investment managers, and more prone to manager-specific idiosyncratic risks such as style drifts, faulty operations, or fraud.
oversight, bypass licensing requirements applicable to investment companies, and operate with greater flexibility than mutual funds and other investment funds.
A dozen other hedge funds along with Renaissance Technologies used Deutsche Bank's and Barclays' basket options.
Over the next decade hedge fund strategies expanded to include: credit arbitrage, distressed debt, fixed income, quantitative, and multi-strategy.
Some services are attempting to improve matching between hedge funds and investors: HedgeZ is designed to allow investors to easily search and sort through funds; iMatchative aims to match investors to funds through algorithms that factor in an investor's goals and behavioral profile, in hopes of helping funds and investors understand the how their perceptions and motivations drive investment decisions.
Market neutral funds have less correlation to overall market performance by "neutralizing" the effect of market swings, whereas directional funds utilize trends and inconsistencies in the market and have greater exposure to the market's fluctuations.
returns, inception date, net assets value, incentive fee, management fee, investment styles, etc.)
and that 5% of return numbers and 5% of NAV numbers were dramatically different.
Nowadays, however, many different investment strategies are used, many of which do not "hedge risk".
Directional investment strategies use market movements, trends, or inconsistencies when picking stocks across a variety of markets.
In testimony to the House Financial Services Committee in 2009, Ben Bernanke, the Federal Reserve Board Chairman said he "would not think that any hedge fund or private equity fund would become a systemically critical firm individually".
The name ''hedge fund'' originated from the paired long and short positions that the first of these funds used to hedge market risk.
The SEC also has expressed concern about aggressive use of side pockets and has sanctioned certain fund managers for inappropriate use of them.
As such, they generally avoid direct regulatory
The risk element arises from the possibility that the merger or acquisition will not go ahead as planned; hedge fund managers will use research and analysis to determine if the event will take place.
* Risk arbitrage: exploiting market discrepancies between acquisition price and stock price
Indices play a central and unambiguous role in traditional asset markets, where they are widely accepted as representative of their underlying portfolios.
It can provide custodial services for the fund's assets, and execution and clearing services for the hedge fund manager.
The investment manager who organizes the hedge fund may retain an interest in the fund, either as the general partner of a limited partnership or as the holder of "founder shares" in a corporate fund.
"Emerging markets" funds focus on emerging markets such as China and India, whereas "sector funds" specialize in specific areas including technology, healthcare, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, energy and basic materials.
Funds may have "risk officers" who assess and manage risks but are not otherwise involved in trading, and may employ strategies such as formal portfolio risk models.
Strategies within these categories each entail characteristic risk and return profiles.
Some performance fees include a "hurdle", so that a fee is only paid on the fund's performance in excess of a benchmark rate (e.g.
Investment in hedge funds may provide diversification which can reduce the overall risk of an investor's portfolio.
The US had 24%, Luxembourg 10%, Ireland 7%, the British Virgin Islands  6% and Bermuda had 3%.
Performance fees are intended to provide an incentive for a manager to generate profits.
Some factors, such as normality of return, are not always accounted for by conventional risk measurement methodologies.
This may include detailed discussions of risks assumed and significant positions.
While event-driven investing in general tends to thrive during a bull market, distressed investing works best during a bear market.
To make the index investable, hedge funds must agree to accept investments on the terms given by the constructor.
*Equity market neutral: exploits differences in stock prices by being long and short in stocks within the same sector, industry, market capitalization, country, which also creates a hedge against broader market factors.
Regulatory considerations will also play a role.
A hedge fund is an investment vehicle that is most often structured as an offshore corporation, limited partnership or limited liability company.
The optimizer found that a mean-variance efficient portfolio did not contain any allocation to hedge funds, largely because of the impact of performance fees.
Valuation risk refers to the concern that the net asset value of investments may be inaccurate; capacity risk can arise from placing too much money into one particular strategy, which may lead to fund performance deterioration; and concentration risk may arise if a fund has too much exposure to a particular investment, sector, trading strategy, or group of correlated funds.
With these limitations, investors have to do their own research, which may cost on the scale of US$50,000 for a fund that is not well-established.
These risks may be managed through defined controls over conflict of interest, restrictions on allocation of funds, and set exposure limits for strategies.
The limited partners serve as the fund's investors, and have no responsibility for management or investment decisions.
healthcare); the method used to select investments; and the amount of diversification within the fund.
The performance fee is typically 20% of the fund's profits during any year, though they range between 10% and 50%.
Many managers also have large stakes in their own funds.
The word "hedge", meaning a line of bushes around a field, has long been used as a metaphor for the placing of limits on risk.
London is Europe's leading center for hedge fund managers.
Managers employing such a strategy capitalize on valuation inconsistencies in the market before or after such events, and take a position based on the predicted movement of the security or securities in question.
By contrast, offshore corporate funds are usually used for non-US investors, and when they are domiciled in an applicable offshore tax haven, no entity-level tax is imposed.
Sometimes hedge fund strategies are described as absolute return and are classified as either market neutral or directional.
It is likely that funds only publish their results when they are favorable, so that the average performances displayed by the funds during their incubation period are inflated.
AIFMD also introduced a "passport" for hedge funds authorised in one EU country to operate throughout the EU.
According to ''Absolute Return + Alpha'', in 2011 the mean total compensation for all hedge fund investment professionals was $690,786 and the median compensation was $312,329.
Hedge funds share many of the same types of risk as other investment classes, including liquidity risk and manager risk.
An event-driven investment strategy finds investment opportunities in corporate transactional events such as consolidations, acquisitions, recapitalizations, bankruptcies, and liquidations.
Other relative value sub-strategies include:
However, in practice board members may lack sufficient expertise to be effective in performing those duties.
(As it happens, no financial assistance was provided to LTCM by the US Federal Reserve, so there was no direct cost to US taxpayers, but a large bailout had to be mounted by a number of financial institutions.)
The U.S. regulations and restrictions that apply to hedge funds differ from its mutual funds.
The investment manager, usually based in a major financial center, pays tax on its management fees per the tax laws of the state and country where it is located.
Hedge fund legal structures vary depending on location and the investor(s).
The scope of AIFMD is broad and encompasses managers located within the EU as well as non-EU managers that market their funds to European investors.
Service providers include prime brokers, banks, administrators, distributors and accounting firms.
Large institutional investors such as hedge funds are more likely to pursue event-driven investing strategies than traditional equity investors because they have the expertise and resources to analyze corporate transactional events for investment opportunities.
These types of strategies have a greater exposure to the fluctuations of the overall market than do market neutral strategies.
The hedge fund's prospectus, also known as an offering memorandum, offers potential investors information about key aspects of the fund, including the fund's investment strategy, investment type, and leverage limit.
