On 21 April, Himmler met with Norbert Masur, a Swedish representative of the World Jewish Congress, to discuss the release of Jewish concentration camp inmates.
Children who passed muster at first but were later rejected were taken to a ghetto in Łódź, where most of them eventually died.
Himmler visited the camp at Sobibór in early 1943, by which time 250,000 people had been killed at that location alone.
During his second year at university, Himmler redoubled his attempts to pursue a military career.
With the SA thus neutralised, the SS became an independent organisation answerable only to Hitler on 20 July 1934.
The couple did unite for social functions; they were frequent guests at the Heydrich home.
Himmler was interested in mysticism and the occult from an early age.
However, he—like other top Nazi officials—had aspirations to one day succeed Hitler as leader of the Reich.
As a result, instead of deportation, many Jews in Europe were destined for death.
Heydrich began to racially classify the Czechs, deporting many to concentration camps.
Along with Interior Minister Frick, they hoped to create a unified German police force.
Working as a nurse for the German Red Cross during the war, Margarete was appointed supervisor in Military District III (Berlin-Brandenburg).
He maintained that he was entitled to a position in Dönitz' interim government as ''Reichsführer-SS'', believing the SS would be in a good position to restore and maintain order after the war.
He declared that no drop of German blood would be lost or left behind to mingle with an "alien race".
The two men had a good working relationship and a mutual respect.
Members of a swelling resistance were shot, earning Heydrich the nickname "the Butcher of Prague".
On 1 August 1934, Hitler's cabinet passed a law which stipulated that upon von Hindenburg's death, the office of president would be abolished and its powers merged with those of the chancellor.
Germany subsequently invaded Denmark and Norway, the Netherlands, and France, and began bombing Great Britain in preparation for an invasion.
Spain and Italy also provided men for Waffen-SS units.
Death tolls were high.
The grave's location remains unknown.
In 1931 he appointed Reinhard Heydrich chief of the new Ic Service (intelligence service), which was renamed the ''Sicherheitsdienst'' (SD: Security Service) in 1932.
In 1923–24, Himmler, while searching for a world view, came to abandon Catholicism and focused on the occult and in antisemitism.
All regalia and uniforms of Nazi Germany, particularly those of the SS, used symbolism in their design.
Himmler was taken to the headquarters of the Second British Army in Lüneburg, where Doctor Wells conducted a medical exam on him.
Röhm had socialist and populist views, and believed that the real revolution had not yet begun.
Margarete saw it as her duty to invite the wives of the senior SS leaders over for afternoon coffee and tea on Wednesday afternoons.
Hitler removed Fromm from his post and named Himmler as his successor.
Himmler's title of ''Reichsführer-SS'' became the highest formal SS rank, equivalent to a field marshal in the army.
His brother, Gebhard, served on the western front and saw combat, receiving the Iron Cross and eventually being promoted to lieutenant.
Most of them were Polish and Soviet citizens.
As facilitator and overseer of the concentration camps, Himmler directed the killing of some six million Jews, between 200,000 and 500,000 Romani people, and other victims; the total number of civilians killed by the regime is estimated at eleven to fourteen million people.
At a military briefing on that day, Hitler stated that he would not be leaving Berlin, in spite of Soviet advances.
In accordance with German racial laws, sexual relations between Germans and foreigners were forbidden as ''Rassenschande'' (race defilement).
On the evening of 28 April, the BBC broadcast a Reuters news report about Himmler's attempted negotiations with the western Allies.
He sent Göring to Berlin on 29 June, to meet with Himmler and Heydrich to plan the action.
Himmler also later obtained a large house in the Berlin suburb of Dahlem, free of charge, as an official residence.
In August 1941, Himmler attended the shooting of 100 Jews at Minsk.
As the Germans were pushed back from Moscow in December 1941, signalling that the invasion of the Soviet Union had failed, Hitler and other Nazi officials realised that mass deportations to the east would no longer be possible.
Disappointed by his failure to make a career in the military and his parents' inability to finance his doctoral studies, he was forced to take a low-paying office job after obtaining his agricultural diploma.
In the testament, completed on 29 April—one day prior to his suicide—Hitler declared both Himmler and Göring to be traitors.
At the age of 16 he joined the SS in Brno and shortly afterwards went "into battle", He was captured by the Russians but later returned to Germany and lived in North Germany.
Authorised by Hitler and under the direction of Himmler and Heydrich, the ''Einsatzgruppen'' units—now repurposed as death squads—followed the ''Heer'' (army) into Poland, and by the end of 1939 they had murdered some 65,000 intellectuals and other civilians.
This suggestion met with some support from the British Home Office.
From mid-1924 he worked under Gregor Strasser as a party secretary and propaganda assistant.
He was known to have good organisational skills and for selecting highly competent subordinates, such as Reinhard Heydrich in 1931.
He also claimed very high survival rates for the camps at Auschwitz and Bergen-Belsen, even as these sites were liberated and it became obvious that his figures were false.
To this end, administrator Oswald Pohl set up the ''Deutsche Wirtschaftsbetriebe'' (German Economic Enterprise) in 1940.
Between 85 and 200 members of the SA leadership and other political adversaries, including Gregor Strasser, were killed between 30 June and 2 July 1934 in these actions, known as the Night of the Long Knives.
After witnessing a gassing, he gave 28 people promotions, and ordered the operation of the camp to be wound down.
On 27 April Himmler's SS representative at Hitler's HQ in Berlin, Hermann Fegelein, was caught in civilian clothes preparing to desert; he was arrested and brought back to the ''Führerbunker''.
Himmler socialised almost exclusively with other members of the SS.
Upon the resignation of SS commander Erhard Heiden in January 1929, Himmler assumed the position of ''Reichsführer-SS'' with Hitler's approval; he still carried out his duties at propaganda headquarters.
By that time, the inner circle of people which Hitler trusted was rapidly shrinking.
Bormann used his position to control the flow of information and access to Hitler, earning him enemies, including Himmler.
Himmler modified a variety of existing customs to emphasise the elitism and central role of the SS; an SS naming ceremony was to replace baptism, marriage ceremonies were to be altered, a separate SS funeral ceremony was to be held in addition to Christian ceremonies, and SS-centric celebrations of the summer and winter solstice were instituted.
Margarete, by then living in Gmund with her daughter, learned of the relationship sometime in 1941; she and Himmler were already separated, and she decided to tolerate the relationship for the sake of her daughter.
As a result of these negotiations, about 20,000 people were released in the White Buses operation.
Under pressure from Hitler over the worsening military situation, Himmler became anxious and unable to give him coherent reports.
He studied agronomy in college, and joined the Nazi Party in 1923 and the SS in 1925.
Himmler's first leadership position in the SS was that of ''SS-Gauführer'' (district leader) in Lower Bavaria from 1926.
At least 1,300 people were executed by firing squads.
The SS, initially part of the much larger SA, was formed in 1923 for Hitler's personal protection, and was re-formed in 1925 as an elite unit of the SA.
Within five days, tanks of the Red Army had reached the Baltic, trapping the German forces, who sought to escape by sea.
The ''Totenkopf'' (death's head) symbol, used by German military units for hundreds of years, had been chosen for the SS by Schreck.
Gudrun emerged from the experience embittered by her alleged mistreatment and has remained devoted to her father's memory.
Himmler was antisemitic by the time he went to university, but not exceptionally so; students at his school would avoid their Jewish classmates.
It called for the Baltic States, Poland, western Ukraine, and Byelorussia to be conquered and resettled by ten million German citizens.
On 1 January 1945 Hitler and his generals launched Operation North Wind (''Unternehmen Nordwind'').
The SA was converted into a sports and training organisation.
He was dead within 15 minutes.
In early 1945, the German war effort was on the verge of collapse and Himmler's relationship with Hitler had deteriorated.
Shortly thereafter, Himmler created the ''Kriminalpolizei'' (Kripo: criminal police) as the umbrella organisation for all criminal investigation agencies in Germany.
He again placed Heydrich in command.
Hyperinflation was raging, and his parents could no longer afford to educate all three sons.
Historian Peter Padfield opined that "Himmler&nbsp;... appeared the most powerful man under Hitler.
From the east, the highest number of men came from Lithuania (50,000) and the lowest from Bulgaria (600).
This move gave Himmler operational control over Germany's entire detective force.
By this time, Hitler had appointed Himmler as Minister of the Interior and Plenipotentiary General for Administration (''Generalbevollmächtigter für die Verwaltung'').
Himmler attempted to go into hiding, but was detained and then arrested by British forces once his identity became known.
On 6 June 1944 the Western Allied armies landed in northern France during Operation Overlord.
Nazi racial policies, including the notion that people who were racially inferior had no right to live, date back to the earliest days of the party; Hitler discusses this in ''Mein Kampf''.
He appointed Darré as its first chief, with the rank of SS-''Gruppenführer''.
Himmler's diary, which he kept intermittently from the age of ten, shows that he took a keen interest in current events, dueling, and "the serious discussion of religion and sex".
Himmler was a main architect of the Holocaust, using his deep belief in the racist Nazi ideology to justify the murder of millions of victims.
In 1915, he began training with the Landshut Cadet Corps.
The stylized lightning bolt logo of the SS was chosen in 1932.
In March 1933, less than three months after the Nazis seized power, Himmler set up the first official concentration camp at Dachau.
The plan would have extended the border of Germany a thousand kilometres to the east (620 miles).
Hitler promoted and practised the ''Führerprinzip''.
Nominally under the authority of Himmler, the ''Waffen-SS'' developed a fully militarised structure of command and operations.
The coalition government of the Weimar Republic was unable to improve the economy, so many voters turned to the political extreme, which included the NSDAP.
That same year, Hitler promoted Himmler to the rank of SS-''Obergruppenführer'', equal in rank to the senior SA commanders.
The Nazi Party's rise to power provided Himmler and the SS an unfettered opportunity to thrive.
Over the following two days, he was moved around to several camps and was brought to the British 31st Civilian Interrogation Camp near Lüneburg, on 23 May.
Himmler was not a member of Hitler's inner circle; the two men were not very close, and rarely saw each other socially.
Uniforms were issued for prisoners and guards alike; the guards' uniforms had a special ''Totenkopf'' (death's head) insignia on their collars.
By early 1941, following Himmler's orders, ten concentration camps had been constructed in which inmates were subjected to forced labour.
He began to collect statistics on the number of Jews, Freemasons, and enemies of the party, and following his strong need for control, he developed an elaborate bureaucracy.
He tied this interest into his racist philosophy, looking for proof of Aryan and Nordic racial superiority from ancient times.
The duty officer, Captain Thomas Selvester, began a routine interrogation.
Eicke devised a system that was used as a model for future camps throughout Germany.
He fathered two children with her: a son, Helge (born 15 February 1942) and a daughter, Nanette Dorothea (born 20 July 1944 at Berchtesgaden).
The "racially valuable" children were to be removed from all contact with Poles, and raised as Germans, with German names.
By January 1943, Himmler reported that 629,000 ethnic Germans had been resettled; however, most resettled Germans did not live in the envisioned small farms, but in temporary camps or quarters in towns.
Heinrich Luitpold Himmler was born in Munich on 7 October 1900 into a conservative middle-class Roman Catholic family.
Himmler instructed that the German nation should view all foreign workers brought to Germany as a danger to their German blood.
Himmler declared, "We have faith above all in this our own blood, which has flowed into a foreign nationality through the vicissitudes of German history.
Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany by President Paul von Hindenburg on 30 January 1933, heading a short-lived coalition of his Nazis and the German National People's Party.
He attended a grammar school in Landshut, where his father was deputy principal.
He was questioned by the police about his role in the putsch, but was not charged because of insufficient evidence.
As was typical in the NSDAP, he had considerable freedom of action in his post, which increased over time.
This included Jews, Gypsies, communists, and those persons of any other cultural, racial, political, or religious affiliation deemed by the Nazis to be ''Untermensch'' (sub-human).
In June 1942, Heydrich was assassinated in Prague in an operation led by Jozef Gabčík and Jan Kubiš, members of Czechoslovakia's army-in-exile who had been trained by the British Special Operations Executive.
If any non-Aryan forebears were found in either family tree during the racial investigation, the person concerned was excluded from the SS.
With a small band of companions, he headed south on 11 May to Friedrichskoog, without a final destination in mind.
Himmler's racial groupings began with the ''Volksliste'', the classification of people deemed of German blood.
Hitler had stated that he did not want it to be just another prison or detention camp.
In the 1932 election, the Nazis won 37.3 percent of the vote and 230 seats in the Reichstag.
Although he was not successful, he was able to extend his involvement in the paramilitary scene in Munich.
, a research society founded by Himmler in 1935, conducted research all over the globe to look for proof of the superiority and ancient origins of the Germanic race.
Shortly afterward, Himmler's body was buried in an unmarked grave near Lüneburg.
After 1943 most men from the east were conscripts.
Initially the victims were killed with gas vans or by firing squad, but these methods proved impracticable for an operation of this scale.
The couple saw little of each other as Himmler became totally absorbed by work.
Röhm lobbied Hitler to appoint him Minister of Defence, a position held by conservative General Werner von Blomberg.
A second goal was the elimination of those considered racially inferior, particularly the Jews and Slavs, from territories controlled by the Reich.
He also gained authority over all of Germany's uniformed law enforcement agencies, which were amalgamated into the new ''Ordnungspolizei'' (Orpo: "order police"), which became a branch of the SS under Daluege.
Accordingly, Himmler placed himself in a position of subservience to Hitler, and was unconditionally obedient to him.
The ancient Sowilō rune originally symbolized the sun, but was renamed as "Sig" (victory) in List's iconography.
Göring, concerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to use the Gestapo effectively to counteract the power of the SA, handed over its control to Himmler on 20 April 1934.
Hitler left it to Himmler and Heydrich to work out the arrangements with Frick.
Panzer general Heinz Guderian considered Himmler's appointment "idiocy" and regarded the officers Himmler chose to organize the defense as "uniformly incapable of performing their allotted tasks".
Seven years his senior, she was a nurse who shared his interest in herbal medicine and homoeopathy, and was part owner of a small private clinic.
From 1943 onwards, he was both Chief of German Police and Minister of the Interior, overseeing all internal and external police and security forces, including the Gestapo (Secret State Police).
Himmler was one of the most powerful men in Nazi Germany and one of the people most directly responsible for the Holocaust.
During the negotiations, Himmler falsely claimed that the crematoria had been built to deal with the dead from a typhus epidemic.
Himmler took over leadership of the RSHA and stepped up the pace of the killing of Jews in ''Aktion Reinhard'' (Operation Reinhard), named in Heydrich's honour.
When Röhm refused to kill himself, he was shot dead by two SS officers.
His strength lay in a combination of unusual shrewdness, burning ambition, and servile loyalty to Hitler."
Hitler was sent frequent reports.
However, Göring sent a telegram a few hours earlier, asking permission to take over the leadership of the ''Reich''—an act that Hitler, under the prodding of Martin Bormann, interpreted as a demand to step down or face a coup.
Pohl was unscrupulous and quickly exploited the companies for personal gain.
He had not made extensive preparations for this, but he had equipped himself with a forged paybook under the name of Sergeant Heinrich Hitzinger.
Himmler appointed Heydrich commander of Department IV, the political police.
As he learned more about Hitler through his reading, he began to regard him as a useful face of the party, and he later admired and even worshipped him.
Hitler used populist rhetoric, including blaming scapegoats—particularly the Jews—for the economic hardships.
Himmler expected that each SS marriage should produce at least four children, thus creating a pool of genetically superior prospective SS members.
The ''Einsatzgruppen'' (SS task forces) had been originally formed by Heydrich to secure government papers and offices in areas taken over by Germany before World War II.
Hitler decided on 21 June that Röhm and the SA leadership had to be eliminated.
The Nazis planned to kill Polish intellectuals and restrict non-Germans in the General Government and conquered territories to a fourth-grade education.
As head of the Reserve Army, Himmler was now responsible for prisoners of war.
Hitler, who had long believed Himmler was second only to Joseph Goebbels in loyalty—calling Himmler "''der treue Heinrich''" (the loyal Heinrich)—flew into a rage about this apparent betrayal.
As an agronomist and farmer Himmler was acquainted with the principles of selective breeding, which he proposed to apply to humans.
It was at this time that he first met Ernst Röhm, an early member of the Nazi Party and co-founder of the ''Sturmabteilung'' ("Storm Battalion"; SA).
Thereafter, Himmler and Heydrich took over the political police of state after state; soon only Prussia was controlled by Göring.
Bernadotte asked Himmler to put his proposal in writing, and Himmler obliged.
He stripped Himmler of all of his party and state offices and expelled him from the Nazi Party.
Less than a month later, the Reichstag building was set on fire.
Himmler considered Speer to be an especially dangerous rival, both in the Reich administration and as a potential successor to Hitler.
The incidents were then used in Nazi propaganda to justify the invasion of Poland, the opening event of World War II.
His masseur, Felix Kersten, who had moved to Sweden, acted as an intermediary in negotiations with Count Folke Bernadotte, head of the Swedish Red Cross.
Himmler and Heydrich wanted to extend the power of the SS; thus, they urged Hitler to form a national police force overseen by the SS, to guard Nazi Germany against its many enemies at the time—real and imagined.
Hitler thus intended to prevent internal friction like that occurring earlier in Poland in 1939, when several German Army generals had attempted to bring ''Einsatzgruppen'' leaders to trial for the murders they had committed.
Himmler was close to his first daughter, Gudrun, whom he nicknamed ''Püppi'' ("dolly"); he phoned her every few days and visited as often as he could.
Other boys at the school later remembered him as studious and awkward in social situations.
Since the Reserve Army consisted of two million men, Himmler hoped to draw on these reserves to fill posts within the Waffen-SS.
From 1919 to 1922, he studied agronomy at the Munich ''Technische Hochschule'' (now Technical University Munich) following a brief apprenticeship on a farm and a subsequent illness.
By the end of the war, at least 5.5 million Jews had been killed by the Nazi regime; most estimates range closer to six million.
The remainder were killed.
Margarete's diaries reveal that Gerhard had to leave the National Political Educational Institute in Berlin because of poor results.
Hitler's leadership style was to give contradictory orders to subordinates and to place them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped with those of others.
In September 1927, Himmler told Hitler of his vision to transform the SS into a loyal, powerful, racially pure elite unit.
Himmler and Heydrich had greater bargaining power, as they were allied with Frick's old enemy, Göring.
He wrote a letter on 6 May—two days before the German Instrument of Surrender—formally dismissing Himmler from all his posts.
He believed that he could engineer the German populace, for example, through eugenics, to be Nordic in appearance within several decades of the end of the war.
He decided that alternate methods of killing should be found.
He had poor health, suffering from lifelong stomach complaints and other ailments.
The whole of Germany is looking to him."
All males aged sixteen to sixty were eligible for conscription into this militia, over the protests of Armaments Minister Albert Speer, who noted that irreplaceable skilled workers were being removed from armaments production.
In a revolt that October, prisoners killed most of the guards and SS personnel, and 300 prisoners escaped.
Operation Solstice, an attack from Pomerania against the northern flank of Marshal Georgy Zhukov's 1st Belarusian Front, was launched on 16 February 1945, but could make little headway against Pavel Alexeyevich Belov's 61st Army and Semyon Bogdanov's 2nd Guards Tank Army.
Himmler's belief that "it is in the nature of German blood to resist" led to his conclusion that Balts or Slavs who resisted Germanization were racially superior to more compliant ones.
Strasser appointed Himmler deputy propaganda chief in January 1927.
Historian Adrian Weale comments that Himmler and the SS followed Hitler's policies, without question or ethical considerations.
Heydrich arranged a meeting, held on 20 January 1942 at Wannsee, a suburb of Berlin.
Under the auspices of the SS Economy and Administration Head Office, this holding company owned housing corporations, factories, and publishing houses.
These laws were among the first race-based measures instituted by the Third Reich.
After the war, Himmler completed his grammar-school education.
This event would set Himmler on a life of politics.
In 1929, he was appointed ''Reichsführer-SS'' by Hitler.
The train had only one telephone line, inadequate maps, and no signal detachment or radios with which to establish communication and relay military orders.
Letters were exchanged between the two men, and direct meetings were arranged by Walter Schellenberg of the RSHA.
Because of severe shortages in weapons and equipment and lack of training, members of the ''Volkssturm'' were poorly prepared for combat, and about 175,000 of them lost their lives in the final months of the war.
They were brought to Nuremberg to testify at the trials and were released in November 1946.
Speer refused to accept Himmler's offer of the high rank of SS-Oberst-Gruppenführer, as he felt to do so would put him in Himmler's debt and obligate him to allow Himmler a say in armaments production.
Heydrich calculated the number of Jews to be killed at 11 million, and told the attendees that Hitler had placed Himmler in charge of the plan.
Thus, the camps became a mechanism for social and racial engineering.
These hopes were wildly optimistic.
Though Himmler was embarrassed by his failure to uncover the plot, it led to an increase in his powers and authority.
