Killed in battle while protecting his father from Memnon.
Artemis was enraged by a sacrilegious act of the Greeks, and only the sacrifice of Agamemnon's daughter, Iphigenia, could appease her.
* '''Amphimachus''' – Son of Cteatus.
* '''Ajax''' (AKA Ajax the Lesser or Locrian Ajax) – Son of Oileus.
Claude Calame and other scholars try to analyze the affinity between the cults of Helen and Artemis Orthia, pointing out the resemblance of the terracotta female figurines offered to both deities.
Artists of the 1460s and 1470s were influenced by Guido delle Colonne's ''Historia destructionis Troiae'', where Helen's abduction was portrayed as a scene of seduction.
* Edmunds, ''Helen's Divine Origins'', 7–8
He had demanded that only he should slay his unfaithful wife; but, when he was ready to do so, she dropped her robe from her shoulders, and the sight of her beauty caused him to let the sword drop from his hand.
* Allan, ''Introduction'', 14–16; Calame, ''Choruses of Young Women'', 192–197; Pomeroy, ''Spartan Women'', 114–118
In medieval illustrations, this event was frequently portrayed as a seduction, whereas in Renaissance painting it is usually depicted as a rape by Paris.
In Virgil's ''Aeneid'', Deiphobus gives an account of Helen's treacherous stance: when the Trojan Horse was admitted into the city, she feigned Bacchic rites, leading a chorus of Trojan women, and, holding a torch among them, she signaled to the Greeks from the city's central tower.
None of the etymological sources appear to support the existence, save as a coincidence only, of a connection between the name of Helen and the name by which the classical Greeks commonly described themselves, namely ''Hellenic'' or ''Hellenistic'', after Hellen (; ) the mythological progenitor of the Greeks.
Her beauty inspired artists of all time to represent her, frequently as the personification of ideal beauty.
However, Helen was sought by many suitors, who came from far and near, among them Paris who surpassed all the others and won the favor of Tyndareus and his sons.
Before this journey, Paris had been appointed by Zeus to judge the most beautiful goddess; Hera, Athena, or Aphrodite.
Megapenthes was a son of Menelaus by his concubine Tereis, no further origin.
* '''Polypoetes''' – Son of Pirithous.
* '''Podalirius''' – Son of Asclepius, brother of Machaon.
Killed in battle by Deiphobus.
* Hughes, ''Helen of Troy'', 220; Suzuki, ''Metamorphoses of Helen'', 99–100.
They say that this Polyxo desired to avenge the death of Tlepolemus on Helen, now that she had her in her power.
Helen is frequently depicted on Athenian vases as being threatened by Menelaus and fleeing from him.
* '''Leitus''' – Son of Alector
Helen is also conjured by Faust in Goethe's ''Faust''.
* Hard & Rose, ''The Roudlegde Handbook'', 438–439
Killed in battle by Eurypylus (the son of Telephus).
The swan gained her affection, and the two mated.
Other accounts have a treacherous Helen who simulates Bacchic rites and rejoices in the carnage.
When it was time for Helen to marry, many kings and princes from around the world came to seek her hand, bringing rich gifts with them, or sent emissaries to do so on their behalf.
Zeus also transformed himself into a goose and mated with Nemesis, who produced an egg from which Helen was born.
At Sparta, the urban sanctuary of Helen was located near the Platanistas, so called for the plane trees planted there.
As a sign of the importance of the pact, Tyndareus sacrificed a horse.
Leda then produced an egg, from which Helen emerged.
There are three available and not entirely consistent lists of suitors, compiled by Pseudo-Apollodorus (31 suitors), Hesiod (11 suitors), and Hyginus (36 suitors), for a total of 45 distinct names.
With Leonteus, he led 40 ships of the Lapiths to Troy.
Recent archaeological excavations in Greece suggest that modern-day Laconia was a distinct territory in the Late Bronze Age, while the poets narrate that it was a rich kingdom.
After the death of Hector and Paris, Helen became the paramour of their younger brother, Deiphobus; but when the sack of Troy began, she hid her new husband's sword, and left him to the mercy of Menelaus and Odysseus.
It has also been suggested that the λ of  arose from an original ν, and thus the etymology of the name is connected with the root of ''Venus''.
He thus promised to solve the problem, if Tyndareus in turn would support him in his courting of Penelope, the daughter of Icarius.
Led 40 ships to Troy.
Despite its name, both the shrine and the cult originally belonged to Helen; Menelaus was added later as her husband.
* '''Thoas''' – He led 40 ships from Aetolia to Troy.
In ''Odyssey'', however, Homer narrates a different story: Helen circled the Horse three times, and she imitated the voices of the Greek women left behind at home—she thus tortured the men inside (including Odysseus and Menelaus) with the memory of their loved ones, and brought them to the brink of destruction.
In her youth she was abducted by Theseus.
In most sources, Iphigeneia is the daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, but Duris of Samos and other writers followed Stesichorus' account.
* '''Diomedes''' – Son of Tydeus.
One of the Epigoni, he went with Diomedes to Troy.
An oath sworn beforehand by all the suitors (known as the Oath of Tyndareus) requires them to provide military assistance in the case of her abduction; this oath culminates in the Trojan War.
Pausanias traveled to Sparta to visit the sanctuary, dedicated to Hilaeira and Phoebe, in order to see the relic for himself.
Those three authors are Euripides, Stesichorus, and Herodotus.
* '''Polyxenus''' – Son of Agasthenes.
* '''Elephenor''' – Son of Chalcodon.
* '''Prothous''' – He led 40 ships from Magnetes to Troy.
* '''Lycomedes''' – a Cretan.
'''Nineteen Suitors listed by both Apollodorus and Hyginus'''
Tlepolemus was a son of Heracles and Astyoche.
In Pre-Raphaelite art, Helen is often shown with shining curly hair and ringlets.
In contrast, on Athenian vases of c.&nbsp;550–470, Menelaus threateningly points his sword at her.
The abduction by Paris was another popular motif in ancient Greek vase-painting; definitely more popular than the kidnapping by Theseus.
Led 12 ships from Ithaca to Troy.
The fall of Troy came to represent a fall from an illustrious heroic age, remembered for centuries in oral tradition before being written down.
* '''Podarces''' – The younger brother of Protesilaus.
Enlèvement d'Hélène, Reni (Louvre INV 539) 09.jpg|In Guido Reni's homonymous painting (1631, Louvre, Paris), however, Paris holds Helen by her wrist, and leave together for Troia.
In most sources, including the ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey'', Helen is the daughter of Zeus and Leda, and the wife of the Spartan king Menelaus.
He was the first Greek to die in battle at the hands of Hector.
She was also worshiped in Attica, and on Rhodes.
* '''Menelaus''' – Son of Atreus.
'''Six Suitors listed in all three sources'''
The major centers of Helen's cult were in Laconia.
The marriage of Helen and Menelaus marks the beginning of the end of the age of heroes.
'''One Suitor listed by Hesiod and Hyginus'''
Led 40 ships to Troy, drowned on the way home when Poseidon split the rock he was on.
Ultimately, Paris was killed in action, and in Homer's account Helen was reunited with Menelaus, though other versions of the legend recount her ascending to Olympus instead.
Before the opening of hostilities, the Greeks dispatched a delegation to the Trojans under Odysseus and Menelaus; they endeavored to persuade Priam to hand Helen back without success.
* Cyrino, "Helen of Troy", 133–134
Theseus took Helen and left her with his mother Aethra or his associate Aphidnus at Aphidnae or Athens.
''The Rape of Helen'' by Francesco Primaticcio (c.&nbsp;1530–1539, Bowes Museum) is representative of this tradition.
Her mythological birthplace was Sparta of the Age of Heroes, which features prominently in the canon of Greek myth: in later ancient Greek memory, the Mycenaean Bronze Age became the age of the Greek heroes.
Thus, Helen waited in Memphis for ten years, while the Greeks and the Trojans fought.
Although Helen is sometimes depicted as being raped by Paris, Ancient Greek sources are often elliptical and contradictory.
Went with his father and 90 ships to Troy.
In the ''Florentine Picture Chronicle'' Paris and Helen are shown departing arm in arm, while their marriage was depicted into Franco-Flemish tapestry.
Concluding the catalog of Helen's suitors, Hesiod reports Zeus' plan to obliterate the race of men and the heroes in particular.
Paris, a Trojan prince, came to Sparta to claim Helen, in the guise of a supposed diplomatic mission.
Sextus Propertius imagines Helen as a girl who practices arms and hunts with her brothers:* Cairns, ''Sextus Propertius'', 421–422; Hughes, ''Helen of Troy'', 60; Pomeroy, ''Spartan Women'', 28: "In the Roman period, because Sparta was a destination for tourists, the characteristics that made Sparta distinctive were emphasized.
* '''Sthenelus''' – Son of Capaneus.
Homer narrates that during a brief stop-over in the small island of Kranai, according to ''Iliad'', the two lovers consummated their passion.
She is filled with self-distaste and regret for what she has caused; by the end of the war, the Trojans have come to hate her.
On the other hand, ''Cypria'' note that this happened the night before they left Sparta.
Thus he won her fairly and took her away to Troia, with the full consent of her natural protectors.
In the form of a swan, the king of gods was chased by an eagle, and sought refuge with Leda.
Led 40 ships from Phylace to Troy.
Martin F. Nilsson has argued that the cult in Rhodes has its roots to the Minoan, pre-Greek era, when Helen was allegedly worshiped as a vegetation goddess.
Helen's abduction caused an invasion of Athens by Castor and Pollux, who captured Aethra in revenge, and returned their sister to Sparta.
When Hector dies, she is the third mourner at his funeral, and she says that, of all the Trojans, Hector and Priam alone were always kind to her:* Hughes, ''Helen of Troy'', 219; Redfold, ''The Tragedy of Hector'', 122
* '''Meges''' – Son of Phyleus.
Excavations made from the early 1990s to the present suggest that the area around Menelaion in the southern part of the Eurotas valley seems to have been the center of Mycenaean Laconia.
After the suitors had sworn not to retaliate, Menelaus was chosen to be Helen's husband.
'''Ten Suitors listed only by Hyginus'''
Led 40 ships from Thessaly to Troy.
File:Tintoretto Rape of Helen.jpg|''The Rape of Helen'' by Tintoretto (1578–1579, Museo del Prado, Madrid); Helen languishes in the corner of a land-sea battle scene.
The ancient world starts to paint Helen's picture or inscribe her form on stone, clay and bronze by the 7th century BC.
This is not, however, the case with certain secular medieval illustrations.
They say that when Menelaus was dead, and Orestes still a wanderer, Helen was driven out by Nicostratus and Megapenthes and came to Rhodes, where she had a friend in Polyxo, the wife of Tlepolemus.
Tlepolemus was killed by Sarpedon on the first day of fighting in the ''Iliad''.
'''One Suitor listed by Apollodorus and Hesiod'''
Dio Chrysostom gives a completely different account of the story, questioning Homer's credibility: after Agamemnon had married Helen's sister, Klytaemnestra, Tyndareus sought Helen's hand for Menelaus on account of political reasons.
* '''Leonteus''' – Son of Coronos.
During the contest, Castor and Pollux had a prominent role in dealing with the suitors, although the final decision was in the hands of Tyndareus.
* Hughes, ''Helen of Troy'', 26–27
Ovid's ''Heroides'' give us an idea of how ancient and, in particular, Roman authors imagined Helen in her youth: she is presented as a young princess wrestling naked in the palaestra; an image alluding to a part of girls' physical education in classical (and not in Mycenaean) Sparta.
Hades pretended to offer them hospitality and set a feast, but, as soon as the pair sat down, snakes coiled around their feet and held them there.
An Argonaut and physician.
Homer depicts her as a wistful, even a sorrowful, figure, coming to regret her choice and wishing to be reunited with Menelaus.
The athleticism of women was exaggerated."
Nicostratus was a son of Menelaus by his concubine Pieris, an Aetolian slave.
Helen was also worshiped in Attica along with her brothers, and on Rhodes as Helen ''Dendritis'' (Helen of the Trees, Έλένα Δενδρῖτις); she was a vegetation or a fertility goddess.
* '''Patroclus''' – Son of Menoetius.
Herodotus states that Helen was abducted, but the ''Cypria'' simply mentions that, after giving Helen gifts, "Aphrodite brings the Spartan queen together with the Prince of Troy."
The first record of her name appears in the poems of Homer, but scholars assume that such myths invented or received by the Mycenaean Greeks made their way to Homer.
The Etruscans, who had a sophisticated knowledge of Greek mythology, demonstrated a particular interest in the theme of the delivery of Helen's egg, which is depicted in relief mirrors.
Linda Lee Clader, however, says that none of the above suggestions offers much satisfaction.
The etymology of Helen's name continues to be a problem for scholars.
The story of Zeuxis deals with this exact question: how would an artist immortalize ideal beauty?
From one side, we read about the treacherous Helen who simulated Bacchic rites and rejoiced over the carnage of Trojans.
* '''Machaon''' – Son of Asclepius, brother of Podalirius.
With Amphimachus, and Thalpius, he led 40 ships from Elis to Troy.
A cult associated with her developed in Hellenistic Laconia, both at Sparta and elsewhere; at Therapne she shared a shrine with Menelaus.
* '''Ajax''' – Son of Telamon.
Theseus and Pirithous then traveled to the underworld, the domain of Hades, to kidnap Persephone.
Paris returned to Troy without a new bride, but the Greeks refused to believe that Helen was in Egypt and not within Troy's walls.
Georg Curtius related ''Helen'' () to the moon (Selene ).
Odysseus was one of the suitors, but had brought no gifts because he believed he had little chance to win the contest.
In Greek mythology, '''Helen of Troy''' (Greek  ''Helénē'', ), also known as '''Helen of Sparta''', or simply '''Helen''', was the daughter of Zeus and Leda, and was a sister of Castor, Pollux, and Clytemnestra.
However, Helen's portraits in Troy seem to contradict each other.
File:Francesco Primaticcio 003.jpg|In western painting, Helen's journey to Troy is usually depicted as a forced abduction.
Led 7 ships from Thessaly to Troy, he was an archer and killed Paris.
By marriage she was Queen of Laconia, a province within Homeric Greece, the wife of King Menelaus.
Later sources state either that it was brought to Leda by a shepherd who discovered it in a grove in Attica, or that it was dropped into her lap by Hermes.
A competition between her suitors for her hand in marriage sees Menelaus emerge victorious.
* '''Teucer''' – The half-brother of Ajax.
Led 80 ships to Troy.
A curious fate is recounted by Pausanias the geographer (3.19.11–13), which has Helen share the afterlife with Achilles.
A popular theme, ''The Request of Helen'' (Helenes Apaitesis, Ἑλένης Ἀπαίτησις), was the subject of a drama by Sophocles, now lost.
Presumably, in the ''Cypria'', this egg was somehow transferred to Leda.
These mansions that were destroyed, by an earthquake and by fire, are considered by archaeologists to be the possible palace of Menelaus and Helen.
Émile Boisacq considered Ἑλένη to derive from the noun  meaning "torch".
He returned home to Sparta with Helen.
This is not the case, however, in Laconic art: on an Archaic stele depicting Helen's recovery after the fall of Troy, Menelaus is armed with a sword but Helen faces him boldly, looking directly into his eyes; and in other works of Peloponnesian art, Helen is shown carrying a wreath, while Menelaus holds his sword aloft vertically.
* '''Eurypylus''' – Son of Euaemon.
Commits suicide there.
Menelaus, her future husband, did not attend but sent his brother, Agamemnon, to represent him.
Theseus chose Helen, and Pirithous vowed to marry Persephone, the wife of Hades.
* Maguire, ''Helen of Troy'', 52 Electra wails:
Hera and Athena watch nearby.
In most accounts of this event, Helen was quite young; Hellanicus of Lesbos said she was seven years old and Diodorus makes her ten years old.
Tyndareus readily agreed, and Odysseus proposed that, before the decision was made, all the suitors should swear a most solemn oath to defend the chosen husband against whoever should quarrel with him.
According to these priests, Helen had arrived in Egypt shortly after leaving Sparta, because strong winds had blown Paris's ship off course.
Astyoche was a daughter of Phylas, King of Ephyra who was killed by Heracles.
Herodotus adds weight to the "Egyptian" version of events by putting forward his own evidence—he traveled to Egypt and interviewed the priests of the temple (''Foreign Aphrodite'', ξείνης Ἀφροδίτης) at Memphis.
Homer paints a poignant, lonely picture of Helen in Troy.
People believed that this was "the famous egg that legend says Leda brought forth".
Led 12 ships from Salamis to Troy.
He eventually selected the best features from five virgins.
Other painters of the same period depict Helen on the ramparts of Troy, and focus on her expression: her face is expressionless, blank, inscrutable.
With Amphimachus and Polyxenus, he led 40 ships from Elis to Troy.
* '''Thalpius''' – Son of Eurytus.
From Antiquity, depicting Helen would be a remarkable challenge.
* '''Ialmenus''' – Companion of Ascalaphus, who led 30 ships to Troy
* '''Ascalaphus''' – Son of Ares and King of Orchemenus.
Accompanied his younger cousin Achilles to Troy, where he was killed by Hector.
After Paris was killed in action, there was some dispute among the Trojans about which of Priam's surviving sons she should remarry: Helenus or Deiphobus, but she was given to the latter.
His wife took a lover and Diomedes lost his kingdom, so after the war he settled in Italy.
He is inspecting Aphrodite, who is standing naked before him.
Sappho argues that Helen willingly left behind Menelaus and their nine-year-old daughter, Hermione, to be with Paris:
The First Vatican Mythographer introduces the notion that two eggs came from the union: one containing Castor and Pollux; one with Helen and Clytemnestra.
* '''Agapenor''' – Son of Ancaeus, King of Arcadia.
Diomedes was one of the Epigoni and King of Argos.
On the other hand, Stesichorus said that Iphigeneia was the daughter of Theseus and Helen, which obviously implies that Helen was of childbearing age.
* '''Meriones''' – A companion of Idomeneus of Crete.
* Gantz, ''Early Greek Myth'', 320–321; Hughes, ''Helen of Troy'', 350; Moser, ''A Cosmos of Desire'', 443–444 Pseudo-Apollodorus states that Leda had intercourse with both Zeus and Tyndareus the night she conceived Helen.
In Gustave Moreau's painting, Helen will finally become faceless; a blank ''eidolon'' in the middle of Troy's ruins.
The Trojan War, caused by Helen's elopement with Paris, is going to be his means to this end.
Following the conclusion of the Trojan War, Menelaus sailed to Memphis, where Proteus reunited him with Helen.
Recent archeological excavations at the Menelaion uncovered several findings including two Mycenaean mansions.
With Polypoetes he led 40 ships of the Lapiths to Troy.
The date of the ''Cypria'' is uncertain, but it is generally thought to preserve traditions that date back to at least the 7th century&nbsp;BC.
* '''Menestheus''' – Son of Peteos.
* '''Ancaeus''' – son of King Lycurgus of Arcadia
In Simonianism, it was taught that Helen of Troy was one of the incarnations of the ''Ennoia'' in human form.
Euripides' play ''Helen'', written in the late 5th century BC, is the earliest source to report the most familiar account of Helen's birth: that, although her putative father was Tyndareus, she was actually Zeus' daughter.
There are only fragments from Hesiod's poem, so his list would have contained more.
Swayed by Aphrodite's offer, Paris chose her as the most beautiful of the goddesses, earning the wrath of Athena and Hera.
Archaeologists have unsuccessfully looked for a Mycenaean palatial complex buried beneath present-day Sparta.
Clytemnestra (unsuccessfully) warns Agamemnon that sacrificing Iphigenia for Helen's sake is, "buying what we most detest with what we hold most dear".
At the time she was queen of the island, having been left with an orphan boy.
File:Enrique Simonet - El Juicio de Paris - 1904.jpg|''El Juicio de Paris'' by Enrique Simonet, c. 1904.
King Proteus of Egypt, appalled that Paris had seduced his host's wife and plundered his host's home in Sparta, disallowed Paris from taking Helen to Troy.
Pausanias the geographer has another story (3.19.9–10): "The account of the Rhodians is different.
He went with the Boetian force of 50 ships to Troy.
