Algeria quickly became the second leading producer of helium.
Inhaling helium directly from pressurized cylinders or even balloon filling valves is extremely dangerous, as high flow rate and pressure can result in barotrauma, fatally rupturing lung tissue.
Activated charcoal is used as a final purification step, usually resulting in 99.995% pure Grade-A helium.
In the perspective of quantum mechanics, helium is the second simplest atom to model, following the hydrogen atom.
Two new molecular species, predicted using theory, CsFHeO and N(CH3)4FHeO, are derivatives of a metastable F– HeO anion first theorized in 2005 by a group from Taiwan.
If the interior of the container is heated, the superfluid helium changes to non-superfluid helium.
This helium-nitrogen mixture was injected and stored in the Cliffside gas field until needed, at which time it was further purified.
Although the helium atoms are not attached by covalent or ionic bonds, these substances have distinct properties and a definite composition, like all stoichiometric chemical compounds.
Large amounts of new helium are being created by nuclear fusion of hydrogen in stars.
This technique has also produced the neutral molecule He2, which has a large number of band systems, and HgHe, which is apparently held together only by polarization forces.
Because the fundamental frequency of a gas-filled cavity is proportional to the speed of sound in the gas, when helium is inhaled there is a corresponding increase in the resonant frequencies of the vocal tract.
Most helium on Earth is a result of radioactive decay.
After hydrogen, helium is the second lightest and second most abundant element in the observable universe, being present at about 24% of the total elemental mass, which is more than 12 times the mass of all the heavier elements combined.
Solid helium has a density of 0.214&nbsp;±&nbsp;0.006&nbsp;g/cm3 at 1.15&nbsp;K and 66&nbsp;atm; the projected density at 0&nbsp;K and 25 bar (2.5 MPa) is 0.187&nbsp;±&nbsp;0.009&nbsp;g/cm3.
In this way an estimated 3000 metric tons of helium are generated per year throughout the lithosphere.
Like other cryogenic liquids, helium&nbsp;I boils when it is heated and contracts when its temperature is lowered.
Police have launched an investigation due to a neglect of safety measures.
On October 20 of the same year, English astronomer Norman Lockyer observed a yellow line in the solar spectrum, which he named the D3 Fraunhofer line because it was near the known D1 and D2 lines of sodium.
Helium can form unstable compounds, known as excimers, with tungsten, iodine, fluorine, sulfur, and phosphorus when it is subjected to a glow discharge, to electron bombardment, or reduced to plasma by other means.
The helium mass spectrometer was also vital in the atomic bomb Manhattan Project.
Nasdaq reported (2015) that for Air Products, an international corporation that sells gases for industrial use, helium volumes remain under pressure due to feedstock supply constraints.
Unlike most elements, helium's isotopic abundance varies greatly by origin, due to the different formation processes.
Trace amounts are also produced by the beta decay of tritium.
Theoretically, other true compounds may be possible, such as helium fluorohydride (HHeF) which would be analogous to HArF, discovered in 2000.
Liquid helium-4 can be cooled to about 1 kelvin using evaporative cooling in a 1-K pot.
It is a colorless, odorless, tasteless, non-toxic, inert, monatomic gas, the first in the noble gas group in the periodic table.
Helium has a negative Joule-Thomson coefficient at normal ambient temperatures, meaning it heats up when allowed to freely expand.
Helium's other industrial uses—as a pressurizing and purge gas, as a protective atmosphere for arc welding and in processes such as growing crystals to make silicon wafers—account for half of the gas produced.
In the Earth's atmosphere, the concentration of helium by volume is only 5.2 parts per million.
Helium is commercially available in either liquid or gaseous form.
This line was initially assumed to be sodium.
In a plasma, helium's electrons are not bound to its nucleus, resulting in very high electrical conductivity, even when the gas is only partially ionized.
Other major uses were pressurizing and purging systems, welding, maintenance of controlled atmospheres, and leak detection.
Liquid helium is used in cryogenics (its largest single use, absorbing about a quarter of production), particularly in the cooling of superconducting magnets, with the main commercial application being in MRI scanners.
However, the higher resonant frequencies cause a change in timbre, resulting in a reedy, duck-like vocal quality.
Liquid helium below its lambda point (called ''helium&nbsp;II'') exhibits very unusual characteristics.
As with the other noble gases, helium has metastable energy levels that allow it to remain ionized in an electrical discharge with a voltage below its ionization potential.
Another minor use is in rocketry, where helium is used as an ullage medium to displace fuel and oxidizers in storage tanks and to condense hydrogen and oxygen to make rocket fuel.
Current theory explains this using the ''two-fluid model'' for helium II.
The concentration is low and fairly constant despite the continuous production of new helium because most helium in the Earth's atmosphere escapes into space by several processes.
Helium has a valence of zero and is chemically unreactive under all normal conditions.
In 2004–2006, additional plants in Ras Laffan, Qatar, and Skikda, Algeria were built.
The inertness of helium has environmental advantages over conventional refrigeration systems which contribute to ozone depletion or global warming.
In 1882, Italian physicist Luigi Palmieri detected helium on Earth for the first time through its D3 spectral line, when he analyzed the lava of Mount Vesuvius.
In 1903, large reserves of helium were found in natural gas fields in parts of the United States, which is by far the largest supplier of the gas today.
Helium can be synthesized by bombardment of lithium or boron with high-velocity protons, but this process is a completely uneconomic method of production.
Van der Waals compounds of helium can also be formed with cryogenic helium gas and atoms of some other substance, such as LiHe and He2.
The staff of TV Asahi held an emergency press conference to communicate that the member had been taken to the hospital and is showing signs of rehabilitation such as moving eyes and limbs, but her consciousness has not been sufficiently recovered as of yet.
As a liquid, it can be supplied in small insulated containers called dewars which hold as much as 1,000 liters of helium, or in large ISO containers which have nominal capacities as large as 42&nbsp;m3 (around 11,000 U.S. gallons).
Because helium diffuses through solids three times faster than air, it is used as a tracer gas to detect leaks in high-vacuum equipment (such as cryogenic tanks) and high-pressure containers.
Helium-3 is present on Earth only in trace amounts; most of it since Earth's formation, though some falls to Earth trapped in cosmic dust.
Due to its high thermal conductivity, when it boils, it does not bubble but rather evaporates directly from its surface.
The helium that escapes through the leaks is detected by a sensitive device (helium mass spectrometer), even at the leak rates as small as 10−9 mbar·L/s (10−10 Pa·m3/s).
While balloons are perhaps the best known use of helium, they are a minor part of all helium use.
Unlike any other element, helium will remain liquid down to absolute zero at normal pressures.
The most common isotope, helium-4, is produced on Earth by alpha decay of heavier radioactive elements; the alpha particles that emerge are fully ionized helium-4 nuclei.
Solid helium requires a temperature of 1–1.5&nbsp;K (about −272&nbsp;°C or −457&nbsp;°F) and about 25 bar (2.5&nbsp;MPa) of pressure.
For example, when it flows through capillaries as thin as 10−7 to 10−8&nbsp;m it has no measurable viscosity.
Although it is rare on Earth, helium is the second most abundant element in the known Universe (after hydrogen), constituting 23% of its baryonic mass.
If confirmed by experiment, the only remaining element with no known stable compounds would be neon.
This radiogenic helium is trapped with natural gas in concentrations as great as 7% by volume, from which it is extracted commercially by a low-temperature separation process called fractional distillation.
Helium-7 also emits a beta particle as well as a gamma ray.
It was independently isolated from cleveite in the same year by chemists Per Teodor Cleve and Abraham Langlet in Uppsala, Sweden, who collected enough of the gas to accurately determine its atomic weight.
In scientific research, the behavior of the two fluid phases of helium-4 (helium&nbsp;I and helium&nbsp;II) is important to researchers studying quantum mechanics (in particular the property of superfluidity) and to those looking at the phenomena, such as superconductivity, produced in matter near absolute zero.
This may be an effect of its boiling point being so close to absolute zero, preventing random molecular motion (thermal energy) from masking the atomic properties.
This is necessary for applications requiring liquid helium and also allows helium suppliers to reduce the cost of long distance transportation, as the largest liquid helium containers have more than five times the capacity of the largest gaseous helium tube trailers.
Helium was primarily used as a lifting gas in lighter-than-air craft.
The speed of sound in helium is nearly three times the speed of sound in air.
For this ''helium conservation'' program, the Bureau built a  pipeline from Bushton, Kansas, to connect those plants with the government's partially depleted Cliffside gas field near Amarillo, Texas.
At high pressures (more than about 20&nbsp;atm or two&nbsp;MPa), a mixture of helium and oxygen (heliox) can lead to high-pressure nervous syndrome, a sort of reverse-anesthetic effect; adding a small amount of nitrogen to the mixture can alleviate the problem.
In gaseous form, small quantities of helium are supplied in high-pressure cylinders holding as much as 8 m3 (approx.
The shortest-lived heavy helium isotope is helium-5 with a half-life of .
A youth asphyxiated in Vancouver during 2003, and a 27-year-old man in Australia had an embolism after breathing from a cylinder in 2000.
This is because heat conduction occurs by an exceptional quantum mechanism.
Helium must be extracted from natural gas because it is present in air at only a fraction of that of neon, yet the demand for it is far higher.
In the Earth's crust, the concentration of helium is 8 parts per billion.
Ramsay was looking for argon but, after separating nitrogen and oxygen from the gas liberated by sulfuric acid, he noticed a bright yellow line that matched the D3 line observed in the spectrum of the Sun.
The first media-recorded case was that of a 15-year-old girl from Texas who died in 1998 from helium inhalation at a friend's party; the exact type of helium death is unidentified.
If helium-3 is used, it can be readily observed by helium nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Lockyer was the first to propose that the line was due to a new element, which he named.
This effect may be countered to some extent by adding an amount of narcotic gas such as hydrogen or nitrogen to a helium–oxygen mixture.
Helium&nbsp;I has a gas-like index of refraction of 1.026 which makes its surface so hard to see that floats of Styrofoam are often used to show where the surface is.
One industrial application for helium is leak detection.
Once precooled below this temperature, helium can be liquefied through expansion cooling.
The first evidence of helium was observed on August 18, 1868, as a bright yellow line with a wavelength of 587.49 nanometers in the spectrum of the chromosphere of the Sun.
In the Earth's heterosphere, a part of the upper atmosphere, helium and other lighter gases are the most abundant elements.
In seawater, the concentration is only 4 parts per trillion.
Helium is used for many purposes that require some of its unique properties, such as its low boiling point, low density, low solubility, high thermal conductivity, or inertness.
There are nine known isotopes of helium, but only helium-3 and helium-4 are stable.
Many fullerenes containing helium-3 have been reported.
For example, the Saturn V rocket used in the Apollo program needed about 370,000&nbsp;m3 (13 million cubic feet) of helium to launch.
Fatalities have been recorded, including a youth who suffocated in Vancouver in 2003 and two adults who suffocated in South Florida in 2006.
Most extraterrestrial helium is found in a plasma state, with properties quite different from those of atomic helium.
Helium use in the United States in 1965 was more than eight times the peak wartime consumption.
Calculations show that two new compounds containing a helium-oxygen bond could be stable.
His letter of congratulations to Ramsay offers an interesting case of discovery and near-discovery in science.
For large-scale use, helium is extracted by fractional distillation from natural gas, which can contain as much as 7% helium.
This is a direct effect of quantum mechanics: specifically, the zero point energy of the system is too high to allow freezing.
Helium produced between 1930 and 1945 was about 98.3% pure (2% nitrogen), which was adequate for airships.
Helium&nbsp;II also exhibits a creeping effect.
Because helium is trapped in the subsurface under conditions that also trap natural gas, the greatest natural concentrations of helium on the planet are found in natural gas, from which most commercial helium is extracted.
At 130&nbsp;GPa Na2He is thermodynamically stable with a fluorite structure.
According to helium conservationists like Nobel laureate physicist Robert Coleman Richardson, the free market price of helium has contributed to "wasteful" usage (e.g.
Thus in the interstellar medium, the proportion of  to  is about 100 times higher than on Earth.
Helium is named for the Greek god of the Sun, Helios.
The reserve was expected to run out of helium in 2018.
Thus, numerical mathematical methods are required, even to solve the system of one nucleus and two electrons.
The fundamental frequency (sometimes called pitch) does not change, since this is produced by direct vibration of the vocal folds, which is unchanged.
This colorless liquid has a very low viscosity and a density of 0.145–0.125 g/mL (between about 0 and 4 K), which is only one-fourth the value expected from classical physics.
From 2002 to 2007 helium prices doubled.
HeH+ is also stable in its ground state, but is extremely reactive—it is the strongest Brønsted acid known, and therefore can exist only in isolation, as it will protonate any molecule or counteranion it contacts.
A girl from Michigan died from hypoxia later in the year.
Helium-6 decays by emitting a beta particle and has a half-life of 0.8 second.
On February 4, 2015 it was revealed that during the recording of their main TV show on January 28, a 12-year-old member (name withheld) of Japanese all-girl singing group 3B Junior suffered from air embolism, losing consciousness and falling in a coma as a result of air bubbles blocking the flow of blood to the brain, after inhaling huge quantities of helium as part of a game.
Because of its inertness, thermally and calorically perfect nature, high speed of sound, and high value of the heat capacity ratio, it is also useful in supersonic wind tunnels and impulse facilities.
Helium&nbsp;II has no such valence band but nevertheless conducts heat well.
'''Helium''' is a chemical element with symbol '''He''' and atomic number 2.
The formal discovery of the element was made in 1895 by two Swedish chemists, Per Teodor Cleve and Nils Abraham Langlet, who found helium emanating from the uranium ore cleveite.
Helium-7 and helium-8 are created in certain nuclear reactions.
The principal impurity in Grade-A helium is neon.
Unless the container is carefully constructed, the helium&nbsp;II will creep along the surfaces and through valves until it reaches somewhere warmer, where it will evaporate.
For many years, the United States produced more than 90% of commercially usable helium in the world, while extraction plants in Canada, Poland, Russia, and other nations produced the remainder.
However, recent studies suggest that helium produced deep in the earth by radioactive decay can collect in natural gas reserves in larger than expected quantities, in some cases having been released by volcanic activity.
In 1945, a small amount of 99.9% helium was produced for welding use.
An estimated  of helium was detected in Tanzania in 2016.
In a final production step, most of the helium that is produced is liquefied via a cryogenic process.
After the "Helium Acts Amendments of 1960" (Public Law 86–777), the U.S. Bureau of Mines arranged for five private plants to recover helium from natural gas.
Helium is composed of two electrons in atomic orbitals surrounding a nucleus containing two protons and (usually) two neutrons.
It is estimated that if all neon production were retooled to save helium, that 0.1% of the world's helium demands would be satisfied.
In the United States, most helium is extracted from natural gas of the Hugoton and nearby gas fields in Kansas, Oklahoma, and the Panhandle Field in Texas.
The flow of heat is governed by equations that are similar to the wave equation used to characterize sound propagation in air.
In 1938, Russian physicist Pyotr Leonidovich Kapitsa discovered that helium-4 has almost no viscosity at temperatures near absolute zero, a phenomenon now called superfluidity.
For example, in the solar wind together with ionized hydrogen, the particles interact with the Earth's magnetosphere, giving rise to Birkeland currents and the aurora.
With further analysis, Cady and McFarland discovered that 1.84% of the gas sample was helium.
Diffusion of crude natural gas through special semipermeable membranes and other barriers is another method to recover and purify helium.
Similar cooling of helium-3, which has a lower boiling point, can achieve about  in a helium-3 refrigerator.
Its boiling point is the lowest among all the elements.
The government of the United States set up the National Helium Reserve in 1925 at Amarillo, Texas, with the goal of supplying military airships in time of war and commercial airships in peacetime.
At depths below  divers breathing helium–oxygen mixtures begin to experience tremors and a decrease in psychomotor function, symptoms of high-pressure nervous syndrome.
Hillebrand, however, attributed the lines to nitrogen.
Since helium has a lower boiling point than any other element, low temperature and high pressure are used to liquefy nearly all the other gases (mostly nitrogen and methane).
Janssen observed during the solar eclipse of 1868 while Lockyer observed from Britain.
Such computational chemistry methods have been used to create a quantum mechanical picture of helium electron binding which is accurate to within 4, SF6, and C4F8 have lower mole fraction solubilities: 0.3802, 0.4394, and 0.2372 x2/10−5, respectively, versus helium's 0.70797 x2/10−5), and helium's index of refraction is closer to unity than that of any other gas.
Meanwhile, by 2000, the consumption of helium within the U.S. had risen to more than 15 million kg per year.
These samples were identified as helium by Lockyer and British physicist William Crookes.
In 1972, the same phenomenon was observed in helium-3, but at temperatures much closer to absolute zero, by American physicists Douglas D. Osheroff, David M. Lee, and Robert C. Richardson.
Other uses by category were relatively minor fractions.
Extraplanetary material, such as lunar and asteroid regolith, have trace amounts of helium-3 from being bombarded by solar winds.
In stars, it is formed by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen in proton-proton chain reactions and the CNO cycle, part of stellar nucleosynthesis.
Helium as a breathing gas has no narcotic properties, so helium mixtures such as trimix, heliox and heliair are used for deep diving to reduce the effects of narcosis, which worsen with increasing depth.
In 2008, approximately 169 million standard cubic meters (SCM) of helium were extracted from natural gas or withdrawn from helium reserves with approximately 78% from the United States, 10% from Algeria, and most of the remainder from Russia, Poland and Qatar.
The molecular compounds HeNe, HgHe10, and WHe2, and the molecular ions , , , and  have been created this way.
However, when measurements were done between two moving discs, a viscosity comparable to that of gaseous helium was observed.
In the mid-1990s, a new plant in Arzew, Algeria, producing 17&nbsp;million cubic meters (600&nbsp;million cubic feet) began operation, with enough production to cover all of Europe's demand.
Most helium in the universe is helium-4, and is believed to have been formed during the Big Bang.
The opposite effect, lowering resonant frequencies, can be obtained by inhaling a dense gas such as sulfur hexafluoride or xenon.
By 1995, a billion cubic meters of the gas had been collected and the reserve was US$1.4&nbsp;billion in debt, prompting the Congress of the United States in 1996 to phase out the reserve.
Helium–neon lasers, a type of low-powered gas laser producing a red beam, had various practical applications which included barcode readers and laser pointers, before they were almost universally replaced by cheaper diode lasers.
Most terrestrial helium present today is created by the natural radioactive decay of heavy radioactive elements (thorium and uranium, although there are other examples), as the alpha particles emitted by such decays consist of helium-4 nuclei.
This showed that despite its overall rarity on Earth, helium was concentrated in large quantities under the American Great Plains, available for extraction as a byproduct of natural gas.
In 1908, helium was first liquefied by Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes by cooling the gas to less than one kelvin.
10 GPa in a diamond anvil cell.
The safety issues for cryogenic helium are similar to those of liquid nitrogen; its extremely low temperatures can result in cold burns, and the liquid-to-gas expansion ratio can cause explosions if no pressure-relief devices are installed.
In the ''fountain effect'', a chamber is constructed which is connected to a reservoir of helium&nbsp;II by a sintered disc through which superfluid helium leaks easily but through which non-superfluid helium cannot pass.
Containers of helium gas at 5 to 10 K should be handled as if they contain liquid helium due to the rapid and significant thermal expansion that occurs when helium gas at less than 10 K is warmed to room temperature.
Similarly, only 1% of the world's helium demands could be satisfied by re-tooling all air distillation plants.
Some of this gas was used in the world's first helium-filled airship, the U.S. Navy's C-7, which flew its maiden voyage from Hampton Roads, Virginia, to Bolling Field in Washington, D.C., on December 1, 1921, nearly two years before the Navy's first ''rigid'' helium-filled airship, the Naval Aircraft Factory-built ''USS Shenandoah'', flew in September 1923.
The endohedral fullerene molecules formed are stable at high temperatures.
By 1949, commercial quantities of Grade A 99.95% helium were available.
As in Newtonian mechanics, no system that consists of more than two particles can be solved with an exact analytical mathematical approach (see 3-body problem) and helium is no exception.
The goal was to supply barrage balloons with the non-flammable, lighter-than-air gas.
In their book, the ''Future of helium as a natural resource'' (Routledge, 2012), Nuttall, Clarke & Glowacki (2012) also proposed to create an International Helium Agency (IHA) to build a sustainable market for this precious commodity.
In 2013, Qatar started up the world's largest helium unit.
During World War II, the demand increased for helium for lifting gas and for shielded arc welding.
Helium-nitrogen clathrate (He(N2)11) crystals have been grown at room temperature at pressures ca.
Much of this gas was once sent by pipeline to the National Helium Reserve, but since 2005 this reserve is being depleted and sold off, and is expected under present law to be largely depleted by 2021.
The helium market after World War II was depressed but the reserve was expanded in the 1950s to ensure a supply of liquid helium as a coolant to create oxygen/hydrogen rocket fuel (among other uses) during the Space Race and Cold War.
The resulting "Helium Privatization Act of 1996" (Public Law 104–273) directed the United States Department of the Interior to empty the reserve, with sales starting by 2005.
Helium atoms have been inserted into the hollow carbon cage molecules (the fullerenes) by heating under high pressure.
It was also formed in enormous quantities during Big Bang nucleosynthesis.
Lockyer and English chemist Edward Frankland named the element with the Greek word for the Sun, ἥλιος (''helios'').
Following a suggestion by Sir Richard Threlfall, the United States Navy sponsored three small experimental helium plants during World War I.
Previously, terrestrial helium—a non-renewable resource, because once released into the atmosphere it readily escapes into space—was thought to be in increasingly short supply.
A well-known but minor use is as a lifting gas in balloons and airships.
This phenomenon is related to Bose–Einstein condensation.
Helium&nbsp;II is a superfluid, a quantum mechanical state (see: macroscopic quantum phenomena) of matter with strange properties.
By 2013, increases in helium production in Qatar (under the company RasGas managed by Air Liquide) had increased Qatar's fraction of world helium production to 25%, and made it the second largest exporter after the United States.
Helium is used as a shielding gas in arc welding processes on materials that at welding temperatures are contaminated and weakened by air or nitrogen.
In 1907, Ernest Rutherford and Thomas Royds demonstrated that alpha particles are helium nuclei by allowing the particles to penetrate the thin glass wall of an evacuated tube, then creating a discharge in the tube to study the spectra of the new gas inside.
In 1996, the U.S. had ''proven'' helium reserves, in such gas well complexes, of about 147 billion standard cubic feet (4.2 billion SCM).
172,000 standard cubic feet).
The charged particles are highly influenced by magnetic and electric fields.
Helium is used as a protective gas in growing silicon and germanium crystals, in titanium and zirconium production, and in gas chromatography, because it is inert.
A number of inert shielding gases are used in gas tungsten arc welding, but helium is used instead of cheaper argon especially for welding materials that have higher heat conductivity, like aluminium or copper.
File:Blausen 0476 HeliumAtom.png|3D schematic of a Helium atom
Quantum mechanics is needed to explain this property and thus both states of liquid helium (helium I and helium II) are called ''quantum fluids'', meaning they display atomic properties on a macroscopic scale.
Helium-6 and helium-8 are known to exhibit a nuclear halo.
It is also used to purge fuel and oxidizer from ground support equipment prior to launch and to pre-cool liquid hydrogen in space vehicles.
It moves in a 30&nbsp;nm-thick film regardless of surface material.
These waves are known as ''third sound''.
