Conversely, Helsinki enjoys long daylight in summer, during the summer solstice days last 18 hours and 57 minutes .
The plague of 1710 killed the greater part of the inhabitants of Helsinki.
The tap water is of excellent quality and it is supplied by  long Päijänne Water Tunnel, one of the world's longest continuous rock tunnels.
The Helsinki metropolitan area includes the urban core of Helsinki, Espoo, Vantaa, Kauniainen, and surrounding commuter towns.
The Centre Party of Finland, despite being one of the major parties in national politics, has little support in Helsinki, as is the case in most big cities.
It has a population of over 1,1 million, and is by far the biggest and most densely populated area of Finland, over four times bigger than Tampere.
Designmuseo I Helsinki.jpg|The Design Museum (1894)
Much of Helsinki outside the inner city area consists of postwar suburbs separated from each other by patches of forest.
Because some streetscapes were reminiscent of Leningrad's and Moscow's old buildings, they too were used in movie productions.
All TV channels are broadcast digitally, both terrestrially and on cable.
Value-added services are rare.
Helsinki has experienced strong growth since the 1810s, when it replaced Turku as the capital of the Grand Duchy of Finland, which later became the sovereign Republic of Finland.
Despite the intensity of land use, the region also has large recreational areas and green spaces.
However, because of the latitude, days last 5 hours and 48 minutes around the winter solstice with very low Sun (at noon Sun is little bit over 6 degrees in the sky), and the cloudy weather at this time of year accentuates the darkness.
Called the "Daughter of the Baltic", Helsinki is located on the tip of a peninsula and on 315 islands.
Yrjönkatu 27-29.jpg|Amos Anderson Art Museum (1913)
Arppeanum - DSC05409.JPG|Helsinki University Museum "Arppeanum" (1869)
Taidehalli Helsinki.jpg|Kunsthalle Helsinki art venue (1928)
The city continued to show strong growth from that time onward, with the exception during the Finnish Civil War period.
Winters in Helsinki are notably warmer than in the north, and the snow season is much shorter.
Finnish today is the common language of communication between Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers, and speakers of other languages (New Finns) in day-to-day affairs in the public sphere between unknown persons.
The fixtures between the two are commonly known as Stadin derby.
Support for the Swedish People's Party has been steadily declining over the years, most likely because of the diminishing proportion of Swedish speakers in Helsinki.
Helsinki has Finland's largest fairgrounds.
The Olympics were a landmark event symbolically and economically for Helsinki and Finland as a whole that was recovering from the winter war and the continuation war fought with the Soviet Union.
This is less than in cities of similar population and construction density, such as Brussels' 483 per 1000, Stockholm's 401, and Oslo's 413.
In 2012, 68,375 residents spoke a native language other than Finnish, Swedish, or one of the three Sami languages spoken in Finland.
Following the Great Fire of Turku in 1827, The Royal Academy of Turku, at the time the country's only university, was also relocated to Helsinki, and eventually became the modern University of Helsinki.
Many widely renowned and acclaimed bands have originated in Helsinki, including Hanoi Rocks, HIM, Stratovarius, The 69 Eyes, Finntroll, Ensiferum, Wintersun, The Rasmus, Poets of the Fall, and Apocalyptica.
Helsinki also hosted the event in 2005, thus also becoming the first city to ever host the Championships for a second time.
Another popular film festival is DocPoint, a festival that focuses solely on documentary cinema.
Yle, the Finnish Broadcasting Company, operates five television channels and thirteen radio channels in both national languages.
Carl Ludvig Engel, appointed to plan a new city centre all on his own, designed several neoclassical buildings in Helsinki.
The other major publisher Alma Media publishes over thirty magazines, including the newspaper ''Aamulehti'', tabloid ''Iltalehti'', and commerce-oriented ''Kauppalehti''.
The educational department takes part in Lifelong Learning Programme 2007–2013 in Finland.
Helsinki's track and field club Helsingin Kisa-Veikot is also dominant within Finland.
In 2009 Helsinki was host of the European Figure Skating Championships.
Following the most recent municipal elections, in 2012, the three largest parties are the National Coalition Party (23), the Greens (19), and the Social Democrats (15).
Helsinki Airport (located in Vantaa,  north of the Helsinki city centre) recorded a temperature of , on 29 July 2010, and a low of , on 9 January 1987.
Helsinki has 190 comprehensive schools, 41 upper secondary schools, and 15 vocational institutes.
The Metropolitan Area has a high concentration of employment: approximately 750,000 jobs.
The rail tunnel would connect Helsinki to the Estonian capital Tallinn, further linking Helsinki to the rest of continental Europe by Rail Baltica.
In 2000 the Greens, for which Helsinki is the strongest area of support nationally, gained the position of second most popular party in the city, in 2004 the Social Democrats regained that position, and since 2008 the Greens have again been the second biggest party.
Acclaimed contemporary composers Kaija Saariaho, Magnus Lindberg, Esa-Pekka Salonen, and Einojuhani Rautavaara, among others, were born and raised in Helsinki, and studied at the Sibelius Academy.
In Pasila, twenty new high-rises will be erected within 10 years.
Several projects are already in progress, mainly in Pasila and Kalasatama.
Finnish and Swedish are the official languages of the municipality of Helsinki.
Life expectancy for both genders is slightly below the national averages: 75.1 years for men as compared to 75.7 years, 81.7 years for women as compared to 82.5 years.
Around 12.2% of the population speaks a native language other than Finnish or Swedish.
The increasing scarcity of housing and the higher costs of living in the Helsinki Capital Region have pushed many daily commuters to find housing in formerly very rural areas, and even further, to such cities as Lohja ( northwest from the city centre), Hämeenlinna and Lahti (both  from Helsinki), and Porvoo ( to the east).
A Formula 3000 race through the city streets was held on 25 May 1997.
Despite the tumultuous nature of Finnish history during the first half of the 20th century (including the Finnish Civil War and the Winter War which both left marks on the city), Helsinki continued its steady development.
Helsinki has a population of , an urban population of 1,214,210, and a metropolitan population of over 1.4 million, making it the most populous municipality and urban area in Finland.
It is in the region of Uusimaa, in southern Finland, on the shore of the Gulf of Finland.
Over 300 cruise ships and 360,000 cruise passengers visit Helsinki annually.
The Music Centre also houses a part of the Sibelius Academy.
This transformation is highly apparent in the downtown core, which was rebuilt in neoclassical style to resemble St. Petersburg, mostly to a plan by the German-born architect C. L. Engel.
The City of Helsinki has about 11,000 boat berths and possesses over 14 000 hectares of marine fishing waters adjacent to the Capital Region.
The construction of the naval fortress Sveaborg (In Finnish ''Viapori'', today also ''Suomenlinna'') in the 18th century helped improve Helsinki's status, but it was not until Russia defeated Sweden in the Finnish War and annexed Finland as the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland in 1809 that the town began to develop into a substantial city.
Helsinki's metro system currently consists of 17 stations, with six of them being underground.
Public transport is generally a hotly debated subject in the local politics of Helsinki.
Tram museum in Helsinki-7152.jpg|Tram museum (''Ratikkamuseo'') (1900)
Most of them are small venues, but some have gained renown even abroad.
The move consolidated the city's new role and helped set it on a path of continuous growth.
'''Helsinki''' (; ; ) is the capital and largest city of Finland.
Sanoma publishes the newspaper ''Helsingin Sanomat'' (its circulation of 412,000 making it the largest), the tabloid ''Ilta-Sanomat'', the commerce-oriented ''Taloussanomat'', and the television channel Nelonen.
Helsinki's own airport, Helsinki-Malmi Airport, is mainly used for general and private aviation.
The commercial television channel MTV3 and commercial radio channel Radio Nova are owned by Nordic Broadcasting (Bonnier and Proventus Industrier).
Helsinki has some 390 cars per 1000 inhabitants.
The largest groups () are from Sweden, Russia, Estonia, Somalia, China, Kurdistan, Spain, Germany, France, Vietnam, and Turkey.
The Greater Helsinki area is the world's northernmost urban area with a population of over one million people, and the city is the northernmost capital of an EU member state.
140811Ha001.jpg|Sinebrychoff Art Museum (1842)
Another major historical museum is the Helsinki City Museum, which introduces visitors to Helsinki's 500-year history.
Neighboring Vantaa has seen even more dramatic change in the same time span: from 14,976 in 1950 to 197,663 in 2009, a thirteenfold increase.
A narrow,  long Helsinki Central Park, stretching from the inner city to the northern border of Helsinki, is an important recreational area for residents.
This is how the form Helsinki came to be used in written Finnish.
Ferry connections to Tallinn, Mariehamn, and Stockholm are serviced by various companies.
The University of Helsinki also has many significant museums, including the Helsinki University Museum "Arppeanum" and the Finnish Museum of Natural History.
Foreign citizens make up 8.0% of the population, while the total foreign-born population makes up 11.1%.
Two-thirds of the 200 highest-paid Finnish executives live in Greater Helsinki and 42% in Helsinki.
Charter flights are available from Hernesaari Heliport.
Helsinki also features several buildings by Finnish architect Alvar Aalto, recognized as one of the pioneers of architectural functionalism.
Due to the marine effect, especially during hot summer days, daily temperatures are a little cooler and night temperatures are higher than further away in the mainland.
The biggest historical museum in Helsinki is the National Museum of Finland, which displays a vast historical collection from prehistoric times to the 21st century.
Traditionally, the conservative National Coalition Party (Kokoomus) has been the biggest party on Helsinki City Council, with the Social Democrats being the second biggest.
In October 2009, Finland's Ministry of Transport and Communications committed to ensuring that every person in Finland would be able to access the Internet at a minimum speed of one megabit-per-second beginning July 2010.
In instances where a speaker's knowledge of Finnish is not known, English is usually spoken.
Didrichsenin taidemuseo.jpg|Didrichsen Art Museum (1964)
The Design Museum is devoted to the exhibition of both Finnish and foreign design, including industrial design, fashion, and graphic design.
Temperatures below  occur a few times a year or less.
A Helsinki to Tallinn Tunnel has been proposed and agreed upon by representatives of the cities.
Other museums in Helsinki include the Military Museum of Finland, Didrichsen Art Museum, Amos Anderson Art Museum, and the Tram Museum.
Espoo's population increased ninefold in sixty years, from 22,874 people in 1950 to 244,353 in 2009.
It is the world's northernmost metro area of over one million people, and the city is the northernmost capital of an EU member state.
Sotakorkeakoulu.jpg|The Military Museum of Finland (1881)
The Finnish National Gallery consists of three museums: Ateneum Art Museum for classical Finnish art, Sinebrychoff Art Museum for classical European art, and Kiasma Art Museum for modern art, in a building by architect Steven Holl.
The city has Finland's largest immigrant population in both absolute and relative terms.
Little came of the plans as Helsinki remained a tiny town plagued by poverty, wars, and diseases.
Helsinki houses HJK Helsinki, Finland's largest and most successful football club, and IFK Helsingfors, their local rivals with 7 championship titles.
Helsinki's neoclassical buildings were often used as a backdrop for scenes set to take place in the Soviet Union in many Cold War era Hollywood movies, when filming in the USSR was not possible.
Czar Alexander I of Russia moved the Finnish capital from Turku to Helsinki in 1812 to reduce Swedish influence in Finland, and to bring the capital closer to St. Petersburg.
''Helsingfors'' comes from the name of the surrounding parish, ''Helsinge'' (source for Finnish ''Helsinki'') and the rapids (), which flowed through the original village, which is now located in the neighboring city Vantaa.
, around 79% of the Finnish population uses the Internet.
Pihlajasaari island is a favorite summer spot for gay men and naturists, comparable to Fire Island off New York City.
Helsinki was also in 1983 the first ever city to host the World Championships in Athletics.
Recreational fishing is a popular hobby among kids and adults alike.
Between 1944 and 1969 the population of the city nearly doubled from 275,000 to 525,600.
One suggestion for the origin of the name ''Helsinge'' is that it originated with medieval Swedish settlers who came from Hälsingland in Sweden.
Knowledge of Finnish is also essential in business and is usually a basic requirement in the employment market.
There are international cruise ship docks in South Harbour, Katajanokka, West Harbour, and Hernesaari.
The Olympic Stadium and Helsinki-Malmi Airport are in addition catalogued by the Finnish National Board of Antiquities as cultural-historical environments of national significance.
The Mayor, Jussi Pajunen, is a member of the National Coalition Party.
Helsingin Luonnontieteellinen museo.JPG|The Finnish Museum of Natural History (1913)
There are over 140 nationalities represented in Helsinki.
The Helsinki Metro, opened in 1982, is the only rapid transit system in Finland.
Helsinki is the second busiest passenger port in Europe with approximately 11 million passengers in 2013.
Helsinki was already an international city in the 19th century with a distinctive Swedish majority as well as Finnish, Russian, and German minorities.
Major islands in Helsinki include Seurasaari, Vallisaari, Lauttasaari, and Korkeasaari&nbsp;– the lattermost being the site of the country's biggest zoo.
The highest temperature ever recorded in the city centre was , on 18 July 1945, and the lowest was , on 10 January 1987.
The decrees issued in Helsinki were dated with Helsinki as the place of issue.
Helsinki was established as a trading town by King Gustav I of Sweden in 1550 as the town of Helsingfors, which he intended to be a rival to the Hanseatic city of Reval (today known as Tallinn).
The largest groups of residents not of Finnish background come from Russia (14,532), Estonia (9,065), and Somalia (6,845).
Half of the immigrant population in Finland lives in Greater Helsinki, and one third in the city of Helsinki.
The average income of the top 50 earners was 1.65 million euro.
Higher level education is given in eight universities (see the section "Universities" below) and four polytechnics.
Population density in certain parts of Helsinki's inner city area is very high, reaching  in the district of Kallio, but as a whole Helsinki's population density of  ranks the city as quite sparsely populated in comparison to other European capital cities.
The relatively sparse population density of Helsinki and its peculiar structure have often been attributed to the lateness of its growth.
The Olympic stadium hosted the first ever Bandy World Championship in 1957.
Other notable theatres in the city include the Alexander Theatre, ''Q-teatteri'', Savoy Theatre, KOM-theatre, and ''Teatteri Jurkka''.
The Metropolitan Area covers  and contains a total population of over 1.4 million, or about a fourth of the total population of Finland.
83 of the 100 largest Finnish companies are headquartered in Greater Helsinki.
Finnlines passenger-freight ferries to Gdynia, Poland; Travemünde, Germany; and Rostock, Germany are also available.
The average maximum temperature from June to August is around .
File:Helsinki July 2013-26a.jpg|Classical art museum Ateneum (1887)
Some 60 fish species are found in this area.
Half of the 41 upper secondary schools are private or state-owned, the other half municipal.
The tallest (with 40 floors) will rise to at least 150 metres (500 feet).
Helsinki has a long tradition of sports: the city gained much of its initial international recognition during the 1952 Summer Olympics, and the city has arranged sporting events such as the first World Championships in Athletics 1983 and 2005, and the European Championships in Athletics 1971, 1994, and 2012.
Instead Helsinki was the host of the 1952 Summer Olympics.
The nearby municipality of Vantaa is the location of Helsinki Airport, with frequent service to various destinations in Europe and Asia.
Helsinki was elected host-city of the 1940 Summer Olympics, but due to World War II they were canceled.
Precipitation is received from frontal passages and thunderstorms.
The opera singer Martti Wallén, one of the company's long-time soloists, was born and raised in Helsinki, as was mezzo-soprano Monica Groop.
In 2006, the construction of the long debated extension of the metro into Western Helsinki and Espoo was approved, and serious debate about an eastern extension into Sipoo has taken place.
The Capital Region spreads over a land area of  and has a population density of .
It is surrounded by the Government Palace (to the east), the main building of Helsinki University (to the west), and (to the north) the large Cathedral, which was finished in 1852, twelve years after Engel's death.
In 2009, Helsinki was chosen to be the World Design Capital for 2012 by the International Council of Societies of Industrial Design, narrowly beating Eindhoven for the title.
Many of them are listed by DoCoMoMo as significant examples of modern architecture.
Helsinki is the global gateway to and from Finland.
Other noteworthy islands are the fortress island of Suomenlinna (Sveaborg), the military island of Santahamina, and Isosaari.
National Museum of Finland.jpg|The National Museum of Finland (1910)
Night Visions, on the other hand, focuses on genre cinema, screening horror, fantasy, and science fiction films in very popular movie marathons that take whole night.
Finland had around 1.52 million broadband Internet connections by the end of June 2007 or around 287 per 1,000 inhabitants.
In the Kalasatama area, there will be 30 high-rises within 10 years.
Helsinki also hosts many film festivals.
The city therefore was able to benefit from good sea transportation links right from the start.
The diverse public transport system consists of trams, commuter rail, the metro, bus lines, two ferry lines, and on-demand minibuses.
As elsewhere, technological advancements such as railroads and industrialization were key factors behind the city's growth.
Others have proposed that the name derives from the Swedish word ''helsing'', a former version of the word ''hals'' (neck), referring to the narrowest part of a river, i.e.
Helsinki hosts successful local teams in both of the most popular team sports in Finland: football and ice hockey.
Approximately 75% of foreign companies operating in Finland have settled in the Helsinki region.
The city's main musical venues are the Finnish National Opera, the Finlandia concert hall, and the Helsinki Music Centre.
Helsinki's Art Nouveau style is also featured in large residential areas such as Katajanokka and Ullanlinna.
During the war, Russians besieged the Sveaborg fortress, and about one quarter of the town was destroyed in an 1808 fire.
The most prolific would be the Love & Anarchy film festival (also known as Helsinki International Film Festival), which features films on a wide spectrum.
The freezing of the sea imposed limitations on sea traffic up to the end of the 19th century.
The focal point of Engel's city plan is the Senate Square.
All Finnish schools and public libraries have Internet connections and computers, and most residents have a mobile phone.
Helsinki slang today combines influences mainly from Finnish and English, but has traditionally had strong Russian and Swedish influences.
The master of the Finnish Art Nouveau was Eliel Saarinen, whose architectural masterpiece was the Helsinki Central railway station.
Later they will be joined by a 37-story (140 metres), two 32-story (122 metres, 400 feet), 31-story (120 metres), and 27-story (100 metres) residential buildings.
Other Scandinavian cities located at similar geographic locations were given similar names at the time, for example Helsingør and Helsingborg.
Helsinki Kiasma.jpg|Kiasma museum of contemporary art (1998)
The city was the venue for the 1952 Summer Olympics and the 52nd Eurovision Song Contest 2007.
Worldwide, Finns, along with other Nordic peoples and the Japanese, spend the most time reading newspapers.
HIFK, with 14 Finnish championships titles, also plays in the highest bandy division, along with Botnia−69.
A landmark event were the 1952 Olympic Games, held in Helsinki.
Helsinki has close historical connections with these three cities.
The Helsinki metropolitan area is the fourth largest metropolitan area in the Nordic countries, the City of Helsinki being the third largest after Stockholm and Oslo.
The name ''Helsinki'' has been used in Finnish official documents and in Finnish language newspapers since 1819, when the Senate of Finland moved to Helsinki from Turku (Åbo).
St Peter Line offers passenger ferry service to Saint Petersburg several times a week.
Once the expansion into Western Helsinki and Espoo is completed in August 2016, seven new metro stations will be opened, with all of them being underground.
Helsinki's current population density of 2,739.36 people per square kilometre is by far the highest in Finland.
The Finnish name probably comes from ''Helsinga'' and similar names used for the river that is currently known as the Vantaa River, as documented already in the 14th century.
The inner city area occupies a southern peninsula, which is rarely referred to by its actual name Vironniemi.
Helsinki Arena hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, the first Eurovision Song Contest arranged in Finland, following Lordi's win in 2006.
Many residents began to move to neighbouring Espoo and Vantaa, where population growth has since soared.
Like many other cities of the world, Helsinki had been deliberately founded next to the sea.
There used to be two other cities in Finland with trams: Turku and Viipuri (Vyborg, now in Russia), but both have since abandoned them.
Functionalist buildings in Helsinki by other architects include the Olympic Stadium, the Tennis Palace, the Rowing Stadium, the Swimming Stadium, the Velodrome, the Glass Palace, the Exhibition Hall (now Töölö Sports Hall), and Helsinki-Malmi Airport.
The Swedish name '''' is the original official name of the city (originally in the form ''Hellssingeforss'').
The museum building itself, a national romantic style neomedieval castle, is a tourist attraction.
However, some of his works, such as the headquarters of the paper company Stora Enso and the concert venue Finlandia Hall, have been subject to divided opinions from the citizens.
In 2011, the ''Monocle'' magazine ranked Helsinki the most liveable city in the world in its "Liveable Cities Index 2011".
Ice hockey is popular among many Helsinki residents, who usually support either of the local clubs IFK Helsingfors (HIFK) or Jokerit.
Finland's rapid urbanization in the 1970s, occurring late relative to the rest of Europe, tripled the population in the metropolitan area, and the Helsinki Metro subway system was built.
The arrival and departure of ships has also been a part of everyday life in Helsinki.
At the time, the population of Helsinki was 61,530.
In Helsinki slang the city is called either ''Stadi'' (from the Swedish word ''stad'', meaning "city") or ''Hesa'' (short for Helsinki), with ''Stadi'' being used to assert that the speaker is native to the city. ''''
Some of them include ''The Kremlin Letter'' (1970), ''Reds'' (1981), and ''Gorky Park'' (1983).
