This folding pattern contains a pocket that strongly binds the heme group.
If superoxide ion associated to Fe3+ is protonated, the hemoglobin iron will remain oxidized and incapable of binding oxygen.
Laboratory hemoglobin test methods require a blood sample (arterial, venous, or capillary) and analysis on hematology analyzer and CO-oximeter.
This increased affinity for carbon dioxide by the venous blood is known as the Haldane effect.
Hemoglobin in organisms at high altitudes has also adapted such that it has less of an affinity for 2,3-BPG and so the protein will be shifted more towards its R state.
viridicuada'') have caused the protein to have less of an affinity for inositol hexaphosphate (IHP), a molecule found in birds that has a similar role as 2,3-BPG in humans; this results in the ability to bind oxygen in lower partial pressures.
shifting the curve down, not just to the right) due to reduced pH is called the root effect.
This test is especially useful for diabetics.
;Coboglobin: A synthetic cobalt-based porphyrin.
Hemoglobin exists in two forms, a ''taut (tense) form'' (T) and a ''relaxed form'' (R).
* Pregnant women: 11 to 14 g/dL (110 to 140 g/L, or 6.83 to 8.69&nbsp;mmol/L) (9.5 to 15 usual value during pregnancy)
'''Hemoglobin''' (); also spelled '''haemoglobin''' and abbreviated '''Hb''' or '''Hgb''', is the iron-containing oxygen-transport metalloprotein in the red blood cells of all vertebrates (with the exception of the fish family Channichthyidae) as well as the tissues of some invertebrates.
In all these groups, heme/globin-containing molecules (even monomeric globin ones) that deal with gas-binding are referred to as oxyhemoglobins.
Additionally, the binding of oxygen to the iron(II) heme pulls the iron into the plane of the porphyrin ring, causing a slight conformational shift.
The α- and β-like globin genes encode the individual subunits of the protein.
This process also produces one molecule of carbon monoxide for every molecule of heme degraded.
Hummingbirds already expend a lot of energy and thus have high oxygen demands and yet Andean hummingbirds have been found to thrive in high altitudes.
The other major final product of heme degradation is bilirubin.
Hemoglobin is also found outside red blood cells and their progenitor lines.
* Infrared vibrational frequencies of the O-O bond suggests a bond length fitting with superoxide (a bond order of about 1.6, with superoxide being 1.5).
When red cells reach the end of their life due to aging or defects, they are removed from the circulation by the phagocytic activity of macrophages in the spleen or the liver or hemolyze within the circulation.
This conclusion seemed likely, since the iron oxidation state III as methemoglobin, when ''not'' accompanied by superoxide '''.
The iron atom in the heme group must initially be in the ferrous (Fe2+) oxidation state to support oxygen and other gases' binding and transport (it temporarily switches to ferric during the time oxygen is bound, as explained above).
The second choice of the logical possibilities above for diamagnetic oxyhemoglobin being found correct by experiment, is not surprising: singlet oxygen (possibility #1) is an unrealistically high energy state.
Each subunit has a molecular weight of about 16,000&nbsp;daltons, for a total molecular weight of the tetramer of about 64,000&nbsp;daltons (64,458 g/mol).
Organisms living at high elevations experience lower partial pressures of oxygen compared to those at sea level.
Each subunit is composed of a protein chain tightly associated with a non-protein heme group.
Long-term control of blood sugar concentration can be measured by the concentration of Hb A1c.
Having multiple subunits contributes to hemoglobin's ability to bind oxygen cooperatively as well as be regulated allosterically.
NIRS can be used both on the head as on muscles.
For example, the most common hemoglobin sequences in humans and chimpanzees are nearly identical, differing by only one amino acid in both the alpha and the beta globin protein chains.
;Chlorocruorin: Found in many annelids, it is very similar to erythrocruorin, but the heme group is significantly different in structure.
A (mostly) separate set of diseases called thalassemias involves underproduction of normal and sometimes abnormal hemoglobins, through problems and mutations in globin gene regulation.
The gamma chains are gradually replaced by β chains as the infant grows.
This interaction forces the plane of the ring sideways toward the outside of the tetramer, and also induces a strain in the protein helix containing the histidine as it moves nearer to the iron atom.
* Women: 12.1 to 15.1 g/dL (121 to 151 g/L, or 7.51 to 9.37&nbsp;mmol/L)
These hemoglobins are remarkable for being able to carry oxygen in the presence of sulfide, and even to carry sulfide, without being completely "poisoned" or inhibited by it as hemoglobins in most other species are.
Other common causes of low hemoglobin include loss of blood, nutritional deficiency, bone marrow problems, chemotherapy, kidney failure, or abnormal hemoglobin (such as that of sickle-cell disease).
Iron's shift to a higher oxidation state in Hb-O2 decreases the atom's size, and allows it into the plane of the porphyrin ring, pulling on the coordinated histidine residue and initiating the allosteric changes seen in the globulins.
This difference also accounts for the presentation of cyanosis, the blue to purplish color that tissues develop during hypoxia.
Natural selection seems to be the main force working on this gene because mortality rate of offspring is significantly lower for women with higher hemoglobin-oxygen affinity when compared to the mortality rate of offspring from women with low hemoglobin-oxygen affinity.
At this point, the nucleus is lost in mammalian red blood cells, but not in birds and many other species.
All these diseases produce anemia.
The iron is bound strongly (covalently) to the globular protein via the N atoms of the imidazole ring of F8 histidine residue (also known as the proximal histidine) below the porphyrin ring.
Albumin can indicate hydration status.
Hemoglobin binding affinity for CO is 250 times greater than its affinity for oxygen, meaning that small amounts of CO dramatically reduce hemoglobin's ability to transport oxygen.
The worms end with a deep-red fan-like structure ("plume"), which extends into the water and absorbs H2S and O2 for the bacteria, and CO2 for use as synthetic raw material similar to photosynthetic plants.
The sculpture was made from glass and weathering steel.
The resulting S-nitrosylated hemoglobin influences various NO-related activities such as the control of vascular resistance, blood pressure and respiration.
However, the singlet form of oxygen is the higher-energy form of the molecule.
Hemoglobin A is the most intensively studied of the hemoglobin molecules.
However, it can also be pathologically altered in, e.g., carbon monoxide poisoning.
Hence, blood with high carbon dioxide levels is also lower in pH (more acidic).
Engelhard discovered that the ratio of Fe to protein is identical in the hemoglobins of several species.
If the concentration is below normal, this is called anemia.
Fish use both ATP and GTP.
When oxygen binds to the iron complex, it causes the iron atom to move back toward the center of the plane of the porphyrin ring (see moving diagram).
Hemoglobin has an oxygen-binding capacity of 1.34 mL O2 per gram, which increases the total blood oxygen capacity seventy-fold compared to dissolved oxygen in blood.
However, the level of Hb F can be elevated in persons with sickle-cell disease and beta-thalassemia.
When oxygen is not bound, a very weakly bonded water molecule fills the site, forming a distorted octahedron.
The structure of hemoglobins varies across species.
"The genetic difference enables highland mice to make more efficient use of their oxygen", since less is available at higher altitudes, such as those in the mountains.
It has been suggested that brain hemoglobin in these cells may enable the "storage of oxygen to provide a homeostatic mechanism in anoxic conditions, which is especially important for A9 DA neurons that have an elevated metabolism with a high requirement for energy production".
elite sports training, ergonomics, rehabilitation, patient monitoring, neonatal research, functional brain monitoring, brain computer interface, urology (bladder contraction), neurology (Neurovascular coupling) and more.
* X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy suggests iron has an oxidation state of approximately 3.2
The specific enzyme protected is nitrogenase, which is unable to reduce nitrogen gas in the presence of free oxygen.
Anemia has many different causes, although iron deficiency and its resultant iron deficiency anemia are the most common causes in the Western world.
* Hemoglobin Portland II (ζ2β2).
As the concentration of glucose in the blood increases, the percentage of Hb A that turns into Hb A1c increases.
There is a group of genetic disorders, known as the ''porphyrias'' that are characterized by errors in metabolic pathways of heme synthesis.
The iron chemistry in this previous classical model was elegant, but the required presence of the diamagnetic, high-energy, singlet oxygen molecule was never explained.
Some well-known hemoglobin variants, such as sickle-cell anemia, are responsible for diseases and are considered hemoglobinopathies.
Nitric oxide is bound to specific thiol groups in the globin protein to form an S-nitrosothiol, which dissociates into free nitric oxide and thiol again, as the hemoglobin releases oxygen from its heme site.
In 1851, German physiologist Otto Funke published a series of articles in which he described growing hemoglobin crystals by successively diluting red blood cells with a solvent such as pure water, alcohol or ether, followed by slow evaporation of the solvent from the resulting protein solution.
Extraction of an additional electron from iron by oxygen is required to explain both iron's smaller size and observed increased oxidation state, and oxygen's weaker bond.
A variant of the molecule, called leghemoglobin, is used to scavenge oxygen away from anaerobic systems, such as the nitrogen-fixing nodules of leguminous plants, before the oxygen can poison (deactivate) the system.
Scientists agree that the event that separated myoglobin from hemoglobin occurred after lampreys diverged from jawed vertebrates.
This phenomenon, where molecule Y affects the binding of molecule X to a transport molecule Z, is called a ''heterotropic'' allosteric effect.
For example, recent studies have suggested genetic variants in deer mice that help explain how deer mice that live in the mountains are able to survive in the thin air that accompanies high altitudes.
* Hemoglobin F (α2γ2) – In adults Hemoglobin F is restricted to a limited population of red cells called F-cells.
Normal values of hemoglobin in the 1st and 3rd trimesters of pregnant women must be at least 11 g/dL and at least 10.5 g/dL during the 2nd trimester.
Gilbert Smithson Adair confirmed Engelhard's results in 1925 by measuring the osmotic pressure of hemoglobin solutions.
Instead of a digestive tract, these worms contain a population of bacteria constituting half the organism's weight.
Because the reaction is slow, the Hb A1c proportion represents glucose level in blood averaged over the half-life of red blood cells, is typically 50–55 days.
It is displayed in the atrium of McGill University Health Centre's research centre in Montreal.
Heme degradation is one of the few natural sources of carbon monoxide in the human body, and is responsible for the normal blood levels of carbon monoxide even in people breathing pure air.
This means that the oxygen binding curve for fetal hemoglobin is left-shifted (i.e., a higher percentage of hemoglobin has oxygen bound to it at lower oxygen tension), in comparison to that of adult hemoglobin.
Montreal artist Nicolas Baier created Lustre (Hémoglobine), a sculpture in stainless steel that shows the structure of the hemoglobin molecule.
:CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → HCO3− + H+
Nitric oxide is capable of converting a small fraction of hemoglobin to methemoglobin in red blood cells.
In all proteins, it is the amino acid sequence that determines the protein's chemical properties and function.
Increased levels of this chemical are detected in the blood if red cells are being destroyed more rapidly than usual.
Each protein chain arranges into a set of alpha-helix structural segments connected together in a globin fold arrangement, so called because this arrangement is the same folding motif used in other heme/globin proteins such as myoglobin.
The subunits are structurally similar and about the same size.
This improves oxygen delivery in the periphery and contributes to the control of respiration.
Hemoglobin has a quaternary structure characteristic of many multi-subunit globular proteins.
There is a variation in the β-chain gene, causing a change in the properties of hemoglobin, which results in sickling of red blood cells.
This is denoted as α2β2.
Dehydration or hyperhydration can greatly influence measured hemoglobin levels.
Besides the oxygen ligand, which binds to hemoglobin in a cooperative manner, hemoglobin ligands also include competitive inhibitors such as carbon monoxide (CO) and allosteric ligands such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitric oxide (NO).
Or, they may have a recognizable separate circulatory system but not one that deals with oxygen transport (for example, many insects and other arthropods).
In similar fashion, hemoglobin also has competitive binding affinity for cyanide (CN−), sulfur monoxide (SO), nitric oxide (NO), and sulfide (S2−), including hydrogen sulfide (H2S).
Each heme group contains one iron atom, that can bind one oxygen molecule through ion-induced dipole forces.
In heavy smokers, up to 20% of the oxygen-active sites can be blocked by CO.
Globulin is metabolised into amino acids that are then released into circulation.
In diabetics whose glucose usually runs high, the percent Hb A1c also runs high.
In these tissues, hemoglobin has a non-oxygen-carrying function as an antioxidant and a regulator of iron metabolism.
Conversely, a high pH, low CO2, or low 2,3 BPG favors the relaxed form, which can better bind oxygen.
Inversely, at low partial pressures (such as those present in respiring tissues), the (low affinity, T) tense state is favoured.
For example, it is typically tested before or after blood donation.
Elevated levels of hemoglobin are associated with increased numbers or sizes of red blood cells, called polycythemia.
* Hemoglobin S (α2βS2) – A variant form of hemoglobin found in people with sickle cell disease.
Oxygen binds in an "end-on bent" geometry where one oxygen atom binds to Fe and the other protrudes at an angle.
Different organisms have adapted to such a challenge.
As a consequence, the oxygen binding curve of hemoglobin is sigmoidal, or ''S''-shaped, as opposed to the normal hyperbolic curve associated with noncooperative binding.
The diamagnetism in this configuration arises from the single unpaired electron on superoxide aligning antiferromagnetically with the single unpaired electron on iron (in a low-spin d5 state), to give no net spin to the entire configuration, in accordance with diamagnetic oxyhemoglobin from experiment.
A sixth position can reversibly bind oxygen by a coordinate covalent bond, completing the octahedral group of six ligands.
'''O2− to "hold" the oxidation electron, was known to render hemoglobin incapable of binding normal triplet O2 as it occurs in the air.
* Hemoglobin A (α2β2) () – The most common with a normal amount over 95%
The heme part is synthesized in a series of steps in the mitochondria and the cytosol of immature red blood cells, while the globin protein parts are synthesized by ribosomes in the cytosol.
In hemolysis (accelerated breakdown of red blood cells), associated jaundice is caused by the hemoglobin metabolite bilirubin, and the circulating hemoglobin can cause renal failure.
Intestines metabolise bilirubin into urobilinogen.
This variant causes a mild chronic hemolytic anemia.
Ventilation, or breathing, may reverse this condition by removal of carbon dioxide, thus causing a shift up in pH.
A heme group consists of an iron (Fe) ion (charged atom) held in a heterocyclic ring, known as a porphyrin.
Many nematode worms, molluscs, and crustaceans contain very large multisubunit molecules, much larger than those in vertebrates.
The binding of glucose to amino acids in the hemoglobin takes place spontaneously (without the help of an enzyme) in many proteins, and is not known to serve a useful purpose.
This positive cooperative binding is achieved through steric conformational changes of the hemoglobin protein complex as discussed above; i.e., when one subunit protein in hemoglobin becomes oxygenated, a conformational or structural change in the whole complex is initiated, causing the other subunits to gain an increased affinity for oxygen.
It is used to store oxygen rather than transport it.
There it releases the oxygen to permit aerobic respiration to provide energy to power the functions of the organism in the process called metabolism.
Other anemias are rarer.
;Pinnaglobin: Only seen in the mollusc ''Pinna nobilis''.
Because of the slow rate of Hb A combination with glucose, the Hb A1c percentage is representative of glucose level in the blood averaged over a longer time (the half-life of red blood cells, which is typically 50–55 days).
Through the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, carbon dioxide reacts with water to give carbonic acid, which decomposes into bicarbonate and protons:
To a small extent, hemoglobin A slowly combines with glucose at the terminal valine (an alpha aminoacid) of each β chain.
The energy shift of 5 eV between deoxyhemoglobin and oxyhemoglobin, as for all the methemoglobin species, strongly suggests an actual local charge closer to Fe3+ than Fe2+.
;Myoglobin: Found in the muscle tissue of many vertebrates, including humans, it gives muscle tissue a distinct red or dark gray color.
This was also found in hummingbirds that inhabit the Andes.
Protons bind at various places on the protein, while carbon dioxide binds at the α-amino group.
Many of these mutant forms of hemoglobin cause no disease.
Most of the amino acids in hemoglobin form alpha helices, connected by short non-helical segments.
* Men: 13.8 to 18.0 g/dL (138 to 180 g/L, or 8.56 to 11.17&nbsp;mmol/L)
The shift encourages oxygen to bind to the three remaining heme units within hemoglobin (thus, oxygen binding is cooperative).
While the exact genotype and mechanism by which this occurs is not yet clear, selection is acting on these women's ability to bind oxygen in low partial pressures which overall allows them to better sustain crucial metabolic processes.
Appears pink/violet when oxygenated, clear when not.
For example, if the hemoglobin is measured at 17 g/dL, that compares with a hematocrit of 51%.
Hydrogen bonds stabilize the helical sections inside this protein, causing attractions within the molecule, folding each polypeptide chain into a specific shape.
This is seen in bony fish.
This separation of myoglobin and hemoglobin allowed for the different functions of the two molecules to arise and develop: myoglobin has more to do with oxygen storage while hemoglobin is tasked with oxygen transport.
Within these cells the hemoglobin molecule is broken up, and the iron gets recycled.
Hb A1c is the product of the irreversible reaction of hemoglobin A with glucose.
In 1959, Max Perutz determined the molecular structure of myoglobin (similar to hemoglobin) by X-ray crystallography.
In the tetrameric form of normal adult hemoglobin, the binding of oxygen is, thus, a cooperative process.
Here, the iron has been oxidized by two electrons, and the oxygen reduced by two electrons.
NO binds reversibly to a specific cysteine residue in globin; the binding depends on the state (R or T) of the hemoglobin.
Hemoglobin deficiency can be caused either by a decreased amount of hemoglobin molecules, as in anemia, or by decreased ability of each molecule to bind oxygen at the same partial pressure of oxygen.
Combined measurement with NIRS shows good correlation with both the oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin signal compared to the BOLD signal.
Initial oxidation to the ferric (Fe3+) state without oxygen converts hemoglobin into "hem'''i'''globin" or methemoglobin (pronounced "MET-hemoglobin"), which cannot bind oxygen.
Primitive species such as bacteria, protozoa, algae, and plants often have single-globin hemoglobins.
In these organisms, hemoglobins may carry oxygen, or they may act to transport and regulate other small molecules and ions such as carbon dioxide, nitric oxide, hydrogen sulfide and sulfide.
The oxygen-carrying protein hemoglobin was discovered by Hünefeld in 1840.
Carbon ''di''oxide occupies a different binding site on the hemoglobin.
In addition to dealing with transport and sensing of oxygen, they may also deal with NO, CO2, sulfide compounds, and even O2 scavenging in environments that must be anaerobic.
An Hb A1c proportion of 6.0% or less show good long-term glucose control, while values above 7.0% are elevated.
* Hemoglobin H (β4) – A variant form of hemoglobin, formed by a tetramer of β chains, which may be present in variants of α thalassemia.
There is more than one hemoglobin gene: in humans, hemoglobin A (the main form of hemoglobin present) is coded for by the genes, ''HBA1'', ''HBA2'', and ''HBB''.
It is very similar to hemoglobin in structure and sequence, but is not a tetramer; instead, it is a monomer that lacks cooperative binding.
Thus, the nearest formal oxidation state of iron in Hb-O2 is the +3 state, with oxygen in the −1 state (as superoxide '''.'''O2−).
King George III of the United Kingdom was probably the most famous porphyria sufferer.
* Hemoglobin D-Punjab – (α2βD2) – A variant form of hemoglobin.
Mammoth hemoglobin featured mutations that allowed for oxygen delivery at lower temperatures, thus enabling mammoths to migrate to higher latitudes during the Pleistocene.
Both low-spin iron and singlet oxygen are diamagnetic.
This porphyrin ring consists of four pyrrole molecules cyclically linked together (by methine bridges) with the iron ion bound in the center.
Hemoglobin occurs in all kingdoms of organisms, but not in all organisms.
This strain is transmitted to the remaining three monomers in the tetramer, where it induces a similar conformational change in the other heme sites such that binding of oxygen to these sites becomes easier.
;Hemocyanin: The second most common oxygen-transporting protein found in nature, it is found in the blood of many arthropods and molluscs.
The anemia is called "microcytic" if red cells are small, "macrocytic" if they are large, and "normocytic" otherwise.
Measuring it directly would require many samples because blood sugar levels vary widely through the day.
Early postulates by bio-inorganic chemists claimed that possibility #1 (above) was correct and that iron should exist in oxidation state II.
As absence of iron decreases heme synthesis, red blood cells in iron deficiency anemia are ''hypochromic'' (lacking the red hemoglobin pigment) and ''microcytic'' (smaller than normal).
The ability of each hemoglobin molecule to carry oxygen is normally modified by altered blood pH or CO2, causing an altered oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve.
The latter reaction is a remnant activity of the more ancient nitric oxide dioxygenase function of globins.
Hemoglobin deficiency is, in general, strictly distinguished from hypoxemia, defined as decreased partial pressure of oxygen in blood, although both are causes of hypoxia (insufficient oxygen supply to tissues).
The predecessors of these genes arose through another duplication event also after the gnathosome common ancestor derived from jawless fish, approximately 450–500 million years ago.
Hemoglobin can bind protons and carbon dioxide, which causes a conformational change in the protein and facilitates the release of oxygen.
Hemoglobin adaptation extends to humans, as well.
The partial pressure of the system also affects O2 affinity where, at high partial pressures of oxygen (such as those present in the alveoli), the relaxed (high affinity, R) state is favoured.
It should be noted, however, that birds' unique circulatory lungs also promote efficient use of oxygen at low partial pressures of O2.
The functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) machine uses the signal from deoxyhemoglobin, which is sensitive to magnetic fields since it is paramagnetic.
* Gower 2 (α2ε2) ()
Mutations in the genes for the hemoglobin protein in a species result in hemoglobin variants.
They may also be pathologic mutant forms of hemoglobin in a population, caused by variations in genetics.
However, the model of iron in Hb-O2 being Fe(III) is more correct than the classical idea that it remains Fe(II).
Animals other than humans use different molecules to bind to hemoglobin and change its O2 affinity under unfavorable conditions.
The normal reference range is approximately 4–5.9 %.
This presents a challenge to the organisms that inhabit such environments because hemoglobin, which normally binds oxygen at high partial pressures of oxygen, must be able to bind oxygen when it is present at a lower pressure.
;Hemerythrin: Some marine invertebrates and a few species of annelid use this iron-containing non-heme protein to carry oxygen in their blood.
Uses copper prosthetic groups instead of iron heme groups and is blue in color when oxygenated.
The development of α and β genes created the potential for hemoglobin to be composed of multiple subunits, a physical composition central to hemoglobin's ability to transport oxygen.
Various factors such as low pH, high CO2 and high 2,3 BPG at the level of the tissues favor the taut form, which has low oxygen affinity and releases oxygen in the tissues.
