On July 9, 1861, a hot day, Fanny was putting locks of her children's hair into an envelope and attempting to seal it with hot sealing wax while Longfellow took a nap.
His popularity spread throughout Europe as well and his poetry was translated during his lifetime into Italian, French, German, and other languages.
He wrote, "I hate the sight of pen, ink, and paper...
A number of schools are named after him in various states as well.
As a friend once wrote to him, "no other poet was so fully recognized in his lifetime".
Longfellow attended a dame school at the age of three and by age six was enrolled at the private Portland Academy.
Longfellow retired from teaching in 1854, to focus on his writing, living the remainder of his life in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in a former Revolutionary War headquarters of George Washington.
There, he further studied German as well as Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Finnish, and Icelandic.
A small collection, ''Poems on Slavery'', was published in 1842 as Longfellow's first public support of abolitionism.
::These eighteen years, through all the changing scenes
The visitor then asked if he had died here.
Though much of his work is categorized as lyric poetry, Longfellow experimented with many forms, including hexameter and free verse.
I say she ''shall''!
Longfellow lived there for the rest of his life.
Longfellow, despite his aversion to public speaking, accepted an offer from Joshua Chamberlain to speak at his fiftieth reunion at Bowdoin College; he read the poem "Morituri Salutamus" so quietly that few could hear him.
Much of his poetry imparts cultural and moral values, particularly focused on promoting life as being more than material pursuits.
Lewis Mumford said that Longfellow could be completely removed from the history of literature without much effect.
In preparing the volume, Longfellow hired Katherine Sherwood Bonner as an amanuensis.
Longfellow intended the anthology "to bring together, into a compact and convenient form, as large an amount as possible of those English translations which are scattered through many volumes, and are not accessible to the general reader".
He was such an admired figure in the United States during his life that his 70th birthday in 1877 took on the air of a national holiday, with parades, speeches, and the reading of his poetry.
He added, "Longfellow was no revolutionarie: never traveled new paths: of course never broke new paths."
His mother encouraged his enthusiasm for reading and learning, introducing him to ''Robinson Crusoe'' and ''Don Quixote''.
Longfellow began publishing his poetry, including the collection ''Voices of the Night'' in 1839.
:Such is the cross I wear upon my breast
John Greenleaf Whittier suggested it was this massive correspondence that led to Longfellow's death, writing: "My friend Longfellow was driven to death by these incessant demands".
Between January 1824 and his graduation in 1825, he published nearly 40 minor poems.
He gave the student commencement address.
During the 1860s, Longfellow supported abolitionism and especially hoped for reconciliation between the northern and southern states after the American Civil War.
In fact, Longfellow rarely wrote on current subjects and seemed detached from contemporary American concerns.
On May 10, 1843, after seven years, Longfellow received a letter from Fanny Appleton agreeing to marry him and, too restless to take a carriage, walked 90 minutes to meet her at her house.
In March 1882, Longfellow went to bed with severe stomach pain.
The ''New-Yorker'' called him "one of the very few in our time who has successfully aimed in putting poetry to its best and sweetest uses".
In 1845, he published ''The Poets and Poetry of Europe'', an 800-page compilation of translations made by other writers, including many by his friend and colleague Cornelius Conway Felton.
Longfellow considered moving to New York after New York University considered offering him a newly created professorship of modern languages, though there would be no salary.
In Madrid, he spent time with Washington Irving and was particularly impressed by the author's work ethic.
He and Fanny had six children: Charles Appleton (1844–1893), Ernest Wadsworth (1845–1921), Fanny (1847–1848), Alice Mary (1850–1928), Edith (1853–1915), and Anne Allegra (1855–1934).
As a very private man, Longfellow did not often add autobiographical elements to his poetry.
He boarded with a clergyman for a time before rooming in 1823 on the third floor of what is now known as Winthrop Hall.
The next morning, July 10, 1861, she died shortly after 10 o'clock after requesting a cup of coffee.
His memorial poem to her, a sonnet called "The Cross of Snow", was not published in his lifetime.
He had difficulty coping with the death of his second wife.
In "Nature", for example, death is depicted as bedtime for a cranky child.
Longfellow was born on February 27, 1807, to Stephen Longfellow and Zilpah (Wadsworth) Longfellow in Portland, Maine, then a district of Massachusetts, and he grew up in what is now known as the Wadsworth-Longfellow House.
I do not believe that I was born for such a lot.
It is not ''pride'', but the madness of passion".
He also encouraged and supported other translators.
He is a protagonist in Matthew Pearl's murder mystery ''The Dante Club'' (2003).
On September 14, 1831, Longfellow married Mary Storer Potter, a childhood friend from Portland.
His time abroad would last three years and cost his father $2,604.24.
Longfellow was the most popular poet of his day.
The trustees raised his salary to $800 with an additional $100 to serve as the college's librarian, a post which required one hour of work per day.
The lady says she ''will not''!
His friend George Stillman Hillard encouraged Longfellow in the pursuit: "I delight to see you keeping up so stout a heart for the resolve to conquer is half the battle in love as well as war".
Members included Cornelius Conway Felton, George Stillman Hillard, and Charles Sumner, the latter of whom would become Longfellow's closest friend over the next 30 years.
Elizabeth Craigie, widow of Andrew Craigie, owned the home and rented rooms on the second floor.
He became the most popular American poet of his day and also had success overseas.
When Longfellow graduated from Bowdoin, he was ranked fourth in the class, and had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
In ''Kavanagh'', a character says:
Longfellow's friend Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. wrote of him as "our chief singer" and one who "wins and warms... kindles, softens, cheers and calms the wildest woe and stays the bitterest tears!"
He studied at Bowdoin College.
Longfellow did not respond publicly, but, after Poe's death, he wrote: "The harshness of his criticisms I have never attributed to anything but the irritation of a sensitive nature chafed by some indefinite sense of wrong".
When his son was injured during the war, he wrote the poem "Christmas Bells", later the basis of the carol ''I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day''.
He worried he would go insane and begged "not to be sent to an asylum" and noted that he was "inwardly bleeding to death".
The full three-volume translation was published in the spring of 1867, though Longfellow would continue to revise it, and went through four printings in its first year.
Even so, Longfellow, like many during this period, called for the development of high quality American literature.
There Longfellow met Nathaniel Hawthorne, who would later become his lifelong friend.
There was some confusion over its original manuscript.
Over the years, Longfellow's personality has become part of his reputation.
In his years there he earned a reputation as being very studious and became fluent in Latin.
His love for Fanny is evident in the following lines from Longfellow's only love poem, the sonnet "The Evening Star", which he wrote in October 1845: "O my beloved, my sweet Hesperus!
He was also important as a translator; his translation of Dante became a required possession for those who wanted to be a part of high culture.
Two notable exceptions are dedicated to the death of members of his family.
He was inspired, for example, by Norse mythology for "The Skeleton in Armor" and by Finnish legends for ''The Song of Hiawatha''.
He wrote in his journal in 1878: "I have only one desire; and that is for harmony, and a frank and honest understanding between North and South".
Contemporary writer Edgar Allan Poe wrote to Longfellow in May 1841 of his "fervent admiration which your genius has inspired in me" and later called him "unquestionably the best poet in America".
After her death, Longfellow had difficulty writing poetry for a time and focused on translating works from foreign languages.
My morning and my evening star of love!"
After being printed in ''Graham's Magazine'', its editor Rufus Wilmot Griswold saved the manuscript from the trash.
Poet Walt Whitman also considered Longfellow an imitator of European forms, though he praised his ability to reach a popular audience as "the expressor of common themes – of the little songs of the masses".
Longfellow's popularity rapidly declined, beginning shortly after his death and into the twentieth century as academics began to appreciate poets like Walt Whitman, Edwin Arlington Robinson, and Robert Frost.
Irving encouraged the young Longfellow to pursue writing.
Longfellow also became part of the local social scene, creating a group of friends who called themselves the Five of Clubs.
Over a half a century later, Longfellow's youngest daughter Annie explained the story differently, claiming that there had been no candle or wax but that the fire had started from a self-lighting match that had fallen on the floor.
20th-century poet Lewis Putnam Turco concluded "Longfellow was minor and derivative in every way throughout his career... nothing more than a hack imitator of the English Romantics."
Neil Diamond's 1974 hit song, "Longfellow Serenade", is a reference to the poet.
Longfellow was of entirely English ancestry, all of which had been in New England since the early 1600s.
He stayed at the Portland Academy until the age of fourteen.
His facial injuries led him to stop shaving, thereafter wearing the beard which became his trademark.
A critic for ''The Dial'' agreed, calling it "the thinnest of all Mr. Longfellow's thin books; spirited and polished like its forerunners; but the topic would warrant a deeper tone".
As a professor, Longfellow was well liked, though he disliked being "constantly a playmate for boys" rather than "stretching out and grappling with ''men's'' minds."
He suffered from neuralgia, which caused him constant pain, and he also had poor eyesight.
At Longfellow's funeral, his friend Ralph Waldo Emerson called him "a sweet and beautiful soul".
He was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws from Harvard in 1859.
As he says, "what a writer asks of his reader is not so much to ''like'' as to ''listen''".
"Not yet", he replied.
As an editor of the ''Boston Evening Transcript'' wrote in 1846, "Whatever the miserable envy of trashy criticism may write against Longfellow, one thing is most certain, no American poet is more read".
The professorship was not created and Longfellow agreed to continue teaching at Bowdoin.
In December 1834, Longfellow received a letter from Josiah Quincy III, president of Harvard College, offering him the Smith Professorship of Modern Languages with the stipulation that he spend a year or so abroad.
His literary income was increasing considerably: in 1840, he had made $219 from his work but the year 1850 brought him $1,900.
Poet John Greenleaf Whittier said that Longfellow's poetry illustrated "the careful moulding by which art attains the graceful ease and chaste simplicity of nature".
He had become one of the first American celebrities and was also popular in Europe.
He expressed his grief in the sonnet "The Cross of Snow" (1879), which he wrote eighteen years later to commemorate her death:
Nathan Appleton bought the Craigie House as a wedding present to the pair.
There, he began courting Appleton's daughter, Frances "Fanny" Appleton.
He has been criticized, however, for imitating European styles and writing specifically for the masses.
Longfellow, awakened from his nap, rushed to help her and threw a rug over her, though it was too small.
His first wife Mary Potter died in 1835, after a miscarriage.
As scholar Bliss Perry later wrote, Longfellow was so highly praised that criticizing him was a criminal act like "carrying a rifle into a national park".
''Ballads and Other Poems'' was published shortly thereafter in 1841 and included "The Village Blacksmith" and "The Wreck of the Hesperus", which were instantly popular.
Children adored him and, when the "spreading chestnut-tree" mentioned in the poem "The Village Blacksmith" was cut down, the children of Cambridge had the tree converted into an armchair which they presented to the poet.
In 1909, a seated statue of Longfellow sculpted by William Couper was unveiled in Washington, D. C.
He joined the Peucinian Society, a group of students with Federalist leanings.
On June 14, 1853, Longfellow held a farewell dinner party at his Cambridge home for his friend Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was preparing to move overseas.
They were soon married.
However, as Longfellow himself wrote, the poems were "so mild that even a Slaveholder might read them without losing his appetite for breakfast".
In July 1839, he wrote to a friend: "Victory hangs doubtful.
Longfellow met Boston industrialist Nathan Appleton and his family, including his son Thomas Gold Appleton, in the town of Thun, Switzerland.
He traveled to France, Spain, Italy, Germany, back to France, then England before returning to the United States in mid-August 1829.
He was deeply saddened by her death, writing "One thought occupies me night and day... She is dead — She is dead!
Longfellow was surprised to hear that it had been saved, unusual for a printing office, and asked to borrow it so that he could revise it, forgetting to return it to Griswold.
We want a national literature commensurate with our mountains and rivers... We want a national epic that shall correspond to the size of the country... We want a national drama in which scope shall be given to our gigantic ideas and to the unparalleled activity of our people...
The story, possibly apocryphal, is that an influential trustee, Benjamin Orr, had been so impressed by Longfellow's translation of Horace that he was hired under the condition that he travel to Europe to study French, Spanish, and Italian.
Many of the metaphors he used in his poetry as well as subject matter came from legends, mythology, and literature.
Margaret Fuller judged him "artificial and imitative" and lacking force.
Their second-youngest daughter, Edith, married Richard Henry Dana III, son of the popular writer Richard Henry Dana, Jr., author of ''Two Years Before the Mast''.
On August 27, 1829, he wrote to the president of Bowdoin that he was turning down the professorship because he considered the $600 salary "disproportionate to the duties required".
During the courtship, Longfellow frequently walked from Cambridge to the Appleton home in Beacon Hill in Boston by crossing the Boston Bridge.
Longfellow told her it was not.
When he returned to the United States in 1836, Longfellow took up the professorship at Harvard.
While in Spain, Longfellow was saddened to learn that his favorite sister, Elizabeth, had died of tuberculosis at the age of 20 that May while he was abroad.
Towards the end of his life, contemporaries considered him more of a children's poet as many of his readers were children.
Longfellow's early collections, ''Voices of the Night'' and ''Ballads and Other Poems'', made him instantly popular.
In reality, Longfellow's life was much more difficult than was assumed.
The death of his second wife Frances, as biographer Charles Calhoun wrote, deeply affected Longfellow personally but "seemed not to touch his poetry, at least directly".
Many of his works helped shape the American character and its legacy, particularly with the poem "Paul Revere's Ride".
All day I am weary and sad".
He was required to live in Cambridge to be close to the campus and, therefore, rented rooms at the Craigie House in the spring of 1837, now preserved as the Longfellow House–Washington's Headquarters National Historic Site.
Typically, Longfellow would carefully consider the subject of his poetic ideas for a long time before deciding on the right metrical form for it.
As James Russell Lowell said, Longfellow had an "absolute sweetness, simplicity, and modesty".
He once attended a ball without her and noted, "The lights seemed dimmer, the music sadder, the flowers fewer, and the women less fair."
He spent much of his summers as a child at his grandfather Peleg's farm in the western Maine town of Hiram.
"Resignation", written as a response to the death of his daughter Fanny in 1848, does not use first-person pronouns and is instead a generalized poem of mourning.
The New England Anti-Slavery Association, however, was satisfied with the collection enough to reprint it for further distribution.
The bulk of ''Voices of the Night'', Longfellow's debut book of poetry, was translations though he also included nine original poems and seven poems he had written as a teenager.
While overseas, he learned French, Spanish, Portuguese, and German, mostly without formal instruction.
She did not recover and died after several weeks of illness at the age of 22 on November 29, 1835.
In the twentieth century, literary scholar Kermit Vanderbilt noted, "Increasingly rare is the scholar who braves ridicule to justify the art of Longfellow's popular rhymings."
A contemporary reviewer noted in 1848 that Longfellow was creating a "Goody two-shoes kind of literature... slipshod, sentimental stories told in the style of the nursery, beginning in nothing and ending in nothing".
The rapidity with which American readers embraced Longfellow was unparalleled in publishing history in the United States; by 1874, he was earning $3,000 per poem.
Longfellow wrote many lyric poems known for their musicality and often presenting stories of mythology and legend.
Several years later, he wrote the poem "Mezzo Cammin," which expressed his personal struggles in his middle years.
Her dress suddenly caught fire, though it is unclear exactly how; it may have been burning wax or a lighted candle that fell on her dress.
He has been presented as a gentle, placid, poetic soul: an image perpetuated by his brother Samuel Longfellow, who wrote an early biography which specifically emphasized these points.
The home, built in 1759, had once been the headquarters of George Washington during the Siege of Boston beginning in July 1775.
He also published a travel book, ''Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea'', first published in serial form before a book edition was released in 1835.
The often vindictive Griswold wrote an angry letter in response.
It was reported that 10,000 copies of ''The Courtship of Miles Standish'' sold in London in a single day.
It may have been joyless work.
However, after Poe's reputation as a critic increased, he publicly accused Longfellow of plagiarism in what has been since termed by Poe biographers as "The Longfellow War".
After graduating in 1825, he was offered a job as professor of modern languages at his alma mater.
In 1874, Samuel Cutler Ward helped him sell the poem "The Hanging of the Crane" to the ''New York Ledger'' for $3,000; it was the highest price ever paid for a poem.
His father was a lawyer, and his maternal grandfather, Peleg Wadsworth, was a general in the American Revolutionary War and a Member of Congress.
Longfellow was the second of eight children; his siblings were Stephen (1805), Elizabeth (1808), Anne (1810), Alexander (1814), Mary (1816), Ellen (1818) and Samuel (1819).
Much of his work is recognized for its melody-like musicality.
In the last two decades of his life, he often received requests for autographs from strangers, which he always sent.
Three years later, he was inspired to write the poem "Footsteps of Angels" about her.
After returning, Longfellow published a play in 1842, ''The Spanish Student'', reflecting his memories from his time in Spain in the 1820s.
I am almost confident in believing, that if I can ever rise in the world it must be by the exercise of my talents in the wide field of literature.
Longfellow was born in Portland, Maine, which was then a part of Massachusetts.
His first major poetry collections were ''Voices of the Night'' (1839) and ''Ballads and Other Poems'' (1841).
A London critic in the ''London Quarterly Review'', however, condemned all American poetry, saying, "with two or three exceptions, there is not a poet of mark in the whole union" but singled out Longfellow as one of those exceptions.
He endured the pain for several days with the help of opium before he died surrounded by family on Friday, March 24, 1882.
Whatever the motivation, he began his tour of Europe in May 1826 aboard the ship ''Cadmus''.
The next year, 1876, he declined an offer to be nominated for the Board of Overseers at Harvard "for reasons very conclusive to my own mind".
He is buried with both of his wives at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
In both versions of the story, however, Fanny was taken to her room to recover and a doctor was called.
Longfellow also often used allegory in his work.
In his senior year, Longfellow wrote to his father about his aspirations:
Longfellow, in trying to save her, had burned himself badly enough for him to be unable to attend her funeral.
At the time of his death, his estate was worth an estimated $356,320.
He pursued his literary goals by submitting poetry and prose to various newspapers and magazines, partly due to encouragement from Professor Thomas Cogswell Upham.
Longfellow often used didacticism in his poetry, though he focused on it less in his later years.
The "Dante Club", as it was called, regularly included William Dean Howells, James Russell Lowell, Charles Eliot Norton and other occasional guests.
In the fall of 1822, the 15-year-old Longfellow enrolled at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maine, along with his brother Stephen.
A more modern critic said, "Who, except wretched schoolchildren, now reads Longfellow?"
Longfellow was very quiet, reserved, and private; in later years, he was known for being unsocial and avoided leaving home.
Scholars generally regard the work as autobiographical, reflecting the translator as an aging artist facing his impending death.
Longfellow spent several years translating Dante Alighieri's ''Divine Comedy''.
His published poetry shows great versatility, using anapestic and trochaic forms, blank verse, heroic couplets, ballads and sonnets.
After spending time in Europe he became a professor at Bowdoin and, later, at Harvard College.
Longfellow had her body embalmed immediately and placed in a lead coffin inside an oak coffin which was then shipped to Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston.
He wrote to friend Charles Sumner: "I do not believe anyone ''can'' be perfectly well, who has a brain and a heart".
The ''Southern Literary Messenger'' immediately put Longfellow "among the first of our American poets".
In 1854, Longfellow retired from Harvard, devoting himself entirely to writing.
His accusations may have been a publicity stunt to boost readership of the ''Broadway Journal'', for which he was the editor at the time.
On August 22, 1879, a female admirer traveled to Longfellow's house in Cambridge and, unaware to whom she was speaking, asked Longfellow: "Is this the house where Longfellow was born?"
Devastated by her death, he never fully recovered and occasionally resorted to laudanum and ether to deal with it.
At first, the independent-minded Appleton was not interested in marriage but Longfellow was determined.
In a word, we want a national literature altogether shaggy and unshorn, that shall shake the earth, like a herd of buffaloes thundering over the prairies.
In late 1839, Longfellow published ''Hyperion'', a book in prose inspired by his trips abroad and his unsuccessful courtship of Fanny Appleton.
