Like other Southern Congressmen, Clay took domestic slaves to Washington, DC to support his household.
In the presidential election, Jackson took 56% of the popular vote and won almost every state outside of New England; Clay was especially distressed by Jackson's victory in Kentucky.
Clay presided at the founding meeting of the ACS on December 21, 1816, at the Davis Hotel in Washington, D.C. Attendees included Robert Finley, James Monroe, Bushrod Washington, Andrew Jackson, Francis Scott Key, and Daniel Webster.
With the defeat of Adams, Clay became the leader of the National Republicans.
President Taylor, who had opposed the compromise from the start, died in June 1851, and he was succeeded by Millard Fillmore.
However, he was unsuccessful in all of his attempts to reach his nation's highest office.
Although Adams and Jackson still considered themselves Republicans, Adams followers began to call themselves National Republicans and Jackson's followers "Democrats."
Facing little opposition at the convention, Clay won the party's presidential nomination, and the convention nominated Pennsylvania Congressman John Sergeant as Clay's running mate.
Jackson opposed using the federal government to promote economic modernization, thereby appealing to his agrarian base that wanted rural expansion but distrusted cities.
One was Humphrey Marshall, an "aristocratic lawyer who possessed a sarcastic tongue," who had been hostile toward Clay in 1806 during the trial of Aaron Burr.
Clay ran for president in 1824 and lost, finishing fourth in a four-person contest.
Governor John Floyd of Virginia won South Carolina's eleven electoral votes.
Polk won the election, taking 49.5% of the popular vote and 170 of the 275 electoral votes.
The Tariff of 1828, dubbed the "tariff of abominations," had raised tariffs considerably in an attempt to protect fledgling factories.
Webster, Ohio Senator Thomas Corwin, Associate Justice John McLean, and Generals Winfield Scott and Zachary Taylor emerged as potential challengers for the Whig nomination.
As election returns came to Washington, Clay rightly assumed that no one had won a majority of electoral votes, and that Jackson and Adams (in either order) would finish first and second in the electoral college.
Clay announced on the Senate floor the next day that he intended to persevere and pass each individual part of the bill.
In February 1842, with the United States facing a looming budget crisis, Clay proposed a detailed economic plan that combined budget cuts with an increased tariff.
In 1791, Henry Watkins moved the family to Kentucky, joining his brother in the pursuit of fertile new lands in the West.
In November 1847, Clay delivered a speech that was harshly critical of the Mexican-American War and President Polk, signalling the start of his own 1848 candidacy.
* A more stringent Fugitive Slave Act.
Clay was able to engineer a compromise that allowed Missouri to join as a state in August 1821.
The war started poorly for the Americans and for Clay, who lost friends and relatives in the fighting.
She is interred with her husband in the vault of his monument at the Lexington Cemetery.
Clay's role in the compromise, as well as his opposition to Jackson, strongly increased his approval among those in the South.
When in 1826 the U.S. was invited to attend the Columbia Conference of new nations, opposition emerged, and the American delegation never arrived.
Clay initially viewed Webster as his strongest rival, but Clay, Harrison, and General Winfield Scott emerged as the principal candidates at the 1839 Whig National Convention.
Clay was surprised by Van Buren's defeat but remained confident of his chances in the 1844 election, and Whigs mocked Polk for his relative obscurity.
Clay supported the Monroe Doctrine, which called for the non-intervention of European powers in the Americas, though Clay was not as pleased with the part of the Monroe Doctrine that called for American non-intervention in European affairs.
Inspired by the Anti-Masonic Party's national convention, Clay's followers arranged for a national nominating convention, with the intention of anointing Clay as the National Republican nominee.
Like his predecessors, Clay insisted that the French pay for damages arising from attacks on American shipping during the Napoleonic Wars, but the French refused.
The North and South would come to increased tensions during Polk's presidency over the extension of slavery into Texas and beyond.
In 1805, Clay was appointed to the faculty of Transylvania University, where Clay taught, among others, future Kentucky Governor Robert P. Letcher, and Robert Todd, the future father-in-law of Abraham Lincoln.
Furious, President Jackson threatened to lead an army to South Carolina and hang any man who refused to obey the law.
Clay supported the Greek independence revolutionaries in 1824 who wished to separate from the Ottoman Empire, an early move into European affairs.
Henry Clay was a second cousin of Cassius Marcellus Clay, who became a politician and an abolitionist in Kentucky.
Discouraged by the Democratic victory, Clay began pondering retirement from public life.
One of Clay's clients was his father-in-law, Colonel Thomas Hart, an early settler of Kentucky and a prominent businessman.
Clay adapted well to his new role, and his handwriting earned him the attention of George Wythe, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, mentor of Thomas Jefferson, and a judge on Virginia's High Court of Chancery.
Clay and his wife had eleven children (six daughters and five sons): Henrietta (1800–1801), Theodore (1802–1870), Thomas (1803–1871), Susan (1805–1825), Anne (1807–1835), Lucretia (1809–1823), Henry, Jr. (1811–1847), Eliza (1813–1825), Laura (1815–1817), James Brown Clay (1817–1864), and John Morrison Clay (1821–1887).
Marshall hit Clay once in the thigh.
During the convention, Thaddeus Stevens, a Pennsylvania Antimason and supporter of Harrison, arranged for the Virginia delegation to receive a letter that showed Scott's anti-slavery views.
Jackson was outraged by the election, and he and his supporters accused Clay and Adams of having reached a "Corrupt Bargain."
Clay then resigned, orchestrating the selection of Crittenden as his successor, and began to prepare for another presidential campaign.
After beginning his law career, on April 11, 1799, Clay married Lucretia Hart at the Hart home in Lexington, Kentucky.
Though he felt confident that he could win election to a full Senate term, Clay instead chose to seek election to the United States House of Representatives.
On June 29, 1852, Clay died of tuberculosis in Washington, D.C., at the age of 75.
However, Whigs tended to favor a stronger legislature, a stronger federal government, a higher tariff, spending on infrastructure, re-authorization of the Second Bank of the United States, moral reform (such as the temperance movement), and publicly-funded education.
Neither party took a strong national stand on slavery.
Though he did not remain in Washington long, Clay won numerous friends and established a reputation as a diligent worker and an entertaining public speaker.
The Bluegrass Region, with Lexington at its center, had quickly grown in the preceding decades, and had only recently stopped being under the threat of Native American raids with the end of the Northwest Indian War.
Jackson's policies united his enemies, including southerners, Antimasons, and National Republicans.
He was chosen Speaker on the first day of his first session, something never done before or since (except for the first ever session of Congress back in 1789).
Douglas separated the bills and guided them through the Senate.
In 1804, Clay purchased land outside of Lexington, with the dream of building a plantation called "Ashland," named for the surrounding forest of ash trees.
After Tyler told Whig Congressman Alexander Stuart that he would sign a similar bill that addressed his concerns, Congressional Whigs wrote another bill that they hoped would satisfy Tyler.
Jackson's opponents took on the name "Whig," which proved to be a more unifying term than "National Republican" had, as the latter term was too closely associated with northern business interests.
Prior to the Civil War, Lincoln and Clay held similar views about slavery and the union, each calling for gradual emancipation and resettlement of African-Americans.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the Mexican-American War and ceded new lands to the United States.
Harrison initially pursued a policy of "non-action," hoping to avoid slavery debates by immediately admitting the new territory as states.
With the help of loyal lieutenants John C. Calhoun and William Lowndes, Clay passed the Tariff of 1816, which served the dual purpose of raising revenue and protecting American goods.
By the time of his death, his only surviving children were sons Theodore, Thomas, James Brown Clay and John Morrison Clay, who inherited the estate and took portions for use.
The Taylor-Fillmore ticket won 47.3% of the popular vote and 163 of 290 electoral votes.
Clay and his law partner John Allen successfully defended Burr.
Reflecting his belief in legislative supremacy and his anger at Tyler's actions, Clay unsuccessfully proposed Constitutional amendments removing the president's veto power and giving Congress the authority to appoint the Secretary of the Treasury.
Tyler had joined the Whig ticket largely due to his perceived personal closeness with Clay, but he quickly proved to have political views of his own.
Even Clay's long-time ally, John Crittenden, abandoned Clay's potential candidacy in favor of Taylor
Combined, these two groups were able to crush the third.
Democrats, meanwhile, nominated Van Buren for a second term.
Clay, himself a Freemason, considered withdrawing from the race in hopes of unifying Jackson's opponents, but he ultimately decided to stay in the race.
Clay and Adams maintained an uneasy relationship marked by frequent clashes, and Gallatin emerged as the unofficial leader of the American commission.
Clay maneuvered House voting in favor of John Quincy Adams, who appointed him as Secretary of State.
The resolutions included:
Clay originally intended the resolutions to be voted on separately, but at the urging of southerners he agreed to the creation of a Committee of Thirteen to consider the measures.
Wirt won 7.8% of the popular vote and carried Vermont.
Clay received a significant share of the presidential electoral vote in three separate elections, a feat matched only by John Adams, Andrew Jackson, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Grover Cleveland, Richard Nixon, Thomas Jefferson, and William Jennings Bryan, and only the latter (like Clay) failed to win a presidential election.
On his return to the House, President Madison called for an ambitious domestic package, including the protection of domestic manufacturing, infrastructure investment, a stable currency, and a fairly large standing army and navy.
As 1844 approached, Clay wanted to focus on economic issues, especially the recovering economy which they argued was a result of the Tariff of 1842.
In 1957, a Senate Committee selected Clay as one of the five greatest U.S.
Clay unanimously won the presidential nomination at the 1844 Whig National Convention, but southern Democrats successfully opposed Van Buren's nomination, and the 1844 Democratic National Convention instead chose former Speaker of the House James K. Polk.
Tyler retained Harrison's Cabinet, but quickly made it known that he had reservations about re-establishing a national bank, a key priority of Clay's.
Clay won Kentucky, Ohio, and Missouri, but the failure of Clay's supporters in New York and Louisiana allowed Crawford to finish third.
To quell rumors that he did not intend to seek the presidency, Clay issued a nationally-published statement of his intent to seek the 1848 Whig nomination, an unprecedented and unpopular act at a time when politicians were supposed to adhere to the fiction that they were reluctant recruits for office.
On the insistence of the Kentucky legislature, Clay helped prevent the re-charter of the First Bank of the United States, arguing that it interfered with state banks and infringed on states' rights.
Described later by Friedrich List, it was designed to allow the fledgling American manufacturing sector, largely centered on the eastern seaboard, to compete with British manufacturing through the creation of tariffs.
As Speaker of the House, Clay felt confident that he could win a contingent presidential election held in the House.
Frustrated at Eustis's perceived inaction, Clay urged William Henry Harrison to reinforce the American force at the Siege of Detroit.
He may have been freed or "given his time" by one of Clay's sons, as Dupuy continued to work at Ashland, for pay.
Webster was instead chosen as Secretary of State, while John J. Crittenden, a close Clay ally, was chosen as Attorney General.
Clay's headstone reads: "I know no North—no South—no East—no West."
It quieted the controversy between Northerners and Southerners over the expansion of slavery, and helped delay secession and civil war until the 1860s.
It was still used as a method of settling disputes of honor.
However, Polk, a former Governor of Tennessee, convinced Tyler to drop out of the race and effectively courted the various factions of Democrats.
Henry Clay helped establish and became president in 1816 of the American Colonization Society, a group that wanted to establish a colony for free American blacks in Africa; it founded Monrovia, in what became Liberia, for that purpose.
Henry Clay was born on April 12, 1777, at the Clay homestead in Hanover County, Virginia, in a story-and-a-half frame house.
However, Clay continued to fight them on the issue of Mississippi River navigation rights, judging that the British wanted peace more than they were letting on; Clay was proven right when the British offered an even better deal.
Calhoun was too ill to read the speech, and Virginia Senator James Murray Mason did so for him on March 4.
Adams and Clay were both wary of forming entangling alliances with the emerging states, but continued to uphold the Monroe Doctrine which called for European non-intervention in former colonies.
As a plantation owner, Clay held slaves during his lifetime, but freed them in his will.
Such an age qualification issue has occurred with only two other U.S.
When Clay returned to Kentucky in 1807, he was elected as the Speaker of the state House of Representatives.
Clay's national plan, which was rooted in Alexander Hamilton's American School, took on the name "The American System."
In the lead-up to the 1848 presidential election, Clay refused to publicly commit to another candidacy, saying that he would only seek the office if he retained the support of his fellow Whigs.
Clay was reluctant to leave Congress, but chose to felt duty-bound to accept the offer, and so he resigned from Congress and prepared to travel to Europe.
A key point of contention between the two men was over the Maysville Road.
Clay declined Madison's offer of an appointment as minister to Russia, and Clay won another term as Speaker of the House.
Early in Jackson's presidency, many doubted that Jackson would seek a second term, and Clay, Vice President John Calhoun, and former Treasury Secretary William Crawford (whose health had somewhat improved since 1824) all began preparations for the upcoming election.
With Van Buren still damaged by the Panic of 1837, Harrison won 52.9% of the vote and 234 of the 294 electoral votes.
Clay's legal career would continue long after his election to Congress, and in the 1823 Supreme Court case, ''Green v. Biddle'', Clay submitted the Supreme Court's first amicus curiae.
As the Adams administration came to an end, Clay declined an offer to be nominated to the Supreme Court and returned home.
In hopes of winning New York's electoral votes, Clay named former Senator Nathan Sanford as his running mate.
Senator John C. Calhoun composed a speech arguing against the compromise and warning of the possibility of disunion.
Many of the more anti-slavery northerners, such as New York Senator William H. Seward, opposed the compromise as well.
Senators, along with Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun, Robert La Follette, and Robert A. Taft.
Clay was humiliated that he finished behind the invalid Crawford and Jackson, but supporters of the three remaining presidential candidates immediately began courting his support for the House vote.
After serving two brief stints in the Senate, Clay won election to the House of Representatives in 1810 and was elected Speaker of the House in 1811.
Lincoln wholeheartedly supported Clay's economic programs.
After President Tyler concluded an annexation treaty with Texas, Clay announced his opposition to the annexation, stating his belief that the United States should focus on developing territory already part of the Union, and arguing that annexation would cause sectional tensions over slavery.
In November 1797, Clay relocated to Lexington, Kentucky, near where his parents and siblings then resided in Versailles, Kentucky.
Ideologically, Adams and Clay both supported a relatively strong federal government, while Crawford and Jackson tended to oppose federal infrastructure projects, instead favoring stronger state governments.
On the first ballot of the convention, Clay narrowly led Harrison, but Scott also received a solid minority of the vote.
Had Clay won New York, which Polk won by a margin of 38,000 votes out of a total of 2.7 million votes, Clay would have won the election.
For several years (1866–1878), James Clay allowed the mansion to be used as a residence for the regent of Kentucky University, forerunner of the University of Kentucky and present-day Transylvania University.
Harrison ran on a campaign that emphasized his personal heroism and Van Buren's failures rather than Whig policies.
Clay also departed from precedent by frequently taking part in floor debates.
In August 1841, Tyler was presented with a bill that incorporated some of Tyler's proposals.
The Treaty of Ghent was signed on December 24, 1814, ending the war.
The group was made up of both abolitionists from the North, who wanted to end slavery, and slaveholders, who wanted to deport free blacks to reduce what they considered a threat to the stability of slave society.
President Taylor and the 31st United States Congress faced several vexing problems regarding the disposition of lands acquired in the Mexican-American War.
By 1835 all six daughters had died of varying causes, two when very young, two as children, and the last two as young women: from whooping cough, yellow fever, and complications of childbirth, respectively.
Because Dupuy refused to return voluntarily to Kentucky, Clay had his agent arrest her.
In the general election, Monroe easily defeated the Federalist candidate, Rufus King.
The 1852 pro-slavery novel novel ''Life at the South; or, "Uncle Tom's Cabin" As It Is'', by W.L.G.
Though Clay had previously called for gradual emancipation in Kentucky, he sided with the southerners in voting down Talmadge's amendment.
Only Sam Rayburn has occupied the office for a longer amount of time.
At 34, Clay also became the youngest Speaker, though Robert M. T. Hunter would later win that distinction.
Though many (including Clay) did not take his candidacy seriously at first, Jackson's emergence threatened Clay's presidential chances, since both candidates had a strong following in the western states.
After apprenticing himself to Kentucky attorneys such as George Nicholas, John Breckinridge, and James Brown, Clay established his own law practice, frequently working on debt collection and land disputes.
The 1824 election thus had four major candidates, all of them Democratic-Republicans: Adams of Massachusetts, Crawford of Georgia, Jackson of Tennessee, and Clay of Kentucky.
Using the pseudonym "Scaevola" (in reference to Gaius Mucius Scaevola), Clay advocated for direct elections for Kentucky elected officials and the gradual abolition of slavery in Kentucky.
Martin Van Buren, a prominent backer of Crawford, asked Clay to serve as Crawford's running mate; Clay declined the offer, but rumors of the offer hurt Clay's presidential candidacy.
Tyler sought to create a new party opposed to both Clay and Van Buren, the presumed Democratic nominee.
Fillmore signaled his support for the compromise, offering a huge boost to its chances.
At the time of his death, Clay's father owned more than 22 slaves, making him part of the planter class in Virginia (those men who owned 20 or more slaves).
As the 1840 presidential election approached, many expected that the Whigs would win control of the presidency in the aftermath of the Panic of 1837.
Clay's health was also an issue, as Clay turned 70 in 1847, and Clay may have suffered from early-stage tuberculosis in the late 1840s.
By 1824, with Crawford still in the race, Clay concluded that no candidate would win a majority of electoral votes; such a scenario would require the House of Representatives to decide the election.
He was viewed as the primary representative of Western interests in this group, and was given the names "Henry of the West" and "The Western Star."
Following the election, the National Republicans united with other opponents of Jackson to form the Whig Party, which remained one of the two major American political parties until after Clay's death.
The bill was opposed for different reasons by hardliners on both sides.
Shortly after the death of Clay's father, the British under Banastre Tarleton raided Clay's home, leaving the family in a precarious position.
Clay instead proposed simultaneous statehood for both Missouri and Maine, which was then a part of Massachusetts.
At the time, the Republicans used a congressional nominating caucus to choose their presidential nominees, giving Congressmen a powerful role in the presidential selection process.
Despite his absence, Clay's constituents elected him in 1814 to another term.
Like most other Kentuckians, Clay became a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, but, as Kentucky debated revising its constitution, Clay clashed with the state party leadership.
Defeated yet again, Clay returned to his career as an attorney, and a stream of donations helped Clay retire much of the debt he and his son, Thomas, had accumulated.
Clay's drive to increase the power of the office Speaker was aided by President James Madison, who similarly believed in the supremacy of Congress in most matters.
Unfortunately for Clay, Monroe had decided to place a northeasterner into the most prominent Cabinet position, and was also fearful that the appointment of Clay to State would look like a reward for Clay's support in the nominating caucus.
Clay left the Senate to recuperate in Newport, Rhode Island.
His term ended before his thirtieth birthday.
'''Henry Clay, Sr.''' (April 12, 1777&nbsp;– June 29, 1852) was an American lawyer and planter, politician, and skilled orator who represented Kentucky in both the United States Senate and House of Representatives.
However, in October 1813, the British asked Madison begin negotiations in Europe, and Madison asked Clay to join his diplomatic team.
Clay's influence in Kentucky state politics was such that in 1806 the Kentucky legislature elected him to the Senate seat of John Breckinridge, who had resigned when appointed as US Attorney General.
In 1818, General Andrew Jackson had crossed into Spanish Florida to suppress raids by Seminole Indians.
Clay frequently called on the Monroe administration to recognize these republics, which Clay saw as similar to the United States, but Monroe wanted to avoid antagonizing Spain while he planned to acquire Spanish Florida.
John Randolph, a fellow Republican but also a member of the tertium quids group that opposed many federal initiatives, emerged as a prominent opponent of Speaker Clay.
Clay's original proposal had banned slavery in all of the Mexican Cession, but he dropped this in favor of popular sovereignty, winning the support of many centrist southerners.
After Harrison's death, President Fillmore consulted with Clay in appointing a new Cabinet.
The rivalry and the controversy over Jackson's expedition temporarily subsided after the signing of the Adams–Onís Treaty, which saw the United States purchase Florida and delineate its western boundary with New Spain.
Having suffered numerous losses, many younger Whigs sought new leaders who could win over Democrats and other non-Whigs.
Re-elected as Speaker in 1823, Clay passed the Tariff of 1824 and the General Survey Act, and Clay campaigned on his American System of high tariffs and federal spending on infrastructure.
Further controversy ensued when Missouri's constitution banned free blacks from entering the state.
Senators, Armistead Thomson Mason (aged 28 in 1816), and John Eaton (aged 28 in 1818).
Though Clay desired a high tariff, he found Jackson's war-like rhetoric against South Carolina distressing, and sought to avoid a crisis that could end in civil war.
The high tariffs angered John C. Calhoun of South Carolina and his followers, and South Carolina declared its right to nullify federal tariff legislation and cease the assessment of the tariff on imports.
However, Clay strongly desired the office of Secretary of State, and was angered when Monroe instead chose John Quincy Adams.
On December 29, 1806, Clay was sworn in as senator, serving for slightly more than two months During his brief tenure, Clay advocated for the construction of various bridges and canals, including a canal connecting the Chesapeake Bay and the Delaware River.
* Establishment of boundaries for the state of Texas in exchange for federal payment of Texas's ten million dollar debt.
Clay's tenure as Speaker of the House was hampered by near-constant illness, and Clay found his work tedious.
In July, Clay wrote two letters in which he attempted to clarify his position on the annexation of Texas, and Democrats attacked his supposedly inconsistent position.
Some years later Thomas Jefferson convinced Clay that Daveiss had been right in his charges.
After it became clear that Congress would pass the recharter but Jackson would veto it, Clay and his allies ensured that Jackson would have to veto the bill (rather than use a pocket veto) in the hope that it would hurt Jackson politically.
Clay's greatest weakness in his bid for the Whig nomination was his lack of strength in the North, as abolitionists and Antimasons both disapproved of Clay.
His return to the Senate after 20 years, 8 months, 7 days out of office, marks the fourth longest gap in service to the chamber in history.
When elected by the legislature, Clay was below the constitutionally required age of thirty.
Clay was part of a team of five commissioners, which also included Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin, Senator James Bayard, ambassador Jonathan Russell, and ambassador John Quincy Adams, the nominal head of the American team.
Clay was physically exhausted; the tuberculosis that would eventually kill him had begun to take its toll.
Clay also advocated for internal improvements, which would become a consistent theme throughout his public career.
In November 1972, Joe Biden was elected to the Senate at the age of 29, but he reached his 30th birthday before the swearing-in ceremony for incoming senators in January 1973.
One of her brothers was Nathaniel G. S. Hart, who later served as a captain in the War of 1812 and was killed in the Massacre of the River Raisin.
Clay clashed with legislators who sought to reduce the power of Clay's Bluegrass Region, and Clay unsuccessfully advocated moving the state capitol from Frankfort to Lexington.
In 1844, Clay won the Whig Party's presidential nomination.
Tyler's plans delighted many Whigs who thought that Tyler's efforts would prove more damaging to the Democrats.
Though Clay was distressed over the disagreements with Tyler, Tyler's apostasy, combined with Webster's continuing affiliation with Tyler, positioned Clay as the natural Whig candidate for the 1844 presidential election.
Clay was so upset that many years later, when he met Burr again, Clay refused to shake his hand.
Thomas's idea won the backing of Clay, who helped the compromise pass the House and defeated a last-second procedural challenge from John Randolph.
Clay called for no acquisition of territory from Mexico, thereby avoiding the possibility of adding new slave territories and winning some northern support for his candidacy.
Having already passed the Virginia Bar, Clay quickly received a Kentucky license to practice law.
A leading war hawk, Speaker Clay favored war with Britain and played a significant role in leading the nation into the War of 1812.
After his 1832 re-election, Jackson suspected that the bank's supporters would again seek to re-charter the bank, and he sought remove federal money from it.
