With this success, Murphy and other stockholders in the Detroit Automobile Company formed the Henry Ford Company on November 30, 1901, with Ford as chief engineer.
The directors elected him, and he served until the end of the war.
Ludecke asked Ford for a contribution to the Nazi cause, but was apparently refused.
On January 7, 1942, Ford wrote a letter to Sigmund Livingston as the Founder and National Chairman of the Anti-Defamation League.
His father expected him to eventually take over the family farm, but he despised farm work.
In 1929, in the absence of diplomatic relations between the United States and the Soviet Union, Ford accepted an offer by the Soviet Government to provide technical aid in building the first Soviet automobile plant (GAZ) near Nizhny Novgorod (Gorky).
President Woodrow Wilson asked Ford to run as a Democrat for the United States Senate from Michigan in 1918.
Men need counsel and men need help, often special help; and all this ought to be rendered for decency's sake.
Ford did not believe in accountants; he amassed one of the world's largest fortunes without ever having his company audited under his administration.
Most of the directors did not want to see him as President.
His introduction of the Model T automobile revolutionized transportation and American industry.
In response, Malcomson brought in another group of investors and convinced the Dodge Brothers to accept a portion of the new company.
In Germany, Ford's antisemitic articles from ''The Dearborn Independent'' were issued in four volumes, cumulatively titled ''The International Jew, the World's Foremost Problem'' published by Theodor Fritsch, founder of several antisemitic parties and a member of the Reichstag.
With Ford gone, Murphy renamed the company the Cadillac Automobile Company.
He pursued the project with a great deal of technical expertise in design of the engine, chassis, and other mechanical necessities, while leaving the body design to his son.
In 1918, with the war on and the League of Nations a growing issue in global politics, President Woodrow Wilson, a Democrat, encouraged Ford to run for a Michigan seat in the U.S. Senate.
It sat on 55 acres of manicured lawns and flowering gardens.
They frowned on heavy drinking, gambling, and (what today are called) deadbeat dads.
The contract involved the purchase of $30,000,000 worth of knocked-down Ford cars and trucks for assembly during the first four years of the plant’s operation, after which the plant would gradually switch to Soviet-made components.
Detroit was already a high-wage city, but competitors were forced to raise wages or lose their best workers.
His River Rouge Plant became the world's largest industrial complex, pursuing vertical integration to such an extent that it could produce its own steel.
It is difficult to remember what life was like before Mr. Ford began preaching his doctrine of salvation".
After his promotion to Chief Engineer in 1893, he had enough time and money to devote attention to his personal experiments on gasoline engines.
His support of the American war effort, however, was problematic.
Speaking in 1931 to a ''Detroit News'' reporter, Hitler said he regarded Ford as his "inspiration," explaining his reason for keeping Ford's life-size portrait next to his desk.
The design never caught on.
Michael Barkun observed:
Up until the apology, a considerable number of dealers, who had been required to make sure that buyers of Ford cars received the ''Independent'', bought up and destroyed copies of the newspaper rather than alienate customers.
(Apparently the program started with Saturday being a workday and sometime later it was changed to a day off.)
His health failing, Ford ceded the company Presidency to his grandson, Henry Ford II, in September 1945 and went into retirement.
At that time, which was before the U.S. entered the war and still had full diplomatic relations with Nazi Germany, ''Ford-Werke'' was under the control of the Ford Motor Company.
Overnight, the Ford Motor Company went from the most stubborn holdout among automakers to the one with the most favorable UAW contract terms.
Ford had a global vision, with consumerism as the key to peace.
Ford also was one of the early backers of the Indianapolis 500.
In 1879, Ford left home to work as an apprentice machinist in Detroit, first with James F. Flower & Bros., and later with the Detroit Dry Dock Co.
Teaming up with former racing cyclist Tom Cooper, Ford also produced the 80+ horsepower racer "999" which Barney Oldfield was to drive to victory in a race in October 1902.
In 1936, Ford broke ground for a beautiful Greek revival style mansion on the banks of the Ogeechee River on the site of a 1730s plantation.
The grand house, made of Savannah-gray brick, had marble steps, air conditioning, and an elevator.
Bennett employed various intimidation tactics to squash union organizing.
Germans who discussed "Fordism" often believed that it represented something quintessentially American.
When he received his 33rd in 1940, he said, "Masonry is the best balance wheel the United States has."
In 1915, the pacifist Rosika Schwimmer gained favor with Ford, who agreed to fund a Peace Ship to Europe, where World War I was raging.
It weighed 30% less than a steel car and was said to be able to withstand blows ten times greater than could steel.
During the trial, the editor of Ford's "Own Page," William Cameron, testified that Ford had nothing to do with the editorials even though they were under his byline.
All the world is bound to catch some good from it.”
It used a new alloy called Alclad that combined the corrosion resistance of aluminum with the strength of duralumin.
All new cars were black; as Ford wrote in his autobiography, "Any customer can have a car painted any color that he wants so long as it is black".
Ford was devastated when his mother died in 1876.
Ford converted the 1870s–era rice mill into his personal research laboratory and powerhouse and constructed an underground tunnel from there to the new home, providing it with steam.
He entered stripped-down Model Ts in races, finishing first (although later disqualified) in an "ocean-to-ocean" (across the United States) race in 1909, and setting a one-mile (1.6&nbsp;km) oval speed record at Detroit Fairgrounds in 1911 with driver Frank Kulick.
In 1927 Ford partnered with Thomas Edison and Harvey Samuel Firestone (each contributing $25,000) to create the Edison Botanic Research Corp. in Fort Myers, Florida, to look for a native source of rubber.
However, Max Wallace has stated "History records that...Adolf Hitler was an ardent Anti-Semite before he ever read Ford's ''The International Jew''.
Ford was increasingly sidelined, and others made decisions in his name.
Ford had made the decision to boost productivity, as workers were expected to put more effort into their work in exchange for more leisure time, and because he believed decent leisure time was good for business, since workers would actually have more time to purchase and consume more goods.
His father gave him a pocket watch in his early teens.
He later wrote, "I never had any particular love for the farm—it was the mother on the farm I loved."
The most famous incident, on May 26, 1937, involved Bennett's security men beating with clubs UAW representatives, including Walter Reuther.
The car was very simple to drive, and easy and cheap to repair.
In the run-up to World War II and when the war erupted in 1939, he reported that he did not want to trade with belligerents.
Ford was also widely known for his pacifism during the first years of World War I, and for having published the antisemitic  book ''The International Jew''.
Ford married Clara Jane Bryant (1866–1950) on April 11, 1888 and supported himself by farming and running a sawmill.
Ford's network of local dealers made the car ubiquitous in almost every city in North America.
In the 1920s, Ford also opened plants in Australia, India, and France, and by 1929, he had successful dealerships on six continents.
This project culminated in 1942, when Ford patented an automobile made almost entirely of plastic, attached to a tubular welded frame.
The Social Department used 50 investigators, plus support staff, to maintain employee standards; a large percentage of workers were able to qualify for this "profit-sharing."
According to Spencer Blakeslee:
The plane was similar to Fokker's V.VII-3m, and some say that Ford's engineers surreptitiously measured the Fokker plane and then copied it.
"You are the only man in Michigan who can be elected and help bring about the peace you so desire," the president wrote Ford.
On May 1, 1926, the Ford Motor Company's factory workers switched to a five-day 40-hour workweek, with the company's office workers making the transition the following August.
199 Trimotors were built before it was discontinued in 1933, when the Ford Airplane Division shut down because of poor sales during the Great Depression.
Ford's 1927 apology was well received.
It was opened in 1929 as the Edison Institute.
During this period the company began to decline, losing more than $10&nbsp;million a month ($ today).
Ford's most successful aircraft was the Ford 4AT Trimotor, often called the "Tin Goose" because of its corrugated metal construction.
Ford announced his $5-per-day program on January 5, 1914, raising the minimum daily pay from $2.34 to $5 for qualifying male workers.
During this period Ford also studied bookkeeping at Goldsmith, Bryant & Stratton Business College in Detroit.
Ford did acknowledge, however, that many managers were basically too bad at managing to understand this fact.
Nevertheless, Ford did make quite an impact on auto racing during his racing years, and he was inducted into the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 1996.
Ford was interested in engineered woods ("Better wood can be made than is grown") (at this time plywood and particle board were little more than experimental ideas); corn as a fuel source, via both corn oil and ethanol; and the potential uses of cotton.
Testifying at Nuremberg, convicted Hitler Youth leader Baldur von Schirach who, in his role as military governor of Vienna, deported 65,000 Jews to camps in Poland, stated:
Sorensen recounted that a distraught Henry Ford was very close to following through with a threat to break up the company rather than cooperate, but his wife Clara told him she would leave him if he destroyed the family business.
It may have been Couzens who convinced Ford to adopt the $5-day.
Ford sent his engineers and technicians to the Soviet Union to help install the equipment and train the working force, while over a hundred Soviet engineers and technicians were stationed at Ford’s plants in Detroit and Dearborn “for the purpose of learning the methods and practice of manufacture and assembly in the Company's plants.” Said Ford: “No matter where industry prospers, whether in India or China, or Russia, the more profit there will be for everyone, including us.
Ford's incursion into his employees' private lives was highly controversial, and he soon backed off from the most intrusive aspects.
Although Ford is often credited with the idea, contemporary sources indicate that the concept and its development came from employees Clarence Avery, Peter E. Martin, Charles E. Sorensen, and C. Harold Wills.
Without changing the principle we have changed the method of payment."
The entire engine and transmission were enclosed; the four cylinders were cast in a solid block; the suspension used two semi-elliptic springs.
For several years, he kept Bennett in charge of talking to the unions that were trying to organize the Ford Motor Company.
He viewed the increased wages as profit-sharing linked with rewarding those who were most productive and of good character.
Sales were slow, and a crisis arose when the Dodge brothers demanded payment for their first shipment.
When Edsel Ford died prematurely in 1943, Henry Ford nominally resumed control of the company, but a series of strokes in the late 1930s had left him increasingly debilitated, and his mental ability was fading.
The purpose of the letter was to clarify some general misconceptions that he subscribed or supported directly or indirectly, “any agitation which would promote antagonism toward my Jewish fellow citizens.”  He concluded the letter with “My sincere hope that now in this country and throughout the world when the war is finished, hatred of the Jews and hatred against any other racial or religious groups shall cease for all time.”
The decision was made in 1922, when Ford and Crowther described it as six 8-hour days, giving a 48-hour week, but in 1926 it was announced as five 8-hour days, giving a 40-hour week.
Sales skyrocketed—several years posted 100% gains on the previous year.
The administration of President Franklin Roosevelt had been considering a government takeover of the company in order to ensure continued war production, but the idea never progressed.
The Ford Motor Company was the last Detroit automaker to recognize the United Auto Workers union (UAW).
Ford then demonstrated a newly designed car on the ice of Lake St. Clair, driving  in 39.4 seconds and setting a new land speed record at .
A libel lawsuit was brought by San Francisco lawyer and Jewish farm cooperative organizer Aaron Sapiro in response to the antisemitic remarks, and led Ford to close the ''Independent'' in December 1927.
Convinced by this success, the race driver Barney Oldfield, who named this new Ford model "999" in honor of the fastest locomotive of the day, took the car around the country, making the Ford brand known throughout the United States.
Subsequently, the Ford company adopted an annual model change system similar to that recently pioneered by its competitor General Motors (and still in use by automakers today).
To forestall union activity, Ford promoted Harry Bennett, a former Navy boxer, to head the Service Department.
Ford also believed that union leaders had a perverse incentive to foment perpetual socio-economic crisis as a way to maintain their own power.
Ford's philosophy was one of economic independence for the United States.
Ford grew jealous of the publicity Sorensen received and forced Sorensen out in 1944.
When Wilson made a major speaking tour in the summer of 1919 to promote the League, Ford helped fund the attendant publicity.
It had the steering wheel on the left, which every other company soon copied.
Ford talked to President Wilson about the mission but had no government support.
After various test drives, Ford brainstormed ways to improve the Quadricycle.
He thought they were too heavily influenced by some leaders who, despite their ostensible good motives, would end up doing more harm than good for workers.
The design was fervently promoted and defended by Ford, and production continued as late as 1927; the final total production was 15,007,034.
Ford did run, however, and came within 4,500 votes of winning, out of more than 400,000 cast statewide.
However, Ford continued to do business with Nazi Germany, including the manufacture of war materiel.
The company was in fact controlled by a handful of senior executives led by Charles Sorensen, an important engineer and production executive at Ford; and Harry Bennett, the chief of Ford's Service Unit, Ford's paramilitary force that spied on, and enforced discipline upon, Ford employees.
Several variants were also used by the U.S. Army.
Henry started buying land in this area and eventually owned 70,000 acres (110 square miles) there.
Once the U.S. entered the war, Ford directed the Ford Motor Company to construct a vast new purpose-built factory at Willow Run near Detroit, Michigan.
He also hired women and handicapped men at a time when doing so was uncommon.
He also had a vacation home (known today as the "Ford Plantation") in Richmond Hill, Georgia which is still in existence today as a private community.
Funeral services were held in Detroit's Cathedral Church of St. Paul and he was buried in the Ford Cemetery in Detroit.
Henry complied with his wife's ultimatum, and even agreed with her in retrospect.
Ford's goal was to produce a vehicle from scratch without reliance on foreign trade.
Encouraged by Edison, Ford designed and built a second vehicle, completing it in 1898.
It set up numerous subsidiaries that sold or assembled the Ford cars and trucks:
The result was the successful Ford Model A, introduced in December 1927 and produced through 1931, with a total output of more than 4&nbsp;million.
(He was determined to have full control over strategic decisions.)
(See Ford Piquette Avenue Plant)
Ford was defeated in a close election by the Republican candidate, Truman Newberry, a former United States Secretary of the Navy.
A compendium of short biographies of famous Freemasons, published by a Freemason lodge, lists Ford as a member.
Ford was always eager to sell to farmers, who looked on the vehicle as a commercial device to help their business.
In 1891, Ford became an engineer with the Edison Illuminating Company.
Ford had an interest in "Americana".
Ford repeated the concept of collecting historic structures with the creation of Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Michigan.
By the time he wrote his 1922 memoir, he spoke of the Social Department and of the private conditions for profit-sharing in the past tense, and admitted that "paternalism has no place in industry.
He opened Ford assembly plants in Britain and Canada in 1911, and soon became the biggest automotive producer in those countries.
He believed that international trade and cooperation led to international peace, and he used the assembly line process and production of the Model T to demonstrate it.
In 1913, Ford attempted to enter a reworked Model T in the Indianapolis 500 but was told rules required the addition of another  to the car before it could qualify.
By 1926, flagging sales of the Model T finally convinced Henry to make a new model.
They saw the size, tempo, standardization, and philosophy of production demonstrated at the Ford Works as a national service—an "American thing" that represented the culture of the United States.
The original investors included Ford and Malcomson, the Dodge brothers, Malcomson's uncle John S. Gray, Malcolmson's secretary James Couzens, and two of Malcomson's lawyers, John W. Anderson and Horace Rackham.
During this period, Ford emerged as "a respected spokesman for right-wing extremism and religious prejudice," reaching around 700,000 readers through his newspaper.
A Cleveland, Ohio newspaper editorialized that the announcement "shot like a blinding rocket through the dark clouds of the present industrial depression."
At the same time, Ford had a reputation as one of the few major corporations actively hiring black workers, and was not accused of discrimination against Jewish workers or suppliers.
In ''My Life and Work'', Ford predicted that if greed, racism, and short-sightedness could be overcome, then economic and technological development throughout the world would progress to the point that international trade would no longer be based on (what today would be called) colonial or neocolonial models and would truly benefit all peoples.
But Henry, who still had the final veto in the company on a ''de facto'' basis even if not an official one, refused to cooperate.
357, Detroit, in 1894.
For many Germans, Ford embodied the essence of successful Americanism.
The Model T was introduced on October 1, 1908.
When the U.S. entered the war in 1917 the company became a major supplier of weapons, especially the Liberty engine for airplanes, and anti-submarine boats.
It remains the centerpiece of  The Ford Plantation today.
Ford had opposed America's entry into World War II and continued to believe that international business could generate the prosperity that would head off wars.
Every Ford franchise nationwide had to carry the paper and distribute it to its customers.
The first plants in Germany were built in the 1920s with the encouragement of Herbert Hoover and the Commerce Department, which agreed with Ford's theory that international trade was essential to world peace.
Sales passed 250,000 in 1914.
Extremist groups often recycle the material; it still appears on antisemitic and neo-Nazi websites.
Ford's incompetence led to discussions in Washington about how to restore the company, whether by wartime government fiat, or by instigating some sort of coup among executives and directors.
In 1923, Ford's pastor, and head of his sociology department, Episcopal minister Samuel S. Marquis, claimed that Ford believed, or "once believed," in reincarnation.
Ultimately, the company was not successful and was dissolved in January 1901.
His brother in law, E.G.
Ford received the backing of an old acquaintance, Alexander Y. Malcomson, a Detroit-area coal dealer.
Ford's Episcopalian pastor, Reverend Samuel S. Marquis, accompanied him on the mission.
In July 1938, before the outbreak of war, the German consul at Cleveland gave Ford, on his 75th birthday, the award of the Grand Cross of the German Eagle, the highest medal Nazi Germany could bestow on a foreigner.
Robert Lacey wrote in ''Ford: The Men and the Machines'' that a close Willow Run associate of Ford reported that when he was shown newsreel footage of the Nazi concentration camps, he "was confronted with the atrocities which finally and unanswerable laid bare the bestiality of the prejudice to which he contributed, he collapsed with a stroke – his last and most serious."
Ford became highly critical of those who he felt financed war, and he tried to stop them.
Ford is the only American mentioned favorably in ''Mein Kampf'', although he is only mentioned once: Adolf Hitler wrote, "only a single great man, Ford, who, to the Jews' fury, still maintains full independence...from the controlling masters of the producers in a nation of one hundred and twenty millions."
His father, William Ford (1826–1905), was born in County Cork, Ireland, to a family that was originally from Somerset, England, His mother, Mary Ford (née Litogot) (1839–1876), was born in Michigan as the youngest child of Belgian immigrants; her parents died when she was a child and she was adopted by neighbors, the O'Herns.
These experiments culminated in 1896 with the completion of a self-propelled vehicle which he named the Ford Quadricycle.
But Ford believed that eventually, if good managers such as he could fend off the attacks of misguided people from both left and right (i.e., both socialists and bad-manager reactionaries), the good managers would create a socio-economic system wherein neither bad management nor bad unions could find enough support to continue existing.
Soybean-based plastics were used in Ford automobiles throughout the 1930s in plastic parts such as car horns, in paint, etc.
At twenty, Ford walked four miles to their Episcopal church every Sunday.
He was later hired by Westinghouse to service their steam engines.
Henry Ford was born July 30, 1863, on a farm in Greenfield Township, Michigan.
His ideas in this passage were vague, but they were idealistic.
Henry Ford's siblings were Margaret Ford (1867–1938); Jane Ford (c. 1868–1945); William Ford (1871–1917) and Robert Ford (1873–1934).
The house became the center of social gatherings with visitations by the Vanderbilts, Rockefellers, and the DuPonts.
(Using the consumer price index, this price was equivalent to $7,828.08 in 2015 dollars.)
Ludecke was introduced to Ford by Siegfried Wagner (son of the composer Richard Wagner) and his wife Winifred, both Nazi sympathizers and antisemites.
Ford had suffered previous strokes and his final cerebral hemorrhage occurred in 1947 at age 83.
As one German explained, "Automobiles have so completely changed the American's mode of life that today one can hardly imagine being without a car.
Ford wrote back: "If they want to elect me let them do so, but I won't make a penny's investment."
Beginning in 1940, with the requisitioning of between 100 and 200 French POWs to work as slave laborers, ''Ford-Werke'' contravened Article 31 of the 1929 Geneva Convention.
Ford went to work designing an inexpensive automobile, and the duo leased a factory and contracted with a machine shop owned by John and Horace E. Dodge to supply over $160,000 in parts.
By 1932, Ford was manufacturing one third of all the world's automobiles.
Always on the hunt for more efficiency and lower costs, in 1913 Ford introduced the moving assembly belts into his plants, which enabled an enormous increase in production.
"Four-Fifths of the hundreds of letters addressed to Ford in July 1927 were from Jews, and almost without exception they praised the industrialist."
He explained his views on unions in Chapter 18 of ''My Life and Work''.
Ford has been honored by the Smithsonian Institution for changing the aviation industry.
But for the previous 20 years, though he had long been without any official executive title, he had always had ''de facto'' control over the company; the board and the management had never seriously defied him, and this moment was not different.
Ford plants in the United Kingdom produced tractors to increase the British food supply, as well as trucks and aircraft engines.
His intense commitment to systematically lowering costs resulted in many technical and business innovations, including a franchise system that put dealerships throughout most of North America and in major cities on six continents.
Wilson believed that Ford could tip the scales in Congress in favor of Wilson's proposed League.
This record stood for the next 45 years.
While Bennett's men were beating the UAW representatives, the supervising police chief on the scene was Carl Brooks, an alumnus of Bennett’s Service Department, and Brooks "did not give orders to intervene."
He describes himself as someone who raced only because in the 1890s through 1910s, one had to race because prevailing ignorance held that racing was the way to prove the worth of an automobile.
Although greatly modernized, the museum continues today.
Welfare work that consists in prying into employees' private concerns is out of date.
Ford created a huge publicity machine in Detroit to ensure every newspaper carried stories and ads about the new product.
In January 1937, a Ford statement to the ''Detroit Jewish Chronicle'' disavowed "any connection whatsoever with the publication in Germany of a book known as the ''International Jew''."
He is credited with "Fordism": mass production of inexpensive goods coupled with high wages for workers.
It was so cheap at $825 in 1908 ($ today) (the price fell every year) that by the 1920s, a majority of American drivers had learned to drive on the Model T.
Marquis headed Ford's Sociology Department from 1913 to 1921.
