Unfortunately, corticosteroids are contraindicated in some patients, such as those who have active gastrointestinal bleeding, infection, kidney failure, or pancreatitis.
Causes of hepatitis can be divided into the following major categories: infectious, metabolic, ischemic, autoimmune, genetic, and other.
* NS3/4A protease inhibitors, including telaprevir, boceprevir, simeprevir, and others
For women who are HCV-positive and HIV-negative, breastfeeding is safe; however, CDC guidelines suggest avoiding breastfeeding if a woman's nipples are "cracked or bleeding" to reduce the risk of transmission.
There is also a combination formulation that includes both hepatitis A and B vaccines.
In adults, hepatitis B infection is most commonly self-limiting, with less than 5% progressing to chronic state, and 20 to 30% of those chronically infected developing cirrhosis and/or liver cancer.
within 1 week), IgM antibodies are found in the blood.
However, in those who use alcohol, the diagnosis may just as likely be alcoholic or nonalcoholic hepatitis especially if there is concurrent obesity, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome.
A systematic review of the Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry database found that there was no increased risk of congenital anomalies with Tenofovir; for this reason, along with its potency and low risk of resistance, the AASLD recommends this drug.
Screening consists of a blood test that detects hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg).
The restaurant was purchasing its green onion stock from farms in Mexico at the time.
If anti-hepatitis C virus antibody is present, a confirmatory test to detect HCV RNA indicates chronic disease.
Ischemic hepatitis results from reduced blood flow to the liver as in shock, heart failure, or vascular insufficiency.
&nbsp;If the vaccine is combined hepatitis A and hepatitis B, up to 4 doses may be required.
Factors accelerating progression from NAFLD to NASH are obesity, older age, non-African American ethnicity, female gender, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, higher ALT or AST level, higher AST/ALT ratio, low platelet count, and an  ultrasound steatosis score.
Microscopically, changes that can be seen include steatosis with large and swollen hepatocytes (ballooning), evidence of cellular injury and cell death (apoptosis, necrosis), evidence of inflammation in particular in zone 3 of the liver, variable degrees of fibrosis and Mallory-Denk bodies.
Vertical transmission is a significant contributor of new HBV cases each year, with 35–50% of transmission from mother to neonate in endemic countries.
Risk of infection is highest among intravenous drug users, individuals with high-risk sexual behaviors, healthcare workers, individuals with a history of multiple transfusions, organ transplant patients, dialysis patients and newborns infected during the birthing process.
Of those acutely infected, 25% become lifetime carriers of the virus.
Cirrhosis has been reported to develop in 20–50% of patients with chronic hepatitis C.
This allows for early treatment, which can prevent disease progression, and decreases transmission to others.
Worldwide, viral hepatitis is the most common cause, followed closely by alcoholic liver disease and non-alcoholic liver disease (NAFLD).
levels in the hundreds vs. in the thousands), the predominance for AST vs. ALT elevation, and the ratio between AST and ALT are informative of the diagnosis.
It accounts for more than 55,000 deaths annually with approximately 20 million people worldwide thought to be infected with the virus.
In general, for viral hepatitis and other acute causes of hepatitis, the patient's blood tests and clinical picture are sufficient for diagnosis.
Viral hepatitis is caused by five different viruses (hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E).
The complication more frequently occurs in instances of hepatitis B and D co-infection at a rate of 2–20% and in pregnant women with hepatitis E at rate of 15–20% of cases.
The purpose of screening for viral hepatitis is to identify people infected with the disease as early as possible.
# The initial prodromal phase (preceding symptoms) involves non-specific and flu-like symptoms common to many acute viral infections.
In early infection (i.e.
In addition to referral to psychotherapy and other treatment programs, treatment should include nutritional and psychosocial evaluation and treatment.
Mortality rates in cases of fulminant hepatitis rise over 80%, but those patients that do survive often make a complete recovery.
Soldiers received vaccines against diseases such as yellow fever, but these vaccines were stabilized with human serum and often created epidemics of hepatitis.
A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis of 47 studies that included 3968 people found maternal case-fatality rates (CFR) of 20.8% and fetal CFR of 34.2%; among women who developed fulminant hepatic failure, CFR was 61.2%.
&nbsp;The dosing is slightly different for adults depending on the type of the vaccine.
Many people develop nausea and cannot tolerate food later in the day, so the bulk of intake may be concentrated in the earlier part of the day.
In the WHO study, the prevalence of HIV-HCV co-infection was markedly higher at 82.4% in those who injected drugs compared to the general population (2.4%).
Acute hepatitis is caused by ''Neisseria meningitidis'', ''Neisseria gonorrhoeae'', ''Bartonella henselae'', ''Borrelia burgdorferi'', salmonella species, brucella species and campylobacter species.
Other contributing factors include younger age <60, binge pattern drinking, poor nutritional status, obesity and hepatitis C co-infection.
The condition usually resolves if the underlying cause is treated successfully.
In the early stages (as with NAFLD and early NASH), most patients are asymptomatic or have mild right upper quadrant pain, and diagnosis is suspected on the basis of abnormal liver function tests.
Currently available treatments include indirect and direct acting antiviral drugs.
First-line treatment of alcoholic hepatitis is treatment of alcoholism.
Bacterial infection of the liver commonly results in pyogenic abscesses, acute hepatitis, or granulomatous (or chronic) liver disease.
It affects predominantly young adults, causing acute hepatitis.
Other rare complications of acute hepatitis include pancreatitis, aplastic anemia, peripheral neuropathy, and myocarditis.
Of the worms, the cestode Echinococcus granulosus, also known as the small dog tapeworm, infects the liver and forms characteristic hepatic hydatid cysts.
Prominent classes of drugs causing liver injury include the aforementioned analgesic acetaminophen and the anti-tuberculosis agent isoniazid; anti-epileptics such as valproic acid and phenytoin; antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, erythromycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; cholesterol-lowering statins; exogenous steroids such as oral contraceptives and anabolic steroids; and highly active anti-retroviral therapy used in the treatment of HIV.
Fever, when present, is most common in cases of hepatitis A and E. Late in this phase, people can experience liver-specific symptoms, including choluria (dark urine) and clay-colored stools.
for autoantibodies), nucleic acid testing (i.e.
These include long-acting interferon bound to polyethylene glycol (pegylated interferon) and the oral nucleoside analogues.
The Sumerians believed that the liver was the home of the soul, and attributed the findings of jaundice to the attack of one’s liver by a devil named Ahhazu.
The best way to reduce the long-term risk of HCC is to achieve sustained virological response (SVR).
Blumberg continued to study the antigen, and eventually developed the first hepatitis B vaccine using plasma rich in HBsAg, for which he received the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1976.
The CDC believes that the restaurant's use of a large communal bucket for chopped raw green onion allowed non-contaminated plants to be mixed with contaminated ones, increasing the number of vectors of infection and amplifying the outbreak.
It is safe for non-immune pregnant women to receive the HBV vaccine.
* Lamivudine was the first approved oral nucleoside analogue.
Overall, the mortality rate for acute hepatitis is low: ~0.1% in total for cases of hepatitis A and B, but rates can be higher in certain populations (super infection with both hepatitis B and D, pregnant women, etc.
Acute hepatitis can be self-limiting (resolving on its own), can progress to chronic hepatitis, or can cause acute liver failure in rare instances.
As in other autoimmune diseases, circulating auto-antibodies may be present and are helpful in diagnosis.
Another protozoan, Entamoeba histolytica, causes hepatitis with distinct liver abscesses.
Around 400 B.C., Hippocrates recorded the first documentation of an epidemic jaundice, in particular noting the uniquely fulminant course of a cohort of patients who all died within two weeks.
Toxins and medications can cause liver injury through a variety of mechanisms, including direct cell damage, disruption of cell metabolism, and causing structural changes.
Rarely, people with the hepatitis A virus can rapidly develop liver failure, termed ''fulminant hepatic failure'', especially the elderly and those who had a pre-existing liver disease, especially hepatitis C. Mortality risk factors include greater age and chronic hepatitis C. In these cases, more aggressive supportive therapy and liver transplant may be necessary.
These drugs are used in various combinations, sometimes combined with ribavirin, based on the patient's genotype (delineated as genotypes 1-6).
In a study of HCV co-infection among HIV positive men who have sex with men (MSM), the overall prevalence of anti-hepatitis C antibodies was estimated to be 8.1% and increased to 40% among HIV positive MSM who also injected drugs.
He travelled across the globe collecting blood samples, investigating the interplay between disease, environment, and genetics with the goal of designing  targeted interventions for at-risk individuals that could prevent them from getting sick.
Given the high risk of perinatal transmission, the CDC recommends screening all pregnant women for HBV at their first prenatal visit.
Rates of mortality increase with progression of the underlying liver disease.
Hepatitis B is the most common cause of viral hepatitis in the world with more than 240 million chronic carriers of the virus, 1 million of whom are in the United States.
It has been estimated that direct and indirect costs are approximately $1817 and $2459 respectively per case, and that an average of 27 work days is lost per infected adult.
The most apparent distinguishing factor between alcoholic steatohepatitis (ASH) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a history of alcohol use or abuse.
PEG IFN is not effective in patients with high levels of viral activity and cannot be used in immunosuppressed patients or those with cirrhosis.
It has several side effects, most of which are reversible with removal of therapy, but it has been supplanted by newer treatments for this indication.
Viral particles have also been found in saliva and breastmilk.
Specific populations at greatest risk include: travelers to endemic regions, men who have sex with men, those with occupational exposure to non-human primates, individuals with clotting disorders who have received clotting factors, individuals with a history of chronic liver disease where co-infection with hepatitis A can lead to fulminant hepatitis, and intravenous drug users (rare).
hepatitis) or fibrosis.
The availability of a childhood vaccine has significantly reduced infections in the United States, with incidence declining by more than 95% as of 2013.
The condition is most often associated with heart failure but can also be caused by shock or sepsis.
Natural killer cells are the primary drivers of the initial innate response and create a cytokine environment that results in the recruitment of CD4 T-helper and CD8 cytotoxic T-cells.
That number nearly doubles to $1,227 for people with compensated (stable) cirrhosis, while the monthly cost of people with decompensated (worsening) cirrhosis is almost five times as large at $3,682.
In Egypt, rates of hepatitis C infection as high as 20%  have been documented and are associated with iatrogenic contamination related to schistosomiasis treatment in the 1950s–1980s.
Chronic hepatitis is often asymptomatic early on in its course and is detected only by liver laboratory studies for screening purposes or to evaluate non-specific symptoms.
However, kissing, sharing utensils, and breastfeeding do not lead to transmission unless these fluids are introduced into open sores or cuts.
Without any treatment, 20-50% of patients may die within a month, but evidence shows treatment may extend life beyond one month (i.e., reduce short-term mortality).
Infection is rare in the United States but rates are high in the developing world (Africa, Asia, Central America, Middle East).
However, all of these diseases can lead to scarring, fibrosis, and cirrhosis of the liver.
While effective and potent, lamivudine has been replaced by newer, more potent treatments in the Western world and is no longer recommended as first-line treatment.
While hepatitis A infections are self-limited events, they are associated with significant costs in the United States.
Interferon alpha has proven effective at inhibiting viral activity but only on a temporary basis.
Hepatitis D infections can transform benign cases of hepatitis B into severe, progressive hepatitis, a phenomenon known as superinfection.
A 1997 report demonstrated that a single hospitalization related to hepatitis A cost an average of $6,900 and resulted in around $500 million in total annual healthcare costs.
Mortality due to fulminant hepatitis is typically the result of various complications including cerebral edema, gastrointestinal bleeding, sepsis, respiratory failure, or kidney failure.
Initial accounts of a syndrome that we now think is likely to be hepatitis begin to occur around 3000 B.C.
There are wide variations in the mechanisms of liver injury and latency period from exposure to development of clinical illness.
Herbal remedies and dietary supplements are another important cause of hepatitis; these are the most common causes of drug-induced hepatitis in Korea.
Available treatment options include pentoxifylline (PTX), which is a nonspecific TNF inhibitor, corticosteroids, such as prednisone or prednisolone (CS), corticosteroids with ''N''-acetylcysteine (CS with NAC), and corticosteroids with pentoxifylline (CS with PTX).
Many genotypes exist and are differentially distributed around the world.
First-line therapy for GT1 is a combination of sofosbuvir and ledipasvir (SOF/LDV) for 12 weeks for most patients, including those with advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis.
Glucocorticoids are not recommended as a treatment option for acute viral hepatitis and may even cause harm, such as development of chronic hepatitis.
First-line treatments currently used include PEG IFN, entecavir, and tenofovir, subject to patient and physician preference.
However, it is still used in areas where newer agents either have not been approved or are too costly.
Chronic hepatitis presents similarly, but can manifest signs and symptoms specific to liver dysfunction with long-standing inflammation and damage to the organ.
Overall, hepatitis accounts for a significant portion of healthcare expenditures in both developing and developed nations, and is expected to rise in a several developing countries.
Jaundice and icterus can occur as well, but occur much later in the disease process and are typically a sign of advanced disease.
In late infection and after recovery, IgG antibodies are present and remain in the body for up to years.
Thus, in patients who have no or negligible alcohol use, the diagnosis is unlikely to be alcoholic hepatitis.
Cases of drug-induced hepatitis can manifest with systemic signs of an allergic reaction including rash, fever, serositis (inflammation of membranes lining certain organs), elevated eosinophils (a type of white blood cell), and suppression of bone marrow activity.
Some drugs such as acetaminophen (aka Tylenol or paracetamol) exhibit predictable dose-dependent liver damage while others such as isoniazid cause idiosyncratic and unpredictable reactions that vary among individuals.
Hepatitis usually develops over years-long exposure to alcohol, occurring in 10 to 20% of alcoholics.
Hepatitis C is the second most common cause of cirrhosis in the US (second to alcoholic hepatitis).
It has been estimated that a person infected with hepatitis C in the United States will result in a monthly cost of $691.
Pyogenic abscesses commonly involve enteric bacteria such as ''Escherichia coli'' and ''Klebsiella pneumoniae'' and are composed of multiple bacteria up to 50% of the time.
People infected with chronic hepatitis C tend to be frequent users of the health care system globally.
Treatment of hepatitis varies based on the form (acute versus chronic), severity of disease, and cause.&nbsp;
A Canadian paper published in 2015 used a mouse model of chronic hepatitis B infection and showed that interfering with certain proteins can facilitate clearance of the virus which may have implications for human disease.
Of these, amoxicillin-clavulanate is the most common cause of drug-induced liver injury, and acetaminophen the most common cause of acute liver failure in the United States and Europe.
Nearly all patients with hepatitis A infections recover completely without complications if they were healthy prior to the infection.
* People with poor sanitary habits such as not washing hands after using the restroom or changing diapers
NASH is thought to be the primary cause of cirrhosis in approximately 25% of patients in the United States, representing 1–2% of the general population.
Unlike steatosis and cirrhosis, no imaging test is able to detect liver inflammation (i.e.
Over time, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease can progress to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, which additionally involves liver cell death, liver inflammation and possible fibrosis.
The indirect acting antivirals include pegylated interferon (PEG IFN) and ribavirin (RBV), which in combination have historically been the basis of therapy for HCV.
In contrast to hepatitis A and B, progression to chronic hepatitis C is much more common.
In the developing regions of Africa, Asia and South America, prevalence can be as high as 10% of the population.
Viral hepatitis is primarily diagnosed through blood tests for levels of viral antigens (such as the hepatitis B surface or core antigen), anti-viral antibodies (such as the anti-hepatitis B surface antibody or anti-hepatitis A antibody), or viral DNA/RNA.
It is primarily transmitted via non-sexual contact and via needles.
Most chronic carriers of hepatitis C are unaware of their infection status.
Intravenous drug use was an independent risk factor for HCV infection.
Metabolic diseases such as glycogen storage disorders and lysosomal storage disorders are also implicated.
In this case, liver biopsy is the gold standard for establishing the diagnosis as histopathologic analysis is able to reveal the precise extent and pattern of inflammation and fibrosis.
Autoimmune hepatitis increases the risk for cirrhosis, and the risk for liver cancer is increased by about 1% for each year of the disease.
Liver transplantation can be life-saving in patients with fulminant liver failure.
In such regions, as much as 90% of children younger than 10 years old have been infected and are immune, corresponding both to lower rates of clinically symptomatic disease and outbreaks.
Currently, multidrug treatment is not recommended in treatment of chronic HBV as it is no more effective in the long term than individual treatment with entecavir or tenofovir.
Since widespread screening of blood products for hepatitis C began in 1992, the risk of acquiring hepatitis C from a blood transfusion has decreased from approximately 10% in the 1970s to 1 in 2 million currently.
Treatment initiation is guided by recommendations issued by The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) and the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) and is based on detectable viral levels, HBeAg positive or negative status, ALT levels, and in certain cases, family history of HCC and liver biopsy.
Overtime, this abnormal lipid deposition triggers the immune system via toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) resulting in the production of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF that cause liver cell injury and death.
Genotype 1 (GT1), which is the most prevalent genotype in the United States and around the world, can now be cured with a direct acting antiviral regimen.
The presence of anti-hepatitis A IgG in the blood indicates past infection with the virus or prior vaccination.
Hepatitis A and hepatitis E behave similarly: they are both transmitted by the fecal-oral route, are more common in developing countries, and are self-limiting illnesses that do not lead to chronic hepatitis.
In patients with compensated cirrhosis, treatment is recommended regardless of HBeAg status or ALT level, but recommendations differ regarding HBV DNA levels; AASLD recommends treating at DNA levels detectable above 2x103 IU/mL; EASL and WHO recommend treating when HBV DNA levels are detectable at any level.
Chronic hepatitis may have no symptoms, or may progress over time to cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), fibrosis (the formation of extra fibrous connective tissue), and chronic liver failure.
* NS5B polymerase inhibitors, including sofosbuvir, dasabuvir, and others
Other autoantibodies that are less common but more specific to autoimmune hepatitis are the antibodies against liver kidney microsome 1 (LKM1) and soluble liver antigen (SLA).
Cost remains a major factor limiting access to these drugs, particularly in low-resource nations; the cost of the 12-week GT1 regimen (SOF/LDV)  has been estimated at US$94,500.
After changing the seed virus strain, they observed no cases of jaundice in the subsequent 8,000 vaccinations.
The hepatitis D virus causes chronic and fulminant hepatitis in the context of co-infection with the hepatitis B virus.
Hepatitis D is difficult to treat, and effective treatments are lacking.
In the United States and Northern Europe, populations at risk are intravenous drug users and individuals who receive multiple transfusions.
People in these groups who are not already immune can receive the hepatitis A vaccine.
ACOG states that the evidence available does not suggest any particular mode of delivery (i.e.
In March 2015, a group in China published an article regarding the development of a vaccine for hepatitis E. As of March 2016, the United States government was in the process of recruiting participants for the phase IV trial of the drug Hecolin.
Similarly, acute hepatitis B infections have a favorable course towards complete recovery in 95–99% of patients.
Unfortunately, there are currently no drug treatments that decrease these patients’ risk of dying in the longer term, at 3–12 months and beyond.
* Adefovir dipivoxil, a nucleotide analogue, has been used to supplement lamivudine in patients who develop resistance, but is no longer recommended as first-line therapy.
Hepatitis can also occur in neonates and is attributable to a variety of causes, some of which are not typically seen in adults.
Although it does not develop resistance as do many of the oral antivirals, it is poorly tolerated and requires close monitoring.
Persons infected with HIV have a particularly high burden of HCV co-infection.
NASH is recognized as the third most common cause of liver disease in the United States.
Exposure to other hepatotoxins can occur accidentally or intentionally through ingestion, inhalation, and skin absorption.
The chronic presence of the virus within liver cells results in multiple waves of inflammation, injury and wound healing that overtime lead to scarring or fibrosis and culminate in hepatocellular carcinoma.
This includes fatigue, nausea, vomiting, poor appetite, joint pain, and headaches.
It is preferred to adefovir both in lamivudine-resistant patients and as initial treatment since it is both more potent and less likely to develop resistance.
Generally, AST and ALT are elevated in most cases of hepatitis regardless of whether the patient shows any symptoms.
Patients should also be treated appropriately for related signs and symptoms, such as ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, and infection.
* People in close contact (either living with or having sexual contact) with someone who has hepatitis A
Patients are asymptomatic 25–34% of the time, and the diagnosis is suspected on the basis of abnormal liver function tests.
Based on viral response, longer therapy may be required, and certain patients require indefinite long-term therapy.
Worldwide, the estimated prevalence of hepatocellular carcinoma related to NAFLD is 15–30%.
Carrier rates in developed nations are significantly lower, encompassing less than 1% of the population.
Excessive alcohol consumption is a significant cause of hepatitis and is the most common cause of cirrhosis in the U.S. Alcoholic hepatitis is within the spectrum of alcoholic liver disease.
Estimates of the rate of HCV vertical transmission range from 2–8%; a 2014 systematic review and meta-analysis found the risk to be 5.8% in HCV-positive, HIV-negative women.
Hepatitis A causes an acute illness that does not progress to chronic liver disease.
* Telbivudine is effective but not recommended as first-line treatment; as compared to entecavir, it is both less potent and more resistance prone.
A growing body of evidence shows that antiviral therapy initiated in the third trimester significantly reduces transmission to the neonate.
* Adoptive family members of a child from an area with endemic hepatitis A
Cirrhosis can lead to other life-threatening complications such as hepatic encephalopathy, esophageal varices,  hepatorenal syndrome, and liver cancer.
It is believed that the green onions may have been contaminated through the use of contaminated water for crop irrigation, rinsing, or icing or by handling of the vegetables by infected individuals.
Hepatitis E is spread primarily through the oral-fecal route but may also be spread by blood and from mother to fetus.
The outbreak was brought to the attention of health officials when local emergency medicine physicians noticed a significant increase in  cases of hepatitis A in the county.
Infectious agents include viruses, bacteria, and parasites.
Autoimmune hepatitis can present anywhere within the spectrum from asymptomatic to acute or chronic hepatitis to fulminant liver failure.
As with other autoimmune diseases, autoimmune hepatitis usually affects young women (though it can affect patients of either sex of any age), and patients can exhibit classic signs and symptoms of autoimmunity such as fatigue, anemia, anorexia, amenorrhea, acne, arthritis, pleurisy, thyroiditis, ulcerative colitis, nephritis, and maculopapular rash.
Toxins, drugs, alcohol, and lipids are metabolic causes of liver injury and inflammation.
Liver biopsy is the only definitive diagnostic test that is able to assess inflammation and fibrosis of the liver.
After conducting its investigation, the CDC attributed the source of the outbreak to the use of contaminated raw green onion.
He wrote, “The bile contained in the liver is full of phlegm and blood, and erupts...After such an eruption, the patient soon raves, becomes angry, talks nonsense and barks like a dog.”  His recommended treatment was a mixture of honey and water called ''melikraton''.
Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic disease caused by an abnormal immune response against liver cells.
Green onion had caused similar outbreaks of hepatitis A in the southern United States prior to this, but not to the same magnitude.
Individuals with an impaired immune response are at greater risk of developing chronic infection.
As hepatitis B and C are transmitted through blood and multiple bodily fluids, prevention is aimed at screening blood prior to transfusion, abstaining from the use of injection drugs, safe needle and sharps practices in healthcare settings, and safe sex practices.
Certain patients warrant hospitalization, especially those who present with clinical signs of ascites, peripheral edema, and hepatic encephalopathy, and laboratory signs of hypoglycemia, prolonged prothrombin time, low serum albumin, and very high serum blirubin.
It is not recommended for lamivudine-resistant patients or as monotherapy in patients who are HIV positive.
Vertical transmission occurs largely via a neonate's exposure to maternal blood and vaginal secretions during birth.
Blood testing of a person with ischemic hepatitis will show very high levels of transaminase enzymes (AST and ALT).
Though the inciting event may differ, the progression of events is similar and begins with accumulation of free fatty acids (FFA) and their breakdown products  in the liver cells in a process called steatosis.
Henry Beecher was one of the foremost critics in an article in the ''New England Journal of Medicine'' in 1966, arguing that parents were unaware to the risks of consent and that the research was done to benefit others at the expense of children.
A 2010 systematic review and meta-analysis found that Lamivudine initiated early in the third trimester also significantly reduced mother-to-child transmission of HBV, without any known adverse effects.
Most people who develop AH are men but women are at higher risk of developing AH and its complications likely secondary to high body fat and differences in alcohol metabolism.
