Though ordinaries are not easily defined, they are generally described as including the cross, the fess, the pale, the bend, the chevron, the saltire, and the pall.
These fell out of fashion during the mid-nineteenth century, when a renewed interest in the history of armory led to the re-evaluation of earlier designs, and a new appreciation for the medieval origins of the art.
The dexter side is considered the side of greatest honour (see also Dexter and sinister).
As the rise of firearms rendered the mounted knight increasingly irrelevant on the battlefield during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and the tournament faded into history, the military character of heraldry gave way to its use as a decorative art.
Similar emblems and devices are found in ancient Mesopotamian art of the same period, and the precursors of heraldic beasts such as the griffin can also be found.
In the United Kingdom, only peers of the realm, a few baronets, senior members of orders of knighthood, and some corporate bodies are granted supporters.
Portuguese heraldry, however, does use crests.
, also , , and , are Japanese emblems used to decorate and identify an individual or family.
From the ''Notitia Dignitatum'', a medieval copy of a Late Roman register of military commands.
The crest is rarely used separately as in British heraldry, but can sometimes serve as a mark of difference between different branches of a family.
A Spanish manuscript from 1109 describes both plain and decorated shields, none of which appears to have been heraldic.
The Rule of tincture applies to all semés and variations of the field.
Dutch heraldry is characterised by its simple and rather sober style, and in this sense, is closer to its medieval origins than the elaborate styles which developed in other heraldic traditions.
Clergy often refrain from displaying a helm or crest in their heraldic achievements.
Unless otherwise specified an ordinary is drawn with straight lines, but each may be indented, embattled, wavy, engrailed, or otherwise have their lines varied.
Eastern European heraldry is in the traditions developed in Belarus, Bulgaria, Serbia, Croatia, Hungary, Romania, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Ukraine, and Russia.
The Greek Heraldry Society is a useful source of information on Hellenic Heraldry and Byzantine etiquette.
If the bearer is entitled to the ribbon, collar, or badge of a knightly order, it may encircle or depend from the shield.
This heraldic tradition was also exported to the erstwhile Dutch colonies.
A coat of arms in the European heraldic sense was created in the late 19th century.
In many traditions, these have acquired strict guidelines for use by certain social classes.
The origins of heraldry are sometimes associated with the Crusades, a series of military campaigns undertaken by Christian armies from 1096 to 1487, with the goal of reconquering Jerusalem and other former Byzantine territories captured by Muslim forces during the seventh century.
Directly above them is a serekh containing the name of the king, Narmer.
Latin heraldry is known for extensive use of quartering, because of armorial inheritance via the male and the female lines.
The blazon includes a description of the arms contained within the escutcheon or shield, the crest, supporters where present, motto and other insignia.
While ''mon'' is an encompassing term that may refer to any such device, ''kamon'' and ''mondokoro'' refer specifically to emblems used to identify a family.
Sometimes an oval shield, or cartouche, was substituted for the lozenge; this shape was also widely used for the arms of clerics in French, Spanish, and Italian heraldry, although it was never reserved for their use.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the English Kings of Arms, Scotland's Lord Lyon King of Arms, and the Chief Herald of Ireland continue making grants of arms.
Perhaps owing to the realization that there is really no such thing as a ''stain'' in genuine heraldry, as well as the desire to create new and unique designs, the use of these colours for general purposes has become accepted in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
Semés, or patterns of repeated charges, are also considered variations of the field.
At least two distinctive features of heraldry are generally accepted as products of the crusaders: the surcoat, an outer garment worn over the armor to protect the wearer from the heat of the sun, was often decorated with the same devices that appeared on a knight's shield.
Quarters are numbered from the dexter chief (the corner nearest to the right shoulder of a man standing behind the shield), proceeding across the top row, and then across the next row and so on.
When the rows are arranged so that the bells of each tincture form vertical columns, it is termed ''vair in pale''; in continental heraldry one may encounter ''vair in bend'', which is similar to vair in pale, but diagonal.
The shape of the heraldic ermine spot has varied considerably over time, and nowadays is typically drawn as an arrowhead surmounted by three small dots, but older forms may be employed at the artist's discretion.
Coats consisting only of a divided field are somewhat more frequent in Germany than elsewhere.
Although it is really just a variation of vair, it is frequently treated as a separate fur.
The heraldry of southern France, Andorra, Spain, and Italy is characterized by a lack of crests, and uniquely shaped shields.
In German heraldry one may encounter ''kursch'', or vair bellies, depicted as brown and furry; all of these probably originated as variations of vair.
It is common to see heraldic furs used.
Beginning in the reign of Henry VIII, the Kings of Arms were commanded to make ''visitations'', in which they traveled about the country, recording arms borne under proper authority, and requiring those who bore arms without authority either to obtain authority for them, or cease their use.
A few lineages have accumulated hundreds of quarters, though such a number is usually displayed only in documentary contexts.
Prominent burghers and corporations, including many cities and towns, assumed or obtained grants of arms, with only nominal military associations.
Its slashed or scalloped edge, today rendered as billowing flourishes, is thought to have originated from hard wearing in the field, or as a means of deadening a sword blow and perhaps entangling the attacker's weapon.
The term "coat of arms" technically refers to the shield of arms itself, but the phrase is commonly used to refer to the entire achievement.
In the earliest period, arms were assumed by their bearers without any need for heraldic authority.
Nations and their subdivisions &ndash; provinces, states, counties, cities, etc.
The metals are ''or'' and ''argent'', representing gold and silver, respectively, although in practice they are usually depicted as yellow and white.
Usually vairé will consist of one metal and one colour, but ermine or one of its variations may also be used, and vairé of four tinctures, usually two metals and two colours, is sometimes found.
The whole surface of the escutcheon is termed the field, which may be plain, consisting of a single tincture, or divided into multiple sections of differing tinctures by various lines of partition; and any part of the field may be ''semé'', or powdered with small charges.
For example, a shield divided azure and gules would be perfectly acceptable.
A pattern of diagonal stripes may be called ''bendy'' or ''bendy sinister'', depending on the direction of the stripes.
The use of multiple crests is also common.
An enamel, probably commissioned by Geoffrey's widow between 1155 and 1160, depicts him carrying a blue shield decorated with six golden lions rampant.
This distinction was not always strictly adhered to, and a general exception was usually made for sovereigns, whose arms represented an entire nation.
This can form a pun on the family name as in Thomas Nevile's motto "Ne vile velis".
Ermine was traditionally used to line the cloaks and caps of the nobility.
Furs are considered amphibious, and neither metal nor colour; but in practice ermine and erminois are usually treated as metals, while ermines and pean are treated as colours.
These in turn came to be decorated with fan-shaped or sculptural crests, often incorporating elements from the shield of arms; as well as a wreath or torse, or sometimes a coronet, from which depended the lambrequin or mantling.
In the modern form, the bells are depicted with straight lines and sharp angles, and meet only at points; in the older, undulating pattern, now known as ''vair ondé'' or ''vair ancien'', the bells of each tincture are curved and joined at the base.
Marks of difference are very rare in this tradition as are heraldic furs.
Unless otherwise specified they extend to the edges of the field.
All of these variations can also be depicted in the form known as ''potent'', in which the shape of the vair bell is replaced by a ''T''-shaped figure, known as a potent from its resemblance to a crutch.
These too are now regarded as a fanciful invention, rather than evidence of the antiquity of heraldry.
A medieval chronicle states that Geoffrey was given a shield of this description when he was knighted by his father-in-law, Henry I, in 1128; but this account probably dates to about 1175.
This was originally a cloth worn over the back of the helmet as partial protection against heating by sunlight.
This often takes the form of a small crowned, wide brimmed hat called a galero with the colours and tassels denoting rank; or, in the case of Papal coats of arms until the inauguration of Pope Benedict XVI in 2005, an elaborate triple crown known as a tiara.
Trees are frequent charges in Latin arms.
At the least, fifteen per cent of all Hungarian personal arms bear a severed Turk's head, referring to their wars against the Ottoman Empire.
An heraldic achievement consists of a shield of arms, together with all of its accompanying elements, such as a crest, supporters, and other heraldic embellishments.
This rule does not apply to charges which cross a division of the field, which is partly metal and partly colour; nor, strictly speaking, does it prevent a field from consisting of two metals or two colours, although this is unusual.
In South Africa, the right to armorial bearings is also determined by Roman Dutch law, due to its origins as a 17th-century colony of the Netherlands.
At one time vair commonly came in three sizes, and this distinction is sometimes encountered in continental heraldry; if the field contains fewer than four rows, the fur is termed ''gros vair'' or ''beffroi''; if of six or more, it is ''menu-vair'', or miniver.
The shields look heraldic, but do not seem to have been personal or hereditary emblems.
Typically in British heraldry, the outer surface of the mantling is of the principal colour in the shield and the inner surface is of the principal metal, though peers in the United Kingdom use standard colourings (Gules doubled Argent - Red/White) regardless of rank or the colourings of their arms.
The shape of the shield, like many other details, is normally left to the discretion of the heraldic artist, and many different shapes have prevailed during different periods of heraldic design, and in different parts of Europe.
A notable example of an early armorial seal is attached to a charter granted by Philip I, Count of Flanders, in 1164.
Every sultan of the Ottoman Empire had his own monogram, called the tughra, which served as a royal symbol.
Although certain designs that are now considered heraldic were evidently in use during the eleventh century, most accounts and depictions of shields up to the beginning of the twelfth century contain little or no evidence of their heraldic character.
One of the most striking characteristics of German-Nordic heraldry is the treatment of the crest.
The most elaborate achievements sometimes display the entire coat of arms beneath a pavilion, an embellished tent or canopy of the type associated with the medieval tournament.
To provide for contrast and visibility, metals should never be placed on metals, and colours should never be placed on colours.
Vair represents the winter coat of the red squirrel, which is blue-grey on top and white underneath.
The Scottish and Spanish traditions resist allowing more than four quarters, preferring to subdivide one or more "grand quarters" into sub-quarters as needed.
Mottoes are generally changed at will and do not make up an integral part of the armorial achievement.
In Scottish heraldry where the motto is granted as part of the blazon, it is usually shown on a scroll above the crest, and may not be changed at will.
In English the word "crest" is commonly (but erroneously) used to refer to an entire heraldic achievement of armorial bearings.
As more complicated shields came into use, these bold shapes were set apart in a separate class as the "honorable ordinaries".
All of the other elements of an achievement are designed to decorate and complement these arms, but only the shield of arms is required.
The third common mode of marshalling is with an inescutcheon, a small shield placed in front of the main shield.
Other variations include ''chevrony'', ''gyronny'' and ''chequy''.
Moreover, Italian heraldry is dominated by the Roman Catholic Church, featuring many shields and achievements, most bearing some reference to the Church.
They therefore served the main purpose of heraldry: identification.
There are heraldic authorities in Canada, South Africa, Spain, and Sweden that grant or register coats of arms.
Although conventional heraldry with its rules and conventions began in Medieval Europe, there were other civilisations which also used symbols and emblems for families or individuals.
If the armiger has the title of baron, hereditary knight, or higher, he may display a coronet of rank above the shield.
Today it takes the form of a stylized cloak hanging from the helmet.
The earlier heraldic writers attributed the lions of England to William the Conqueror, but the earliest evidence of the association of lions with the English crown is a seal bearing two lions passant, used by the future King John during the lifetime of his father, Henry II, who died in 1189.
Originally, heraldic style was very similar from country to country.
In German heraldry, animate charges in combined coats usually turn to face the centre of the composition.
These are considered divisions of a shield, so the rule of tincture can be ignored.
A pattern of horizontal (barwise) stripes, for example, is called ''barry'', while a pattern of vertical (palewise) stripes is called ''paly''.
This practice originated in Spain (Castile and León) after the 13th century.
There is a separate class of charges called sub-ordinaries which are of a geometrical shape subordinate to the ordinary.
In the Anglican tradition, clergy members may pass crests on to their offspring, but rarely display them on their own shields.
Eagles are almost always shown with their wings spread, or displayed.
The use of cadency marks to difference arms within the same family and the use of semy fields are distinctive features of Gallo-British heraldry (in Scotland the most significant mark of cadency being the bordure, the small brisures playing a very minor role).
The beauty and pageantry of heraldic designs allowed them to survive the gradual abandonment of armour on the battlefield during the seventeenth century.
The top row depicts four men carrying standards.
When the helm and crest are shown, they are usually accompanied by a mantling.
In the United Kingdom, the style is notably still controlled by royal officers of arms.
There is no fixed rule as to whether the argent bells should be at the top or the bottom of each row.
To these elements, modern heraldry often adds a motto displayed on a ribbon, typically below the shield.
In the Bible, the Book of Numbers refers to the standards and ensigns of the children of Israel, who were commanded to gather beneath these emblems and declare their pedigrees.
File:NAMA Mycènes bouclier 2.jpg|Fresco depicting a shield of a type common in Mycenaean Greece.
The Abbey of St. Denis contained a window commemorating the knights who embarked on the Second Crusade in 1147, and was probably made soon after the event; but Montfaucon's illustration of the window before it was destroyed shows no heraldic design on any of the shields.
This is usually represented by a collar or similar band surrounding the shield.
The Roman Catholic Church, the Church of England, and other Churches maintain the tradition of ecclesiastical heraldry for their high-rank prelates, religious orders, universities, and schools.
French blazon makes no such distinction between these diminutives and the ordinaries when borne singly.
Today, heraldry is not a worldly expression of aristocracy, merely a form of identification.
In England, from the time of the Norman conquest, official documents had to be sealed.
The most celebrated armorial dispute in English heraldry is that of ''Scrope v. Grosvenor'' (1390), in which two different men claimed the right to bear ''azure, a bend or''.
Heraldry has been described poetically as "the handmaid of history", "the shorthand of history", and "the floral border in the garden of history".
The much-maligned practice of landscape heraldry, which flourished in the latter part of the eighteenth and early part of the nineteenth century, made extensive use of such non-heraldic colours.
In the early days of heraldry, very simple bold rectilinear shapes were painted on shields.
The continued proliferation of arms, and the number of disputes arising from different men assuming the same arms, led Henry V to issue a proclamation in 1419, forbidding all those who had not borne arms at the Battle of Agincourt from assuming arms, except by inheritance or a grant from the crown.
The placement of various charges may also refer to a number of specific points, nine in number according to some authorities, but eleven according to others.
The one indispensable element of a coat of arms is the shield; many ancient coats of arms consist of nothing else, but no coat of arms exists without a shield.
The technical use of the heraldic term crest refers to just one component of a complete achievement.
Charged bordures, including bordures inscribed with words, are seen often in Spain.
When three coats are quartered, the first is repeated as the fourth; when only two coats are quartered, the second is also repeated as the third.
Eastern coats of arms are characterized by a pronounced, territorial, clan system &ndash; often, entire villages or military groups were granted the same coat of arms irrespective of family relationships.
The Greek and Latin writers frequently describe the shields and symbols of various heroes, and units of the Roman army were sometimes identified by distinctive markings on their shields.
Beginning in the twelfth century, seals assumed a distinctly heraldic character; a number of seals dating from between 1135 and 1155 appear to show the adoption of heraldic devices in England, France, Germany, Spain, and Italy.
Often, the same design is repeated in the shield and the crest.
Also the lambrequin, or mantling, that depends from the helmet and frames the shield in modern heraldry, began as a practical covering for the helmet and the back of the neck during the Crusades, serving much the same function as the surcoat.
Yet no individual is depicted twice bearing the same arms, nor are any of the descendants of the various persons depicted known to have borne devices resembling those in the tapestry.
It included two flags: the flag of the Ottoman Dynasty, which had a crescent and a star on red base, and the flag of the Islamic Caliph, which had three crescents on a green base.
While there is no evidence that heraldic art originated in the course of the Crusades, there is no reason to doubt that the gathering of large armies, drawn from across Europe for a united cause, would have encouraged the adoption of armorial bearings as a means of identifying one's commanders in the field, or that it helped disseminate the principles of armory across Europe.
File:Hoplitodromos Staatliche Antikensammlungen 1471.jpg|Race with Greek soldiers in armor, ''circa'' 550 BC.
The modern crest has grown out of the three-dimensional figure placed on the top of the mounted knights' helms as a further means of identification.
Considerable latitude is given to the heraldic artist in depicting the heraldic tinctures; there is no fixed shade or hue to any of them.
The edges and adjacent parts of the escutcheon are used to identify the placement of various heraldic charges; the upper edge, and the corresponding upper third of the shield, are referred to as the chief; the lower part is the base.
Crest-coronets are generally simpler than coronets of rank, but several specialized forms exist; for example, in Canada, descendants of the United Empire Loyalists are entitled to use a Loyalist military coronet (for descendants of members of Loyalist regiments) or Loyalist civil coronet (for others).
A more recent addition is the use of ''copper'' as a metal in one or two Canadian coats of arms.
For example, the coat of arms of the Ottoman Empire incorporated, along with such traditional Western heraldic elements as the escutcheon and the compartment, the royal tughra as part of its crest.
File:Harold dead bayeux tapestry.png|The death of King Harold, from the Bayeux Tapestry.
Heraldic societies abound in Africa, Asia, Australasia, the Americas and Europe.
All of these charges occur frequently in basic undifferenced coats of arms.
Richard is also credited with having originated the English crest of a lion statant (now statant-guardant).
Heraldry flourishes in the modern world; institutions, companies, and private persons continue using coats of arms as their pictorial identification.
As the coat of arms had not been previously used in Ottoman Empire, it was designed after this request and the final design was adopted by Sultan Abdul Hamid II on April 17, 1882.
The devices are similar to the badges and coats of arms in European heraldic tradition, which likewise are used to identify individuals and families.
Orthodox and Presbyterian clergy do sometimes adopt other forms of head gear to ensign their shields.
The sub-ordinaries include the inescutcheon, the orle, the tressure, the double tressure, the bordure, the chief, the canton, the label, and flaunches.
Ordinaries may appear in parallel series, in which case blazons in English give them different names such as pallets, bars, bendlets, and chevronels.
An authoritative ''mon'' reference compiles Japan's 241 general categories of ''mon'' based on structural resemblance (a single ''mon'' may belong to multiple categories), with 5116 distinct individual ''mon'' (it is however well acknowledged that there exist lost or obscure ''mon'' that are not in this compilation).
But these fabulous claims have long since been dismissed as the fantasy of medieval heralds, for there is no evidence of a distinctive symbolic language akin to that of heraldry during this early period; nor do many of the shields described in antiquity bear a close resemblance to those of medieval heraldry; nor is there any evidence that specific symbols or designs were passed down from one generation to the next, representing a particular person or line of descent.
John's elder brother, Richard the Lionheart, who succeeded his father on the throne, is believed to have been the first to have borne the arms of three lions passant-guardant, still the arms of England, having earlier used two lions rampant combatant, which arms may also have belonged to his father.
Apart from the ordinaries, the most frequent charges are the cross &ndash; with its hundreds of variations &ndash; and the lion and eagle.
A pair of wings conjoined is called a vol.
Until the nineteenth century, it was common for heraldic writers to cite examples such as these, and metaphorical symbols such as the "Lion of Judah" or "Eagle of the Caesars" as evidence of the antiquity of heraldry itself; and to infer therefrom that the great figures of ancient history bore arms representing their noble status and descent.
A form peculiar to German heraldry is ''alternate vair'', in which each vair bell is divided in half vertically, with half argent and half azure.
Coats of arms in the Netherlands were not controlled by an official heraldic system like the two in the United Kingdom, nor were they used solely by noble families.
In addition it can be argued that newer national heraldic traditions, such as South African and Canadian, have emerged in the 20th century.
Similarly, an account of the French knights at the court of the Byzantine emperor Alexius I at the beginning of the twelfth century describes their shields of polished metal, utterly devoid of heraldic design.
To "blazon" arms means to describe them using the formal language of heraldry.
It is from this garment that the phrase "coat of arms" is derived.
One shape alone is normally reserved for a specific purpose: the lozenge, a diamond-shaped escutcheon, was traditionally used to display the arms of women, on the grounds that shields, as implements of war, were inappropriate for this purpose.
The opportunity for knights and lords to display their heraldic bearings in a competitive medium led to further refinements, such as the development of elaborate tournament helms, and further popularized the art of heraldry throughout Europe.
Unlike European coats of arms, tamgas were not always inherited, and could stand for families or clans (for example, when denoting territory, livestock, or religious items) as well as for specific individuals (such as when used for weapons, or for royal seals).
The mantling is sometimes conventionally depicted with a ragged edge, as if damaged in combat, though the edges of most are simply decorated at the emblazoner's discretion.
File:Narmer Palette serpopard side.jpg|Reverse of the Narmer Palette, ''circa'' 3100 BC.
When the arms of a knight and his wife are shown in one achievement, the insignia of knighthood surround the husband's arms only, and the wife's arms are customarily surrounded by a meaningless ornamental garland of leaves for visual balance.
However, by the middle of the fourteenth century, the principle that only a single individual was entitled to bear a particular coat of arms was generally accepted, and disputes over the ownership of arms seems to have led to gradual establishment of heraldic authorities to regulate their use.
According to Friar, they are distinguished by their order in blazon.
Wave shaped stripes are termed ''undy''.
One of the earliest known examples of armory as it subsequently came to be practiced can be seen on the tomb of Geoffrey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, who died in 1151.
Impalement replaced the earlier dimidiation &ndash; combining the dexter half of one coat with the sinister half of another &ndash; because dimidiation can create ambiguity between, for example, a bend and a chevron.
When the field is sable and the ermine spots argent, the same pattern is termed ''ermines''; when the field is ''or'' rather than argent, the fur is termed ''erminois''; and when the field is sable and the ermine spots ''or'', it is termed ''pean''.
In some cases, with the influence of European cultures, these symbols mingled with Western heraldry.
For further variations, these are sometimes combined to produce patterns of ''barry-bendy'', ''paly-bendy'', ''lozengy'' and ''fusilly''.
For example, the Bayeux Tapestry, illustrating the Norman invasion of England in 1066, and probably commissioned about 1077, when the cathedral of Bayeux was rebuilt, depicts a number of shields of various shapes and designs, many of which are plain, while others are decorated with dragons, crosses, or other typically heraldic figures.
This does not seem to have been done in the earliest heraldry, but examples are known from at least the seventeenth century.
Over time, heraldic tradition diverged into four broad styles: German-Nordic, Gallo-British, Latin, and Eastern.
The field of a shield, or less often a charge or crest, is sometimes made up of a pattern of colours, or ''variation''.
Any person could develop and use a coat of arms if they wished to do so, provided they did not usurp someone else's arms, and historically, this right was enshrined in Roman Dutch law.
He wears a blue helmet adorned with another lion, and his cloak is lined in vair.
In 1484, during the reign of Richard III, the various heralds employed by the crown were incorporated into the College of Arms, through which all new grants of arms would eventually be issued.
When alternating rows are reversed as in counter-vair, and then displaced by half the width of one bell, it is termed ''vair in point'', or wave-vair.
As a result, many merchant families had coats of arms even though they were not members of the nobility.
In continental Europe an inescutcheon (sometimes called a "heart shield") usually carries the ancestral arms of a monarch or noble whose domains are represented by the quarters of the main shield.
The heraldic fur is depicted with interlocking rows of argent and azure, although the shape of the pelts, usually referred to as "vair bells", is usually left to the artist's discretion.
French heraldry experienced a period of strict rules of construction under the Emperor Napoleon.
The college currently consists of three Kings of Arms, assisted by six Heralds, and four Pursuivants, or junior officers of arms, all under the authority of the Earl Marshal; but all of the arms granted by the college are granted by the authority of the crown.
This rule is strictly adhered to in British armory, with only rare exceptions; although generally observed in continental heraldry, it is not adhered to quite as strictly.
Often, these can have local significance or a historical link to the armiger.
Five colours are universally recognized: ''gules'', or red; ''sable'', or black; ''azure'', or blue; ''vert'', or green; and ''purpure'', or purple; and most heraldic authorities also admit two additional colours, known as ''sanguine'' or ''murrey'', a dark red or mulberry colour between gules and purpure, and ''tenné'', an orange or dark yellow to brown colour.
A common variation is ''counter-vair'', in which alternating rows are reversed, so that the bases of the vair bells of each tincture are joined to those of the same tincture in the row above or below.
A motto may be in any language.
Hampton Court requested from Ottoman Empire the coat of arms to be included in their collection.
