In 1883 Kitchener became a Freemason.
He received an enthusiastic welcome on his arrival the following month.
Kitchener was under pressure from French Prime Minister Aristide Briand (29 March 1916) for the British to attack on the Western Front to help relieve the pressure of the German attack at Verdun.
They remained close until they met a common death on their voyage to Russia.
The camps lacked space, food, sanitation, medicine, and medical care, leading to rampant disease and a very high death rate for those Boers who entered.
Kitchener warned French in January 1915 that the Western Front was a siege line that could not be breached, in the context of Cabinet discussions about amphibious landings on the Baltic or North Sea Coast, or against Turkey.
Kitchener built up the "New Armies" as separate units because he distrusted the Territorials from what he had seen with the French Army in 1870.
While on board HMS ''Hampshire'' with Kitchener, Duquesne signalled a German submarine that then sank the cruiser, and was rescued by the submarine, later being awarded the Iron Cross for his efforts.
Milner told Gwynne (18 August 1915) that he thought Kitchener a “slippery fish”.
At this point, however, the authorities intervened and the coffin was opened in the presence of police and a distinguished pathologist.
Asquith asked them to negotiate an agreement, which they did over the exchange of several draft documents at the Hotel de Crillon in Paris.
According to Hyam, "there is no evidence that he ever loved a woman".
The biggest critic of the camps was the Englishwoman, humanitarian, and welfare worker Emily Hobhouse.
His advice was no longer accepted without question, but the British forces were eventually besieged and captured at Kut.
Despite having warned of the difficulty of provisioning Britain for a long war, he was blamed for the shortage of shells in the spring of 1915&nbsp;– one of the events leading to the formation of a coalition government&nbsp;– and stripped of his control over munitions and strategy.
That failure, combined with the Shell Crisis of 1915&nbsp;– amidst press publicity engineered by Sir John French&nbsp;– dealt Kitchener's political reputation a heavy blow; Kitchener was popular with the public, so Asquith retained him in office in the new coalition government, but responsibility for munitions was moved to a new ministry headed by David Lloyd George.
The French leaders believed Russia might sue for peace (Warsaw had fallen on 4 August).
Promoted to brevet major on 8 October 1884 and to brevet lieutenant-colonel on 15 June 1885, he became the British member of the Zanzibar boundary commission in July 1885.
He received a resounding vote of thanks from the 200 Members of Parliament who had arrived to question him, both for his candour and for his efforts to keep the troops armed; Sir Ivor Herbert, who, a week before, had introduced the failed vote of censure in the House of Commons against Kitchener's running of the War Department, personally seconded the motion.
Esher complained that he would either lapse into “obstinacy and silence” or else mull aloud over various difficulties.
In the Second World War, he ran a German spy ring in the United States until he was caught by the FBI in what became the biggest roundup of spies in U.S. history: the ''Duquesne Spy Ring''.
At this stage of his career Kitchener was keen to exploit the press, cultivating G. W. Steevens of the "Daily Mail" who wrote a book ''With Kitchener to Khartum''.
:The great outstanding fact is that within eighteen months of the outbreak of the war, when he had found a people reliant on sea-power, and essentially non-military in their outlook, he had conceived and brought into being, completely equipped in every way, a national army capable of holding its own against the armies of the greatest military Power the world had ever seen."
Kitchener's successor General O’Moore Creagh was nicknamed "no More K" and concentrated on establishing good relations with the Viceroy, Lord Hardinge.
General Erich Ludendorff, Generalquartiermeister and joint head (with von Hindenburg) of Germany's war effort, stated that Russian communist elements working against the Tsar had betrayed Kitchener's travel plans to Germany.
He served in Palestine, Egypt, and Cyprus as a surveyor, learned Arabic, and prepared detailed topographical maps of the areas.
Eventually 26,370 women and children (81% were children) died in the concentration camps.
Kitchener's plan “The Reorganisation and Redistribution of the Army in India” recommended preparing the Indian Army for any potential war by reducing the size of fixed garrisons and reorganising it into two armies, to be commanded by the splendidly-named Generals Blood and Luck.
Duquesne was later apprehended and tried by the authorities in the U.S. for insurance fraud, but managed to escape again.
Huguet recorded that Kitchener was "calm, balanced, reflective" whilst Sir John was "sour, impetuous, with congested face, sullen and ill-tempered".
Cabinet Secretary Maurice Hankey wrote of Kitchener:
However, Ian Hamilton later wrote of Kitchener "he hated organisations; he smashed organisations ... he was a Master of Expedients".
His term of office as Commander-in-Chief, India was extended by two years in 1907.
At the outset of the First World War, the Prime Minister, Asquith, quickly had Lord Kitchener appointed Secretary of State for War; Asquith had been filling the job himself as a stopgap following the resignation of Colonel Seely over the Curragh Incident earlier in 1914, and Kitchener was by chance briefly in Britain on leave when war was declared.
He was a sceptic about the tank, which is why it was developed under the auspices of Churchill’s Admiralty.
Churchill successfully sued Douglas in what proved to be the last successful case of criminal libel in British legal history, and the latter spent six months in prison.
The Official History later admitted that Kitchener hoped to be appointed Supreme Allied Commander.
Against cabinet opinion, Kitchener correctly predicted a long war that would last at least three years, require huge new armies to defeat Germany, and cause huge casualties before the end would come.
In order to deal with the Military Member, a request had to be made through the Army Secretary, who reported to the Indian Government and had right of access to the Viceroy.
Kitchener was somewhat doubtful of Haig's plan to win decisive victory in 1916, and would have preferred smaller and purely attritional attacks, but sided with Robertson in telling the Cabinet that the planned Anglo-French offensive on the Somme should go ahead.
Power brought a coffin back from Norway and prepared it for burial in St. Paul's.
His term as Commander-in-Chief (1902–09) of the Army in India saw him quarrel with another eminent proconsul, the Viceroy Lord Curzon, who eventually resigned.
However, Morley could not be moved.
After Omdurman, Kitchener opened a special sealed letter from Salisbury that told him that Salisbury's real reason for ordering the conquest of the Sudan was to prevent France from moving into the Sudan, and that the talk of "avenging Gordon" had been just a pretext.
However, Kitchener now came to support the upcoming Loos offensive.
New Army divisions first saw action at Loos in September 1915.
Landing in Southampton on 12 July, he was greeted by the corporation, who presented him with the Freedom of the borough.
An inter-Allied conference at Chantilly (7 July, including Russian, Belgian, Serb and Italian delegates) agreed on coordinated offensives.
Kitchener was also keen to break up Territorial units whenever possible whilst ensuring that “No “K” Division left the country incomplete”.
''Hap'' Kitchener, who had married a Bermudian, purchased (with a legacy left to him by his uncle) Hinson's Island, part of the former Prisoner of War camp from which Duquesne had escaped, after the First World War as the location of his home and business.
The French refused to bring troops home from Salonika, which Kitchener thought a play for the increase of French power in the Mediterranean.
In 1878 having completed the survey of Western Palestine, Kitchener was sent to Cyprus to undertake a survey of that newly acquired British protectorate.
Following the defeat of the conventional Boer forces, Kitchener succeeded Roberts as overall commander in November 1900.
They met, together with Viviani (French Prime Minister) and Millerand (now French War Minister).
Kitchener won fame in 1898 for winning the Battle of Omdurman and securing control of the Sudan, after which he was given the title "Lord Kitchener of Khartoum"; as Chief of Staff (1900–02) in the Second Boer War he played a key role in Lord Roberts' conquest of the Boer Republics, then succeeded Roberts as commander-in-chief&nbsp;– by which time Boer forces had taken to guerrilla fighting and British forces imprisoned Boer civilians in concentration camps.
Commissioned into the Royal Engineers on 4January 1871, his service in France had violated British neutrality, and he was reprimanded by the Duke of Cambridge, the commander-in-chief.
Kitchener became second-in-command of an Egyptian Cavalry regiment in February 1883 and then took part in the failed Gordon relief expedition in the Sudan in late 1884.
Kitchener became Governor-General of the Sudan in September 1898 and began a programme of restoring good governance to the Sudan.
Kitchener agreed that Robertson alone should present strategic advice to the Cabinet, with Kitchener responsible for recruiting and supplying the Army, although he refused to agree that military orders should go out over Robertson’s signature alone – it was agreed that the Secretary of State should continue to sign orders jointly with the CIGS.
In 1914, at the start of the First World War, Lord Kitchener became Secretary of State for War, a Cabinet Minister.
", remains recognised and parodied in popular culture.
Kitchener drowned on 5 June 1916 when HMS ''Hampshire'' sank west of the Orkney Islands, Scotland.
Shortly before 19:30 hrs the same day, while en route to the Russian port of Arkhangelsk during a Force 9 gale, ''Hampshire'' struck a mine laid by the newly launched German U-boat ''U-75'' (commanded by Curt Beitzen) and sank west of the Orkney Islands leading to the deaths of most of the people who had sailed in her.
He became Governor of the Egyptian Provinces of Eastern Sudan and Red Sea Littoral (which in practice consisted of little more than the Port of Suakin) in September 1886 and led his forces in action against the followers of the Mahdi at Handub in January 1888 when he was injured in the jaw.
He found it “repugnant and unnatural to have to discuss military secrets with a large number of gentlemen with whom he was but barely acquainted”.
Later, as his legend had grown, he was able to be rude to the press, on one occasion in the Second Boer War bellowing: "Get out of my way, you drunken swabs".
Kitchener visited Rome and Athens, but Murray warned that he would likely demand the diversion of British troops to fight the Turks in the Sinai.
He attempted to prevent evangelical Christian missionaries from trying to convert Muslims to Christianity.
Sir Evelyn Baring, the ''de facto'' British ruler of Egypt, thought Kitchener “the most able (soldier) I have come across in my time”.
The agreement was formalised in a Royal Order in Council in January 1916.
He also visited King Edward VII, who was confined to his room recovering from his recent operation for appendicitis, but wanted to meet the general on his arrival and to personally bestow on him the insignia of the Order of Merit.
It may have encouraged large numbers of volunteers and has proven to be one of the most enduring images of the war, having been copied and parodied many times since.
Only 480 of these rifles had arrived in the UK by 4 June 1916.
The box was found to contain only tar for weight.
His appearance added to his mystique: his long legs made him appear taller, whilst a cast in his eye made people feel he was looking right through them.
The celebrated horseman and bush poet Lt. Harry "Breaker" Morant and Lt. Peter Handcock were found guilty, sentenced to death, and shot by firing squad at Pietersburg on 27 February 1902.
Kitchener was appointed Commander-in-Chief, India in 1902 and immediately began the task of reorganising the Indian Army.
He aspired to be Viceroy of India, but the Secretary of State for India, John Morley, was not keen and hoped to send him instead to Malta as Commander-in-Chief of British forces in the Mediterranean, even to the point of announcing the appointment in the newspapers.
He was making his way to Russia in order to attend negotiations when the ship struck a German mine.
His father had only recently bought land in Ireland under a scheme to encourage the purchase of land after selling his commission.
Kitchener's great fame, the suddenness of his death, and its apparently convenient timing for a number of parties gave almost immediate rise to a number of conspiracy theories about his death.
In January 1915, Field Marshal Sir John French, the commander of the British Expeditionary Force, with the concurrence of other senior commanders (e.g.
His commanding image, appearing on recruiting posters demanding "Your country needs you!
He reprieved a third soldier, Lt. George Witton, who served 28 months before being released.
On Bertie’s advice Kitchener dropped his intention of inspecting the BEF.
On 2June 1916, Lord Kitchener personally answered questions asked by politicians about his running of the war effort; at the start of hostilities Kitchener had ordered two million rifles from various US arms manufacturers.
While many of the Kitchener Reforms were supported by the Viceroy Lord Curzon of Kedleston, who had originally lobbied for Kitchener's appointment, the two men eventually came into conflict.
Kitchener was promoted to the highest Army rank, Field Marshal, on 10September 1909 and went on a tour of Australia and New Zealand.
Generals such as Sir William Robertson were critical of Kitchener's failure to ask the General Staff (whose chief James Wolfe-Murray was intimidated by Kitchener) to study the feasibility of any of these campaigns.
In addition to his military work, Lord Kitchener contributed to efforts on the home front.
One in particular was posited by Lord Alfred Douglas (of Oscar Wilde fame), positing a connection between Kitchener's death, the recent naval Battle of Jutland, Winston Churchill, and a Jewish conspiracy.
Kitchener presided over the Rawalpindi Parade 1905 to honour the Prince and Princess of Wales' visit to India.
Given that the tiny BEF (about 100,000 men, half of them serving regulars and half reservists) was Britain’s only field army, Lord Kitchener also instructed French to avoid undue losses and exposure to “forward movements where large numbers of French troops are not engaged” until Kitchener himself had had a chance to discuss the matter with the Cabinet.
After the meeting Kitchener telegraphed the Cabinet that the BEF would remain in the line, although taking care not to be outflanked, and told French to consider this "an instruction".
He was arrested and court-martialled in Cape Town and sent to the penal colony of Bermuda, but managed to escape to the U.S. MI5 confirmed that Duquesne was "a German intelligence officer&nbsp;... involved in a series of acts of sabotage against British shipping in South American waters during the First World war"; he was wanted for: "murder on the high seas, the sinking and burning of British ships, the burning of military stores, warehouses, coaling stations, conspiracy, and the falsification of Admiralty documents."
Robin Neillands, for instance, notes that Kitchener consistently rose in ability as he was promoted.
In the Breaker Morant case five Australian and one English officers of an irregular unit The Bush Veld Carabiniers, were court-martialled for summarily executing twelve Boer prisoners,  and also for the murder of a German missionary believed to be a Boer sympathiser, all under unwritten orders approved by Kitchener.
Kitchener, who had been promoted to the substantive rank of general on 1 June 1902, was hosted to a farewell reception at Cape Town on 23 June, and left for the United Kingdom in the SS ''Orotava'' on the same day.
The knitted sock patterns of the day used a seam up the toe that could rub uncomfortably against the toes.
There were even instances, when the two separate bureaucracies produced different answers to a problem with the Commander-in-Chief disagreeing with himself as Military Member.
A massive recruitment campaign began, which soon featured a distinctive poster of Kitchener, taken from a magazine front cover.
They also clashed over the question of military administration, as Kitchener objected to the system whereby transport and logistics were controlled by a "Military Member" of the Viceroy's Council.
Kitchener pushed hard for the Viceroyalty, returning to London to lobby Cabinet ministers and the dying King Edward VII, from whom, whilst collecting his Field Marshal's baton, Kitchener obtained permission to refuse the Malta job.
Kitchener was born in Ballylongford near Listowel, County Kerry, in Ireland, son of army officer Henry Horatio Kitchener (1805–1894) and Frances Anne Chevallier (d. 1864; daughter of John Chevallier, a priest, and his third wife, Elizabeth, ''née'' Cole).
Kitchener was worried that, although his moustache was bleached white by the sun, his blond hair refused to turn grey, making it harder for Egyptians to take him seriously.
Duquesne's story was that he returned to Europe, posed as the Russian Duke Boris Zakrevsky in 1916, and joined Kitchener in Scotland.
Egypt had recently become a British puppet state, its army led by British officers, although still nominally under the sovereignty of the Khedive (Egyptian monarch) and his nominal overlord the (Ottoman) Sultan of Turkey.
Asquith, who told Robertson that Kitchener was “an impossible colleague” and “his veracity left much to be desired”, hoped that he could be persuaded to remain in the region as Commander-in-Chief and acted in charge of the War Office, but Kitchener took his seals of office with him so he could not be sacked in his absence.
Lord Kitchener sailed from Scrabster to Scapa Flow on 5 June 1916 aboard HMS ''Oak'' before eventually transferring to the armoured cruiser ''Hampshire'' for his diplomatic mission to Russia.
Officially holding the title of chief of staff, he was in practice a second-in-command and was present at the relief of Kimberley before leading an unsuccessful frontal assault at the Battle of Paardeberg in February 1900.
The proponents of the case point to Kitchener's friend Captain Oswald Fitzgerald, his "constant and inseparable companion", whom he appointed his aide-de-camp.
French had a friendly exchange of letters with Joffre.
Kitchener continued to lose favour with politicians and professional soldiers.
Then in 1879 he became vice-consul in Anatolia.
The Prime Minister, Herbert Henry Asquith, was sympathetic to Kitchener but was unwilling to overrule Morley, who threatened resignation, so Kitchener was finally turned down for the post of Viceroy of India in 1911.
Patrick Barkham, a contemporary journalist, remarked that Kitchener "has the failing acquired by most of the Egyptian officers, a taste for buggery".
Some biographers have concluded that Kitchener was a latent or active homosexual.
Early in 1916 Kitchener visited Douglas Haig, newly appointed Commander-in-Chief of the BEF in France.
Although the offices of Commander-in-Chief and Military Member were now held by a single individual, senior officers could approach only the Commander-in-Chief directly.
Writers who make the case for his homosexuality include Montgomery Hyde, Ronald Hyam, Denis Judd and Frank Richardson.
They then moved to Switzerland where the young Kitchener was educated at Montreux, then at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich.
The programme had a strong foundation, based on education at Gordon Memorial College as its centrepiece—and not simply for the children of the local elites: children from anywhere could apply to study.
There was widespread public outrage at Power, but he was never prosecuted.
With the Russians being pushed back from Poland, Kitchener thought the transfer of German troops west and a possible invasion of Britain increasingly likely, and told the War Council (14 May) that he was not willing to send the New Armies overseas.
In 1926, a hoaxer named Frank Power claimed in the Sunday Referee newspaper that Kitchener's body had been found by a Norwegian fisherman.
Frederick Joubert Duquesne, a Boer soldier and spy, claimed that he had assassinated Kitchener after an earlier attempt to kill him in Cape Town failed.
Kitchener wanted to build a railroad to supply the Anglo-Egyptian army, and assigned the task of constructing the Sudan Military Railroad to a Canadian railroad builder, Percy Girouard, who Kitchener had specifically asked for.
Kitchener was mentioned in despatches from Lord Roberts several times during the early part of the war; in a despatch from March 1900 Lord Roberts wrote how he was "greatly indebted to him for his counsel and cordial support on all occasions".
“Unfortunately we have to make war as we must, and not as we should like” as he told the Dardanelles Committee on 20 August 1915.
He subsequently inherited and expanded the successful strategies devised by Roberts to force the Boer commandos to submit, including concentration camps and the burning of farms.
Douglas Haig&nbsp;– at that time involved in intrigues to have Robertson appointed Chief of the Imperial General Staff&nbsp;– recommended that Kitchener be appointed Viceroy of India (“where trouble was brewing”) but not to the Middle East, where his strong personality would have led to that sideshow receiving too much attention and resources.
He was created '''Earl Kitchener''', of Khartoum and of Broome in the County of Kent, on 29 June 1914.
Kitchener advised the Dardanelles Committee (21 October) that Baghdad be seized for the sake of prestige then abandoned as logistically untenable.
Kitchener had been a key figure in the removal of Haig's predecessor Sir John French, with whom he had a poor relationship.
By autumn 1915, with Asquith’s Coalition close to breaking up over conscription, he was blamed for the failure to bring in that measure and for the excessive influence which civilians like Churchill and Haldane had come to exert over strategy, allowing ''ad hoc'' campaigns to develop in Sinai, Mesopotamia and Salonika.
However, he thought Kitchener "pinched, tired, and much aged", and thought it sad that his mind was “losing its comprehension” as the time for decisive victory on the Western Front (as Haig and Robertson saw it) approached.
Some historians now praise his strategic vision in the First World War, especially his laying the groundwork for the expansion of munitions production and his central role in the raising of the British army in 1914 and 1915, providing a force capable of meeting Britain's continental commitment.
By the end of the year French thought that Kitchener had "gone mad" and his hostility had become common knowledge at GHQ and GQG.
This became known as "the canonisation of duality".
French and Kitchener moved to a separate room, and no independent account of the meeting exists.
Kitchener explained the efforts he had made to secure alternative supplies.
Sir John French’s orders from Kitchener were to cooperate with the French but not to take orders from them.
Kitchener then returned to Egypt as British Agent and Consul-General (''de facto'' administrator).
In London, he was met at the train station by the Prince of Wales, drove in a procession through streets lined by military personnel from 70 different units and watched by thousands of people, and received a formal welcome at St James's Palace.
"When the great field marshal stayed in aristocratic houses, the well informed young would ask servants to sleep across their bedroom threshold to impede his entrance".
From his time in Egypt in 1892, he gathered around him a cadre of eager young and unmarried officers nicknamed "Kitchener's band of boys".
He was one of more than 600 killed on board the ship.
He ordered the mosques of Khartoum rebuilt, instituted reforms which recognised Friday&nbsp;— the Muslim holy day&nbsp;— as the official day of rest, and guaranteed freedom of religion to all citizens of the Sudan.
One of the few to foresee a long war, lasting for at least three years, and have the authority to act effectively on that perception, he organised the largest volunteer army that Britain had seen, and oversaw a significant expansion of materials production to fight Germany on the Western Front.
According to A. N. Wilson, his interests were not exclusively homosexual.
General Sir Douglas Haig), wanted the New Armies incorporated into existing divisions as battalions rather than sent out as entire divisions.
Their death warrants were personally signed by Kitchener.
Kitchener (19 August) ordered the Loos offensive to proceed, despite the attack being on ground not favoured by French or Haig (then commanding First Army).
During what became known as the Fashoda Incident.
Liddell Hart speculated that this was why he allowed himself to be persuaded by Joffre.
Pro-French and eager to see action, he joined a French field ambulance unit in the Franco-Prussian War.
French had been particularly angry that Kitchener had arrived wearing his Field Marshal's uniform.
He travelled to France for talks with Joffre and Millerand (16 August).
His brother, Lt. Gen. Sir Walter Kitchener, had also entered the army, and was Governor of Bermuda from 1908 to 1912.
Haig differed with Kitchener over the importance of Mediterranean efforts and wanted to see a strong General Staff in London, but nonetheless valued Kitchener as a military voice against the folly of civilians such as Churchill.
Salisbury's letter ordered Kitchener to head south as soon as possible to evict Marchand before he got a chance to become well established on the Nile.
That same year Kitchener founded the Indian Staff College at Quetta (now the Pakistani Command and Staff College), where his portrait still hangs.
He was also promoted to lieutenant-general on 29 November 1900 and to local general on 12 December 1900.
During this period Kitchener struggled against Sir Alfred Milner, the Governor of the Cape Colony, and the British government.
The Treaty of Vereeniging, ending the War, was signed in May 1902 following a tense six months.
At an Anglo-French conference at Calais (6 July) Joffre and Kitchener, who was opposed to “too vigorous” offensives, reached a compromise on “local offensives on a vigorous scale”, and Kitchener agreed to deploy New Army divisions to France.
This was how Kitchener normally dressed at the time (Hankey thought Kitchener’s uniform tactless, but it had probably not occurred to him to change), but French felt that Kitchener was implying that he was his military superior and not simply a cabinet member.
On 4 January 1883 Kitchener was promoted to captain, given the Turkish rank bimbashi (major) and despatched to Egypt where he took part in the reconstruction of the Egyptian Army.
Milner was a hard-line conservative and wanted forcibly to Anglicise the Afrikaans people (the Boers), and Milner and the British government wanted to assert victory by forcing the Boers to sign a humiliating peace treaty; Kitchener wanted a more generous compromise peace treaty that would recognize certain rights for the Afrikaners and promise future self-government.
Kitchener achieved further successes at the Battle of Atbara in April 1898 and then the Battle of Omdurman in September 1898.
He was created '''Baron Kitchener''', of Khartoum and of Aspall in the County of Suffolk, on 31 October 1898.
Curzon wrote to Kitchener advising him that signing himself “Kitchener of Khartoum” took up too much time and space&nbsp;– Kitchener commented on the pettiness of this (Curzon simply signed himself "Curzon" as an hereditary peer, although he later took to signing himself “Curzon of Kedleston”).
This may have been a mistaken judgement, as the British reservists of 1914 tended to be much younger and fitter than their French equivalents a generation earlier.
Kitchener and Asquith were agreed that Robertson should become CIGS, but Robertson refused to do this if Kitchener “continued to be his own CIGS”, although given Kitchener’s great prestige he did not want him to resign; he wanted the Secretary of State to be sidelined to an advisory role like the Prussian War Minister.
He stated that Kitchener was killed "because of his ability", as it was feared he would help the tsarist Russian Army to recover.
Archibald Murray (Chief of the Imperial General Staff) later recorded that Kitchener was “quite unfit for the position of secretary of state” and “impossible”, claiming that he never assembled the Army Council as a body, but instead gave them orders separately, and was usually exhausted by Friday.
Murray wrote that “He seldom told the absolute the truth and the whole truth” and claimed that it was not until he left on a tour of inspection of Gallipoli and the Near East that Murray was able to inform the Cabinet that volunteering had fallen far below the level needed to maintain a BEF of 70 divisions, requiring the introduction of conscription.
Later events proved Curzon was right in opposing Kitchener's attempts to concentrate all military decision-making power in his own office.
This was perhaps in part because Kitchener was thought to be a Tory (the Liberals were in office at the time); perhaps due to a Curzon-inspired whispering campaign; but most importantly because Morley, who was a Gladstonian and thus suspicious of imperialism, felt it inappropriate, after the recent grant of limited self-government under the 1909 Indian Councils Act, for a serving soldier to be Viceroy (in the event, no serving soldier was appointed Viceroy until Archibald Wavell in 1943, during the Second World War).
He was promoted to brevet colonel on 11 April 1888 and to the substantive rank of major on 20 July 1889 and led the Egyptian Cavalry at the Battle of Toski in August 1889 before being appointed Adjutant-General of the Egyptian Army in December 1890 and Sirdar (Commander-in-Chief) of the Egyptian Army with the local rank of brigadier in April 1892.
Another claimed that the ''Hampshire'' did not strike a mine at all, but was sunk by explosives secreted in the vessel by Irish Republicans.
Kitchener, at 6'2", towered over most of his contemporaries.
He had wanted to conserve his New Armies to strike a knockout blow in 1916–17, but by the summer of 1915 realised that high casualties and a major commitment to France were inescapable.
Since 1970, the opening of new records has led historians to rehabilitate Kitchener's reputation to some extent.
Conditions in the concentration camps, which had been conceived by Roberts as a form of control of the families whose farms he had destroyed, began to degenerate rapidly as the large influx of Boers outstripped the ability of the minuscule British force to cope.
Kitchener was created '''Viscount Kitchener''', of Khartoum and of the Vaal in the Colony of Transvaal and of Aspall in the County of Suffolk on 28 July 1902.
He was initiated in Cairo at "La Concordia Lodge" number 1226, English constitution  and was the first Grand master of the District Grand Lodge of Egypt-Sudan, under the United Grand Lodge of England, created in 1899.
Kitchener stated that the conflict would plumb the depths of manpower "to the last million."
This further damaged relations between French and Kitchener, who had travelled to France in September 1914 during the First Battle of the Marne to order French to resume his place in the Allied line.
Kitchener encouraged British and American women to knit for the war effort, and contributed a sock pattern featuring a new technique for a seamless join of the toe, still known as the Kitchener stitch.
During the Second Boer War, Kitchener arrived in South Africa with Lord Roberts on the RMS ''Dunottar Castle'' along with massive British reinforcements in December 1899.
The Commander-in-Chief won the crucial support of the government in London, and the Viceroy chose to resign.
His father took him back to England after he caught pneumonia after ascending in a balloon to see the French Army of the Loire in action.
Robertson was suspicious of efforts in the Balkans and Near East, and was instead committed to major British offensives against Germany on the Western Front&nbsp;— the first of these was to be the Somme in 1916.
The numbers of shells supplied were no less paltry.
Philip Magnus hints at homosexuality, though Lady Winifred Renshaw said that Magnus later repudiated this belief.
Alexandretta was an area with a large Christian population and was the strategic centre of the Ottoman Empire's railway network&nbsp;— its capture would have cut the empire in two.
He also avoided interviews with women, took a great deal of interest in the Boy Scout movement, and decorated his rose garden with four pairs of sculptured bronze boys.
(Churchill's responsibility for the failure of this campaign is debated; for more information see David Fromkin's ''A Peace to End All Peace.'')
He wired French (16 May 1915) that he would send no more reinforcements to France until he was clear the German line could be broken, but sent two divisions at the end of May to please Joffre, not because he thought a breakthrough possible.
