His lectures at Columbia and Stanford universities were published in 1909 as ''Principles of Mining'', which became a standard textbook.
Your concurrence is comforting."
He explained that he "was one of the ancient believers that the Supreme Court should have a strong minority of the opposition's party and that all appointments should be made from experienced jurists.
Hoover held a press conference on his first day in office, promising a "new phase of press relations".
On Hoover's initiative, a school meals program in the American and British occupation zones of Germany was begun on April 14, 1947.
But having lost in his home state, Hoover was not considered a serious contender at the convention.
She had been an Episcopalian and became a Quaker.
He had originally planned to make only one or two major speeches, and to leave the rest of the campaigning to proxies, but when polls showed that the entire Republican ticket could be facing a resounding defeat, Hoover agreed to an expanded schedule of public addresses.
In his spare time, Hoover wrote.
Hoover graduated in 1895 with a degree in geology.
The first-year students were not required to pay tuition.
His answer was: "I'll do what I can for you with pleasure; but I'll be damned if I'll give up my American citizenship—not on your life!"
Hundreds of thousands of Americans found themselves homeless and began congregating in the numerous Hoovervilles (shanty towns) that sprang up in major cities; Democrats tied on the nasty name.
He worked at gold mines in Big Bell, Cue, Gwalia, Menzies, and Coolgardie.
By the time of his death, he had rehabilitated his image.
His use of ''"experiment"'' suggested it was not permanent.
White House physician Admiral Joel T. Boone invented the sport Hooverball to keep Hoover fit while in the White House.
Both the U.S. Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission opposed Hoover's goals, but the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in ''Maple Flooring Manufacturers' Assn.
He also outlived both his successor Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Eleanor Roosevelt who died in 1945 and 1962, respectively.
In 1919 he established the Hoover War Collection at Stanford University.
In July 1922, Soviet author Maxim Gorky wrote to Hoover:
Hoover is the most recent cabinet secretary to be elected President of the United States, as well as one of only two Presidents (along with William Howard Taft) who had neither been elected to a national political office or governorship, nor served as military generals.
Ten months later he had severe gastrointestinal bleeding and seemed terminally ill and frail, but his mind was clear and he maintained a great deal of correspondence.
However, economic depression had spread worldwide, and Canada, France and other nations retaliated by raising tariffs on imports from the U.S.
The NAACP claimed that Parker had made many court decisions against African-Americans, and they fought the nomination.
One major achievement was to promote product standardizations.
Washington police attempted to remove the demonstrators from their camp, but they were outnumbered and unsuccessful.
Roosevelt's running mate, John Nance Garner, accused the Republican of "leading the country down the path of socialism".
Hoover fought for more power to control the proliferation of licensed radio stations (which in 1927, stood at 732 stations).
Hoover was made a partner in Bewick, Moreing & Co. on December 18, 1901 and assumed responsibility for various Australian operations and investments.
Hoover himself granted more subsidies to ship construction through the Federal Shipping Board and asked for a further $175 million appropriation for public works; this was followed in July 1930 with the expenditure of a giant $915 million public works program, including a Hoover Dam on the Colorado River.
An open feud developed between Hoover and his boss Ernest Williams, with Hoover persuading four other mine managers to conspire against his rival.
MacArthur, believing he was fighting a communist revolution, chose to clear out the camp with military force.
Although he continued to consider Harding ill-suited to be President, the two men nevertheless became friends.
He served as a geologist and mining engineer while searching the Western Australian goldfields for investments.
He was convinced from his Belgian work that centralization of authority was essential to any relief effort; he demanded, and got, great power albeit not as much as he sought.
The treatment of African-Americans during the disaster endangered Hoover's reputation as a humanitarian.
The conferences issued a model Uniform Vehicle Code for adoption by the states, and a Model Municipal Traffic Ordinance for adoption by cities.
Neither Hoover nor Smith wanted the Negro vote and both publicly insulted us."
In August–September 1905, he founded the Zinc Corporation (eventually part of the Rio Tinto Group) with William Baillieu and others.
While living in London, noting the American engineer's patriotic intensity, some British acquaintances referred to him as the "star-spangled Hoover".
The CRB obtained and imported millions of tons of foodstuffs for the CNSA to distribute, and watched over the CNSA to make sure the German army didn't appropriate the food.
Following the release in 1930 of the Clark Memorandum, Hoover began formulating what would become Roosevelt's Good Neighbor policy.
Frankly, my heart went out to him, but I pointed out that fate and destiny played a part in the lives of all presidents and that I felt all possible precautions should be taken to protect him but that he should appear and make one of the greatest speeches of his administration.
Hoover worked as chief engineer for the Chinese Bureau of Mines, and as general manager for the Chinese Engineering and Mining Corporation.
President Calvin Coolidge sent Hoover to mobilize state and local authorities, militia, army engineers, the Coast Guard, and the American Red Cross.
These workers stamped out malaria, pellagra, and typhoid fever from many areas.
Roosevelt attacked Hoover for "reckless and extravagant" spending, for thinking "that we ought to center control of everything in Washington as rapidly as possible".
He was approached on behalf of the British Government with the suggestion that if he would become a British subject the Government would be pleased to give him an important executive post and with the hint that if he succeeded a title might await him.
Hoover believed "food will win the war"; and beginning on September 29, this slogan was introduced and put into frequent use.
He promoted international trade by opening overseas offices to advise businessmen.
'''Herbert Clark Hoover''' (August 10, 1874 – October 20, 1964) was an American politician who served as the 31st President of the United States from 1929 to 1933.
First Lady Lou Hoover defied custom and invited the wife of Republican Oscar De Priest, the only African-American member in Congress, to tea at the White House.
Hoover and the national party had pursued a "lily-white southern strategy" to resuscitate the Republican Party in the South, "purging black Republicans from leadership positions in the southern wing of the G.O.P."
He was appointed chairman of a similar commission by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1953.
His Quaker upbringing influenced his views that Native Americans needed to achieve economic self-sufficiency.
Hoover became one of the most visible men in the country, often overshadowing Presidents Harding and Coolidge.
He declined them all.
Smith was a "wet" who called for its repeal, whereas Hoover gave limited support for prohibition, calling it an "experiment noble in purpose".
The Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum is located in West Branch, Iowa next to the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site.
In 1901, Hoover no longer lived in Australia, but he visited the country in 1902, 1903, 1905, and 1907 as an overseas investor.
Hoover had sent orders that the Army was not to move on the encampment, but MacArthur chose to ignore the command.
Although Hoover never raised the religious issue, some of his supporters did in mobilizing anti-Catholic sentiment against his opponent Al Smith.
The final attempt of the Hoover Administration to rescue the economy occurred in 1932 with the passage of the Emergency Relief and Construction Act, which authorized funds for public works programs and the creation of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC).
Hoover himself guided U.S. Marines around Tianjin during the battle, using his knowledge of the local terrain.
Hoover and his wife also published their English translation of the 1556 mining classic ''De re metallica'' in 1912.
Great Britain grew reluctant to support the CRB, preferring instead to emphasize Germany's obligation to supply the relief; Winston Churchill, whom Hoover intensely disliked, led a military faction that considered the Belgian relief effort "a positive military disaster".
He placed his name on the ballot in the California state primary election, where he nearly beat popular Senator Hiram Johnson.
Like many, he initially believed that the European Allies would be able to contain Germany, and that Imperial Japan would not attack American interests in the Pacific.
Both of his parents were Quakers.
The economy of Germany had "sunk to the lowest level in a hundred years".
This downward spiral, plus his support for prohibition policies that had lost favor, set the stage for Hoover's overwhelming defeat in 1932 by Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, who promised a New Deal.
After graduation, Hoover worked in the gold mining districts of Nevada City and Grass Valley, California, before landing a job with the mining engineering firm of Louis Janin.
Hoover's chief objective was to address the growing casualty toll of traffic accidents, but the scope grew and soon embraced motor vehicle standards, rules of the road, and urban traffic control.
In a Memoranda dated December 30, 1916, Page wrote: Mr. Herbert C. Hoover, Chairman of the Commission for Relief in Belgium, would, if opportunity should offer, make a useful officer in the State Department.
Although he lived to see the 1964 convention, ill health prevented him from attending.
In 1936, Hoover entertained hopes of receiving the Republican presidential nomination again, and thus facing Roosevelt in a rematch.
Hoover's rustic rural presidential retreat, Rapidan Camp (also known as Camp Hoover) in the Shenandoah National Park, Virginia, has been restored and opened to the public.
In an early form of shuttle diplomacy, he crossed the North Sea forty times to meet with German authorities and persuade them to allow food shipments, becoming an international hero.
He warned that  Roosevelt's destruction of personal liberty was akin to European fascism.
To pay for these and other government programs and to make up for revenue lost due to the Depression, in addition to the Revenue Act of 1932 Hoover agreed to roll back several tax cuts that his Administration had enacted on upper incomes.
The square is near the Central Library of the Catholic University of Leuven, where a bust of the president can be seen.
From Coolidge's death on January 5, 1933, until Roosevelt was sworn into office on March 4 of that year, Hoover had the distinction of being President with no living ex-Presidents.
Although he retained strong support among some delegates, his base of support was too narrow.
Hoover attempted to appoint John J. Parker of North Carolina to the Supreme Court in 1930 to replace Edward Sanford.
"I suppose I could have called in the Army to help", he said, "but why should I, when I only had to call upon Main Street."
As the new air transport industry developed, Hoover held a conference on aviation to promote codes and regulations.
The Commerce Secretary headed the group of dignitaries accompanying Harding's body back to the capital.
Then he agreed to manage one of the Russian Czar's Cabinet Mines located in the Altai Mountains.
The NAACP was successful in gaining Senator William Borah's support and the nomination was defeated by two votes (39-41) in the Senate.
Hoover entered Stanford University in 1891, its inaugural year, after failing all the entrance exams (except mathematics) and then being tutored for the summer in Palo Alto.
His goal was to have Indians acting as individuals (not as tribes) and to assume the responsibilities of citizenship granted with the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924.
After Roosevelt assumed the Presidency in 1933, Hoover became a conservative spokesman for opposition to the domestic and foreign policies of the New Deal.
I was on the slippery road of public life."
Most historians agree that Hoover's defeat in the 1932 election was caused primarily by the downward economic spiral, although his strong support for prohibition was also significant.
He was a professional mining engineer and was raised as a Quaker.
During a radio broadcast on June 29, 1941, one week after the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, Hoover disparaged any "tacit alliance" between the U.S. and the USSR by saying:
Hoover sent U.S. Army forces led by General Douglas MacArthur and helped by lower ranking officers Dwight D. Eisenhower and George S. Patton to stop a march.
By 1914, Hoover was a wealthy man, with an estimated personal fortune of $4 million.
In response to the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, he and Secretary of State Henry Stimson outlined the Hoover–Stimson Doctrine which held that the United States would not recognize territories gained by force.
A total of 40,000 tons of American food was provided during the ''Hooverspeisung'' (Hoover meals).
The RFC's initial goal was to provide government-secured loans to financial institutions, railroads and local governments to continue relief programs.
While Smith won extra support among Catholics in the big cities Smith was the target of intense anti-Catholicism from some Protestant communities, especially as Southern Baptists and German Lutherans.
She typified the new woman of the post–World War I era: intelligent, robust, and aware of multiple female possibilities.
Hoover's reputation, experience, and popularity coalesced to give him the Republican nomination on the first ballot.
Hoover realized that he was in a unique position to collect information about the Great War and its aftermath.
This act allowed the government to intervene and abolish radio stations that were deemed "non-useful" to the public.
In November 1885, he went to Newberg, Oregon, to live with his uncle Dr. John Minthorn, a physician and businessman whose own son had died the year before.
The Hoovers had two sons, Herbert Charles Hoover (1903–1969) and Allan Henry Hoover (1907–1993).
From Coolidge's death in 1933 to Dwight D. Eisenhower's last day of serving the presidency in 1961, Hoover had been the only living Republican former president.
Joking to the delegates, he said, "Apparently, my last three good-byes didn't take."
Despite efforts to prevent it, some companies reaped great profits.
The convention selected Senator Charles Curtis of Kansas.
Fellow Quaker Lawrie Tatum was appointed as Hoover's guardian.
The statue is one of seven honoring Presidents who have visited the United States territory during their term of office.
Following World War II, Hoover became friends with President Harry S. Truman.
The Act increased taxes across the board, so that top earners were taxed at 63% on their net income.
Hoover was also a director of Chinese Engineering and Mining Corporation (CEMC) when it became a supplier of immigrant labor from Southeast Asia for South African mines.
Nonetheless, Hoover declared that it would be folly for the United States to declare war on Germany and to rush to save the United Kingdom.
In June 1930, over the objection of many economists, Congress approved and Hoover reluctantly signed into law the Smoot–Hawley Tariff Act.
Overall the religious factor worked to the advantage of Hoover, although he took no part in it.
The CRB became a veritable independent republic of relief, with its own flag, navy, factories, mills, and railroads.
Collectively the meetings were called the National Conference on Street and Highway Safety.
Hoover saw volunteerism as preferable to governmental coercion or intervention which he saw as opposed to the American ideals of individualism and self-reliance.
He was once quoted as saying "If a man has not made a million dollars by the time he is forty, he is not worth much".
Hoover enjoyed returning to the men's clubs that he had long been involved with, including the Bohemian Club, the Pacific-Union Club, and the University Club in San Francisco.
The Hoovers went first to New York City, where they stayed for a while in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
In exchange for keeping the sufferings of African-Americans quiet, Hoover promised unprecedented influence for African-Americans should he become president.
A working compromise was never established, and reparations payments virtually stopped.
At the time of his death, he had the longest retirement of any President.
Hoover served as head of the U.S. Food Administration during World War I, and became internationally known for humanitarian relief efforts in wartime Belgium.
The legislation raised tariffs on thousands of imported items.
As Commerce Secretary, Hoover also hosted two national conferences on street traffic, in 1924 and 1926 (a third convened in 1930, during Hoover's presidency).
The lead-silver ore produced at Broken Hill, New South Wales was rich in zinc.
In his first 120 days in office, he held more regular and frequent press conferences than any other President, before or since.
He was defeated in a landslide in 1932 by Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, and spent the rest of his life as a conservative denouncing big government, liberalism and federal intervention in economic affairs, as Democrats repeatedly used his Depression record to attack conservatism and justify more regulation of the economy.
He became President of the American Child Health Organization, and he raised private funds to promote health education in schools and communities.
Democratic Party leaders saw him as a potential Presidential candidate, and President Wilson privately preferred Hoover as his successor.
The apologetic approach did not allow Hoover to refute Democratic nominee Franklin Roosevelt's charge that he was personally responsible for the depression.
Rather, he held, it was far wiser for this nation to devote itself to building up its own defenses, and to wash its hands of the mess in Europe.
In the electoral college he carried only Pennsylvania, Delaware, and four other Northeastern states to lose 59–472.
He had his second successful venture with the British firm Burma Corporation, again producing silver, lead, and zinc in large quantities at the Namtu Bawdwin Mine, where he caught malaria in 1907.
The relationship between Hoover and Roosevelt was one of the most severely strained in Presidential history.
In the spring of 1930, Hoover acquired from Congress an added $100 million to continue the Federal Farm Board lending and purchasing policies.
$125 million capital was subscribed by the Treasury and this was subsequently shifted to the RFC.
Hoover's wife learned Mandarin Chinese (she was a first-rate linguist), and he also learned some of the language while he worked in China; it is said that they used it during his tenure at the White House when they wanted to foil eavesdroppers.
Hoover's humanitarian and Quaker reputation, along with Curtis as a vice-president, gave special meaning to his Indian policies.
Hoover provided aid to the defeated German nation after the war, as well as relief to famine-stricken Bolshevik-controlled areas of Russia in 1921, despite the opposition of Senator Henry Cabot Lodge and other Republicans.
His father, noted by the local paper for his "pleasant, sunshiny disposition", died in 1880.
Hoover claimed to be the very first student at Stanford, by virtue of having been the first person in the first class to sleep in the dormitory.
Hoover ultimately chose Commerce.
Lou Henry Hoover was an activist First Lady.
Even so, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the popular Commerce Secretary's nomination.
Commerce was considered a minor Cabinet post, with limited and vaguely defined responsibilities.
"I did not realize it at the moment, but on August 3, 1914, my career was over forever.
Roosevelt won 46 of the 48 states, burying Landon in the Electoral College, and the Republican Party in Congress in another landslide.
For the next two years, Hoover worked 14-hour days from London, administering the distribution of over two million tons of food to nine million war victims.
The entire incident was another devastating negative for Hoover in the 1932 election.
In his campaign trips around the country, Hoover was faced with perhaps the most hostile crowds of any sitting president.
At its peak, Hoover's American Relief Administration (ARA) fed 10.5 million people daily.
After being appointed as mine manager at the age of 23, he led a major program of expansion for the Sons of Gwalia gold mine at Gwalia, and brought in many Italian immigrants to cut costs and counter the union militancy of the Australian miners.
Hoover made recommendations to improve the lot of the Chinese worker, seeking to end the practice of imposing long term servitude contracts and to institute reforms for workers based on merit.
He believed it was essential to balance the budget despite falling tax revenue, so he raised the tax rates.
When the United States entered the war following the December 7, 1941, Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hoover swept aside all feelings of neutrality and called for total victory.
Essentially an attack on the statesmanship of Franklin D. Roosevelt, Hoover completed this work in his 90th year but it was not published until the historian George H. Nash took on the task of editing it.
His work revolved around the situation of the huge Kaiping Mines.
Hoover was especially eager to promote Hollywood films overseas.
The Moratorium did little to ease economic declines.
Historians agree that Hoover's national reputation and the booming economy, combined with deep splits in the Democratic Party over religion and prohibition, guaranteed his landslide victory with 58% of the vote.
As chairman of the CRB, Hoover worked with the leader of the Belgian ''Comité National de Secours et d'Alimentation'' (CNSA), Émile Francqui, to feed the entire nation for the duration of the war.
Hoover declined to use a spokesman, instead asking reporters to directly quote him and giving them handouts with his statements ahead of time.
This was the first time that a Republican candidate for president had carried Texas.
The scheme was abandoned in 1911.
The collection was later renamed the Hoover War Library and is now known as the Hoover Institution.
Both candidates were pro-business, and each promised to improve conditions for farmers, reform immigration laws, and maintain America's isolationist foreign policy.
The Bawdwin mine ultimately became the chief source of Hoover's fortune.
At the time of Hoover's death he was the second longest-lived president after John Adams; both were since surpassed by Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and Jimmy Carter.
This program helped reduce consumption of foodstuffs needed overseas and avoided rationing at home.
As the moratorium neared its expiration the following year, an attempt to find a permanent solution was made at the Lausanne Conference of 1932.
In his nine major radio addresses Hoover primarily defended his administration and his philosophy.
As secretary and later as President, Hoover revolutionized relations between business and government.
It is still in print.
Hoover then began to take stock of his private life, including contemplating the separation from his Stanford sweetheart, Lou Henry.
He believed "the rivalry between the Italians and the other men was of no small benefit."
This included reducing labor losses from trade disputes and seasonal fluctuations, reducing industrial losses from accident and injury, and reducing the amount of crude oil spilled during extraction and shipping.
The successful mine had yielded $55m in gold and $10m in dividends for investors.
Within the last six months two large financial organizations, each independently, have offered him $100,000 a year to enter their service; and an industrial company offered him $100,000 "to start with."
Significant themes are his belief that the western democratic powers should have let Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia assail and weaken each other, and opposition to the British guarantee of Poland's independence.
For almost a month, the settlement was under fire, and both dedicated themselves to defense of their city.
Hoover was the last President to have held a full cabinet position.
I was particularly offended by his comment to 'shit or get off the pot'."
This was a position he actively sought, though he later claimed it was thrust upon him.
It recalled the nickname he had acquired in the Australian outback: "Hail Columbia" Hoover.
Although offered money by Congress to return home, some members of the "Bonus Army" remained.
It has been suggested that Herbert Hoover was the best Secretary of Commerce in United States history.
When the living and working conditions of the laborers became known, public opposition to the scheme grew and questions were asked in the British Parliament.
Herbert Hoover was born on August 10, 1874, in West Branch, Iowa, the first of his office born in that state and west of the Mississippi River.
Hoover is usually ranked lower than average among U.S. Presidents.
The agency employed a system of price controls and licensing requirements for suppliers to maximize production.
There is a general realization everywhere ... that civilization as we know it cannot survive another great war."
