The use of a witness when administering diamorphine is to avoid the possibility of the drug being diverted onto the black market.
The medical use of diamorphine, in common with other strong opioids such as morphine, fentanyl and oxycodone, is controlled in the UK by the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
Later in 2010 other cities including Århus and Esbjerg joined the scheme.
File:Heroin Stamp.jpg|One stamp of heroin
Researchers are attempting to reproduce the biosynthetic pathway that produces morphine in genetically engineered yeast.
In the 11th edition of Encyclopædia Britannica (1910), the article on morphine states: "In the cough of phthisis minute doses of morphine are of service, but in this particular disease morphine is frequently better replaced by codeine or by heroin, which checks irritable coughs without the narcotism following upon the  administration of morphine."
Large doses of heroin can cause fatal respiratory depression, and the drug has been used for suicide or as a murder weapon.
Symptoms include slurred speech and difficulty walking.
Heroin trafficking was virtually eliminated in the U.S. during World War II because of temporary trade disruptions caused by the war.
Some sources quote the median lethal dose (for an average 75&nbsp;kg opiate-naive individual) as being between 75 and 600 &nbsp;mg.
It is available by prescription.
Anyone supplying diamorphine without a valid prescription can be fined $10,000 (HKD).
It should also be noted that since heroin can cause nausea and vomiting, a significant number of deaths attributed to heroin overdose are caused by aspiration of vomit by an unconscious person.
However, many fatalities reported as overdoses are probably caused by interactions with other depressant drugs such as alcohol or benzodiazepines.
In ''Righteous Dopefiend'', Philippe Bourgois and Jeff Schonberg use anomie theory to explain why people begin using heroin.
This aspect of harm reduction is seen as being beneficial to both the individual and the community at large, who are then protected from the possible theft of their goods.
Depending on drug interactions and numerous other factors, death from overdose can take anywhere from several minutes to several hours.
However, administration by other routes is permitted in other areas of the hospital.
Of the estimated 1500 drug users who did not benefit from the then-current oral substitution treatment, approximately 900 would not be in the target group for treatment with injectable diamorphine, either because of "massive multiple drug abuse of non-opioids" or "not wanting treatment with injectable diamorphine".
While the onset of the rush induced by injection can occur in as little as a few seconds, the oral route of administration requires approximately half an hour before the high sets in.
In June 2015 the ''S''-reticuline could be produced from sugar and ''R''-reticuline could be converted to morphine, but the intermediate reaction could not be performed.
Morphine also binds to δ- and κ-opioid receptors.
Tolerance develops quickly, and increased doses are needed in order to achieve the same effects.
Opium production in that country has increased rapidly since, reaching an all-time high in 2006.
Although it remained legal in some countries until after World War II, health risks, addiction, and widespread recreational use led most western countries to declare heroin a controlled substance by the latter half of the 20th century.
A national referendum in November 2008 showed 68% of voters supported the plan, introducing diamorphine prescription into federal law.
Injecting diamorphine users are encouraged to use new needles, syringes, spoons/steri-cups and filters every time they inject and not share these with other users.
He boiled anhydrous morphine alkaloid with acetic anhydride for several hours and produced a more potent, acetylated form of morphine, now called ''diacetylmorphine'' or ''morphine diacetate''.
Because of this, many hospitals changed to using morphine instead of diamorphine.
Hoffmann, working at Bayer pharmaceutical company in Elberfeld, Germany, was instructed by his supervisor Heinrich Dreser to acetylate morphine with the objective of producing codeine, a constituent of the opium poppy, pharmacologically similar to morphine but less potent and less addictive.
Traffic is heavy worldwide, with the biggest producer being Afghanistan.
War in Afghanistan once again appeared as a facilitator of the trade.
Intravenous injection is the fastest route of drug administration, causing blood concentrations to rise the most quickly, followed by smoking, suppository (anal or vaginal insertion), insufflation (snorting), and ingestion (swallowing).
This helped the development of the Golden Triangle opium production region, which supplied about one-third of heroin consumed in US after the 1973 American withdrawal from Vietnam.
Illicit heroin is sometimes available in a matte-white powder freebase form.
Possession of diamorphine for the purpose of trafficking is an indictable offense and subject to imprisonment for life.
This reverses the effects of heroin and other opioids and causes an immediate return of consciousness but may result in withdrawal symptoms.
In 1994 Switzerland began a trial diamorphine maintenance program for users that had failed multiple withdrawal programs.
Pantera frontman, Phil Anselmo, turned to heroin while touring during the 1990s to cope with his back pain.
Some 3.3 million Afghans are involved in producing opium.
The advantage of diamorphine over morphine is that diamorphine is more fat soluble and therefore more potent by injection, so smaller doses of it are needed for the same analgesic effect.
Beginning in February 2010, addicts in Copenhagen and Odense became eligible to receive free diamorphine.
At present, opium poppies are mostly grown in Afghanistan (), and in Southeast Asia, especially in the region known as the Golden Triangle straddling Burma (), Thailand, Vietnam, Laos () and Yunnan province in China.
It is the 3,6-diacetyl ester of morphine.
The trials proved diamorphine maintenance to be superior to other forms of treatment in improving the social and health situation for this group of patients.
Another popular route to intake heroin is insufflation (snorting), where a user crushes the heroin into a fine powder and then gently inhales it (sometimes with a straw or a rolled-up banknote, as with cocaine) into the nose, where heroin is absorbed through the soft tissue in the mucous membrane of the sinus cavity and straight into the bloodstream.
This was reported in most of mainland Europe and the UK which led to a price increase of approximately 30 percent in the cost of street heroin and an increased demand for diverted methadone.
The weakness of government in China and conditions of civil war enabled heroin production to take root there.
* Decreased kidney function (nephropathy), although it is not currently known if this is because of adulterants or infectious diseases
File:chunkyno3.jpg|Chunky "No.3" heroin
Heroin's oral bioavailability is both dose-dependent (as is morphine's) and significantly higher than oral use of morphine itself, reaching up to 64.2% for high doses and 45.6% for low doses; opiate-naive users showed far less absorption of the drug at low doses, having bioavailabilities of only up to 22.9%.
Many countries and local governments have begun funding programs that supply sterile needles to people who inject illegal drugs in an attempt to reduce these contingent risks, and especially the spread of blood-borne diseases.
It is also used less commonly as a cough suppressant and as an antidiarrhoeal.
The serial killer Harold Shipman used diamorphine on his victims, and the subsequent Shipman Inquiry led to a tightening of the regulations surrounding the storage, prescribing and destruction of controlled drugs in the UK.
Most commercial opiate screening tests cross-react appreciably with these metabolites, as well as with other biotransformation products likely to be present following usage of street-grade diamorphine such as 6-acetylcodeine and codeine.
Death usually occurs due to lack of oxygen resulting from the lack of breathing caused by the opioid.
Cocaine acts as a stimulant, whereas heroin acts as a depressant.
When interpreting the results of a test, it is important to consider the diamorphine usage history of the individual, since a chronic user can develop tolerance to doses that would incapacitate an opiate-naive individual, and the chronic user often has high baseline values of these metabolites in his system.
It is now a Schedule I substance, which makes it illegal for non-medical use in signatory nations of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs treaty, including the United States.
It was also a problem with many rock musicians, particularly from the late 1960s through the 1990s.
This includes promoting safer means of taking the drug, such as smoking, nasal use, oral or rectal insertion.
He had been experimenting with combining morphine with various acids.
Some Australian cities (such as Sydney) have instituted legal diamorphine supervised injecting centers, in line with other wider harm minimization programs.
When diamorphine is prescribed in a hospital or similar environment, its administration must be supervised by two people who must then complete and sign a controlled drugs register (CD register) detailing the patient's name, amount, time, date and route of administration.
However, these statistics may be significantly unreliable, the DEA's 50/50 split between Colombia and Mexico is contradicted by the amount of hectares cultivated in each country and in 2014, the DEA claimed most of the heroin in the US came from Colombia.
Cocaine is sometimes used in combination with heroin, and is referred to as a speedball when injected or ''moonrocks'' when smoked together.
On August 26 2016 Health Canada issued regulations amending prior regulations it had issued under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act; the "New Classes of Practitioners Regulations", the "Narcotic Control Regulations", and the "Food and Drug Regulations", to allow doctors to prescribe diamorphine to people who have a severe opioid addiction who haven't responded to other treatments.
Examples include the overdose deaths of Sid Vicious, Janis Joplin, Tim Buckley, Hillel Slovak, Layne Staley, Bradley Nowell, Ted Binion, and River Phoenix.
Subcutaneous infusion, along with subcutaneous and intramuscular injection (bolus administration), is often used in the patient's own home, in order to treat severe pain in terminal illness.
Anthropologists Philippe Bourgois and Jeff Schonberg performed a decade of fieldwork among homeless heroin and cocaine addicts in San Francisco, published in 2009.
Like most opioids, unadulterated heroin does not cause many long-term complications other than dependence and constipation.
Possession of more than 100&nbsp;grams of diamorphine or a mixture containing diamorphine is punishable with a minimum mandatory sentence of 5 years of imprisonment in a federal prison.
The contribution of these receptors to the overall pharmacology of heroin remains unknown.
Diamorphine is produced from acetylation of morphine derived from natural opium sources.
As with the injection of any drug, if a group of users share a common needle without sterilization procedures, blood-borne diseases, such as HIV or hepatitis, can be transmitted.
Users who have used this route of administration often develop a deep vein thrombosis.
Heroin in the east-coast United States is most commonly found in the hydrochloride salt form, requiring just water (and no heat) to dissolve.
After World War II, the Mafia took advantage of the weakness of the postwar Italian government and set up heroin labs in Sicily.
The compound was sent to F. M. Pierce of Owens College in Manchester for analysis.
Injection, also known as "slamming", "banging", "shooting up", "digging" or "mainlining", is a popular method which carries relatively greater risks than other methods of administration.
Wright's invention did not lead to any further developments, and diamorphine became popular only after it was independently re-synthesized 23 years later by another chemist, Felix Hoffmann.
Another harm reduction measure employed for example in Europe, Canada and Australia are safe injection sites where users can inject diamorphine and cocaine under the supervision of medically trained staff.
In 1924, the United States Congress banned its sale, importation, or manufacture.
The trade shifted away from Sicily in the late 1970s as various criminal organizations violently fought with each other over the trade.
The number of addicts seeking treatment also increased significantly during this period.
It increased international production of heroin at lower prices in the 1980s.
Two other 3,6 diesters of morphine invented in 1874–75 along with diamorphine, dibenzoylmorphine and acetylpropionylmorphine, were made as substitutes after it was outlawed in 1925 and, therefore, sold as the first "designer drugs" until they were outlawed by the League of Nations in 1930.
Internationally, heroin is controlled under Schedules I and IV of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
The United States federal government does not operate needle exchanges, although some state and local governments do support such programs.
This "policing and prescribing" policy effectively controlled the perceived diamorphine problem in the UK until 1959 when the number of diamorphine addicts doubled every 16 months during the ten years from 1959 to 1968.
This includes subcutaneous, intramuscular, intravenously as part of a patient controlled analgesia setup, and as an already established epidural infusion pump.
By analyzing a community in San Francisco, they demonstrated that heroin use was caused in part by internal and external factors such as violent homes and parental neglect.
In late 1960s and early 1970s, the CIA supported anti-Communist Chinese Nationalists settled near the Sino-Burmese border and Hmong tribesmen in Laos.
Repeated use of heroin results in a number of physiological changes, including an increase in the production of μ-opioid receptors (upregulation).
Conviction for trafficking heroin carries the death penalty in most Southeast Asian, some East Asian and Middle Eastern countries (see Use of death penalty worldwide for details), among which Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand are the most strict.
It can also be smoked off aluminium foil, which is heated underneath by a flame and the resulting smoke is inhaled through a tube of rolled up foil, This method is also known as "chasing the dragon" (whereas smoking methamphetamine is known as "chasing the ''white'' dragon").
Diamorphine is also used as a maintenance drug to assist the treatment of opiate addiction, normally in long-term chronic intravenous (IV) heroin users.
No.3 is "brown sugar" for smoking (base).
By the mid-1920s, heroin production had been made illegal in many parts of the world.
They reported that the African-American addicts they observed were more inclined to "direct deposit" heroin into a vein, while "skin-popping" was a far more widespread practice: "By the midpoint of our fieldwork, most of the whites had given up searching for operable veins and skin-popped.
Heroin was first made by C.&nbsp;R. Alder Wright in 1874 by adding two acetyl groups to the molecule morphine, a natural product of the opium poppy.
The French Connection route started in the 1930s.
They further found that heroin users practiced "retreatism", a behavior first described by Howard Abadinsky, in which those suffering from such strain reject society's goals and institutionalized means of achieving them.
In some countries it is also given to long-term users as a form of opioid replacement therapy alongside counseling.
Afghan opium kills around 100,000 people annually.
When taken orally, heroin undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism via deacetylation, making it a prodrug for the systemic delivery of morphine.
There is also cultivation of opium poppies in Pakistan (), Mexico () and in Colombia ().
The origins of the present international illegal heroin trade can be traced back to laws passed in many countries in the early 1900s that closely regulated the production and sale of opium and its derivatives including heroin.
The cause has yet to be identified, but one speculation is that the disorder is caused by an uncommon adulterant that is only active when heated.
In the United States, diamorphine is a Schedule I drug according to the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, making it illegal to possess without a DEA license.
The majority, however, continue to use diamorphine, and diamorphine tablets are supplied for pain management.
The previous trials were based on time-limited executive ordinances.
A schedule 9 drug is outlined in the Poisons Act 1964 as "Substances which may be abused or misused, the manufacture, possession, sale or use of which should be prohibited by law except when required for medical or scientific research, or for analytical, teaching or training purposes with approval of the CEO."
Instead, the experiment produced an acetylated form of morphine one and a half to two times more potent than morphine itself.
Smoking heroin refers to vaporizing it to inhale the resulting fumes, not burning it to inhale the resulting smoke.
It was supposed that around 230 addicts would be able to receive free diamorphine.
Unlike hydromorphone and oxymorphone, however, administered intravenously, heroin creates a larger histamine release, similar to morphine, resulting in the feeling of a greater subjective "body high" to some, but also instances of pruritus (itching) when they first start using.
Both morphine and 6-MAM are μ-opioid agonists that bind to receptors present throughout the brain, spinal cord, and gut of all mammals.
The Drug Policy Alliance reports that up to 75% of new AIDS cases among women and children are directly or indirectly a consequence of drug use by injection.
Heroin can be dissolved and withdrawn into an oral syringe which may then be lubricated and inserted into the anus or vagina before the plunger is pushed.
John Bodkin Adams is also known to have used heroin as a murder weapon.
Though this is somewhat controversial among proponents of a zero-tolerance drug policy, it has proven superior to methadone in improving the social and health situations of addicts.
Governments that support a harm reduction approach usually fund needle and syringe exchange programs, which supply new needles and syringes on a confidential basis, as well as education on proper filtering before injection, safer injection techniques, safe disposal of used injecting gear and other equipment used when preparing diamorphine for injection may also be supplied including citric acid sachets/vitamin C sachets, steri-cups, filters, alcohol pre-injection swabs, sterile water ampules and tourniquets (to stop use of shoe laces or belts).
Because significant tolerance to respiratory depression develops quickly with continued use and is lost just as quickly during withdrawal, it is often difficult to determine whether a heroin lethal overdose was accidental, suicide or homicide.
Many countries now supply small sterile spoons and filters for single use in order to prevent the spread of disease.
According to a U.N. sponsored survey, in 2004, Afghanistan accounted for production of 87 percent of the world's diamorphine.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, Swiss authorities ran the ZIPP-AIDS (Zurich Intervention Pilot Project), handing out free syringes in the officially tolerated drug scene in Platzspitz park.
Although there is no longer a problem with the manufacturing of diamorphine in the UK, some hospitals there have continued to use morphine.
From 1898 through to 1910, diamorphine was marketed under the trademark name '''Heroin''' as a non-addictive morphine substitute and cough suppressant.
According to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 90% of the heroin seized in Canada (where the origin was known) came from Afghanistan.
Pierce told Wright:
Other measures include using a small amount of the drug first to gauge the strength, and minimize the risks of overdose.
The first trial in 1994 involved 340 users, although enrollment was later expanded to 1000 based on the apparent success of the program.
A subclass of morphine derivatives, namely the 3,6 esters of morphine, with similar effects and uses, includes the clinically used strong analgesics nicomorphine (Vilan), and dipropanoylmorphine; there is also the latter's dihydromorphine analogue, diacetyldihydromorphine (Paralaudin).
The withdrawal syndrome from heroin (the so-called "cold turkey") may begin within 6–24&nbsp;hours of discontinuation of the drug; however, this time frame can fluctuate with the degree of tolerance as well as the amount of the last consumed dose.
The dose of heroin used for recreational purposes is dependent on the frequency and level of use: thus a first-time user may use between 5 and 20&nbsp;mg, while an established addict may require several hundred mg per day.
Anthropologist Michael Agar once described heroin as "the perfect whatever drug."
However, contrary to Bayer's advertising as a "non-addictive morphine substitute," heroin would soon have one of the highest rates of addiction among its users.
Based on heroin production statistics compiled by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in 2006, Bagcho's activities accounted for approximately 20 percent of the world's total production for that year.
Short-term addiction studies by the same researchers demonstrated that tolerance developed at a similar rate to both heroin and morphine.
It is available for prescription under tight regulation exclusively to long-term addicts for whom methadone maintenance treatment has failed.
According to the DEA, the majority of the heroin consumed in the United States comes from Mexico (50%) and Colombia (43-45%) via Mexican criminal cartels such as Sinaloa Cartel.
In the case of a physician administering diamorphine, then he/she may administer the drug alone, however the rule requiring two registered practitioners, such as a nurse, midwife or another physician to sign the CD register still applies.
The head of Bayer's research department reputedly coined the drug's new name, "heroin," based on the German ''heroisch'', which means "heroic, strong" (from the ancient Greek word "heros, ήρως").
Morphine and heroin were also much more likely to produce euphoria and other positive subjective effects when compared to these other opioids.
Bourgois and Schonberg describes how the cultural difference between the African-Americans and the whites leads to this contrasting behavior, and also points out that the two different ways to inject heroin comes with different health risks.
In particular, users report an intense rush, an acute transcendent state of euphoria, which occurs while diamorphine is being metabolized into 6-monoacetylmorphine (6-MAM) and morphine in the brain.
The maximum plasma concentration of morphine following oral administration of heroin was around twice as much as that of oral morphine.
These methods of administration are commonly carried out using an oral syringe.
Illicit heroin is of widely varying and unpredictable purity.
In Australia diamorphine is listed as a schedule 9 prohibited substance under the Poisons Standard (October 2015).
This has had the effect of drastically reducing an area's crime rate as individuals arrested for theft in order to supply the funds for their drugs are no longer in the position of having to steal to purchase heroin because they have been placed onto a methadone program, quite often more quickly than would have been possible had they not been arrested.
The prescription heroin can be accessed by doctors through Health Canada's Special Access Programme (SAP) for "emergency access to drugs for patients with serious or life-threatening conditions when conventional treatments have failed, are unsuitable, or are unavailable."
File:Anal Heroin.jpg|Modified syringe for suppository administration
In 1999, Burma, the heartland of the Golden Triangle, was the second largest producer of heroin, after Afghanistan.
An illegal trade developed at that time between heroin labs in China (mostly in Shanghai and Tianjin) and other nations.
'''Heroin''' is an opioid pain killer.
In 2003 ''The Independent'' reported:
Coadministration provides an intense rush of euphoria with a high that combines both effects of the drugs, while excluding the negative effects, such as anxiety and sedation.
Diamorphine was first synthesized in 1874 by C. R. Alder Wright, an English chemist working at St. Mary's Hospital Medical School in London.
Snorting heroin becomes an often unwanted route, once a user begins to inject the drug.
The fighting also led to a stepped-up government law enforcement presence in Sicily.
Studies have shown that the subjective pleasure of drug use (the reinforcing component of addiction) is proportional to the rate at which the blood level of the drug increases.
Furthermore, some testing procedures employ a hydrolysis step before quantitation that converts many of the metabolic products to morphine, yielding a result that may be 2&nbsp;times larger than with a method that examines each product individually.
No.4 is the purest form – white powder (salt) to be easily dissolved and injected.
For safety reasons, many UK National Health Service hospitals now only permit the administration of intravenous diamorphine in designated areas.
By 1980, 60 percent of heroin sold in the U.S. originated in Afghanistan.
Some believe that heroin produces more euphoria than other opioids; one possible explanation is the presence of 6-monoacetylmorphine, a metabolite unique to heroin – although a more likely explanation is the rapidity of onset.
Possession of diamorphine without a license from the Department of Health is illegal with a $10,000 (HKD) fine and/or 7 years of jail time.
Some researchers have attempted to explain heroin use and the culture that surrounds it through the use of sociological theories.
It has also been shown to save money, despite high treatment expenses, as it significantly reduces costs incurred by trials, incarceration, health interventions and delinquency.
In July 2009 the German Bundestag passed a law allowing diamorphine prescription as a standard treatment for addicts; a large-scale trial of diamorphine prescription had been authorized in that country in 2002.
In 2005 there was a shortage of diamorphine in the UK, because of a problem at the main UK manufacturers.
However, this perception is not supported by the results of clinical studies comparing the physiological and subjective effects of injected heroin and morphine in individuals formerly addicted to opioids; these subjects showed no preference for one drug over the other.
This method of administration redirects first-pass metabolism, with a quicker onset and higher bioavailability than oral administration, though the duration of action is shortened.
The half-life of naloxone is shorter than most opioids, so that it has to be administered multiple times until the opioid has been metabolized by the body.
This method is sometimes preferred by users who do not want to prepare and administer heroin for injection or smoking, but still experience a fast onset.
Chinese triad gangs eventually came to play a major role in the illicit heroin trade.
Diamorphine continues to be widely used in palliative care in the UK, where it is commonly given by the subcutaneous route, often via a syringe driver, if patients cannot easily swallow oral morphine solution.
In Canada, diamorphine is a controlled substance under Schedule I of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA).
Also, tolerance typically decreases after a period of abstinence.
However, Danish addicts would only be able to inject heroin according to the policy set by Danish National Board of Health.
The onset of heroin's effects depends upon the route of administration.
Users are also encouraged to not use it on their own, as others can assist in the event of an overdose.
In other countries it is more common to use morphine or other strong opioids in these situations.
The final products have a different appearance depending on purity and have different names.
Harm reduction is a public health philosophy that seeks to reduce the harms associated with the use of diamorphine.
No.1 and No.2 are unprocessed raw heroin (salt or base).
In practice this usually means a critical care unit, an accident and emergency department, operating theatres by an anaesthetist or nurse anaesthetist or other such areas where close monitoring and support from senior staff is immediately available.
The rectum or the vaginal canal is where the majority of the drug would likely be taken up, through the membranes lining their walls.
In the UK it is a class A controlled drug and as such is subject to guidelines surrounding its storage, administration and destruction.
Patients appear twice daily at a treatment center, where they inject their dose of diamorphine under the supervision of medical staff.
The major metabolites of diamorphine, 6-MAM, morphine, morphine-3-glucuronide and morphine-6-glucuronide, may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor for abuse, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in a medicolegal death investigation.
Possession of diamorphine without a prescription is an arrestable offence.
Since January 2009, Denmark has prescribed diamorphine to a few addicts that have tried methadone and subutex without success.
In 2004 the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, a non-departmental public body of the Department of Health in the United Kingdom, produced guidance on the management of caesarian section, which recommended the use of intrathecal or epidural diamorphine for post-operative pain relief.
The UK Department of Health's Rolleston Committee Report in 1926 established the British approach to diamorphine prescription to users, which was maintained for the next 40 years: dealers were prosecuted, but doctors could prescribe diamorphine to users when withdrawing from it would cause harm or severe distress to the patient.
This variation has led to individuals inadvertently experiencing overdoses when the purity of the drug was higher than they expected.
In the United Kingdom, diamorphine is available by prescription, though it is a restricted Class A drug.
* Contracting bacterial or fungal endocarditis and possibly venous sclerosis
