Materials aimed at instilling principles of nationalism and Islam in children are an aspect of Hezbollah's media operations.
Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema differentiated the wings of Hezbollah: "Apart from their well-known terrorist activities, they also have political standing and are socially engaged."
J. Gresham Barrett brought up legislation in the U.S. House of Representatives which, among other things, referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.
It was our presence there that created Hezbollah".
Iran is said to have given $400 million between 1983 and 1989 through donation.
The entire organization Hezbollah
In addition, Hezbollah has a weekly publication, ''Al Ahd'', which was established in 1984.
However, German officials have indicated they would likely support designating Hezbollah a terrorist organization.
However, they withdrew from the government citing inability to discuss issues over the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
According to CNN, "Hezbollah did everything that a government should do, from collecting the garbage to running hospitals and repairing schools."
This has resulted in Hezbollah introducing a change to its rotation policy for its fighters from 7 days fighting followed by 7 days leave, Hezbollah has increased it to 20 days fighting and followed by 7 days leave for its fighters.
On May 12, 2013, Hezbollah with the Syrian army attempted to retake part of Qusayr.
It fuses traditional Islamic anti-Judaism with Western conspiracy myths, Third Worldist anti-Zionism, and Iranian Shiite contempt for Jews as 'ritually impure' and corrupt infidels.
However, Nasrallah has repeatedly denied any links between the South American drug trade and Hezbollah, calling such accusations "propaganda" and attempts " to damage the image of Hezbollah".
The United States, France, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Australia, Canada, the Netherlands, and Israel have classified Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.
Netanyahu said that the attack in Bulgaria was just one of many that Hezbollah and Iran have planned and carried out, including attacks in Thailand, Kenya, Turkey, India, Azerbaijan, Cyprus and Georgia.
Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the step “important and even amazing".
Specially Designated Terrorist lists.
Former Swiss member of parliament, Jean Ziegler, said in 2006: "I refuse to describe Hezbollah as a terrorist group.
Its strength was reduced in late 2013 from 500 to 200–250 due to residents complaints about some fighters of the group exacerbating tensions with the local community.
Hezbollah's military strength has grown so significantly that its paramilitary wing is considered more powerful than the Lebanese Army.
A poll in August 2006 by ABC News and the ''Washington Post'' found that 68% of the 1,002 Americans polled blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the civilian casualties in Lebanon during the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 31% who blamed Israel to some degree.
Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia have condemned Hezbollah's actions, saying that "the Arabs and Muslims can't afford to allow an irresponsible and adventurous organization like Hezbollah to drag the region to war" and calling it "dangerous adventurism",
Hezbollah won all twelve seats which were on its electoral list.
Hezbollah is part of the March 8 Alliance within Lebanon, in opposition to the March 14 Alliance.
Hezbollah has been one of the main parties of March 8 Alliance since March 2005.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the report "further corroboration of what we have already known, that Hezbollah and its Iranian patrons are orchestrating a worldwide campaign of terror that is spanning countries and continents."
General Secretary Nasrallah denied Hezbollah had been fighting on behalf of the Syrian government, stating in an October 12, 2012, speech that "right from the start the Syrian opposition has been telling the media that Hizbullah sent 3,000 fighters to Syria, which we have denied".
While Hezbollah has supported popular uprisings in Egypt, Yemen, Bahrain and Tunisia, Hezbollah publicly sided with Iran and Syria in their own violent repressions of dissent.
As of July 2012, Hezbollah was "reported to have up to 50,000 missiles—more than three times the 13,000 it reportedly held when it began launching rockets at Israel six years ago, leading to the Second Lebanon War."
Hariri then contacted Hezbollah and advised them of the situation.
Hezbollah operates a satellite television station, Al-Manar TV ("the Lighthouse"), and a radio station, al-Nour ("the Light").
On October 7, 2000, three Israeli soldiers – Adi Avitan, Staff Sgt.
Israel withdrew from Lebanon in 2000, and their withdrawal was verified by the United Nations as being in accordance with resolution 425 of March 19, 1978, however Lebanon considers the Shebaa farms—a 26-km² (10-mi²) piece of land captured by Israel from Syria in the 1967 war and considered by the UN to be Syrian territory occupied by Israel—to be Lebanese territory.
The bomb exploded as the Israeli tourists boarded a bus from the airport to their hotel.
He said "those Hezbollah fighters who are killing children and terrorizing people and destroying houses in Syria will go to hell".
Hezbollah nurtures the original ideas of Islamic Jihad."
However, Hezbollah's early primary focus was ending Israel's occupation of southern Lebanon following Israel's 1982 invasion and siege of Beirut.
Hezbollah has long been an ally of the Ba'ath government of Syria, led by the Al-Assad family.
On May 25, 2013, Nasrallah announced that Hezbollah is fighting in the Syrian Civil War against Islamic extremists and "pledged that his group will not allow Syrian militants to control areas that border Lebanon".
Translated excerpts from Hezbollah's original 1985 manifesto read:We are the sons of the umma (Muslim community)&nbsp;......&nbsp;We are an ummah linked to the Muslims of the whole world by the solid doctrinal and religious connection of Islam, whose message God wanted to be fulfilled by the Seal of the Prophets, i.e., Prophet Muhammad.&nbsp;... As for our culture, it is based on the Holy Quran, the Sunna and the legal rulings of the faqih who is our source of imitation&nbsp;...
In 2006, former Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak stated, "When we entered Lebanon … there was no Hezbollah.
Furthermore, Hezbollah is a strong supporter of the ongoing Al-Aqsa Intifada.
It also has ties with the leadership in Syria, specifically President Hafez al-Assad (until his death in 2000) supported it.
However, according to scholars, "these words do not hold up upon closer examination".
An IRIN news report of the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted: "Hezbollah not only has armed and political wings – it also boasts an extensive social development program.
Eighty percent of Christians polled supported Hezbollah, along with 80 percent of Druze and 89 percent of Sunnis.
According to reports released in February 2010, Hezbollah received $400&nbsp;million from Iran.
In August 2008, Lebanon's cabinet completed a policy statement which recognized "the right of Lebanon's people, army, and resistance to liberate the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms, Kafar Shuba Hills, and the Lebanese section of Ghajar village, and defend the country using all legal and possible means."
He went on to say that in 1996 Hezbollah apprehended an agent working for Israel by the name of Ahmed Nasrallah – no relation to Hassan Nasrallah – who allegedly contacted Hariri's security detail and told them that he had solid proof that Hezbollah was planning to take his life.
Five Israeli citizens, the Bulgarian bus driver, and the bomber were killed.
In 2009, a Hezbollah commander (speaking on condition of anonymity) said, "We have far more rockets and missiles now than we did in 2006."
Hezbollah said three Lebanese Shiites, "acting in self-defense", were killed in the clashes with the FSA.
In 1992 Hezbollah decided to participate in elections, and Ali Khamenei, supreme leader of Iran, endorsed it.
They accused Hezbollah of acting on behalf of Iran and Syria.
Hezbollah also employed more conventional military tactics and weaponry, notably Katyusha rockets and other missiles.
All Shia foreign advisors and fighters withdrew from Bosnia at the end of conflict.
The group has been accused by American analysts of engaging in Holocaust denial.
On 10 April, 2013, Bahrain blacklisted Hezbollah as a terrorist group, being the first Arab state in this regard.
In the summit, Lebanese Foreign Minister Gebran Bassil said that "Hezbollah enjoys wide representation and is an integral faction of the Lebanese community", while Iraqi Foreign Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari said PMF and Hezbollah "have preserved Arab dignity" and those who accuse them of being terrorists are terrorists themselves.
Argentine prosecutors hold Hezbollah and their financial supporters in Iran responsible for the 1994 AMIA Bombing of a Jewish cultural center, described by the Associated Press as "the worst terrorist attack on Argentine soil," in which "eighty-five people were killed and more than 200 others injured."
In the televised address, he said, "If Syria falls in the hands of America, Israel and the takfiris, the people of our region will go into a dark period."
Russia considers Hezbollah a legitimate sociopolitical organization.
It also declared it would protect all Lebanese communities except the ones which collaborated with Israel, and supported all national movements—Muslim or non-Muslim—throughout the world.
Former Hezbollah secretary general, Subhi al-Tufayli, contested this decision, which led to a schism in Hezbollah.
They include the Iranian-made Fajr-3 and Fajr-5, the latter with a range of , enabling it to strike the Israeli port of Haifa, and the Zelzal-1, with an estimated  range, which can reach Tel Aviv.
On December 1, 2006, these groups began the 2006–2008 Lebanese political protests, a series of protests and sit-ins in opposition to the government of Prime Minister Fouad Siniora.
Hezbollah reportedly also used another name, "Islamic Resistance" (''al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya''), for attacks against Israel.
Hezbollah has helped the Syrian government during the Syrian civil war in its fight against the Syrian opposition, which Hezbollah has described as a zionist plot to destroy its alliance with al-Assad against Israel.
Amal, the main Lebanese Shia political group, initiated guerrilla warfare.
Countries and organizations below have officially listed Hezbollah in at least some part as a terrorist organization.
Hezbollah launched the station in 1991 with the help of Iranian funds.
According to various reports, Hezbollah is armed with anti-tank guided missiles, namely, the Russian-made AT-3 Sagger, AT-4 Spigot, AT-5 Spandrel, AT-13 Saxhorn-2 'Metis-M', АТ-14 Spriggan 'Kornet'; Iranian-made Ra'ad (version of AT-3 Sagger), Towsan (version of AT-5 Spandrel), Toophan (version of BGM-71 TOW); and European-made MILAN missiles.
The report said that the attack was an assassination attempt on the Israeli consul to Turkey, Moshe Kimchi.
A poll of Gaza Strip and West Bank residents indicated that 79.6% had "a very good view" of Hezbollah, and most of the remainder had a "good view".
In a poll of Lebanese adults taken in 2004, 6% of respondents gave unqualified support to the statement "Hezbollah should be disarmed".
The ideology of Hezbollah has been summarized as Shi'i radicalism; Hezbollah follows the Islamic Shi'a theology developed by Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
In July 2012, a Lebanese man was detained by Cyprus police on possible charges relating to terrorism laws for planning attacks against Israeli tourists.
Hezbollah maintains strong support among Lebanon's Shi'a population, while Sunnis have disagreed with the group's agenda.
Hezbollah was responsible for thousands of Katyusha rocket attacks against Israeli civilian towns and cities in northern Israel, which Hezbollah said were in retaliation for Israel's killing of civilians and targeting Lebanese infrastructure.
Hezbollah waged an asymmetric war using suicide attacks against the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and Israeli targets outside of Lebanon.
Following the 2006 War, other Lebanese including members of the government were resentful of the large damage sustained by the country and saw Hezbollah's actions as unjustified "dangerous adventurism" rather than legitimate resistance.
On July 3, Hassan Nasrallah rejected the indictment and denounced the tribunal as a plot against the party, vowing that the named persons would not be arrested under any circumstances.
In August 2008, Lebanon's new Cabinet unanimously approved a draft policy statement which recognized Hezbollah's existence as an armed organization and guarantees its right to "liberate or recover occupied lands" (such as the Shebaa Farms).
Hezbollah, along with the Amal Movement, represents most of Lebanese Shi'a.
The entire organization Hezbollah
Whether the Islamic Jihad Organization (IJO) was a ''nom de guerre'' used by Hezbollah or a separate organization, is disputed.
After an alleged 2009 Hezbollah plot in Egypt, the Egyptian regime of Hosni Mubarak officially classified Hezbollah as a terrorist group.
Syria denied the reports.
The United States also urged the EU to classify Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.
In 2009, Hezbollah apprehended Marwan Faqih, a garage owner who installed tracking devices in Hezbollah-owned vehicles.
A nearby research center for chemical weapons was also damaged.
On the day of the act's introduction, Congressman Darrell Issa said, "Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a cancer on Lebanon.
As Iran was one of the very first Muslim countries to provide support for besieged Bosniaks (predominantly Sunni Muslim, that ascribe to the Hanafi school of thought).
Since the Second Lebanon War, however, Iran has restructured Hezbollah to limit the power of Hassan Nasrallah, and invested billions of dollars "rehabilitating" Hezbollah.
If it’s a choice between the CIA and the Iranians, they’ll take the Iranians any day.” By war’s end, public opinion polls showed some eighty-six percent of the Bosnian Muslim population expressed a positive attitude toward Iran.
In 2010, Iran's parliamentary speaker Ali Larijani said, "Iran takes pride in Lebanon's Islamic resistance movement for its steadfast Islamic stance.
Additionally, Hezbollah claims that three Lebanese prisoners are being held in Israel.
According to security officials, the man was planning attacks for Hezbollah in Cyprus and admitted this after questioning.
Although Hezbollah has denounced certain attacks on civilians, some people accuse the organization of the bombing of an Argentine synagogue in 1994.
He confirmed that Hezbollah was fighting in the strategic Syrian town of Al-Qusayr on the same side as Assad's forces.
Gebran Tueni, a late conservative Orthodox Christian editor of an-Nahar, referred to Hezbollah as an "Iranian import and said "they have nothing to do with Arab civilization."
The conflict is believed to have killed 1,191–1,300 Lebanese citizens including combatants and 165 Israelis including soldiers.
Prior to the release of the list, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov called "on Hezbollah to stop resorting to any terrorist methods, including attacking neighboring states."
In June 2002, shortly after the Israeli government launched Operation Defensive Shield, Nasrallah gave a speech in which he defended and praised suicide bombings of Israeli targets by members of Palestinian groups for "creating a deterrence and equalizing fear."
Since 2012, Hezbollah has helped the Syrian government during the Syrian civil war in its fight against the Syrian opposition, which Hezbollah has described as a Zionist plot and a "Wahhabi-Zionist conspiracy" to destroy its alliance with Assad against Israel.
In August 2012, the United States State Department's counter-terrorism coordinator Daniel Benjamin warned that Hezbollah may attack Europe at any time without any warning.
Once seen as a resistance movement throughout much of the Arab world, this image upon which the group's legitimacy rested has been severely damaged due to the sectarian nature of the Syrian Civil War in which it has become embroiled.
In 2011, a bipartisan group of members of Congress introduced the Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism Act.
Its leaders were followers of Ayatollah Khomeini, and its forces were trained and organized by a contingent of 1,500 Revolutionary Guards that arrived from Iran with permission from the Syrian government, which was in occupation of Lebanon at the time.
Al-Manar was criticized in the West for airing "anti-Semitic propaganda" in the form of a television drama depicting a Jewish world domination conspiracy.
According to Ahmad Hamzeh, Hezbollah's counterintelligence service is divided into ''Amn al-Muddad'', responsible for "external" or "encounter" security; and ''Amn al-Hizb'', which protects the organization's integrity and its leaders.
The US estimates that Iran has been giving Hezbollah about US$60–100&nbsp;million per year in financial assistance.
A day before the move by the Arab League, Hezbollah leader Nsarallah said that "Saudi Arabia is angry with Hezbollah since it is daring to say what only a few others dare to say against its royal family".
In August 2012, the United States sanctioned Hezbollah for its alleged role in the war.
Since then both Israel and Hezbollah have asserted that the organization has gained in military strength.
Hezbollah currently operates at least four hospitals, twelve clinics, twelve schools and two agricultural centres that provide farmers with technical assistance and training.
On May 28, 2013, Free Syrian Army General Salim Idris gave Hezbollah "24 hours to withdraw from Syria" or he may order FSA units to attack Hezbollah targets in Lebanon.
Hezbollah was largely formed with the aid of the Ayatollah Khomeini's followers in the early 1980s in order to spread Islamic revolution and follows a distinct version of Islamic Shi'a ideology (''Valiyat al-faqih'' or Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists) developed by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, leader of the "Islamic Revolution" in Iran.
Syrian rebels have also shelled al-Hermel previously.
On the basis of this agreement, Hezbollah and its opposition allies were effectively granted veto power in Lebanon's parliament.
Leaked cables from American diplomats suggest that the United States has been trying unsuccessfully to prevent Syria from "supplying arms to Hezbollah in Lebanon", and that Hezbollah has "amassed a huge stockpile (of arms) since its 2006 war with Israel"; the arms were described as "increasingly sophisticated."
The European Union, New Zealand and the United Kingdom have proscribed Hezbollah's military wing as a terrorist organization, while making a distinction with Hezbollah's political wing.
Furthermore, most of the Sunni Arab world sees Hezbollah as an agent of Iranian influence, and therefore, would like to see their power in Lebanon diminished.
After the death of Iran's first Supreme Leader, Khomeini, Hezbollah's governing bodies developed a more "independent role" and appealed to Iran less often.
Hezbollah's counterintelligence apparatus also uses electronic surveillance and intercept technologies.
Robert Baer, a CIA agent stationed in Sarajevo during the war, later claimed that “In Sarajevo, the Bosnian Muslim government is a client of the Iranians .
A small number of Saeghe-2s (Iranian-made version of M47 Dragon) were also used in the war.
Lebanese security sources said that the three were Hezbollah members.
Shortly before a speech by Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, U.S.
Benjamin said, "Hezbollah maintains a presence in Europe and its recent activities demonstrate that it is not constrained by concerns about collateral damage or political fallout that could result from conducting operations there&nbsp;... We assess that Hezbollah could attack in Europe or elsewhere at any time with little or no warning" and that Hezbollah has "stepped up terrorist campaigns around the world."
The Arab League, United States, France, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Australia, Canada, the Netherlands, and Israel have classified Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.
Saudi delegation walked out of the meeting.
During the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin condemned attacks by Hezbollah fighters on Israeli forces in south Lebanon, saying they were "terrorism" and not acts of resistance.
In the mid-1990s, Hezbollah was able to "download unencrypted video feeds from Israeli drones," and Israeli SIGINT efforts intensified after the 2000 withdrawal from Lebanon.
After the 2006–08 Lebanese protests and clashes, a national unity government was formed in 2008, with Hezbollah and its opposition allies obtaining eleven of thirty cabinets seats, which gives them veto power.
In 2009, the Resistance Brigades were reactivated, mainly comprising Sunni supporters from the southern city of Sidon.
Lebanese MP Antoine Zahra said that the issue is another item "in the endless list of excuses" meant to justify the continued existence of Hezbullah's arsenal.
The entire organization Hezbollah
But United States intelligence officials speculate that there has been contact between Hezbollah and low-level al-Qaeda figures who fled Afghanistan for Lebanon.
Polls of Jordanian adults in December 2005 and June 2006 showed that 63.9% and 63.3%, respectively, considered Hezbollah to be a legitimate resistance organization.In the December 2005 poll, only 6% of Jordanian adults considered Hezbollah to be terrorist.
Hezbollah has set up a Martyr's Institute (Al-Shahid Social Association), which guarantees to provide living and education expenses "for the families of fighters who die" in battle.
Hezbollah has close relations with Iran.
Russia considers Hezbollah a legitimate sociopolitical organization.
Hezbollah also collaborated with the Lebanese government in 2006 to detect Adeeb al-Alam, a former colonel, as an Israeli spy.
The act ensures that no American aid to Lebanon will enter the hands of Hezbollah.
By 2011, Hezbollah counterintelligence began to use software to analyze cellphone data and detect espionage; suspicious callers were then subjected to conventional surveillance.
One of the most effective weapons deployed by Hezbollah has been the C-802 anti-ship missile.
Argentine prosecutor Alberto Nisman, Marcelo Martinez Burgos, and their "staff of some 45 people" said that Hezbollah and their contacts in Iran were responsible for the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Argentina, in which "eighty-five people were killed and more than 200 others injured."
It is often described as more militarily powerful than the Lebanese Army.
In 2010, Ahbash and Hezbollah members were involved in a street battle which was perceived to be over parking issues, both groups later met to form a joint compensation fund for the victims of the conflict.
Additionally, 76% disapproved of the military action Hezbollah took in Israel, compared to 38% who disapproved of Israel's military action in Lebanon.
This close connection with Lebanese intelligence helped bolster Hezbollah's financial counterintelligence unit.
"It is an additional factor that we will have to deal with.
By June 2013, this figure had risen to 60–80,000 missiles and rockets.
China remains neutral, and maintains contacts with Hezbollah.
Hezbollah has been described as a "state within a state", and has grown into an organization with seats in the Lebanese government, a radio and a satellite TV station, social services and large-scale military deployment of fighters beyond Lebanon's borders.
Subhi al-Tufayli, Hezbollah's former leader, said "Hezbollah should not be defending the criminal regime that kills its own people and that has never fired a shot in defense of the Palestinians".
A Lebanese public opinion poll taken in August 2006 shows that most of the Shia did not believe that Hezbollah should disarm after the 2006 Lebanon war, while the majority of Sunni, Druze and Christians believed that they should.
According to Wege, ''Amn al-Muddad'' "may have received specialized intelligence training in Iran and possibly North Korea".
Hezbollah also possesses about 100 long-range missiles.
Al-Manar, the self-proclaimed "Station of the Resistance," (''qanat al-muqawama'') is a key player in what Hezbollah calls its "psychological warfare against the Zionist enemy" and an integral part of Hezbollah's plan to spread its message to the entire Arab world.
The Lebanese man was in possession of photographs of Israeli targets and had information on Israeli airlines flying back and forth from Cyprus, and planned to blow up a plane or tour bus.
Hezbollah is a terrorist organization."
The conflict was precipitated by a cross-border raid by Hezbollah during which they kidnapped and killed Israeli soldiers.
Another August 2006 poll by CNN showed that 69% of the 1,047 Americans polled believed that Hezbollah is unfriendly towards, or an enemy of, the United States.
Some public opinion has started to turn against Hezbollah for their support of Syrian President Assad's attacks on the opposition movement in Syria.
In August 2010, in response to notification that the UN tribunal would indict some Hezbollah members, Hassan Nasrallah said Israel was looking for a way to assassinate Hariri as early as 1993 in order to create political chaos that would force Syria to withdraw from Lebanon, and to perpetuate an anti-Syrian atmosphere in Lebanon in the wake of the assassination.
We&nbsp;... think that as a resistance movement they have done a good job to keep on defending Lebanese territory and trying to regain land occupied by Israel is legal and legitimate."
For these reasons, they justify their actions as acts of defensive jihad.
Demonstrators were shouting, "Syria wants freedom," "Anyone who kills his people is a murderer and a coward," and "the people want an end to the regime."
Saad Hariri responded that the UN should investigate these claims.
The entire organization Hezbollah
American and Israeli counter-terrorism officials claim that Hezbollah has (or had) links to Al Qaeda, although Hezbollah's leaders deny these allegations.
At the end of the Lebanese Civil War in 1990, despite the Taif Agreement asking for the "disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias," Syria, which controlled Lebanon at that time, allowed Hezbollah to maintain their arsenal and control Shia areas along the border with Israel.
Hezbollah has also used drones against Israel, by penetrating air defense systems, in a report verified by Nasrallah, who added, "This is only part of our capabilities".
Hezbollah's paramilitary wing is the Jihad Council, and its political wing is Loyalty to the Resistance Bloc party in the Lebanese parliament.
The Israeli Ambassador to United States Michael Oren expressed deep concern with the revelation.
In 1997 Hezbollah formed the multi-confessional Lebanese Brigades to Fighting the Israeli Occupation in an attempt to revive national and secular resistance against Israel, thereby marking the "Lebanonisation" of resistance.
In response, the FSA allegedly attacked two Hezbollah positions on February 21; one in Syria and one in Lebanon.
Members of the Venezuelan government have been accused of providing financial aid to Hezbollah by the United States Department of the Treasury.
Human rights organizations Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have accused Hezbollah of committing war crimes against Israeli civilians.
Congressman Dennis Hastert said, "He Maliki denounces terrorism, and I have to take him at his word.
On May 26, 2013, two rockets hit a Hezbollah area of Beirut injuring five people whilst another two rockets caused property damage to buildings in the al-Hermel district of Beirut.
Al-Manar's transmission in France is prohibited due to promotion of Holocaust denial, a criminal offense in France.
It was reported that Hezbollah is in possession of Scud missiles that were provided to them by Syria.
Failure to disarm remains a violation of the resolution and agreement as well as subsequent United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701.
Hezbollah receives military training, weapons, and financial support from Iran, and political support from Syria.
The Egyptian ambassador to Lebanon, Ashraf Hamdy, stated that "Resistance in the sense of defending Lebanese territory&nbsp;... That's their primary role.
Also, the organization recruited IDF Lieutenant Colonel Omar al-Heib, who was convicted in 2006 of conducting surveillance for Hezbollah.
The second objective was to gather all Muslims in the concept of ummah; then Lebanon would continue the 1979 Revolution of Iran.
The Lebanese ''Daily Star'' newspaper reported on April 14, 2014 that three Hezbollah members had been arrested in Thailand.
In 2009, the United Nations special tribunal investigating the murder of Hariri reportedly found evidence linking Hezbollah to the murder.
In the midst of the 2006 conflict between Hezbollah and Israel, Russia's government declined to include Hezbollah in a newly released list of terrorist organizations, with Yuri Sapunov, the head of anti-terrorism for the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation, saying that they list only organizations which represent "the greatest threat to the security of our country".
In a Sky News interview during the 2006 Lebanon war, British MP George Galloway said that Hezbollah is: "not a terrorist organization".
Iran not only sent much needed supplies but Lebanese Shia Hezbollah provided its fighters in the Bosnian war.
41% reported unqualified disagreement.
Lebanese Shiites "see Hezbollah as a political movement and a social service provider as much as it is a militia."
Like the Hamas propaganda for holy war, that of Hezbollah has relied on the endless vilification of Jews as 'enemies of mankind,' 'conspiratorial, obstinate, and conceited' adversaries full of 'satanic plans' to enslave the Arabs.
In response to an attack against a military convoy comprising Hezbollah and Iranian officers on January 18, 2015 at Quneitra in south of Syria, Hezbollah launched an ambush on January 28 against an Israeli military convoy in the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms with anti-tank missiles against two Israeli vehicles patrolling the border, killing 2 and wounding 7 Israeli soldiers and officers, as confirmed by Israeli military.
