The syllable ''Om'' (which represents the ''Brahman'' and Atman) has grown to represent Hinduism itself, while other markings such as the Swastika sign represent auspiciousness, and ''Tilaka'' (literally, seed) on forehead – considered to be the location of spiritual third eye, marks ceremonious welcome, blessing or one's participation in a ritual or rite of passage.
which emerged after the Vedic period, between 500-200 BCE and c. 300 CE, the beginning of the "Epic and Puranic" c.q.
Some Shaivas worship in temples, while others emphasize yoga, striving to be one with Shiva within.
All aspects of a Hindu life, namely acquiring wealth (Artha), fulfillment of desires (kama), and attaining liberation (moksha) are part of dharma which encapsulates the "right way of living" and eternal harmonious principles in their fulfillment.
This is done through a system of postures and exercises to practise control of the body and mind.
Both theistic and atheistic ideas, for epistemological and metaphysical reasons, are profuse in different schools of Hinduism.
Western orientalist searched for the "essence" of the Indian religions, discerning this in the Vedas, and meanwhile creating the notion of "Hinduism" as a unified body of religious praxis and the popular picture of 'mystical India'.
Bhakti ideas centered around loving devotion to Vishnu and Shiva with songs and music, were pioneered in this period by the Alvars and Nayanars of South India.
The ''Rig Veda'' praises various deities, none superior nor inferior, in a henotheistic manner.
Despite the differences, there is also a sense of unity.
The Bhagavad Gita and the Ramayana, along with Vishnu-oriented Puranas provide its theistic foundations.
These are legendary dialogues interspersed with philosophical treatises.
The religion "defies our desire to define and categorize it".
Other significant populations are found in Nepal (23 million), Bangladesh (15 million) and the Indonesian island of Bali (3.9 million).
In border regions such as the Punjab and eastern Bengal, the share of Muslims grew as large as 70% to 90% of the population, whereas in the heartland of Muslim rule, the upper Gangetic Plain, the Muslims constituted only 10 to 15% of the population.
Yoga is means, and the four major ''marga'' (paths) discussed in Hinduism are: Bhakti Yoga (the path of love and devotion), Karma Yoga (the path of right action), Rāja Yoga (the path of meditation), Jñāna Yoga (the path of wisdom) An individual may prefer one or some yogas over others, according to his or her inclination and understanding.
He states that the shared theology, common ritual grammar and way of life of those who identify themselves as Hindus is traceable to ancient times.
Vidyaranya, also known as Madhava, who was the 12th Jagadguru of the Śringeri Śarada Pītham from 1380-6, and a minister in the Vijayanagara Empire, helped establish Shankara as a rallying symbol of values, and helped spread historical and cultural influence of Shankara's Vedanta philosophies.
A temple incorporates all elements of Hindu cosmology, the highest spire or dome representing Mount Meru – reminder of the abode of Brahma and the center of spiritual universe, the carvings and iconography symbolically presenting dharma, kama, artha, moksa and karma.
This approach had a great appeal, not only in India, but also in the west.
* Old Holy cities as per Puranic Texts: Varanasi formerly known as Kashi, Allahabad formerly known as Prayag, Haridwar-Rishikesh, Mathura-Vrindavan, and Ayodhya.
There are four ''Vedas'' - ''Rigveda'', ''Samaveda'', ''Yajurveda'' and ''Atharvaveda''.
James Mill (1773–1836), in his ''The History of British India'' (1817), distinguished three phases in the history of India, namely Hindu, Muslim and British civilisations.
The ancient scriptures of Hinduism are in Sanskrit.
The Islamic rule period witnessed Hindu-Muslim confrontation and violence, but "violence did not normally characterize the relations of Muslim and Hindu."
The adherents of this sect are generally non-ascetic, monastic, oriented towards community events and devotionalism practices inspired by "intimate loving, joyous, playful" ''Krishna'' and other Vishnu avatars.
For example, Advaita Vedanta holds that after attaining ''moksha'' a person knows their "soul, self" and identifies it as one with Brahman and everyone in all respects.
Some Hindus leave their social world and material possessions, then engage in lifelong Sannyasa (monastic practices) to achieve moksha.
The "One Truth" of Vedic literature, in modern era scholarship, has been interpreted as monotheism, monism, as well as a deified Hidden Principles behind the great happenings and processes of nature.
Lorenzen traces the emergence of a "family resemblance", and what he calls as "beginnings of medieval and modern Hinduism" taking shape, at c. 300-600 CE, with the development of the early Puranas, and continuities with the earlier Vedic religion.
Some Hindu philosophies postulate a theistic ontology of creation, of sustenance, and of the destruction of the universe, yet some Hindus are atheists, as they view Hinduism more as philosophy than religion.
Central to his philosophy is the idea that the divine exists in all beings, that all human beings can achieve union with this "innate divinity", and that seeing this divine as the essence of others will further love and social harmony.
* Char Dham (Famous Four Pilgrimage sites): The four holy sites Puri, Rameswaram, Dwarka, and Badrinath (or alternatively the Himalayan towns of Badrinath, Kedarnath, Gangotri, and Yamunotri) compose the ''Char Dham'' (''four abodes'') pilgrimage circuit.
The Artha concept includes all "means of life", activities and resources that enables one to be in a state one wants to be in, wealth, career and financial security.
The Puranas were living texts that were revised over time, and Lorenzen suggests these texts may reflect the beginnings of "medieval Hinduism".
This, according to Witzel, decisively changed the Vedic heritage of the early Vedic period, collecting the Vedic hymns into collections, and shifting ritual exchange within a tribe to social exchange within the larger Kuru realm through complicated Srauta rituals.
The Hindu scriptures refer to celestial entities called ''Devas'' (or '''' in feminine form; '''' used synonymously for Deva in Hindi), which may be translated into English as "gods" or "heavenly beings".
Narratives in the Upanishads present characters questioning persons of authority.
The concept Dharma includes behaviors that are considered to be in accord with ''rta'', the order that makes life and universe possible, and includes duties, rights, laws, conduct, virtues and "right way of living".
The ultimate goal of life, referred to as ''moksha'', ''nirvana'' or ''samadhi'', is understood in several different ways: as the realization of one's union with God; as the realization of one's eternal relationship with God; realization of the unity of all existence; perfect unselfishness and knowledge of the Self; as the attainment of perfect mental peace; and as detachment from worldly desires.
There are 108 Muktikā Upanishads in Hinduism, of which between 10 and 13 are variously counted by scholars as Principal Upanishads.
It is sometimes called ''Gitopanishad'', then placed in the Shruti category, being Upanishadic in content.
Hinduism has been described as a tradition having a "complex, organic, multileveled and sometimes internally inconsistent nature."
Pilgrimage is not mandatory in Hinduism, though many adherents undertake them.
Other styles include cave, forest and mountain temples.
Followers of Shaktism recognize Shakti as the power that underlies the male principle.
Some forms of religious expression are central to Hinduism and others, while not as central, still remain within the category.
'''Hinduism''' is a religion, or a way of life, found most notably in India and Nepal.
The cow in Hindu society is traditionally identified as a caretaker and a maternal figure, and Hindu society honours the cow as a symbol of unselfish giving.
* Prevedic religions (pre-history and Indus Valley Civilisation; until c. 1750 BCE);
This idea of a Vedic essence was taken over by Hindu reform movements as the Brahmo Samaj, which was supported for a while by the Unitarian Church, together with the ideas of Universalism and Perennialism, the idea that all religions share a common mystic ground.
Since the 1990s, those influences and its outcomes have been the topic of debate among scholars of Hinduism,
David Gordon White cites three other mainstream scholars who "have emphatically demonstrated" that Vedic religion is partially derived from the Indus Valley Civilizations.
Food affects body, mind and spirit in Hindu beliefs.
The list of sanskaras in Hinduism include both external rituals such as those marking a baby's birth and a baby's name giving ceremony, as well as inner rites of resolutions and ethics such as compassion towards all living beings and positive attitude.
Hindu-modernists like Vivekananda see the Vedas as the laws of 'the spiritual world, which would still exist even if they were not revealed to the sages.
The Smriti literature of Hinduism, particularly the Sutras, as well as other Hindu texts such as the Arthasastra and Sushruta Samhita were also written or expanded during this period.
Major scriptures include the Vedas and Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, and the Agamas.
It is a synthesis of various traditions, the "Brahmanical orthopraxy, the renouncer traditions and popular or local traditions."
'''' refers to the "eternal" duties all Hindus have to follow, regardless of class, caste, or sect, such as honesty, refraining from injuring living beings, purity, goodwill, mercy, patience, forbearance, self-restraint, generosity, and asceticism.
Shaivas are more attracted to ascetic individualism, and it has several sub-schools.
The Sanskrit word dharma has a much deeper meaning than religion and is not its equivalent.
Bhakti marga, states Pechelis, is more than ritual devotionalism, it includes practices and spiritual activities aimed at refining one's state of mind, knowing god, participating in god, and internalizing god.
Other major life-stage events, such as rituals after death, include the ''yajña'' and chanting of Vedic mantras.
Rudimentary state-forms appeared, of which the Kuru-Pañcāla union was the most influential.
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan states that the Upanishads have played a dominating role ever since their appearance.
The followers of Dvaita (dualistic) schools, in moksha state, identify individual "soul, self" as distinct from Brahman but infinitesimally close, and after attaining ''moksha'' expect to spend eternity in a ''loka'' (heaven).
Religious conversion to Hinduism has a long history outside India.
Lorenzen states that the establishment of a Hindu self-identity took place "through a process of mutual self-definition with a contrasting Muslim Other."
According to the Supreme Court of India,
While ancient Vedic literature including Upanishads make no mention of reincarnation of God, the Puranas and the Epics relate several episodes of the descent of God to Earth in corporeal form to restore ''dharma'' to society.
The early Nyaya school of Hinduism, for example, was non-theist/atheist, but later Nyaya school scholars argued that God exists and offered proofs using its theory of logic.
Hinduism has been called the "oldest religion" in the world, and some practitioners and scholars refer to it as '''', "the eternal law" or the "eternal way" beyond human origins.
Kāma (Sanskrit, Pali; Devanagari: काम) means desire, wish, passion, longing, pleasure of the senses, the aesthetic enjoyment of life, affection, or love, with or without sexual connotations.
The major traditional rites of passage in Hinduism include Garbhadhana (pregnancy), Pumsavana (rite before the fetus begins moving and kicking in womb), Simantonnayana (parting of pregnant woman's hair, baby shower), ''Jatakarman'' (rite celebrating the new born baby), ''Namakarana'' (naming the child), ''Nishkramana'' (baby's first outing from home into the world), ''Annaprashana'' (baby's first feeding of solid food), ''Chudakarana'' (baby's first haircut, tonsure), ''Karnavedha'' (ear piercing), ''Vidyarambha'' (baby's start with knowledge), Upanayana (entry into a school rite), ''Keshanta'' and ''Ritusuddhi'' (first shave for boys, menarche for girls), Samavartana (graduation ceremony), Vivaha (wedding), ''Vratas'' (fasting, spiritual studies) and Antyeshti (cremation for an adult, burial for a child).
A female renunciate is called a ''Sanyāsini''.
Hinduism has been variously defined as a religion, a religious tradition, a set of religious beliefs, and "a way of life."
There are many Hindu groups that have continued to abide by a strict vegetarian diet in modern times.
Samkhya, Mimamsa and Carvaka schools of Hinduism, were non-theist/atheist, arguing that "God was an unnecessary metaphysical assumption".
This Arabic term was itself taken from the pre-Islamic Persian term ''Hindū'', which refers to all Indians.
This is contrasted with svadharma, one's "own duty", the duties to be followed by members of a specific caste and stage of life.
Jayadeva's Gita Govinda presents criticism via the character of Radha.
Temple worship and festivals are typically elaborate in Vaishnavism.
Dharma, according to Van Buitenen, is that which all existing beings must accept and respect to sustain harmony and order in the world.
The epics consist of the ''Mahabharata'' and the ''Ramayana''.
Early colonial era orientalists proposed that the Puranas were religious texts of medieval Hinduism.
''Moksha'' in these schools of Hinduism, suggests Klaus Klostermaier, implies a setting free of hitherto fettered faculties, a removing of obstacles to an unrestricted life, permitting a person to be more truly a person in the full sense; the concept presumes an unused human potential of creativity, compassion and understanding which had been blocked and shut out.
These texts are classified into two: Shruti and Smriti.
The 9th and 8th centuries BCE witnessed the composition of the earliest Upanishads with such ideas.
The first half of the 1st millennium BCE was a period of great intellectual and social-cultural ferment in ancient India.
Hinduism includes a diversity of ideas on spirituality and traditions, but has no ecclesiastical order, no unquestionable religious authorities, no governing body, no prophet(s) nor any binding holy book; Hindus can choose to be polytheistic, pantheistic, monotheistic, monistic, agnostic, atheistic or humanist.
* Islam and Sects of Hinduism (c. 1200-1700 CE);
Vaishnavism is the devotional religious tradition that worships Vishnu and his avatars, particularly Krishna and Rama.
Philosophically, their beliefs are rooted in the dualism sub-schools of Vedanta Hinduism.
These texts discuss theology, philosophy, mythology, Vedic yajna, Yoga and agamic rituals and temple building, among other topics.
Hindu scriptures were composed, memorized and transmitted verbally, across generations, for many centuries before they were written down.
According to Lorenzen, this "presence of the Other" is necessary to recognise the "loose family resemblance" among the various traditions and schools,
The major kinds, according to McDaniel are, Folk Hinduism, based on local traditions and cults of local deities and is the oldest, non-literate system; Vedic Hinduism based on the earliest layers of the Vedas traceable to 2nd millennium BCE; Vedantic Hinduism based on the philosophy of the Upanishads, including Advaita Vedanta, emphasizing knowledge and wisdom; Yogic Hinduism, following the text of Yoga Sutras of Patanjali emphasizing introspective awareness; Dharmic Hinduism or "daily morality", which McDaniel states is stereotyped in some books as the "only form of Hindu religion with a belief in karma, cows and caste"; and Bhakti or devotional Hinduism, where intense emotions are elaborately incorporated in the pursuit of the spiritual.
Two major styles of Hindu temples include the Gopuram-style found in south India, and Nagara-style found in north India.
Observant Hindus who do eat meat almost always abstain from beef.
"Preclassical" period.
Of the historical division into six darsanas (philosophies), two schools, Vedanta and Yoga, are currently the most prominent.
The goddess is viewed as the heart of the most esoteric Saiva traditions.
In larger temples, the central space typically is surrounded by an ambulatory for the devotee to walk around and ritually circumambulate the Purusa (Brahman), the universal essence.
The idol and ''Grabhgriya'' in the Brahma-pada (the center of the temple), under the main spire, serves as a focal point (''darsana'', a sight) in a Hindu temple.
Scholars debate whether the so-called ''caste system'' is part of Hinduism sanctioned by the scriptures or social custom.
Although Hinduism contains a broad range of philosophies, it is linked by shared concepts, recognisable rituals, cosmology, shared textual resources and pilgrimage to sacred sites.
It was a tribal union, which developed into the first recorded state-level society in South Asia around 1000 BCE.
From tribal Animism to Buddhism, everything was subsumed as part of Hinduism.
Scholars regard Hinduism as a fusion or synthesis of various Indian cultures and traditions, with diverse roots and no founder.
The ''smriti'' texts of the period between 200 BCE-100 CE affirmed the authority of the Vedas.
In Australia, the number of practitioners is about 300,000.
Combined with four proper goals of human life (Purusartha), the Ashramas system traditionally aimed at providing a Hindu with fulfilling life and spiritual liberation.
* Shakti Peethas: Another important set of pilgrimages are the ''Shakti Peethas'', where the Mother Goddess is worshipped, the two principal ones being ''Kalighat'' and ''Kamakhya''.
These texts used it to contrast Hindus from Muslims who are called Yavanas (foreigners) or Mlecchas (barbarians), with the 16th-century ''Chaitanya Charitamrita'' text and the 17th century ''Bhakta Mala'' text using the phrase "Hindu dharma".
Shaktism is also associated with Tantra practices.
The disintegration of central power also led to regionalisation of religiosity, and religious rivalry.
Flowers, birds, animals, instruments, symmetric mandala drawings, objects, idols are all part of symbolic iconography in Hinduism.
* Major Temple cities: Puri, which hosts a major Vaishnava Jagannath temple and Rath Yatra celebration; Katra, home to the Vaishno Devi temple; Madurai, which is home to Meenakshi Amman Temple; Three comparatively recent temples of fame and huge pilgrimage are Shirdi, home to Sai Baba of Shirdi, Tirumala - Tirupati, home to the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple; and Sabarimala, where Swami Ayyappan is worshipped.
The oldest of these Vedic texts is the Rigveda, composed between c. 1500-1200 BCE, though a wider approximation of c. 1700-1100 BCE has also been given.
With the onset of the British Raj, the colonization of India by the British, there also started a Hindu renaissance in the 19th century, which profoundly changed the understanding of Hinduism in both India and the west.
These denominations differ primarily in the central deity worshipped, the traditions and the soteriological outlook.
Within India, archeological and textual evidence such as the 2nd century BCE Heliodorus pillar suggest that Greeks and other foreigners converted to Hinduism.
The ''Sannyasa'' stage marks renunciation and a state of disinterest and detachment from material life, generally without any meaningful property or home (Ascetic), and focussed on Moksha, peace and simple spiritual life.
All these sects of Hinduism have welcomed new members to their group, while other leaders of Hinduism's diverse schools have stated that given the intensive proselytization activities from missionary Islam and Christianity, this "there is no such thing as proselytism in Hinduism" view must be re-examined.
The religion of this period included worship of a Great male god, which is compared to a proto-Shiva, and probably a Mother Goddess, that may prefigure Shakti.
Authority and eternal truths play an important role in Hinduism.
Classified by primary deity or deities, four major Hinduism modern currents are Vaishnavism (Vishnu), Shaivism (Shiva), Shaktism (Devi) and Smartism (five deities treated as same).
Yoga is a Hindu discipline which trains the body, mind and consciousness for health, tranquility and spiritual insight.
A Hindu monk is called a ''Sanyāsī'',  ''Sādhu'', or ''Swāmi''.
In Agamic schools of Hinduism, the Vedic literature and the Agamas are equally authoritative.
'''K Werner''' (1982), Men, gods and powers in the Vedic outlook, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland, Volume 114, Issue 01, pages 14-24;'''H Coward''' (1995), Book Review:" The Limits of Scripture: Vivekananda's Reinterpretation of the Vedas", Journal of Hindu-Christian Studies, Volume 8, Issue 1, pages 45-47, '''Quote''': "There is little doubt that the theo-monistic category is an appropriate one for viewing a wide variety of experiences in the Hindu tradition".
The tendency of "a blurring of philosophical distinctions" has also been noted by Burley.
During this period Buddhism declined rapidly, and a distinct Indo-Islamic culture emerged.
Sources of authority and eternal truths in its texts play an important role, but there is also a strong Hindu tradition of the questioning of this authority, to deepen the understanding of these truths and to further develop the tradition.
The appropriateness of conversion from major religions to Hinduism, and vice versa, has been and remains an actively debated topic in India, and in Indonesia.
:* "Golden Age" (Gupta Empire) (c. 320-650 CE);
The rituals vary greatly among regions, villages, and individuals.
This "Hindu synthesis" started to develop between 500 BCE and 300 CE, following the Vedic period (1500 BCE to 500 BCE).
This Hindu sect practices a philosophical Jnana yoga, scriptural studies, reflection, meditative path seeking an understanding of Self's oneness with God.
The meaning of ''moksha'' differs among the various Hindu schools of thought.
However these links of deities and practices of the Indus religion to later-day Hinduism are subject to both political contention and scholarly dispute.
The other paths, left to the choice of a Hindu, are ''Jnana marga'' (path of knowledge), ''Karma marga'' (path of works), ''Rāja marga'' (path of contemplation and meditation).
The Kena Upanishad repeatedly asks ''kena'', 'by what' power something is the case.
According to Flood, Vivekananda's vision of Hinduism "is one generally accepted by most English-speaking middle-class Hindus today."
Classical Hindu thought accepts four proper goals or aims of human life: Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha.
Some Hindus from certain sects - generally Shakta, and Hindus in regions such as Bali and Nepal practise animal sacrifice.
Major life stage milestones are celebrated as ''sanskara'' (''saṃskāra'', rites of passage) in Hinduism.
''Vanaprastha'' is the retirement stage, where a person hands over household responsibilities to the next generation, took an advisory role, and gradually withdrew from the world.
The majority of the Vietnamese Cham people also follow Hinduism.
Practice of one yoga does not exclude others.
Gautama Dharmasutras composed in about the middle of 1st millennium BCE lists 48 sanskaras, while Gryhasutra and other texts composed centuries later list between 12 and 16 sanskaras.
Prominent themes in Hindu beliefs include the four ''Puruṣārthas'', the proper goals or aims of human life, namely Dharma (ethics/duties), Artha (prosperity/work), Kama (desires/passions) and Moksha (liberation/freedom); ''karma'' (action, intent and consequences), ''samsara'' (cycle of rebirth), and the various Yogas (paths or practices to attain moksha).
In general religious conversion was a gradual process, with some converts attracted to pious Muslims while others converted to Islam to gain tax relief, land grant, marriage partners, social and economic advancement, or freedom from slavery.
All these texts describe Hindu renunciation and monastic values, and express strongly Advaita Vedanta tradition ideas.
During the Gupta period, the first stone and cave Hindu temples dedicated to Hindu deities were built, some of which have survived into the modern era.
In other schools of Hinduism, such as monistic, ''moksha'' is a goal achievable in current life, as a state of bliss through self-realization, of comprehending the nature of one's soul, of freedom and of "realizing the whole universe as the Self".
Some mobility and flexibility within the varnas challenge allegations of social discrimination in the caste system, as has been pointed out by several sociologists, although some other scholars disagree.
The term ''Hinduism'', then spelled ''Hindooism'', was introduced into the English language in the 18th-century to denote the religious, philosophical, and cultural traditions native to India.
Texts dedicated to Yoga include the Yoga Sutras, the Hatha Yoga Pradipika, the Bhagavad Gita and, as their philosophical and historical basis, the Upanishads.
The choice is a matter of individual preference, and of regional and family traditions.
Some scholars state that the colonial polemical reports led to fabricated stereotypes where Hinduism was mere mystic paganism devoted to the service of devils, while other scholars state that the colonial constructions influenced the belief that the ''Vedas'', ''Bhagavad Gita'', ''Manusmriti'' and such texts were the essence of Hindu religiosity, and in the modern association of 'Hindu doctrine' with the schools of Vedanta (in particular Advaita Vedanta) as paradigmatic example of Hinduism's mystical nature".
This "Hindu synthesis" emerged after the Vedic period, between 500-200 BCE and c. 300 CE, the beginning of the "Epic and Puranic" c.q.
;"Golden Age" (Gupta Empire) (c. 320–650 CE)
Demographically, Hinduism is the world's third largest religion, after Christianity and Islam.John Schwarz (2015), What's Christianity All About?, Wipf and Stock Publishers, ISBN 978-1498225373, page 176
Part of the problem with a single definition of the term "Hinduism" is the fact that Hinduism does not have a founder.
This soul – the spirit or true "self" of every person, is called the ''ātman''.
Raja Rammohan Roy is known as the father of the Hindu Renaissance.
In the 20th century, Hinduism also gained prominence as a political force and a source for national identity in India.
Hinduism, for example, developed its ideas with the premise that every human being has a soul (''atman'', self), while Buddhism developed with the premise that there is no soul or self.Steven Collins (1994), Religion and Practical Reason (Editors: Frank Reynolds, David Tracy), State Univ of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791422175, page 64; Quote: "Central to Buddhist soteriology is the doctrine of not-self (Pali: anattā, Sanskrit: anātman, the opposed doctrine of ātman is central to Brahmanical thought).
Some Hindus choose to live a monastic life (Sannyāsa) in pursuit of liberation or another form of spiritual perfection.
In the later Vedic period, it co-existed with local religions, such as the mother goddess worshipping Yaksha cults.
Four major denominations are, however, used in scholarly studies: ''Vaishnavism'', ''Shaivism'', ''Shaktism'' and ''Smartism''.
Hinduism is the world's third largest religion, with over 1 billion followers or 15% of the global population, known as Hindus.
In the Mahabharata, Krishna defines dharma as upholding both this-worldly and other-worldly affairs.
He classifies most Hindus as belonging by choice to one of the "founded religions" such as Vaishnavism and Shaivism that are salvation-focussed and often de-emphasize Brahman priestly authority yet incorporate ritual grammar of Brahmanic-Sanskritic Hinduism.
The first version of early Puranas, likely composed between 250 and 500 CE, show continuities with the Vedic religion, but also an expanded mythology of Vishnu, Shiva and Devi (goddess).
It has developed partly due to "re-enculturation", or the Pizza effect, in which elements of Hindu culture have been exported to the West, gaining popularity there, and as a consequence also gained greater popularity in India.
The earliest prehistoric religion in India that may have left its traces in Hinduism comes from mesolithic as observed in the sites such as the rock paintings of Bhimbetka rock shelters dating to a period of 30,000 BCE or older, as well as neolithic times.
Elaborate ''Tilaka'' with lines may also identify a devotee of a particular denomination.
Pennington, while concurring that the study of Hinduism as a world religion began in the colonial era, disagrees that Hinduism is a colonial European era invention.
Western stereotypes were reversed, emphasizing the universal aspects, and introducing modern approaches of social problems.
Lorenzen locates the origins of a distinct Hindu identity in the interaction between Muslims and Hindus, and a process of "mutual self-definition with a contrasting Muslim other", which started well before 1800.
The Smarta tradition is aligned with Advaita Vedanta, and regards Adi Shankara as its founder or reformer, who considered worship of God-with-attributes (saguna Brahman) as a journey towards ultimately realizing God-without-attributes (nirguna Brahman, Atman, Self-knowledge).
Renunciates receive high respect in Hindu society because of their simple ahimsa-driven lifestyle and dedication to spiritual liberation (moksha) – believed to be the ultimate goal of life in Hinduism.
Over time, some Buddhist practices were integrated into Hinduism, monumental Hindu temples were built in South Asia and Southeast Asia, while Vajrayana Buddhism literature developed as a result of royal courts sponsoring both Buddhism and Saivism.
Estimates of strict lacto vegetarians in India (includes adherents of all religions) who never eat any meat, fish or eggs vary between 20% and 42%, while others are either less strict vegetarians or non-vegetarians.
The Hindu Maratha Confederacy rose to power in 18th century and ended up overthrowing Muslim power in India
The Vedic religion history is unclear and "heavily contested", states Samuel.
The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad states it as:
Hindu traditionalists prefer to call it ''Sanatana Dharma'' (the eternal or ancient dharma).
To its adherents, Hinduism is a traditional way of life.
They worship the Supreme Being variously as Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva, or Shakti, depending upon the sect.
Other notable characteristics include a belief in existence of ātman (soul, self), reincarnation of one's ātman, and karma as well as a belief in dharma (duties, rights, laws, conduct, virtues and right way of living).
Their practices include Bhakti-style devotionalism, yet their beliefs lean towards nondual, monistic schools of Hinduism such as Advaita and Yoga.
The Ashramas system has been one facet of the Dharma concept in Hinduism.
McDaniel (2007) classifies Hinduism into six major kinds and numerous minor kinds, in order to understand expression of emotions among the Hindus.
By the 13th century, ''Hindustan'' emerged as a popular alternative name of India, meaning the "land of ''Hindus''".
During this period, the foundational texts of several schools of Hindu philosophy were formally written down, including Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Purva-Mimamsa and Vedanta.
This cycle of ''birth, life, death and rebirth'' is called ''samsara''.
