Some opened the first health food stores, and many moved to southern California where they could practice an alternative lifestyle in a warm climate.
Instead, hippies seek to change the world through reason and by living what they believe."
In that article, Fallon wrote about the Blue Unicorn coffeehouse, using the term ''hippie'' to refer to the new generation of beatniks who had moved from North Beach into the Haight-Ashbury district.
Haight-Ashbury could not accommodate the influx of crowds (mostly naive youngsters) with no place to live.
Some of the little hippie health food stores of the 1960s and 1970s are now large-scale, profitable businesses, due to greater interest in natural foods, herbal remedies, vitamins and other nutritional supplements.
The origins of the terms ''hip'' and ''hep'' are uncertain, although by the 1940s both had become part of African American jive slang and meant "sophisticated; currently fashionable; fully up-to-date".
After the hippie era, the Dudeist philosophy and lifestyle developed, its inspired by "The Dude", the neo-hippie protagonist of the Coen Brothers' 1998 film ''The Big Lebowski''.
Psychedelic light-shows were a new art-form developed for rock concerts.
The first signs of modern "proto-hippies" emerged in fin de siècle Europe.
Hippie communes, where members tried to live the ideals of the hippie movement continued to flourish.
Caen determined that, "Except in their music, they couldn't care less about the approval of the straight world."
They enlarged their spiritual pharmacopeia to include hallucinogens such as peyote, LSD, psilocybin mushrooms and DMT, while often renouncing the use of alcohol.
Sexual experimentation alongside psychedelics also occurred, due to the perception of their being uninhibitors.
Favored accessories for both men and women included Native American jewelry, head scarves, headbands and long beaded necklaces.
Activity centered around the Diggers, a guerrilla street theatre group that combined spontaneous street theatre, anarchistic action, and art happenings in their agenda to create a "free city".
Songwriter eden ahbez wrote a hit song called ''Nature Boy'' inspired by Robert Bootzin (Gypsy Boots), who helped popularize health-consciousness, yoga, and organic food in the United States.
Eugene McCarthy's brief presidential campaign successfully persuaded a significant minority of young adults to "get clean for Gene" by shaving their beards or wearing longer skirts; however the "Clean Genes" had little impact on the popular image in the media spotlight, of the hirsute hippy adorned in beads, feathers, flowers and bells.
On the west coast, Oregon had quite a few.
Psychedelic trance (also known as psytrance) is a type of electronic music influenced by 1960s psychedelic rock.
During the mid 1970s, with the end of the draft and the Vietnam War, a renewal of patriotic sentiment associated with the approach of the United States Bicentennial and the emergence of punk in London, Manchester, New York and Los Angeles, the mainstream media lost interest in the hippie counterculture.
Although the music favored by this movement was modern electronic music, especially house music and acid house, one could often hear songs from the original hippie era in the ''chill out rooms'' at raves.
In the UK, there are many new age travellers who are known as hippies to outsiders, but prefer to call themselves the Peace Convoy.
By this time, the recreational or 'fun' aspects of sexual behavior were being discussed more openly than ever before, and this more 'enlightened' outlook resulted not just from the publication of such new books as these, but from a more pervasive sexual revolution that had already been well underway for some time.
He and his cohorts created what became known as "The Red Dog Experience", featuring previously unknown musical acts &mdash; Grateful Dead, Jefferson Airplane, Big Brother and the Holding Company, Quicksilver Messenger Service, The Charlatans, and others — who played in the completely refurbished, intimate setting of Virginia City's Red Dog Saloon.
(1968), admonished his audience that "we all wear a uniform".
Dudeism, as it is known, holds many connections to the hippie ethos, from its “take it easy” attitude and rebel shrug, to its come-as-you-are sense of individual freedom and expression.
In later years, mobile "peace convoys" of New Age travelers made summer pilgrimages to free music festivals at Stonehenge and elsewhere.
Whether at a "love-in" on Mount Tamalpais near San Francisco, a demonstration against the Vietnam War in Berkeley, or one of Ken Kesey's "Acid Tests", if the "vibe" wasn't right and a change of scene was desired, hippies were mobile at a moment's notice.
During this period Greenwich Village in New York City and Berkeley, California anchored the American folk music circuit.
On the West Coast, a unique lifestyle developed around the Renaissance Faires that Phyllis and Ron Patterson first organized in 1963.
In the UK and Europe, the years 1987 to 1989 were marked by a large-scale revival of many characteristics of the hippie movement.
There was no clear delineation between "performers" and "audience" in "The Red Dog Experience", during which music, psychedelic experimentation, a unique sense of personal style and Bill Ham's first primitive light shows combined to create a new sense of community.
Such activism was ideally carried through anti-authoritarian and non-violent means; thus it was observed that "The way of the hippie is antithetical to all repressive hierarchical power structures since they are adverse to the hippie goals of peace, love and freedom... Hippies don't impose their beliefs on others.
In 2005, journalist Oliver Benjamin founded  The Church of Latter-Day Dude, a website-philosophy and mock religion inspired by the character "the Dude", a former hippie, in the 1998 movie ''The Big Lebowski''.
Crass had its roots in Dial House, which was established in 1967 as a commune.
The University of California, Berkeley had demolished all the buildings on a  parcel near campus, intending to use the land to build playing fields and a parking lot.
The draft was ended soon thereafter, in 1973.
The countercultural movement was also under covert assault by J. Edgar Hoover's infamous "Counter Intelligence Program" (COINTELPRO), but in some countries it was other youth groups that were a threat.
Inspired by the works of Friedrich Nietzsche, Goethe, Hermann Hesse, and Eduard Baltzer, Wandervogel attracted thousands of young Germans who rejected the rapid trend toward urbanization and yearned for the pagan, back-to-nature spiritual life of their ancestors.
They included overwhelming sound, free-form dancing, weird lighting, colorful costumes, and hallucinogens.
Regarding LSD, Leary said, "Expand your consciousness and find ecstasy and revelation within."
Hippies tended to travel light, and could pick up and go wherever the action was at any time.
Today, hippies in the UK can be found in parts of South West England, such as Bristol (particularly the neighborhoods of Montpelier, Stokes Croft, St Werburghs, Bishopston, Easton and Totterdown), Glastonbury in Somerset, Totnes in Devon, and Stroud in Gloucestershire, as well as in Hebden Bridge in West Yorkshire, and in areas of London and Brighton.
", where they sang, "You keep adding to my numbers as you shoot my people down", as well as Neil Young's "Ohio", recorded by Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young.
Hippies created their own communities, listened to psychedelic music, embraced the sexual revolution, and used drugs such as cannabis, LSD, peyote and psilocybin mushrooms to explore altered states of consciousness.
One such hippie "high priest" was San Francisco State University Professor Stephen Gaskin.
Nevertheless, the open relationship became an accepted part of the hippy lifestyle.
Astrology, including everything from serious study to whimsical amusement regarding personal traits, was integral to hippie culture.
The events at Altamont Free Concert shocked many Americans, including those who had strongly identified with hippie culture.
In June 1967, Herb Caen was approached by "a distinguished magazine" to write about why hippies were attracted to San Francisco.
We also discovered the more you share, the more you get!
Known as ''Der Wandervogel'' ("wandering bird"), the hippie movement opposed the formality of traditional German clubs, instead emphasizing amateur music and singing, creative dress, and communal outings involving hiking and camping.
This ceremony combined a psychedelic experience with traditional Native American spiritual values; these people went on to sponsor a unique genre of musical expression and performance at the Red Dog Saloon in the isolated, old-time mining town of Virginia City, Nevada.
Gilbert Shelton created perhaps the most enduring of underground cartoon characters, "The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers", whose drugged-out exploits held a hilarious mirror up to the hippy lifestyle of the 1960s.
Called "The Trips Festival", it took place on January 21&ndash;January 23, 1966, and was organized by Stewart Brand, Ken Kesey, Owsley Stanley and others.
At the same time, many thoughtful hippies distanced themselves from the very idea that the way a person dresses could be a reliable signal of who he or she was &mdash; especially after outright criminals such as Charles Manson began to adopt superficial hippie characteristics, and also after plainclothes policemen started to "dress like hippies" to divide and conquer legitimate members of the counterculture.
The peak experience of this type was the Woodstock Festival near Bethel, New York, from August 15 to 18, 1969, which drew between 400,000 and 500,000 people.
Some hippies embraced neo-paganism, especially Wicca.
Harder drugs, such as cocaine, amphetamines and heroin, were also sometimes used in hippie settings; however, these drugs were often disdained, even among those who used them, because they were recognized as harmful and addictive.
McKenzie has dedicated every American performance of "San Francisco" to Vietnam veterans, and he sang in 2002 at the 20th anniversary of the dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
They used alternative arts, street theatre, folk music, and psychedelic rock as a part of their lifestyle and as a way of expressing their feelings, their protests and their vision of the world and life.
In his seminal, contemporaneous work, "The Hippie Trip", author Lewis Yablonsky notes that those who were most respected in hippie settings were the spiritual leaders, the so-called "high priests" who emerged during that era.
Hippies often chose brightly colored clothing and wore unusual styles, such as bell-bottom pants, vests, tie-dyed garments, dashikis, peasant blouses, and long, full skirts; non-Western inspired clothing with Native American, Asian, Indian, African and Latin American motifs were also popular.
Modeled on their Red Dog experiences, on October 16, 1965, the Family Dog hosted "A Tribute to Dr.
Others explored the spiritual aspects of sex.
None of these trends reflected what the hippies had envisioned.
Their early escapades were documented in Tom Wolfe's book ''The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test''.
As explained by Allan Cohen, co-founder of the ''San Francisco Oracle'', the purpose of the rally was twofold: to draw attention to the fact that LSD had just been made illegal — and to demonstrate that people who used LSD were not criminals, nor were they mentally ill.
Many took to living on the street, panhandling and drug-dealing.
The legacy of the hippie movement continues to permeate Western society.
Strange" at Longshoreman's Hall.
Hippie fashion and values had a major effect on culture, influencing popular music, television, film, literature, and the arts.
Scott McKenzie's rendition of John Phillips' song, "San Francisco", became a hit in the United States and Europe.
The later electronic dance genres known as goa trance and psychedelic trance and its related events and culture have important hippie legacies and neo hippie elements.
Starting in the late 1960s, hippies began to come under attack by skinheads.
Other events that enjoy a large attendance include the Rainbow Family Gatherings, The Gathering of the Vibes, Community Peace Festivals, and the Woodstock Festivals.
This meant that you might have a primary relationship with one person, but if another attracted you, you could explore that relationship without rancor or jealousy."
It also rejected consumerism in that the hand-production of clothing called for self-efficiency and individuality.
This profound truth was one of the great hippie revelations."
Bill Ham, who had pioneered the original Red Dog light shows, perfected his art of liquid light projection, which combined light shows and film projection and became synonymous with the San Francisco ballroom experience.
On the East Coast of the United States, Harvard University professors Timothy Leary, Ralph Metzner and Richard Alpert (Ram Dass) advocated psychotropic drugs for psychotherapy, self-exploration, religious and spiritual use.
Dudeism's stated primary objective is to promote a modern form of Chinese Taoism, outlined in ''Tao Te Ching'' by Laozi (6th century BC), blended with concepts by the Ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus (341-270 BC), and presented in a style as personified by the character of Jeffrey "The Dude" Lebowski, a fictional hippie character portrayed by Jeff Bridges in the film.
Initially billed as "Woodstock West", its official name was The Altamont Free Concert.
When they returned to San Francisco, Red Dog participants Luria Castell, Ellen Harman and Alton Kelley created a collective called "The Family Dog."
The hippie subculture is also linked to the psychedelic trance or psytrance scene, born out of the Goa scene in India.
Regarding the political activity of hippies, Rubin said, "They mostly prefer to be stoned, but most of them want peace, and they want an end to this stuff."
A derivative of this free-flow style of travel were the hippie trucks and buses, hand-crafted mobile houses built on a truck or bus chassis to facilitate a nomadic lifestyle, as documented in the 1974 book ''Roll Your Own''.
Over time, young Americans adopted the beliefs and practices of the new immigrants.
In 1968, self-described hippies represented just under 0.2% of the U.S. population and dwindled away by mid-1970s.
In 1970 Gaskin founded a Tennessee community called The Farm, and he still lists his religion as "Hippie."
In 1961, Vito Paulekas and his wife Szou established in Hollywood a clothing boutique which was credited with being one of the first to introduce "hippie" fashions.
By late 1966, the Diggers opened free stores which simply gave away their stock, provided free food, distributed free drugs, gave away money, organized free music concerts, and performed works of political art.
Hippies embraced the old slogan of free love of the radical social reformers of other eras; it was accordingly observed that "Free love made the whole love, marriage, sex, baby package obsolete.
The San Francisco group known as the Diggers articulated an influential radical criticism of contemporary mass consumer society, and so they opened free stores which simply gave away their stock, provided free food, distributed free drugs, gave away money, organized free music concerts, and performed works of political art.
The popular DJ of the genre Goa Gil, like other hippies from the 1960s, decided to leave the US and Western Europe to travel on the hippie trail and later developing psychedelic parties and music in the Indian island of Goa in which the goa and psytrance genres were born and exported around the world in the 1990s and 2000s.
President Nixon himself actually ventured out of the White House and chatted with a group of the 'hippie' protesters.
With the demise of Grateful Dead and Phish, nomadic touring hippies attend a growing series of summer festivals, the largest of which is called the Bonnaroo Music & Arts Festival, which premiered in 2002.
The annual Starwood Festival, founded in 1981, is a seven-day event indicative of the spiritual quest of hippies through an exploration of non-mainstream religions and world-views, and has offered performances and classes by a variety of hippie and counter-culture icons.
The Hells Angels provided security that proved far less benevolent than the security provided at the Woodstock event: 18-year-old Meredith Hunter was stabbed and killed during The Rolling Stones' performance after he brandished a gun and waved it toward the stage.
As ''San Francisco Chronicle'' music columnist Ralph J. Gleason put it, "They danced all night long, orgiastic, spontaneous and completely free form."
So why reserve your love for a select few?
Beatle George Harrison had once visited Haight-Ashbury and found it to be just a haven for dropouts, inspiring him to give up LSD.
By the end of the summer, the Haight-Ashbury scene had deteriorated.
Frank Zappa, known for lampooning hippie ethos, particularly with songs like "Who Needs the Peace Corps?"
Bobby Seale discussed the differences between Yippies and hippies with Jerry Rubin, who told him that Yippies were the political wing of the hippie movement, as hippies have not "necessarily become political yet".
In 1995, The Sekhmet Hypothesis attempted to link both hippie and rave culture together in relation to transactional analysis, suggesting that rave culture was a social archetype based on the mood of friendly strength, compared to the gentle hippie archetype, based on friendly weakness.
Leading proponents of the 1960s Psychedelic Art movement were San Francisco poster artists such as: Rick Griffin, Victor Moscoso, Bonnie MacLean, Stanley Mouse & Alton Kelley, and Wes Wilson.
There were problems with malnourishment, disease, and drug addiction.
According to Malcolm X's 1964 autobiography, the word ''hippie'' in 1940s Harlem had been used to describe a specific type of white man who "acted more Negro than Negroes".
Group sex, public sex... homosexuality under the influence of drugs, all the taboos went out the window.
He declined the assignment but interviewed hippies in the Haight for his own newspaper column in the ''San Francisco Chronicle''.
On October 6, 1966, the state of California declared LSD a controlled substance, which made the drug illegal.
The incessant media coverage led the Diggers to declare the "death" of the hippie with a parade.
Although not as visible as it once was, hippie culture has never died out completely: hippies and neo-hippies can still be found on college campuses, on communes, and at gatherings and festivals.
''New York Times'' editor and usage writer Theodore M. Bernstein said the paper changed the spelling from ''hippy'' to ''hippie'' to avoid the ambiguous description of clothing as ''hippy fashions''.
Scott McKenzie's 1967 rendition of John Phillips' song "San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)", which helped to inspire the hippie Summer of Love, became a homecoming song for all Vietnam veterans arriving in San Francisco from 1967 onward.
Towards the end of the 20th century, a trend of "cyber hippies" emerged, that embraced some of the qualities of the 1960s psychedelic counterculture.
In April 1963, Chandler A. Laughlin III, co-founder of the Cabale Creamery, established a kind of tribal, family identity among approximately fifty people who attended a traditional, all-night Native American peyote ceremony in a rural setting.
Ten thousand people attended this sold-out event, with a thousand more turned away each night.
During the summer and fall months, entire families traveled together in their trucks and buses, parked at Renaissance Pleasure Faire sites in Southern and Northern California, worked their crafts during the week, and donned Elizabethan costume for weekend performances, and to attend booths where handmade goods were sold to the public.
In Greenwich Village in the early 1960s, New York City, young counterculture advocates were named ''hips'' because they were considered "in the know" or "cool", as opposed to being ''square''.
Timothy Leary was an American psychologist and writer, known for his advocacy of psychedelic drugs.
Psychedelic soul groups like the Chambers Brothers and especially Sly and The Family Stone influenced proto-disco acts such as Isaac Hayes, Willie Hutch and the Philadelphia Sound.
The anti-war movement reached its peak at the 1971 May Day Protests as over 12,000 protesters were arrested in Washington DC.
Hippies seldom worried whether they had money, hotel reservations or any of the other standard accoutrements of travel.
Some of the earliest San Francisco hippies were former students at San Francisco State College who became intrigued by the developing psychedelic hippie music scene.
In 2002, photojournalist John Bassett McCleary published a 650-page, 6,000-entry unabridged slang dictionary devoted to the language of the hippies titled ''The Hippie Dictionary: A Cultural Encyclopedia of the 1960s and 1970s''.
Hippie homes, vehicles and other possessions were often decorated with psychedelic art.
Members included Beat Generation hero Neal Cassady, Ken Babbs, Carolyn Adams (aka Mountain Girl/Carolyn Garcia), Stewart Brand, Del Close, Paul Foster, George Walker, Sandy Lehmann-Haupt and others.
Much of hippie style had been integrated into mainstream American society by the early 1970s.
Although the word ''hippies'' made other isolated appearances in print during the early 1960s, the first use of the term on the West Coast appeared on September 5, 1965, in the article, "A New Haven for Beatniks", by San Francisco journalist Michael Fallon.
As in the beat movement preceding them, and the punk movement that followed soon after, hippie symbols and iconography were purposely borrowed from either "low" or "primitive" cultures, with hippie fashion reflecting a disorderly, often vagrant style.
Many hippies rejected mainstream organized religion in favor of a more personal spiritual experience, often drawing on indigenous and folk beliefs.
For example, Hippies were often not directly engaged in politics, as opposed to their activist counterparts known as “Yippies” (Youth International Party).
The lyrics, "If you're going to San Francisco, be sure to wear some flowers in your hair", inspired thousands of young people from all over the world to travel to San Francisco, sometimes wearing flowers in their hair and distributing flowers to passersby, earning them the name, "Flower Children".
In addition to non-violent political demonstrations, hippie opposition to the Vietnam War included organizing political action groups to oppose the war, refusal to serve in the military and conducting "teach-ins" on college campuses that covered Vietnamese history and the larger political context of the war.
According to Cohen, those who took LSD "were not guilty of using illegal substances...We were celebrating transcendental consciousness, the beauty of the universe, the beauty of being."
By 1965, hippies had become an established social group in the U.S., and the movement eventually expanded to other countries, extending as far as the United Kingdom and Europe, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Japan, Mexico, and Brazil.
Their Psychedelic Rock concert posters were inspired by Art Nouveau, Victoriana, Dada, and Pop Art.
Like Wandervogel, the hippie movement in the United States began as a youth movement.
By February 1966, the Family Dog became Family Dog Productions under organizer Chet Helms, promoting happenings at the Avalon Ballroom and the Fillmore Auditorium in initial cooperation with Bill Graham.
Bands like the Grateful Dead, Big Brother and the Holding Company (with Janis Joplin), and Jefferson Airplane lived in the Haight.
The English magician Aleister Crowley became an influential icon to the new alternative spiritual movements of the decade as well as for rock musicians.
For the next several decades, many hippies and neo-hippies became part of the Deadhead community, attending music and art festivals held around the country.
Beats like Allen Ginsberg crossed over from the beat movement and became fixtures of the burgeoning hippie and anti-war movements.
Hippies were often pacifists, and participated in non-violent political demonstrations, such as Civil Rights Movement, the marches on Washington D.C., and anti–Vietnam War demonstrations, including draft-card burnings and the 1968 Democratic National Convention protests.
In August 1969, the Woodstock Music and Art Fair took place in Bethel, New York, which for many, exemplified the best of hippie counterculture.
Along with the New Left and the Civil Rights Movement, the hippie movement was one of three dissenting groups of the 1960s counterculture.
The Charlatans, Jefferson Airplane, Big Brother and the Holding Company, and the Grateful Dead all moved to San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood during this period.
Distinct appearance and clothing was one of the immediate legacies of hippies worldwide.
The political ideals of hippies influenced other movements, such as anarcho-punk, rave culture, green politics, stoner culture and the New Age movement.
About 300,000 people gathered to hear The Rolling Stones; Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young; Jefferson Airplane and other bands.
The word ''hippie'' came from ''hipster'' and was initially used to describe beatniks who had moved into New York City's Greenwich Village and San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district.
Kesey and the Pranksters had a "vision of turning on the world."
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'' while Jimmy Page, the guitarist of The Yardbirds and co-founder of 1970s rock band Led Zeppelin was fascinated by Crowley, and owned some of his clothing, manuscripts and ritual objects, and during the 1970s bought Boleskine House, which also appears in the band's movie ''The Song Remains the Same''.
Dudeism has sometimes been regarded as a mock religion, though its founder and many adherents regard it seriously.
Hippies also inspired the decline in popularity of the necktie and other ''business'' clothing, which had been unavoidable for men during the 1950s and early 1960s.
After the first three Family Dog events, a much larger psychedelic event occurred at San Francisco's Longshoreman's Hall.
In April 1969, the building of People's Park in Berkeley, California received international attention.
Like Crass, Jello Biafra was influenced by the hippie movement, and cited the yippies as a key influence on his political activism and thinking, though he also wrote songs critical of hippies.
On September 19, 1966, Leary founded the League for Spiritual Discovery, a religion declaring LSD as its holy sacrament, in part as an unsuccessful attempt to maintain legal status for the use of LSD and other psychedelics for the religion's adherents based on a "freedom of religion" argument.
Hippie households welcomed overnight guests on an ''impromptu'' basis, and the reciprocal nature of the lifestyle permitted greater freedom of movement.
On Saturday January 22, the Grateful Dead and Big Brother and the Holding Company came on stage, and 6,000 people arrived to imbibe punch spiked with LSD and to witness one of the first fully developed light shows of the era.
If they adhered to mainstream faiths, hippies were likely to embrace Buddhism, Unitarian Universalism, Hinduism and the restorationist Christianity of the Jesus Movement.
Penny Rimbaud of the English anarcho-punk band Crass said in interviews, and in an essay called ''The Last Of The Hippies'', that Crass was formed in memory of his friend, Wally Hope.
The Brotherhood of Light were responsible for many of the light-shows in San Francisco psychedelic rock concerts.
While many hippies made a long-term commitment to the lifestyle, some people argue that hippies "sold out" during the 1980s and became part of the materialist, consumer culture.
In January 1967, the Human Be-In in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco popularized hippie culture, leading to the Summer of Love on the West Coast of the United States, and the 1969 Woodstock Festival on the East Coast.
Andrew Loog Oldham refers to "all the Chicago hippies," seemingly in reference to black blues/R&B musicians, in his rear sleeve notes to the 1965 LP ''The Rolling Stones, Now!''
Hippies were also vilified and sometimes attacked by punks, revivalist mods, greasers, football casuals, Teddy boys, and members of other youth subcultures of the 1970s and 1980s.
The San Francisco clown/hippie Wavy Gravy said in 1987 that he could still see fellow-feeling in the eyes of Market Street businessmen who had dressed conventionally to survive.
Some punks were often critical of Crass for their involvement in the hippie movement.
The article described the guidelines of the hippie code: "Do your own thing, wherever you have to do it and whenever you want.
The events featured practical workshops and displays advocating alternative lifestyles, self sufficiency, clean and sustainable energy and sustainable living.
The Avalon Ballroom, the Fillmore Auditorium and other venues provided settings where participants could partake of the full psychedelic music experience.
One travel experience, undertaken by hundreds of thousands of hippies between 1969 and 1971, was the Hippie trail overland route to India.
Over 500,000 people arrived to hear some of the most notable musicians and bands of the era, among them Canned Heat, Richie Havens, Joan Baez, Janis Joplin, The Grateful Dead, Creedence Clearwater Revival, Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young, Carlos Santana, Sly & The Family Stone, The Who, Jefferson Airplane, and Jimi Hendrix.
The media was right behind them, casting a spotlight on the Haight-Ashbury district and popularizing the "hippie" label.
With this increased attention, hippies found support for their ideals of love and peace but were also criticized for their anti-work, pro-drug, and permissive ethos.
Blow the mind of every straight person you can reach.
Wavy Gravy's Hog Farm provided security and attended to practical needs, and the hippie ideals of love and human fellowship seemed to have gained real-world expression.
A July 1968 ''Time Magazine'' study on hippie philosophy credited the foundation of the hippie movement with historical precedent as far back as the Sadhu of India, the spiritual seekers who had renounced the world by taking "Sannyas".
During the summer of 1965, Laughlin recruited much of the original talent that led to a unique amalgam of traditional folk music and the developing psychedelic rock scene.
It also named as notable influences the religious and spiritual teachings of Henry David Thoreau, Hillel the Elder, Jesus, Buddha, St. Francis of Assisi, Gandhi, and J.R.R.
The Merry Pranksters filmed and audio taped their bus trips, creating an immersive multimedia experience that would later be presented to the public in the form of festivals and concerts.
Hippie ideals had a marked influence on anarcho-punk and some post-punk youth subcultures, especially during the Second Summer of Love.
Personality traits and values that hippies tend to be associated with are "altruism and mysticism, honesty, joy and nonviolence".
Misgivings about the hippie culture, particularly with regard to drug abuse and lenient morality, fueled the moral panics of the late 1960s.
At this point, The Beatles had released their groundbreaking album ''Sgt.
Hippie political expression often took the form of "dropping out" of society to implement the changes they sought.
The Yippies, especially their leaders Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin, became notorious for their theatrics, such as trying to levitate the Pentagon at the October 1967 war protest, and such slogans as "Rise up and abandon the creeping meatball!"
Similar rock festivals occurred in other parts of the country, which played a significant role in spreading hippie ideals throughout America.
The Grateful Dead (originally billed as "The Warlocks") played some of their first shows at the Acid Tests, often as high on LSD as their audiences.
In both songs, the term is applied to residents of Philadelphia's South Street.
The Burning Man festival began in 1986 at a San Francisco beach party and is now held in the Black Rock Desert northeast of Reno, Nevada.
Large rock concerts that originated with the 1967 KFRC Fantasy Fair and Magic Mountain Music Festival and Monterey Pop Festival and the 1968 Isle of Wight Festival became the norm, evolving into stadium rock in the process.
The Grateful Dead toured continuously, with few interruptions between 1965 and 1995.
People generally cooperated to meet each other's needs in ways that became less common after the early 1970s.
The 1969 book ''Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex (But Were Afraid to Ask)'' by psychiatrist David Reuben was a more popular attempt at answering the public's curiosity regarding such matters.
Hippie culture spread worldwide through a fusion of rock music, folk, blues, and psychedelic rock; it also found expression in literature, the dramatic arts, fashion, and the visual arts, including film, posters advertising rock concerts, and album covers.
