Three species of Malagasy hippopotamus became extinct during the Holocene on Madagascar, one of them within the past 1,000 years.
The hippopotamus characters "Happy Hippos" were created in 1987 by the French designer André Roche to be hidden in the "Kinder Surprise egg" of the Italian chocolate company Ferrero SpA.
Instead, the animals may synthesize the pigments from precursors such as the amino acid tyrosine.
*'''Cape hippopotamus''' or '''South African hippopotamus''' ''H.
The National Geographic Channel produced a documentary about them titled ''Cocaine Hippos''.
The common '''hippopotamus''' (''Hippopotamus amphibius''), or '''hippo''', is a large, mostly herbivorous mammal in sub-Saharan Africa, and one of only two extant species in the family Hippopotamidae, the other being the pygmy hippopotamus (''Choeropsis liberiensis'' or ''Hexaprotodon liberiensis'').
A study examining mitochondrial DNA from skin biopsies taken from 13 sampling locations, considered genetic diversity and structure among hippo populations across the continent.
The hippo population declined most dramatically in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The hippo lost most of his hair and was too embarrassed to leave the water.
a. tschadensis'' – throughout Western Africa to, as the name suggests, Chad, slightly shorter and wider face, with prominent orbits
Studying the interaction of male and female hippopotamuses has long been complicated because hippos are not sexually dimorphic; thus females and young males are almost indistinguishable in the field.
The suggested subspecies were never widely used or validated by field biologists; the described morphological differences were small enough that they could have resulted from simple variation in nonrepresentative samples.
Genetic analyses have tested the existence of three of these putative subspecies.
Hippos are born with sterile intestines, and require bacteria obtained from their mothers' feces to digest vegetation.
They were deemed too difficult to seize and move after Escobar's death, and hence left on the untended estate.
Despite its stocky shape and short legs, it is capable of running  over short distances.
After becoming pregnant, a female hippopotamus will typically not begin ovulation again for 17 months.
Nevertheless, they are still threatened by habitat loss and poaching for their meat and ivory canine teeth.
The earliest evidence of human interaction with hippos comes from butchery cut marks on hippo bones at Bouri Formation dated around 160,000 years ago.
Archaeological evidence exists of its presence in the Levant, dating to less than 3,000 years ago.
Other artiodactyls include camels, cattle, deer and pigs, although hippopotamuses are not closely related to these groups.
The animals' upper parts are purplish-gray to blue-black, while the under parts and areas around the eyes and ears can be brownish-pink.
On the National Geographic Channel television program, "Dangerous Encounters with Brady Barr", Dr. Brady Barr measured the bite force of an adult female hippo at ; Barr also attempted to measure the bite pressure of an adult male hippo, but had to abandon the attempt due to the male's aggressiveness.
Despite their physical resemblance to pigs and other terrestrial even-toed ungulates, the closest living relatives of the Hippopotamidae are cetaceans (whales, porpoises, etc.)
As of early 2014, 40 hippos have been reported to exist in Puerto Triunfo, Antioquia from the original four belonging to Escobar.
They also feature in the songs "The Hippopotamus" and "Hippo Encore" by Flanders and Swann, with the famous refrain "Mud, Mud, Glorious Mud".
They even inspired a popular board game, Hungry Hungry Hippos.
The sale of hippo meat is illegal, but black-market sales are difficult for Virunga National Park officers to track.
She lived at the Mesker Park Zoo in Evansville, Indiana in the US until her death in 2012 at the age of 61.
Five subspecies of hippos have been described based on morphological differences in their skulls and geographical differences:
The column was joined by John Dunn, a white Zulu chief, who led an ''impi'' (army) of 2,000 Zulu warriors to join the British."
a. amphibius'' – (the nominate subspecies) which stretched from Egypt, where they are now extinct, south up the Nile River to Tanzania and Mozambique
The hippopotamus is considered to be very aggressive and has frequently been reported as charging and attacking boats.
They spend four to five hours grazing and can consume  of grass each night.
The ancient Egyptians recognised the hippo as a ferocious denizen of the Nile.
The chief collaborators and proponents of Broussard's bill were Major Frederick Russell Burnham and Captain Fritz Duquesne Former President Theodore Roosevelt backed the plan, as did the U.S. Department of Agriculture, ''The Washington Post'', and ''The New York Times'' which praised the taste of hippopotamus as "lake cow bacon".
The young often rest on their mothers' backs when the water is too deep for them, and they swim under water to suckle.
By contrast, its subcutaneous fat layer is thin.
One branch would evolve into cetaceans, possibly beginning about , with the protowhale ''Pakicetus'' and other early whale ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti, which eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans.
This is an example of mutualism in which the hippo benefits from the cleaning, while the fish receive food.
Hippopotamuses have long been popular zoo animals.
In the 1980s, zoo designers increasingly designed exhibits that reflected the animals' native habitats.
Hippopotamuses are aggressive animals.
The Pleistocene also saw a number of dwarf species evolve on several Mediterranean islands, including Crete (''H.
The species was common in Egypt's Nile region during antiquity, but has since been extirpated.
In the U.S., Representative Robert F. Broussard of Louisiana introduced the "American Hippo bill" in 1910 to authorize the importation and release of hippopotamus into the bayous of Louisiana.
Hippopotamuses are gregarious, living in groups of up to thirty animals.
Yes, he is better than a lion &ndash; he is a hippopotamus.'"
Nile crocodiles, lions and spotted hyenas are known to prey on young hippos.
In 2009, two adults and one calf escaped the herd and, after attacking humans and killing cattle, one of the adults (called "Pepe") was killed by hunters under authorization of the local authorities.
The lower canines and lower incisors are enlarged, especially in males, and grow continuously.
In Africa, the hippo is known by various names, including ''seekoei'' (Afrikaans), ''mvuvu'' (Venda), ''kubu'' (Lozi) and ''mvubu'' (Xhosa, Siswati and Zulu) in the south; ''kiboko'' (Swahili), e''nsherre'' (Nkore), ''tomondo'' (Turu), ''nvubu'' (Luganda), ''ifuru'' (Luhya), ''emiria'' (Ateso), ''magawit'' (Sebei), ''kibei'' (Kalenjin) and ''olmakau'' (Maasai) in the African Great Lakes region; and ጉማርረ/''gumarre'' (Amharic) and ''jeer'' (Somali) in the Horn of Africa.
With the exception of eating, most of hippopotamuses' lives &ndash; from fighting with other hippos, mating, to parturition &ndash; occurs in the water.
Hippopotamidae are sometimes known as hippopotamids.
Hippos that attack other animals are often either territorial bulls or females protecting their calves.
The Greek historian Herodotus described the hippopotamus in ''The Histories'' (written ''circa'' 440 BC) and the Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder wrote about the hippopotamus in his encyclopedia ''Naturalis Historia'' (written ''circa'' 77 AD).
Weaning starts between six and eight months after birth, and most calves are fully weaned after a year.
The word "hippopotamus" is derived from the ancient Greek , ''hippopotamos'', from , ''hippos'', "horse", and , ''potamos'', "river", meaning "horse of the river".
In addition, the penis retracts into the body when not erect.
They suckle on land when the mother leaves the water.
These deposits have an unclear ecological function.
The hippopotamus is the type genus of the family Hippopotamidae.
The other branch became the anthracotheres, a large family of four-legged beasts, the earliest of which in the late Eocene would have resembled skinny hippopotamuses with comparatively small and narrow heads.
Males may be found in very small number in rapid waters in rocky gorges.
A hippo closes its nostrils when it submerges into the water.
"John Dunn was at the head of his ''impi''.
In English, the plural is hippopotamuses, but "hippopotami" is also used; "hippos" can be used as a short plural.
The earliest known hippopotamus fossils, belonging to the genus ''Kenyapotamus'' in Africa, date to around .
Hippos are also subject to unregulated hunting and poaching.
All branches of the anthracotheres, except that which evolved into Hippopotamidae, became extinct during the Pliocene without leaving any descendants.
In the late 1980s, Pablo Escobar kept four hippos in a private menagerie at his residence in Hacienda Nápoles,  east of Medellín, Colombia, after buying them in New Orleans.
Small boats can be capsized by hippos and passengers can be injured or killed by the animals or drown.
a. amphibius'', ''H.
The stomach anatomy of a hippo is not suited to carnivory, and meat-eating is likely caused by aberrant behaviour or nutritional stress.
It is rarely found in deep water; when it is, the animal moves by porpoise-like leaps from the bottom.
While hippopotamuses rest near each other in the water, grazing is a solitary activity and hippos are not territorial on land.
The function of these is unknown.
After the elephant and rhinoceros, the common hippopotamus is the third-largest type of land mammal and the heaviest extant artiodactyl.
A moderate folding of the orbicularis oris muscle allows the hippo to achieve such a gape without tearing any tissue.
Proper habitat requires enough water to submerge in and grass nearby.
The first zoo hippo in modern history was Obaysch, which arrived at the London Zoo on May 25, 1850, where he attracted up to 10,000 visitors a day and inspired a popular song, the "Hippopotamus Polka".
Hippopotamus teeth sharpen themselves as they grind together.
''Hippopotamus amphibius'' was widespread in North Africa and Europe during the Eemian and late Pleistocene until about 30,000 years ago.
The incisors can reach , while the canines reach up to .
They emerge at dusk to graze on grasses.
This secretion is initially colourless and turns red-orange within minutes, eventually becoming brown.
Taxonomists disagree whether or not the modern pygmy hippopotamus is a member of ''Hexaprotodon'' &ndash; an apparently paraphyletic genus, also embracing many extinct Asian hippopotamuses, that is more closely related to ''Hippopotamus'' &ndash; or of ''Choeropsis'', an older and basal genus.
The jaw hinge is located far back enough to allow the animal to open its mouth at almost 180°.
As hippopotamuses will often engage in raiding nearby crops if the opportunity arises, humans may also come in conflict with them on these occasions, with potential for fatalities on both sides.
Despite being semiaquatic and having webbed feet, an adult hippo is not a particularly good swimmer nor can it float.
The hippopotamus is a highly aggressive and unpredictable animal and is ranked among the most dangerous animals in Africa.
a. capensis'' – from Zambia to South Africa, most flattened skull of the subspecies
During the day, they remain cool by staying in the water or mud; reproduction and childbirth both occur in water.
Their birth rates are lower than in the wild, but this is attributed to zoos not wanting to breed as many hippos as possible, since hippos are large and relatively expensive animals to maintain.
When fighting, male hippos use their incisors to block each other's attacks and their large canines to inflict injuries.
The pygmy hippopotamus belongs to a different genus in Hippopotamidae, either ''Choeropsis'' or ''Hexaprotodon.''
The process of surfacing and breathing is automatic.
Hippos have (rarely) been filmed eating carrion, usually close to the water.
from which they diverged about .
Hippos mark their territory by defecation.
Within the pods, the hippos tend to segregate by gender.
Set's consort Tawaret was also seen as part hippo and was a goddess of protection in pregnancy and childbirth, because ancient Egyptians recognised the protective nature of a female hippopotamus toward her young.
Fossil evidence indicates many Malagasy hippos were hunted by humans, a likely factor in their eventual extinction.
*'''Great northern hippopotamus''' or '''Nile hippopotamus''' ''H.
They are incapable of jumping but do climb up steep banks.
Adult hippos move at speeds up to  in water; typically resurfacing to breathe every three to five minutes.
These findings have important conservation implications as hippo populations across the continent are currently threatened by loss of access to fresh water.
The hippo's jaw is powered by a large masseter and a well-developed digastric; the latter loops up behind the former to the hyoid.
As with fish and turtles on a coral reef, hippos occasionally visit cleaning stations and signal, by opening their mouths wide, their readiness for being cleaned of parasites by certain species of fishes.
The secretion is sometimes referred to as "blood sweat", but is neither blood nor sweat.
Female hippos reach sexual maturity at five to six years and have a gestation period of eight months.
The Ijo people of the Niger Delta wore masks of aquatic animals like the hippo when practicing their water spirit cults.
Donna the Hippo was the oldest living hippo in captivity.
All hippos, even those with different diets, secrete the pigments, so it does not appear that food is the source of the pigments.
A red hippo represented the Ancient Egyptian god Set; the thigh is the "phallic leg of Set" symbolic of virility.
The most recent theory of the origins of Hippopotamidae suggests that hippos and whales shared a common semiaquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around .
Ancestors of European hippos found their way to many islands of the Mediterranean during the Pleistocene.
The Malagasy hippos were smaller than the modern hippopotamus, likely through the process of insular dwarfism.
The "American Hippo Bill" fell just short of being passed.
Hippos leave the water at dusk and travel inland, sometimes up to , to graze on short grasses, their main source of food.
Baby hippos are born underwater at a weight between  and an average length of around , and must swim to the surface to take their first breaths.
Though they are bulky animals, hippopotamuses can gallop at  on land but normally trot.
Hippopotamuses are among the largest living land mammals, being only smaller than elephants and some rhinoceroses.
By 2007, the animals had multiplied to 16 and had taken to roaming the area for food in the nearby Magdalena River.
The population in Virunga National Park had dropped to 800 or 900 from around 29,000 in the mid-1970s.
Reasons for poaching include the belief that hippos are harmful to society, as well as financial gain.
Genetic evidence suggests that common hippos in Africa experienced a marked population expansion during or after the Pleistocene epoch, attributed to an increase in water bodies at the end of the era.
Hippos have been the subjects of various African folktales.
a. capensis'', and ''H.
Unlike most other semiaquatic animals, the hippopotamus has very little hair.
The hippopotamus was also known to the Greeks and Romans.
The hippo is considered to be a pseudoruminant; it has a complex three-chambered stomach but does not "chew cud".
Hippopotamidae are classified along with other even-toed ungulates in the order Artiodactyla.
Both pigments inhibit the growth of disease-causing bacteria; as well, the light absorption of both pigments peaks in the ultraviolet range, creating a sunscreen effect.
Hippos rely on their broad horny lips to grasp and pull grasses which are then ground by the molars.
Their barrel-shaped bodies have graviportal skeletal structures, adapted to carrying their enormous weight, and their specific gravity allows them to sink and move along the bottom of a river.
In May 2006, the hippopotamus was identified as a vulnerable species on the IUCN Red List drawn up by the World Conservation Union (IUCN), with an estimated population of between 125,000 and 150,000 hippos, a decline of between 7% and 20% since the IUCN's 1996 study.
Zulu warriors preferred to be as brave as a hippopotamus, since even lions were not considered to match its courage.
A hippo's lifespan is typically 40–50 years.
In one case in Niger, a boat was capsized by a hippo and 13 people were killed.
The reason they huddle close together is unknown.
In a Ndebele tale, the hippo originally had long, beautiful hair, but was set on fire by a jealous hare and had to jump into a nearby pool.
The two pigments are highly acidic compounds.
Hippo defecation creates allochthonous deposits of organic matter along the river beds.
"Yawning" serves as a threat display.
Crocodiles are frequent targets of hippo aggression, probably because they often inhabit the same riparian habitats; crocodiles may be either aggressively displaced or killed by hippopotamuses.
Hippopotamuses appear to communicate vocally, through grunts and bellows, and they may practice echolocation, but the purpose of these vocalizations is currently unknown.
Hippopotamuses have small legs (relative to other megafauna) because the water in which they live reduces the weight burden.
Male hippos appear to continue growing throughout their lives while females reach maximum weight at around age 25.
Their common ancestor would have lived in the Miocene, about .
Hippos are also very aggressive towards humans, whom they sometimes attack whether in boats or on land, commonly with no apparent provocation, and are widely considered to be one of the most dangerous large animals in Africa.
''Merycopotamus'', ''Libycosaurus'' and all hippopotamids can be considered to form a clade, with ''Libycosaurus'' being more closely related to hippos.
Sometimes, the subfamily Hippopotaminae is used.
Isolated members of Malagasy hippopotamus may have survived in remote pockets; in 1976, villagers described a living animal called the ''kilopilopitsofy'', which may have been a Malagasy hippopotamus.
The animated film series Madagascar features a zoo Hippo named Gloria.
The eyes, ears, and nostrils of hippos are placed high on the roof of their skulls.
A hippo sleeping underwater rises and breathes without waking.
The Behemoth from the Book of Job, 40:15–24 is thought to be based on a hippo.
The Hippopotamidae are believed to have evolved in Africa; the oldest known hippopotamid is the genus ''Kenyapotamus'', which lived in Africa from 16 to .
Mating occurs in the water, with the female submerged for most of the encounter, her head emerging periodically to draw breath.
Because of their size and their habit of taking the same paths to feed, hippos can have a significant impact on the land across which they walk, both by keeping the land clear of vegetation and depressing the ground.
Larger densities of the animals inhabit quiet waters with mostly firm, smooth sloping beaches.
Later rock paintings and engravings showing hippos being hunted have been found in the mountains of the central Sahara dated 4,000–5,000 years ago near Djanet in the Tassili n'Ajjer Mountains.
The authors found low, but significant, genetic differentiation among ''H.
*'''West African hippopotamus''' or '''Tchad hippopotamus''' ''H.
Broussard argued that the hippopotamus would eat the invasive water hyacinth that was clogging the rivers and also produce meat to help solve the American meat crisis.
Zambia (40,000) and Tanzania (20,000–30,000) possess the largest populations.
The canines and incisors are used for combat and play no role in feeding.
The genitals of the female are unusual in that the vagina is ridged and two large diverticula protrude from the vulval vestibule.
Pliny the Elder writes that, in his time, the best location in Egypt for capturing this animal was in the Saite nome; the animal could still be found along the Damietta branch after the Arab Conquest in 639.
The skin is  thick, providing it great protection against conspecifics and predators.
For example, the Disney film ''Fantasia'' featured a ballerina hippopotamus dancing to the opera ''La Gioconda'', and Hanna-Barbera created Peter Potamus.
Of these, the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus survived until the end of the Pleistocene or early Holocene.
After begging and pleading, the hippos were finally allowed to live in the water on the conditions that they would eat grass instead of fish and would fling their dung so that it can be inspected for fish bones.
According to a San story; when the Creator assigned each animal its place in nature, the hippos wanted to live in the water, but were refused out of fear that they might eat all the fish.
Like almost any herbivore, they consume other plants if presented with them, but their diet in nature consists almost entirely of grass, with only minimal consumption of aquatic plants.
There are other reports of meat-eating, and even cannibalism and predation.
Hippos can be found in both savannah and forest areas.
Like many other large mammals, hippos are described as K-strategists, in this case typically producing just one large, well-developed infant every couple of years (rather than many small, poorly developed young several times per year as is common among small mammals such as rodents).
Bachelors lounge near other bachelors, females with other females, and the bull on his own.
a. tschadensis'' nor ''H.
This is because of the female's oestrous cycle; as with most large mammals, male hippopotamus spermatozoa is active year round.
gorgops'', ranged throughout continental Europe and the British Isles.
The testes of the males descend only partially and a scrotum is not present.
However, due to their aggression and size, adult hippopotamus are not usually preyed upon by other animals.
Mean adult weight is around  and  for males and females respectively, very large males can reach  and an exceptional male weighing almost  has been reported.
minor''), Malta (''H.
Younger bachelors are allowed in a bull's stretch, as long as they behave submissively toward the bull.
Studies of hippos in Zambia and South Africa also showed evidence of births occurring at the start of the wet season.
A mother typically gives birth to only one calf, although twins also occur.
Hippopotamuses are territorial only in water, where a bull presides over a small stretch of river, on average  in length, and containing 10 females.
The words of the Zulu anthem sounded like this:
Three species of hippopotamus, the European hippopotamus (''H.
creutzburgi''), Cyprus (''H.
While depositing the faeces, hippos spin their tails to distribute their excrement over a greater area.
The young have to breathe every two to three minutes.
"In 1888, Captain Baden-Powell was part of a column searching for the Zulu chief Dinuzulu, who was leading the Usutu people in revolt against the British colonists.
In the case of hippos, they usually had a pool of water and patch of grass.
When hippos become over-populated or a habitat is reduced, bulls sometimes attempt infanticide, but this behaviour is not common under normal conditions.
Different from all other large land mammals, hippos are of semiaquatic habits, spending the day in lakes and rivers.
