The Spaniards and the Portuguese took the Roman Catholic faith to Ibero-America and the Philippines, and Roman Catholicism remains the predominant religion amongst most Hispanics.
The Hispanic world, according to the United Nations World Heritage Committee, has contributed substantially more than any other ethnicity to the cultural heritage of the world.
Along side with English and Tagalpg, Spanish use to be one of the official language in the Philippines after been abolished in 1973 by the Cory Aquino government.
In English, the term ''Hispano-Roman'' is sometimes used.
'''Equatorial Guinea'''
Before the marriage of Queen Isabella I of Castile and King Ferdinand II of Aragon in 1469, the four Christian kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula—the Kingdom of Portugal, the Crown of Aragon, the Crown of Castile, and the Kingdom of Navarre—were collectively called The Spains.
The Hispano-Romans were composed of people from many different tribes.
Officially, however, the U.S. Government has defined ''Hispanic or Latino'' persons as being "persons who trace their origin or descent to Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Central and South America, and other Spanish cultures".
The Royal Spanish Academy (Spanish: Real Academia Española, RAE), the official royal institution responsible for regulating the Spanish language defines the term "Hispano" (which means "Hispanic" in Spanish) as:
Hispanic influences have impacted several native languages, such as Tagalog, Cebuano and Ilocano.
Philippine Spanish is natively spoken by 5,000 people but second- and third-language speakers range from 500,000 to 2,500,000.
Of those who speak Spanish in the United States, three quarters speak English well or very well.''
Also, in Guam – a U.S. territory – and the Northern Mariana Islands, a commonwealth in political union with the U.S., a Malayo-Polynesian language called Chamorro is spoken, with numerous loanwords with Spanish etymological origins.
According to census reports, of the above races the largest number of Hispanic or Latinos are of the White race, the second largest number come from the Native American/American Indian race who are the indigenous people of the Americas.
Modern hispanization of a place, namely in the United States, might be illustrated by Spanish-language media and businesses.
The first recorded use of an anthroponym derived from the toponym Hispania is attested in one of the five fragments, of Ennius in 236 B.C.
These and other Spanish-speaking territories were part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, and later Mexico (with the exception of Florida and Puerto Rico), before these regions joined or were taken over by the United States in 1848.
* Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
Notable Hispanic sports television networks are ESPN Latin America, Fox Sports Latin America and TyC Sports.
* White or Caucasian
Asians, Micronesians, and others
The Congressional Hispanic Caucus and the Congressional Hispanic Conference include representatives of Spanish and Portuguese, Puerto Rican and Mexican descent.
In a recent study, most Spanish-speakers of Spanish or Hispanic American descent do not prefer the term "Hispanic" or "Latino" when it comes to describing their identity.
There are also Spanish-speaking Jews, most of whom are the descendants of Ashkenazi Jews who migrated from Europe (German Jews, Russian Jews, Polish Jews, etc.)
Spain alone has 39 cultural sites, only second in the world to Italy.
Other syncretistic beliefs include Spiritism and Curanderismo.
A small but growing number of Hispanics belong to a Protestant denomination.
Genetic studies on the (male) Y-chromosome conducted by the University of Leeds in 2008 appear to support the idea that the number of forced conversions have been previously underestimated significantly.
With the ''Decretos de Nueva Planta'', Philip V started to organize the fusion of his kingdoms that until then were ruled as distinct and independent, but this unification process lacked a formal and juridic proclamation.
Spanish 67.6% (official), other 32.4% (includes the other 2 official languages - French and Portuguese, Fang, Bube, Annobonese, Igbo, Krio, Pichinglis, and English) (1994 census)'''Note:''' Equatorial Guinea was the only Spanish colony in Sub-Saharan Africa.
'''Dominican Republic'''
'''FSM Micronesia'''
These designations can be mutually recognized by people in Portugal and Brazil, unlike "Hispanic", which is totally void of any self-identification in those countries, and quite on the opposite, serves the purpose of marking a clear distinction in relation to neighboring countries´ culture.
The inhabitants of Easter Island are Pacific Islanders and since the island belongs to Chile they are theoretically Hispanic or Latinos.
Those in the Philippines live predominantly in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao province.
This definition has been adopted by the Small Business Administration as well as by many federal, state, and municipal agencies for the purposes of awarding government contracts to minority owned businesses.
Spanish 59.4%, Amerindian languages 40.5% (23 officially recognized Amerindian languages, including K'iche, Kakchiquel, Kekchi, Mam, Garifuna, and Xinca).
Hispanization of a person might be illustrated by speaking Spanish, making and eating Hispanic American food, listening to Spanish language music or participating in Hispanic festivals and holidays - Hispanization of those outside the Hispanic community as opposed to assimilation of Hispanics into theirs.
Meanwhile, native Andean sounds and melodies are the backbone of Peruvian and Bolivian music, but also play a significant role in the popular music of most South American countries and are heavily incorporated into the folk music of Ecuador and Chile and the tunes of Colombia, and again in Chile where they play a fundamental role in the form of the greatly followed nueva canción.
However it is not a Spanish creole language.
The recent influx of large numbers of immigrants from Spanish-speaking countries into the U.S. has meant that the number of Spanish-speaking U.S. residents has increased, but the children speaking English as is true of the historic U.S. immigrant experience, continues.
Language retention is a common index to assimilation; according to the 2000 census, about 75 percent of all Hispanics spoke Spanish in the home.
The degree of retention of Spanish as the native language is based on recent arrival from countries where Spanish is spoken.
Asians, Chamorro, and others
Spain was not a political entity until much later, and when referring to the Middle Ages, one should not be confounded with the nation-state of today.
There are people in Hispanic America that are not of Spanish origin, as the original people of these areas are Amerindians.
Accordingly, it may be copied freely without permission of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).'''
Fang 85.7%, Bubi 6.5%, Mdowe 3.6%, Annobon 1.6%, Bujeba 1.1%, other 1.4% (1994 census)
Mestizo 86%, White 12%, Amerindian 1%
Spanish 43%, Belizean Creole 37%, Mayan dialects 7.8%, English 5.6% (official), German 3.2%, Garifuna 2%, other 1.5%
Such is the case of Santería, popular with Afro-Cubans, which combines old African beliefs in the form of Roman Catholic saints and rituals.
White (mostly from Spanish and Italian ancestries) 88%, Mestizo 8%, Black 4%, Amerindian (less than 0.5%)
The Hispanic countries, including Spain, are also inhabited by peoples of non-Spanish ancestry, to widely varying extents.
In U.S. communities of immigrants from these countries it is common to hear these styles.
Spanish (official), 68 ethnic languages and dialects.
Easter IslandTerritory of Chile
Initially, this territory was divided into two provinces: Hispania Citerior and Hispania Ulterior.
As a result, any individual who traces his or her origins to part of the Spanish Empire or Portuguese Empire may self-identify as Hispanic, because an employer may not override an individual's self-identification.
Spanish 97.5% (official), Miskito 1.7%, others 0.8% (1995 census) (English and indigenous languages on Atlantic coast).
Therefore, in many parts of the U.S., the Hispanic cultural legacy predates English/British influence.
It commonly applies to countries once colonized by Spain in the Americas, and Asia particularly the countries of Latin America and the Philippines.
Additionally, there are Sephardic Jews who are descendants of those Jews who fled Spain to Turkey, Syria, and North Africa, some of whom have now migrated to Hispanic America, holding on to some Spanish/Sephardic customs, such as the Ladino language, which mixes Spanish, Hebrew, Arabic and others, though written with Hebrew and Latin characters.
Many aspects of Filipino culture including cuisine, traditional dances, music, festivals, religion, architecture, traditional costumes and crafts exhibit Hispanic origin and influences.
''Hispania'' was the Roman name for the whole territory of the Iberian Peninsula.
'''Puerto Rico'''(Territory of the U.S. with Commonwealth status)
Hispanic Caribbean music tends to favor complex polyrhythms of African origin.
('''''Note:''' The U.S. is a predominantly English-speaking country.
Micronesia's official language is English, although native languages, such as Chuukese, Kosraean, Pohnpeian, Yapese, Ulithian, Woleaian, Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi are also prominent.
(See also History of the Jews in Hispanic America and List of Hispanic American Jews.)
Spanish (official), English 14% (bilingual: requires verification)
Former Spanish territories in Asia-Pacific no longer recognize Spanish as an official language.
It was only in the constitution of 1812 that was adopted the name ''Españas'' (Spains) for the Spanish nation and the use of the title of "king of the Spains".
A majority (51%) say they most often identify themselves by their family’s country of origin, while 24% say they prefer a pan-ethnic label such as Hispanic or Latino.
Spanish (official), numerous indigenous dialects
Nearly 30 percent (22 percent foreign-born Latinos) of MLB players today have Hispanic heritage.
Mestizo (mixed European and Amerindian) 74,5%, White 20%, Mulato 3,5%, Indigenous 1,5%
It could be argued that the term should apply to all Spanish-speaking cultures or countries, as the historical roots of the word specifically pertain to the Iberian region.
In addition, due to the high national development of the diverse nationalities and regions of Spain, there is a lot of music in the different languages of the Peninsula (Catalan, Galician and Basque, mainly).
The United States Census uses the ethnonym ''Hispanic or Latino'' to refer to "a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Hispanic culture or origin regardless of race."
Among the smallest groups, less than 4%, are Jewish.
The word ''Lusitanian'', relates to Lusitania or Portugal, also in reference to the Lusitanians, possibly one of the first Indo-European tribes to settle in Europe.
Spanish (official), other European and Amerindian languages
The Spanish La Liga is one of the most popular in the world, known for FC Barcelona and Real Madrid.
Among the Spanish-speaking Catholics, most communities celebrate their homeland's patron saint, dedicating a day for this purpose with festivals and religious services.
to Hispanic America, particularly Argentina, Uruguay, Peru and Cuba (Argentina is host to the third largest Jewish population in the Western Hemisphere, after the United States and Canada) in the 19th century and following World War II.
who wrote "Hispane, non Romane memoretis loqui me" ("Remember that I speak like a Spaniard not a Roman") as having been said by a native of Hispania.
Spanish (official), Amerindian languages (especially Quechua)
''Hispaniensis'' means 'connected in some way to Hispania', as in "Exercitus Hispaniensis" ('the Spanish army') or "mercatores Hispanienses" ('Spanish merchants').
''(See: Colombian people)''
* Of or pertaining to Spain.
For example, California, Texas, Colorado, New Mexico (1598), Arizona, Nevada, Florida and Puerto Rico have been home to Spanish-speaking peoples since the 16th century, long before the U.S. existed.
* Belonging or relative to old Hispania.
For example, San Miguel de Gualdape, Pensacola and St. Augustine, Florida were founded in 1526, 1559 and 1565 respectively.
The 2010 Census asked if the person was "Spanish/Hispanic/Latino".
*''Hispano-Roman'' is used to refer to the culture and people of Hispania.
Among the Protestant, 85% are "Born-again Christians" and belong to Evangelical or Pentecostal churches.
In 27 B.C, Hispania Ulterior was divided into two new provinces, Hispania Baetica and Hispania Lusitania, while Hispania Citerior was renamed Hispania Tarraconensis.
Culturally, Spaniards are typically European, but they also have small traces of many peoples from the rest of Europe, the Near East and the Mediterranean areas of northern Africa.
Hispanicization is the process by which a place or a person absorbs characteristics of Hispanic society and culture.
The U.S. Office of Management and Budget currently defines "Hispanic or Latino" as "a person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race".
Spain was a geographic territory, home to several kingdoms (Christian and Muslim), with separate governments, laws, languages, religions, and customs, and was the historical remnant of the Hispano-Gothic unity.
Various ethnolinguistic groups particularly with some Hispanic heritage that forms up the Filipino people (Chavacanos, Cebuanos, Hiligaynons, Warays, Tagalogs, Ilocanos, Kapampangan, Bicolanos and others)
Asians, Chamorro, Filipinos, and others
Mestizo (mixed Amerindian and European) 69%, White 17%, Black 9%, Amerindian 5%
A World Heritage Cultural Site is a place such as a building, city, complex, or monument that is listed by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as being of special cultural significance.
Mestizo 41%, K'iche 9.1%, Kaqchikel 8.4%, Mam 7.9%, Q'eqchi 6.3%, other Maya peoples 8.6%, indigenous non-Mayan 0.2%, other 0.1%, White 18.5% (2001 census)
'''The CIA World Factbook is in the public domain.
'''Northern Mariana Islands'''
Migration from Hispanic countries has increased the Spanish-speaking population in the United States.
It is difficult to label a nation or culture with one term, such as ''Hispanic,'' as the ethnicities, customs, traditions, and art forms (music, literature, dress, architecture, cuisine, and others) vary greatly by country and region.
This division of Hispania explains the usage of the singular and plural forms (Spain, and The Spains) used to refer to the peninsula and its kingdoms in the Middle Ages.
This may imply that there were more forced conversions than was previously thought.
Mestizo 34%, Kriol 25%, Maya peoples 10.6%, Garifuna 6.1%, other 11% (2000 census) ''(See:Belizean people)''
The predominant languages used in Guam are English, Chamorro and Filipino.
Latin pop, Rock en Español, Latin hip-hop, Salsa, Merengue, colombian cumbia and Reggaeton styles tend to appeal to the broader Hispanic population, and varieties of Cuban music are popular with many Hispanics of all backgrounds.
* Of or pertaining to the nations of Hispanic America.
Some famous ''Hispani'' (plural of ''Hispanus'') were Marcus Annaeus Lucanus, Martial, Prudentius, Theodosius I, and Magnus Maximus and Maximus of Hispania.
While a tiny minority, there are some Muslims in Latin America, in the US, and in the Philippines.
Among those 24% who have a preference for a pan-ethnic label, "'Hispanic' is preferred over 'Latino' by more than a two-to-one margin—33% versus 14%."
Here follows a comparison of several terms related to ''Hispanic'':
The Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities, proclaimed champions of Hispanic success in higher education, is committed to Hispanic educational success in the U.S., Puerto Rico, Ibero-America, Spain and Portugal.
Mestizo (mixed Amerindian and European) 70%, Black 14%, White 10%, Amerindian 6%
* Black or African American
Therefore, a person of Hispanic descent is typically defined using both race and ethnicity as an identifier—i.e., Black-Hispanic, White-Hispanic, Asian-Hispanic, Amerindian-Hispanic or "other race" Hispanic.
European Argentine 86% (mostly from Spanish and Italian ancestries), Mestizo, Amerindian and other non-European or non-White groups (including Arab, East Asian, and Black minorities) 14% ''(See: Argentinian people)''
People who identify their origin as Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish may be of any race."
The Census Bureau also explains that "origin can be viewed as the heritage, nationality group, lineage, or country of birth of the person or the person's ancestors before their arrival in the United States.
The Spanish Inquisition led to a large number of forced conversions of Spanish Jews.
Some of the most recognized writers are Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Spain), Lope de Vega (Spain), Calderón de la Barca (Spain), Jose Rizal (Philippines), Carlos Fuentes (Mexico), Octavio Paz (Mexico), Miguel Ángel Asturias (Guatemala), George Santayana (US), José Martí (Cuba), Sabine Ulibarri (US), Federico García Lorca (Spain), Miguel de Unamuno (Spain), Gabriel García Márquez (Colombia), Rafael Pombo (Colombia), Horacio Quiroga (Uruguay), Rómulo Gallegos (Venezuela), Luis Rodriguez Varela (Philippines), Rubén Darío (Nicaragua), Mario Vargas Llosa (Peru), Giannina Braschi (Puerto Rico), Cristina Peri Rossi (Uruguay), Luisa Valenzuela (Argentina), Roberto Quesada (Honduras), Julio Cortázar (Argentina), Pablo Neruda (Chile), Gabriela Mistral (Chile), Jorge Luis Borges (Argentina), Pedro Henríquez Ureña (Dominican Republic), Ernesto Sabato (Argentina), Juan Tomás Ávila Laurel (Equatorial Guinea), Ciro Alegría (Peru), Joaquin Garcia Monge (Costa Rica), and Jesus Balmori (Philippines).
In the Council of Constance, the four kingdoms shared one vote.
White 65.1% (mostly Spanish), Mulattoes 24.8%, Black 10.1% (2002 census) ''(See: Cubans)''
The 1970 Census was the first time that a "Hispanic" identifier was used and data collected with the question.
Flamenco is also a very popular music style in Spain, especially in Andalusia.
The Spaniards brought with them the Castilian language and culture, and in this process that lasted several centuries, created a global empire with a diverse population.
Accordingly, it may be copied freely without permission of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).'''
Mestizo 38%, Quechua 29.7%, Aymara 4.7%, Amazonian 1.8%, White 15.5%, Black 5%, East Asian 3.3%.
''Hispanus'' was the Latin name given to a person from Hispania during Roman rule.
Notable Hispanic teams in early baseball are the All Cubans, Cuban Stars and New York Cubans.
El Paso was founded in 1659, San Antonio in 1691, Laredo, Texas in 1755, San Diego in 1769, San Francisco in 1776, San Jose, California in 1777, New Iberia, Louisiana in 1779, and Los Angeles in 1781.
As is true of many immigrant families, the immigrants often speak Spanish and some English, while their children are fluent English speakers because they were born and educated in the U.S.
Spanish (official), (various Amerindian languages, including Garifuna, Lenca, Miskito, Ch’orti’, and Tol).
This includes Spain and Portugal which is the origin of Hispanic/Iberian culture.
White (mostly of Spanish ancestry) 76.2%, Black 6.9%, Asian 0.3%, Amerindian 0.2%, mixed 4.4%, other 12% (2007)
Spanish (official), Guaraní (official)
The United States Census uses the ethnonym ''Hispanic or Latino'' to refer to "a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin regardless of race."
The terms ''Spain'' and ''the Spains'' were not interchangeable.
In Spanish, the term "hispano" as in "hispanoamericano", refers to the people of Spanish origin who live in the Americas; it also refers to a relationship to Hispania or to the Spanish language.
The correct modern term to identify Portuguese and Spanish cultures under a single nomenclature is "Iberian", and the one to refer to cultures derived from both countries in the Americas is "Iberian-American".
Mexican music shows combined influences of mostly Spanish and Native American origin, while traditional Northern Mexican music &mdash; norteño and banda &mdash; is more influenced by country-and-western music and the polka, brought by Central European settlers to Mexico.
In Palau, Spanish is no longer used; instead, the people use their native languages, such as Palauan, Angaur, Sonsorolese and Tobian.
Asians, Palauan, and others
Today, Spanish is among the most commonly spoken first languages of the world.
The United States Department of Labor - Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs encourages the same self-identification.
Spanish 60.7% (official), Quechua 21.2% (official), Aymara 14.6% (official), foreign languages 2.4%, other 1.2% (2001 census)
There are also thought to be many Catholic-professing descendants of marranos and Spanish-speaking crypto-Jews in the Southwestern United States and scattered through Hispanic America.
The constitution of 1876 adopts for the first time the name "Spain" for the Spanish nation and from then on the kings would use the title of "king of Spain".
* American Indian or Alaska Native
); about 15–16% of the total U.S. population is Hispanic, not including estimates about alien residents'').
Miscegenation between peoples in the colonies led to the creation of the new mixed peoples, chiefly half-caste and mulattos, in many countries.
Quechua 30%, Mestizo (mixed White and Amerindian ancestry) 30%, Aymara 25%, White 15%, Black minority.
The definition of "Hispanic" has been modified in each successive census.
Twenty-one percent prefer to be referred to simply as "Americans."
There are thousands of writers from many places, and dating from the Middle Ages to the present.
''Hispanicus'' implies 'of' or 'belonging to' Hispania or the Hispanus or of their fashion as in "glaudius Hispanicus".
When asked if they have a preference for either being identified as "Hispanic" or "Latino," the Pew study finds that "half (51%) say they have no preference for either term."
''Hispanic'' originally referred to the people of ancient Roman Hispania, which roughly comprised the Iberian Peninsula including the contemporary states of Spain, Portugal, Andorra, and the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar.
('''''Note:''' a separate listing for Hispanics is not included because the U.S. Census Bureau considers Hispanic to mean a person of Hispanic American descent (including persons of Cuban, Mexican, or Puerto Rican origin) and of Spanish descent living in the U.S. who may be of any race or ethnic group (white, black, Asian, etc.
Later generations are increasingly less likely to speak the language spoken in the country of their ancestors, as is true of other immigrant groups.
Today, organizations in the United States use the term as a broad catchall to refer to persons with a historical and cultural relationship with Spain, regardless of race and ethnicity.
Although colloquially and literally the expression "King of Spain" or "King of the Spains" was already widespread, it did not refer to a unified nation-state.
In Portugal, Hispanic refers to something related to ancient Hispania, Spain or the Spanish language and culture, not Portugal.
The Miguel de Cervantes Prize is awarded to Hispanic writers, whereas the Latin Grammy Award recognizes Hispanic and Portuguese musicians, and the Platino Awards as given to outstanding Hispanic films.
*''Spanish'' is used to refer to the people, nationality, culture, language and other things of Spain.
As is true of other immigrants, those who were born in other countries still speak their native language.
For instance, the music from Spain is a lot different from the Hispanic American, although there is a high grade of exchange between both continents.
Mestizo 49%, White 37%, Black 10.6% (includes Mulatto and Zambo), Amerindian 3.4%, Roma 0.01%, among other ethnic groups.
A Hispanus is someone who is a native of Hispania with no foreign parents, while children born in Hispania of (Latin) Roman parents were Hispaniensis.
The gentile adjectives were not ethnolinguistic but derived primarily on a geographic basis, from the toponym Hispania as the people of Hispania spoke different languages, although Livy said they could all understand each other, not making clear if they spoke dialects of the same language or were polyglots.
Spanish language retention rates vary geographically; parts of Texas and New Mexico have language retention rates over 90 percent, whereas in parts of Colorado and California, retention rates are lower than 30 percent.
Some retain their Spanish language as is true of other immigrant families.
In the Northern Mariana Islands, a commonwealth in political union with the U.S., a Malayo-Polynesian language called Chamorro is spoken, with numerous loanwords with Spanish etymological origins.
'''The CIA World Factbook is in the public domain.
Spanish (official), Rapanui
Technically speaking, persons from Portugal or of Portuguese extraction are referred to as Lusitanians.
Latino can refer to males or females, while Latina refers to only females.
Though, it should be noted, that Ladinos were also African slaves captive in Spain held prior to the colonial period in the Americas.
*''Hispanic'' is used to refer to modern Spain, to the Spanish language, and to the Spanish-speaking nations of the world and particularly the Americas.
Mestizo 44%, Mulatto 30%, White 16%, African 10%
* Of or pertaining to the population of Hispanic American origin who live in the United States of America.
English(on the Bay Islands)
From this tribe's name had derived the name of the Roman province of Lusitania, and ''Lusitania'' remains the name of Portugal in Latin.
White 52.7%, Mestizo 44.1%, Amerindian 3.2% ''(See: Chilean people)''
The music of Hispanic Americans &mdash; such as tejano music &mdash; has influences in rock, jazz, R&B, pop, and country music as well as traditional Mexican music such as Mariachi.
The Hispanic Heritage Baseball Museum recognizes Hispanic baseball personalities.
Spanish ballads "romances" can be traced in Mexico as "corridos" or in Argentina as "milongas", same structure but different scenarios.
The Hispanic Society of America is dedicated to the study of the arts and cultures of Spain, Portugal, and Latin America.
Many Spanish-speaking Jews also originate from the small communities of reconverted descendants of anusim &mdash; those whose Spanish Sephardi Jewish ancestors long ago hid their Jewish ancestry and beliefs in fear of persecution by the Spanish Inquisition in the Iberian Peninsula and Ibero-America.
The term '''''Hispanic''''' ( or , , , ,  ''hispàno'') broadly refers to the people, nations, and cultures that have a historical link to Spain.
The Latin gentile adjectives that belong to Hispania are ''Hispanus, Hispanicus,'' and ''Hispanienses.''
The men's national teams of Argentine, Uruguay and Spain have won the FIFA World Cup a total five times.
