In the United States, the ''Dictionary of American Biography'' was planned in the late 1920s and appeared with numerous supplements into the 1980s.
Yet Toynbee's work lost favor among both the general public and scholars by the 1960s, due to the religious and spiritual outlook that permeates the largest part of his work.
There is a tendency to focus on histories of particular countries or regions (the Andes, the Southern Cone, the Caribbean) with relatively little comparative work.
It was not called ''philosophia historiae'' anymore, but merely history (''historia'').
Arnold J. Toynbee's ten-volume ''A Study of History'', written between 1933 and 1954, was an important influence on this developing field.
His brilliant style kept his writing in circulation long after his theoretical approaches were passé.
He considered the dynamic forces of history as being the hopes and aspirations of people that took the form of ideas, and were often ossified into ideologies.
He was one of the first historians to rise above the narrow nineteenth-century notion that "history is past politics and politics current history.
Harvey J. Graff says:
Prominent leaders included Richard Hofstadter, Louis Hartz, Daniel Boorstin, Allan Nevins, Clinton Rossiter, Edmund Morgan,  and David M. Potter.
He pioneered the idea of "the milieu" as an active historical force which amalgamated geographical, psychological, and social factors.
The tumultuous events surrounding the French Revolution inspired much of the historiography and analysis of the early 19th century.
In history, however, quantification remained central to demographic studies, but slipped behind in political and social history as traditional narrative approaches made a comeback.
Greek historians greatly contributed to the development of historical methodology.
Hume adopted a similar scope to Voltaire in his history; as well as the history of Kings, Parliaments, and armies, he examined the history of culture, including literature and science, as well.
Marx then predicted the eventual proletarian revolution that would result in the attainment of socialism, followed by Communism, where property would be communally owned.
In general, Whig historians emphasized the rise of constitutional government, personal freedoms and scientific progress.
The now lost history of Alexander's campaigns by the diadoch Ptolemy&nbsp;I () may represent the first historical work composed by a ruler.
The earliest works of history produced in Japan were the ''Rikkokushi'', a corpus of six national histories covering the history of Japan from its mythological beginnings until the 9th century.
Beard was the most prominent representative with his "Beardian" approach that reached both scholars and the general public.
The New Political History saw the application of social history methods to politics, as the focus shifted from politicians and legislation to voters and elections.
During the Age of Enlightenment, the modern development of historiography through the application of scrupulous methods began.
Some writers in the period did construct a more narrative form of history.
For the early modern period, the emergence of Atlantic history, based on comparisons and linkages of Europe, the Americas, and Africa from 1450-1850 that developed as a field in its own right has integrated early modern Latin American history into a larger framework.
His writings are famous for their ringing prose and for their confident, sometimes dogmatic, emphasis on a progressive model of British history, according to which the country threw off superstition, autocracy and confusion to create a balanced constitution and a forward-looking culture combined with freedom of belief and expression.
He maintained that there is such a vast quantity of information that the historian always chooses the "facts" he or she decides to make use of.
By the time of crisis the school was building a vast publishing and research network reaching across France, Europe, and the rest of the world.
Thomas Macaulay produced his most famous work of history, ''The History of England from the Accession of James the Second'', in 1848.
The vetting and publication process often takes months or longer.
'''Historiography''' is the study of the methodology of historians in developing history as an academic discipline, and by extension is any body of historical work on a particular subject.
What constitutes history is a philosophical question (see philosophy of history).
Elton had no use for those who seek history to make myths, to create laws to explain the past, or to produce theories such as Marxism.
Consensus history emphasizes the basic unity of American values and downplays conflict as superficial.
The modern academic study of history and methods of historiography were pioneered in 19th-century German universities, especially the University of Göttingen.
Carr is held by some critics to have had a deterministic outlook in history.
The tradition of Korean historiography was established with the ''Samguk Sagi'', a history of Korea from its allegedly earliest times.
With numerous conflicting narratives regarding Muhammad and his companions from various sources, it was necessary to verify which sources were more reliable.
These viewpoints stress conflict and emphasize the central roles of class, race and gender.
Indeed, the region’s political independence places it at the forefront of two trends that are regularly considered thresholds of the modern world.
Other important Marxist historians included Eric Hobsbawm, C. L. R. James, Raphael Samuel, A. L. Morton and Brian Pearce.
He was a good palaeographer, and excelled in textual criticism, in examination of authorship, and other such matters, while his vast erudition and retentive memory made him second to none in interpretation and exposition.
Much emphasis was given to quantitative data, seen as the key to unlocking all of social history.
The ''Classic of History'' is one of the Five Classics of Chinese classic texts and one of the earliest narratives of China.
Chicago historian William H. McNeill wrote ''The Rise of the West'' (1965) to improve upon Toynbee by showing how the separate civilizations of Eurasia interacted from the very beginning of their history, borrowing critical skills from one another, and thus precipitating still further change as adjustment between traditional old and borrowed new knowledge and practice became necessary.
In this insistence upon the importance of primary sources, Gibbon broke new ground in the methodical study of history:
* Quantitative history, Cliometrics (in economic history); Prosopography using statistics to study biographies
However, by the 1980s the first blush of quantification had worn off, as traditional historians counterattacked.
The central role of the Bible in Christianity is reflected in the preference of Christian historians for written sources, compared to the classical historians' preference for oral sources and is also reflected in the inclusion of politically unimportant people.
Hippolyte Taine (1828-1893) was the chief theoretical influence of French naturalism, a major proponent of sociological positivism, and one of the first practitioners of historicist criticism, who was unable to secure an academic position.
Whig historians emphasized the achievements of the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
British historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography of the First World War in recent years has been reinvigorated by the cultural turn.
The extent to which historians are influenced by their own groups and loyalties&nbsp;–  such as to their nation state&nbsp;–  is a debated question.
Western Europe and the United States took leading roles in this development.
Famous historians in this tradition include Urwah (d.&nbsp;712), Wahb ibn Munabbih (d.&nbsp;728), Ibn Ishaq (d.&nbsp;761), al-Waqidi (745–822), Ibn Hisham (d.&nbsp;834), Muhammad al-Bukhari (810–870) and Ibn Hajar (1372–1449).
The most famous exponent of 'Whiggery' was Thomas Babington Macaulay, who published the first volumes of his ''The History of England from the Accession of James II'' in 1848.
* Environmental history, a relatively new field
Polybius (&nbsp;– ) wrote on the rise of Rome to world prominence, and attempted to harmonize the Greek and Roman points of view.
In 2007, of 5,723 faculty in the departments of history at British universities, 1,644 (29%) identified themselves with social history and 1,425 (25%) identified themselves with political history.
His credo was to write history the way it was.
''The Agrarian Problem in the Sixteenth Century'' (1912) and ''Religion and the Rise of Capitalism'' (1926), reflected his ethical concerns and preoccupations in economic history.
Voltaire explains his view of historiography in his article on "History" in Diderot's ''Encyclopédie'': ''"One demands of modern historians more details, better ascertained facts, precise dates, more attention to customs, laws, mores, commerce, finance, agriculture, population."''
Peter Gay says Voltaire wrote "very good history", citing his "scrupulous concern for truths", "careful sifting of evidence", "intelligent selection of what is important", "keen sense of drama", and "grasp of the fact that a whole civilization is a unit of study."
The first stage was primitive communism where property was shared and there was no concept of "leadership".
The historical journal, a forum where academic historians could exchange ideas and publish newly discovered information, came into being in the 19th century.
Biography has been a major form of historiography since the days when Plutarch wrote the parallel lives of great Roman and Greek leaders.
R. H. Tawney was an early historian working in this tradition.
Gibbon's work has been praised for its style, its piquant epigrams and its effective irony.
He then discusses the dramatic effect of Western civilization on others in the past 500 years of history.
In 1948 Hofstadter made a compelling statement of the consensus model of the U.S. political tradition:
They preferred to stress slow change and the longue durée.
Diplomatic historian Melvyn P. Leffler finds that the problem with the "cultural turn" is that the culture concept is imprecise, and may produce excessively broad interpretations, because it:
:Voltaire recast historiography in both factual and analytical terms.
According to John Lukacs, he was the first master of cultural history, which seeks to describe the spirit and the forms of expression of a particular age, a particular people, or a particular place.
It is traditionally attributed to Confucius(551–479 BCE).
Interest in the 1688 Glorious Revolution was also rekindled by the Great Reform Act of 1832 in England.
Before about 1500, the network of communication between cultures was that of Eurasia.
The earliest known systematic historical thought emerged in ancient Greece, a development which would be an important influence on the writing of history elsewhere around the Mediterranean region.
''Zhan Guo Ce'' was a renowned ancient Chinese historical compilation of sporadic materials on the Warring States period compiled between the .
The pioneers shared a commitment to quantification.
In his main work ''Histoire de France'' (1855), French historian Jules Michelet (1798-1874) coined the term Renaissance (meaning "rebirth" in French), as a period in Europe's cultural history that represented a break from the Middle Ages, creating a modern understanding of humanity and its place in the world.
* History of Religion and Church History; the history of theology is usually handled under Theology
According to Lawrence Stone, narrative has traditionally been the main rhetorical device used by historians.
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. wrote the ''Age of Jackson'' (1945), one of the last major books from this viewpoint.
By the mid-19th century, scholars were beginning to analyse the history of institutional change, particularly the development of constitutional government.
Traditional Chinese historiography describes history in terms of dynastic cycles.
Although he found evil in the historical record, he fervently believed reason and educating the illiterate masses would lead to progress.
However, after 1980 the "cultural turn" directed the next generation to new topics.
In accuracy, thoroughness, lucidity, and comprehensive grasp of a vast subject, the 'History' is unsurpassable.
In 1979, at a time when the new Social History was demanding a social-science model of analysis, Stone detected a move back toward the narrative.
* Military history, including naval and air
He had a decisive impact on scholars.
Although Marxist historiography made important contributions to the history of the working class, oppressed nationalities, and the methodology of history from below, its chief problematic aspect was its argument on the nature of history as ''determined'' or ''dialectical''; this can also be stated as the relative importance of subjective and objective factors in creating outcomes.
I rode triumphantly through it from end to end and enjoyed it all."
* Diplomatic history
He opened the gates for a generation of labor historians, such as David Montgomery and Herbert Gutman, who made similar studies of the American working classes.
The Orientals do not know that the spirit or man as such are free in themselves.
* Political history
For all periods, global or world history have focused on the connections between areas, likewise integrating Latin America into a larger perspective.
Biographer Leslie Stephen wrote that thereafter, "His fame was as rapid as it has been lasting."
The work traced the development of the English constitution from the Teutonic invasions of Britain until 1485, and marked a distinct step in the advance of English historical learning.
Nicolas Barker argues that ",more and more biographies command an ever larger readership", as he speculates that biography has come ",to express the spirit of our age."
His 'Whiggish convictions' are spelled out in his first chapter:
The emergence of area studies of other regions also developed historiographical practices.
French sociologist Maurice Halbwachs, opened the field with ''La mémoire collective'' (Paris: 1950).
And because they do not know that, they are not themselves free.
This progressed to a slave society where the idea of class emerged and the State developed.
It increasingly fell out of favour in the 1960s and '70s.
He took a hostile view of those historians who stress the workings of chance and contingency in the workings of history.
The earliest known critical historical works were ''The Histories'', composed by Herodotus of Halicarnassus (484–425 BCE) who became known as the "father of history".
In Carr's famous example, he claimed that millions had crossed the Rubicon, but only Julius Caesar's crossing in 49 BC is declared noteworthy by historians.
In Ranke's view, the historian had to understand a period on its own terms, and seek to find only the general ideas which animated every period of history.
His speculation about what would have happened if Alexander the Great had marched against Rome represents the first known instance of alternate history.
It is commonly recognised by historians that, in themselves, individual historical facts dealing with names, dates and places are not particularly meaningful.
Popular history continued to be written by self-educated amateurs, but scholarly history increasingly became the province of PhD's trained in research seminars at a university.
Herodotus attempted to distinguish between more and less reliable accounts, and personally conducted research by travelling extensively, giving written accounts of various Mediterranean cultures.
Thucydides largely eliminated divine causality in his account of the war between Athens and Sparta, establishing a rationalistic element which set a precedent for subsequent Western historical writings.
An eminent member of this school, Georges Duby, described his approach to history as one that relegated the sensational to the sidelines and was reluctant to give a simple accounting of events, but strived on the contrary to pose and solve problems and, neglecting surface disturbances, to observe the long and medium-term evolution of economy, society and civilisation.
Ranke also rejected the 'teleological approach' to history, which traditionally viewed each period as inferior to the period which follows.
Meanwhile, quantitative history became well-established in other disciplines, especially economics (where they called it "cliometrics"), as well as in political science.
However, J. R. Western wrote that: "Despite its age and blemishes, Macaulay's ''History of England'' has still to be superseded by a full-scale modern history of the period".
Voltaire's best-known histories are ''The Age of Louis XIV'' (1751), and his ''Essay on the Customs and the Spirit of the Nations'' (1756).
The term for these areas of interaction differ from one world historian to another and include ''world-system'' and ''ecumene.''
His work was forgotten until it was rediscovered in the late 19th century.
While some members of the group (most notably Christopher Hill and E. P. Thompson) left the CPGB after the 1956 Hungarian Revolution, the common points of British Marxist historiography continued in their works.
Sources had to be solid, not speculations and rationalizations.
They considered the continuities of the deepest structures were central to history, beside which upheavals in institutions or the superstructure of social life were of little significance, for history lies beyond the reach of conscious actors, especially the will of revolutionaries.
It was compiled by Goryeo court historian Kim Busik after its commission by King Injong of Goryeo (r. 1122 - 1146).
Consensus history was rejected by New Left viewpoints that attracted a younger generation of radical historians in the 1960s.
In particular, Elton was opposed to the idea that the English Civil War was caused by socioeconomic changes in the 16th and 17th centuries, arguing instead that it was due largely to the incompetence of the Stuart kings.
Latin America is the former Spanish American empire in the Western Hemisphere plus Portuguese Brazil.
The term Whig history, coined by Herbert Butterfield in his short book ''The Whig Interpretation of History'' in 1931, means the approach to historiography which presents the past as an inevitable progression towards ever greater liberty and enlightenment, culminating in modern forms of liberal democracy and constitutional monarchy.
His short biographies of leading scientists explored the process of scientific change and he developed new ways of seeing scientists in the context of their times by looking at how they interacted with society and each other&nbsp;– he paid special attention to Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle, Isaac Newton and William Harvey.
Such interactions have become both more numerous and more continual and substantial in recent times.
Representative of recent scholarship is a collection of studies on the "Dynamics of Memory and Identity in Contemporary Europe"  SAGE has published the scholarly journal ''Memory Studies'' since 2008, and the book series ‘Memory Studies’ was launched by Palgrave Macmillan in 2010 with 5-10 titles a year.
Carlyle presented the history as dramatic events unfolding in the present as though he and the reader were participants on the streets of Paris at the famous events.
Another important German thinker was Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, whose theory of historical progress ran counter to Ranke's approach.
Another standard division within the historiography is the temporal factor, with works falling into either the early modern period (or “colonial era”) or the post-independence (or “national”) period, from the early nineteenth onward.
The movement established a strong base at the History Department at the University of Wisconsin with Curtis Nettels, William Hesseltine, Merle Curti, Howard K. Beale, Merrill Jensen, Fred Harvey Harrington (who became the university president), William Appleman Williams, and a host of graduate students.
Sima Qian (around ) was the first in China to lay the groundwork for professional historical writing.
It was especially attractive in the 1950s and 1960s.
The proverbial Philippic attacks of the Athenian orator Demosthenes () on Philip&nbsp;II of Macedon marked the height of ancient political agitation.
It proved an immediate success and replaced Hume's history to become the new orthodoxy.
Instead, they proclaimed it was a:
Journals also helped historians to establish various historiographical approaches, the most notable example of which was ''Annales.
It is rarely read or cited in the last century.
In the historiography of the United States, there were a series of major approaches in the 20th century.
Biography, although popular throughout antiquity, was introduced as a branch of history by the works of Plutarch (&nbsp;– ) and Suetonius (&nbsp;– after ) who described the deeds and characters of ancient personalities, stressing their human side.
The research interests of historians change over time, and there has been a shift away from traditional diplomatic, economic, and political history toward newer approaches, especially social and cultural studies.
The goal of the Annales was to undo the work of the Sorbonnistes, to turn French historians away from the narrowly political and diplomatic toward the new vistas in social and economic history.
The history of dissent, and the experiences of racial minorities and disadvantaged classes was central to the narratives produced by New Left historians.
In 2009-2012, there were an average of 16,000 new academic history books published in the U.S. every year.
His 'longue durée' approach stressed slow, and often imperceptible effects of space, climate and technology on the actions of human beings in the past.
One of Carr's most forthright critics was Hugh Trevor-Roper, who argued that Carr's dismissal of the "might-have-beens of history" reflected a fundamental lack of interest in examining historical causation.
The Second American Revolution, while destroying the economic foundation of the slave-owning aristocracy, assured the triumph of business enterprise."
These included Gregory of Tours, and more successfully Bede who wrote both secular and ecclesiastical history and is known for writing the ''Ecclesiastical History of the English People''.
Historians examine how legends are invented.
He took a comparative topical approach to 26 independent civilizations and demonstrated that they displayed striking parallels in their origin, growth, and decay.
Understanding the past appears to be a universal human need, and the telling of history has emerged independently in civilisations around the world.
They only know that '''One''' is free....
Scholars discuss historiography by topic&nbsp;– such as the "Historiography of the United Kingdom", the "Historiography of Canada", "Historiography of the British Empire", the "historiography of early Islam", the "historiography of China"&nbsp;–  and different approaches and genres, such as political history and social history.
Most libraries have a system for obtaining specific articles through inter-library loan.
Historians of Latin America have contributed to various types of historical writing, but one major, innovative development in Spanish American history is the emergence of ethnohistory, the history of indigenous peoples, especially in Mexico based on alphabetic sources in Spanish or in indigenous languages.
The 19-volume work covered French history from Charlemagne to the outbreak of the French Revolution.
Marxist historian E. H. Carr developed a controversial theory of history in his 1961 book ''What Is History?
In Hegel's own words, his philosophical theory of "World history... represents the development of the spirit's consciousness of its own freedom and of the consequent realization of this freedom.".
His written work was the ''Shiji'' (''Records of the Grand Historian''), a monumental lifelong achievement in literature.
Islamic historical writing eventually culminated in the works of the Arab Muslim historian Ibn Khaldun (1332–1406), who published his historiographical studies in the ''Muqaddimah'' (translated as ''Prolegomena'') and ''Kitab al-I'bar'' (''Book of Advice'').
Carlyle's style of historical writing stressed the immediacy of action, often using the present tense.
The Annalistes, especially Lucien Febvre, advocated a ''histoire totale'', or ''histoire tout court'', a complete study of a historical problem.
History became an independent discipline.
It stressed the central importance of class conflict in American history.
The goal was to incorporate in historical studies perspectives from all the social sciences, especially political science, sociology and economics.
Seminars taught graduate students how to review the historiography of the topics, so that they could understand the conceptual frameworks currently in use, and the criticisms regarding their strengths and weaknesses.
It has now been displaced by the ''American National Biography'' as well as numerous smaller historical encyclopedias that give thorough coverage to Great Persons.
Christian theology considered time as linear, progressing according to divine plan.
Eventually, the dynasty becomes so weak as to allow its replacement by a new dynasty.
Although it lacked a rigorous engagement with archival sources, it indicated an early interest in history from below and class analysis, and it attempts a dialectical analysis.
It is the one English history which may be regarded as definitive.... Whatever its shortcomings the book is artistically imposing as well as historically unimpeachable as a vast panorama of a great period.
It was completed in 1145 and relied not only on earlier Chinese histories for source material, but also on the ''Hwarang Segi'' written by the Silla historian Kim Daemun in the 8th century.
He proposed a universal model to each of these civilizations, detailing the stages through which they all pass: genesis, growth, time of troubles, universal state, and disintegration.
World history, as a distinct field of historical study, emerged as an independent academic field in the 1980s.
“Latin America’s central, and sometimes pioneering, role in the development of globalization and modernity did not cease with the end of colonial rule and the early modern period.
* Local History and Microhistory
This model of human progress has been called the Whig interpretation of history.
In the two decades from 1975 to 1995, the proportion of professors of history in U.S. universities identifying with social history rose from 31% to 41%, while the proportion of political historians fell from 40% to 30%.
He argued that the theory of the unity and continuity of history should not remove distinctions between ancient and modern history.
William Stubbs's  ''Constitutional History of England'' (3 vols., 1874–78) was an important influence on this developing field.
Elton saw the duty of historians as empirically gathering evidence and objectively analyzing what the evidence has to say.
During the Renaissance, history was written about states or nations.
The ''Spring and Autumn Annals'', the official chronicle of the State of Lu covering the period from , is among the earliest surviving historical texts to be arranged on annalistic principles in the world.
He was the first scholar to make a serious attempt to write the history of the world, eliminating theological frameworks, and emphasizing economics, culture and political history.
Over time, the dynasty becomes morally corrupt and dissolute.
For this reason, Carr argued that Leopold von Ranke's famous dictum ''wie es eigentlich gewesen'' (show what actually happened) was wrong because it presumed that the "facts" influenced what the historian wrote, rather than the historian choosing what "facts of the past" he or she intended to turn into "historical facts".
The Social Science History Association was formed in 1976 as an interdisciplinary group with a journal ''Social Science History'' and an annual convention.
At the same time, philosopher David Hume was having a similar effect on the study of history in Great Britain.
Tacitus () denounces Roman immorality by praising German virtues, elaborating on the topos of the Noble savage.
Noting the political upheavals in Europe and especially in France in 1968, Eric Hobsbawm argued that "in France the virtual hegemony of Braudelian history and the ''Annales'' came to an end after  1968, and the international influence of the journal dropped steeply."
'''Social history''', sometimes called the "new social history," is a broad branch that studies the experiences of ordinary people in the past.
These methodologies were later applied to other historical figures in the Islamic civilization.
A new discipline, sociology, emerged in the late 19th century and analyzed and compared these perspectives on a larger scale.
