Without this function, T cell depletion is more likely, leading to immunodeficiency.
Three of these genes, ''gag'', ''pol'', and ''env'', contain information needed to make the structural proteins for new virus particles.
HIV-1 appears to have originated in southern Cameroon through the evolution of SIV(cpz), a simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) that infects wild chimpanzees (HIV-1 descends from the SIV(cpz) endemic in the chimpanzee subspecies ''Pan troglodytes troglodytes'').
During the microtubule-based transport to the nucleus, the viral single-strand RNA genome is transcribed into double-strand DNA, which is then integrated into a host chromosome.
In these situations, a second specimen is collected and tested for HIV infection.
This CCR5 coreceptor is used by almost all primary HIV-1 isolates regardless of viral genetic subtype.
When simultaneous infection occurs, the genome of progeny virions may be composed of RNA strands from two different strains.
It is unknown how often such mixed packaging occurs under natural conditions.
Although IFA can be used to confirm infection in these ambiguous cases, this assay is not widely used.
In 2000, the last year in which an analysis of global subtype prevalence was made, 47.2% of infections worldwide were of subtype C, 26.7% were of subtype A/CRF02_AG, 12.3% were of subtype B, 5.3% were of subtype D, 3.2% were of CRF_AE, and the remaining 5.3% were composed of other subtypes and CRFs.
While transmission rates of HIV during vaginal intercourse are typically low, they are increased many fold if one of the partners suffers from a sexually transmitted infection resulting in genital ulcers.
This process pulls the viral and cellular membranes together, fusing them.
gp120 binds to integrin α4β7 activating LFA-1 the central integrin involved in the establishment of virological synapses, which facilitate efficient cell-to-cell spreading of HIV-1.
HIV-1 (+) & HIV-2 (+): HIV antibodies detected
The density is high as the glycans shield the underlying viral protein from neutralisation by antibodies.
HIV-1 entry, as well as entry of many other retroviruses, has long been believed to occur exclusively at the plasma membrane.
Entry to the cell begins through interaction of the trimeric envelope complex (gp160 spike) and both CD4 and a chemokine receptor (generally either CCR5 or CXCR4, but others are known to interact) on the cell surface.
HIV-1 infection causes chronic ongoing inflammation and production of reactive oxygen species.
The six remaining genes, ''tat'', ''rev'', ''nef'', ''vif'', ''vpr'', and ''vpu'' (or ''vpx'' in the case of HIV-2), are regulatory genes for proteins that control the ability of HIV to infect cells, produce new copies of virus (replicate), or cause disease.
it employs hybrid spreading mechanisms.
HIV-1 (-) & HIV-2 (+): HIV-2 antibodies detected
AIDS is a condition in humans in which progressive failure of the immune system allows life-threatening opportunistic infections and cancers to thrive.
In HIV-1 and SIVcpz, Nef does not inhibit T-cell activation and it has lost this function.
Intravital imaging studies have supported the concept of the HIV virological synapse ''in vivo''.
gp41 undergoes significant conformational change; folding in half and forming coiled-coils.
Again, this proportion is even lower in rural health facilities.
This is, in turn, surrounded by the viral envelope, that is composed of the lipid bilayer taken from the membrane of a human cell when the newly formed virus particle buds from the cell.
Three groups of HIV-1 have been identified on the basis of differences in the envelope (''env'') region: M, N, and O.
This gives rise to four possible scenarios:
A positive NAT result  confirms HIV-1 infection whereas a negative result rules out infection (false positive p24).
In patients infected with subtype B HIV-1, there is often a co-receptor switch in late-stage disease and T-tropic variants appear that can infect a variety of T cells through CXCR4.
The Gag (p55) and Gag-Pol (p160) polyproteins also associate with the inner surface of the plasma membrane along with the HIV genomic RNA as the forming virion begins to bud from the host cell.
They also used ''Kaposi's Sarcoma and Opportunistic Infections'', the name by which a task force had been set up in 1981.
Once gp120 is bound with the CD4 protein, the envelope complex undergoes a structural change, exposing the chemokine binding domains of gp120 and allowing them to interact with the target chemokine receptor.
In addition, Hu and Temin suggested that recombination is an adaptation for repair of damage in the RNA genomes.
HIV-1 will bind to any appropriate RNA.
This complex scenario leads to the generation of many variants of HIV in a single infected patient in the course of one day.
HIV-1 (+) & HIV-2 (-): HIV-1 antibodies detected
At the same time, Montagnier's group isolated a virus from a patient presenting with swelling of the lymph nodes of the neck and physical weakness, two classic symptoms of AIDS.
The Vpu protein (p16) influences the release of new virus particles from infected cells.
How this selective process works is still under investigation, but one model is that spermatozoa may selectively carry R5 HIV as they possess both CCR3 and CCR5 but not CXCR4 on their surface and that genital epithelial cells preferentially sequester X4 virus.
Contradicting the report from Gallo's group, Montagnier and his colleagues showed that core proteins of this virus were immunologically different from those of HTLV-I.
The integration of the viral DNA into the host cell's genome is carried out by another viral enzyme called ''integrase''.
Coinfection with distinct subtypes gives rise to circulating recombinant forms (CRFs).
This is one of the most densely glycosylated molecules known and the density is sufficiently high to prevent the normal maturation process of glycans during biogenesis in the endoplasmic and Golgi apparatus.
A number of studies with subtype B-infected individuals have determined that between 40 and 50 percent of AIDS patients can harbour viruses of the SI and, it is presumed, the X4 phenotypes.
Two pathways of cell-to-cell transmission have been reported.
For example, in 2001 less than 1% of the sexually active urban population in Africa had been tested, and this proportion is even lower in rural populations.
HIV-1 and HIV-2 appear to package their RNA differently.
During viral replication, the integrated DNA provirus is transcribed into RNA, some of which then undergo RNA splicing to produce mature mRNAs.
For example, ''env'' codes for a protein called gp160 that is cut in two by a cellular protease to form gp120 and gp41.
This recombination is most obvious when it occurs between subtypes.
The molecular structure of the viral spike has now been determined by X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy.
The single-stranded RNA is tightly bound to nucleocapsid proteins, p7, and enzymes needed for the development of the virion such as reverse transcriptase, proteases, ribonuclease and integrase.
The final step of the viral cycle, assembly of new HIV-1 virions, begins at the plasma membrane of the host cell.
The HIV virion enters macrophages and CD4+ T cells by the adsorption of glycoproteins on its surface to receptors on the target cell followed by fusion of the viral envelope with the cell membrane and the release of the HIV capsid into the cell.
The majority of the glycans are therefore stalled as immature 'high-mannose' glycans not normally present on secreted or cell surface human glycoproteins.
suggested that template switching by the reverse transcriptase acts as a repair process to deal with breaks in the ssRNA genome.
This hybrid virion then infects a new cell where it undergoes replication.
Many species are infected by lentiviruses, which are characteristically responsible for long-duration illnesses with a long incubation period.
The two Tat proteins (p16 and p14) are transcriptional transactivators for the LTR promoter acting by binding the TAR RNA element.
The resulting viral DNA is then imported into the cell nucleus and integrated into the cellular DNA by a virally encoded integrase and host co-factors.
The Rev protein (p19) is involved in shuttling RNAs from the nucleus and the cytoplasm by binding to the RRE RNA element.
Infection with HIV occurs by the transfer of blood, semen, vaginal fluid, pre-ejaculate, or breast milk.
This variability is compounded when a single cell is simultaneously infected by two or more different strains of HIV.
The ''α''-chemokine SDF-1, a ligand for CXCR4, suppresses replication of T-tropic HIV-1 isolates.
Some of these full-length RNAs function as new copies of the virus genome, while others function as mRNAs that are translated to produce the structural proteins Gag and Env.
In general, a second specimen should be collected more than a month later and retested for persons with indeterminate western blot results.
HIV is different in structure from other retroviruses.
Two types of HIV have been characterized: HIV-1 and HIV-2.
The chance of a false-positive result in standard two-step testing protocol is estimated to be about 1 in 250,000 in a low risk population.
The latest recommendations of the CDC show that HIV testing must start with an immunoassay combination test for HIV-1 and HIV-2 antibodies and p24 antigen.
In 1983, two separate research groups led by Robert Gallo and Luc Montagnier independently declared that a novel retrovirus may have been infecting AIDS patients, and published their findings in the same issue of the journal ''Science''.
Macrophage (M-tropic) strains of HIV-1, or non-syncytia-inducing strains (NSI; now called R5 viruses ) use the ''β''-chemokine receptor CCR5 for entry and are, thus, able to replicate in macrophages and CD4+ T cells.
Many more cases of PCP and KS emerged, alerting U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and a CDC task force was formed to monitor the outbreak.
HIV-2 is much less pathogenic than HIV-1 and is restricted in its worldwide distribution.
HIV-1 entry to macrophages and CD4+ T cells is mediated through interaction of the virion envelope glycoproteins (gp120) with the CD4 molecule on the target cells and also with chemokine coreceptors.
Within these bodily fluids, HIV is present as both free virus particles and virus within infected immune cells.
The unusual processing and high density means that almost all broadly neutralising antibodies that have so far been identified (from a subset of patients that have been infected for many months to years) bind to or, are adapted to cope with, these envelope glycans.
From 2 to 20 events per genome may occur at each replication cycle, and these events can rapidly shuffle the genetic information that is transmitted from parental to progeny genomes.
It is thought that several transmissions of the virus from individual to individual in quick succession are necessary to allow it enough time to mutate into HIV.
As this happens, the reverse transcriptase, by jumping back and forth between the two different RNA templates, will generate a newly synthesized retroviral DNA sequence that is a recombinant between the two parental genomes.
New World monkeys such as the owl monkey are resistant to HIV-1 infection, possibly because of a genomic fusion of two viral resistance genes.
Testing post exposure is recommended initially and at six weeks, three months, and six months.
To actively produce the virus, certain cellular transcription factors need to be present, the most important of which is NF-''κ''B (NF kappa&nbsp;B), which is upregulated when T-cells become activated.
Only mature virions are then able to infect another cell.
Many governments and research institutions participate in HIV/AIDS research.
This view of the adaptive benefit of recombination in HIV could explain why each HIV particle contains two complete genomes, rather than one.
After HIV has bound to the target cell, the HIV RNA and various enzymes, including reverse transcriptase, integrase, ribonuclease, and protease, are injected into the cell.
However, after determining that AIDS was not isolated to the gay community, it was realized that the term GRID was misleading and ''AIDS'' was introduced at a meeting in July 1982.
SIVcpz appears to have been transmitted relatively recently to chimpanzee and human populations, so their hosts have not yet adapted to the virus.
These mRNAs are exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm, where they are translated into the regulatory proteins Tat (which encourages new virus production) and Rev.
During reverse transcription the nascent DNA can switch multiple times between the two copies of the viral RNA.
Yet, for the adaptive advantages of genetic variation to be realized, the two viral genomes packaged in individual infecting virus particles need to have arisen from separate progenitor parental viruses of differing genetic constitution.
HIV infects vital cells in the human immune system such as helper T cells (specifically CD4+ T cells), macrophages, and dendritic cells.
AIDS was first clinically observed in 1981 in the United States.
HIV can also disseminate by direct transmission from one cell to another by a process of cell-to-cell spread.
Modern HIV testing is extremely accurate.
A positive differentiation test confirms diagnosis, while a negative or indeterminate result must be followed by nucleic acid test (NAT).
There is evidence that humans who participate in bushmeat activities, either as hunters or as bushmeat vendors, commonly acquire SIV.
Cell-to-cell spread is thought to be particularly important in lymphoid tissues where CD4+ T lymphocytes are densely packed and likely to frequently interact.
HIV-1 testing is initially by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect antibodies to HIV-1.
If the result of either duplicate test is reactive, the specimen is reported as repeatedly reactive and undergoes confirmatory testing with a more specific supplemental test (e.g., western blot or, less commonly, an immunofluorescence assay (IFA)).
Soon thereafter, additional gay men developed a previously rare skin cancer called Kaposi's sarcoma (KS).
These advances in structural biology  were made possible due to the development of stable recombinant forms of the viral spike by the introduction of an intersubunit disulphide bond and an isoleucine to proline mutation in gp41.
HIV-2 will preferentially bind to the mRNA that was used to create the Gag protein itself.
By September 1982 the CDC started using the name AIDS.
The adoption of "accessory genes" by HIV-2 and its more promiscuous pattern of coreceptor usage (including CD4-independence) may assist the virus in its adaptation to avoid innate restriction factors present in host cells.
In contrast, when these strains infect species that have not adapted to SIV ("heterologous" hosts such as rhesus or cynomologus macaques), the animals develop AIDS and the virus generates genetic diversity similar to what is seen in human HIV infection.
For HIV, as well as for viruses generally, successful infection depends on overcoming host defensive strategies that often include production of genome-damaging reactive oxygen.
The hybrid spreading mechanisms of HIV contribute to the virus's ongoing replication against antiretroviral therapies.
A negative result rules out infection, while a positive one must be followed by an HIV-1/2 antibody differentiation immunoassay.
Thus, Michod et al.
As these two viruses turned out to be the same, in 1986, LAV and HTLV-III were renamed HIV.
They are currently thought to play an important role by transmitting HIV to T-cells when the virus is captured in the mucosa by DCs.
Specific proposed high-risk transmission channels, allowing the virus to adapt to humans and spread throughout the society, depend on the proposed timing of the animal-to-human crossing.
A number of factors contribute to this increased efficiency, including polarised virus budding towards the site of cell-to-cell contact, close apposition of cells which minimizes fluid-phase diffusion of virions, and clustering of HIV entry receptors on the target cell to the contact zone.
Thus, the HIV genome may be vulnerable to oxidative damages, including breaks in the single-stranded RNA.
Having achieved a low pathogenicity, over time, variants more successful at transmission will be selected.
Strand switching (copy-choice recombination) by reverse transcriptase could generate an undamaged copy of genomic DNA from two damaged ssRNA genome copies.
HIV that use only the CCR5 receptor are termed R5; those that use only CXCR4 are termed X4, and those that use both, X4R5.
Gallo's group called their newly isolated virus HTLV-III.
Adaptation to use normal cellular machinery to enable transmission and productive infection has also aided the establishment of HIV-2 replication in humans.
Early 1900s colonial cities were notable due to their high prevalence of prostitution and genital ulcers to the degree that as of 1928 as many as 45% of female residents of eastern Leopoldville were thought to have been prostitutes and as of 1933 around 15% of all residents of the same city were infected by one of the forms of syphilis.
Other medical research areas include the topics of pre-exposure prophylaxis, post-exposure prophylaxis, circumcision and HIV, and accelerated aging effects.
Both X4 and R5 HIV are present in the seminal fluid, which is passed from a male to his sexual partner.
The initial cases were a cluster of injection drug users and gay men with no known cause of impaired immunity who showed symptoms of ''Pneumocystis carinii'' pneumonia (PCP), a rare opportunistic infection that was known to occur in people with very compromised immune systems.
A matrix composed of the viral protein p17 surrounds the capsid ensuring the integrity of the virion particle.
HIV can infect a variety of immune cells such as CD4+ T cells, macrophages, and microglial cells.
The first step in fusion involves the high-affinity attachment of the CD4 binding domains of gp120 to CD4.
It is roughly spherical with a diameter of about 120&nbsp;nm, around 60&nbsp;times smaller than a red blood cell.
The gp160 spike contains binding domains for both CD4 and chemokine receptors.
The ends of each strand of HIV RNA contain an RNA sequence called the long terminal repeat (LTR).
Thus, during the course of infection, viral adaptation to the use of CXCR4 instead of CCR5 may be a key step in the progression to AIDS.
The presence of FEZ-1, which occurs naturally in neurons, is believed to prevent the infection of cells by HIV.
When CD4+ T cell numbers decline below a critical level, cell-mediated immunity is lost, and the body becomes progressively more susceptible to opportunistic infections.
In the beginning, the CDC did not have an official name for the disease, often referring to it by way of the diseases that were associated with it, for example, lymphadenopathy, the disease after which the discoverers of HIV originally named the virus.
HIV-1 (-) or indeterminate & HIV-2 (-): Nucleic acid test must be carried out to detect the acute infection of HIV-1 or its absence.
However, the use of coreceptor alone does not explain viral tropism, as not all R5 viruses are able to use CCR5 on macrophages for a productive infection and HIV can also infect a subtype of myeloid dendritic cells, which probably constitute a reservoir that maintains infection when CD4+ T cell numbers have declined to extremely low levels.
The Vif protein (p23) prevents the action of APOBEC3G (a cellular protein that deaminates Cytidine to Uridine in the single stranded viral DNA and/or interferes with reverse transcription).
A negative result rules out HIV exposure, while a positive one must be followed by an HIV-1/2 antibody differentiation immunoassay to detect which is present.
The earliest well documented case of HIV in a human dates back to 1959 in the Belgian Congo.
The viral envelope contains proteins from the host cell and relatively few copies of the HIV Envelope protein, which consists of a cap made of three molecules known as glycoprotein (gp) 120, and a stem consisting of three gp41 molecules which anchor the structure into the viral envelope.
A single screening test is correct more than 99% of the time.
Indeed, macrophages play a key role in several critical aspects of HIV infection.
It is composed of two copies of positive single-stranded RNA that codes for the virus's nine genes enclosed by a conical capsid composed of 2,000 copies of the viral protein p24.
An updated algorithm published by the CDC in June 2014 recommends that diagnosis starts with the p24 antigen test.
Specimens with a reactive ELISA result are retested in duplicate.
Chimpanzee SIV (SIVcpz), the closest genetic relative of HIV-1, is associated with increased mortality and AIDS-like symptoms in its natural host.
Since HIV-1 is derived from SIVcpz, and HIV-2 from SIVsm, the genetic sequence of HIV-2 is only partially homologous to HIV-1 and more closely resembles that of SIVsm.
Many HIV-positive people are unaware that they are infected with the virus.
However, SIV is a weak virus, and it is typically suppressed by the human immune system within weeks of infection.
They appear to be the first cells infected by HIV and perhaps the source of HIV production when CD4+ cells become depleted in the patient.
As the sole viral protein on the surface of the virus, the Envelope protein is a major target for HIV vaccine efforts.
Gag proteins bind to copies of the virus RNA genome to package them into new virus particles.
A survival strategy for any infectious agent is not to kill its host but ultimately become a commensal organism.
Upon infection and replication catalyzed by reverse transcriptase, recombination between the two genomes can occur.
Montagnier's group named their isolated virus lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV).
Most HIV-1 research is focused on subtype B; few laboratories focus on the other subtypes.
It does this by down-regulating the expression of CXCR4 on the surface of these cells.
Regions in the LTR act as switches to control production of new viruses and can be triggered by proteins from either HIV or the host cell.
The reverse transcriptase also has ribonuclease activity that degrades the viral RNA during the synthesis of cDNA, as well as DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity that creates a sense DNA from the ''antisense'' cDNA.
On the view that that recombination in HIV is a repair process, the generation of recombinational variation would be a consequence, but not the cause of, the evolution of template switching.
Genetic studies of the virus suggest that the most recent common ancestor of the HIV-1 M group dates back to circa 1910.
Two RNA genomes are encapsidated in each HIV-1 particle (see Structure and genome of HIV).
Proponents of this dating link the HIV epidemic with the emergence of colonialism and growth of large colonial African cities, leading to social changes, including a higher degree of sexual promiscuity, the spread of prostitution, and the concomitant high frequency of genital ulcer diseases (such as syphilis) in nascent colonial cities.
Only specimens that are repeatedly reactive by ELISA and positive by IFA or reactive by western blot are considered HIV-positive and indicative of HIV infection.
The budded virion is still immature as the gag polyproteins still need to be cleaved into the actual matrix, capsid and nucleocapsid proteins.
The virus may have been present in the United States as early as the mid-to-late 1950s, as a sixteen-year-old male presented with symptoms in 1966 died in 1969.
This integrated viral DNA may then lie dormant, in the latent stage of HIV infection.
Specimens that are repeatedly ELISA-reactive occasionally provide an indeterminate western blot result, which may be either an incomplete antibody response to HIV in an infected person or nonspecific reactions in an uninfected person.
Some people are resistant to certain strains of HIV.
The RNA genome consists of at least seven structural landmarks (LTR, TAR, RRE, PE, SLIP, CRS, and INS), and nine genes (''gag'', ''pol'', and ''env'', ''tat'', ''rev'', ''nef'', ''vif'', ''vpr'', ''vpu'', and sometimes a tenth ''tev'', which is a fusion of tat env and rev), encoding 19 proteins.
The '''human immunodeficiency virus''' ('''HIV''') is a lentivirus (a subgroup of retrovirus) that causes HIV infection and over time acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
The Psi element is involved in viral genome packaging and recognized by Gag and Rev proteins.
The term viral tropism refers to the cell types a virus infects.
Whichever pathway is used, infection by cell-to-cell transfer is reported to be much more efficient than cell-free virus spread.
This cleavage is mediated by the also packaged viral protease and can be inhibited by antiretroviral drugs of the protease inhibitor class.
Recombinant trimeric viral spikes are promising vaccine candidates as they display less non-neutralising epitopes than recombinant monomeric gp120 which act to suppress the immune response to target epitopes.
This loop structure brings the virus and cell membranes close together, allowing fusion of the membranes and subsequent entry of the viral capsid.
Shortly after the viral capsid enters the cell, an enzyme called ''reverse transcriptase'' liberates the single-stranded (+)RNA genome from the attached viral proteins and copies it into a complementary DNA (cDNA) molecule.
Furthermore, the view that recombination is a repair process implies that the benefit of repair can occur at each replication cycle, and that this benefit can be realized whether or not the two genomes differ genetically.
Furthermore, due to its relatively low person-to-person transmission rate, it can only spread throughout the population in the presence of one or more of high-risk transmission channels, which are thought to have been absent in Africa prior to the 20th century.
HIV-1 is thought to have jumped the species barrier on at least three separate occasions, giving rise to the three groups of the virus, M, N, and O.
The closely related simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) has evolved into many strains, classified by the natural host species.
Since donors may therefore be unaware of their infection, donor blood and blood products used in medicine and medical research are routinely screened for HIV.
HIV can infect dendritic cells (DCs) by this CD4-CCR5 route, but another route using mannose-specific C-type lectin receptors such as DC-SIGN can also be used.
An alternative view holds that unsafe medical practices in Africa during years following World War II, such as unsterile reuse of single use syringes during mass vaccination, antibiotic, and anti-malaria treatment campaigns, were the initial vector that allowed the virus to adapt to humans and spread.
In the general press, the term ''GRID'', which stood for gay-related immune deficiency, had been coined.
The Env polyprotein (gp160) goes through the endoplasmic reticulum and is transported to the Golgi complex where it is cleaved by furin resulting in the two HIV envelope glycoproteins, gp41 and gp120.
The TAR may also be processed into microRNAs that regulate the apoptosis genes ERCC1 and IER3.
Firstly, an infected T cell can transmit virus directly to a target T cell via a virological synapse.
Because of its relatively poor capacity for transmission, HIV-2 is largely confined to West Africa.
The most prevalent are subtypes B (found mainly in North America and Europe), A and D (found mainly in Africa), and C (found mainly in Africa and Asia); these subtypes form branches in the phylogenetic tree representing the lineage of the M group of HIV-1.
For non-pathogenic SIV variants, Nef suppresses T-cell activation through the CD3 marker.
Repeat sequences in gp41, HR1, and HR2 then interact, causing the collapse of the extracellular portion of gp41 into a hairpin.
Dual-tropic HIV-1 strains are thought to be transitional strains of HIV-1 and thus are able to use both CCR5 and CXCR4 as co-receptors for viral entry.
HIV infection leads to low levels of CD4+ T cells through a number of mechanisms, including pyroptosis of abortively infected T cells, apoptosis of uninfected bystander cells, direct viral killing of infected cells, and killing of infected CD4+ T cells by CD8 cytotoxic lymphocytes that recognize infected cells.
SIV strains of the African green monkey (SIVagm) and sooty mangabey (SIVsmm) are thought to have a long evolutionary history with their hosts.
The Vpr protein (p14) arrests cell division at G2/M.
