The woman performs actions normally undertaken inside the house to the best of her ability."
In early 2016 Dawn reported a crackdown on HT
Since then Hizb ut-Tahrir has spread to more than 50 countries, and grown to a membership estimated to be between "tens of thousands" to "about one million".
Critics (Sardar, Kadri, Ahmed & Stuart) complain that the "particular sharia" advocated by HT  would contravene the standards and values of "universal human rights", and "was formulated in the ninth century and is frozen in history.
HT allegedly involved in two (failed) coup attempts in Jordan and Syria.
William Scates Frances argues that the groups are "embroiled in a bitter and ongoing feud" and are quite different in organizational structure, and—at least in Australia—in their supporters culture and demographics.
What has lost membership for the party has been the failure of rumored military takeovers by pro-caliphate forces to materialize in Pakistan or other Muslim countries.
A 2002 HTB conference in London drew 6,500 people, and a conference the next year in Birmingham drew 7,000.
By the mid-1990s, Hizb was "a fixture on university campuses, organising societies and debates", known for its "fierce" rhetoric, young audiences, and aloofness from other Muslim organizations or initiatives.
However, it is still in operation as a clandestine organization.
Men and women are to be segregated in public except when absolutely necessary according to HT Draft Constitution.
Sahloul added that "We cannot deny people of speaking freely, but we believe that these kind of radical ideologies are not helpful."
Baran lists four groups involving former HT members, the most noted being Omar Bakri Muhammad's group Al-Muhajiroun.
The group's representative in Germany Assem Shaker responded that the group was not anti-Semitic.
The ban was lifted in 2005.
According to scholar David Commins, the "liberation of Palestine" from Israel was the original "primary concern" of Hizb ut-Tahrir, with the project of setting up a unitary "Islamic state that would revive the "true" Islamic order throughout the Muslim world coming later.
Uzbekistan has been called the sight of the "main ideological battle of competition over the region’s future".
Attacks on Muslims, whether they be arrest and torture in Uzbekistan, executions in China, or attacks by Hindu mobs in India,  are actually "orchestrated and sanctioned by the head of Kufr, America".
Imam Ramee, an American, spoke on behalf of HT while living in Manchester, and was the featured speaker at the HT organized Muslim Unity Action March against the war in Iraq on March 15, 2003.
The ''Mu’tamad'' is appointed by the central committee.
The party demonstrated for hijab at the French embassy in London protesting France’s March 2004 law banning the wearing of religious symbols in state schools,
''wilaya''s have an executive committee which is charged with executing the administrative affairs and elected every two years by the membership of the party in the ''wilaya''.
In June 2003 Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) arrested 121 illegal immigrants suspected of having ties with Hizb ut-Tahrir al-Islami.
According to Michael Whine, a "partial list" of "terrorists who were also HT members and/or influenced by its teachings" in Britain includes: Faisal Moustafa, Shafihur Rehman and Iftikar Sattar, who in 1995 were arrested and charged with conspiring to assassinate the Israeli ambassador, were reported to have been in possession of HT literature and to have helped organize HT meetings in Manchester.
A 2004 report by the Nixon Center states "credible reports" indicate that HT members have been "involved in coup attempts in Jordan, Syria, Egypt, Tunisia and Iraq."
Hizb ut-Tahrir forthrightly advocates women's (i.e.
and Great Britain declare war against Islam and
Therefore, the army was an army that belonged to a state.'
Schily banned Hizb ut-Tahrir three months later, for going "against the concept of international understanding" contained in the German constitution, a charge that has been used in the past against neo-Nazi groups.
In origin, no one likes the Jews except the Jews.
According to HT founder an-Nabhani, "the husband performs all work undertaken outside of the house.
The "head of Kufr (unbelief)" is the United States  and its international domination "a danger to the world" which "only the Khilafah can save” it from, according to HT statements.
Taji-Farouki describes HT as "operating openly despite" a 2003 ban.
Hizb ut-Tahrir states its aim as unification of all Muslim countries (or as it calls them "Islamic lands")
The author, now a moderate Muslim, is opposed to the ideology of Hizb ut-Tahrir and critical of the consequences of political Islam poisoning young minds.
"The fierce struggle between the Islamic thoughts and the Kufr thoughts, ... will continue ... – a bloody struggle alongside the intellectual struggle – until the Hour comes and Allah (swt) inherits the Earth and those on it.
Later statements by HT spokespersons also emphasize the importance of Islamic control of every bit of Palestine (Taji Mustafa in 2008) and rejecting negotiation in favor of military Jihad (Imran Wahid, January 2009)
The ''Kharaj'' ... is a right imposed on the neck of the land that has been conquered from the ''Kuffar'' by way of war or by way of peaceful agreement, provided that the peace agreement stipulates that the land is ours (i.e.
Know that the Jews and their usurping state in Palestine will, by the Help and Mercy of Allah, be destroyed "until the stones and trees will say: O Muslim, O Slave of Allah.
Conservative news media and politicians attacked state funding for the two primary schools and the debate sponsors were compelled to return some of the funding provided by the Hamlets council.
For monetary policy the constitution calls for use of the Gold Standard, and gold and silver coinage.
Hizb ut-Tahrir (which was founded in Palestine by Palestinians) strongly opposes Zionism and existence of the state of Israel, or any compromise or peaceful relations with that state.
And a 2008 HT press release called the reluctance of  Pakistan Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani to "fight a war with America" "shameful", citing Pakistan's possession of "nuclear weapons, missiles technology and half a million brave soldiers who are ready to attain martyrdom for Islam".
(The party later denounced him as an American agent.)
Conscription is compulsory for all male Muslims 15 and over in the proposed state "in readiness for jihad."
Even they themselves rarely like each other....
and the ''Daily Telegraph'' of Australia.)
Hizb ut-Tahrir Britain was led by Syrian-born Omar Bakri Muhammad from 1986 to 1996.
A range of disciplinary measures are applied to members who break the rules, with expulsion being the most severe.
The party claims it "works to cultivate a Muslim community that ... adhers to the rules of Islam and preserves a strong Islamic identity"; to "project a positive image of Islam" and "engages in dialogue with Western thinkers, policymakers and academics", but "does not work ... to change the system of government".
Regarding debate and amendment of legal rulings of the caliph, articles 3 and 35a of the proposed constitution stipulate that they must be obeyed.
They obstruct you from undertaking the obligation Allah has obliged upon you, the Jihaad and the eradication of the Jews.
*In Britain: Faisal Moustafa, Shafihur Rehman and Iftikar Sattar, who in 1995 were arrested and charged with conspiring to assassinate the Israeli ambassador, were reported to have been in possession of HT literature and to have helped organize HT meetings in Manchester.
The invasion and subsequent occupation helps HT by raising consciousness among Muslims of a "global ''umma''" and by lowering Muslims' opinion of the United States -- the leader of the invasion and (according to HT) the "head of ''Kufr''".
2,) says concerning non-Muslim states, "…If they accepted to pay the ''jizyah'' but refused to be ruled by Islam, it is not allowed to accept this from them because the cause of fighting – which is that they are disbelievers who have refused to accept the ''da’wah'' – remains standing so fighting them remains obligatory… "
this will create a base.
One HT member in Iraq, Abu Abdullah Al-Kurdi, claimed in a 2008 interview that the party has two offices in Baghdad, which American forces allegedly bombed, killing one HT activist.
There were arrests in Jordan, Morocco, Tunisia, and visible public activities in the Palestinian territories, Zanzibar, and Lebanon, enjoying growing support among senior army staff, government officials, and the intelligentsia.
HT declares that the Muslims had reached a state of total surrender and despair and are not responding to its call.
In March and April 2002, Hizb Ut Tahrir handed out leaflets in a square in Copenhagen, and at a mosque.
;Expansion to non-Muslim lands
Omar Khan Sharif and Asif Hanif, the Mike’s Place suicide bombers, had contact with HT before moving on to more extreme organisations.
(Use of the punishments of ‘chopping off’ of hands for theft and stoning to death for adultery, would become law in the HT caliphate was confirmed in a 2009 interview of Tayyib Muqeem, a HT leader.)
Another source  describes HT as supporting the "destruction of Israel", but seeing this as the job of the Caliphate, which must be founded first for this to take place.
In the civil war that followed the US invasion, HT has called for Sunni, Shia, Arab and Kurdish citizens to unite.
Hizb ut-Tahrir is very active in Western countries, particularly in the United Kingdom, and also in several Arab and Central Asian countries, despite being banned by some governments.
HT begins "Interaction Stage" in Jordan.
Because Western democracy gives not just authority but sovereignty to the people, it is "deeply flawed"—a "''Kufr'' system" that violates sharia, is "controlled by large corporations and largely indifferent to the needs of ordinary citizens".
According to HT, in July 2009, “100s” of its activists were arrested and authorities stopped the HT 2009 annual conference from being held.
The officers had allegedly attempted to recruit officers to their group "including the commander of the army’s 111 Brigade, which covers the capital and has been historically linked to army coups."
The Australian HT Media Pack describes Western governments as "the major obstacle to positive change in the Muslim World".
This animosity is fueled by a wish for revenge and manifests itself in ‘oppression, humiliation, colonization and exploitation.
And the ''Dīn'' of Muhammad (saw) will prevail over all other ways of life including Western Capitalism and the culture of Western Liberalism”.
Founder and leader Taqiuddin al-Nabhani dies in Lebanon.
(In reply conservative columnist Andrew Giligan writes: "In fact, at least 19 terrorists convicted in Britain have had links with al-Muhajiroun, including Omar Khayam, sentenced to life imprisonment as leader of the “fertiliser bomb” plot, and Abdullah Ahmed Ali, the ringleader of the airliner “liquid bomb” plot, who is also serving life.")
Sheikh Nabhani considered Western animosity to Islam as a constant ever since the Crusades.
The Egyptian government banned Hizb ut-Tahrir in 1974 after an alleged coup attempt.
The party plans its political progress in three stages, taking after the process "by which the Prophet Muhammad established the Caliphate in thirteen years."
To "achieve its objective" HT seeks "to gain the leadership of the Islamic ''Ummah'' Islamic community" so that the community will "accept it as her the community's leader, to implement Islam upon her and proceed with it in her struggle against the ''Kuffar'' (unbelievers) and in the work towards the return of the Islamic State ..."
In the HT Draft Constitution,  Article 7 declares that Muslims who "have by themselves renounced Islam... are guilty of apostasy (ridda) from Islam are to be executed."
O Muslims: Your brothers in Palestine are calling you, and you feel the pain to help them.
At least one HT text (''How the Khilafah was Destroyed'' written by Abdul Qadeem Zallum, HT global leader from 1977 to 2003) emphasizes the importance of the "rule of Shariah" calling for the killing of apostates from Islam (those who have left Islam).
Prospective HT members study the "core books" of HT in preparation for being accepted as members.
Article of the constitution detail such points as metals to be used in currency (silver and gold), age at which Muslims males will begin military training (15), the "sole language of the state" (Arabic), and obedience of wives to their husbands.
HT talks about a “bloodless” coup, aka ''nussrah'', for the facilitation of "a change of the government".
The Islamic state will not "adopt a particular" Madhhab (school of fiqh)..) According to  Forum 18 News Service, it was told by an HT representative that "the only true Muslims" are those who adhere to one of the four Sunni madhhabs, and "those who depart" the four "would be considered as apostates and liable to punishment according to Islamic law."
One, (known as ''Muqadimmat ul-Dustur aw asbab ul-Muwajjabbat lah'' or  "The Introduction to the Constitution or the Causes of its Obligation",)  noted those in the ''Dar al-Harb'' ("House of War", i.e.
However, HT founder An-Nabhani writing in his book ''The Islamic Personality, Vol.
One observer (Zeyno Baran) has argued that statements by US President George W. Bush (the war on terrorism is a "crusade", “you are either with us or against us”)) and at least one US military leader (U.S. Army Lt. General Jerry Boykin: “I knew my God is bigger than Osama bin Laden’s),) and actions such as civilian deaths in the War in Iraq, have alarmed many Muslims and played into the HT message.
The HT "Information Pack" for the Britain Media states that "the suggestion that Hizb ut-Tahrir will be permitted to engage in an armed struggle when the Caliphate re-emerges, is absolutely false",
It is the most populous former-Soviet Central Asian country, and possessor of the region’s "largest and most effective army".
2'', stresses that the need to fight ''kufr'' extends to Muslims living outside the land of Islam (''Dar al-Islam'').
They forbid the hijacking of civilian aeroplanes carrying innocent civilians and forbid the destruction of homes and offices that contain innocent civilians."
;Draft Constitution
Baran argues that as members become "impatience with the lack of success HT has had so far in overthrowing governments", they leave the party to create/join "splinter groups" less wedded to the idea that attacks on "enemies of Islam" must wait for a caliph.
The British website of Hizb ut-Tahrir states that the party uses the methods "employed by the Prophet Muhammad who limited his struggle for the establishment of the Islamic State to intellectual and political work.
The ''mushrif'' leads a study-circle and supervises its members study the HT ideology, listening to readings from books by the party’s founder, Nabhani, particularly ''Nidham al-Islam'', or ''the System of Islam'', which "lays out Nabhani’s vision of an `Islamic` state" and "refutes" other Arab political ideologies.
In the organization itself, women are thought to comprise 10% of HT’s membership, playing an "active role" in "intellectual and political work" such as conferences held by the UK women’s section of HT, and following a dress code of ''jilbab'' (a loose dress), ''Khimar'' (headscarf) and socks, so similar it has been compared to a "uniform-like style".
as an example of the anti-Muslim wrongdoing by Westerners.
*the historical Abbasid and Ottoman caliphates were "ignored or opposed by five of the civilizations HT seemed to think it had governed".
At HTB’s 2003 annual conference, an HTB member warned the audience:
*In Germany, HT leader Shaker Assem lectured to the 9/11 terrorists after one of the plot leaders, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, facilitated his introduction.
To avoid infiltration by security agents and maintain ideological coherence in a pyramid-like group, the party enforces internal discipline and obedience to the central leadership.
(the Lebanese branch of the MB), Hizbollah and Hamas, met in Lebanon to oppose US President Barack Obama’s Arab-Israeli peace plan.
Once one or more Muslim countries coming under the organization’s control (such as Pakistan, Indonesia or a country in Central Asia)
Members should accept the goals and methods of the organization as their own and be ready to work to fulfill these goals.
It changes them frequently, using a number of languages.
Although it has its "agents" in power throughout  the Muslim world, the US is using capitalism (i.e.
Prior to the civil war, in Syria, party members, along with their relatives and acquaintances, were subject to repeated extrajudicial arrest.
(This process of what the party calls “intellectual transformation through political and cultural interaction”, attempts to imitate Muhmmad's using his core of supporters to win over the population of Mecca and later Medina.)
One revivalist Muslim opponent of the HT position on boycotting elections in Western  democracies,
Party revises its method.
He was succeeded by Shaykh Abdul Qadeem Zallum who led HT until his death in 2003.
It follows the path of a young man coming to terms with his extremist/Islamist mindset.
The book ''The Islamist'' by Ed Husain, reveals the inner workings of the political organisation.
In a pamphlet titled ‘An Open Letter to the Muslims in Britain regarding the Dangerous Call of Integration’, it warns that Integration into Western society and secularism are a way to "keep Islam completely away from their lives such that nothing remains of it but spiritualistic rituals conducted in the places of worship and a few pages in books of history".
(Ibrahima had been raised Christian and married a Christian but her absent father was a Muslim so the court ruled her marriage was an act of fornication and apostacy.)
Stage two involves penetration into government positions and military special forces," according to HT critic Zeyno Baran.
The head of the HT media office stated that “the party will concentrate on an ideological and political call (da’wah) using argument and persuasion and conducting lectures, philosophical and political conferences, campaigns, forming and sending political delegations, etc.”
Four different "camps" develop.
And they have the right to do so."
The new caliphate would unify the Muslim community (''Ummah'') in a unitary (not federal)   "superstate" of unified Muslim-majority countries spanning from Morocco in West Africa to the southern Philippines in East Asia.
According to an analyst of Hizb ut-Tahrir in Kazakhstan, where the group is outlawed: "First they convert new members.
Members typically meet in small private study circles, but in countries where the group is not illegal (such as Europe) it also engages with the media and organises rallies and conferences.
and it survived proposed bans in Australia and the UK after clearance from the intelligence services and police.
that proof of their commitment is the number of members who "have been imprisoned, tortured and even killed for their beliefs," but resisted resorting to violence;  and that the party helps channel Muslim "anger and frustration over events in the Muslim world towards positive political work".
So that "Spain is indeed an Islamic country".
Çelebi was allegedly the key that made possible the arrest of five Hizb ut-Tahrir members in September 2008.
In 2002 HT Denmark was also accused of produced "a ‘hit list’ of 15 to twenty leading members of Denmark’s Jewish community.”
However, according to Jean-François Mayer of the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs, the insinuation "that the party will turn violent and has links with the IMU" is inaccurate; the comments attributed to a member "contradicted the party's ideas".
in  Turkmenistan in part at least because of the nomadic nature of the population, the relatively shallow Islamic roots in its culture, and the extreme repression of the government.
of leaflets deemed as disturbing public order.’
British HT members gathered outside London Central Mosque in Regent’s Park in an attempt
Critics (Houriya Ahmed and Hannah Stuart of The Centre for Social Cohesion) complain that non-Muslims living the caliphate are not included among those giving "popular consent" nor able to serve in the government, while the judges ruling over any recall attempt of the caliph are appointed by him or by a judge (the Supreme Judge) who is appointed by the Caliph.
...’ Modern Europe is engaged in a cultural Crusade against Islam.
According to ''Today's Zaman'', lieutenant Mehmet Ali Çelebi, detained in the Ergenekon investigations in 2008, allegedly had links with Hizb ut-Tahrir.
One observer (Olivier Roy) describes the strategy as “global, grassroots revolution, culminating in a sudden, millenarian victory", as opposed to a slog through a political process
;Justifying terrorism and the "conveyor belt"
Critics have pointed out differences between party texts and public statements and  accused HT of varying its "message to suit different audiences", or of attempting to "soften" its public image (by deleting pamphlets from its website and other means), "as a defensive reaction to increased scrutiny," while leaving its original strategy/ideology untouched.
The constitution states the Caliph "possesses all the powers and function of the State ..." appointing and dismissing the governors and assistants of all the provinces of caliphate,  the directors of departments, the heads of the armed forces and the generals, the chief judge and most judges, "who are all responsible to the ''Khaleefah'' Caliph and not to the ''Majlis al-Ummah''" (according to Article 35e of the constitution).
According to the same book, the Muslim world fell behind the West, (or other non-Muslim societies) not because it has failed to borrow some political, cultural or social concepts these civilizations had to offer, but because it did:
On 24 July 2009, Turkish police arrested almost 200 people suspected of being members of Hizb ut-Tahrir.
Hizb ut-Tahrir political doctrine has been said to be founded on two principles:
''Radical'' was released in the UK in 2012; a US edition was published by Lyons Press in October 2013 with a preface for US readers and an updated epilogue.
The HT constitution also include rights such as assumption of innocence until proven guilty, due process, a ban on torture.
Along with the establishment of an Islamic State, Hizb ut-Tahrir's other main principle/objective is the enforcement of shariah law to regulate all aspects of human life— politics, economics, sciences, and ethics.
The president of the National Union of Students (NUS), declared HTB as ‘the single biggest extremism threat in the UK at the moment’.
Non-Muslim would be subject to the same laws and in addition would be subject to special taxes—the poll tax of ''jizya'' and the land tax of ''Kharaj''.
Allah is the Witness of my words”.
Muslims who claim that the freedom of belief does not contradict Islam are among the "trumpets of the ''Kuffar''" (unbelievers).
The anti-semitism charges were not upheld in German courts, but the ban was continued based on the state's finding that the group's activity opposed the idea of understanding among nations and endorsed force as a means towards its political aims.
In '''Central Asia''', the party has expanded since the breakup of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s from a small group to "one of the most powerful organizations" operating in Central Asia.
The "basis" of the party's "ideological platform" has been described as the writings of its deceased founder al-Nabhani, "unchanged in the last 50 years" and unlikely to be, as "any major changes" might "undermine" party unity.
Although in public pronouncements the party has criticised the 9/11 and 7/7  terror attacks, it has declared the "war on terrorism" to be not just overreach or arrogant disregard for Muslim lives, but a "disguise" for a "ruthless campaign against Islam and Muslims".
They demand the return of God's rule on Earth.
As in other parts of Central Asia the party has been designated "terrorist" by the government and is banned.
Critics complain HT has invoked "freedom of speech, tolerance, ... human rights and democracy" when it was under threat of proscription in 2005.
Representatives of Hizb ut-Tahrir report that they have repeatedly attempted to contact Ahmed Rashid in order to make their views known, but say they have not succeeded.
HT "reject(s) the charge" of "inciting others to commit violent acts", maintaining that there are "many academics that reject the allegation".
HT sources differ over whether dress for women is not a matter of choice.
'''Hizb ut-Tahrir''' ( ''Ḥizb at-Taḥrīr''; ''Party of Liberation'') is a radical, international, pan-Islamic political organisation, which describes its "ideology as Islam", and its aim as the re-establishment of "the Islamic Khilafah (Caliphate)" or Islamic state.
Mohammed M. Ramadan, a Libyan journalist and announcer at the BBC's Arabic section in London, was a member of Hizb ut-Tahrir and opposed to the regime of Colonel Muammar al-Gaddafi.
The leaders issued a statement concluding that the plan ‘poses one of the most dangerous American plans in the region.’ They also said that the plan: ‘… needs to be opposed in all possible forms, in particular by increasing acts of resistance … and opposing Israeli efforts towards a normalisation of their relations with Arab countries….’ The leaders further added that the “monopolisation” of Palestinian leadership by President Abbas must be challenged, and the choice of resistance against US plans should
Abdelatif was also found guilty of threats against the Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen.
Human rights groups have complained that authorities were increasingly becoming repressive and planting evidence on Muslims to justify charges.
Unlike many court systems the caliphate would have no courts of appeal or cessation.
and insisting "Peace with Israel" was "a Crime Against Islam".
The network of underground cells resembles that of the successful Bolshevik revolutionaries in Russia.
Other Muslim countries will be convinced to join and a "domino effect" will be created to establish a new caliphate.
The organization was founded in 1953 as a Sunni Muslim organization in Jerusalem by Taqiuddin al-Nabhani, an Islamic scholar and appeals court judge ''(Qadi)'' from Palestine.
Self-intentified Muslims alleged to be Jews by the party include Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, (the founder of the modern Turkish state who disbanded the Ottoman caliphate), and Islam Karimov, (the authoritarian ruler of Uzbekistan who has reportedly detained HT members without charge or trial for lengthy periods, tortured and subject them to unfair trials).
The party principle of overthrowing existing Muslim governments has been questioned as a violation of the ayah
At the provincial level, there is a committee headed by a provincial representative (''Mu’tamad'') who oversees group activities.
The basic unit of the party is a cell of five members, the leader of which is called a ''mushrif''.
The court rejected his claims that he was just quoting from the Koran, that it was an act of free speech and that it was aimed only at the Israeli state and not Jews.
Since the organization will not reveal its leadership, the "only public face" of Hizb ut-Tahrir in Australia is its “media spokesmen”.
(Journalist Khaled Diab)
Another facet of "Capitalism" opposed by the party is the Western concept of "compromise"—an example of its unIslamic nature is the proposed compromise solution of allowing both Jews and Muslims to have a state in Palestine.
... A truly Islamic woman would say she wore her headscarf in obedience to the Creator whether the Creator gave reasons or not."
After fifty years of covert activity in Lebanon, the Lebanese government approved the registration of HT as a political party.
As of 2004 there were at least seven websites "related directly" to HT.
(America is commonly referred to as "the head of kufr" (unbelief) by HT.
But critics complain that the HT draft constitution describes the Caliph as simply "the State".
or requires only an "amir" to lead Muslims (''Hizb ut-Tahrir'' pamphlet).
"Democracy, pluralism, human rights and free market policies"), to suppress Islam", as it fears the revival of Islam and "the return" of "the Khilafah State",
Party acknowledges that this had caused the level of activity to decline almost to standstill, mainly due to misconceptions.
The "About Us" section of the Hizb ut-Tahrir "Official Website" states  "Hizb ut-Tahrir is determined to work within the Ummah in order to implement Islam and achieve its objective by endeavouring to gain the leadership of the Islamic Ummah so that she could accept it as her leader, to implement Islam upon her and proceed with it in her struggle against the Kuffar ..." But according to a former leader in the UK, Jalaluddin Patel, once the caliphate has been established, HT "will never assume the role of a vanguard party".
on a list of banned terrorist organizations.
This, it holds, is an obligation decreed by God, warning that he will punish those Muslims "who neglect this duty."
In 1983, 30 men, including the head of the Tunisian HT branch, were arrested, charged with membership of an illegal organisation and attempting to overthrow the government in order to replace it with a Caliphate.
Zaher Sahloul, who is the chairman of the Council of Islamic Organizations of Greater Chicago and president of the Mosque Foundation of Bridgeview, stated that "Hizb ut-Tahrir's is on the fringes of the political Islamic groups.
Central Asian governments have been accused of torturing Hizb ut-Tahrir members and violating international law in their campaigns against the group.
About Hizb ut-Tahrir's activities in Pakistan and subsequent political crackdown Multan Bench of the Lahore High Court said in March 2005 : "Hizb ut-Tahrir has shown dissatisfaction on the policies of the Pakistan government that is the right of each and every citizen ...
Mohammad Babar, who is linked to the seven men currently on trial in London on charges of planning terrorist attacks between January 2003 and April 2004, has stated that he was a member of HT while in college.
Globalsecurity.org, describes Hizb ut-Tahrir's position as not being "against violence as such ... just against the use of violence now."
According to HT critics, labelling Muslims who "do not adhere" to HT positions, "Jews" is "not uncommon" in HT.
At the time of HT’s founding in the West Bank that area was under the control of the Kingdom of Jordan, and one HT member (Ahmad Ad-Da’ur) won a seat in Jordan's parliament.
Since the civil war started in 2011, HT reports that it is engaged in ''dawah'' in Syria as of 2013,
Hizb ut-Tahrir has used the term "one state solution" for the Israel/Palestine dispute ("Palestine&nbsp;– why only a one state solution will work").
In addition to the five ex-Soviet states of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan, the adjacent republic of Afghanistan, which was never part of the Soviet Union,  and Chinese province of Xinjiang, are (or at least traditionally were in the case of Xinjiang) Muslim majority areas of Central Asia.
