* The Church mourns for Christ's death, reveres the Cross, and marvels at his life for his obedience until death.
This day is related to the events of Holy Week in that  tells of a visit of Jesus to Lazarus immediately before recounting the events of Palm Sunday.
After the sermon, a choir inside the open doors of the church sings the Miserere by Manoel Dias de Oliveria, while the black box is brought inside the church, and people come in to kiss the human-sized figure of Christ.
The Mass of the Lord's Supper commemorates the Last Supper of Jesus with his Twelve Apostles, "the institution of the Eucharist, the institution of the priesthood, and the commandment of brotherly love that Jesus gave after washing the feet of his disciples."
Likewise, each night service is also divided into the same five hours.
* Outside the afternoon liturgical celebration, the altar remains completely bare in Catholic churches, without altar cloth, candlesticks, or cross.
The Campanha Holy Week begins on the Monday evening with the Procession of the Deposit.
Throughout Holy Week, a paschal service is conducted each evening, starting on Sunday night (the eve of Monday), and every morning, up until Easter.
If a bishop celebrates, he wears a plain mitre.
Holy Week has developed into one of Brazil's main symbols of community identity, more specifically in the southern town of Campanha.
*On Wednesday, some observe the story of Judas arranging his betrayal of Jesus with the high priests ().
Also, before the liturgy the priests wash the feet of the congregation in imitation of Jesus washing his disciples' feet.
In the Lutheran and Methodist churches, the altar is usually draped in black.
Thus, it is the matins service of Great Monday that is on "Palm Sunday" evening in parish churches and often vespers is in the morning.
In Málaga the lifelike wooden or plaster sculptures are called "tronos" and they are carried through the streets by "costaleros" ( Translated literally as "sack men", because of the ''costal'', a sack-like cloth that they wear over their neck, to soften the burden).
The days between Palm Sunday and Holy Thursday are known as Holy Monday, Holy Tuesday, and Holy Wednesday.
Then it is solemnly taken to the church following a band and a procession of people.
* On Tuesday, some observe Jesus' predictions of his own death, as described in () and ().
This new fire symbolizes the light of salvation and hope that God brought into the world through Christ's Resurrection, dispelling the darkness of sin and death.
In front of them walk the penitentes, dressed in long purple robes, often with pointed hats, followed by women in black carrying candles for up to 11 hours.
The service is known as the "Orthros of Lamentations at the Tomb", because the majority of the service is composed of the clergy and faithful gathered around the tomb, chanting the "Lamentations" interspersed between the verses of Kathisma XVII (Psalm 118).
The heavy ''andas'' are held by the locals, both men and women, who are frequently in purple robes.
Because it is a Great Feast of the Lord, the normal resurrectional elements of the Sunday services are omitted.
Just before the reading of the Gospel, the hangings and vestments and changed from dark lenten colors to white, and the entire mood of the service changes from mourning to joy.
If there are catechumens who are prepared for baptism they are baptized and chrismated during the Old Testament readings.
Each Old Testament reading is followed by a psalm or canticle (such as  and a prayer relating what has been read to the Mystery of Christ.
Processions in Gozo will be in Nadur, Victoria, Xagħra Xewkija, and Żebbuġ.
The same theme is repeated in the exapostilarion, a hymn which occurs near the end of the service.
The light is spread from person to person until everyone holds a lighted candle.
In some countries, such as Malta, Philippines, Italy and Spain, processions with statues representing the Passion of Christ are held.
This cross will remain in the center of the church until the bringing out of the plashchanitza the next evening.
On the afternoon of Easter Day, a joyful service called "Agape Vespers" is celebrated During this service the Great Prokeimenon is chanted and a lesson from the Gospel () is read in as many different languages as possible, accompanied by the joyful ringing of bells.
Matins of Great and Holy Friday is celebrated on the evening of Holy Thursday.
The people venerate it on their knees.
Sunday is a much-anticipated celebration of Christ’s resurrection filled with beautiful flowers and fireworks.
The blessing is thus followed by a procession or solemn entrance into the church, with the participants holding the blessed branches in their hands.
The figure used to be beaten after the Crucifixion performance on Good Friday, but is now treated more calmly.
Late Friday night until early Saturday morning is called Apocalypse Night.
It does not include Easter Sunday, although traditions observing the Easter Triduum may overlap or displace part of Holy Week or Easter itself within that additional liturgical period.
O Lord, the woman who had fallen into many sins, sensing Your Divinity, takes upon herself the duty of a myrrh-bearer.
Since the Orthodox liturgical day starts at sunset (as it has from antiquity), Holy Monday services begin Sunday evening, at the normal timing for Monday Vespers (Vespers is the first service of the day).
During the eve of Friday, four gospel passages are read, and more prophecies are read as well.
The procession stops in front of the closed doors of the church.
Vespers joined to the Divine Liturgy is served on Great and Holy Saturday, prescribed by the Liturgical books to be served in the afternoon but often served in the morning.
On Saturday morning a drama is performed by the youth.
In the Catholic Church, the altars of the church (except the one used for altar of repose) are later stripped quite bare and, to the extent possible, crosses are removed from the church or veiled.
Of the particular days of the "great week" the earliest to emerge into special prominence was naturally Good Friday.
These paschal services take place in the middle of the church, not on the altar, because Jesus suffered and was crucified on Golgotha, outside of Jerusalem.
A brass band, marching band, a drum and bugle band, or in the cases of Cartagena and Málaga a military band (such as that of the Spanish Legion or other military units) may accompany the group, playing funeral marches, hymns or "marchas" written for the occasion.
Tenebrae (Latin for "shadows" or "darkness") is celebrated within Western Christianity on the evening before or early morning of Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and Holy Saturday.
This practice started during the Spanish times, originally called the encuentro.
Holy Week in Guatemala incorporates processions with images of saints carried on huge wooden platforms.
Its date is exactly a week before Good Friday.
However, some of these resurrectional elements are found in the Lazarus Saturday service.
A procession then circles around the outside of the church, recreating the journey of the Myrrh Bearers as they journeyed to the Tomb of Jesus on the first Easter morning.
On Holy Thursday, after services, the faithful will visit several Churches where they will pray in front of each church's Altar of Repose.
Next came the ''Sabbatum Magnum'' ("Great Sabbath", i.e., Holy Saturday or Easter Eve) with its vigil, which in the early church was associated with an expectation that the second advent would occur on an Easter Sunday.
Among Lutherans and Anglicans, the day is known as the Sunday of the Passion: Palm Sunday.
On this day wine and oil are allowed (and, in the Russian tradition, caviar), lightening the fast by one degree.
These services follow much the same pattern as services on weekdays of Great Lent.
As this symbolic "Light of Christ" spreads throughout those gathered, the darkness is decreased.
While there is no celebration of the Eucharist, Holy Communion is distributed to the faithful only in the Service of the Passion of the Lord, but can be taken at any hour to the sick who are unable to attend this service.
After 15:00 PHT on Good Friday (the time at which Jesus is traditionally believed to have died), noise is discouraged, many radio stations and television stations close down (some remain on-air, broadcasting religious programming, with non-Catholic owned stations continuing broadcast), businesses automatically close, and the faithful are urged to keep a solemn and prayerful disposition through to Easter Sunday.
Receive the fountain of my tears, O You who gathers into clouds the waters of the sea.
The Misteri are amongst the oldest continuously running religious events in Europe, having been played every Good Friday since before the Easter of 1612, and running for at least 16 continuous hours, but occasionally well beyond the 24 hours; they are the longest religious festival in Sicily and in Italy.
It is the first day of the new season of the Great Fifty Days, or Eastertide, which runs from Easter Sunday to Pentecost Sunday.
In many Latin American countries, such as Mexico, Brazil, Nicaragua, Guatemala and Peru, as well as in Spain and the Philippines, this Friday feast of Our Lady of Sorrows is called ''Viernes de Dolores'' (Friday of Sorrows).
The Good Friday service is not a Mass, and in fact, celebration of Catholic Mass on Good Friday is forbidden.
This is in commemoration of the anointing of Jesus, and a preparation of the faithful to enter with Christ into his death and Resurrection.
* In the Catholic Church, the only sacraments celebrated are Penance and Anointing of the Sick.
Easter morning is marked with joyous celebration, the first being the dawn Salubong, wherein large statues of Jesus and Mary are brought in procession together to meet, imagining the first reunion of Jesus and his mother Mary after Jesus' Resurrection.
During each hour, one prophecy is read at the beginning, a hymn is chanted twelve times, a psalm is sung in a sad tune, one passage from a gospel is read, and an exposition concludes the hour.
It is the Eucharist consecrated the evening before (Holy Thursday) that is distributed.
Then the deacon or a cantor chants the Exultet (also called the "Easter Proclamation"), After that, the people put aside their candles and sit down for the Liturgy of the Word.
However, fasting is always adjusted to the needs of the individual, and those who are very young, ill or elderly are not expected to fast as strictly.
This is followed by the joyous Easter Mass.
On Great and Holy Friday morning the Royal Hours are served.
During the meal, Jesus predicted the events that would immediately follow, including his betrayal, the Denial of Peter, and his death and resurrection.
In Mexico, Holy Week vacations replace spring break in its entirety, and some processions like the Iztapalapa Passion Play can draw over 2 million spectators.
For many southern cities such as Seville, Holy Week is the most important period of the year, during which the entire city comes to a standstill, while processions of local venerated icons are held from the afternoon to the morning of the next day.
As the Sabbath day, the Gospel accounts all note that Jesus was hurriedly buried in a cave tomb after his crucifixion, with the intent to finish proper embalming and burial ceremonies on Sunday, after the Sabbath had ended, as the Sabbath day prohibitions would have prevented observant Jews from completing a proper burial.
The Anglican Communion defines fasting more generically as: "The amount of food eaten is reduced."
During the Eucharist, the newly baptised receive Holy Communion for the first time.
Near the end of the service, the Epitaphios is carried in a candlelit procession around the outside of the church as the faithful sing the Trisagion.
However, during Holy Week, in most parishes, many service times are advanced from six to twelve hours in time and celebrated in anticipation, which permits more of the faithful to attend the most prominent services.
This is the ''Proti Anastasi'' (First Resurrection) service, commemorating the Harrowing of Hell.
Incline unto me,  unto the sighings of my heart, O You who bowed the heavens by your ineffable condescension.
On Thursday of Holy Week, also called Covenant Thursday, a liturgy is prayed and communion is given to symbolize the Last Supper of Jesus.
Processions on Tuesday and Wednesday stop at different chapels at each of which a large painting portrays episodes of the Way of the Cross and a related hymn is sung at each.
Many Filipinos bring home the palm leaves after the Mass and place these above their front doors or their windows, believing that doing so can ward off evil spirits.
Those who are able may receive the blessing of their spiritual father to observe an even stricter fast, whereby they eat only two meals that week: one on Wednesday night and one after Divine Liturgy on Thursday.
that we may cling more firmly each day
With lamentations she brings you myrrh in anticipation of your entombment.
in contemplating the Passion of Christ,
After the Old Testament readings conclude, the Gloria in excelsis Deo, which has been suspended during Lent, is intoned and bells are rung
On Thursday morning the Chrism Mass is celebrated, with a blessing of the oils.
In the Roman Catholic Church and (optionally) in the Anglican Church, a sufficient number of hosts are consecrated for use also in the Good Friday service, and at the conclusion the Blessed Sacrament is carried in procession to a place of reposition away from the main body of the church, which, if it involves an altar, is often called an "altar of repose".
In the darkness (often in a side chapel of the church building or, preferably, outside the church), a new fire is kindled and blessed by the priest.
Today, in the Western Christian Church, among Lutherans, Anglicans, Methodists, Presbyterians and Roman Catholics, the liturgies used for Holy Week are nearly identical.
Divine Liturgy of the Last Supper is held on the morning of Great and Holy Thursday, combining Vespers with the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great.
The services are so laid out that the entire Psalter (with the exception of Kathisma XVII) is chanted on the first three days of Holy Week.
:''Communion service'': Hosts consecrated  at the Mass of the previous day are distributed to the people.
Since the liturgical day starts from the evening before a calendar day, the prayers of Palm Sunday begin on the evening of Lazarus' Saturday.
Easter processions begin at sunrise and everyone comes to join the festivities.
During this part, the "Reproaches" are often sung.
All the bells of the church, including altar bells, may be rung during the ''Gloria in Excelsis Deo'' of the Mass (the Gloria is not traditionally sung during the entire Lenten season).
On this day a special service called "The Unction of the Sick" is conducted.
Then, the priest lights a single candle from the eternal flame on the altar (which is never extinguished).
Palm Sunday is considered one of the Great Feasts of the Lord, and is celebrated with fish, wine and oil, the lightest degree of fasting, in observance of the festival.
The Lutheran Church, Methodist Church, and Presbyterian Church continue to use black, as was the practice in the Catholic Church before 1970.
Fasting during Great and Holy Week is very strict, as in Lent at a minimum: dairy products and meat products are strictly forbidden, and on most days, no alcoholic beverages are permitted and no oil is used in cooking.
When it is necessary for an autocephalous church to consecrate more chrysm the primate of that church will consecrate it at this Liturgy.
and come at last to the fullness of his grace.
I will wash your immaculate feet with kisses and dry them again with the tresses of my hair; those very feet at whose sound Eve hid herself from in fear when she heard You walking in Paradise in the twilight of the day.
In some communities (most famously in San Fernando, Pampanga), the processions include devotees who self-flagellate and sometimes even have themselves nailed to crosses as expressions of penance.
she cries, "for me night has become a frenzy of licentiousness, a dark and moonless love of sin.
* Since 1970, in the Catholic Church the colour of the vestments is red.
Children and a dark hooded figure, symbolizing the betrayer of Christ, join the Thursday morning procession to the church.
The figure of Our Lord of the Stations, representing the blood-stained Jesus carrying the cross, is brought from the church in a large black box and displayed in the main square.
Holy Saturday is the day between the crucifixion of Jesus and his resurrection.
Western Catholic Church practice is to have only one full meal with, if needed, two small snacks that together do not make a full meal.
The opening of these doors symbolized the "rolling away of the stone" from the tomb by the angel, and all enter the church joyfully singing the Troparion of Pascha.
Easter Sunday begins before sunrise with the singing of the choir and band performances to celebrate the resurrection of Christ.
The following night, the Paschal Vigil is celebrated, and the streets are transformed into a beautiful array of intricate, colorful carpets to prepare for the following day.
'''Holy Week''' (Latin: ''Hebdomas Sancta'' or ''Hebdomas Maior'', "Greater Week"; Greek: Ἁγία καὶ Μεγάλη Ἑβδομάς, ''Hagia kai Megale Hebdomas'', "Holy and Great Week") in Christianity is the week just before Easter.
The bells then fall silent and the organ and other musical instruments may be used only to support the singing until the Gloria at the Easter Vigil.
Good Friday in the Philippines is commemorated with street processions, the Way of the Cross, the commemoration of Jesus' Seven last words (Siete Palabras) and a Passion play called the Sinakulo.
During this service, twelve Matins Gospels are chanted, from which this service derives its name of "Matins of the Twelve Gospels".
Once the procession concludes with the singing of the third proclamation, the lights throughout the church are lit, except for the altar candles.
Bells and fireworks are followed by a Mass that ends with the "Hallelujah Chorus".
With his Code of Rubrics of 1960, Pope John XXIII reduced the feast on the Friday of what was then called Passion Week (the week before Holy Week) to the level of a commemoration, and in 1969 the celebration was removed from the General Roman Calendar as a duplicate of the September feast.
* It was once customary in some countries, especially England, to place a veiled monstrance with the Blessed Sacrament or a cross in a Holy Sepulchre".
For this reason, the day is sometimes called Spy Wednesday.
In many liturgical denominations, to commemorate the Messiah's entry into Jerusalem to accomplish his paschal mystery, it is customary to have a blessing of palm leaves (or other branches, for example olive branches).
In this text, abstinence from flesh is commanded for all the days, while for the Friday and Sunday an absolute fast is commanded.
The procession is led by a man holding a container of incense accompanied by a small horn and flute band.
In the Roman Catholic Church, "tenebrae" is the name given to the celebration, with special ceremonies, of Matins and Lauds, the first two hours of the Liturgy of the Hours, of the last three days of Holy Week.
Holy Week begins with Palm Sunday, which may also be known as Passion Sunday in some denominations.
Each day service is divided into 5 "hours"; The First Hour, The Third Hour, The Sixth Hour, The Ninth Hour, and The Eleventh Hour.
Other events which the Gospels tell of which may have occurred on this day include cursing the fig tree and the Cleansing of the Temple.
The figure of Christ is taken down from the Cross, and a richly-embroidered cloth icon called the ''Epitaphios'' (Church Slavonic: ''Plashchanitza'') depicting Christ prepared for burial is laid in a "Tomb" decorated with flowers.
Towards the end of the Tuesday evening Bridegroom service (Orthros for Great and Holy Wednesday), the ''Hymn of Kassiani'' is sung.
In the Moravian Church, the Holy Week services (Passion Week) are extensive, as the Congregation follows the life of Christ through His final week in daily services dedicated to readings from a harmony of the Gospel stories, responding to the actions in hymns, prayers  and litanies, beginning on the eve of Palm Sunday and culminating in the "Easter Morning" or Easter Sunrise service begun by the Moravians in 1732.
Dionysius Alexandrinus in his canonical epistle (AD 260), refers to the 91 fasting days implying that the observance of them had already become an established usage in his time.
The candles of those present are lit from the Paschal candle.
On Saturday, an image of Jesus’ betrayer, Judas, is detained, as many people gather to watch the celebration.
A deacon, or the priest if there is no deacon, carries the Paschal Candle at the head of the entrance procession and, at three points, stops and chants the proclamation "The Light of Christ" (until Easter 2011, the official English text was "Christ our Light"), to which the people respond "Thanks be to God."
The ''Codex Theodosianus'', however, is explicit in ordering that all actions at law should cease, and the doors of all courts of law be closed during those 15 days (1. ii.
Orthros of Great and Holy Thursday does not follow the format of Great Lent (with the singular exception of chanting Alleluia in place of God is the Lord), but is celebrated as outside Lent, having a complete canon.
Also, beginning at this service there will be no more reading of the psalter for the rest of Holy Week, with the exception of kathisma XVII at Orthros of Great and Holy Saturday.
(Before the reform of Pope Pius XII, only the priest received Communion in the framework of what was called the "Mass of the Presanctified", which included the usual Offertory prayers, with the placing of wine in the chalice, but which omitted the Canon of the Mass.)
The Liturgy of the Word includes between three and seven readings from the Old Testament, followed by two from the New (an Epistle and a Gospel).
(In the pre-Vatican II rite, crucifixes and statues are covered with violet covers during Passion time, but the crucifix covers can be white instead of violet on Holy Thursday.)
In the Catholic tradition, Mass is not celebrated on what is liturgically Holy Saturday.
(In the extraordinary form of the Roman Rite, the Passion according to St. Luke is read instead.)
These Gospel lessons recount in chronological order the events from the Last Supper though the Crucifixion and burial of Jesus.
Other events connected with this date include the events at the house of Simon the Leper, especially the anointing of Jesus by Mary of Bethany, the events of which directly preceded the betrayal by Judas to the Sanhedrin.
In Amatenango, the figure of Judas, who betrayed Christ has been the main point of focus during the Mayan Holy Week.
In some places, notably the Philippines, Catholics will travel from church to church praying at each church's altar of repose in a practice called "Visita Iglesia" or Seven Churches Visitation.
It consists of seven prayers and at the conclusion of the prayers, the priest anoints each member of the congregation with the holy oil.
In the Catholic Church, on this day the private celebration of Mass is forbidden.
A dance drama is performed enacting evil being defeated by good.
While daytime services or commemorations of the day are rare in the Western tradition, after sundown on Holy Saturday is the traditional time for Easter Vigil.
However, Good Friday has an extra hour added to it, that of The Twelfth Hour.
The last Mass before Easter is also celebrated on Holy Thursday, usually including a reenactment of the Washing of the Feet of the Apostles.
The Resurrection of Christ on Easter Sunday is the main reason why Christians keep Sunday as the primary day of religious observance.
Tenebrae services are celebrated by some parishes of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, of the Polish National Catholic Church, of Anglicanism, of other Protestant churches such as Lutheranism, and of Western Rite Orthodoxy within the Eastern Orthodox Church.
A solemn atmosphere arises on Friday when a representation of Jesus is beaten and buried.
These pasos and tronos are physically carried on their necks  or "braceros" (this name is popular in Leon).
Holy Week in the Christian year is the week immediately before Easter.
Good Friday processions take place in Birgu, Bormla, Għaxaq, Luqa, Mosta, Naxxar, Paola, Qormi, Rabat, Senglea, Valletta, Żebbuġ and Żejtun.
The Friday before Palm Sunday is called "The Concluding Friday of Great Lent".
A reading from the Epistle to the Romans is proclaimed.
During this night, another liturgy is prayed and the entire Book of the Apocalypse is read, to symbolize the Second Coming.
At Mass on Palm Sunday, Catholics carry "palaspas" or palm leaves to be blessed by the priest.
There is a custom among some churches to place a simple white linen cloth over the Holy Table (altar) for this Liturgy, reminiscent of the Last Supper.
Before the reform of the rite by Pope Pius XI, the blessing of the palms occurred inside the church within a service that followed the general outline of a Mass, with Collect, Epistle and Gospel, as far as the Sanctus.
The Roman Missal recommends that, if considered pastorally appropriate, the priest should, immediately after the homily, celebrate the rite of washing the feet of an unspecified number of men, customarily twelve, recalling the number of the Apostles.
to imitate devoutly the Blessed Virgin Mary
* Even if music is used in the Liturgy, it is not used to open and close the Liturgy, nor is there a formal recessional (closing procession).
Slavs bring Easter baskets filled with eggs, meat, butter, and cheese—foods from which the faithful have abstained during Great Lent—to be blessed by the priest which are then taken back home to be shared by family and friends with joy.
Other writings that refer to related traditions of the early Church include, most notably, ''The Pilgrimage of Etheria'' (also known as ''The Pilgrimage of Egeria''), which details the whole observance of Holy Week at that time.
The celebration at the Colosseum with participation by the Pope has become a traditional fixture widely covered by television.
::The ''Passion narrative'' of the Gospel of John is sung or read, often divided between more than one singer or reader.
The Holy Week commemorations reach their paramount on Good Friday as the Catholic Church celebrates the passion of Jesus.
The palms were then blessed with five prayers, and a procession went out of the church and on its return included a ceremony for the reopening of the doors, which had meantime been shut.
Good Friday afternoon ceremonies are followed by the week's main spectacle of the Taking Down from the Cross in front of the cathedral followed by the Funeral Procession of Our Dead Lord.
Paschal Orthros begins with an Ektenia (litany) and the chanting of the Paschal Canon.
Another feast with the same name was and still is celebrated in September.
Light begins to go out and people begin the whipping to the sound of ceremonial groans.
Others celebrate versions of the Jewish Passover at this time.
The somber and often nocturnal commemoration with public processions directs thoughts to the desolate emotional state of the Virgin Mary on Black Saturday as prophesied by the Rabbi Simeon on the "seven sorrows" that as an allegorical sword pierced her heart.
give your Church the grace
In the West, it is also the last week of Lent, and includes Palm Sunday, Holy Wednesday (Spy Wednesday), Maundy Thursday (Holy Thursday), Good Friday (Holy Friday), and Holy Saturday.
On this day the Coptic Church commemorates Lazarus, the brother of Martha and Mary of Bethany.
The hymn, (written in the 9th century by Kassia) tells of the woman who washed Christ's feet in the house of Simon the Pharisee.
However, the faithful do not yet greet one another with the Paschal kiss, since the Resurrection has not yet been announced to the living.
Do not disdain me Your handmaiden, O You who are boundless in mercy."
At one point, when we reach the first Gospel which speaks of the Crucifixion, there is a custom for the priest to bring out a large cross with an icon the crucified Christ attached to it, and places it in the center of the nave for all the faithful to venerate.
There is some doubt about the genuineness of an ordinance attributed to Roman Emperor Constantine, in which abstinence from public business was enforced for the seven days immediately preceding Easter Sunday, and also for the seven which followed it.
