Despite appearances to the contrary, the Army of the Empire did not constitute a permanent standing army that was always at the ready to fight for the Empire.
Conrad ousted the Welfs from their possessions, but after his death in 1152, his nephew Frederick I "Barbarossa" succeeded him and made peace with the Welfs, restoring his cousin Henry the Lion to his—albeit diminished—possessions.
The latter would end up going to a more junior branch of the Habsburgs in the person of Charles's brother Ferdinand, while the senior branch continued rule in Spain and in the Burgundian inheritance in the person of Charles's son, Philip II of Spain.
The second class, the Council of Princes, consisted of the other princes.
The direct governance of the ''Reichsgut'' no longer matched the needs of either the king or the dukes.
In the west, the Rhineland increasingly fell under French influence.
The Peace of Westphalia in 1648, which ended the Thirty Years' War, gave the territories almost complete independence.
Later Emperors dispensed with the papal coronation altogether, being content with the styling ''Emperor-Elect'': the last Emperor to be crowned by the Pope was Charles V in 1530.
The title continued in the Carolingian family until 888 and from 896 to 899, after which it was contested by the rulers of Italy in a series of civil wars until the death of the last Italian claimant, Berengar, in 924.
He abdicated and divided his territories between Philip and Ferdinand of Austria.
Instead, it was divided into dozens—eventually hundreds—of individual entities governed by kings, dukes, counts, bishops, abbots and other rulers, collectively known as princes.
Henry added the Norman kingdom of Sicily to his domains, held English king Richard the Lionheart captive, and aimed to establish a hereditary monarchy when he died in 1197.
In 1190, Frederick participated in the Third Crusade and died in the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia.
He also embroiled himself in another conflict with the Papacy by supporting a candidate elected by a minority against Pope Alexander III (1159–81).
The only Free Imperial Cities still being states within Germany are Hamburg and Bremen.
In practice, the imperial troops often had local allegiances stronger than their loyalty to the Emperor.
Although many of these privileges had existed earlier, they were now granted globally, and once and for all, to allow the German princes to maintain order north of the Alps while Frederick concentrated on Italy.
The empire never achieved the extent of political unification formed in France, evolving instead into a decentralized, limited elective monarchy composed of hundreds of sub-units, principalities, duchies, counties, Free Imperial Cities, and other domains.
Still, Otto formed marital ties with the east when he married the Byzantine princess Theophanu.
After Ferdinand died in 1564, his son Maximilian II became Emperor, and like his father, accepted the existence of Protestantism and the need for occasional compromise with it.
In a famous assessment of the name, the French Enlightenment writer Voltaire remarked sardonically:  "This agglomeration which was called and which still calls itself the Holy Roman Empire was in no way holy, nor Roman, nor an empire."
As his son, Frederick II, though already elected king, was still a small child and living in Sicily, German princes chose to elect an adult king, resulting in the dual election of Frederick Barbarossa's youngest son Philip of Swabia and Henry the Lion's son Otto of Brunswick, who competed for the crown.
This comprehensive list included public roads, tariffs, coining, collecting punitive fees, and the investiture, the seating and unseating of office holders.
This ensured for the first time that all the realms of what is now Spain would be united by one monarch under one nascent Spanish crown.
To a greater extent than in other medieval kingdoms such as France and England, the Emperors were unable to gain much control over the lands that they formally owned.
During the Middle Ages, some Kings and Emperors were not of German origin, but since the Renaissance, German heritage was regarded as vital for a candidate in order to be eligible for imperial office.
The power of the emperor was limited, and while the various princes, lords, bishops and cities of the empire were vassals who owed the emperor their allegiance, they also possessed an extent of privileges that gave them ''de facto'' independence within their territories.
In 1282, Rudolf I thus lent Austria and Styria to his own sons.
He eventually incorporated the territories of present-day France, Germany, northern Italy, and beyond, linking the Frankish kingdom with Papal lands.
The ''Imperial Diet'' as a legislative organ of the Empire did not exist at that time.
Kingship continued to be transferred by election, but Kings often ensured their own sons were elected during their lifetimes, enabling them to keep the crown for their families.
Nevertheless, their participation was formally acknowledged only as late as in 1648 with the Peace of Westphalia ending the Thirty Years' War.
The third class was the Council of Imperial Cities, which was divided into two colleges: Swabia and the Rhine.
The precise term "Holy Roman Empire" was not used until the 13th century, but the concept of ''translatio imperii'', the notion that he held supreme power inherited from the emperors of Rome, was fundamental to the prestige of the emperor.
Court practice heavily relied on traditional customs or rules described as customary.
This process began in the 11th century with the Investiture Controversy  and was more or less concluded with the 1648 Peace of Westphalia.
Henry gave only lackluster support to Frederick's policies, and in a critical situation during the Italian wars, Henry refused the Emperor's plea for military support.
The only princely member state of the Holy Roman Empire that has preserved its status as a monarchy until today is the Principality of Liechtenstein.
This group eventually developed into the college of Electors.
Frederick's policies were primarily directed at Italy, where he clashed with the increasingly wealthy and free-minded cities of the north, especially Milan.
Another point of contention was the crusade, which Frederick had promised but repeatedly postponed.
On 25 December 800, Pope Leo III crowned the Frankish king Charlemagne as Emperor, reviving the title in Western Europe after more than three centuries.
In addition to conflicts between his Spanish and German inheritances, conflicts of religion would be another source of tension during the reign of Charles V. Before Charles's reign in the Holy Roman Empire began, in 1517, Martin Luther launched what would later be known as the Reformation.
Lutheranism was officially recognized in the Peace of Augsburg of 1555, and Calvinism in the Peace of Westphalia of 1648.
A candidate for election would be expected to offer concessions of land or money to the electors in order to secure their vote.
By the middle of the 8th century, however, the Merovingians had been reduced to figureheads, and the Carolingians, led by Charles Martel, had become the ''de facto'' rulers.
Otto died young in 1002, and was succeeded by his cousin Henry II, who focused on Germany.
Contradicting the traditional view concerning that designation, Hermann Weisert has stated in a study on imperial titulature that, despite the claim of many textbooks, the name ''Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation'' never had an official status and points out that documents were thirty times as likely to omit the national suffix as include it.
According to Regino of Prüm, the parts of the realm "spewed forth kinglets", and each part elected a kinglet "from its own bowels".
While concentrated on establishing a modern, centralized state in Sicily, he was mostly absent from Germany and issued far-reaching privileges to Germany's secular and ecclesiastical princes: In the 1220 ''Confoederatio cum principibus ecclesiasticis,'' Frederick gave up a number of ''regalia'' in favour of the bishops, among them tariffs, coining, and fortification.
The Napoleonic Confederation of the Rhine was replaced by a new union, the German Confederation, in 1815, following the end of the Napoleonic Wars.
German kings had been elected since the 9th century; at that point they were chosen by the leaders of the five most important tribes (the Salian Franks of Lorraine, Ripuarian Franks of Franconia, Saxons, Bavarians and Swabians).
The representation of the Free Cities at the Diet had become common since the late Middle Ages.
During this time, the concept of "reform" emerged, in the original sense of the Latin verb ''re-formare'' – to regain an earlier shape that had been lost.
The kingdom had no permanent capital city.
Otto prevailed for a while after Philip was murdered in a private squabble in 1208, until he began to also claim Sicily.
A side effect was the Cologne War, which ravaged much of the upper Rhine.
Their son, Otto III, came to the throne only three years old, and was subjected to a power struggle and series of regencies until his age of majority in 994.
He emphasized the "Romanness" of the empire, partly in an attempt to justify the power of the Emperor independent of the (now strengthened) Pope.
The Hohenstaufen rulers increasingly lent land to ''ministerialia'', formerly non-free service men, who Frederick hoped would be more reliable than dukes.
The kings beginning with Rudolf I of Germany increasingly relied on the lands of their respective dynasties to support their power.
Fearing Frederick's concentration of power, the Pope finally excommunicated the Emperor.
From the High Middle Ages onwards, the Holy Roman Empire was marked by an uneasy coexistence of the princes of the local territories who were struggling to take power away from it.
Due to a combination of (1) the traditions of dynastic succession in Aragon, which permitted maternal inheritance with no precedence for female rule; (2) the insanity of Charles's mother, Joanna of Castile; and (3) the insistence by his remaining grandfather, Maximilian I, that he take up his royal titles, Charles initiated his reign in Castile and Aragon, a union which evolved into Spain, in conjunction with his mother.
The Swiss Confederation, which had already established quasi-independence in 1499, as well as the Northern Netherlands, left the Empire.
The concept of "property" began to replace more ancient forms of jurisdiction, although they were still very much tied together.
Around 900, autonomous stem duchies (Franconia, Bavaria, Swabia, Saxony and Lotharingia) reemerged in East Francia.
Conrad's death was followed by the Interregnum, during which no king could achieve universal recognition, allowing the princes to consolidate their holdings and become even more independent rulers.
When there was danger, an Army of the Empire was mustered from among the elements constituting it, in order to conduct an imperial military campaign or ''Reichsheerfahrt''.
German speaking farmers, traders, and craftsmen from the western part of the Empire, both Christians and Jews, moved into these areas.
Cities that were founded in the 12th century include Freiburg, possibly the economic model for many later cities, and Munich.
There were also some areas ruled directly by the Emperor.
These were partly caused by the explosion in population, and they also concentrated economic power at strategic locations.
Simultaneously, the Catholic Church experienced crises of its own, with wide-reaching effects in the Empire.
At this time, many local dukes saw it as a chance to oppose the hegemony of Emperor Charles V. The empire then became fatally divided along religious lines, with the north, the east, and many of the major cities—Strasbourg, Frankfurt and Nuremberg—becoming Protestant while the southern and western regions largely remained Catholic.
The shift in power away from the emperor is also revealed in the way the post-Hohenstaufen kings attempted to sustain their power.
As Roman power in Gaul declined during the 5th century, local Germanic tribes assumed control.
For electors the title became hereditary, and they were given the right to mint coins and to exercise jurisdiction.
Maximilian was succeeded in 1576 by Rudolf II, a strange man who preferred classical Greek philosophy to Christianity and lived an isolated existence in Bohemia.
The Peace of Augsburg ended the war in Germany and accepted the existence of the Protestant princes, although not Calvinism, Anabaptism, or Swiss Reformed.
After the death of Frederick II in 1250, the German kingdom was divided between his son Conrad IV (died 1254) and the anti-king, William of Holland (died 1256).
This continued after Frederick was crowned Emperor in 1220.
Rules from the past no longer adequately described the structure of the time, and a reinforcement of earlier ''Landfrieden'' was urgently called for.
Charles V continued to battle the French and the Protestant princes in Germany for much of his reign.
The founding territories retained their separate governance codes and laws.
The actual end of the empire came in several steps.
The political power of the Empire was maintained, but the conflict had demonstrated the limits of the ruler's power, especially in regard to the Church, and it robbed the king of the sacral status he had previously enjoyed.
Henry reached a truce with the raiding Magyars, and in 933 he won a first victory against them in the Battle of Riade.
A further important constitutional move at Roncaglia was the establishment of a new peace mechanism for the entire empire, the Landfrieden, with the first imperial one being issued in 1103 under Henry IV at Mainz.
The first class, the Council of Electors, consisted of the electors, or the princes who could vote for King of the Romans.
Upon Henry the Fowler's death, Otto, his son and designated successor, was elected King in Aachen in 936.
Under the son and successor of Frederick Barbarossa, Henry VI, the Hohenstaufen dynasty reached its apex.
The 1232 ''Statutum in favorem principum'' mostly extended these privileges to secular territories.
Initially used mainly for war services, this new class of people would form the basis for the later knights, another basis of imperial power.
Earlier, the Empire's strength (and finances) greatly relied on the Empire's own lands, the so-called ''Reichsgut'', which always belonged to the king of the day and included many Imperial Cities.
Francis' House of Habsburg-Lorraine survived the demise of the empire, continuing to reign as Emperors of Austria and Kings of Hungary until the Habsburg empire's final dissolution in 1918 in the aftermath of World War I.
Several Emperors attempted to reverse this steady dissemination of their authority, but were thwarted both by the papacy and by the princes of the Empire.
His second son, Henry V, reached an agreement with the Pope and the bishops in the 1122 Concordat of Worms.
The empire was dissolved on 6 August 1806, when the last Holy Roman Emperor Francis II (from 1804, Emperor Francis I of Austria) abdicated, following a military defeat by the French under Napoleon at Austerlitz (see Treaty of Pressburg).
In Germany, the Emperor had repeatedly protected Henry the Lion against complaints by rival princes or cities (especially in the cases of Munich and Lübeck).
Throughout the 18th century, the Habsburgs were embroiled in various European conflicts, such as the War of the Spanish Succession, the War of the Polish Succession and the War of the Austrian Succession.
After the Dutch revolt against Spain erupted, the Empire remained neutral; de facto allowing the Netherlands to depart the empire in 1581, a succession acknowledged in 1648.
The title was revived in 962 when Otto I was crowned emperor, fashioning himself as the successor of Charlemagne and beginning a continuous existence of the empire for over eight centuries.
At the Battle of Vienna (1683), the Army of the Holy Roman Empire, led by the Polish King John III Sobieski, decisively defeated a large Turkish army, ending the western colonial Ottoman advance and leading to the eventual dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire in Europe.
A prospective Emperor had first to be elected King of the Romans (Latin: ''Rex romanorum''; German: ''römischer König'').
The conflict between several papal claimants (two anti-popes and the "legitimate" Pope) ended only with the Council of Constance (1414–1418); after 1419 the Papacy directed much of its energy to suppressing the Hussites.
After being elected, the King of the Romans could theoretically claim the title of "Emperor" only after being crowned by the Pope.
Instead of personal duties, money increasingly became the common means to represent economic value in agriculture.
After him all kings and emperors relied on the lands of their own family (''Hausmacht''): Louis IV of Wittelsbach (king 1314, emperor 1328–47) relied on his lands in Bavaria; Charles IV of Luxembourg, the grandson of Henry VII, drew strength from his own lands in Bohemia.
When Frederick III needed the dukes to finance a war against Hungary in 1486, and at the same time had his son (later Maximilian I) elected king, he faced a demand from the united dukes for their participation in an Imperial Court.
Another new concept of the time was the systematic foundation of new cities by the Emperor and by the local dukes.
This state developed into modern Germany.
coexisted illegally within the Empire.
Otto's coronation as Emperor marked the German kings as successors to the Empire of Charlemagne, which through the concept of ''translatio imperii'', also made them consider themselves as successors to Ancient Rome.
He repudiated the Pope's interference and persuaded his bishops to excommunicate the Pope, whom he famously addressed by his born name "Hildebrand", rather than his regnal name "Pope Gregory VII".
All other historic member states of the HRE were either dissolved or are republican successor states to their princely predecessor states.
In 963, Otto deposed the current pope John XII and chose Pope Leo VIII as the new pope (although John XII and Leo VIII both claimed the papacy until 964, when John XII died).
After Richard's death in 1273, the Interregnum ended with the unanimous election of Rudolf I of Germany, a minor pro-Staufen count.
Kings traveled between residences (called Kaiserpfalz) to discharge affairs.
Meanwhile, the German princes had elected another king, Rudolf of Swabia.
Before 1157, the realm was merely referred to as the Roman Empire.
Whether and to what degree he had to be German was disputed among the Electors, contemporary experts in constitutional law, and the public.
On the eastern front, the Turks continued to loom large as a threat, although war would mean further compromises with the Protestant princes, and so the Emperor sought to avoid it.
His power was severely restricted by the various local leaders.
It is important to note, however, that jurisdiction at this time did not include legislation, which virtually did not exist until well into the 15th century.
Imperial rights had been referred to as ''regalia'' since the Investiture Controversy, but were enumerated for the first time at Roncaglia.
In 1312, Henry VII of the House of Luxembourg was crowned as the first Holy Roman Emperor since Frederick II.
Some historians refer to the coronation of Charlemagne as the origin of the empire, while others prefer the coronation of Otto I as its beginning.
The Council of Princes was divided into two "benches," one for secular rulers and one for ecclesiastical ones.
The king found himself with almost no political support and was forced to make the famous Walk to Canossa in 1077, by which he achieved a lifting of the excommunication at the price of humiliation.
In 751, Martel’s son Pepin became King of the Franks, and later gained the sanction of the Pope.
After the death of Charles the Fat, those crowned emperor by the pope controlled only territories in Italy.
In 1555, Paul IV was elected pope and took the side of France, whereupon an exhausted Charles finally gave up his hopes of a world Christian empire.
For example, this act produced the Imperial Circle Estates and the ''Reichskammergericht'' (Imperial Chamber Court), institutions that would—to a degree—persist until the end of the Empire in 1806.
Interestingly, it was thus increasingly in the king's own interest to strengthen the power of the territories, since the king profited from such a benefit in his own lands as well.
The balance (and imbalance) between these separate inheritances would be defining elements of his reign, and would ensure that personal union between the Spanish and German crowns would be short-lived.
By the rise of Louis XIV, the Habsburgs were chiefly dependent on their hereditary lands to counter the rise of Prussia, some of whose territories lay inside the Empire.
The Habsburg Emperors focused on consolidating their own estates in Austria and elsewhere.
At no time could the Emperor simply issue decrees and govern autonomously over the Empire.
Each college had one vote.
In 1212, King Ottokar I (bearing the title "king" since 1198) extracted a Golden Bull of Sicily (a formal edict) from the emperor Frederick II, confirming the royal title for Ottokar and his descendants and the Duchy of Bohemia was raised to a kingdom.
During this time territories began to transform into the predecessors of modern states.
The Council of Imperial Cities was not fully equal with the others; it could not vote on several matters such as the admission of new territories.
The German mediatization was the series of mediatizations and secularizations that occurred between 1795 and 1814, during the latter part of the era of the French Revolution and then the Napoleonic Era.
The Pope, in turn, excommunicated the king, declared him deposed, and dissolved the oaths of loyalty made to Henry.
Higher-ranking princes had individual votes, while lower-ranking princes were grouped into "colleges" by geography.
"Secularization" was the abolition of the temporal power of an ecclesiastical ruler such as a bishop or an abbot and the annexation of the secularized territory to a secular territory.
By the end of the 18th century, the term 'Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation' had fallen out of official use.
It was divided into three classes.
The Pope and the German princes had surfaced as major players in the political system of the empire.
Although some procedures and institutions had been fixed, for example by the Golden Bull of 1356, the rules of how the king, the electors, and the other dukes should cooperate in the Empire much depended on the personality of the respective king.
Now, although excommunicated, Frederick led the Sixth Crusade in 1228, which ended in negotiations and a temporary restoration of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
In 962, Otto was crowned Emperor by Pope John XII, thus intertwining the affairs of the German kingdom with those of Italy and the Papacy.
On his deathbed, Conrad yielded the crown to his main rival, Henry the Fowler of Saxony (r. 919–36), who was elected king at the Diet of Fritzlar in 919.
In 768 Pepin’s son Charlemagne became King of the Franks and began an extensive expansion of the realm.
Germany would enjoy relative peace for the next six decades.
The Teutonic Knights were invited to Prussia by Duke Konrad of Masovia to Christianize the Prussians in 1226.
In 951, Otto came to the aid of Adelaide, the widowed queen of Italy, defeating her enemies, marrying her, and taking control over Italy.
The dukes often conducted feuds against each other - feuds that, more often than not, escalated into local wars.
The gradual Germanization of these lands was a complex phenomenon that should not be interpreted in the biased terms of 19th-century nationalism.
The eastward settlement expanded the influence of the empire to include Pomerania and Silesia, as did the intermarriage of the local, still mostly Slavic, rulers with German spouses.
The King also made sure that his own court, the ''Reichshofrat'', continued to operate in parallel to the ''Reichskammergericht''.
Otto III's former mentor Antipope John XVI briefly held Rome, until the Holy Roman Emperor seized the city.
Frederick supported a succession of antipopes before finally making peace with Alexander in 1177.
The Empire also had two courts: the ''Reichshofrat'' (also known in English as the Aulic Council) at the court of the King/Emperor, and the ''Reichskammergericht'' (Imperial Chamber Court), established with the Imperial Reform of 1495.
When he died in 1137, the princes again aimed to check royal power; accordingly they did not elect Lothair's favoured heir, his son-in-law Henry the Proud of the Welf family, but Conrad III of the Hohenstaufen family, the grandson of Emperor Henry IV and thus a nephew of Emperor Henry V. This led to over a century of strife between the two houses.
During the 13th century, a general structural change in how land was administered prepared the shift of political power towards the rising bourgeoisie at the expense of aristocratic feudalism that would characterize the Late Middle Ages.
In a decree following the 1512 Diet of Cologne, the name was changed to '''Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation''' (, ), a form first used in a document in 1474.
The process varied greatly among the various lands and was most advanced in those territories that were most identical to the lands of the old Germanic tribes, ''e.g.''
The office of Holy Roman Emperor was traditionally elective, although frequently controlled by dynasties.
Peasants were increasingly required to pay tribute for their lands.
It lasted until 1866 when Prussia founded the North German Confederation, a forerunner of the German Empire which united the German-speaking territories outside of Austria and Switzerland under Prussian leadership in 1871.
Napoleon reorganized much of the Empire into the Confederation of the Rhine, a French satellite.
In many cases, this took several years while the King was held up by other tasks: frequently he first had to resolve conflicts in rebellious northern Italy, or was in quarrel with the Pope himself.
After his victory, Frederick did not act upon his promise to keep the two realms separate – though he had made his son Henry king of Sicily before marching on Germany, he still reserved real political power for himself.
Scholars generally concur, however, in relating an evolution of the institutions and principles constituting the empire, describing a gradual assumption of the imperial title and role.
These were regional groupings of most (though not all) of the various states of the Empire for the purposes of defence, imperial taxation, supervision of coining, peace-keeping functions and public security.
Here, the king and the dukes agreed on four bills, commonly referred to as the ''Reichsreform'' (Imperial Reform): a set of legal acts to give the disintegrating Empire some structure.
After 1257, the crown was contested between Richard of Cornwall, who was supported by the Guelph party, and Alfonso X of Castile, who was recognized by the Hohenstaufen party but never set foot on German soil.
"Mediatization" was the process of annexing the lands of one imperial estate to another, often leaving the annexed some rights.
After that, the king managed to control the appointment of dukes and often also employed bishops in administrative affairs.
The monastic state of the Teutonic Order () and its later German successor state of Prussia were, however, never part of the Holy Roman Empire.
In the wake of the Cluniac Reforms, this involvement was increasingly seen as inappropriate by the Papacy.
Despite his imperial claims, Frederick's rule was a major turning point towards the disintegration of central rule in the Empire.
During the Hohenstaufen period, German princes facilitated a successful, peaceful eastward settlement of lands that were uninhabited or inhabited sparsely by West Slavs.
He overcame a series of revolts from an elder brother and from several dukes.
The reform-minded Pope Gregory VII was determined to oppose such practices, which led to the Investiture Controversy with King Henry IV (r. 1056–1106).
The difficulties in electing the king eventually led to the emergence of a fixed college of prince-electors (''Kurfürsten''), whose composition and procedures were set forth in the Golden Bull of 1356, which remained valid until 1806.
In 955, Otto won a decisive victory over the Magyars in the Battle of Lechfeld.
Pope Innocent III, who feared the threat posed by a union of the empire and Sicily, now supported Frederick II, who marched to Germany and defeated Otto.
After returning to Germany, an embittered Frederick opened proceedings against the Duke, resulting in a public ban and the confiscation of all his territories.
The medieval idea of unifying all Christendom into a single political entity, with the Church and the Empire as its leading institutions, began to decline.
It therefore proved somewhat damaging that Sigismund of Luxemburg (king 1410, emperor 1433–1437) and Frederick III of Habsburg (king 1440, emperor 1452–1493) neglected the old core lands of the empire and mostly resided in their own lands.
The "constitution" of the Empire still remained largely unsettled at the beginning of the 15th century.
Henry managed to defeat him but was subsequently confronted with more uprisings, renewed excommunication, and even the rebellion of his sons.
The long conflict so bled the Empire that it never recovered its strength.
In 996 Otto III appointed his cousin Gregory V, the first German Pope.
This development probably best symbolizes the emerging duality between emperor and realm (''Kaiser und Reich''), which were no longer considered identical.
With these drastic changes, much discussion emerged in the 15th century about the Empire itself.
The Imperial Diet (''Reichstag'', or ''Reichsversammlung'') was the legislative body of the Holy Roman Empire and theoretically superior to the emperor himself.
