The thesis of modern analysts being questioned, the debate remains open.
Other unions are certainly possible, provided they are attested.
There is no beginning and no end.
If he is correct, the stock themes and verses of rhapsodes may be far older than the Trojan War, which would, in that case, be only the latest opportunity for an epic.
Two other poems, the ''Capture of Oechalia'' and the ''Phocais'' were also assigned Homeric authorship.
Considered word-for-word, the printed texts as we know them are the product of the scholars of the last three centuries.
The example of John Milton, who composed and dictated ''Paradise Lost'' while totally blind, demonstrates that a blind man can compose an epic.
The total sum of all the problems is known as the Homeric question, which is, of course, generic and not singular.
The details and conjoined events are the topic of Thucydides’ ''History of the Peloponnesian War''.
At about 688&nbsp;BCE Smyrna was taken by Colophonians who had ostensibly come to a festival there and passed into Ionian hands.
Attic began to appear in the inscriptions of Ionia in the 4th&nbsp;century&nbsp;BCE and had displaced Ionian by about 100 BCE.
If on the other hand Homer is to be considered a mythical character, the legendary founder of a guild of rhapsodes (professional performers of epic poetry) called the Homeridae, then “Homer” means the works attributed to the rhapsodes of the guild, who might have composed primarily in a single century or over a period of centuries.
The Greeks of the sixth and early fifth centuries BCE understood by the works of "Homer", generally, "the whole body of heroic tradition as embodied in hexameter verse".
The claim cannot be false without the supposition of a deliberate fraud, rather than a mere mistake.
Zeus, the king of the gods, presides over the proceedings.
Exactly when these poems would have taken on a fixed written form is subject to debate.
The word is segmented Hom-eros, where Hom is from Greek homou, "together", and the second -ar- in arariskein, "join together", the eta in -eros being East Greek.
The epic weaves brilliantly the '''' (scattered remains) of these distinct tribal narratives, exchanged among clan bards, into a monumental tale in which Greeks join collectively to do battle on the distant plains of Troy.
He attributed the ''Thebais'', an epic about the attack on Boeotian Thebes by the epigonoi, to Homer.
The villages to which they immigrated were already populated by the descendants of the Trojan War population.
The Smyrna connection is alluded to in the original name posited for him by several vitae: Melesigenes, “born of Meles", a river which flowed by that city.
Hesiod quoted ''Works and Days''; Homer, the ''Iliad'', both citing texts as they are now.
The language used by Homer is an archaic version of Ionic Greek, with admixtures from certain other dialects, such as Aeolic Greek.
Scholars are divided as to which category, if any, the court singer or the wandering minstrel, the historic "Homer" belonged.
Themes were selected from them for Greek drama as well.
The victory was given to Hesiod because his poem was about peace, but Homer's poem was about war.
Gregory Nagy uses a phrase, phone homereusai, "fitting the song together with the voice" found in Hesiod, a contemporary of Homer, to interpret Homeros as "he who fits (the Song) together".
Also, critics have long taken as self-referential a passage in the ''Odyssey'' describing a blind bard, Demodocus, in the court of the Phaeacian king, who recounts stories of Troy to the shipwrecked Odysseus.
Either at the beginning of his career or early in it, he assumes a stage name, reputedly "the blind man", which declares himself to be in the category of blind prophets, who see with inspired inner vision, but not with outer, bringing a sort of divine glamor to the performance.
On the one hand, he may have a Hellenized Phoenician name.
This claim is quite different from the mere attribution of the hymn to Homer by a third party from a different time.
Parry started with "traditional": the repetitive chunks of language, he said, were inherited by the singer-poet from his predecessors, and were useful to him in composition.
One of the vitae, the ''Certamen'', picks up this theme.
The Greek alphabet was introduced in the early 8th century BCE, so it is possible that Homer himself was of the first generation of authors who were also literate.
The plainness and directness of both thought and expression which characterise him were doubtless qualities of his age, but the author of the ''Iliad'' (similar to Voltaire, to whom Arnold happily compares him) must have possessed this gift in a surpassing degree.
The classicist Barry B. Powell suggests that the Greek alphabet was invented c. 800 BCE by one man, whom he calls the "adapter," in order to write down oral epic poetry.
There is a strong aristocratic bias in the poems demonstrated by the lack of any major protagonists of non-aristocratic stock, and by episodes such as the beating down of the commoner Thersites by the king Odysseus for daring to criticize his superiors.
The term “accuracy” reveals a fundamental belief in an original uniform text.
However, Homer also had a geographical knowledge of all Mycenaean Greece that has been verified by discovery of most of the sites.
The poems give evidence of familiarity with the natural details and place-names of this area of Asia Minor; for example, Homer refers to meadow birds at the mouth of the Caystros, a storm in the Icarian sea, and mentions that women in Maeonia and Caria stain ivory with scarlet.
The poet's name is homophonous with Greek  (''hómēros''), "hostage" (or "surety").
It is probable, therefore, that the story of the Trojan War as reflected in the Homeric poems derives from a tradition of epic poetry founded on a war which actually took place.
In the 20th century CE, all the vitae were gathered into a standard reference work by Thomas W. Allen and made a part of Homeri Opera, "the Works of Homer", first published in 1912 by Oxford University Press.
They had their own dialect of East Greek.
Homer and Hesiod were contemporaries, it says.
In the last few centuries, they have revolved around the process by which the Homeric poems came into existence and were transmitted over time to us, first orally and later in writing.
A number of combined archaeological and philological works have been written on the topic, such as Denys Page’s “History and the Homeric Iliad” and Martin P. Nilsson’s “The Mycenaean Origin of Greek Mythology.” The linguist, Calvert Watkins, went so far as to seek an inherited Proto-Indo-European language origin for some epithets and the epic verse form.
He was believed by the ancient Greeks to have been the first and greatest of the epic poets.
Their method was intuitive.
Pseudo-Plutarch I, relying less on mythology, presents an alternative genealogy that makes Homer and Hesiod cousins.
For example, Chios had always been a member of the Ionian League, and yet Chian “contains a few special characteristics, which are of Aeolic origin.” The same sort of admixture did not occur at the Ionic-Dorian border in southwestern Anatolia.
The importance of Homer to the ancient Greeks is described in Plato's ''Republic'', where he is referred to as the ''protos didaskalos'', "first teacher", of tragedy, the ''hegemon paideias'', "leader of learning", and the one who ''ten Hellada pepaideuken'', "has taught Greece".
Priam was perhaps from  Luwian Priya-muwa-, which means "exceptionally courageous.” Many names have a derivation from a foreign language but also fit or partially fit derivations from Proto-Indo-European through Greek.
William Ihne examining the sources counted as many 19 locations in classical times that claimed Homer as a citizen, including Athens, which accepted Smyrna as Homer’s native city, but insisted the city was its colony.
The cause of these multiple claims was civic competition for the honor.
There is no linguistic reason other than usage for thinking so.
Unable to decide, the judge had them each recite from their poems.
Oliver Taplin, in the Oxford History of the Classical World’s article on Homer, announces that the elements of his life “are largely … demonstrable fictions.” Another attack on the biographical details comes from G.S.
No etymology was given.
The ''Certamen'' mentions the ''Thebaid'', quoting the first line, which differs but little from the first line of the Iliad as it is now.
According to Diodorus Siculus, Homer had even visited Egypt.
It is also distinguished from the works of these artists by the comparative absence of underlying motives or sentiment.
It is crucial, however, not to underestimate the creative and transforming power of subsequent tradition: for instance, Achilles, the most important character of the ''Iliad'', is strongly associated with southern Thessaly, but his legendary figure is interwoven into a tale of war whose kings were from the Peloponnese.
The earliest mention of a work of Homer was by Callinus, a poet who flourished about 650 BCE.
Scorialenses I says “we only hear the report, and do not know anything.” Most therefore report several origin stories.
He provides the names of other authors where they were available in his sources.
Consideration of the name as a type leaves open the possibility that any rhapsode could conform to it; that is, there was no biographic original named Homer.
Samuel Butler argues, based on literary observations, that a young Sicilian woman wrote the ''Odyssey'' (but not the ''Iliad''), an idea further pursued by Robert Graves in his novel ''Homer's Daughter'' and Andrew Dalby in ''Rediscovering Homer''.
The entire last book of the Odyssey was marked.
The "blind" meaning joins together the blind man and his guide.
If he could not write, then he was illiterate and incapable of composition.
The chronological period of Homer depends on the meaning to be assigned to the word “Homer.” Was Homer a single person, an imaginary person representing a group of poets, or the imaginary author of a traditional body of oral myths?
Regardless of whether there was or was not a Homer, or whether the texts of the Homerica were or were not close to the ones that exist today, philology alone does not shed any light on the similarities between Mycenaean culture and the geographical and material props of the world of Homer.
Tribal wanderings were frequent, and far-flung, ranging over much of Greece and the Eastern Mediterranean.
The association with Chios dates back to at least Semonides of Amorgos, who cited ''Iliad'' 6.146 as by "the man of Chios".
These circumstances give precedence to the longest, most detailed vita, that of Pseudo-Herodotus, which is one of the sources that identify Smyrna as originally Aeolian.
Some of the main trends in modern Homeric scholarship have been, in the 19th and early 20th centuries, ''Analysis'' and ''Unitarianism'' (see Homeric Question), schools of thought which emphasized on the one hand the inconsistencies in, and on the other the artistic unity of, Homer; and in the 20th century and later ''Oral Theory'', the study of the mechanisms and effects of oral transmission, and ''Neoanalysis'', the study of the relationship between Homer and other early epic material.
A shrine, the ''Homereion'', was devoted to him in Alexandria by Ptolemy IV Philopator in the late 3rd century BCE.
The entire Epic Cycle was included.
On the contrary, they belong rather to the humbler epico-lyrical school for which Homer has been so often claimed.
Etymologies for the name Homeros reach beyond the Greek.
With or without Homer, according to Murray, there is little likelihood that the Iliad and Odyssey of the early sources are the ones we know.
The manuscripts of the whole work currently available date to no earlier than the 10th century.
Nagy reorganizes the list into eleven, Vita 1 through Vita 10, with Plutarch being divided into 3a and 3b.
Almost all the ancient sources from the very earliest appear determined that a Homer, author of the Iliad and Odyssey, existed.
An analysis of the structure and vocabulary of the ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey'' shows that the poems contain many formulaic phrases typical of extempore epic traditions; even entire verses are at times repeated.
This word is in the Attic dialect, and was a word in general use.
In Virgil's poetry, a sense of the greatness of Rome and Italy is the leading motive of a passionate rhetoric, partly veiled by the considered delicacy of his language.
Moreover, the images in the poem are very graphic, but a blind man would never have experienced the scenes of the images.
He had collected several manuscripts, which he named: the Sinopic, the Massiliotic, etc.
On Ios were used some words known to be Aeolic; for example, Homêreôn was one of the names for a month in the calendar of Ios.
'''Homer''' ( , ''Hómēros'') is best known as the author of the ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey''.
When he lived, as well as whether he lived at all, is unknown.
Author of the first known literature of Europe, he is central to the Western canon.
Taplin prefers instead to speak of Homer as “a historical context for the poems.” His dates for this context are 750-650 BCE, without considering Murray’s “fluid state.”
Librarian of the Library of Alexandria, he had noticed a wide divergence in the works attributed to Homer, and was trying to restore a more authentic copy.
The Homeric period would in that case cover a number of historical periods, especially the Mycenaean Age, prior to the first delivery of a work called the Iliad.
The geographic specificity of the word typically is explained by a presumption that it was known mainly in Aeolis on the coast of Asia Minor, the locale where Homer performed, and therefore is a word of the Aeolic dialect.
He presents 150 BCE as the date after which the text solidifies around the Vulgate.
Aeolis extended from the coast opposite Lesbos to Smyrna on the edge of Ionia.
He resorts to the fragments, the quotations of Homer in other works.
The traditional solution is the "transcription hypothesis", wherein a non-literate "Homer" dictates his poem to a literate scribe between the 8th and 6th centuries BCE.
But neither poem can then have been the modern version.
Subsequently he went to Delos, where he delivered the "Hymn to Apollo", and was made a citizen of all the Ionian states.
Aeolians came mainly from Thessaly, occupying also Boeotia at an early date, after the Trojan War, in parallel to the occupation of Peloponnesus by the Dorians.
They may have been Aeolic-speaking.
We are given the image of a "blind, begging singer who hangs around with little people: shoemakers, fisherman, potters, sailors, elderly men in the gathering places of harbour towns".
He tells how Ptolemy "placed in a circle around the statue of Homer all the cities who laid claim to Homer" and mentions a painting of the poet by the artist Galaton, which apparently depicted Homer in the aspect of Oceanus as the source of all poetry.
The poems, on the other hand, give us evidence of singers at the courts of the nobility.
The only account that presumes a historical character and a real-life setting without resorting to mythology is the more lengthy Pseudo-Herodotus' ''Life of Homer''.
Some of these match the current texts, some seem to paraphrase them, and some are not represented at all.
Strabo (14.1.37) records an Homeric temple in Smyrna with an ancient ''xoanon'' or cult statue of the poet.
Other works, such as the corpus of ''Homeric Hymns'', the comic mini-epic ''Batrachomyomachia'' ("The Frog-Mouse War"), and the ''Margites'', were also attributed to him.
Lesbian went on until the 1st&nbsp;century&nbsp;CE and was the last Aeolic dialect to disappear.
Various traditions have survived purporting to give details of Homer's birthplace and background.
The political relevance of the two leagues came to a practical end in the latter half of the 5th&nbsp;century&nbsp;BCE when most of the cities around the Aegean joined, or were forced to join, the Delian League, a koine implementing the hegemony of Athens.
Many classicists hold that this reform must have involved the production of a canonical written text.
They are typically at least in part mythical.
Kirk, who said:  "Antiquity knew nothing definite about the life and personality of Homer."
Smyrna had not yet been taken by the Ionians.
Whether the latter are given unfeigned credibility is not clear.
The "lives of Homer" refer to a set of longer fragments on the topic of the life and works of Homer written by authors who for the most part remain anonymous.
The one he selected for correction was the koine, which Murray translates as “the Vulgate”.
The treasury was kept at Athens.
Hesiod cannot have described beforehand the very event in which he was participating.
In it, one was required to ask a question of the other, who must reply in verse.
Martin West has asserted that "Homer" is "not the name of a historical poet, but a fictitious or constructed name."
The hypothetical semitic ancestors are in the plural; where "ben" can be used for one "father", the id- construction can never designate a plural father.
He had already written the ''Iliad'' in 15,500 lines (today's is 15,693).
The name appears in the ''Chrestomathia'' of Eutychius Proclus, a synopsis of Greek literature, known only through further abridged fragments written by Patriarch Photios I of Constantinople.
Independent of the question of single authorship is the near-universal agreement, after the work of Milman Parry, that the Homeric poems are dependent on an oral tradition, a generations-old technique that was the collective inheritance of many singer-poets (''aoidoi'').
However, many Greek words, and especially names in the east, where the Greeks were in contact with eastern language speakers, were loans, approximations, or paraphrases of foreign words.
When the Emperor Hadrian asked the Oracle at Delphi about Homer, the Pythia proclaimed that he was Ithacan, the son of Epikaste and Telemachus, from the ''Odyssey''.
First and oldest, the ''Titanomachia'' ("War of the Titans"), eight fragments, is said to have been written by either Eumelus of Corinth, ''floruit'' 760-740 BCE, or Arctinus of Miletus, ''floruit'' in the First Olympiad, starting 776 BCE.
Based on the frequencies of Greek letters, a first study of Dietmar Najock particularly shows the internal cohesion of the ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey''.
Ionic and Attic also were East Greek.
The Theban Cycle consists of three epics: the ''Oidipodeia'' ("Story of Oedipus"), 6600 lines by Cinaethon of Sparta, ''floruit'' 764 BCE; the ''Thebais'' ("Thebaid"), attributed to Homer; and ''Epigonoi'' ("Epigoni"), attributed to Homer.
The satirist Lucian, in his ''True History'', describes him as a Babylonian called Tigranes, who assumed the name Homer when taken "hostage" (''homeros'') by the Greeks.
There are but few rules to assist the linguist in identifying which is the most likely.
West says "The probability is that 'Homer' was not the name of a historical Greek poet but is the imaginary ancestor of the Homeridai; such guild-names in -''idai'' and -''adai'' are not normally based on the name of an historical person".
Murray rejects the concept that an authoritative text for the Vulgate existed at the time of Zenodotus.
That Homer possesses this rapidity without falling into the corresponding faults, that is, without becoming either fluctuant or monotonous, is perhaps the best proof of his unequalled poetic skill.
Wilhelm Dörpfeld, the classical archaeologist, suggests that Homer had visited many of the places and regions which he describes in his epics, such as Mycenae, Troy and more.
Aristarchus was known for his conservative selection of material.
All of these views are only philologic.
The genre included further poems on the Trojan War, such as the ''Little Iliad'', the ''Nostoi'', the ''Cypria'', and the ''Epigoni'', as well as the Theban poems about Oedipus and his sons.
Not all the vitae agree on the meaning of the name.
Herodotus estimates that Homer lived no more than 400 years before his own time, which would place him at around 850 BCE or later.
He also was attempting to restore authenticity to manuscripts he found in a state of chaos.
In the border region between Ionia and Aeolis it was modified to include features taken from Aeolic, creating an Ionic-Aeolic mixture similar to that of the Homeric poems.
Research into oral epics in Serbo-Croatian and Turkic languages, pioneered by the aforementioned Parry and Lord, began convincing scholars that long poems could be preserved with consistency by oral cultures until they are written down.
The excavations of Heinrich Schliemann at Hisarlik in the late 19th century provided initial evidence to scholars that there was an historical basis for the Trojan War.
Murray cites the Shield of Achilles, which also appears as the Shield of Heracles in Hesiod.
Most scholars agree that the ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey'' underwent a process of standardisation and refinement out of older material beginning in the 8th century BCE.
Just these three epics alone are 34,500 lines, word-for-word, we are asked to believe, without reference to the rest of the prodigious Epic Cycle.
No matter what starting problem is selected, it leads immediately to another.
The koine in turn had come from the first librarian at Alexandria, Zenodotus, who flourished at the beginning of the 3rd century BCE.
Murray concludes that the epic poems were still in "a fluid state".
There he won with a ''hymnos'' and took away the prize of a tripod, which he dedicated to the Muses of Mount Helicon, where he first began with ''aoide'', "song".
From the fact that Lesbian acquired more Ionic features in poetry over the course of time Janko argues for “a northward expansion of Ionian population and speech at the expense of the Aeolians.” Aeolic was gradually assimilating to Ionic, but after the 5th century BCE both began to assimilate to the now widespread sister dialect of Ionic, Attic, and the koine that developed from it in the Hellenistic period.
A large poem would have been beyond the capacity of human memory without the assistance of written cues.
Allen records some several vitae collected from various sources: the Vita Herodotea, pp 192–218, now known as Pseudo-Herodotus, because probably not of Herodotus; the Certamen Homeri et Hesiodi, pp 225–238, with fragments on 218-221; the two Plutarchi vitae (now Pseudo-Plutarch), pp 238–244 and pp 244–245 respectively; some vitae identified as IV (elsewhere known as Vita Scorialenses I), pp 245–246, V (Vita Scorialensis II), pp 247–250, VI (Vita Romana), pp 250–253, and finally VII, which is really three, giving extracts from Eustathius, pp 253–254 and 255, John Tzetzes, pp 254–255, and Suidas, pp 256–268, now identified as Hesychius Milesius.
Answers exist to all the objections.
The term ''Epikos Kuklos'' ("Epic Cycle") refers to a series of ten epic poems written by different authors purporting to tell an interconnected sequence of stories covering all Greek mythology.
Archaeology, however, continues to support the theory that much detailed information survived in the form of formulae and stock pieces to be combined creatively by the rhapsodes of later centuries.
Fragments of Homer account for nearly half of all identifiable Greek literary papyrus finds in Egypt.
After the contest, Homer continued his wandering, composing and reciting epic poetry.
Proclus does not subscribe to the authorships of the ''Certamen''.
The ''Certamen'' qualifies the attribution to Homer with "some say …" Subsequently he wrote the epitaph for the tomb of Midas, for which he got a silver bowl, and then the ''Odyssey'' in 12,000 lines (today's is 12,110).
He quotes a few lines from them both, which are the same in today's editions.
Most of the twelve vitae have little concern for historicity.
The author of the Hymn to Apollo identifies himself in the last verse of the poem as a blind man from Chios.
In Greek, the Homer in Homeridae would have to be in the singular, the implied single ancestor of a clan practicing a hereditary trade.
In the latter source, Homer, after losing his sight to disease, embarks on a career as a wandering rhapsode, or impromptu composer of poems at public gatherings.
A marble relief, found in Italy but thought to have been sculpted in Egypt, depicts the apotheosis of Homer.
Some were attributed to more famous authors.
In addition he adds Vita 11 from the Chrestomathia of Proclus, pp 99–102.
It had 7,000 lines, as did the subsequent ''Epigoni'', with a similar first line.
Other scholars still support the idea that Homer was a real person.
The peculiar rapidity of Homer is due in great measure to his use of hexameter verse.
Neither Zenodotus nor Aristarchus mentioned any authentic master copy from which to make corrections.
The decipherment of Linear B in the 1950s by Michael Ventris (and others) convinced many of a linguistic continuity between 13th century BCE Mycenaean writings and the poems attributed to Homer.
Based on the fact that the Iliad was recited at the Panathenaic Games, which started in 566 BCE, Gregory Nagy selects a date of the 6th century for the fixation of the epics, as opposed to Murray’s 150 BCE.
These are at the end of a missing thousand-year chain of copies made as each generation of manuscripts disintegrated or were lost or destroyed.
The relief demonstrates vividly that the Greeks considered Homer not merely a great poet but the divinely inspired reservoir of all literature.
If the works attributed either wholly or partially to a blind poet named Homer, were really authored by such a person, then he must have had biographical dates, or a century or other historical period, which can be described as "the life and times of Homer".
The ''Batrachomyomachia'', ''Homeric Hymns'' and cyclic epics are generally agreed to be later than the ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey''.
To the south were the 12 cities, or dodecapolis, of the Ionian League.
The varying and contradictory biographical information in these sources is termed humorously by Nagy "Variations on a Theme of Homer" after the model of the names of certain musical compositions.
In this view Homer need have written no more than the ''Iliad'', or the ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey'', with the Homeridae responsible for all the rest.
These areas were either Aeolian or partially so.
New methods also try to elucidate the question.
Much of the geographic and material content of the Iliad and Odyssey appear to be consistent with the Aegean Late Bronze Age, the time of the floruit of Troy, but not yet the time of the Greek alphabet.
The relevant part of Volume V in scholarship on the vitae is often called just "Allen" with page numbers denoting the vita.
On the other hand, Proto-Indo-European etymologies are also available.
Herodotus mentions both the ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey'' as works of Homer.
They both attended the funeral games of Amphidamas, conducted by his son, Ganyctor, and both contended in the contest of ''sophia'', "wit".
professional tale-tellers.
The aims and achievements of Homeric studies have changed over the course of the millennia.
Homereia also stood at Chios, Ephesus, and Smyrna, which were among the city-states that claimed to be his birthplace.
