The use of homeopathy in veterinary medicine is controversial; the little existing research on the subject is not of a high enough scientific standard to provide reliable data on efficacy.
One of the reviewers, Edzard Ernst, supplemented the article on his blog, writing: "I have said it often and I say it again: if used as an alternative to an effective cure, even the most 'harmless' treatment can become life-threatening."
The idea of using homeopathy as a treatment for other animals, termed "veterinary homeopathy", dates back to the inception of homeopathy; Hahnemann himself wrote and spoke of the use of homeopathy in animals other than humans.
Regulations 2004), that specifies a blacklist of medicines not to be prescribed under the NHS.
19th-century American physician and author Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. was also a vocal critic of homeopathy and published an essay in 1842 entitled ''Homœopathy and Its Kindred Delusions''.
The high dilutions characteristically used are often considered to be the most controversial and implausible aspect of homeopathy.
Homeopaths claim that Hippocrates may have originated homeopathy around 400 BC, when he prescribed a small dose of mandrake root to treat mania, knowing it produces mania in much larger doses.
In 2013 the UK Advertising Standards Authority concluded that the Society of Homeopaths were targeting vulnerable ill people and discouraging the use of essential medical treatment while making misleading claims of efficacy for homeopathic products.
In August 2011, a class action lawsuit was filed against Boiron on behalf of "all California residents who purchased Oscillo at any time within the past four years".
Internationally, the body that supports and represents homeopathic veterinarians is the International Association for Veterinary Homeopathy.
Of these three the most important was ''psora'' (Greek for "itch"), described as being related to any itching diseases of the skin, supposed to be derived from suppressed scabies, and claimed to be the foundation of many further disease conditions.
He adds: "There is, to my knowledge, no condition for which homeopathy has been proven to be an effective treatment."
Still sceptical of the findings, ''Nature'' assembled an independent investigative team to determine the accuracy of the research, consisting of ''Nature'' editor and physicist Sir John Maddox, American scientific fraud investigator and chemist Walter Stewart, and sceptic James Randi.
A homeopathic ''materia medica'' is a collection of "drug pictures", organized alphabetically.
These organizations report that no evidence exists that homeopathic treatment is effective, but that there is evidence that using these treatments produces harm and can bring indirect health risks by delaying conventional treatment.
This version was less focused on disease categories and would be the forerunner to later works by James Tyler Kent.
A related issue is publication bias: researchers are more likely to submit trials that report a positive finding for publication, and journals prefer to publish positive results.
The use of quantum entanglement to explain homeopathy's purported effects is "patent nonsense", as entanglement is a delicate state which rarely lasts longer than a fraction of a second.
Referring specifically to homeopathy, the British House of Commons Science and Technology Committee has stated:
No individual preparation has been unambiguously shown by research to be different from placebo.
He gathered and published a complete overview of his new medical system in his 1810 book, ''The Organon of the Healing Art'', whose 6th edition, published in 1921, is still used by homeopaths today.
In 2009, the FDA advised consumers to stop using three discontinued cold remedy Zicam products because it could cause permanent damage to users' sense of smell.
Though the proving process has superficial similarities with clinical trials, it is fundamentally different in that the process is subjective, not blinded, and modern provings are unlikely to use pharmacologically active levels of the substance under proving.
The letter also includes information on sanctions in the event of non-compliance including, ultimately, "referral by the  ASA to Trading Standards under the Consumer Protection from Unfair Trading Regulations 2008."
Oscillococcinum would thus require 10320 more universes to simply have one molecule in the final substance.
Insoluble solids, such as granite, diamond, and platinum, are diluted by grinding them with lactose ("trituration").
Because medical practice of the time relied on ineffective and often dangerous treatments, patients of homeopaths often had better outcomes than those of the doctors of the time.
All reported positive results but none could offer any science backing up their statements, only that "it works".
Dilution typically continues well past the point where no molecules of the original substance remain.
Mohandas said that government approval of these colleges makes them appear legitimate, leading thousands of talented students to join them and end up with invalid degrees.
Instances of arsenic poisoning have occurred after use of arsenic-containing homeopathic preparations.
There is an overall absence of sound statistical evidence of therapeutic efficacy, which is consistent with the lack of any biologically plausible pharmacological agent or mechanism.
These treatments are biologically implausible and the clinical tests have shown they don't do anything at all in human beings.
Contrariwise, quantum superposition has been invoked to explain why homeopathy does ''not'' work in double-blind trials.
Johnson asked homeopaths and company representatives about cures for cancer and vaccine claims.
Isopathy is a therapy derived from homeopathy, invented by Johann Joseph Wilhelm Lux in the 1830s.
Some modern homeopaths use preparations they call "imponderables" because they do not originate from a substance but some other phenomenon presumed to have been "captured" by alcohol or lactose.
A common explanation for his settling on this process is said to be that he found preparations subjected to agitation in transit, such as in saddle bags or in a carriage, were more "potent".
Hahnemann's miasm theory remains disputed and controversial within homeopathy even in modern times.
The evidence, however, is not convincing because of methodological shortcomings and inconsistencies."
In the United States, the ''Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act'' of 1938 (sponsored by Royal Copeland, a Senator from New York and homeopathic physician) recognized homeopathic preparations as drugs.
The lack of convincing scientific evidence supporting its efficacy and its use of preparations without active ingredients have led to characterizations as pseudoscience and quackery, or, in the words of a 1998 medical review, "placebo therapy at best and quackery at worst".
The evidence of bias in the primary studies weakens the findings of our original meta-analysis.
This works out to one part of the original substance in 10,000 parts of the solution.
Some products with such relatively lower dilutions continue to be sold, but like their counterparts, they have not been conclusively demonstrated to have any effect beyond that of a placebo.
In 2005, ''The Lancet'' medical journal published a meta-analysis of 110 placebo-controlled homeopathy trials and 110 matched medical trials based upon the Swiss government's Programme for Evaluating Complementary Medicine, or PEK.
The Indian government recognizes homeopathy as one of its national systems of medicine; it has established AYUSH or the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.
Conversely, preparations made from "healthy" specimens are called "sarcodes".
The lawsuit charged that it "is nothing more than a sugar pill", "despite falsely advertising that it contains an active ingredient known to treat flu symptoms".
A 2006 review by W. Steven Pray of the College of Pharmacy at Southwestern Oklahoma State University recommends that pharmacy colleges include a required course in unproven medications and therapies, that ethical dilemmas inherent in recommending products lacking proven safety and efficacy data be discussed, and that students should be taught where unproven systems such as homeopathy depart from evidence-based medicine.
In 2013, Mark Walport, the UK Government Chief Scientific Adviser and head of the Government Office for Science, had this to say: "My view scientifically is absolutely clear: homoeopathy is nonsense, it is non-science.
In March 2016, the University of Barcelona cancelled its Masters degree in Homeopathy citing "lack of scientific basis", after advice from the Spanish Ministry of Health stated that "Homeopathy has not definitely proved its efficacy under any indication or concrete clinical situation".
Promotion of homeopathic alternatives to vaccines has been characterized as dangerous, inappropriate and irresponsible.
The centesimal scale was favoured by Hahnemann for most of his life.
The fact that a number of the new high-quality trials ... have negative results, and a recent update of our review for the most "original" subtype of homeopathy (classical or individualized homeopathy), seem to confirm the finding that more rigorous trials have less-promising results.
Homeopathy is not a plausible system of treatment, as its dogmas about how drugs, illness, the human body, liquids and solutions operate are contradicted by a wide range of discoveries across biology, psychology, physics and chemistry made in the two centuries since its invention.
ones which have been inappropriately designed, conducted or reported) are prone to give misleading results.
Other studies have also found that giving animals placebos can play active roles in influencing pet owners to believe in the effectiveness of the treatment when none exists.
In 2001 and 2004, Madeleine Ennis published a number of studies which reported that homeopathic dilutions of histamine exerted an effect on the activity of basophils.
The National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine of the United States' National Institutes of Health states:
Some homeopaths contend that the phenomenon of hormesis may support the idea of dilution increasing potency, but the dose-response relationship outside the zone of hormesis declines with dilution as normal, and nonlinear pharmacological effects do not provide any credible support for homeopathy.
Ben Goldacre noted that in the early days of homeopathy, when medicine was dogmatic and frequently worse than doing nothing, homeopathy at least failed to make matters worse:
From this, Hahnemann came to believe that all effective drugs produce symptoms in healthy individuals similar to those of the diseases that they treat, in accord with the "law of similars" that had been proposed by ancient physicians.
Hahnemann rejected the notion of a disease as a separate thing or invading entity, and insisted it was always part of the "living whole".
Also, in one case in 2004, a homeopath instructed one of her patients to stop taking conventional medication for a heart condition, advising her on 22 June 2004 to "Stop ALL medications including homeopathic", advising her on or around 20 August that she no longer needed to take her heart medication, and adding on 23 August, "She just cannot take ANY drugs – I have suggested some homeopathic remedies ...
There is no convincing scientific or clinical evidence for flower preparations being effective.
In December 2014, Australian homeopathy supplier Homeopathy Plus!
If, however, these symptoms were suppressed by medication, the cause went deeper and began to manifest itself as diseases of the internal organs.
However, by the mid to late 1970s, homeopathy made a significant comeback and sales of some homeopathic companies increased tenfold.
On 28 September 2016 the UK's Committee of Advertising Practice (CAP) Compliance team wrote to homeopaths  in the UK to "remind them of the rules that govern what they can and can’t say in their marketing materials."
A review conducted in 2010 of all the pertinent studies of "best evidence" produced by the Cochrane Collaboration concluded that "the most reliable evidence&nbsp;– that produced by Cochrane reviews&nbsp;– fails to demonstrate that homeopathic medicines have effects beyond placebo."
During 19th-century epidemics of diseases such as cholera, death rates in homeopathic hospitals were often lower than in conventional hospitals, where the treatments used at the time were often harmful and did little or nothing to combat the diseases.
The first symptomatic homeopathic ''materia medica'' was arranged by Hahnemann.
Subsequent work by John Ioannidis and others has shown that for treatments with no prior plausibility, the chances of a positive result being a false positive are much higher, and that any result not consistent with the null hypothesis should be assumed to be a false positive.
Since Hahnemann's time, other miasms have been proposed, some replacing one or more of psora's proposed functions, including tuberculosis and cancer miasms.
In 2012, a systematic review evaluating evidence of homeopathy's possible adverse effects concluded that "homeopathy has the potential to harm patients and consumers in both direct and indirect ways".
The British Veterinary Association's position statement on alternative medicines says that it "cannot endorse" homeopathy, and the Australian Veterinary Association includes it on its list of "ineffective therapies".
Jack Killen, acting deputy director of the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, says homeopathy "goes beyond current understanding of chemistry and physics".
The letter highlights that "homeopaths may not currently make either direct or implied claims to treat medical conditions" and asks them to review their marketing communications "including websites and social media pages" to ensure compliance by 3 November 2016.
Some clinical trials have tested individualized homeopathy, and there have been reviews of this, specifically.
He experienced fever, shivering and joint pain: symptoms similar to those of malaria itself.
Ben Goldacre says that homeopaths who misrepresent scientific evidence to a scientifically illiterate public, have "... walled themselves off from academic medicine, and critique has been all too often met with avoidance rather than argument".
An account of the effects of eating cinchona bark noted by Oliver Wendell Holmes, and published in 1861, failed to reproduce the symptoms Hahnemann reported.
Since we completed our literature search in 1995, a considerable number of new homeopathy trials have been published.
that more rigorous studies produce less positive results is supported in several and contradicted by none.
The preparations are manufactured using a process of homeopathic dilution, in which a chosen substance is repeatedly diluted in alcohol or distilled water, each time with the containing vessel being bashed against an elastic material, (commonly a leather-bound book).
From its inception, however, homeopathy was criticized by mainstream science.
Furthermore, trials of low methodological quality (i.e.
I feel confident that if she follows the advice she will regain her health."
Sir John Forbes, physician to Queen Victoria, said in 1843 that the extremely small doses of homeopathy were regularly derided as useless, "an outrage to human reason".
instead, he advocated the use of single drugs at lower doses and promoted an immaterial, vitalistic view of how living organisms function, believing that diseases have spiritual, as well as physical causes.
In July 2012, CBC News reporter Erica Johnson for ''Marketplace'' conducted an investigation on the homeopathy industry in Canada; her findings were that it is "based on flawed science and some loopy thinking".
Some homeopathic preparations involve poisons such as Belladonna, arsenic, and poison ivy, which are highly diluted in the homeopathic preparation.
The Chief Medical Officer for England, Dame Sally Davies, has stated that homeopathic preparations are "rubbish" and do not serve as anything more than placebos.
Hahnemann believed the underlying causes of disease were phenomena that he termed ''miasms'', and that homeopathic preparations addressed these.
Continued homeopathic practice, despite the evidence that it does not work, has been criticized as unethical because it discourages the use of effective treatments, with the World Health Organization warning against using homeopathy to try to treat severe diseases such as HIV and malaria.
were found to have acted deceptively in promoting homeopathic alternatives to vaccines.
In Hahnemann's time, it was reasonable to assume the preparations could be diluted indefinitely, as the concept of the atom or molecule as the smallest possible unit of a chemical substance was just beginning to be recognized.
Since better quality trials have become available, the evidence for efficacy of homeopathy preparations has diminished; the highest-quality trials indicate that the preparations themselves exert no intrinsic effect.
A 2C dilution requires a substance to be diluted to one part in 100, and then some of that diluted solution diluted by a further factor of 100.
The south Indian state of Kerala also gives the final nod for AYUSH department where homeopathy and Ayurveda are the main streams along with Sidha, Unani and Yoga.
The process of dilution and succussion is termed "dynamization" or "potentization" by homeopaths.
Park is also quoted as saying that, "to expect to get even one molecule of the 'medicinal' substance allegedly present in 30X pills, it would be necessary to take some two billion of them, which would total about a thousand tons of lactose plus whatever impurities the lactose contained".
Patients who choose to use homeopathy rather than evidence-based medicine risk missing timely diagnosis and effective treatment of serious conditions such as cancer.
The laws of chemistry state that there is a limit to the dilution that can be made without losing the original substance altogether.
A separate 2001 systematic review that assessed the quality of clinical trials of homeopathy found that such trials were generally of lower quality than trials of conventional medicine.
No good-quality, well-designed studies with enough participants for a meaningful result reported either that homeopathy caused greater health improvements than placebo, or caused health improvements equal to those of another treatment."
Other reviews covered osteoarthritis, migraines, postoperative ecchymosis and edema, delayed-onset muscle soreness, or eczema and other dermatological conditions.
This concept is inconsistent with the current understanding of matter, and water memory has never been demonstrated to have any detectable effect, biological or otherwise.
Other meta-analyses include homeopathic treatments to reduce cancer therapy side-effects following radiotherapy and chemotherapy, allergic rhinitis, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and childhood diarrhoea, adenoid vegetation, asthma, upper respiratory tract infection in children, insomnia, fibromyalgia, psychiatric conditions and Cochrane Library reviews of homeopathic treatments for asthma, dementia, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, induction of labour, and irritable bowel syndrome.
Examples include ''arsenicum album'' (arsenic oxide), ''natrum muriaticum'' (sodium chloride or table salt), ''Lachesis muta'' (the venom of the bushmaster snake), ''opium'', and ''thyroidinum'' (thyroid hormone).
The FDA has not approved homeopathic products as veterinary medicine in the U.S.
Zicam was launched without a New Drug Application (NDA) under a provision in the FDA's Compliance Policy Guide called "Conditions under which homeopathic drugs may be marketed" (CPG 7132.15), but the FDA warned Matrixx Initiatives, its manufacturer, via a Warning Letter that this policy does not apply when there is a health risk to consumers.
Hahnemann found that undiluted doses caused reactions, sometimes dangerous ones, so specified that preparations be given at the lowest possible dose.
Some homeopaths give credit for the revival to Greek homeopath George Vithoulkas, who performed a "great deal of research to update the scenarios and refine the theories and practice of homeopathy", beginning in the 1970s, but Ernst and Singh consider it to be linked to the rise of the New Age movement.
Homeopathy maintains that treating diseases by directly alleviating their symptoms, as is sometimes done in conventional medicine, is ineffective because all "disease can generally be traced to some latent, deep-seated, underlying chronic, or inherited tendency".
James Randi stated that he doubted that there had been any conscious fraud, but that the researchers had allowed "wishful thinking" to influence their interpretation of the data.
Hahnemann advocated 30C dilutions for most purposes (that is, dilution by a factor of 1060).
Hahnemann coined the expression "allopathic medicine", which was used to pejoratively refer to traditional Western medicine.
The Food and Drug Administration held a hearing April 20 and 21, 2015, requesting public comment on regulation of homeopathic drugs.
Higher dilutions follow the same pattern.
Many of the early homeopaths were originally doctors and generally used lower dilutions such as "3X" or "6X", rarely going beyond "12X".
One product, Zicam Cold Remedy, which was marketed as an "unapproved homeopathic" product, contains two ingredients that are only "slightly" diluted: zinc acetate (2X = 1/100 dilution) and zinc gluconate (1X = 1/10 dilution), which means both are present in a biologically active concentration strong enough to have caused some people to lose their sense of smell, a condition termed anosmia.
A 6C dilution repeats this process six times, ending up with the original substance diluted by a factor of 100−6=10−12 (one part in one trillion or 1/1,000,000,000,000).
Upon replication in four separate laboratories the study was published.
Assessments by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council, the British National Health and Medical Research Council, and the Swiss Federal Health Office have each concluded that homeopathy is ineffective, and recommended against the practice receiving any further funding.
Many so-called "homeopathic vaccines" are a form of isopathy.
Both meta-analyses, which statistically combine the results of several randomized controlled trials, and other systematic reviews of the literature are essential tools to summarize evidence of therapeutic efficacy.
Whichever is correct, mainstream pharmacy chains recognized the business potential of selling homeopathic preparations.
Belladonna and ipecac "would be indistinguishable from each other in a blind test".
The members of the French Homeopathic Society observed in 1867 that some leading homeopathists of Europe not only were abandoning the practice of administering infinitesimal doses but were also no longer defending it.
Homeopathic preparations are not effective for treating any condition; large-scale studies have found homeopathy to be no more effective than a placebo, suggesting that any positive feelings that follow treatment are only due to the placebo effect and normal recovery from illness.
In 2015 the Federal Court of Australia imposed penalties on a homeopathic company, Homeopathy Plus!
Scientific tests run by both the BBC's ''Horizon'' and ABC's ''20/20'' programmes were unable to differentiate homeopathic dilutions from water, even when using tests suggested by homeopaths themselves.
Isopathy differs from homeopathy in general in that the preparations, known as "nosodes", are made up either from things that cause the disease or from products of the disease, such as pus.
There are no laboratory assays and the importance and techniques for succussion cannot be determined with any certainty from the literature.
This dose-response relationship has been confirmed in myriad experiments on organisms as diverse as nematodes, rats, and humans.
Johnson was unable to find any evidence that homeopathic preparations contain any active ingredient.
The continued practice of homeopathy, despite a lack of evidence of efficacy, has led to it being characterized within the scientific and medical communities as nonsense, quackery, and a sham.
In the 16th century, the pioneer of pharmacology Paracelsus declared that small doses of "what makes a man ill also cures him".
Zicam also listed several normal homeopathic potencies as "inactive ingredients", including ''galphimia glauca'', histamine dihydrochloride (homeopathic name, ''histaminum hydrochloricum''), ''luffa operculata'', and sulfur.
Popular in the late nineteenth century, electrohomeopathy has been described as "utter idiocy".
Homeopathy is a pseudoscience &ndash; a belief that is incorrectly presented as scientific.
The UK's Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) has adopted a robust position against use of "alternative" pet preparations including homeopathy.
Bach flower preparations are manufactured in allegedly "gentler" ways such as placing flowers in bowls of sunlit water, and the preparations are not succussed.
Although the proponents of these preparations share homeopathy's vitalist world-view and the preparations are claimed to act through the same hypothetical "vital force" as homeopathy, the method of preparation is different.
Animals may be treated only by qualified veterinary surgeons in the UK and some other countries.
It is practised worldwide and professional qualifications and licences are needed in most countries.
Critics and advocates of homeopathy alike commonly attempt to illustrate the dilutions involved in homeopathy with analogies.
In April 2012, at the Berkeley SkeptiCal conference, over 100 people participated in a mass overdose, taking ''coffea cruda'', which is supposed to treat sleeplessness.
published in the ''American Journal of Medicine'', Michael Baum and Edzard Ernstwriting to other physicianswrote that "Homeopathy is among the worst examples of faith-based medicine...
This puts visitors to the tropics who take this advice in severe danger, since homeopathic preparations are completely ineffective against the malaria parasite.
James Randi and the 10:23 campaign groups have highlighted the lack of active ingredients in most homeopathic products by taking large 'overdoses'.
The most famous of these are the Bach flower remedies, which were developed by the physician and homeopath Edward Bach.
The patient was admitted to hospital the next day, and died eight days later, the final diagnosis being "acute heart failure due to treatment discontinuation".
In a systematic review of the methodological quality of randomized trials in three branches of alternative medicine, Linde ''et al.''
For comparison, ISO 3696:1987 defines a standard for water used in laboratory analysis; this allows for a contaminant level of ten parts per billion, 4C in homeopathic notation.
These axioms of homeopathy are not only out of line with scientific facts but also directly opposed to them.
He found that this reduced potency as well as side-effects, but formed the view that vigorous shaking and striking on an elastic surface &ndash; a process he termed ''Schütteln'', translated as ''succussion'' &ndash; nullified this.
In both cases different compilers may dispute particular inclusions.
The last school in the US exclusively teaching homeopathy closed in 1920.
On clinical grounds, patients who choose to use homeopathy in preference to normal medicine risk missing timely diagnosis and effective treatment, thereby worsening the outcomes of serious conditions.
Repertories, in particular, may be very large.
My advice to ministers is clear: that there is no science in homoeopathy.
Hahnemann's law of similars is a postulate rather than a scientific law.
200CK is a 200C preparation made using the Korsakovian method.
He published a collection of provings in 1805, and a second collection of 65 preparations appeared in his book, ''Materia Medica Pura'', in 1810.
Not all homeopaths advocate high dilutions.
In Germany, to become a homeopathic physician, one must attend a three-year training programme, while France, Austria and Denmark mandate licences to diagnose any illness or dispense of any product whose purpose is to treat any illness.
Critics of homeopathy have cited individual cases of patients of homeopathy failing to receive proper treatment for diseases that could have been easily diagnosed and managed with conventional medicine and who have died as a result, and the "marketing practice" of criticizing and downplaying the effectiveness of mainstream medicine.
Homeopathic preparations, even if ineffective, would almost surely cause no harm, making the users of homeopathic preparations less likely to be killed by the treatment that was supposed to be helping them.
By 2012, no British universities offered homeopathy courses.
Modern advocates of homeopathy have proposed a concept of "water memory", according to which water "remembers" the substances mixed in it, and transmits the effect of those substances when consumed.
In classical homeopathy, the practitioner attempts to match a single preparation to the totality of symptoms (the ''simlilum''), while "clinical homeopathy" involves combinations of preparations based on the various symptoms of an illness.
Cases of homeopaths advising against the use of anti-malarial drugs have been identified.
Several of the key concepts of homeopathy conflict with fundamental concepts of physics and chemistry.
The first homeopathic repertory was Georg Jahr's ''Symptomenkodex'', published in German in 1835, and translated into English as the ''Repertory to the more Characteristic Symptoms of Materia Medica'' by Constantine Hering in 1838.
Homeopaths claim that use of conventional medicines will "push the disease deeper" and cause more serious conditions, a process referred to as "suppression".
Electrohomeopathy is a treatment devised by Count Cesare Mattei (1809–1896), who proposed that different "colours" of electricity could be used to treat cancer.
The process of homeopathic dilution results in no objectively detectable active ingredient in most cases, but some preparations (e.g.
The Swiss government, after a 5-year trial, withdrew coverage of homeopathy and four other complementary treatments in 2005, stating that they did not meet efficacy and cost-effectiveness criteria, but following a referendum in 2009 the five therapies have been reinstated for a further 6-year trial period from 2012.
It seems, therefore, likely that our meta-analysis at least overestimated the effects of homeopathic treatments.
The results of these reviews are generally negative or only weakly positive, and reviewers consistently report the poor quality of trials.
The paper purported to have discovered that basophils, a type of white blood cell, released histamine when exposed to a homeopathic dilution of anti-immunoglobulin E antibody.
In homeopathy, a solution that is more dilute is described as having a higher "potency", and more dilute substances are considered by homeopaths to be stronger and deeper-acting.
Although some clinical trials produce positive results, multiple systematic reviews have indicated that this is because of chance, flawed research methods, and reporting bias.
A minimum of a recognized diploma in homeopathy and registration on a state register or the Central Register of Homoeopathy is required to practise homeopathy in India.
In an article entitled "Should We Maintain an Open Mind about Homeopathy?"
Regarding the way in which homeopathy is represented in the medical literature, a systematic review found signs of bias in the publications of clinical trials (towards negative representation in mainstream medical journals, and ''vice versa'' in alternative medicine journals), but not in reviews.
Following a threat of legal action by the Good Thinking Society campaign group, the British government has stated that the Department of Health will hold a consultation in 2016 regarding whether homeopathic treatments should be added to the NHS treatments blacklist (officially, Schedule 1 of the National Health Service (General Medical Services Contracts) (Prescription of Drugs etc.)
Shortly afterwards, in April 2016, the University of Valencia announced the elimination of its Masters in Homeopathy for 2017.
Preparations at concentrations below 4X are considered an important part of homeopathic heritage.
Homeopaths contend that their methods produce a therapeutically active preparation, selectively including only the intended substance, though critics note that any water will have been in contact with millions of different substances throughout its history, and homeopaths have not been able to account for a reason why only the selected homeopathic substance would be a special case in their process.
Hahnemann believed that this process aroused and enhanced "the spirit-like medicinal powers of the crude substances".
Hahnemann is reported to have joked that a suitable procedure to deal with an epidemic would be to empty a bottle of poison into Lake Geneva, if it could be succussed 60 times.
Hahnemann conceived of homeopathy while translating a medical treatise by the Scottish physician and chemist William Cullen into German.
They recommended that funding of homeopathic hospitals should not continue, and NHS doctors should not refer patients to homeopaths.
It was introduced to the United States in 1825 by Hans Birch Gram, a student of Hahnemann.
The American College of Medical Toxicology and the American Academy of Clinical Toxicology recommend that no one use homeopathic treatment for disease or as a preventive health measure.
This water may not be kept in glass as contaminants will leach out into the water.
