The first attempts to classify homosexuality as a disease were made by the fledgling European sexologist movement in the late 19th century.
With the outbreak of AIDS in the early 1980s, many LGBT groups and individuals organized campaigns to promote efforts in AIDS education, prevention, research, patient support, and community outreach, as well as to demand government support for these programs.
Gay and lesbian youth bear an increased risk of suicide, substance abuse, school problems, and isolation because of a "hostile and condemning environment, verbal and physical abuse, rejection and isolation from family and peers".
While some people believe that homosexual activity is unnatural, scientific research has shown that homosexuality is a normal and natural variation in human sexuality and is not in and of itself a source of negative psychological effects.
Further, LGBT youths are more likely to report psychological and physical abuse by parents or caretakers, and more sexual abuse.
Many gay and lesbian people are in committed same-sex relationships, though only recently have census forms and political conditions facilitated their visibility and enumeration.
The American Psychological Association says that "most people experience little or no sense of choice about their sexual orientation".
Early 20th-century writers on a homosexual orientation usually understood it to be intrinsically linked to the subject's own sex.
Similar to other minority groups they can also be subject to stereotyping.
Some opponents of gay rights say that such rights may conflict with individuals' freedom of speech, religious freedoms in the workplace, the ability to run churches, charitable organizations and other religious organizations in accordance with one's religious views, and that the acceptance of homosexual relationships by religious organizations might be forced through threatening to remove the tax-exempt status of churches whose views do not align with those of the government.
In both the Male and Female volumes of the ''Kinsey Reports'', an additional grade, listed as "X", has been interpreted by scholars to indicate asexuality.
Rather, LGB individuals are often raised in communities that are either ignorant of or openly hostile toward homosexuality."
There is also a word referring to same-sex love, ''homophilia''.
The 1998 murder of Matthew Shepard, a gay student, is a notorious such incident in the U.S. LGBT people, especially lesbians, may become the victims of "corrective rape", a violent crime with the supposed aim of making them heterosexual.
as recently as 2009.
In many cultures, homosexual people are frequently subject to prejudice and discrimination.
''Sexual Inversion'' by Havelock Ellis, published in 1896, challenged theories that homosexuality was abnormal, as well as stereotypes, and insisted on the ubiquity of homosexuality and its association with intellectual and artistic achievement.
Research into the causes of homosexuality plays a role in political and social debates and also raises concerns about genetic profiling and prenatal testing.
People with a homosexual orientation can express their sexuality in a variety of ways, and may or may not express it in their behaviors.
An individual homosexual, heterosexual or bisexual person may be masculine, feminine, or androgynous, and in addition, many members and supporters of lesbian and gay communities now see the "gender-conforming heterosexual" and the "gender-nonconforming homosexual" as negative stereotypes.
The study's senior researcher said that women's sexual desire is less rigidly directed toward a particular sex, as compared with men's, and it is more changeable over time.
The American Academy of Pediatrics stated in ''Pediatrics'' in 2004:
Societal acceptance of non-heterosexual orientations such as homosexuality is lowest in Asian and African countries, and is highest in Europe, Australia, and the Americas.
Major American motion pictures from this period that dramatized the response of individuals and communities to the AIDS crisis include ''An Early Frost'' (1985), ''Longtime Companion'' (1990), ''And the Band Played On'' (1993), ''Philadelphia'' (1993), and ''Common Threads: Stories from the Quilt'' (1989).
Their results suggested that "genes predisposing to homosexuality may confer a mating advantage in heterosexuals, which could help explain the evolution and maintenance of homosexuality in the population".
In 1886, Richard von Krafft-Ebing used the terms ''homosexual'' and ''heterosexual'' in his book ''Psychopathia Sexualis''.
Yet not all LGBT people choose to participate in "queer culture", and many gay men and women specifically decline to do so.
However, there is substantial evidence for a genetic basis of homosexuality especially in males based on twin studies, with some association with regions of Chromosome 8 and with the Xq28 gene on the X chromosome.
E. E. Evans-Pritchard also recorded that male Azande warriors in the northern Congo routinely took on young male lovers between the ages of twelve and twenty, who helped with household tasks and participated in intercrural sex with their older husbands.
By denying same-sex couples the right to marry, the state reinforces and perpetuates the stigma historically associated with homosexuality.
The American Psychological Association states that "sexual orientation is not a choice that can be changed at will, and that sexual orientation is most likely the result of a complex interaction of environmental, cognitive and biological factors...is shaped at an early age...and evidence suggests biological, including genetic or inborn hormonal factors, play a significant role in a person's sexuality."
Safe sex is a relevant harm reduction philosophy.
There is now a large body of research evidence that indicates that being gay, lesbian or bisexual is compatible with normal mental health and social adjustment.
In ancient Assyria, homosexuality was present and common; it was also not prohibited, condemned, nor looked upon as immoral or disordered.
Desire is an amatory Impulse of the inmost human Parts."
The adjectives deriving from her name and place of birth (Sapphic and Lesbian) came to be applied to female homosexuality beginning in the 19th century.
A review study suggested that the children with lesbian or gay parents appear less traditionally gender-typed and are more likely to be open to homoerotic relationships, partly due to genetic (80% of the children being raised by same-sex couples in the US are not adopted and most are the result of heterosexual marriages)) and family socialization processes (children grow up in relatively more tolerant school, neighborhood, and social contexts, which are less heterosexist), even though majority of children raised by same-sex couples identify as heterosexual.
The formal and final transfer of the Aouzou Strip from Libya to Chad took place on May 30, 1994, when the sides signed a joint declaration stating that the Libyan withdrawal had been effected.
* There are no empirical studies or peer-reviewed research that support theories attributing same-sex sexual orientation to family dysfunction or trauma (Bell et al., 1981; Bene, 1965; Freund & Blanchard, 1983; Freund & Pinkava, 1961; Hooker, 1969; McCord et al., 1962; D. K. Peters & Cantrell, 1991; Siegelman, 1974, 1981; Townes et al., 1976).
One study suggested that children of gay and lesbian parents were more likely to adopt non-heterosexual identities, especially daughters of lesbian parents (inter-generational transfer was not significant in some analyses for sons).
Similarly, David's love for Jonathan is "greater than the love of women."
While the question of homosexuality in the military has been highly politicized in the United States, it is not necessarily so in many countries.
Conversely, ''gay'', a word originally embraced by homosexual men and women as a positive, affirmative term (as in gay liberation and gay rights), has come into widespread pejorative use among young people.
''Gay'' and ''lesbian'' are the most common alternatives.
In 1977, Quebec became the first state-level jurisdiction in the world to prohibit discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
A 2009 study also suggested a significant increase in fecundity in the females related to the homosexual people from the maternal line (but not in those related from the paternal one).
Many commentators oppose the practice altogether, while some encourage outing public figures who use their positions of influence to harm other gay people.
In certain parts of the world, LGBT people are also at risk of "honor killings" perpetrated by their families or relatives.
Krafft-Ebing's book was so popular among both laymen and doctors that the terms "heterosexual" and "homosexual" became the most widely accepted terms for sexual orientation.
Much literature on mental health and homosexual patients centered on their depression, substance abuse, and suicide.
11.1% were based on anti-female homosexual bias.
According to the 2000 United States Census, there were about 601,209 same-sex unmarried partner households.
In Greater Iran, homosexuality and homoerotic expressions were tolerated in numerous public places, from monasteries and seminaries to taverns, military camps, bathhouses, and coffee houses.
In five regions of the genome the methylation pattern appears very closely linked to sexual orientation.
Similar is lesbophobia (specifically targeting lesbians) and biphobia (against bisexual people).
Homosexual behavior has also been documented and is observed in many non-human animal species.
Israel is the only country in the Middle East region that allows openly LGB people to serve in the military.
Since the end of the 19th century, there has been a global movement towards increased visibility, recognition, and legal rights for homosexual people, including the rights to marriage and civil unions, adoption and parenting, employment, military service, equal access to health care, and the introduction of anti-bullying legislation to protect gay minors.
Writings from the Liu Song Dynasty by Wang Shunu claimed that homosexuality was as common as heterosexuality in the late 3rd century.
The Spanish conquerors were horrified to discover sodomy openly practiced among native peoples, and attempted to crush it out by subjecting the ''berdaches'' (as the Spanish called them) under their rule to severe penalties, including public execution, burning and being torn to pieces by dogs.
As with ethnic slurs and racial slurs, however, the misuse of these terms can still be highly offensive; the range of acceptable use depends on the context and speaker.
Crisis centers in larger cities and information sites on the Internet have arisen to help youth and adults.
The Kinsey scale, also called the Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale, attempts to describe a person's sexual history or episodes of his or her sexual activity at a given time.
Since the 1960s, many LGBT people in the West, particularly those in major metropolitan areas, have developed a so-called gay culture.
Some view same-sex love and sexuality as sacred, and a mythology of same-sex love can be found around the world.
Sappho, born on the island of Lesbos, was included by later Greeks in the canonical list of nine lyric poets.
Many countries neither ban nor support LGB service members.
Although homosexual acts were decriminalized in some parts of the Western world, such as Poland in 1932, Denmark in 1933, Sweden in 1944, and the United Kingdom in 1967, it was not until the mid-1970s that the gay community first began to achieve limited civil rights in some developed countries.
There is now a large body of research evidence that indicates that being gay, lesbian or bisexual is compatible with normal mental health and social adjustment.
The word ''lesbian'' is derived from the name of the Greek island Lesbos, where the poet Sappho wrote largely about her emotional relationships with young women.
Little is known of female homosexuality in antiquity.
According to American Psychological Association empirical evidence fails to show that sexual orientation is germane to any aspect of military effectiveness including unit cohesion, morale, recruitment and retention.
"Essentialists" typically believe that sexual preferences are determined by biological forces, while "constructionists" assume that sexual desires are learned.
Most lesbian, gay, and bisexual people who seek psychotherapy do so for the same reasons as heterosexual people (stress, relationship difficulties, difficulty adjusting to social or work situations, etc.
In the United States, according to a ''The Williams Institute'' report in April 2011, only 3.5% or approximately 9 million of the adult population are lesbian, gay, or bisexual.
A few countries continue to ban homosexual personnel outright.
At this age, they may not trust or ask for help from others, especially when their orientation is not accepted in society.
''An American obsession: Science, medicine, and homosexuality in modern society.''
Though the relationship between homosexuality and religion can vary greatly across time and place, within and between different religions and sects, and regarding different forms of homosexuality and bisexuality, current authoritative bodies and doctrines of the world's largest religions generally view homosexuality negatively.
Around 1785 Jeremy Bentham wrote another defense, but this was not published until 1978.
Critics charge that political correctness has led to the association of sex between males and HIV being downplayed.
The authors of a 2008 study stated "there is considerable evidence that human sexual orientation is genetically influenced, so it is not known how homosexuality, which tends to lower reproductive success, is maintained in the population at a relatively high frequency".
The first letters are frequently combined to create the initialism LGBT (sometimes written as GLBT), in which ''B'' and ''T'' refer to bisexual and transgender people.
Zucker have found that a majority of gay men and lesbians report being gender-nonconforming during their childhood years.
Also in 1749, the earliest extended and serious defense of homosexuality in English, ''Ancient and Modern Pederasty Investigated and Exemplified'', written by Thomas Cannon, was published, but was suppressed almost immediately.
The word ''homosexual'' is a Greek and Latin hybrid, with the first element derived from Greek ὁμός ''homos'', "same" (not related to the Latin ''homo'', "man", as in ''Homo sapiens''), thus connoting sexual acts and affections between members of the same sex, including lesbianism.
Same-sex intercourse officially carries the death penalty in several Muslim nations: Saudi Arabia, Iran, Mauritania, northern Nigeria, Sudan, and Yemen.
Many Melanesian societies, however, have become hostile towards same-sex relationships since the introduction of Christianity by European missionaries.
Instead, social ostracism, legal discrimination, internalization of negative stereotypes, and limited support structures indicate factors homosexual people face in Western societies that often adversely affect their mental health.
In 1900, Elisar von Kupffer published an anthology of homosexual literature from antiquity to his own time, ''Lieblingminne und Freundesliebe in der Weltliteratur''.
); their sexual orientation may be of primary, incidental, or no importance to their issues and treatment.
From the second half of the 13th century, death was the punishment for male homosexuality in most of Europe.
Gay men and lesbians form stable, committed relationships that are equivalent to heterosexual relationships in essential respects.
In August 1987, during the Toyota War between the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Chad, Aouzou fell to the Chadian forces, only to be repelled by an overwhelming Libyan counter-offensive.
Aristotle, in the ''Politics'', dismissed Plato's ideas about abolishing homosexuality (2.4); he explains that barbarians like the Celts accorded it a special honor (2.6.6), while the Cretans used it to regulate the population (2.7.5).
Homosexuality in China, known as the ''passions of the cut peach'' and various other euphemisms has been recorded since approximately 600 BCE.
Policies and attitudes toward gay and lesbian military personnel vary widely around the world.
Krafft-Ebing proposed that homosexuality was caused by either "congenital during birth inversion" or an "acquired inversion".
The second phase involves one's decision to come out to others, e.g.
In the late 19th century and early 20th century, pathological models of homosexuality were standard.
The American Psychological Association "encourages mental health professionals to avoid misrepresenting the efficacy of sexual orientation change efforts by promoting or promising change in sexual orientation when providing assistance to individuals distressed by their own or others' sexual orientation and concludes that the benefits reported by participants in sexual orientation change efforts can be gained through approaches that do not attempt to change sexual orientation".
The first record of possible homosexual couple in history is commonly regarded as Khnumhotep and Niankhkhnum, an ancient Egyptian male couple, who lived around 2400 BCE.
On the other hand, many countries today in the Middle East and Africa, as well as several countries in Asia, the Caribbean and the South Pacific, outlaw homosexuality.
It manifests in different forms, and a number of different types have been postulated, among which are internalized homophobia, social homophobia, emotional homophobia, rationalized homophobia, and others.
Heterosexism can include the presumption that everyone is heterosexual or that opposite-sex attractions and relationships are the norm and therefore superior.
'''Homosexuality''' () is romantic attraction, sexual attraction or sexual behavior between members of the same sex or gender.
The statute provides a sentence of up to 2 years in jail.
A 1992 study reported that 6.1% of males in Britain have had a homosexual experience, while in France the number was reported at 4.1%.
In social science, there has been a dispute between "essentialist" and "constructionist" views of homosexuality.
Homosexuality remains stigmatized, and this stigma has negative consequences.
Measuring the prevalence of homosexuality presents difficulties.
However, the experiences of discrimination in society and possible rejection by friends, families and others, such as employers, means that some LGB people experience a greater than expected prevalence of mental health difficulties and substance misuse problems.
Of the 26 countries that participate militarily in NATO, more than 20 permit openly gay, lesbian and bisexual people to serve.
Suggested reasons for this disparity are that (1) LGBT youths may be specifically targeted on the basis of their perceived sexual orientation or gender non-conforming appearance, and (2) that "risk factors associated with sexual minority status, including discrimination, invisibility, and rejection by family members...may lead to an increase in behaviors that are associated with risk for victimization, such as substance abuse, sex with multiple partners, or running away from home as a teenager."
The term ''homosocial'' is now used to describe single-sex contexts that are not specifically sexual.
Some religious texts contain prayers for divine blessings on homosexual relationships.
Sexual orientation is irrelevant to task cohesion, the only type of cohesion that critically predicts the team's military readiness and success.
1During World War II, Nazi Germany annexed territory or established reichskommissariats which extended Germany's laws against same-sex sexual activity to those territories and reichskommissariats.
3Same-sex sexual activity was never criminalized in the following countries and territories: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cambodia Central African Republic, Chad (excluding Aouzou Strip), Clipperton Island, Republic of the Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Gabon, Laos, Madagascar, Mali, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Niger, North Korea, Rwanda, South Korea, Vietnam, and Wallis and Futuna.
In many traditional Melanesian cultures a prepubertal boy would be paired with an older adolescent who would become his mentor and who would "inseminate" him (orally, anally, or topically, depending on the tribe) over a number of years in order for the younger to also reach puberty.
The narrators of many of her poems speak of infatuations and love (sometimes requited, sometimes not) for various females, but descriptions of physical acts between women are few and subject to debate.
In the early Safavid dynasty (1501–1723), male houses of prostitution (''amrad khane'') were legally recognized and paid taxes.
''Coming out'' (''of the closet'') is a phrase referring to one's disclosure of their sexual orientation or gender identity, and is described and experienced variously as a psychological process or journey.
The other two generally do not: China bans gay and lesbian people outright, Russia excludes all gay and lesbian people during peacetime but allows some gay men to serve in wartime (see below).
* Same-sex sexual attractions, behavior, and orientations per se are normal and positive variants of human sexuality; in other words, they are not indicators of mental or developmental disorders.
Libya's laws against same-sex sexual activity where thus extended to the annexed Aouzou Strip.
The bewildering death toll wrought by the AIDS epidemic at first seemed to slow the progress of the gay rights movement, but in time it galvanized some parts of the LGBT community into community service and political action, and challenged the heterosexual community to respond compassionately.
The American Psychological Association, American Psychiatric Association, and National Association of Social Workers stated in 2006:
The researchers suggested that heterosexuality may be a more stable identity because of its normative status.
During the 1980s and 1990s, most developed countries enacted laws decriminalizing homosexual behavior and prohibiting discrimination against lesbian and gay people in employment, housing, and services.
In a 2006 study, 20% of respondents anonymously reported some homosexual feelings, although only 2–3% identified themselves as homosexual.
Some social conservatives believe that all sexual relationships with people other than an opposite-sex spouse undermine the traditional family and that children should be reared in homes with both a father and a mother.
The debate divides those who believe that terms such as "gay" and "straight" refer to objective, culturally invariant properties of persons from those who believe that the experiences they name are artifacts of unique cultural and social processes.
Beginning in 1894 with ''Homogenic Love'', Socialist activist and poet Edward Carpenter wrote a string of pro-homosexual articles and pamphlets, and "came out" in 1916 in his book ''My Days and Dreams''.
The eclipse of this period of relative artistic and erotic freedom was precipitated by the rise to power of the moralizing monk Girolamo Savonarola.
Negative stereotypes characterize LGB people as less romantically stable, more promiscuous and more likely to abuse children, but there is no scientific basis to such assertions.
The first phase is that of "knowing oneself", and the realization emerges that one is open to same-sex relations.
Psychological research in this area has been relevant to counteracting prejudicial ("homophobic") attitudes and actions, and to the LGBT rights movement generally.
In the US, teenage students heard anti-gay slurs such as "homo", "faggot" and "sissy" about 26 times a day on average, or once every 14 minutes, according to a 1998 study by Mental Health America (formerly National Mental Health Association).
They favor biologically-based theories, which point to genetic factors, the early uterine environment, both, or the inclusion of genetic and social factors.
Generally, coming out is described in three phases.
Of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, three (United Kingdom, France and United States) do so.
Some nations mandate that all individuals restrict themselves to heterosexual relationships; that is, in some jurisdictions homosexual activity is illegal.
Ming Dynasty literature, such as ''Bian Er Chai'' (弁而釵/弁而钗), portray homosexual relationships between men as more enjoyable and more "harmonious" than heterosexual relationships.
Many European countries have the same prohibition.
Notwithstanding these regulations, taxes on brothels of boys available for homosexual sex continued to be collected until the end of the reign of Anastasius I in 518.
They concluded: "There is no scientific basis for distinguishing between same-sex couples and heterosexual couples with respect to the legal rights, obligations, benefits, and burdens conferred by civil marriage."
Some synonyms for same-sex attraction or sexual activity include ''men who have sex with men'' or ''MSM'' (used in the medical community when specifically discussing sexual activity) and ''homoerotic'' (referring to works of art).
Anthropologists Stephen Murray and Will Roscoe reported that women in Lesotho engaged in socially sanctioned "long term, erotic relationships" called ''motsoalle.''
For example, demographics would help in calculating the costs and benefits of domestic partnership benefits, of the impact of legalizing gay adoption, and of the impact of the U.S. military's Don't Ask Don't Tell policy.
Offenders can face the death penalty in some fundamentalist Muslim areas such as Iran and parts of Nigeria.
The longstanding consensus of research and clinical literature demonstrates that same-sex sexual and romantic attractions, feelings, and behaviors are normal and positive variations of human sexuality.
In northern Europe the artistic discourse on sodomy was turned against its proponents by artists such as Rembrandt, who in his ''Rape of Ganymede'' no longer depicted Ganymede as a willing youth, but as a squalling baby attacked by a rapacious bird of prey.
As a sexual orientation, homosexuality is "an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic, and/or sexual attractions" to people of the same sex.
A 2012 study found that 2% of a sample of 2,560 adult participants reported a change of sexual orientation identity after a 10-year period.
Beginning in the 1990s, some of these have been reclaimed as positive words by gay men and lesbians, as in the usage of queer studies, queer theory, and even the popular American television program ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy''.
They generally believe that it is determined by biological and environmental factors; they state that most people's sexual orientation is determined at an early age, and sexual orientation development involves a complex interplay between nature and nurture.
This court overturned this decision in 2003.
These terms are often used in medical literature and social research to describe such groups for study, without needing to consider the issues of sexual self-identity.
There are no studies of adequate scientific rigor that conclude that sexual orientation change efforts work to change a person's sexual orientation.
Psychology was one of the first disciplines to study a homosexual orientation as a discrete phenomenon.
Many have sexual relationships predominately with people of their own gender identity, though some have sexual relationships with those of the opposite gender, bisexual relationships, or none at all (celibate).
Among indigenous peoples of the Americas prior to European colonization, a common form of same-sex sexuality centered around the figure of the Two-Spirit individual.
The American Psychological Association and the Royal College of Psychiatrists expressed concerns that the positions espoused by NARTH are not supported by the science and create an environment in which prejudice and discrimination can flourish.
It is necessary to consider the measuring criteria that are used, the cutoff point and the time span taken to define a sexual orientation.
However, the probable reason is that they keep their sexuality a secret for fear of government sanction or rejection by their families.
The longstanding consensus of the behavioral and social sciences and the health and mental health professions is that homosexuality ''per se'' is a normal and positive variation of human sexual orientation, and therefore not a mental disorder.
Some countries allow gay men, lesbians, and bisexual people to serve openly and have granted them the same rights and privileges as their heterosexual counterparts.
The terms are seen as problematic, however, because they "obscure social dimensions of sexuality; undermine the self-labeling of lesbian, gay, and bisexual people; and do not sufficiently describe variations in sexual behavior".
In 1867, he became the first self-proclaimed homosexual person to speak out publicly in defense of homosexuality when he pleaded at the Congress of German Jurists in Munich for a resolution urging the repeal of anti-homosexual laws.
* Gay men, lesbians, and bisexual individuals can live satisfying lives as well as form stable, committed relationships and families that are equivalent to heterosexual relationships in essential respects (APA, 2005c; Kurdek, 2001, 2003, 2004; Peplau & Fingerhut, 2007).
Scientists generally do not believe that sexual orientation is a matter of choice.
When such attitudes manifest as crimes they are often called hate crimes and gay bashing.
California's prohibition on marriage for same-sex couples reflects and reinforces this stigma".
The research must measure some characteristic that may or may not be defining of sexual orientation.
Despite numerous attempts, no "gay gene" has been identified.
Same-sex sexual activity was previously legalized in the following countries or territories before German annexation or establishment of reichskommissariats: Bas-Rhin (legal in 1791), Belgium (legal in 1795), Belluno (legal in 1890), Friuli-Venezia Giulia (legal in 1890), Haut-Rhin (legal in 1791), Luxembourg (legal in 1795), Moselle (legal in 1791), Netherlands (legal in 1811), Nord (legal in 1791), Pas-de-Calais (legal in 1791), Poland (legal in 1932), and Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol (legal in 1890).
Same-sex sexual activity had also never been criminalized in continent of Antarctica.
In the United States, the FBI reported that 20.4% of hate crimes reported to law enforcement in 2011 were based on sexual orientation bias.
Such behaviors include sexual activity, courtship, affection, pair bonding, and parenting, and are widespread; a 1999 review by researcher Bruce Bagemihl shows that homosexual behavior has been documented in about 500 species, ranging from primates to gut worms.
The instances of same-sex affection and sexual interactions described in the classical novel ''Dream of the Red Chamber'' seem as familiar to observers in the present as do equivalent stories of romances between heterosexual people during the same period.
They do, however, encourage gay affirmative psychotherapy.
2In May 1973, the Libyan Arab Republic annexed the Aouzou Strip from Chad.
Some jurisdictions further recognize identical rights, protections, and privileges for the family structures of same-sex couples, including marriage.
In 1998, the state of Hawaii passed a constitutional amendment against gay marriage.
Homosexuality was mentioned in many famous works of Chinese literature.
On the other hand, many governments in the Middle East often ignore, deny the existence of, or criminalize homosexuality.
Homosexual and transgender individuals were also common among other pre-conquest civilizations in Latin America, such as the Aztecs, Mayans, Quechuas, Moches, Zapotecs, and the Tupinambá of Brazil.
Notable politicians, celebrities, military service people, and clergy members have been outed, with motives ranging from malice to political or moral beliefs.
Many historical figures, including Socrates, Lord Byron, Edward II, and Hadrian, have had terms such as ''gay'' or ''bisexual'' applied to them; some scholars, such as Michel Foucault, have regarded this as risking the anachronistic introduction of a contemporary construction of sexuality foreign to their times, though others challenge this.
On 11 December 2013, homosexuality was criminalized in India by a Supreme Court ruling.
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of psychological interventions to change sexual orientation.
Similarly, some recommend completely avoiding usage of ''homosexual'' as it has a negative, clinical history and because the word only refers to one's sexual behavior (as opposed to romantic feelings) and thus it has a negative connotation.
The third phase more generally involves living openly as an LGBT person.
A later study tried to eliminate the sample bias, but still reached similar conclusions.
To some it seems to be a frivolous display, perpetuating gay stereotypes.
A 2008 study showed a correlation between the degree of rejecting behavior by parents of LGB adolescents and negative health problems in the teenagers studied:
Whatever the issue, there is a high risk for anti-gay bias in psychotherapy with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients.
The U.S. organization GLAAD (formerly the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation) advises the media to avoid using the term ''homosexual.''
Typically this individual was recognized early in life, given a choice by the parents to follow the path and, if the child accepted the role, raised in the appropriate manner, learning the customs of the gender it had chosen.
