The oldest honey remains to have been found were in the country of Georgia.
The amino acids form darkened compounds called melanoidins, during a Maillard reaction.
While the risk honey poses to infant health is small, it is recommended not to take the risk until after one year of age, and then giving honey is considered safe.
* a seasonally variable number of male drone bees to fertilize new queens
In ancient Greece, honey was produced from the Archaic to the Hellenistic period.
Proverbs 16:24 in the JPS Tanakh 1917 version says "Pleasant words are as a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul, and health to the bones."
In one country, the USA, according to The National Honey Board (a USDA-overseen organization), "honey stipulates a pure product that does not allow for the addition of any other substance...this includes, but is not limited to, water or other sweeteners".
According to the Codex Alimentarius of the United Nations, any product labeled as honey or pure honey must be a wholly natural product, although different nations have their own laws concerning labeling.
The Maillard reaction will occur slowly at room temperature, taking from a few to several months to show visible darkening, but will speed-up dramatically with increasing temperatures.
People who have a weakened immune system should not eat honey because of the risk of bacterial or fungal infection.
Honey produced from flowers of rhododendrons, mountain laurels, sheep laurel, and azaleas may cause honey intoxication.
There is some evidence that honey may be effective in treating diseases and other medical conditions such as wounds and burns.
Honey contains many kinds of acids, both organic and amino.
Some wasps, such as the ''Polistes versicolor'', even consume honey themselves, switching from feeding on pollen in the middle of their lifecycles to feeding on honey, which can better provide for their energy needs.
Monofloral honey is made primarily from the nectar of one type of flower.
However, honey sometimes contains dormant endospores of the bacterium ''Clostridium botulinum'', which can be dangerous to babies, as it may result in botulism.
Variations in the water content alter the refractive index of honey.
Honey collection is an ancient activity.
Pure honey is considered kosher even though it is produced by a flying insect, a nonkosher creature; other products of nonkosher animals are not kosher.
In many cultures, honey has associations that go beyond its use as a food.
File:Honey-miel.jpg|Pouring raw honey
The higher the water percentage, the easier honey flows.
The key to preservation is limiting access to humidity.
Honeys can be from specific types of flower nectars or can be blended after collection.
These times can be cut nearly in half by heating at .
Honey barbecue and honey mustard are other common flavors used in sauces.
The average pH of honey is 3.9, but can range from 3.4 to 6.1.
To reduce the risk of tutin poisoning, humans should not eat honey taken from feral hives in the risk areas of New Zealand.
Bees gather honeydew produced by the vine hopper insects feeding on the tutu plant.
The monkey's gift is frequently depicted in Buddhist art.
Therefore, larger but fewer crystals tend to form at higher temperatures, while smaller but more-numerous crystals usually form at lower temperatures.
The honeycomb is removed from the hive and the honey may be extracted from that, either by crushing or by using a honey extractor.
Honey is frequently used as a talisman and symbol of sweetness.
In the book ''Golden Rules of Business Success'' written by Fan Li (or Tao Zhu Gong) during the Spring and Autumn Period, some parts mention the art of beekeeping and the importance of the quality of the wooden box for beekeeping that can affect the quality of its honey.
In an unadulterated honey, the carbon isotopic ratios of sugars and proteins should match.
The World Health Organization recommends honey as a treatment for coughs and sore throats, including for children, stating that there is no reason to believe it is less effective than a commercial remedy.
In the Christian New Testament, Matthew 3:4, John the Baptist is said to have lived for a long period of time in the wilderness on a diet consisting of locusts and wild honey.
In 2005 an apiary dating from the 10th century B.C.
Regardless of preservation, honey may crystallize over time.
Another source of honey is from a number of wasp species, such as the wasps ''Brachygastra lecheguana'' and ''Brachygastra mellifica'', which are found in South and Central America.
Clear—"may contain air bubbles which do not materially affect the appearance of the product and may contain a trace of pollen grains or other finely divided particles of suspended material which do not affect the appearance of the product"
The art of beekeeping in ancient China has existed since time immemorial and appears to be untraceable to its origin.
Infantile botulism shows geographical variation.
Of these acids, the amino acids, which occur in very small amounts, play an important role in the darkening of honey.
Most commercially available honey is blended, meaning it is a mixture of two or more honeys differing in floral source, color, flavor, density or geographic origin.
In North Africa (e.g.
Adulteration of honey is the addition of other sugars, syrups or compounds into honey to change its flavor, viscosity, make it cheaper to produce, or to increase the fructose content in order to stave off crystallization.
However, most Biblical commentators write that the original Hebrew in the Bible (דבש ''devash'') refers to the sweet syrup produced from the juice of dates (silan).
However, honey contains fructose, which caramelizes at lower temperatures than the glucose.
In the UK, only six cases have been reported between 1976 and 2006, yet the U.S. has much higher rates: 1.9 per 100,000 live births, 47.2% of which are in California.
Honeys from heather or manuka display thixotropic properties.
Melting 20 kilograms of crystallized honey, at , can take up to 24 hours, while 50 kilograms may take twice as long.
Toxic honey may also result when bees are proximate to tutu bushes (''Coriaria arborea'') and the vine hopper insect (''Scolypopa australis'').
As removed from the hive by a beekeeper, honey has a long shelf life and will not ferment if properly sealed.
This NMR method was not able to quantify maltose, galactose, and the other minor sugars as compared to fructose and glucose.
Less commonly, low blood pressure, shock, heart rhythm irregularities, and convulsions may occur, with rare cases resulting in death.
Honey is recommended by one Canadian physician for children over the age of 1 for the treatment of coughs as it is deemed as effective as dextromethorphan and more effective than diphenhydramine.
Honeydew honey is popular in some areas, but in other areas beekeepers have difficulty selling the stronger flavored product.
Practically free—"contains practically no defects that affect the appearance or edibility of the product"
The rate of crystallization is affected by many factors, but the primary factor is the ratio of the main sugars: fructose to glucose.
Unlike many other liquids, honey has very poor thermal conductivity, taking a long time to reach thermal equilibrium.
In Islam, there is an entire chapter (Surah) in the Qur'an called an-Nahl (the Bee).
The day commemorates Buddha's making peace among his disciples by retreating into the wilderness.
Honey is generally safe but there are various, potential adverse-effects or interactions it may have in combination with excessive consumption, existing disease conditions, or drugs.
The UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency recommends avoiding giving over the counter cough and common cold medication to children under 6, and suggests "a homemade remedy containing honey and lemon is likely to be just as useful and safer to take", but warns that honey should not be given to babies because of the risk of infant botulism.
Honey was also cultivated in ancient Mesoamerica.
The honey, when poured, should form small, temporary layers that disappear fairly quickly, indicating high viscosity.
According to his teachings (hadith), Muhammad strongly recommended honey for healing purposes.
Honey is also produced by bumblebees, stingless bees, and other hymenopteran insects such as honey wasps, though the quantity is generally lower and they have slightly different properties compared to honey from the genus ''Apis''.
It has attractive chemical properties for baking and a distinctive flavor that leads some people to prefer it to sugar and other sweeteners.
In 2013, 1.7 million tonnes of honey were produced worldwide, with China accounting for 28% of the world total (table).
Most microorganisms do not grow in honey so sealed honey does not spoil, even after thousands of years.
Different monofloral honeys have a distinctive flavor and color because of differences between their principal nectar sources.
Intoxication is rarely dangerous.
Both are found throughout New Zealand.
Some Rosh Hashanah greetings show honey and an apple, symbolizing the feast.
Though its supposed antimicrobial properties may be due to high osmolarity even when diluted with water, it is more effective than plain sugar water of a similar viscosity.
Honey is produced by bees from nectar collection which serves the dual purpose to support metabolism of muscle activity during foraging and for long-term food storage as honey.
However, honey will take substantially longer to liquify when just above the melting point than it will at elevated temperatures.
Some types of honey may produce very large but few crystals, while others will produce many small crystals.
Definitive clinical conclusions about the efficacy and safety of treating wounds, however, are not possible from this limited research.
However, while honey is very viscous, it has rather low surface tension.
Fairly free—"may contain defects which do not seriously affect the appearance or edibility of the product"
Historically, the ferment for mead was honey's naturally occurring yeast.
In Buddhism, honey plays an important role in the festival of Madhu Purnima, celebrated in India and Bangladesh.
* Other/undetermined: 3.2%
Honey is classified by its floral source, and there are also divisions according to the packaging and processing used.
Below is the English translation of those specific verses:
Some typical European examples include thyme, thistle, heather, acacia, dandelion, sunflower, lavender, honeysuckle, and varieties from lime and chestnut trees.
The fructose will give a negative rotation, while the glucose will give a positive one.
Symptoms of tutin poisoning include vomiting, delirium, giddiness, increased excitability, stupor, coma, and violent convulsions.
Only a few areas in New Zealand (the Coromandel Peninsula, Eastern Bay of Plenty and the Marlborough Sounds) frequently produce toxic honey.
During foraging, bees access part of the nectar collected to support metabolic activity of flight muscles, with the majority of collected nectar destined for regurgitation, digestion and storage as honey.
Reasonably clear—"may contain air bubbles, pollen grains, or other finely divided particles of suspended material which do not materially affect the appearance of the product"
Adulteration of honey is sometimes used as a method of deception when buyers are led to believe that the honey is pure.
After falling down, the honey should form a bead.
The bees work together as a group with the regurgitation and digestion for as long as 20 minutes until the product reaches storage quality.
The amount of water the honey will absorb is dependent on the relative humidity of the air.
During Roman times, honey was part of many recipes and it is mentioned in the work of many authors, such as Virgil, Pliny, Cicero and others.
'''The honey grade scale is''':
* Fructose: 28% to 41%
Levels as low as 7% of addition can be detected.
The honey is then usually filtered to remove beeswax and other debris.
Preliminary studies found honey to contain an antimicrobial peptide called bee defensin-1.
A wide range of species other than humans are attracted to wild or domestic sources of honey.
In the USA honey is also graded on its color and optical density by USDA standards, graded on the Pfund scale, which ranges from 0 for "water white" honey to more than 114 for "dark amber" honey.
In the US, honey grading is performed voluntarily (USDA does offer inspection and grading "as on-line (in-plant) or lot inspection...upon application, on a fee-for-service basis.")
No symptoms of anxiety, insomnia or hyperactivity were detected with honey consumption compared to placebo, according to another study.
Because honey contains yeast, this hygroscopic nature requires that honey be stored in sealed containers to prevent fermentation, which usually begins if the honey's water content rises much above 25%.
Honey bees convert nectar into honey by a process of regurgitation and evaporation: they store it as a primary food source in wax honeycombs inside the beehive.
Reasonably good—"has a reasonably good, normal flavor and aroma for the predominant floral source or, when blended, a reasonably good flavor for the blend of floral sources and the honey is practically free from caramelized flavor and is free from objectionable flavor caused by fermentation, smoke, chemicals, or other causes with the exception of the predominant floral source"
However, the evidence is overall not conclusive.
Egypt) examples include clover, cotton, and citrus (mainly orange blossoms).
Other organic acids are minor, consisting of formic, acetic, butyric, citric, lactic, malic, pyroglutamic, propionic, valeric, capronic, palmitic, and succinic, among many others.
If not, it indicates excessive water content (over 20%)
Addition of sugars originating from corn or sugar cane (C4 plants, unlike the plants used by bees, and also sugar beet, which are predominantly C3 plants) skews the isotopic ratio of sugars present in honey, but does not influence the isotopic ratio of proteins.
The rheological and melissopalynological properties of honey can be used to identify the major plant nectar source used in its production.
The aliphatic acids contribute greatly to the flavor of honey by interacting with the flavors of other ingredients.
Honey is collected from wild bee colonies, or from domesticated beehives.
The bees may first be pacified by using smoke from a bee smoker.
On Madhu Purnima, Buddhists remember this act by giving honey to monks.
Humans apparently began foraging for honey at least 8,000 years ago, as evidenced by a cave painting in Valencia, Spain.
However, the different types and their amounts vary considerably, depending on the type of honey.
The crystals can be dissolved by heating the honey.
The production of honeydew honey has some complications and dangers.
* 20,000 to 40,000 female worker bees
Honey gets its sweetness from the monosaccharides fructose and glucose, and has about the same relative sweetness as granulated sugar.
The Qur'an promotes honey as a nutritious and healthy food.
This forms a semisolid solution of precipitated glucose crystals in a solution of fructose and other ingredients.
Ripe, freshly collected, high-quality honey at  should flow from a knife in a straight stream, without breaking into separate drops.
Honey has a density of about 1.36 kilograms per litre (36% denser than water).
At , honey may appear or even feel solid, but it will continue to flow at very low rates.
However, the nucleation of microscopic seed-crystals is greatest between .
The physical properties of honey vary, depending on water content, the type of flora used to produce it (pasturage), temperature, and the proportion of the specific sugars it contains.
Honey also contains acids, which act as catalysts, decreasing the caramelization temperature even more.
Melting crystallized honey can easily result in localized caramelization if the heat source is too hot, or if it is not evenly distributed.
These acids may be aromatic or aliphatic (non-aromatic).
Fermentation of honey will usually occur after crystallization because, without the glucose, the liquid portion of the honey primarily consists of a concentrated mixture of the fructose, acids, and water, providing the yeast with enough of an increase in the water percentage for growth.
Organic acids comprise most of the acids in honey, accounting for 0.17–1.17% of the mixture, with gluconic acid formed by the actions of an enzyme called glucose oxidase as the most prevalent.
In Jewish tradition, honey is a symbol for the new year, Rosh Hashanah.
Some cultures believed honey had many practical health uses.
The unique flora of Australia yields a number of distinctive honeys, with some of the most popular being yellow box, blue gum, ironbark, bush mallee, Tasmanian leatherwood, and macadamia.
At very low temperatures, honey will not freeze solid.
Primary fermentation usually takes 2856 days, after which the must needs to be racked into a secondary fermentation vessel and left to sit about 3540 more days.
The specific composition, color, aroma and flavor of any batch of honey depend on the flowers foraged by bees that produced the honey.
A fluffy film on the surface of the honey (like a white foam), or marble-colored or white-spotted crystallization on a container's sides, is formed by air bubbles trapped during the bottling process.
The Hebrew Bible contains many references to honey.
Like all sugar compounds, honey will caramelize if heated sufficiently, becoming darker in color, and eventually burn.
The bees then cap the cells with wax to seal them.
A few types of honey have unusual viscous properties.
Honey, and objects immersed in honey, have been preserved for centuries.
based upon USDA standards.
Researchers were able to identify differences in acacia and polyfloral honeys by the differing proportions of fructose and sucrose, as well as differing levels of aromatic amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine.
In ancient Egypt, honey was used to sweeten cakes and biscuits, and was used in many other dishes.
Generally, honey is classified by the floral source of the nectar from which it was made.
Because of its unique composition and chemical properties, honey is suitable for long-term storage, and is easily assimilated even after long preservation.
The pollen in honey is traceable to floral source and therefore region of origin.
Some ''in vitro'' studies show that honey can kill Methicillin-resistant ''Staphylococcus aureus'' (MRSA),  β-''haemolytic streptococci'' and vancomycin-resistant ''Enterococci''.
The variety produced by honey bees (the genus ''Apis'') is the one most commonly referred to, as it is the type of honey collected by most beekeepers and consumed by people.
These types of honey enter a gel-like state when motionless, but then liquify when stirred.
The smoke triggers a feeding instinct (an attempt to save the resources of the hive from a possible fire), making them less aggressive and the smoke obscures the pheromones the bees use to communicate.
The figures are depicted carrying baskets or gourds, and using a ladder or series of ropes to reach the wild nest.
At the traditional meal for that holiday, apple slices are dipped in honey and eaten to bring a sweet new year.
In the absence of sugar, honey was an integral sweetening ingredient in Greek and Roman cuisine.
The next four largest producers – Turkey, Argentina, Ukraine and Russia – accounted collectively for less than 20% of the world total (table).
In ancient Georgia, several types of honey were buried with a person for their journey into the afterlife, including linden, berry, and meadow-flower varieties.
The taste may vary from year to year, and the aroma and the flavor can be more or less intense, depending on which bloomings are prevalent.
The greater honeyguide bird guides humans to wild bee hives and this behavior may have evolved with early hominids.
However, many of the minor substances in honey can be affected greatly by heating, changing the flavor, aroma, or other properties, so heating is usually done at the lowest temperature possible for the shortest amount of time.
In the Book of Judges, Samson found a swarm of bees and honey in the carcass of a lion (14:8).
Below this temperature, honey can be either in a metastable state, meaning that it will not crystallize until a seed crystal is added, or, more often, it is in a "labile" state, being saturated with enough sugars to crystallize spontaneously.
Fresh honey is a supersaturated liquid, containing more sugar than the water can typically dissolve at ambient temperatures.
The Maya used honey from the stingless bee for culinary purposes, and continue to do so today.
This introduces the poison tutin into honey.
Water content can easily be measured with a refractometer.
Instead of taking nectar, bees can take honeydew, the sweet secretions of aphids or other plant sap-sucking insects.
Honey may vary in color between pale yellow and dark brown, but other bright colors may occasionally be found, depending on the source of the sugar harvested by the bees.
The Vedas and other ancient literature mention the use of honey as a great medicinal and health food.
Aside from water content, the composition of honey also has little effect on viscosity, with the exception of a few types.
The legend has it that while he was there, a monkey brought him honey to eat.
If exposed to moist air, its hydrophilic properties will pull moisture into the honey, eventually diluting it to the point that fermentation can begin.
Although honey is generally safe when taken in typical food amounts, there are various, potential adverse effects or interactions it may have in combination with excessive consumption, existing disease conditions or drugs.
To produce monofloral honey, beekeepers keep beehives in an area where the bees have access to only one type of flower.
Honey will tend to absorb more water in this manner than the individual sugars would allow on their own, which may be due to other ingredients it contains.
Honey collection is an ancient activity.
In modern times the most common adulteration-ingredient became clear, almost-flavorless corn syrup, which, when mixed with honey, is often very difficult to distinguish from unadulterated honey.
At room temperature, honey is a supercooled liquid, in which the glucose will precipitate into solid granules.
One 1980 study found that mixed floral honey from several United States regions typically contains:
Above its melting point, however, water has little effect on viscosity.
According to Columella, Greek beekeepers of the Hellenistic period did not hesitate to move their hives over rather long distances in order to maximise production, taking advantage of the different vegetative cycles in different regions.
These species are known to feed on nectar and produce honey.
By contriving for bee swarms to nest in artificial hives, people have been able to semidomesticate the insects and harvest excess honey.
Temperature also affects the rate of crystallization, with the fastest growth occurring between .
Honey use and production has a long and varied history.
Honey with excessive water content is not suitable for long-term preservation.
Crystal nuclei (seeds) tend to form more readily if the honey is disturbed, by stirring, shaking or agitating, rather than if left at rest.
In some congregations, small straws of honey are given out to usher in the new year.
Good—"has a good, normal flavor and aroma for the predominant floral source or, when blended, a good flavor for the blend of floral sources and the honey is free from caramelized flavor or objectionable flavor caused by fermentation, smoke, chemicals, or other causes with the exception of the predominant floral source"
In the Books of Samuel Jonathan is forced into a confrontation with his father King Saul after eating honey in violation of a rash oath Saul made (14:24–47).
Honey consumption may interact adversely with existing allergies, high blood sugar levels (as in diabetes), or anticoagulants used to control bleeding, among other clinical conditions.
