It maintains a highly developed capitalist economy, ranked the freest in the world by the Index of Economic Freedom every year since 1995.
MacLehose laid the foundation for Hong Kong to establish itself as a key global city in the 1980s and early 1990s.
However, while Hong Kong has one of the highest per capita incomes in the world, it suffers from the most severe income inequality among developed economies.
The first established settlement was City of Victoria on Hong Kong Island.
Hong Kong's Han majority originate mainly from the Guangzhou and Taishan regions in Guangdong province.
The Basic Law protects the Department of Justice from any interference by the government when exercising its control over criminal prosecution.
Other natural disasters, such as flooding, typhoons and famine in mainland China would play a role in establishing Hong Kong as a place for safe shelter.
In 2003, Hong Kong was gravely affected by the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).
The initial ratio of 2:1 was gradually devalued to 4:1 and ownership of Hong Kong dollars was declared illegal and punishable by harsh torture.
Many newcomers, especially those who had been based in the major port cities of Shanghai and Guangzhou, established corporations and small- to medium-sized businesses and shifted their base operations to British Hong Kong.
Hong Kong is ranked No.
Despite a recovering economy from the Asian Financial Crisis, mismanagement of Tung's housing policy triggered a housing market crisis in 1998, disrupting market supply and sent properties prices tumbling until 2002.
Hong Kong claims territorial waters to a distance of .
Due to starvation and forced deportation for slave labour to mainland China, the population of Hong Kong had dwindled from 1.6 million in 1941 to 600,000 in 1945, when the United Kingdom resumed control of the colony on 30 August 1945.
Hong Kong is a recognised global centre of trade and calls itself an "entertainment hub".
This policy has received criticism from various political figures in Hong Kong, and led to the Umbrella Revolution.
The territory's  area consists of Hong Kong Island, the Kowloon Peninsula, the New Territories, and over 200 offshore islands, of which the largest is Lantau Island.
Hong Kong enjoys a high degree of religious freedom, guaranteed by the Basic Law.
In the Tang dynasty, modern-day Guangzhou (Canton) flourished as an international trading centre.
In 1998, Hong Kong moved its international airport from Kai Tak to an artificially-reclaimed island north of Lantau Island.
1 in the world in the Crony Capitalism Index by the Economist.
This Article would grant Hong Kong's police force right of access to private property on grounds of 'safeguarding national security', but without court warrants.
Hong Kong Island's steep, hilly terrain was initially served by sedan chairs.
In 1904, the United Kingdom established the world's first border and immigration control; all residents of Hong Kong were given citizenship as Citizens of United Kingdom and Colonies (CUKC).
Payment can be made using the Octopus card, a stored value system introduced by the MTR (Mass Transit Railway), which is widely accepted on railways, buses and ferries, and accepted like cash at other outlets.
, there were 32 Hong Kong athletes from seven sports ranking in world's Top 20, 29 athletes in six sports in Asia top 10 ranking.
On the first day of Chinese New Year 2016, riots targeting the police force broke out.
Detailed and accurate romanisation systems for Cantonese were available and in use at the time.
Like other non-natives, they may apply for the Right of Abode after seven years of continuous residency.
Hong Kong's most senior leader, '''Chief Executive''', is elected by a committee of 1,200 selected members (600 in 1997) and nominally appointed by the Government of PR China.
The Legislative Council resumed its full function after the 1999 election under pre-reformed rules; one of the prominent tasks was to complete legislation of articles in the Hong Kong Basic Law, constitutional document of the territory.
However, the government has stressed that income disparity does not equate to worsening of the poverty situation, and that the Gini coefficient is not strictly comparable between regions.
While there had been an exodus of 60,000 residents for fear of a German attack on the British colony during the First World War, Hong Kong remained peaceful.
Aberdeen was an initial point of contact between British sailors and local fishermen.
There are 13 private hospitals and more than 40 public hospitals in Hong Kong.
The territory has little arable land and few natural resources, so it imports most of its food and raw materials.
Covert surveillance is another major concern.
The indigenous inhabitants at that time consisted of several ethnicities such as Punti, Hakka, Tanka and Hoklo.
The territory's police, firefighting and customs forces, as well as clerical officers across various government departments, make up the civil service.
Hong Kong's main religions are Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism; a local religious scholar in contact with major denominations estimates there are approximately 1.5 million Buddhists and Taoists.
Unable to defend against intensifying Japanese air and land bombardments, they eventually surrendered control of Hong Kong on 25 December 1941.
Both countries agreed to transfer Hong Kong's sovereignty to the China on 1 July 1997, when Hong Kong would remain autonomous as a ''special administrative region'' and be able to retain its free-market economy, British common law through the Hong Kong Basic Law, independent representation in international organisations (e.g.
Under the principle of "one country, two systems", Hong Kong maintains a separate political and economic system from China.
Most of the territory's urban development exists on Kowloon peninsula, along the northern edge of Hong Kong Island, and in scattered settlements throughout the New Territories.
Over 90% of daily travels (11&nbsp;million) are on public transport, the highest such percentage in the world.
Economic activities slowed down and schools were closed for weeks at the height of SARS epidemic.
The British Nationality Act 1981 reclassifed Hong Kong into a British Dependent Territory amid the reorganisation of global territories of the British Empire.
, Hong Kong women are the longest living demographic group in the world.
Construction of this new airport began under the British Rose Garden Project and was completed in May 1998.
Hong Kong's steep terrain and extensive trail network with expansive views attracts hikers, and its rugged coastline provides many beaches for swimming.
It replaced the overcrowded Kai Tak Airport in Kowloon in 1998, and has been rated as the world's best airport in a number of surveys.
Hong Kong is the eighth most expensive city for expatriates, falling from fifth position in the previous year.
The inauguration ceremony was held at a garrison's naval base in Hong Kong; only pro-Beijing press received invitation to this event.
It mostly consisted of Tanka fishermen and Hakka charcoal burners, whose settlements scattered along several coastal hamlets.
Soon after Hong Kong's transfer to PR China, the territory has suffered coincidentally an economic double-blow: Asian Financial Crisis and the H5N1 avian flu pandemic.
The government's Leisure and Cultural Services Department subsidises and sponsors international performers brought to Hong Kong.
Applications for entry permits are, however, handled by Chinese Embassies for Hong Kong.
Its legal tender, the Hong Kong dollar, is the world's 13th most traded currency.
WTO and WHO), treaty arrangements and policy-making except foreign diplomacy and military defence.
The Governor of Hong Kong was captured and taken as a prisoner of war.
Hong Kong's high-degree autonomy, along with neutrality of press and media, judicial independence and freedom of speech and publication, have at times been scrutinised.
This Declaration stipulates that Hong Kong maintains her capitalist economic system and guarantees the rights and freedoms of her people for at least 50 years after the 1997 handover.
However, Hong Kong has been developing its own postgraduate medical institutions, in particular the Hong Kong Academy of Medicine, and this is gradually taking over the responsibility for all postgraduate medical training in the territory.
Hong Kong offers wide recreational and competitive sport opportunities despite its limited land area.
Moreover, Hong Kong athletes with disabilities are equally impressive in their performance , having won four world championships and two Asian Championships.
The government maintains a policy of "mother tongue instruction" () in which the medium of instruction is Cantonese, with written Chinese and English, while some of the schools are using English as the teaching language.
The Island Line (Hong Kong Island), Kwun Tong Line (Kowloon Peninsula and East Kowloon) and Tsuen Wan Line (Kowloon and urban New Territories) opened in the early 1980s.
Imports account for more than 90% of Hong Kong's food supply, including nearly all of the meat and rice available there.
'''Hong Kong''' (), officially the '''Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China''', is an autonomous territory on the Pearl River Delta in East Asia.
Other concerns in the decade of 2001–2010 relate to the workload medical staff experience; and medical errors and mishaps, which are frequently highlighted in local news.
The Chinese University of Hong Kong was founded in 1963 to fulfill the need for a university with a medium of instruction of Chinese.
With respect to postgraduate education, traditionally many doctors in Hong Kong have looked overseas for further training, and many took British Royal College exams such as the MRCP(UK) and the MRCS(UK).
This has led to protest from local pregnant women for the government to remedy the issue, as they have found difficulty in securing a bed space for giving birth and routine check-ups.
It has 70 members (originally 60) and 40 (originally 30) among them are directly elected by universal suffrage; the other 30 members are "functional constituencies" (indirectly) elected by a smaller electorate of corporate bodies or representatives of stipulated economic sectors as defined by the government.
In addition to the public post-secondary institutions there are also a number of private higher institutions which offer higher diplomas and associate degree courses for those who fail to enter a college for a degree study so as to boost their qualification of education, some of whom can have a second chance of getting into a university if they have a good performance in these sub-degree courses.
Subsequent military clashes between China and Portugal, however, led to the expulsion of all Portuguese merchants from southern China.
When Nanyue lost the Han-Nanyue War in 111 BC, Hong Kong came under the Jiaozhi commandery of the Han dynasty.
Since the abolition of decentralised Urban and District Councils in 1999, Hong Kong is now a unitary territory subdivided into 18 districts.
Inflation was at 2.5% in 2007.
In 1937, the Second Sino-Japanese War broke out when the Japanese Empire expanded its territories from northeastern China into the mainland proper.
The primary pillars of government are the Executive Council, Legislative Council, civil service and Judiciary.
As a result of the lack of space and demand for construction, few older buildings remain, and the city is becoming a centre for modern architecture.
Under the new curriculum, there is only one public examination, namely the Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education.
Approximately 80% of the city's smog originates from other parts of the Pearl River Delta.
Judges from these jurisdictions are permitted to sit as non-permanent judges of the Court of Final Appeal.
On 18 September 2011, UNESCO listed the Hong Kong National Geopark as part of its Global Geoparks Network.
Some figures put it higher, according to a Gallup poll, 64% of Hong Kong residents do not believe in any religion, and possibly 80% of Hong Kong claim no religion.
Travel writer Ryan Levitt considered the main Tsim Sha Tsui to Central route one of the most picturesque in the world.
Hong Kong has two licensed terrestrial broadcasters – ATV and TVB.
The high density and tall skyline of Hong Kong's urban area is due to a lack of available sprawl space, with the average distance from the harbour front to the steep hills of Hong Kong Island at , much of it reclaimed land.
Other ferry services are provided by operators serving outlying islands, new towns, Macau, and cities in mainland China.
A major part of Hong Kong's Cantonese-speaking majority originated from the neighbouring Guangdong province, from where many fled during the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese Civil War, and the communist rule in China.
Further conflicts over the opium trade between Britain and Qing quickly escalated into the Second Opium War.
Of the total area,  is land and  is water.
There are eight public and one private universities in Hong Kong, the oldest being the University of Hong Kong (HKU), established in 1910–1912.
During the Ming dynasty, the area was transferred to Xin'an County (新安縣).
The Lei Cheng Uk Han Tomb on the Kowloon Peninsula is believed to have been built as a burial site during the Han dynasty.
Hong Kong continued to experience modest growth during the first half of the 20th century.
Hong Kong is the centre for Cantopop music, which draws its influence from other forms of Chinese music and Western genres, and has a multinational fanbase.
A number of Consulate-Generals in Hong Kong, such as the United States and United Kingdom, operate independently of their embassies in Beijing, extend their areas of jurisdiction beyond Hong Kong to include Macau, and report directly to their respective foreign offices.
The society, however, remained racially segregated and polarised under early British colonial policies.
Under Sir Murray MacLehose, 25th Governor of Hong Kong (1971–82), a series of reforms improved the public services, environment, housing, welfare, education and infrastructure of Hong Kong.
In 2011, 133,377 foreign domestic helpers from Indonesia and 132,935 from the Philippines were working in Hong Kong.
The media in Hong Kong is relatively free from official interference compared to Mainland China, although the ''Far Eastern Economic Review'' points to signs of self-censorship by media whose owners have close ties to or business interests in the People's Republic of China and states that even Western media outlets are not immune to growing Chinese economic power.
English is also an official language, and according to a 1996 by-census is spoken by 3.1 percent of the population as an everyday language and by 34.9 percent of the population as a second language.
The most recent survey in 2016 (with a sample base of 573) in Hong Kong shows that 17.8% respondents considered themselves as "Chinese citizens", whereas 41.9% considered themselves purely as "citizens of Hong Kong".
Since then, it has grown to become a leading centre for management, financial, IT, business consultation and professional services.
In Central and Western district, there is an extensive system of escalators and moving pavements, including the longest outdoor covered escalator system in the world, the Mid-Levels escalator.
The essence of British Common Law is the juror system: court judges (equivalent to British JPs) make case verdicts with the assistance of a group of eligible, court-appointed jurors who are members of the public.
According to a report by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme in 2008, Hong Kong's Gini coefficient, at 0.53, was the highest in Asia and "relatively high by international standards".
However, there are 27 ex officio members of the district council (the Rural Committee Chairmen in the New Territories) as of the fifth District Council Assembly, and roughly half of the legislative council seats are elected by 3% of the people in Hong Kong through the functional constituency.
Since the 14th century, the Ming court had enforced the maritime prohibition laws that strictly forbade all private maritime activities in order to prevent contact with foreigners by sea.
Crossing the border at Shenzhen River on 8 December, the Battle of Hong Kong lasted for 18 days when British and Canadian forces held onto Hong Kong Island.
Border posts along the north of Hong Kong began operation in 1953 to regulate the movement of people and goods into and out of the territory.
Hong Kong's education system used to roughly follow the system in England, although international systems exist.
The Anglican and Roman Catholic churches each freely appoint their own bishops, unlike in mainland China.
Hong Kong is famous for its junks traversing the harbour, and small kai-to ferries that serve remote coastal settlements.
Foreign representation in Hong Kong includes 59 Consulates-General, 62 Consulates/Embassies and 5 officially recognised international bodies, such as the Office of the European Union.
There are also Britons, Americans, Canadians, Japanese, and Koreans working in the city's commercial and financial sector.
Awareness of the environment is growing as Hong Kong suffers from increasing pollution compounded by its geography and tall buildings.
When the Communist Party eventually took full control of mainland China in 1949, even more skilled migrants fled across the open border for fear of persecution.
Overseas Representatives of Hong Kong cover the fields of economy, trade, monetary finance, shipping, communications, tourism, culture and sports.
Hong Kong's public schools are operated by the Education Bureau.
The practice of Falun Gong is tolerated.
At the end of 2007, there were 3.46&nbsp;million people employed full-time, with the unemployment rate averaging 4.1% for the fourth straight year of decline.
Archaeological evidence indicates an increase of population and flourish of salt production.
The Games were the first and largest international multi-sport event ever organised and hosted by the city.
Nevertheless, a number of century-old institutions still retain the single-word form, such as the Hongkong Post, Hongkong Electric and the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
The Qing admitted defeat when British forces captured Hong Kong Island on 20 January 1841.
In 1925, Cecil Clementi became the 17th Governor of Hong Kong.
Hong Kong is one of the world's most significant financial centres, with the highest Financial Development Index score and consistently ranks as the world's most competitive and most laissez-faire economic entity in the ''World Competitiveness Yearbook''.
There are major multipurpose venues like Hong Kong Coliseum and MacPherson Stadium.
Snowfall is extremely rare, and usually occurs in areas of high elevation.
Most comprehensive schools in Hong Kong fall under three categories: the rarer public schools; the more common subsidised schools, including government aids-and-grant schools; and private schools, often run by Christian organisations and having admissions based on academic merit rather than on financial resources.
Major infrastructure and tourist projects also began under Sir Tsang's second term, including the Ngong Ping Cable Car, Tian Tan Buddha and the West Kowloon Cultural District.
There are also Sikh, Muslim, Jewish, Hindu and Bahá'í communities.
Over 16,000 inhabitants of Xin'an County including those in Hong Kong were forced to migrate inland; only 1,648 of those who had evacuated subsequently returned.
The New Senior Secondary academic structure and curriculum was implemented in September 2009, which provides for all students to receive three years of compulsory junior and three years of compulsory senior secondary education.
There are two medical schools in the territory, one based at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and the other at the University of Hong Kong.
In the 2016 Legislative Council Election, there were reports of discrepancies in the electorate registry, which contains ghost registrations across constituencies, as well as political intervention to strip pro-Independence individuals of their right to stand in elections and alleged death threats to election candidates.
The territory is also known as "Asia's World City".
As of 1997, its official name is the "Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China".
Due mainly to British influence going as far back as the late 19th century, Hong Kong had an earlier introduction to Western athletics compared to other Asia regions.
The mainland Chinese province of Guangdong borders the territory to the north.
Hong Kong comprises three geographical regions, which coincided with its historical expansion by the British colonial government: Hong Kong Island, Kowloon (1860) and the New Territories and Outlying Islands (1898).
A 2008 law against racial discrimination does not cover mainlanders, immigrants or migrant workers.
Local police, who are civil servants, is responsible for maintaining public order; under exceptional circumstances, however, the police force may ask China for assistance from the garrison in disaster relief.
With continued distrust of PR China's government, notable events such as violent attack on journalists, increasing level of press self-censorship, alleged extraterritorial abduction of anti-PR China publishers and covert intervention into Hong Kong's educational, political and independent institutions have posed challenges to the "One Country, Two Systems" arrangement.
The Hong Kong Basic Law, based on English law, would serve as the constitutional document after the transfer.
This caused many homeowners to become bankrupt due to negative equity.
Hong Kong's population recovered quickly after the war, as a wave of skilled migrants from the Republic of China moved in to seek refuge from the Chinese Civil War.
The fusion of east and west also characterises Hong Kong's cuisine, where dim sum, hot pot, and fast food restaurants coexist with haute cuisine.
The Peak Tram, the first public transport system in Hong Kong, has provided vertical rail transport between Central and Victoria Peak since 1888.
Many international cultural activities are organised by the government, consulates, and privately.
This resulted in further discovery of bribery in Tsang's government; then-Chief Secretary of Administration, Rafael Hui, was convicted of corruption in 2014.
He concluded his term, however, when a local news media uncovered evidence of him receiving favours and hospitality from business tycoons on various occasions.
During Leung's term, the government completed legislation of Anti-trust and Competition Ordinance and introduced minimum wage in 2015.
During the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong, the Japanese army committed atrocities against civilians and POWs, such as the St. Stephen's College massacre.
The Hong Kong government generally respects the human rights of its citizens, and members of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong and the District Council of Hong Kong are elected into office by Hong Kong citizens.
Outside this system are the schools under the Direct Subsidy Scheme and private international schools.
In 2002, the government's motion of an anti-subversion bill pursuant to Article 23, was met with fierce opposition and eventually dropped.
One feature of the Common Law system is the basis of legal precedent (''stare decisis'') in which judges refer to empirical evidence from previous cases of a similar category prior to handing out a final verdict.
Some of the rights may also be acquired by marriage (e.g., the right to work), but these do not include the right to vote or stand for office.
The police have been accused of using heavy-handed tactics toward protesters in public rallies, and there is controversy regarding the extensive powers of the police.
They sometimes result in flooding or landslides.
The construction of the Shek Kip Mei Estate in 1953 marked the beginning of the public housing estate programme to provide shelter for the less privileged and to cope with the influx of immigrants.
Before 1842, the name referred to a small inlet—now Aberdeen Harbour (, Sidney Lau: ''heung1gong2 jai2'', Jyutping: '''', or ''Hiong1gong3 zai3'' in a form of Hakka, literally means "Little Hong Kong")—between Aberdeen Island and the southern coast of Hong Kong Island.
Hong Kong is renowned for its deep natural harbour, which enables ready access by international cargo ships, and its skyline, with a very high density of skyscrapers; the territory boasts the second largest number of high rises of any city in the world.
Coupled with years of economic hardships and discontent of Tung's pro-Beijing stance, a mass demonstration broke out on 1 July 2003.
A dispute between high-ranking officials of both countries, however, led to the failure of the treaty's ratification.
On 29 August 1842, Hong Kong Island was formally ceded in perpetuity to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland under the Treaty of Nanking.
Residents of the Mainland do not automatically receive the Right of Abode, and many may not enter the territory freely.
The highest elevation in the territory is at Tai Mo Shan,  above sea level.
In 1983, the Hong Kong dollar left its 16:1 peg with the Pound sterling and switched to the current US-HK Dollar peg.
Hong Kong is the world's eleventh largest trading entity, with the total value of imports and exports exceeding its gross domestic product.
In that year, Hong Kong raised 22 percent of worldwide initial public offering (IPO) capital, making it the largest centre of IPOs in the world  and the easiest place to raise capital.
At this time, the majority of the Chinese population in Hong Kong had no political representation in the British colonial government.
In 1951, a boundary zone was demarked as a buffer zone against potential military attacks from communist China.
Hong Kong matured to become a financial centre in the 1990s, but was greatly affected by the Asian financial crisis in 1998, and again in 2003 by the SARS outbreak.
In addition, the Chief Executive of Hong Kong is elected by 1,200 members based on their contributions to four different sectors of Hong Kong's society.
Since 2011, there have been growing concerns that mothers-to-be from mainland China, in a bid to obtain the right of abode in Hong Kong and the benefits that come with it, have saturated the neonatal wards of the city's hospitals both public and private.
Ideological differences over the pace of democratisation have shadowed over the 2004 Bill of Political Reform "District Council Model (District Office)", 2009 Bill of Political Reform (passed 46-12) "Consultation Document on the Methods for Selecting the Chief Executive and for Forming the LegCo in 2012"  and the 2015 Bill of Political Reform (blocked 8-27).
As the population grew, with labour costs remaining low, living standards began to rise steadily.
Hong Kong's ''de facto'' official language is Cantonese, a variety of Chinese originating from Guangdong province to the north of Hong Kong.
Hong Kong's Basic Law, implemented in the territory on 1 July 1997, consists of outstanding articles which require bill adoption by the Legislative Council before becoming effective laws.
The then-Financial Secretary, Sir Donald Tsang, adopted a radical measure to make use of British Hong Kong foreign currency reserves and restored Hong Kong's financial stability.
During Tsang's second term, he initiated modest reforms in areas of education, environment and food safety.
The nearby Lantau Island was a salt production centre and salt smuggler riots occasionally broke out against the government.
Under Clementi's tenure, Kai Tak Airport entered operation as RAF Kai Tak and several aviation clubs.
It stipulated that Hong Kong would retain its laws and be guaranteed a high degree of autonomy for at least 50 years after the transfer.
Reactions from PR China, including the 2014 White Paper on Hong Kong, attracted worldwide allegations of Beijing's intervention into Hong Kong's high-degree autonomy.
Five privately owned companies provide franchised bus service across the territory, together operating more than 700 routes .
Hong Kong's long and irregular coast provides it with many bays, rivers and beaches.
Under the alias "Hong Kong, China", Hong Kong maintains active partnerships with foreign nations in the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the International Olympic Committee (IOC), the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA), and the International Basketball Federation (FIBA).
This has fuelled up a number of mass protests and the most prominent one was the Occupy Central (later termed "Umbrella") movement in September to December 2014.
Hong Kong maintains an international border with PR China across 5 border control stations by land, 3 entry and exit points by sea and the International Airport.
It is an important centre for international finance and trade, with one of the greatest concentrations of corporate headquarters in the Asia-Pacific region, and is known as one of the Four Asian Tigers for its high growth rates and rapid development from the 1960s to the 1990s.
Hong Kong is ranked fourth in terms of the highest percentage of millionaire households, behind Switzerland, Qatar, and Singapore with 8.5 percent of all households owning at least one million US dollars.
The current population of Hong Kong comprises 91% ethnic Chinese.
In addition, freshwater demand is curtailed by the use of seawater for toilet flushing, using a separate distribution system.
