Frequently, women killed in honor killings are recorded as having committed suicide or died in accidents.
The Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence addresses this issue.
Among Muslims 5% in Paris, 3% in Berlin and 3% in London saw honor killings as acceptable, and 4% in Paris (less than French public), 1% in Berlin and 3% in London saw crimes of passion as acceptable.
Article 192 states that a judge may opt for reduced punishments (such as short-term imprisonment) if the killing was done with an honorable intent.
Police officials, however, claim that these cases are never brought to them, or are not major enough to be pursued on a large scale.
One 2008 Gallup survey compared the views of the French, German and British public and those of French, German and British Muslims on several social issues: 4% of French public said "honor killings" were "morally acceptable" and 8% of French public said "crimes of passion" were "morally acceptable"; honor killings were seen as acceptable by 1% of German public and also 1% of British public; crimes of passion were seen as acceptable by 1% of German public and 2% of British public.
An '''honor killing''' or '''shame killing''' is the homicide of a member of a family by other members, due to the perpetrators' belief that the victim has brought shame or dishonor upon the family, or has violated the principles of a community or a religion, usually for reasons such as refusing to enter an arranged marriage, being in a relationship that is disapproved by their family, having sex outside marriage, becoming the victim of rape, dressing in ways which are deemed inappropriate, engaging in non-heterosexual relations or renouncing a faith.
In 2008 a man had to flee from Turkey after his Kurdish boyfriend was killed by his own father.
Honor killings have become such a pressing issue in Canada that the Canadian citizenship study guide mentions it specifically, saying, "Canada's openness and generosity do not extend to barbaric cultural practices that tolerate spousal abuse, 'honour killings', female genital mutilation, forced marriage or other gender-based violence."
The only way the shame can be erased is through a killing.
Data from police agencies in the UK report 2283 cases in 2010, and an estimated 500 more from jurisdictions that did not provide reports.
This can be seen in the criminal codes of many former French colonies.
As a woman’s killers usually are her family, the law allows them to nominate family members to do the murder which they then forgive.
The general indifference to the issue of honour killing within Pakistan is due to a deep-rooted gender bias in law, the police force, and the judiciary.
She also writes that, although there are not many cases of honor killings within the United States, the overwhelming majority of honor killings are perpetrated by Muslims against Muslims (90% of honor killings known to have taken place in Europe and the United States from 1998 to 2008).
The UNAMI reported that at least 534 honor killings occurred between January and April 2006 in the Kurdish Governorates.
Women's rights groups claimed that in most cases it is the victim's immediate relatives who are the killers, so inherently the new law is just whitewash.
71 which was signed on May 5, 2011 by President Mahmoud Abbas into the October 10, 2011 Official Gazette no.
In contemporary times, the changing cultural and economic status of women has also been used to explain the occurrences of honor killings.
In 2008, a girl was given police protection after reporting that her family intended to kill her for having an affair with a man.
*Haiti: In 2005, the laws were changed, abolishing the right of a husband to be excused for murdering his wife due to adultery.
Amina and Sarah Said, two teenage sisters from Texas were killed, allegedly by their Egyptian father, Yaser Abdel Said, who is still at large.
*Egypt: A number of studies on honor crimes by The Centre of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law, at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London, includes one which reports on Egypt's legal system, noting a gender bias in favor of men in general, and notably article 17 of the Penal Code: judicial discretion to allow reduced punishment in certain circumstance, often used in honor killings case.
*In Brazil, an explicit defense to murder in case of adultery has never been part of the criminal code, but a defense of "honor" (not part of the criminal code) has been widely used by lawyers in such cases to obtain acquittals.
Several honor killings have occurred in the U.S. during recent years.
The way through which women in honor-based societies are considered to bring dishonor to men is often through their sexual behavior.
The murderer then goes free.
Discriminatory family laws, articles in the Criminal Code that show leniency towards honor killings, and a strongly male dominated society have been cited as causes of honor killings in Iran.
In 2005, A small survey in Diyarbakir in southeastern Turkey found that, when asked the appropriate punishment for a woman who has committed adultery, 37% of respondents said she should be killed, while 21% said her nose or ears should be cut off.
* Algeria's 1991 Penal Code Article 279
Honor killings involve violence and fear as a tool of maintaining control.
In 2008, in Georgia, 25-year-old Sandeela Kanwal was killed by her Pakistani father for refusing an arranged marriage.
587: He who causes the death of a spouse, daughter, or sister upon discovering her in illegitimate carnal relations and in the heat of passion caused by the '''offence to his honour or that of his family''' will be sentenced to three to seven years.
In 2013, a 15-year-old girl was killed by her father, who burned her to death, because she talked to her fiance before the wedding.
** These were amended in 1983, 1994, 1995, 1996 and 1999 and were eventually repealed by the Lebanese Parliament on August 4, 2011
17-year-old Du'a Khalil Aswad, an Iraqi girl of the Yazidi faith, was stoned to death in front of a mob of about 2000 men in 2007, possibly because she was allegedly planning to convert to Islam.
The maternal grandmother of the infant, along with six other persons, including a doctor who had reportedly accepted a bribe to not report the birth, were arrested.
Honor killings are common in Yemen.
In 2010, Britain saw a 47% rise of honor-related crimes.
Another well-known case was Heshu Yones, stabbed to death by her Kurdish father in London in 2002 when her family heard a love song dedicated to her and suspected she had a boyfriend.
The family which has prearranged the marriage risks disgrace if the marriage does not proceed.
a male acting or dressing in a "feminine way") can also raise suspicion and lead to honor violence.
France's 1810 Penal Code Article 324 also inspired the 1858 Ottoman Penal Code's Article 188, both the French Article 324 and Ottoman article 188 were drawn on to create Jordan's Article 340 which was retained even after a 1944 revision of Jordan's laws which did not touch public conduct and family law so Article 324 still applies to this day.
In many parts of the world, women who have been raped are considered to have brought 'dishonor' or 'disgrace' to their families.
She had refused an arranged marriage, and was living with her Italian boyfriend.
Inayat wanted to stop his daughter from flying to Dubai to marry her boyfriend, because he believed the marriage would dishonor his family.
In March 2009, a Kurdish immigrant from Turkey, Gülsüm S., was killed for a relationship not in keeping with her religious family's plan for an arranged marriage.
In 2006, 20-year-old Hina Saleem, a Pakistani woman who lived in Brescia, Italy, was murdered by her father who claimed he was "saving the family's honour".
Although this defense was not explicitly stipulated in the 20th century Criminal Code, it has been successfully pleaded by lawyers throughout the 20th century, in particular in the interior of the country, though less so in the coastal big cities.
According to her, this often prevents government officials in the United States and the media from identifying and accurately reporting these incidents as "honor killings" when they occur.
** These were respectively repealed by Article 1 and Article 2 and both by Article 3 of the 2011 Law no.
Yaser is currently on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives, and has been on the list since December 10, 2014.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees state that "claims made by LGBT persons often reveal exposure to physical and sexual violence, extended periods of detention, medical abuse, threat of execution and honour killing."
* Syria's 1953 amended 1949 Penal Code Article 548
In 1999 King Abdullah created a council to review the sex inequalities in the country.
Although this defense has been generally rejected in modern parts of the country (such as big cities) since the 1950s, it has been very successful in the interior of the country.
Honor killings also affect gay people.
:"Certain Eastern European countries have recorded cases of HBV honor based violence within the indigenous populations, such as Albania and Chechnya, and there have been acts of ‘honour’ killings within living memory within Mediterranean countries such as Italy and Greece".
Every year in the United Kingdom (UK), officials estimate that at least a dozen women are victims of honor killings, almost exclusively within Asian and Middle Eastern families.
The family is viewed as the main source of honor and the community highly values the relationship between honor and the family.
The cultural features which lead to honor killings are complex.
Often, a suspected honor killing never even reaches court, but in cases where they do, the alleged killer is often not charged or is given a reduced sentence of three to four years in jail.
Salafi scholar Muhammad Al-Munajjid asserts that the punishment of any crime is reserved for the Islamic ruler only.
This is especially the case if the victim becomes pregnant.
The honor killing and self-immolation condoned or tolerated by the Kurdish administration in Iraqi Kurdistan has been labeled as "gendercide" by Mojab (2003).
She writes that,  Alam argues that it is thus the attempt to regain control and the feelings of alienation that ultimately leads to an honor killing.
In a well-known case, a Kurdish man killed his pregnant girlfriend in Berlin in January 2015 and burned her alive.
The Napoleonic Code Article 324 which was passed in 1810 permitted the murders of an unfaithful wife and her lover at the hand of her husband.
Some women who bridge social divides, publicly engage other communities, or adopt some of the customs or the religion of an outside group may be attacked.
Police enforcement, in situations of admitted murder, do not always take action against the perpetrator.
Honor killings have been reported in northern regions of India, mainly in the Indian states of Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, as a result of people marrying without their family's acceptance, and sometimes for marrying outside their caste or religion.
Recent cases include that of three teenage girls who were buried alive after refusing arranged marriages.
The resolution stated that:
A July 2008 Turkish study by a team from Dicle University on honor killings in the Southeastern Anatolia Region, the predominantly Kurdish area of Turkey, has so far shown that little if any social stigma is attached to honor killing.
Alam argues that immigrants remain close to the home culture and their relatives because it provides a safety net.
The Napoleonic Code of 1804, established under Napoleon Bonaparte, is one of the origins of the legal leniency in regard to adultery-related killings in a variety of legal systems in several countries around the world.
The relation between social views on female sexuality and honor killings is complex.
Indeed, violence related to female sexual expression has been documented since Ancient Rome, when the pater familias had the right to kill an unmarried sexually active daughter or an adulterous wife.
The 2009 European Parliamentary Assembly noted this in their Resolution 1681 which noted the dire need to address honor crimes.
In 1991 Brazil's Supreme Court explicitly rejected the "honour" defense as having no basis in Brazilian law.
Scholars suggest that the Islamic law doctrine of Qisas and Diyya encourages honor killings, particularly against females, as well as allows the murderer to go unpunished.
In 2008, Israr Ullah Zehri, a Pakistani politician in Balochistan, defended the honor killings of five women belonging to the Umrani tribe by a relative of a local Umrani politician.
In 2002 alone over 382 people, about 245 women and 137 men, became victims of honor killings in the Sindh province of Pakistan.
Honor killings have a long tradition in Mediterranean Europe.
In the case of an unmarried girl associating herself with a man, losing virginity, or being raped, the family may attempt to restore its 'honor' with a 'shotgun wedding'.
The Roman law of pater familias gave complete control to the men of the family over both their children and wives.
The incidence of honor killings is very difficult to determine and estimates vary widely.
The court was told that the reason for the murder was the perpetrators' belief that extramarital affairs were against their religion; and that the murder was carried out to protect the honor of the family and was a "pre-planned, premeditated and executed killing".
The group tries to protect Muslim girls and women from oppressive families.
Another significant feature is the connection of honor killings to the control of women’s behavior, in particular in regard to sexuality/male interaction/marriage, by the family as a collective.
The origin of honor killings and the control of women is evidenced throughout history in the culture and tradition of many regions.
Other examples include the killing of Tulay Goren, a Kurdish Shia Muslim girl who immigrated with her family from Turkey, and Samaira Nazir (Pakistani Muslim).
In 2012, Afghanistan recorded 240 cases of honor killings, but the total number is believed to be much higher.
This defense was available only for a husband, not for a wife.
12/1994 Article 232
This law made it that much more risky for women to come forward with accusations of rape.
:The Special Rapporteur indicated that there had been contradictory decisions with regard to the honour defense in Brazil, and that legislative provisions allowing for partial or complete defense in that context could be found in the penal codes of Argentina, Ecuador, Egypt, Guatemala, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Peru, Syria, Venezuela and the Palestinian National Authority.
In some communities, a father, brother or cousin will publicly take pride in a murder committed in order to preserve the 'honour' of a family.
In some cultures, people feel some boundaries are never to be crossed, and if someone would violate those practices or go against it, then killing is justified to them."
Refusal of an arranged marriage is often a cause of an honor killing.
Precise statistics on how many women die every year in such honor killings are hard to come by, as many crimes are never reported, said Myria Boehmecke of the Tuebingen-based women's group ''Terre des Femmes''.
* Tunisia's 1991 Penal Code Article 207 (which was repealed)
Aso Kamal of the Doaa Network Against Violence claimed that they have estimated that there were more than 12,000 honor killings in Iraqi Kurdistan from 1991 to 2007.
This being an alternative to an honor killing, the girl has no choice but to accept the marriage.
In 2009, in Pordenone, Italy, Sanaa Dafani, an 18-year-old girl of Moroccan origin, was murdered by her father because she had a relationship with an Italian man.
A 2013 survey of "856 ninth graders – average age of 15 – from a range of secondary schools across Amman – including private and state, mixed-sex and single gender" showed that attitudes favoring honor killings are present in the "next generation" Jordanians: "In total, 33.4% of all respondents either “agreed” or “strongly agreed” with situations depicting honour killings.
Discriminatory family laws, articles in the Criminal Code that show leniency towards honor killings, and a strongly male dominated society have been cited as causes of honor killings in Iran.
In March 2005, the Pakistani parliament rejected a bill which sought to strengthen the law against the practice of honor killing.
*Syria: In 2009, Article 548 of the Syrian Law code was amended.
Crimes of passion within Latin America have also been compared to honor killings.
In many cultures where honor is of central value, men are sources, or active generators/agents of that honor, while the only effect that women can have on honor is to destroy it.
According to women's rights advocates, the concepts of women as property, and of honor, are so deeply entrenched in the social, political and economic fabric of Pakistan that the government mostly ignores the regular occurrences of women being killed and maimed by their families."
Wilson was repeatedly knifed to death as she walked along a canal in Rotherham city.
79 were killed for violation of "Islamic teachings" and 47 for honor, according to IRIN, the news branch of the U.N.'s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Often, minor girls and boys are selected by the family to act as the killers, so that the killer may benefit of the most favorable legal outcome.
Boys were more than twice as likely to support honour killings: 46.1% of boys and 22.1% of girls agreed with at least two honour killing situations in the questionnaire."
The family of the man is expected to cooperate and provide a groom for the girl.
The World Health Organization (WHO) addressed the issue of honor killings and stated: "Murders of women to 'save the family honour' are among the most tragic consequences and explicit illustrations of embedded, culturally accepted discrimination against women and girls."
In 2002, Widney Brown, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, stated that "crimes of passion have a similar dynamic in that the women are killed by male family members and the crimes are perceived as excusable or understandable".
Also, Amnesty argued for the expansion of victim support services such as shelters.
But parliament returned to session in 2003 and the new amendments were rejected by the lower house after two successful readings in the upper house.
Rana Husseini, a leading journalist on the topic of honor killings, states that "under the existing law, people found guilty of committing honor killings often receive sentences as light as six months in prison".
Honor killings are illegal in Egypt and five of the ten men were arrested.
One of his sons, Shivan Atroshi, who helped with the murder, also lived in Australia.
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif described the stoning as "totally unacceptable," and ordered the chief minister of Punjab province to provide an immediate report.
Honor based violence has a long tradition in Albania, and although much rarer today than in the past, it still exists.
Although rarely, men can also be the victims of honor killings by members of the family of a woman with whom they are perceived to have an inappropriate relationship.
A 2006 BBC poll for the Asian network in the UK found that one in ten of the 500 young Asians polled said that they could condone the killing of someone who dishonored their family.
The Indian state of Punjab also has a large number of honor killings.
The concept of family honor is extremely important in many communities.
There are well documented cases, where Turkish courts have sentenced whole families to life imprisonment for an honor killing.
In Peru, for example, 70 percent of the murders of women in one year were committed by a husband, boyfriend or lover, and most often jealousy or suspicions of infidelity are cited as the reasons for the murders.
Because the woman had admitted to sex outside of marriage, however, she could be punished for having sex outside of the marriage, a punishment that ranged from stoning to public lashing.
Kuwait is relatively liberal (by Middle East standards), and honor killings are rare, but not unheard of – in 2006 a young woman died in an honor killing committed by her brothers.
Violence is seen as a way of ensuring compliance and preventing rebellion.
Men receive reduced sentences for killing their wives or female family members if they are deemed to have brought dishonor to their family.
In 2008 a woman was killed in Saudi Arabia by her father for "chatting" with a man on Facebook.
(Adultery itself was decriminalized in Belgium in 1987.)
On 27 May 2014, a pregnant woman was stoned to death by her own family in front of a Pakistani high court for marrying the man she loved.
According to BBC, "Women's advocacy groups, however, suspect that more than 20,000 women are killed worldwide each year."
According to Widney Brown, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, the practice of honor killing "goes across cultures and across religions."
The article went on to cover the case of Hatun Sürücü, a Turkish-Kurdish woman who was killed by her brother for not staying with the husband she was forced to marry, and of "living like a German".
Similar to other Southern/Mediterranean European areas, "honor" was traditionally important in Italy.
The Palestinian Authority, using a clause in the Jordanian penal code still in effect in the West Bank, exempts men from punishment for killing a female relative if she has brought dishonor to the family.
When it comes to preventive measures, Amnesty underlined the critical need to promote public awareness through the means of media, education, and public announcements.
Honor killings are argued to have their origin among nomadic peoples and herdsmen: such populations carry all their valuables with them and risk having them stolen, and do not have proper recourse to law.
Many Muslim commentators, and organizations condemn honor killings as an un-Islamic cultural practice.
He said that those who are killed have "loose morals" and are rightfully shot by relatives in honor killings.
A July 2008 Turkish study by a team from Dicle University on honor killings in the Southeastern Anatolia Region, the predominantly Kurdish area of Turkey, has so far shown that little if any social stigma is attached to honor killing.
The concept of ownership has turned women into a commodity which can be exchanged, bought and sold".
Another characteristic of honor killings is that the perpetrators often don't face negative stigma within their communities, because their behavior is seen as justified.
Aasiya Zubair was, together with her husband Muzzammil Hassan, the founder and owner of Bridges TV, the first American Muslim English-language television network.
Honor killings have been described as "chillingly common in villages of Haryana dominated by the lawless 'khap panchayats' (caste councils of village elders)".
The Palestinian Independent Commission for Human Rights has reported 29 women were killed 2007–2010, whereas 13 women were killed in 2011 and 12 in the first seven months of 2012.
Since most honor killings are committed by a close relative, if and when the case reaches a court of law, the victim's family may 'pardon' the murderer, or be pressured to accept diyat (financial compensation).
Hatun Sürücü's brother was convicted of murder and jailed for nine years and three months by a German court in 2006.
It also comments that the practice is not related to a feudal societal structure, "there are also perpetrators who are well-educated university graduates.
Among the Ching dynasty in China, fathers and husbands had the right to kill females deemed to have dishonored them.
According to UNICEF, there are an average of 23 honor killings per year in Jordan.
This change of culture can also be seen to have an effect in Western cultures such as Britain where honor killings often arise from women seeking greater independence and adopting seemingly Western values.
* United Arab Emirate's law no.3/1978 Article 334
Savitri Goonesekere states that Islamic leaders in Pakistan use religious justifications for sanctioning honor killings.
On 8 December 2004, under international and domestic pressure, Pakistan enacted a law that made honor killings punishable by a prison term of seven years, or by the death penalty in the most extreme cases.
In Sweden the 26-year-old Iraqi Kurdish woman Fadime Şahindal was killed by her father in 2002.
Women who made accusations of rape, after this law, were required to provide four male witnesses.
Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority, issued a decree in May 2014 under which the exemption of men was abolished in cases of honor killings.
According to the ''Honour Related Violence - European Resource Book and Good Practice'' (page 234): "Honour in the Mediterranean world is a code of conduct, a way of life and an ideal of the social order, which defines the lives, the customs and the values of many of the peoples in the Mediterranean moral".
Such suicides are reported to be common in southeastern Turkey, Iraq and Iran.
In 1990 the National Commission for Women set up a statutory body in order to address the issues of honor killings among some ethnic groups in North India.
Often a man must simply claim the killing was for his honor and he will go free.
Nilofar Bakhtiar, Minister for Tourism and Advisor to Pakistan Prime Minister on Women's Affairs, who had struggled against the honor killing in Pakistan, resigned in April 2007 after the clerics accused her of bringing shame to Pakistan by para-jumping with a male and hugging him after landing.
In 2010 a 16-year-old girl was buried alive by relatives for befriending boys in Southeast Turkey; her corpse was found 40 days after she went missing.
As such, they must submit to male authority figures in the family – failure to do so can result in extreme violence as punishment.
In 2009 a Turkish news agency reported that a 2-day-old boy who was born out of wedlock had been killed for honor in Istanbul.
The rest were sentenced lightly.
A highly publicized case was that of Shafilea Iftikhar Ahmed, a 17-year-old British Pakistani girl from Great Sankey, Warrington, Cheshire, who was murdered in 2003 by her parents.
He said that honor crimes, forced marriages and other violent acts against women were becoming a problem in Australia.
Actions of Pakistani police officers and judges (particularly at the lower level of the judiciary ) have, in the past, seemed to support the act of honor killings in the name of family honor.
In some such cases, local justice officials may side with the family and take no formal action to prevent similar deaths."
Honor killings are tried by the 1990 Qisas and Diyat Ordinance of Pakistan, which permits the individual and his or her family to retain control over a crime, including the right to determine whether to report the crime, prosecute the offender, or demand ''diyat'' (or compensation).
Honor killings continue have some support in the conservative parts of Turkey.
In 2016 a Kurdish woman was shot dead at her wedding in Hannover for refusing to marry her cousin in a forced marriage.
In Jordan six months is the usual penalty for murderers in honor killings, the murderer in honor killings are allowed to get off by Article 97 while the "fit of fury" in Article 98 is used to justify the defense for committing an honor killing, while the murderer can also justify the honor killing with Article 340.
Indeed, although laws that exonerate the perpetrator of rape if he marries his victim after the rape are often associated with the Middle East, such laws were very common around the world until the second half of the 20th century, and as late as 1997, 14 Latin American countries had such laws, although most of these Latin American countries have now abolished them.
In 2007, a famous Norwegian Supreme Court advocate stated that he wanted the punishment for the killing from 17 years in prison to 15 years in the case of honor killings practiced in Norway.
If unable to do this, the alleged rape could not be prosecuted in the courts.
It added that metropolitan cities were the location of many of these, due to growing immigration to these cities from the East.
First of all, legal measures refer to a modification of the government's criminal laws to guarantee equal legal protection of females.
Her parents were dissatisfied with her "westernized" lifestyle.
The practice is supposed to be prosecuted under ordinary killing, but in practice police and prosecutors often ignore it.
The victim had screamed for help for about 20 minutes before neighbours arrived, only to find her smouldering body.
Boys and sometimes women in the family are often asked to closely control and monitor the behavior of their sisters or other females in the family  (there are also few cases of men or boys being killed in the name of 'honor', to ensure that the females do not do anything to tarnish the 'honor' and 'reputation' of the family.
The method used for honor crime included firearms (most common), stabbing, axe and strangulation.
According to police officer, "Omkar Singh told the police that his daughter Manju had relations with several men.
There is evidence that homosexuality can also be perceived as grounds for honor killing by relatives.
She had reported her husband to the police for domestic violence and was seeking a divorce.
In many cases in Pakistan, one of the reasons honor killing cases never make it to the courts, is because, according to some lawyers and women's right activists, Pakistani law enforcement do not get involved.
While some ideas originate in the Spanish colonial culture, others predate it: in the early history of Peru, the laws of the Incas allowed husbands to starve their wives to death if they committed adultery, while Aztec laws during early Mexico stipulated stoning or strangulation as punishment for female adultery.
The 1810 penal code Article 324 passed by Napoleon was copied by Middle Eastern Arab countries.
In some other parts of India, notably West Bengal, honor killings completely ceased about a century ago, largely due to the activism and influence of reformists such as Vivekananda, Ramakrishna, Vidyasagar and Raja Ram Mohan Roy.
