Complementing Kaufmann and True's work, the Norwegian-born, naturalized American sculptor Oskar J.W.
The construction of the dam devastated the populations of native fish in the river downstream from the dam.
Riverside, California
While suspended from the top of the canyon with ropes, the high-scalers climbed down the canyon walls and removed the loose rock with jackhammers and dynamite.
Concrete cores were removed from the dam for testing in 1995; they showed that "Hoover Dam's concrete has continued to slowly gain strength" and the dam is composed of a "durable concrete having a compressive strength exceeding the range typically found in normal mass concrete".
The average power generated was 4.2 TWh/year for 1947-2008.
The spillway entrances are located behind each dam abutment, running roughly parallel to the canyon walls.
For six years after the construction of the dam, while Lake Mead filled, virtually no water reached the mouth of the river.
Electricity from the dam's powerhouse was originally sold pursuant to a fifty-year contract, authorized by Congress in 1934, which ran from 1937 to 1987.
Falling objects were the most common cause of death on the dam site; the high scalers' work thus helped ensure worker safety.
The dam is protected against over-topping by two spillways.
Finally, using pneumatic guns, the overheads were filled in.
Concerned that a violent confrontation was imminent, most workers took their paychecks and left for Las Vegas to await developments.
In March 1937, one more Nevada generator went online and the first Arizona generator by August.
Congress authorized a board of engineers to review plans for the proposed dam.
The first concrete was poured into the dam on June 6, 1933, 18&nbsp;months ahead of schedule.
The  bronze figures, dubbed "Winged Figures of the Republic", were each formed in a continuous pour.
The maximum net generation was 10.348 TWh in 1984, and the minimum since 1940 was 2.648 TWh in 1956.
The dam closed again to the public on September 11, 2001; modified tours were resumed in December and a new "Discovery Tour" was added the following year.
With the agreement of Kaufmann and the engineers, True also devised an innovative color-coding for the pipes and machinery, which was implemented throughout all BOR projects.
Hoover Dam is a major tourist attraction; nearly a million people tour the dam each year.
Although there are myths that men were caught in the pour and are entombed in the dam to this day, each bucket only deepened the concrete in a form by an inch, and Six Companies engineers would not have permitted a flaw caused by the presence of a human body.
Not included in the official fatalities number were deaths that were recorded as pneumonia.
The monolithic dam would be thick at the bottom and thin near the top, and would present a convex face towards the water above the dam.
These tunnels were  in diameter.
When an individual block had cured and had stopped contracting, the pipes were filled with grout.
In 1947, a bill passed both Houses of Congress unanimously restoring the name "Hoover Dam."
Ninety-six of the deaths occurred during construction at the site.
The inner diversion tunnels were plugged at approximately one-third of their length, beyond which they now carry steel pipes connecting the intake towers to the power plant and outlet works.
On August 7, 1931, the company cut wages for all tunnel workers.
This was done to stabilize the rock, to prevent water from seeping past the dam through the canyon rock, and to limit "uplift"—upward pressure from water seeping under the dam.
Following the completion of the dam, the entrances to the two outer diversion tunnels were sealed at the opening and halfway through the tunnels with large concrete plugs.
The entire flow of the Colorado River passes through the turbines.
The site of Hoover Dam endures extremely hot weather, and the summer of 1931 was especially torrid, with the daytime high averaging .
The spillways and outlet works (jet-flow gates) are rarely used.
Overall, there is enough concrete in the dam to pave a two-lane highway from San Francisco to New York.
Gates are raised and lowered depending on water levels in the reservoir and flood conditions.
True's consulting artist job lasted through 1942; it was extended so he could complete design work for the Parker, Shasta and Grand Coulee dams and power plants.
Tests at Grand Coulee Dam showed that the technique worked, in principle.
At one point in the speech, he spoke the words "Boulder Dam" five times within thirty seconds.
The dam was described in minute detail, covering 100&nbsp;pages of text and 76&nbsp;drawings.
The dam closed on November 25, 1963 and March 31, 1969, days of mourning in remembrance of Presidents Kennedy and Eisenhower.
A Colorado attorney proposed that the seven states which fell within the river's basin (California, Nevada, Arizona, Utah, New Mexico, Colorado and Wyoming) form an interstate compact, with the approval of Congress.
Work on the foundation excavations was completed in June 1933.
Wilbur justified his choice on the ground that Hoover was "the great engineer whose vision and persistence&nbsp;... has done so much to make  possible".
The upper cofferdam was  high, and  thick at its base, thicker than the dam itself.
No deaths of non-workers from pneumonia were recorded in Boulder City during the construction period.
A $2&nbsp;million bid bond was to accompany each bid; the winner would have to post a $5&nbsp;million performance bond.
It contained  of material.
During the years of lobbying leading up to the passage of legislation authorizing the dam in 1928, the press generally referred to the dam as "Boulder Dam" or as "Boulder Canyon Dam", even though the proposed site had shifted to Black Canyon.
The Colorado River Aqueduct and Central Arizona Project branch off Lake Havasu while the All-American Canal is supplied by the Imperial Dam.
In the following years, the name "Boulder Dam" failed to fully take hold, with many Americans using both names interchangeably and mapmakers divided as to which name should be printed.
Hoover Dam opened for tours in 1937 after its completion, but following Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, it was closed to the public when the United States entered World War II, during which only authorized traffic, in convoys, was permitted.
The contract required these tunnels to be completed by October 1, 1933, with a $3,000-per-day fine to be assessed for any delay.
As that dam was a curved-gravity type, similar in design to the arch-gravity as was proposed for the Black Canyon dam, opponents claimed that the Black Canyon dam's safety could not be guaranteed.
The present contracts for the sale of electricity expire in 2017.
Glendale, California
Instead, Wilbur announced in early 1930 that a model city was to be built in the desert near the dam site.
The Colorado River Board found the project feasible, but warned that should the dam fail, every downstream Colorado River community would be destroyed, and that the river might change course and empty into the Salton Sea.
The smaller generators were used to serve smaller communities at a time when the output of each generator was dedicated to a single municipality, before the dam's total power output was placed on the grid and made arbitrarily distributable.
The men who removed this rock were called "high scalers".
In these works, which are integrated into the walkways and interior halls of the dam, True also reflected on the machinery of the operation, making the symbolic patterns appear both ancient and modern.
The spillway entrance arrangement forms a classic side-flow weir with each spillway containing four  and  steel-drum gates.
Memories of the Great Depression faded, and Hoover to some extent rehabilitated himself through good works during and after World War II.
Hansen's bas-relief on the Nevada elevator tower depicts the benefits of the dam: flood control, navigation, irrigation, water storage, and power.
Such a large concrete structure had never been built before, and some of the techniques were unproven.
Though water from the Imperial Canal allowed for the widespread settlement of the valley, the canal proved expensive to maintain.
He was noncommittal.
Each five-foot form contained a series of  steel pipes through which first cool river water, then later ice-cold water from a refrigeration plant was run.
He designed sculptured turrets rising seamlessly from the dam face and clock faces on the intake towers set for the time in Nevada and Arizona&nbsp;— the two states are in different time zones, but as Arizona does not observe Daylight Saving Time, the clocks display the same time for more than half the year.
Ickes, who was by then a private citizen, opposed the change, stating, "I didn't know Hoover was that small a man to take credit for something he had nothing to do with."
When construction began, Six Companies hired large numbers of workers, with more than 3,000 on the payroll by 1932 and with employment peaking at 5,251 in July 1934.
In March 1932, work began on lining the tunnels with concrete.
Known as McKeeversville, the camp was home to men hoping for work on the project, together with their families.
The Bureau of Reclamation, more concerned with the dam's functionality, adorned it with a Gothic-inspired balustrade and eagle statues.
The contractor had seven years to build the dam, or penalties would ensue.
The report was principally authored by Davis, and was called the Fall-Davis report after Interior Secretary Albert Fall.
This is intended to help future astronomers, if necessary, calculate the exact date of dedication.
His works include the monument of dedication plaza, a plaque to memorialize the workers killed and the bas-reliefs on the elevator towers.
In the latter half of 1936, water levels in Lake Mead were high enough to permit power generation, and the first three Allis Chalmers built Francis turbine-generators, all on the Nevada side, began operating.
Pending the completion of the bypass, restricted traffic was permitted over Hoover Dam.
This occurred on March 6, 1929 with Utah's ratification; Arizona did not approve it until 1944.
When Ickes spoke at the dedication ceremony on September 30, 1935, he was determined, as he recorded in his diary, "to try to nail down for good and all the name Boulder Dam."
The Fall-Davis report cited use of the Colorado River as a federal concern, because the river's basin covered several states, and the river eventually entered Mexico.
It took nine years (1938–47) under relative secrecy to complete the supplemental grout curtain.
The workers were under severe time constraints due to the beginning of the concrete pour, and when they encountered hot springs or cavities too large to readily fill, they moved on without resolving the problem.
It was constructed between 1931 and 1936 during the Great Depression and was dedicated on September 30, 1935, by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
When the cofferdams were in place and the construction site was drained of water, excavation for the dam foundation began.
As part of the contract, Six Companies, Inc. was to build Boulder City to house the workers.
The original timetable called for Boulder City to be built before the dam project began, but President Hoover ordered work on the dam to begin in March 1931 rather than in October.
The committee drew up a list of demands that evening and presented them to Crowe the following morning.
In 2011, Congress enacted legislation extending the current contracts until 2067, after setting aside 5% of Hoover Dam's power for sale to Native American tribes, electric cooperatives, and other entities.
A total of 58 of the 393 holes were incompletely filled.
During this excavation, approximately  of material was removed.
New holes were drilled from inspection galleries inside the dam into the surrounding bedrock.
Bureau of Reclamation engineers calculated that if the dam was built in a single continuous pour, the concrete would take 125 years to cool and the resulting stresses would cause the dam to crack and crumble.
True's work on the Hoover Dam was humorously referred to in a poem published in ''The New Yorker'', part of which read, "lose the spark, and justify the dream; but also worthy of remark will be the color scheme".
After the war, it reopened September 2, 1945, and by 1953, annual attendance had risen to 448,081.
Las Vegas, then a small city of some 5,000, saw between 10,000 and 20,000 unemployed descend on it.
Ickes stated that Wilbur had been imprudent in naming the dam after a sitting president, that Congress had never ratified his choice, and that it had long been referred to as Boulder Dam.
The company built bunkhouses, attached to the canyon wall, to house 480&nbsp;single men at what became known as River Camp.
However, at the time, the limit of transmission of electric power was , and there were few customers (mostly mines) within that limit.
There were three valid bids, and Six Companies' bid of $48,890,955 was the lowest, within $24,000 of the confidential government estimate of what the dam would cost to build, and five million dollars less than the next-lowest bid.
A total of 42&nbsp;workers were recorded as having died from pneumonia; none were listed as having died from carbon monoxide poisoning.
Surrounding the base of the monument is a terrazzo floor embedded with a "star map".
Lake Mead fell to a new record low elevation of  on July 1, 2016 before beginning to rebound slowly.
The Service investigated Black Canyon and found it ideal; a railway could be laid from the railhead in Las Vegas to the top of the dam site.
Movable sections of steel forms were used for the sidewalls.
By September 1939, four more generators were operating, and the dam's power plant became the largest hydroelectricity facility in the world.
In his words, Hansen wanted his work to express "the immutable calm of intellectual resolution, and the enormous power of trained physical strength, equally enthroned in placid triumph of scientific accomplishment", because "the building of Hoover Dam belongs to the sagas of the daring."
The site's diversion tunnels frequently reached , enveloped in thick plumes of vehicle exhaust gases.
Water released from the Hoover Dam eventually reaches several canals.
The map depicts the Northern Hemisphere sky at the moment of President Roosevelt's dedication of the dam.
The BCPA merely allows the government to "construct, operate, and maintain a dam and incidental works in the main stream of the Colorado River at Black Canyon or Boulder Canyon".
Before the dam could be built, the Colorado River needed to be diverted away from the construction site.
In 1928, Congress authorized the project.
At Kaufmann's request, Denver artist Allen Tupper True was hired to handle the design and decoration of the walls and floors of the new dam.
Sixteen workers and other riverbank residents died of heat prostration between June 25 and July 26, 1931.
Shea Company of Portland, Oregon.
Following an uprating project from 1986 to 1993, the total gross power rating for the plant, including two 2.4 megawatt Pelton turbine-generators that power Hoover Dam's own operations is a maximum capacity of 2080 megawatts.
To mark the occasion, a three-cent stamp was issued by the United States Post Office Department—bearing the name "Boulder Dam", the official name of the dam between 1933 and 1947.
Hansen designed many of the sculptures on and around the dam.
With little guidance on water allocation from the Supreme Court, proponents of the dam feared endless litigation.
When Secretary Wilbur spoke at the ceremony starting the building of the railway between Las Vegas and the dam site on September 17, 1930, he named the dam "Hoover Dam", citing a tradition of naming dams after Presidents, though none had been so honored during their terms of office.
Due to the low water levels, by 2014 it was providing power only during periods of peak demand.
As the technology of electric power transmission improved, the Lower Colorado was considered for its hydroelectric-power potential.
When workers wearing such headgear were struck hard enough to inflict broken jaws, they sustained no skull damage, Six Companies ordered thousands of what initially were called "hard boiled hats" (later "hard hats") and strongly encouraged their use.
Two days later, the remainder were talked into leaving by law enforcement.
The dam was controversially named after President Herbert Hoover.
Today, nearly a million people per year take the tours of the dam offered by the Bureau of Reclamation.
On January 10, 1931, the Bureau made the bid documents available to interested parties, at five dollars a copy.
When a Six Companies manager altered working times to force workers to take lunch on their own time, workers responded with a strike.
The parties came to an agreement and on March 1, 1936, Secretary Ickes formally accepted the dam on behalf of the government.
The four-lane Hoover Dam Bypass opened on October 19, 2010.
To meet the deadline, Six Companies had to complete work by early 1933, since only in late fall and winter was the water level in the river low enough to safely divert.
Some types of vehicles were inspected prior to crossing the dam while semi-trailer trucks, buses carrying luggage, and enclosed-box trucks over  long were not allowed on the dam at all, and were diverted to U.S. Route 95 or Nevada State Routes 163/68.
Although some initially were opposed to these designs, True was given the go-ahead and was officially appointed consulting artist.
More than   of cooling pipes were placed within the concrete.
The Wattis Brothers, heads of the Utah Construction Company, were interested in bidding on the project, but lacked the money for the performance bond.
To put such large bronzes into place without marring the highly polished bronze surface, they were placed on ice and guided into position as the ice melted.
The dam's generators provide power for public and private utilities in Nevada, Arizona, and California.
Burbank, California
The buckets were then suspended from aerial cableways, which were used to deliver the bucket to a specific column.
Edison allowed land options it held on the river to lapse—including an option for what became the site of Hoover Dam.
In total, water from the Lake Mead serves 18 million people in Arizona, Nevada and California and supplies the irrigation of over  of land.
A government camp was established for surveyors and other personnel near the dam site; this soon became surrounded by a squatters' camp.
Soon after the dam was authorized, increasing numbers of unemployed people converged on southern Nevada.
Emboldened by Crowe's reversal of the lunch decree, workers raised their demands to include a $1-per-day raise.
The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW or "Wobblies"), though much-reduced from their heyday as militant labor organizers in the early years of the century, hoped to unionize the Six Companies workers by capitalizing on their discontent.
The delta's estuary, which once had a freshwater-saltwater mixing zone stretching  south of the river's mouth, was turned into an inverse estuary where the level of salinity was higher close to the river's mouth.
With the assistance of the National Laboratory of Anthropology, True researched authentic decorative motifs from Indian sand paintings, textiles,  baskets and ceramics.
The dam eliminated the natural flooding, which threatened many species adapted to the flooding, including both plants and animals.
The Boulder Canyon Project Act appropriated $165&nbsp;million for the Hoover Dam along with the downstream Imperial Dam and All-American Canal, a replacement for Beatty's canal entirely on the U.S. side of the border.
The curving arch of the dam would transmit the water's force into the abutments, in this case the rock walls of the canyon.
The final generator was not placed in service until 1961, bringing the maximum generating capacity to 1,345 megawatts at the time.
The inner tunnels' outlets are equipped with gates that can be closed to drain the tunnels for maintenance.
Since concrete heats and contracts as it cures, the potential for uneven cooling and contraction of the concrete posed a serious problem.
Boulder City, Nevada
To make the powerhouse roof bombproof, it was constructed of layers of concrete, rock, and steel with a total thickness of about , topped with layers of sand and tar.
Each spillway's capacity of  was empirically verified in post-construction tests in 1941.
In response to this finding, the tunnels were patched with special heavy-duty concrete and the surface of the concrete was polished mirror-smooth.
Despite the site change, the dam project was referred to as the "Boulder Canyon Project".
On March 12, 1928, the failure of the St. Francis Dam, constructed by the city of Los Angeles, caused a disastrous flood that killed up to 600 people.
Legislation to authorize the dam was introduced repeatedly by Representative Phil Swing (R-Calif.) and Senator Hiram Johnson (R-Calif.), but representatives from other parts of the country considered the project as hugely expensive and one that would mostly benefit California.
One potential site at Boulder Canyon was bisected by a geologic fault; two others were so narrow there was no space for a construction camp at the bottom of the canyon or for a spillway.
'''Hoover Dam''', once known as '''Boulder Dam''', is a concrete arch-gravity dam in the Black Canyon of the Colorado River, on the border between the U.S. states of Nevada and Arizona.
The river would carry off the smaller pieces of debris, and a dam would be built incorporating the remaining rubble.
Anaheim, California
Six Companies was not required to complete work on one item, a concrete plug for one of the bypass tunnels, as the tunnel had to be used to take in irrigation water until the powerhouse went into operation.
File:Hoover Dam Penstock Header.tif|A worker stands by the  diameter Nevada penstock before its junction with another penstock that delivers water to a turbine
Power is generated in step with and only with the release of water in response to downstream water demands.
In the following years, the Bureau of Reclamation (BOR), known as the Reclamation Service at the time, also considered the Lower Colorado as the site for a dam.
The spillways were modified in 1947 by adding flip buckets, which both slow the water and decrease the spillway's effective capacity, in an attempt to eliminate conditions thought to have contributed to the 1941 damage.
A total of  of concrete was used in the dam before concrete pouring ceased on May 29, 1935.
Los Angeles, California
The Bureau of Reclamation reports that the energy generated is allocated as follows:
The new arrangement will begin in 2017.
The concrete was delivered in huge steel buckets  and almost 7&nbsp;feet in diameter; Crowe was awarded two patents for their design.
In 1902, the Edison Electric Company of Los Angeles surveyed the river in the hope of building a  rock dam which could generate .
The initial plans for the facade of the dam, the power plant, the outlet tunnels and ornaments clashed with the modern look of an arch dam.
There were 112&nbsp;deaths associated with the construction of the dam.
The dam is located near Boulder City, Nevada, a municipality originally constructed for workers on the construction project, about  southeast of Las Vegas, Nevada.
The 1941 damage was attributed to a slight misalignment of the tunnel invert (or base), which caused cavitation, a phenomenon in fast-flowing liquids in which vapor bubbles collapse with explosive force.
Nevertheless, Six Companies turned over the dam to the federal government on March 1, 1936, more than two years ahead of schedule.
They formed a joint venture to bid for the project with Pacific Bridge Company of Portland, Oregon; Henry J. Kaiser & W. A. Bechtel Company of San Francisco; MacDonald & Kahn Ltd. of Los Angeles; and the J.F.
Since the dam was an arch-gravity type, the side-walls of the canyon would bear the force of the impounded lake.
Shortly afterward, work began on two similar tunnels in the Arizona canyon wall.
The annual generation of Hoover Dam varies.
Hoover Dam concrete is not subject to alkali–silica reaction (ASR) as the Hoover Dam builders happened to use nonreactive aggregate, unlike that at downstream Parker Dam, where ASR has caused measurable deterioration.
One writer complained in response that "the Great Engineer had quickly drained, ditched, and dammed the country."
Filling of Lake Mead began February 1, 1935, even before the last of the concrete was poured that May.
As the United States developed the Southwest, the Colorado River was seen as a potential source of irrigation water.
It found that the work had been incompletely done, and was based on less than a full understanding of the canyon's geology.
Under its original design, the dam will no longer be able to generate power once the water level falls below , which could occur as early as 2017.
The intakes provide a maximum hydraulic head (water pressure) of  as the water reaches a speed of about .
This complex spillway entrance arrangement combined with the approximate  elevation drop from the top of the reservoir to the river below was a difficult engineering problem and posed numerous design challenges.
The powerhouse was run under the original authorization by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and Southern California Edison; in 1987, the Bureau of Reclamation assumed control.
Such compacts were authorized by Article I of the United States Constitution but had never been concluded among more than two states.
True's design scheme incorporated motifs of the Navajo and Pueblo tribes of the region.
Holes were driven into the walls and base of the canyon, as deep as   into the rock, and any cavities encountered were to be filled with grout.
