In 1838, he advised "any young man" about to start in the world, "Go to the West: there your capabilities are sure to be appreciated and your energy and industry rewarded."
Circulation reached 9,000, then a sizable number, yet it was ill-managed and eventually fell victim to the economic Panic of 1837.
The Democrats, when they met in Baltimore in July, faced a stark choice—either nominate Greeley, long a thorn in their side, or split the anti-Grant vote and go to certain defeat.
He could not breathe for the first twenty minutes of his life.
On March 22, 1834, he published the first issue of ''The New-Yorker'' in partnership with Jonas Winchester.
But he outraged his colleagues when on December 22, 1848 the ''Tribune'' published evidence that many congressmen had been paid excessive sums as travel allowance.
He subscribed to the views of Charles Fourier, a French mathematician and social thinker, then recently deceased, who proposed the establishment of settlements called "phalanxes" with a given number of people from various walks of life, who would function as a corporation and among whose members profits would be shared.
He launched a campaign against corruption in the New York Legislature, hoping voters would defeat incumbents and the new legislators would elect him to the Senate when Seward's term expired in 1861 (senators were until 1913 elected by state legislatures).
He kept up the pressure until Lincoln was elected in November.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act helped destroy the Whig Party, but a new party with opposition to the spread of slavery at its heart had been under discussion for some years.
He gathered around him an eclectic group of supporters whose only real link was their opposition to Grant, whose administration had proved increasingly corrupt.
While Greeley generally supported the Radical Republicans, he did not like the harshness of Thaddeus Stevens.
In July 1864, Greeley received word that there were Confederate commissioners in Canada, empowered to offer peace.
He tried to change the name of the United States to "Columbia", abolish slavery in the District of Columbia, and increase tariffs.
In 1838, Greeley met Albany editor Thurlow Weed.
Greeley was subscribing to Graham's principles at the time, and to the end of his life rarely ate meat.
Sending dispatches back to be published in the ''Tribune'', Greeley took the Overland Trail, reaching Salt Lake City, where he conducted a two-hour interview with the Mormon leader, Brigham Young, the first newspaper interview Young had given.
Greeley was gratified both by Lincoln's re-election and continued Union victories.
He took no honeymoon with his new wife, returning to work while his wife took up a teaching job in New York City.
This was enough to make him unpopular.
She lived with the Greeley family for several years, and when she moved to Italy, he made her a foreign correspondent.
The price of advertising was initially four cents a line, but was quickly raised to six cents.
Despite this failure and its attendant financial loss, Greeley published the thrice-weekly ''Constitutionalist'', which mostly printed lottery results.
One factor in establishing the paper nationally was the ''Weekly Tribune'', created in September, 1841 when the ''Log Cabin'' and ''The New-Yorker'' were merged.
He hired Greeley as editor of the state Whig newspaper for the upcoming campaign.
Harrison and his running mate John Tyler were easily elected.
At the recommendation of a family physician, Greeley was sent to the asylum of Dr. George S. Choate at Pleasantville, New York.
In return, proponents of slavery recognized Greeley and the ''Tribune'' as adversaries, stopping shipments of the paper to the South and harassing local agents.
Other legislation, all failed, introduced by Greeley included attempts to end flogging in the Navy, and to ban alcohol from its ships.
Greeley felt Lincoln had not truly answered him, "but I'll forgive him everything if he'll issue the proclamation".
He popularized the phrase "Go West, young man, and grow up with the country," although it is uncertain whether it originated with him.
According to Williams, "Lincoln's war for Union was now also Greeley's war for emancipation."
The party needed a candidate, with a presidential election upcoming.
Henry Ward Beecher wrote in the ''Christian Union'', "when Horace Greeley died, unjust and hard judgment of him died also".
Also in 1868, Greeley sought the Republican nomination for governor, but was frustrated by the Conkling forces.
In 1853, with the party increasingly divided over the slavery issue, Greeley printed an editorial disclaiming the paper's identity as Whig and declaring it to be nonpartisan.
Some in the party were not sorry to see him go: the ''Republic'', a Whig organ, mocked Greeley and his beliefs: "If a party is to be built up and maintained on Fourierism, Mesmerism, Maine Liquor laws, Spiritual Rappings, Kossuthism, Socialism, Abolitionism, and forty other isms, we have no disposition to mix with any such companions."
One lasting effect of the term of Congressman Greeley was his friendship with a fellow Whig, serving his only term in the House, Illinois's Abraham Lincoln.
Weed was content to have blocked the editor, and stated that he had "paid the ''first'' installment on a large debt to Mr. Greeley".
The ''Tribune'' was initially in favor of peaceful separation, with the South becoming a separate nation.
Throughout the war, Greeley played with ideas as to how to settle it.
Greeley ran for Congress in 1866, but lost badly, and for Senate in the legislative election held in early 1867, to be defeated by Roscoe Conkling.
As president and Congress battled, Greeley remained firmly opposed to Johnson, and when the president was impeached in 1868, Greeley and the ''Tribune'' strongly supported his removal, strongly attacking Johnson.
In May 1867, a Richmond judge set bail for the former Confederate president at $100,000.
His death came before the Electoral College balloted.
Greeley was one of the first newspaper editors to have a full-time correspondent in Washington, an innovation quickly followed by his rivals.
One of the positions taken by ''The New-Yorker'' was that the unemployed of the cities should seek lives in the developing American West (in the 1830s, the West encompassed today's Midwestern states).
Nevertheless, Greeley's effectiveness as a reformer was undermined by his idiosyncrasies: according to Williams, he "must have looked like an apparition, a man of eccentric habits dressed in an old linen coat that made him look like a farmer who came into town for supplies".
Ralph Waldo Emerson also benefited from Greeley's promotion.
Greeley's estrangement from Seward was not widely known, giving the editor more credibility.
Instead, during the run-up to the 1860 Republican National Convention in Chicago, he pressed the candidacy of former Missouri representative Edward Bates, an opponent of the spread of slavery who had freed his own slaves.
In his letter, Greeley demanded action on emancipation, and strict enforcement of the Confiscation Acts.
As divisions between Clay and President Tyler became apparent, he supported the Kentucky senator and looked to a Clay nomination for president in 1844.
Her condition worsened in October, and he effectively broke off campaigning after October 12 to be with her.
Cast in 1890, it was not dedicated until 1916.
Although Greeley had requested a simple funeral, his daughters ignored his wishes and arranged a grand affair.
Greeley attended the inauguration, sitting close to Senator Douglas, as the ''Tribune'' hailed the beginning of Lincoln's presidency.
He went to Chicago, then to Lawrence in Kansas Territory, and was unimpressed by the local people.
In 1984, a fictionalized version of Greeley was subject of an entire comic book volume, when the French comic book artists Morris, Xavier Fauche and Jean Léturgie created their story "Le Daily Star", the 53rd installment of the ''Lucky Luke'' series.
After Lincoln's assassination, he supported the Radical Republicans in opposition to President Andrew Johnson.
The anti-Greeley campaign was famously and effectively summed up in the cartoons of Thomas Nast, whom Grant later credited with a major role in his re-election.
Nevertheless, the president was acquitted by the Senate, much to Greeley's disappointment.
Greeley was angered over patronage disputes, and felt Seward was courting the rival ''The New York Times'' for support.
Greeley soon pronounced Hay the most brilliant at that craft ever to write for the ''Tribune''.
Nevertheless, by 1858, the ''Tribune'' reached 300,000 subscribers through the weekly edition, and it would continue as the foremost American newspaper through the years of the Civil War.
Nast's cartoons showed Greeley giving bail money for Jefferson Davis, throwing mud on Grant, and shaking hands with John Wilkes Booth across Lincoln's grave.
A second statue of Greeley is located in Greeley Square in Midtown Manhattan.
Greeley's forces did not have enough votes to send him to the Senate, but they had enough strength to block Evarts's candidacy.
Greeley hired Margaret Fuller in 1844 as first literary editor of the ''Tribune'', for which she wrote over 200 articles.
Greeley was the new Liberal Republican Party's candidate in the 1872 U.S. presidential election.
Greeley felt compelled to print, "Mr. Marx has very decided opinions of his own, with some of which we are far from agreeing, but those who do not read his letters are neglecting one of the most instructive sources of information on the great questions of current European politics."
Greeley campaigned on a platform of intersectional reconciliation, arguing that the war was over and the issue of slavery was resolved.
Lincoln's reply would become famous, much more so than the prayer that provoked it.
Lincoln eagerly accepted, "having him firmly behind me will be as helpful to me as an army of one hundred thousand men."
What I do about slavery, and the colored race, I do because it helps to save the Union; and what I forbear, I forbear because I do ''not'' believe it would help to save the Union."
He remained there only briefly, going from town to town seeking newspaper employment, and was hired by the ''Erie Gazette''.
His 66 electoral votes were divided among four others, principally Indiana governor-elect Thomas A. Hendricks and Greeley's vice presidential running mate, Benjamin Gratz Brown.
However, Seward rejected such talks and the prospect of European intervention receded after the bloody Union victory at Antietam in September 1862.
Nevertheless, he wanted to be president, as a Republican if possible, if not, as a Liberal Republican.
He took his seat when Congress convened in December 1848.
Greeley opposed both the war and the expansion of slavery into the new territories seized from Mexico, and feared Taylor would support expansion as president.
This was the first time one man had been nominated for president by two political parties.
Even as his father struggled to make a living as a hired hand, Horace Greeley read everything he could—the Greeleys had a neighbor who let Horace use his library.
In the first issue, Greeley promised that his newspaper would be a "new morning Journal of Politics, Literature, and General Intelligence".
Through the 1840s, the ''Tribune'' was four pages, that is, a single sheet folded.
By early 1862, however, Greeley was again sometimes critical of the administration, frustrated by the failure to win decisive military victories, and perturbed at the president's slowness to commit to the emancipation of the slaves once the Confederacy was defeated, something the ''Tribune'' was urging in its editorials.
During the Civil War, he mostly supported Lincoln, though urging him to commit to the end of slavery before the President was willing to do so.
Greeley attended the first New York state Republican Convention in 1854, and was disappointed not to be nominated either for governor or lieutenant governor.
The following year, he founded the ''Tribune'', which became the highest-circulating newspaper in the country through weekly editions sent by mail.
The books were very successful, selling a total of 225,000 copies by 1870, a large sale for the time.
Van Deusen concluded his biography of Greeley:
In 1832, Greeley worked as an employee of the publication ''Spirit of the Times''.
He published the major Whig periodical the ''Log Cabin'', and also wrote many of the pro-Harrison songs that marked the campaign.
On the first two ballots, Seward led Lincoln, but on the second only by a small margin.
Greeley maintained his interest in associationism.
Greeley was among those who signed the bail bond, and the two men met briefly at the courthouse.
Subscriptions to the ''Tribune'' (especially the ''Weekly Tribune'') also dropped off, though they recovered during the 1868 election.
Greeley continued to seek political office, running for state comptroller in 1869 and the House of Representatives in 1870, losing both times.
He also published the campaign news sheet of the new Whig Party in New York for the 1834 campaign, and came to believe in its positions, including free markets with government assistance in developing the nation.
The ''Tribune'' continued to print a wide variety of material.
Both were living at a boarding house run on the diet principles of Sylvester Graham, eschewing meat, alcohol, coffee, tea, and spices, as well as abstaining from the use of tobacco.
In 1862, Greeley had approached the French minister to Washington, Henri Mercier, to discuss a mediated settlement.
In August, fearing a Democratic victory and acceptance of the Confederacy, Greeley engaged in a plot to get a new convention to nominate another candidate, with Lincoln withdrawing.
Marx collaborated with Friedrich Engels on his work for the ''Tribune'', which continued for over a decade, covering 500 articles.
According to an editorial on November 9,
In conversations with other delegates, he predicted that, if nominated, Seward could not carry crucial battleground states such as Pennsylvania.
In 1839, Greeley worked for several journals, and took a month-long break to go as far west as Detroit.
"We defy it, execrate it, spit upon it."
Greeley, who had met his wife at a Graham boarding house, became enthusiastic about other social movements that did not last, and promoted them in his paper.
The harsh winter of 1836–1837 and the financial crisis that developed soon after made many New Yorkers homeless and destitute.
As technology advanced, it became cheaper and easier to publish a newspaper, and the daily press came to dominate the weekly, which had once been the more common format for news periodicals.
However, when Clay was nominated by the Whigs, he was defeated by the Democrat, former Tennessee governor James K. Polk, though Greeley worked hard on Clay's behalf.
Greeley's wife Mary had returned ill from a trip to Europe in late June.
He was more minded to consider a run for the Republican nomination, fearing the effect on the ''Tribune'' should he bolt the party.
Greeley secured arms from the Brooklyn Navy Yard and 150 soldiers kept the building secure.
Also on the Tribune's staff in the late 1860s was Mark Twain; Henry George sometimes contributed pieces, as did Bret Harte.
The defeat threw Greeley into despair, and he may have suffered a nervous breakdown.
It was time to restore normalcy and end the continuing military occupation of the South.
He was of English descent, and his forebears included early settlers of Massachusetts and New Hampshire.
He was supportive even during the military defeats of the first year of the war.
After the rebel leader was caught, Greeley initially advocated that "punishment be meted out in accord with a just verdict".
The Republican counterattack was well-financed, accusing Greeley of support for everything from treason to the Ku Klux Klan.
Greeley did not initially support Lincoln for nomination in 1864, casting about for other candidates.
Similar editorials appeared through January 1861, after which ''Tribune'' editorials took a hard line on the South, opposing concessions.
The switch in parties coincided with the end of two of his longtime political alliances: in December 1854, Greeley wrote that the political partnership between Weed, William Seward (who was by then senator after serving as governor) and himself was ended "by the withdrawal of the junior partner".
They were married in Warrenton, North Carolina on July 5, 1836, and an announcement duly appeared in ''The New-Yorker'' eleven days later.
Lincoln said nothing publicly concerning Greeley's credulous conduct, but privately indicated that he had no confidence in him anymore.
Culturally deficient, he was to the end ignorant of his own limitations, and this ignorance was a great handicap."
As a congressman for three months, Greeley introduced legislation for a homestead act that would allow settlers who improved land to purchase it at low rates—a fourth of what speculators would pay.
In 1859, Greeley traveled across the continent to see the West for himself, to write about it for the ''Tribune'', and to publicize the need for a transcontinental railroad.
Republican newspapers across the nation regularly reprinted his editorials.
Part of Greeley's strategy was to make the ''Tribune'' a newspaper of national scope, not merely local.
He wrote for or edited several publications and involved himself in Whig Party politics, taking a significant part in William Henry Harrison's successful 1840 presidential campaign.
When Congress convened and gradually took control of Reconstruction, Greeley generally supported their actions, favoring universal male suffrage and, his anger against the Confederates having cooled, amnesty.
Among the mourners were old friends, ''Tribune'' employees including Reid and Hay, his journalistic rivals, and a broad array of politicians, led by President Grant.
Zaccheus was not successful, and moved his family several times, as far west as Pennsylvania.
Greeley, in his paper, initially supported the Whig program.
The ''Tribune'' remained a Whig paper, but Greeley took an independent course.
In the 1852 presidential race, he supported the Whig candidate, General Winfield Scott, but savaged the Whig platform for its support of the Compromise.
There, he learned the mechanics of a printer's job, and acquired a reputation as the town encyclopedia, reading his way through the local library.
Such party divisions contributed to Scott's defeat by former New Hampshire senator Franklin Pierce.
He found himself unable to sleep, and after a final visit to the ''Tribune'' on November 13 (a week after the election) remained under medical care.
At the time, New York had many newspapers, dominated by James Gordon Bennett's ''New York Herald'', which with a circulation of about 55,000 had more readers than its combined competition.
Poor results for the Democrats in those states that had elections for other offices in September and October presaged defeat for Greeley, and so it proved.
She died on October 30, plunging him into despair a week before the election.
Greeley was deeply involved in the campaign of the Whig candidate for president in 1840, William Henry Harrison.
By the end of the 1840s, Greeley's ''Tribune'' was not only solidly established in New York as a daily paper, it was highly influential nationally through its weekly edition, which circulated in rural areas and small towns.
The Liberal Republican national convention met in Cincinnati in May 1872.
He served as treasurer and lent Meeker money to keep the colony afloat.
Greeley's prodding of Lincoln culminated in a letter to him on August 19, 1862, reprinted on the following day in the ''Tribune'' as the "Prayer of Twenty Millions".
In January 1849, Greeley supported a bill that would have corrected the issue, but it was defeated.
Soon after his move to New York City, Greeley met Mary Young Cheney.
It is suggested that this deprivation may have caused him to develop Asperger's syndrome—some of his biographers, such as Mitchell Snay, maintain that this condition would account for his eccentric behaviors in later life.
By the end of the 1840 campaign, the ''Log Cabin'''s circulation had risen to 80,000 and Greeley decided to establish a daily newspaper, the ''New-York Tribune''.
He was devastated at the defeat and died three weeks later.
The Crédit Mobilier scandal—corruption in the financing of the Union Pacific Railroad—broke in September, but Greeley was unable to take advantage of the Grant administration's ties to the scandal as he had stock in the railroad himself, and some alleged it had been given him in exchange for favorable coverage.
In 1868, Whitelaw Reid joined the ''Tribune''&nbsp;'s staff as managing editor.
Through the spring and early summer of 1861, Greeley and the ''Tribune'' beat the drum for a Union attack.
In the early days, Greeley's chief assistant was Henry J. Raymond, who a decade later founded ''The New York Times''.
Many concluded that Lincoln had fallen as the result of a final rebel plot, and the new president, Andrew Johnson, offered $100,000 for the capture of fugitive Confederate president Jefferson Davis.
Among many other issues, he urged the settlement of the American West, which he saw as a land of opportunity for the young and the unemployed.
Greeley had stopped over in Washington, D.C. on his way south to observe Congress.
Greeley vacillated on support for the Compromise of 1850, which gave victories to both sides of the slavery issue, before finally opposing it.
Why can't he restrain himself and wait a little while?"
This talk of moderation ceased when Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth.
The editor-turned-candidate won only six states: Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Tennessee and Texas.
Greeley attended the convention as a substitute for a delegate from Oregon who was unable to attend.
Seward's forces made Greeley a target of their anger at the senator's defeat.
The ''Tribune'' remained under that name until 1924, when it merged with the New York ''Herald'' to become the New York ''Herald-Tribune'', which was published until 1966.
He is buried in Brooklyn's Green-Wood Cemetery.
In Reid, Greeley had found a reliable second-in-command.
New Yorkers were not initially receptive; the first week's receipts were $92 and expenses $525.
With an initial subscription price of $2 a year, this was sent to many across the United States by mail, and was especially popular in the Midwest.
In fact, the men were in Niagara Falls, Canada to aid Peace Democrats and otherwise undermine the Union war effort.
To place the ''Tribune'' on a sound financial footing, Greeley sold a half-interest in it to attorney Thomas McElrath, who became publisher of the ''Tribune'' (Greeley was editor) and ran the business side.
but they played along when Greeley journeyed to Niagara Falls, at Lincoln's request: the president was willing to consider any deal that included reunion and emancipation.
He built his resources and set up a print shop in that year.
Greeley's alliance with William H. Seward and Thurlow Weed led to him serving three months in the House of Representatives, where he angered many by investigating Congress in his newspaper.
In February, he wrote in the ''Tribune'' that Lincoln could not be elected to a second term.
Weed wanted William M. Evarts elected in his place, while the anti-Seward forces in New York gathered around Greeley.
When the paper closed in 1830, the young man went west to join his family, living near Erie, Pennsylvania.
Greeley and the ''Tribune'' were generally supportive of conscription, though feeling that the rich should not be allowed to evade it by hiring substitutes.
Greeley sharpened those skills over time, laying down what future Secretary of State John Hay, who worked for the ''Tribune'' in the 1870s, deemed the "Gospel according to St. Horace".
There, he continued to worsen, and died on November 29, with his two surviving daughters and Whitelaw Reid at his side.
According to his biographer, Erik S. Lunde, "a dedicated social reformer deeply sympathetic to the treatment of poor white males, slaves, free blacks, and white women, he still espoused the virtues of self-help and free enterprise".
Greeley had taken positions in opposition to slavery as editor of ''The New-Yorker'' in the late 1830s, opposing the annexation of the slaveholding Republic of Texas to the United States.
"My paramount object in this struggle ''is'' to save the Union, and is ''not'' either to save or to destroy slavery.
Beginning as a supporter, Greeley soon became disillusioned with President Johnson, whose Reconstruction policies allowed the quick formation of state governments without provision for suffrage for the freedman.
One subscriber cancelled, regretting the three-cent stamp he had to use on the letter; Greeley supplied a replacement.
Under the laws then in force, the Whig committee from the Sixth District chose Jackson's replacement and they chose Greeley, though they did not select him as their candidate for the seat in the following Congress.
These songs were sung at mass meetings, many organized and led by Greeley.
He also planned to give speeches to promote the Republican Party.
Politically, the ''Tribune'' backed Kentucky Senator Henry Clay, who had unsuccessfully sought the presidential nomination that fell to Harrison, and supported Clay's American System for development of the country.
Van Deusen wrote, "Greeley's effectiveness as a crusader was limited by some of his traits and characteristics.
In 1820, Zaccheus's financial reverses caused him to flee New Hampshire with his family lest he be imprisoned for debt, and settle in Vermont.
According to biographer Robert C. Williams, "Greeley's lyrics swept the country and roused Whig voters to action."
Williams concludes that "for a brief moment, Horace Greeley had believed that peaceful secession might be a form of freedom preferable to civil war".
The newspaper, the ''Jeffersonian'', premiered in February 1838 and helped elect the Whig candidate for governor, William H. Seward.
Funds raised by Weed helped distribute the ''Log Cabin'' widely.
After the Union victory at Gettysburg in early July 1863, the ''Tribune'' wrote that the rebellion would be quickly "stamped out".
