A. E. Housman considered ''Odes'' 4.7, in Archilochian couplets, the most beautiful poem of antiquity and yet he generally shared Horace's penchant for quatrains, being readily adapted to his own elegiac and melancholy strain.
Montaigne made constant and inventive use of Horatian quotes.
Horace's Hellenistic background is clear in his Satires, even though the genre was unique to Latin literature.
Maecenas was still the dominant confidante but Horace had now begun to assert his own independence, suavely declining constant invitations to attend his patron.
These became the ancestors of six extant manuscripts dated to the ninth century.
Cheap editions were plentiful and fine editions were also produced, including one whose entire text was engraved by John Pine in copperplate.
The ''Satires'' also include a strong element of Epicureanism, with frequent allusions to the Epicurean poet Lucretius.
Horace proudly claimed to introduce into Latin the spirit and iambic poetry of Archilochus but (unlike Archilochus) without persecuting anyone (''Epistles'' 1.19.23–5).
However a measure of his influence can be found in the diversity of the people interested in his works, both among readers and authors.
In the final poem of the first book of ''Epistles'', he revealed himself to be forty-four years old in the consulship of Lollius and Lepidus i.e.
Pope Urban VIII wrote voluminously in Horatian meters, including an ode on gout.
In fact medieval scholars were also guilty of over-schematism, associating Horace's different genres with the different ages of man.
A twelfth century scholar encapsulated the theory: "...Horace wrote four different kinds of poems on account of the four ages, the ''Odes'' for boys, the ''Ars Poetica'' for young men, the ''Satires'' for mature men, the ''Epistles'' for old and complete men."
There was considerable debate over the value of different lyrical forms for contemporary poets, as represented on one hand by the kind of four-line stanzas made familiar by Horace's Sapphic and Alcaic ''Odes'' and, on the other, the loosely structured Pindarics associated with the odes of Pindar.
It was about this time that he began writing his ''Satires'' and ''Epodes''.
He never mentioned his mother in his verses and he might not have known much about her.
Conversely, they may have created a vogue for the lyrics of the archaic Greek poet Pindar, due to the fact that Horace had neglected that style of lyric (see Pindar#Influence and legacy).
Almost all of Horace's work found favor in the Medieval period.
The Roman poet was presented in the nineteenth century as an honorary English gentleman.
Horace was often evoked by poets of the fourth century, such as Ausonius and Claudian.
One modern scholar has speculated that authors who imitated Horace in accentual rhythms (including stressed Latin and vernacular languages) may have considered their work a natural sequel to Horace's metrical variety.
Juvenal's caustic satire was influenced mainly by Lucilius but Horace by then was a school classic and Juvenal could refer to him respectfully and in a round-about way as "''the Venusine lamp''".
Epicureanism is the dominant influence, characterizing about twice as many of these odes as Stoicism.
Auden for example evoked the fragile world of the 1930s in terms echoing ''Odes'' 2.11.1–4, where Horace advises a friend not to let worries about frontier wars interfere with current pleasures.
''Satires 1.6.65–92''
Yet Horace's lyrics could offer inspiration to libertines as well as moralists, and neo-Latin sometimes served as a kind of discrete veil for the risqué.
His career coincided with Rome's momentous change from Republic to Empire.
By the last half of the ninth century, it was not uncommon for literate people to have direct experience of Horace's poetry.
The obscene qualities of some of the poems have repulsed even scholars yet more recently a better understanding of the nature of Iambic poetry has led to a re-evaluation of the ''whole'' collection.
The content of his poems however  was restricted to simple piety.
Octavian offered an early amnesty to his opponents and Horace quickly accepted it.
Both W.H.Auden and Louis MacNeice began their careers as teachers of classics and both responded as poets to Horace's influence.
In 37 BC, Horace accompanied Maecenas on a journey to Brundisium, described in one of his poems as a series of amusing incidents and charming encounters with other friends along the way, such as Virgil.
The fictional hero Tom Jones recited his verses with feeling.
A group of odes combines these two influences in tense relationships, such as ''Odes'' 1.7, praising Stoic virility and devotion to public duty while also advocating private pleasures among friends.
His work expressed genuine freedom or libertas.
In it, Horace addresses the emperor Augustus directly with more confidence and proclaims his power to grant poetic immortality to those he praises.
''Ode'' 4.11 is neumed with the melody of a hymn to John the Baptist, ''Ut queant laxis'', composed in Sapphic stanzas.
The first poem of the ''Epistles'' sets the philosophical tone for the rest of the collection: "So now I put aside both verses and all those other games: What is true and what befits is my care, this my question, this my whole concern."
Horace's ''Ars Poetica'' is second only to Aristotle's ''Poetics'' in its influence on literary theory and criticism.
Nevertheless, his work in the period 30–27 BC began to show his closeness to the regime and his sensitivity to its developing ideology.
Occasionally  poems had had some resemblance to letters, including an elegiac poem from Solon to Mimnermus and some lyrical poems from Pindar to Hieron of Syracuse.
The letter to Augustus may have been slow in coming, being published possibly as late as 11 BC.
Edward FitzGerald's ''Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam'', though formally derived from the Persian ''ruba'i'', nevertheless shows a strong Horatian influence, since, as one modern scholar has observed,"''...the quatrains inevitably recall the stanzas of the 'Odes', as does the narrating first person of the world-weary, ageing Epicurean Omar himself, mixing sympotic exhortation and 'carpe diem' with splendid moralising and 'memento mori' nihilism.''"
However he also borrowed from Horace when composing his Italian sonnets.
Suetonius recorded some gossip about Horace's sexual activities late in life, involving mirrors.
By then Horace had already received from Maecenas the famous gift of his Sabine farm, probably not long after the publication of the first book of ''Satires''.
His Odes were to become the best received of all his poems in ancient times, acquiring a classic status that discouraged imitation: no other poet produced a comparable body of lyrics in the four centuries that followed (though that might also be attributed to social causes, particularly the parasitism that Italy was sinking into).
Augustus was in fact a prolific letter-writer and he once asked Horace to be his personal secretary.
He was born on 8 December 65 BC in the Samnite south of Italy.
The vernacular languages were dominant in Spain and Portugal in the sixteenth century, where Horace's influence is notable in the works of such authors as Garcilaso de la Vega, Juan Boscán Sá de Miranda, Antonio Ferreira and Fray Luis de León, the latter for example writing odes on the Horatian theme ''beatus ille'' (''happy the man'').
Yet for men like Wilfred Owen, scarred by experiences of World War I, his poetry stood for discredited values:
Matthew Arnold advised a friend in verse not to worry about politics, an echo of ''Odes'' 2.11, yet later became a critic of Horace's inadequacies relative to Greek poets, as role models of Victorian virtues, observing: "''If human life were complete without faith, without enthusiasm, without energy, Horace...would be the perfect interpreter of human life.''"
There are also some indications in his verses that he was with Maecenas at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, where Octavian defeated his great rival, Antony.
By a process called ''derivatio'', he varied established meters through the addition or omission of syllables, a technique borrowed by Seneca the Younger when adapting Horatian meters to the stage.
On returning to Italy, he was confronted with yet another loss: his father's estate in Venusia was one of many throughout Italy to be confiscated for the settlement of veterans (Virgil lost his estate in the north about the same time).
In ''Odes'' 1.2, for example, he eulogized Octavian in hyperboles that echo Hellenistic court poetry.
Thus Christopher Smart entirely omitted ''Odes'' 4.10 and re-numbered the remaining odes.
Thus Horace claimed to be the free-born son of a prosperous 'coactor'.
Philip Francis left out both the English and Latin for those same two epodes, a gap in the numbering  the only indication that something was amiss.
It was in Athens too that he probably acquired deep familiarity with the ancient tradition of Greek lyric poetry, at that time largely the preserve of grammarians and academic specialists (access to such material was easier in Athens than in Rome, where the public libraries had yet to be built by Asinius Pollio and Augustus).
The satirical poet Lucilius was a senator's son who could castigate his peers with impunity.
Petrarch is a key figure in the imitation of Horace in accentual meters.
Nevertheless, the first book includes some of his most popular poems.
Both men bequeathed their property to Augustus, an honour that the emperor expected of his friends.
Either way, he was a slave for at least part of his life.
The sophisticated and flexible style that he had developed in his ''Satires'' was adapted to the more serious needs of this new genre.
The name ''Augustus'', which Octavian assumed in January 27 BC, is first attested in ''Odes'' 3.3 and 3.5.
Such refinement of style was not unusual for Horace.
The German scholar, Ludwig Traube, once dubbed the tenth and eleventh centuries ''The age of Horace'' (''aetas Horatiana''), and placed it between the ''aetas Vergiliana'' of the eighth and ninth centuries, and the ''aetas Ovidiana'' of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, a distinction supposed to reflect the dominant classical Latin influences of those times.
Horace modelled these poems on the work of Archilochus.
He even emerged as "a quite Horatian Homer" in his translation of the ''Iliad''.
Quos procax nobis numeros, jocosque
Horace later claimed that he was reduced to poverty and this led him to try his hand at poetry.
He was evidently a man of strong abilities however and managed to gain his freedom and improve his social position.
He depicted the process as an honourable one, based on merit and mutual respect, eventually leading to true friendship, and there is reason to believe that his relationship was genuinely friendly, not just with Maecenas but afterwards with Augustus as well.
He imitated all Horace's lyrical meters then followed these up with imitations of other meters used by Prudentius and Boethius, indicating that variety, as first modelled by Horace, was considered a fundamental aspect of the lyric genre.
These preliminary comments touch on a small sample of developments in the reception of Horace's work.
At best, it offered future prospects through contacts with other poets and their patrons among the rich.
It was no idle boast.
His ''Odes'' featured more complex measures, including alcaics and sapphics, which were sometimes a difficult fit for Latin structure and syntax.
The reception of Horace's work has varied from one epoch to another and varied markedly even in his own lifetime.
This hymn later became the basis of the solfege system (''Do, re, mi...'')an association with western music quite appropriate for a lyric poet like Horace, though the language of the hymn is mainly Prudentian.
New editions of his works were published almost yearly.
It can be argued that Horace's influence extended beyond poetry to dignify core themes and values of the early Christian era, such as self-sufficiency, inner contentment and courage.
''Odes'' 1–3 were the next focus for his artistic creativity.
Or Chinese with leaves.
The sixteenth century in western Europe was also an age of translations (except in Germany, where Horace wasn't translated until well into the seventeenth century).
Milton recommended both works in his treatise ''of Education''.
::Nor ask what doubtful act allows
Various Italic dialects were spoken in the area and this perhaps enriched his feeling for language.
The ''Epodes'' belong to the iambic genre of 'blame poetry', written to shame fellow citizens into a sense of their social obligations.
In the final poem of his third book of Odes he claimed to have created for himself a monument more durable than bronze ("Exegi monumentum aere perennius", ''Carmina'' 3.30.1).
Many of Horace's poems also contain much reflection on genre, the lyric tradition, and the function of poetry.
For one modern scholar, however, Horace's personal qualities are more notable than the monumental quality of his achievement:
Ambiguity is the hallmark of the ''Epistles''.
The same motto, Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori, had been adapted to the ethos of martyrdom in the lyrics of early Christian poets like Prudentius.
The most prolific imitator of his ''Odes'' was the Bavarian monk, Metellus of Tegernsee, who dedicated his work to the patron saint of Tegernsee Abbey,  St Quirinus, around the year 1170.
The iambic genre seems almost to have disappeared after publication of Horace's ''Epodes''.
Rome's troubles following the assassination of Julius Caesar were soon to catch up with him.
Lucilius had composed a satire in the form of a letter, and some epistolary poems were composed by Catullus and Propertius.
He greeted Augustus on his return to Rome in 24 BC as a beloved ruler upon whose good health he depended for his own happiness (3.14).
Two of those six manuscripts are French in origin, one was produced in Alsace, and the other three show Irish influence but were probably written in continental monasteries (Lombardy for example).
His libertas was the private freedom of a philosophical outlook, not a political or social privilege.
::Where Poland draws her Eastern bow,
His works were also used to justify commonplace themes, such as patriotic obedience, as in James Parry's English lines from an Oxford University collection in 1736:
Horace composed in traditional metres borrowed from Archaic Greece, employing hexameters in his ''Satires'' and ''Epistles'', and iambs in his ''Epodes'', all of which were relatively easy to adapt into Latin forms.
His style included  'metrical vandalism'  and looseness of structure.
He composed a controversial version of ''Odes'' 1.5, and Paradise Lost includes references to Horace's 'Roman' ''Odes'' 3.1–6 (Book 7 for example begins with echoes of ''Odes'' 3.4).
French editions of Horace were influential in England and these too were regularly bowdlerized.
A revival of popular interest in the satires of Lucillius may have been inspired by Horace's criticism of his unpolished style.
Horace's popularity is revealed in the large number of quotes from all his works found in almost every genre of medieval literature, and also in the number of poets imitating him in quantitative Latin meter .
Ancient scholars wrote commentaries on the lyric meters of the ''Odes'', including the scholarly poet Caesius Bassus.
Horace's ''Epodes'' have largely been ignored in the modern era, excepting those with political associations of historical significance.
By the early sixth century, Horace and Prudentius were both part of a classical heritage that was struggling to survive the disorder of the times.
::Our freedom in this English house,
The fragmented nature of the Greek world had enabled his literary heroes to express themselves freely and his semi-retirement from the Treasury in Rome to his own estate in the Sabine hills perhaps empowered him to some extent also yet even when his lyrics touched on public affairs they reinforced the importance of private life.
''Satires'' 1.5, for example, recounts in detail a real trip Horace made with Virgil and some of his other literary friends, and which parallels a Satire by Lucilius, his predecessor.
Arabs flavour our cups with beans
Although he is often thought of as an overly intellectual lover, he is ingenuous in representing passion.
Temperent baccis Arabes, vel herbis
His republican sympathies, and his role at Philippi, may have caused him some pangs of remorse over his new status.
Horace was often commended in periodicals such as The Spectator, as a hallmark of good judgement, moderation and manliness, a focus for moralising.
Horace was probably also with Maecenas on one of Octavian's naval expeditions against the piratical Sextus Pompeius, which ended in a disastrous storm off Palinurus in 36 BC, briefly alluded to by Horace in terms of near-drowning.
The poet later paid tribute to him in a poem that one modern scholar considers the best memorial by any son to his father.
Horace instead adopted an oblique and ironic style of satire, ridiculing stock characters and anonymous targets.
There was nothing like it in Greek or Roman literature.
He addressed his first book of ''Epistles'' to a variety of friends and acquaintances in an urbane style reflecting his new social status as a knight.
Thus he depicts the ups and downs of the philosophical life more realistically than do most philosophers.
It was even thought that Horace had composed his works in the  order in which they had been placed by ancient scholars.
Despite these traditional metres, he presented himself as a partisan in the development of a new and sophisticated style.
Most European nations had their own 'Horaces': thus for example Friedrich von Hagedorn was called ''The German Horace'' and Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski ''The Polish Horace'' (the latter was much imitated by English poets such as Henry Vaughan and Abraham Cowley).
Ben Jonson put Horace on the stage in 1601 in ''Poetaster'', along with other classical Latin authors, giving them all their own verses to speak in translation.
The public reception of ''Odes'' 1–3 disappointed him however.
His ''Epodes'' were modeled on the verses of the Greek poet, as 'blame poetry', yet he avoided targeting real scapegoats.
Whereas Archilochus presented himself as a serious and vigorous opponent of wrong-doers, Horace aimed for comic effects and adopted the persona of a weak and ineffectual critic of his times (as symbolized for example in his surrender to the witch Canidia in the final epode).
I could never be ashamed of such a father, nor do I feel any need, as many people do, to apologize for being a freedman's son.
As the heirs to Hellenistic culture, Horace and his fellow Romans were not well prepared to deal with these problems:
In reality, there was no money to be had from versifying.
Brutus was fêted around town in grand receptions and he made a point of attending academic lectures, all the while recruiting supporters among the impressionable young men studying there, including Horace.
It is the least philosophical collection of his verses, excepting the twelfth ode, addressed to the dead Virgil as if he were living.
On the other hand, St Jerome, modelled an uncompromising response to the pagan Horace, observing: "''What harmony can there be between Christ and the Devil?
The most famous poem of Ernest Dowson took its title and its heroine's name from a line of ''Odes'' 4.1, ''Non sum qualis eram bonae sub regno Cynarae'', as well as its motif of nostalgia for a former flame.
Horatian-style lyrics were increasingly typical of Oxford and Cambridge verse collections for this period, most of them in Latin but some like the previous ode in English.
Translations occasionally involved scholars in the dilemmas of censorship.
Prudentius presented himself as a Christian Horace, adapting Horatian meters to his own poetry and giving Horatian motifs a Christian tone.
Christina Rossetti composed a sonnet depicting a woman willing her own death steadily, drawing on Horace's depiction of 'Glycera' in ''Odes'' 1.19.5–6 and Cleopatra in ''Odes'' 1.37.
The distinction has little relevance for Horace however since his personal and literary experiences are implicated in each other.
Among the most successful imitators of ''Satires'' and ''Epistles'' was another Germanic author, calling himself Sextus Amarcius, around 1100, who composed four books, the first two exemplifying vices, the second pair mainly virtues.
He adapted their forms and themes from Greek lyric poetry of the seventh and sixth centuries BC.
The ''Odes'' display a wide range of topics.
Perhaps it was disappointment that led him to put aside the genre in favour of verse letters.
It signalled his identification with the Octavian regime yet, in the second book of ''Satires'' that soon followed, he continued the apolitical stance of the first book.
It was there in 42 BC that Octavian (later Augustus) and his associate Mark Antony crushed the republican forces at the Battle of Philippi.
Italians in modern and ancient times have always been devoted to their home towns, even after success in the wider world, and Horace was no different.
Literary Latin must have sounded to him like a semi-foreign language, heard only at school.
According to Suetonius, the second book of ''Epistles'' was  prompted by Augustus, who desired a verse epistle to be addressed to himself.
William Thackery produced a version of ''Odes'' 1.38 in which Horace's questionable 'boy' became 'Lucy', and Gerard Manley Hopkins translated the boy innocently as 'child'.
An introduction soon followed and, after a discreet interval, Horace too was accepted.
English literature in the middle of that period has been dubbed Augustan.
In the opening poem, he professed a deeper interest in moral philosophy than poetry but, though the collection demonstrates a leaning towards stoic theory, it reveals no sustained thinking about ethics.
The literary theme was explored still further in ''Ars Poetica'', published separately but written in the form of an epistle and sometimes referred to as ''Epistles'' 2.3 (possibly the last poem he ever wrote).
Horace refused the secretarial role but complied with the emperor's request for a verse letter.
The way was opened for him by his friend, the poet Virgil, who had gained admission into the privileged circle around Maecenas, Octavian's lieutenant, following the success of his  ''Eclogues''.
The ''Satires'' also feature some Stoic, Peripatetic and Platonic (''Dialogues'') elements.
Though elitist in its literary standards, it was written for a wide audience, as a public form of art.
Dante referred to Horace as ''Orazio satiro'', and he awarded him a privileged position in the first circle of Hell, with Homer, Ovid and Lucan.
In France, Horace and Pindar were the poetic models for a group of vernacular authors called the Pléiade, including for example Pierre de Ronsard and Joachim du Bellay.
Works attributed to Helenius Acro and Pomponius Porphyrio are the remnants of a much larger body of Horatian scholarship.
However most Romans considered the civil wars to be the result of ''contentio dignitatis'', or rivalry between the foremost families of the city, and he too seems to have accepted the principate as Rome's last hope for much needed peace.
The poet died at 56 years of age, not long after his friend Maecenas, near whose tomb he was laid to rest.
Porphyrio arranged the poems in non-chronological order, beginning with the ''Odes'', because of their general popularity and their appeal to scholars (the ''Odes'' were to retain this privileged position in the medieval manuscript tradition and thus in modern editions also).
The comparison with the latter poet is uncanny: Archilochus lost his shield in a part of Thrace near Philippi, and he was deeply involved in the Greek colonization of Thasos, where Horace's die-hard comrades finally surrendered.
However, the melody is unlikely to be a survivor from classical times, although Ovid testifies to Horace's use of the lyre while performing his Odes.
Social bonds in Rome had been decaying since the destruction of Carthage a little more than a hundred years earlier, due to the vast wealth that could be gained by plunder and corruption, and the troubles were magnified by rivalry between Julius Caesar, Mark Antony and confederates like Sextus Pompey, all jockeying for a bigger share of the spoils.
For some commentators, his association with the regime was a delicate balance in which he maintained a strong measure of independence (he was "a master of the graceful sidestep") but for others he was, in John Dryden's phrase, "a well-mannered court slave".
In fact the journey was political in its motivation, with Maecenas en route to negotiatie the Treaty of Tarentum with Antony, a fact Horace artfully keeps from the reader (political issues are largely avoided in the first book of satires).
Ovid followed his example in creating a completely natural style of expression in hexameter verse, and Propertius cheekily mimicked him in his third book of elegies.
Classical texts almost ceased being copied in the period between the mid sixth century and the Middle Ages.
Horace was a mere freedman's son who had to tread carefully.
In short, the ''Satires'' present a medley of philosophical programs, dished up in no particular ordera style of argument typical of the genre.
Despite its naivety, the schematism involved an appreciation of Horace's works as a collection, the ''Ars Poetica'', ''Satires'' and ''Epistles'' appearing to find favour as well as the ''Odes''.
In modern literary theory, a distinction is often made between immediate personal experience (''Urerlebnis'') and experience mediated by cultural vectors such as literature, philosophy and the visual arts (''Bildungserlebnis'').
Horace left Rome, possibly after his father's death, and continued his formal education in Athens, a great centre of learning in the ancient world, where he arrived at nineteen years of age, enrolling in The Academy.
The gift, which included income from five tenants, may have ended his career at the Treasury, or at least allowed him to give it less time and energy.
Both Horace and Lucilius were considered good role-models by Persius, who critiqued his own satires as lacking both the acerbity of Lucillius and the gentler touch of Horace.
Such a distinction is over-schematized since Horace was a substantial influence in the ninth century as well.
Horace developed a number of inter-related themes throughout his poetic career, including politics, love, philosophy and ethics, his own social role, as well as poetry itself.
So for example the Epicurean sentiment ''carpe diem'' is the inspiration behind Horace's repeated punning on his own name (''Horatius ~ hora'') in ''Satires'' 2.6.
Lyons argues that the melody in question was linked with Horace's Ode well before Guido d'Arezzo fitted Ut queant laxis to it.
''Odes'' 4, thought to be composed at the emperor's request, takes the themes of the first three books of "Odes" to a new level.
Traube had focused too much on Horace's ''Satires''.
Horace appealed also to female poets, such as Anna Seward (''Original sonnets on various subjects, and odes paraphrased from Horace'', 1799) and Elizabeth Tollet,  who composed a Latin ode in Sapphic meter to celebrate her brother's return from overseas, with tea and coffee substituted for the wine of Horace's sympotic settings:
This book shows greater poetic confidence after the public performance of his "Carmen saeculare" or "Century hymn" at a public festival orchestrated by Augustus.
Unlike much Hellenistic-inspired literature, however, his poetry was not composed for a small coterie of admirers and fellow poets, nor does it rely on abstruse allusions for many of its effects.
He also claimed to be the first to introduce into Latin the lyrical methods of Alcaeus (''Epistles'' 1.19.32–3) and he actually was the first Latin poet to make consistent use of Alcaic meters and themes: love, politics and the symposium.
By this time, he had attained the status of ''eques Romanus'', perhaps as a result of his work at the Treasury.
His influence had a perverse aspect.
Horace's work probably survived in just two or three books imported into northern Europe from Italy.
He learned the basics of military life while on the march, particularly in the wilds of northern Greece, whose rugged scenery became a backdrop to some of his later poems.
