Sometimes "hot-bloods" are classified as "light horses" or "riding horses", with the "cold-bloods" classified as "draft horses" or "work horses".
These inherited traits result from a combination of natural crosses and artificial selection methods.
Foals are generally weaned from their mothers between four and six months of age.
Modern horses are often used to reenact many of their historical work purposes.
They may have calmer temperaments than horses and also a high level of intelligence that may or may not be used to cooperate with human handlers.
It is an odd-toed ungulate mammal belonging to the taxonomic family Equidae.
racing over jumps; and harness racing, where horses trot or pace while pulling a driver in a small, light cart known as a sulky.
The horses' senses are based on their status as prey animals, where they must be aware of their surroundings at all times.
Regardless of a horse or pony's actual birth date, for most competition purposes a year is added to its age each January&nbsp;1 of each year in the Northern Hemisphere and each August&nbsp;1 in the Southern Hemisphere.
The term was once used to refer to breeds of light riding horse other than Thoroughbreds or Arabians, such as the Morgan horse.
Thoroughbred is a specific breed of horse, while a "purebred" is a horse (or any other animal) with a defined pedigree recognized by a breed registry.
Although horses are adapted to live outside, they require shelter from the wind and precipitation, which can range from a simple shed or shelter to an elaborate stable.
The hoof continually grows, and in most domesticated horses needs to be trimmed (and horseshoes reset, if used) every five to eight weeks, though the hooves of horses in the wild wear down and regrow at a rate suitable for their terrain.
These include the lateral rack, running walk, and tölt as well as the diagonal fox trot.
Others, such as the Shire, are slower and more powerful, bred to plow fields with heavy, clay-based soils.
They only have to lie down for an hour or two every few days to meet their minimum REM sleep requirements.
Breeds developed due to a need for "form to function", the necessity to develop certain characteristics in order to perform a particular type of work.
Horses are used, complete with equipment that is authentic or a meticulously recreated replica, in various live action historical reenactments of specific periods of history, especially recreations of famous battles.
The exception is in endurance riding, where the minimum age to compete is based on the animal's actual calendar age.
Height is not the sole criterion for distinguishing horses from ponies.
They can learn using habituation, desensitization, classical conditioning, and operant conditioning, and positive and negative reinforcement.
They also have good spatial discrimination abilities.
A horse's sense of touch is well developed.
Other sports, such as rodeo, developed from practical skills such as those needed on working ranches and stations.
Sport hunting from horseback evolved from earlier practical hunting techniques.
Their leg bones are proportioned differently from those of a human.
Thus, a horse described as "15.2 h" is 15 hands plus 2&nbsp;inches, for a total of  in height.
Equestrian sports provided entertainment for crowds and honed the excellent horsemanship that was needed in battle.
One study has indicated that horses can differentiate between "more or less" if the quantity involved is less than four.
Exposure to horses appears to improve the behavior of inmates and help reduce recidivism when they leave.
Horses and humans interact in a wide variety of sport competitions and non-competitive recreational pursuits, as well as in working activities such as police work, agriculture, entertainment, and therapy.
Equid teeth also evolved from browsing on soft, tropical plants to adapt to browsing of drier plant material, then to grazing of tougher plains grasses.
There are certain jobs that horses do very well, and no technology has yet developed to fully replace them.
Similarly, the Sorraia of Portugal was proposed as a direct descendant of the Tarpan based on shared characteristics, but genetic studies have shown that the Sorraia is more closely related to other horse breeds and that the outward similarity is an unreliable measure of relatedness.
Thus, a powerful but refined breed such as the Andalusian developed as riding horses with an aptitude for dressage.
Horses are herd animals, with a clear hierarchy of rank, led by a dominant individual, usually a mare.
Horses have excellent day and night vision, but they have two-color, or dichromatic vision; their color vision is somewhat like red-green color blindness in humans, where certain colors, especially red and related colors, appear as a shade of green.
Horses require routine hoof care from a farrier, as well as vaccinations to protect against various diseases, and dental examinations from a veterinarian or a specialized equine dentist.
In agriculture, less fossil fuel is used and increased environmental conservation occurs over time with the use of draft animals such as horses.
Studies of feral herds have provided useful insights into the behavior of prehistoric horses, as well as greater understanding of the instincts and behaviors that drive horses that live in domesticated conditions.
Most mares enter an ''anestrus'' period during the winter and thus do not cycle in this period.
Regular grooming is also helpful to help the horse maintain good health of the hair coat and underlying skin.
The extra toe on the front feet soon disappeared with the ''Mesohippus'', which lived 32 to 37&nbsp;million years ago.
Horse breeds are groups of horses with distinctive characteristics that are transmitted consistently to their offspring, such as conformation, color, performance ability, or disposition.
Similarly, the hock contains bones equivalent to those in the human ankle and heel.
Warmbloods are considered a "light horse" or "riding horse".
All forms of competition, requiring demanding and specialized skills from both horse and rider, resulted in the systematic development of specialized breeds and equipment for each sport.
Certain pony breeds with warmblood characteristics have been developed for smaller riders.
Many products are derived from horses, including meat, milk, hide, hair, bone, and pharmaceuticals extracted from the urine of pregnant mares.
The end result is that a horse, weighing on average , travels on the same bones as would a human on tiptoe.
The height is expressed as the number of full hands, followed by a point, then the number of additional inches, and ending with the abbreviation "h" or "hh" (for "hands high").
This condition differs from narcolepsy, although horses may also suffer from that disorder.
Horses are used for leisure activities, sports, and working purposes.
Horse racing is an equestrian sport and major international industry, watched in almost every nation of the world.
The subspecies was presumed extinct in the wild between 1969 and 1992, while a small breeding population survived in zoos around the world.
The first source is based on palaeological and archaeological discoveries; the second source is a comparison of DNA obtained from modern horses to that from bones and teeth of ancient horse remains.
Studies have indicated that horses perform a number of cognitive tasks on a daily basis, meeting mental challenges that include food procurement and identification of individuals within a social system.
Thus proto-horses changed from leaf-eating forest-dwellers to grass-eating inhabitants of semi-arid regions worldwide, including the steppes of Eurasia and the Great Plains of North America.
The American Horse Council estimates that horse-related activities have a direct impact on the economy of the United States of over $39 billion, and when indirect spending is considered, the impact is over $102 billion.
It survived into the historical era, but became extinct in 1909, when the last captive died in a Russian zoo.
They host a huge range of classes, covering all of the mounted and harness disciplines, as well as "In-hand" classes where the horses are led, rather than ridden, to be evaluated on their conformation.
They tend to be physically refined—thin-skinned, slim, and long-legged.
An early example of people who practiced selective horse breeding were the Bedouin, who had a reputation for careful practices, keeping extensive pedigrees of their Arabian horses and placing great value upon pure bloodlines.
In an adaptation from life in the wild, horses are able to enter light sleep by using a "stay apparatus" in their legs, allowing them to doze without collapsing.
Larger horses have larger bones; therefore, not only do the bones take longer to form bone tissue, but the epiphyseal plates are larger and take longer to convert from cartilage to bone.
Drinking their own horses' blood allowed the Mongols to ride for extended periods of time without stopping to eat.
Many horses are also driven, which requires a harness, bridle, and some type of vehicle.
There are more than 300&nbsp;breeds of horse in the world today, developed for many different uses.
* Stallion: A non-castrated male horse four years old and older.
For example, the Riwoche horse of Tibet was proposed as such, but testing did not reveal genetic differences from domesticated horses.
The lower leg bones of a horse correspond to the bones of the human hand or foot, and the fetlock (incorrectly called the "ankle") is actually the proximal sesamoid bones between the cannon bones (a single equivalent to the human metacarpal or metatarsal bones) and the proximal phalanges, located where one finds the "knuckles" of a human.
The oldest verifiable record was "Old Billy", a 19th-century horse that lived to the age of 62.
By about 15,000 years ago, ''Equus ferus'' was a widespread holarctic species.
There are also experimental programs using horses in prison settings.
When grain is fed, equine nutritionists recommend that 50% or more of the animal's diet by weight should still be forage.
* Gelding: A castrated male horse of any age.
Periodically, populations of horses in isolated areas are speculated to be relict populations of wild horses, but generally have been proven to be feral or domestic.
It had 4&nbsp;toes on each front foot, and 3&nbsp;toes on each back foot.
Specifically, in Italian cuisine, the horse tibia is sharpened into a probe called a ''spinto'', which is used to test the readiness of a (pig) ham as it cures.
Horses cannot vomit, so digestion problems can quickly cause colic, a leading cause of death.
For endurance riding competition, horses are not deemed mature enough to compete until they are a full 60&nbsp;calendar months (five years) old.
The '''horse''' (''Equus ferus caballus'') is one of two extant subspecies of ''Equus ferus''.
However, the lack of a detectable substructure  in the horse has resulted in a rejection of both hypotheses.
A related hybrid, a hinny, is a cross between a stallion and a jenny (female donkey).
Related to this need to flee from predators in the wild is an unusual trait: horses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down.
Studies have assessed equine intelligence in areas such as problem solving, speed of learning, and memory.
* Filly: A female horse under the age of four.
The horse genome was sequenced in 2007.
The most sensitive areas are around the eyes, ears, and nose.
Ponies are taxonomically the same animals as horses.
Uncommonly, a few animals live into their 40s and, occasionally, beyond.
They are bred for agility and speed.
These pedigrees were originally transmitted via an oral tradition.
Some, like the Percheron, are lighter and livelier, developed to pull carriages or to plow large fields in drier climates.
Their sense of smell, while much better than that of humans, is not quite as good as that of a dog.
Horses are grazing animals, and their major source of nutrients is good-quality forage from hay or pasture.
Humans provide domesticated horses with food, water and shelter, as well as attention from specialists such as veterinarians and farriers.
Horses are herbivores with a digestive system adapted to a forage diet of grasses and other plant material, consumed steadily throughout the day.
Horse hooves can also be used to produce animal glue.
* Foal: A horse of either sex less than one year old.
Although machinery has replaced horses in many parts of the world, an estimated 100&nbsp;million horses, donkeys and mules are still used for agriculture and transportation in less developed areas.
Horses have a great sense of balance, due partly to their ability to feel their footing and partly to highly developed proprioception—the unconscious sense of where the body and limbs are at all times.
Some horses, both male and female, will also develop one to four very small vestigial teeth in front of the molars, known as "wolf" teeth, which are generally removed because they can interfere with the bit.
Horses sleep better when in groups because some animals will sleep while others stand guard to watch for predators.
A major part of horse racing's economic importance lies in the gambling associated with it.
Heavy or draft horses are usually at least  high and can be as tall as  high.
Domestication of the horse most likely took place in central Asia prior to 3500 BC.
Other horse breeds developed specifically for light agricultural work, carriage and road work, various sport disciplines, or simply as pets.
Breed registries for horses that typically produce individuals both under and over 14.2&nbsp;h consider all animals of that breed to be horses regardless of their height.
The earliest archaeological evidence for the domestication of the horse comes from sites in Ukraine and Kazakhstan, dating to approximately 3500–4000 BC.
They are sometimes nicknamed "gentle giants".
They also have proportionally shorter legs, wider barrels, heavier bone, shorter and thicker necks, and short heads with broad foreheads.
Horses have been used in the 21st century by the Janjaweed militias in the War in Darfur.
The method of judging varies with the discipline, but winning usually depends on style and ability of both horse and rider.
An estimate of a horse's age can be made from looking at its teeth.
If horses are kept inside in a barn, they require regular daily exercise for their physical health and mental well-being.
"Hot blooded" breeds include "oriental horses" such as the Akhal-Teke, Arabian horse, Barb and now-extinct Turkoman horse, as well as the Thoroughbred, a breed developed in England from the older oriental breeds.
However, there are no "albino" horses, defined as having both pink skin and red eyes.
Some land management practices such as cultivating and logging can be efficiently performed with horses.
By about 5&nbsp;million years ago, the modern ''Equus'' had evolved.
Horse bones can be used to make implements.
Humans began to domesticate horses around 4000 BC, and their domestication is believed to have been widespread by 3000 BC.
For example, the body part that is called a horse's "knee" is actually made up of the carpal bones that correspond to the human wrist.
The estrous cycle of a mare occurs roughly every 19–22 days and occurs from early spring into autumn.
The variation in the genetic material shows that very few wild stallions contributed to the domestic horse, while many mares were part of early domesticated herds.
This study also recommended keeping music under a volume of 21 decibels.
However, if a horse is never allowed to lie down, after several days it will become sleep-deprived, and in rare cases may suddenly collapse as it involuntarily slips into REM sleep while still standing.
However, height alone is not dispositive; the difference between horses and ponies may also include aspects of phenotype, including conformation and temperament.
For example, the Shetland pony which averages , is considered a pony.
Historically, equestrians honed their skills through games and races.
The following terminology is used to describe horses of various ages:
The term "horse" is sometimes used colloquially to refer specifically to a stallion.
Owners of such animals often pay a fee for grazing rights.
"Warmblood" breeds, such as the Trakehner or Hanoverian, developed when European carriage and war horses were crossed with Arabians or Thoroughbreds, producing a riding horse with more refinement than a draft horse, but greater size and milder temperament than a lighter breed.
It contains 2.7 billion DNA base pairs, which is larger than the dog genome, but smaller than the human genome or the bovine genome.
There are three types: "flat" racing; steeplechasing, i.e.
Two major sources of information are used to determine where and when the horse was first domesticated and how the domesticated horse spread around the world.
The mythologies of many cultures, including Greco-Roman, Hindu, Islamic, and Norse, include references to both normal horses and those with wings or additional limbs, and multiple myths also call upon the horse to draw the chariots of the Moon and Sun.
Although Thoroughbred race horses are put on the track as young as the age of two in some countries, horses specifically bred for sports such as dressage are generally not put under saddle until they are three or four years old, because their bones and muscles are not solidly developed.
This allows a very rough estimate of a horse's age, although diet and veterinary care can also affect the rate of tooth wear.
Therapeutic riding is used to mentally and physically stimulate disabled persons and help them improve their lives through improved balance and coordination, increased self-confidence, and a greater feeling of freedom and independence.
When turned outside, they require well-maintained, sturdy fences to be safely contained.
Over time, the extra side toes shrank in size until they vanished.
Heavy draft horses developed out of a need to perform demanding farm work and pull heavy wagons.
Horses have two olfactory centers.
Before the availability of DNA techniques to resolve the questions related to the domestication of the horse, various hypotheses were proposed.
They also tend to be curious; when startled, they will often hesitate an instant to ascertain the cause of their fright, and may not always flee from something that they perceive as non-threatening.
The exterior hoof wall and horn of the sole is made of keratin, the same material as a human fingernail.
Horses require a plentiful supply of clean water, a minimum of  to  per day.
In 1992, it was reestablished in the wild due to the conservation efforts of numerous zoos.
A common terminology error is to call any young horse a "colt", when the term actually only refers to young male horses.
An Australian study found that stabled racehorses listening to talk radio had a higher rate of gastric ulcers than horses listening to music, and racehorses stabled where a radio was played had a higher overall rate of ulceration than horses stabled where there was no radio playing.
The size of horses varies by breed, but also is influenced by nutrition.
With rare exceptions, most hybrids are sterile and cannot reproduce.
Conversely, some pony breeds may have features in common with horses, and individual animals may occasionally mature at over 14.2&nbsp;h, but are still considered to be ponies.
The tarpan or European wild horse (''Equus ferus ferus'') was found in Europe and much of Asia.
* Colt: A male horse under the age of four.
Often, gaited horses replace the trot with one of the ambling gaits.
By 3000 BC, the horse was completely domesticated and by 2000 BC there was a sharp increase in the number of horse bones found in human settlements in northwestern Europe, indicating the spread of domesticated horses throughout the continent.
The teeth continue to erupt throughout life and are worn down by grazing.
Examples include show jumping, dressage, three-day eventing, competitive driving, endurance riding, gymkhana, rodeos, and fox hunting.
Horses four years old are considered mature, although the skeleton normally continues to develop until the age of six; maturation also depends on the horse's size, breed, sex, and quality of care.
The horse skeleton averages 205 bones.
A horse's hearing is good, and the pinna of each ear can rotate up to 180°, giving the potential for 360° hearing without having to move the head.
They are sometimes featured as a major character in films about particular animals, but also used as visual elements that assure the accuracy of historical stories.
The most common hybrid is the mule, a cross between a "jack" (male donkey) and a mare.
Female horses, called mares, carry their young for approximately 11&nbsp;months, and a young horse, called a foal, can stand and run shortly following birth.
However, when confined with insufficient companionship, exercise, or stimulation, individuals may develop stable vices, an assortment of bad habits, mostly stereotypies of psychological origin, that include wood chewing, wall kicking, "weaving" (rocking back and forth), and other problems.
In Australia, ponies are considered to be those under , For competition in the Western division of the United States Equestrian Federation, the cutoff is  The International Federation for Equestrian Sports, the world governing body for horse sport, uses metric measurements and defines a pony as being any horse measuring less than  at the withers without shoes, which is just over 14.2 h, and , or just over 14.2½ h, with shoes.
Horses also provide psychological benefits to people whether they actually ride or not.
Horse bones from this time period, the late Pleistocene, are found in Europe, Eurasia, Beringia, and North America.
Horses have 64 chromosomes.
Their legs also lengthened as their toes disappeared until they were a hooved animal capable of running at great speed.
Unlike humans, horses do not sleep in a solid, unbroken period of time, but take many short periods of rest.
Horses which have a white coat color are often mislabeled; a horse that looks "white" is usually a middle-aged or older gray.
Horses are able to sense contact as subtle as an insect landing anywhere on the body.
Light riding horses usually range in height from  and can weigh from .
People of all ages with physical and mental disabilities obtain beneficial results from association with horses.
Horses can crossbreed with other members of their genus.
Specific terms and specialized language are used to describe equine anatomy, different life stages, colors and breeds.
The map is available to researchers.
The benefits of equestrian activity for people with disabilities has also been recognized with the addition of equestrian events to the Paralympic Games and recognition of para-equestrian events by the International Federation for Equestrian Sports (FEI).
Worldwide, horses play a role within human cultures and have done so for millennia.
A  horse will eat  of food per day and, under normal use, drink  of water.
Horses are prey animals with a strong fight-or-flight response.
Communication between human and horse is paramount in any equestrian activity; to aid this process horses are usually ridden with a saddle on their backs to assist the rider with balance and positioning, and a bridle or related headgear to assist the rider in maintaining control.
They have the largest eyes of any land mammal, and are lateral-eyed, meaning that their eyes are positioned on the sides of their heads.
There is also regional variation in mitochondrial DNA due to the inclusion of wild mares in domestic herds.
Horses exhibit a diverse array of coat colors and distinctive markings, described by a specialized vocabulary.
Sometimes, concentrated feed such as grain is fed in addition to pasture or hay, especially when the animal is very active.
For example, the "hot-bloods", such as many race horses, exhibit more sensitivity and energy, while the "cold-bloods", such as most draft breeds, are quieter and calmer.
A nursing foal is sometimes called a ''suckling'' and a foal that has been weaned is called a ''weanling''.
Horses spend four to fifteen hours a day in standing rest, and from a few minutes to several hours lying down.
Many sports, such as dressage, eventing and show jumping, have origins in military training, which were focused on control and balance of both horse and rider.
In the 14th century, Carthusian monks of southern Spain kept meticulous pedigrees of bloodstock lineages still found today in the Andalusian horse.
There are 24&nbsp;teeth adapted for chewing, the premolars and molars, at the back of the mouth.
Different and unrelated genetic factors can produce white coat colors in horses, including several different alleles of dominant white and the sabino-1 gene.
Cattle ranches still require riders on horseback to round up cattle that are scattered across remote, rugged terrain.
"Equine-assisted" or "equine-facilitated" therapy is a form of experiential psychotherapy that uses horses as companion animals to assist people with mental illness, including anxiety disorders, psychotic disorders, mood disorders, behavioral difficulties, and those who are going through major life changes.
Horses are also used to preserve cultural traditions and for ceremonial purposes.
