An each-way (or E/W) bet sees the total bet being split in two, with half being placed on the win, and half on the place.
It became the standard racing distance for Quarter Horses and inspired their name.
Occasionally other handicap races with large fields (numbers of runners) receive the same treatment from various bookmakers, especially if they are sponsoring the race.
An Appendix Quarter Horse is a horse who has either one Quarter Horse parent and one parent of any other eligible breed (such as Thoroughbred, the most common Appendix cross), or both parents are registered Appendix Quarter Horses, or one parent is a Quarter Horse and one parent is an Appendixed Quarter Horse.
They must be able to withstand traveling long distances at a moderate pace.
The world-famous Melbourne Cup, the ''race that stops a nation'', has recently attracted many international entries.
In order to be successful in racing, Quarter Horses need to be able to propel themselves forward at extremely fast sprinter speed.
Also, with the entry into the sport of Han majority provinces such as Hubei, which are better funded and used Western, rather than traditional, breeding and training techniques, meant that the original purpose of the event to foster traditional horse racing for groups like the Mongols was at risk of being usurped.
Other more recently opened tracks include Remington Park, Oklahoma City, opened in 1988, and Lone Star Park in the Dallas–Fort Worth Metroplex, opened in 1997; the latter track hosted the prestigious Breeders' Cup series of races in 2004.
Punters who lay the odds are in effect acting as a bookmaker.
Horse racing was introduced to Singapore by the British during the colonial era and remained one of the legal forms of gambling after independence.
Keeneland, in Lexington, KY, hosted the 2015 breeders cup.
The term "Each-Way" bet is used everywhere but North America, and has a different meaning depending on the location.
In country racing, records indicate that Goulburn commenced racing in 1834.
Each race consisted of only two horses and they raced down the village streets and lanes.
Type II muscles are needed for anaerobic exercise because they can function without the presence of oxygen.
These bundles have different types of fibers within them and horses have adapted over the years to produce different amounts of these fibers.
Thoroughbreds possess more Type II-a muscle fibers than the Quarter Horse or Arabian.
Their muscles are able to work for extended periods of time.
They allow muscles to work for longer periods of time resulting in greater endurance.
Ireland has a thriving Thoroughbred breeding industry, stimulated by favourable tax treatment.
One form of parimutuel gaming is Instant Racing, in which players bet on video replays of races.
The ancestors of the Quarter Horse were prevalent in America in the early 17th century.
There are three founding sires that all Thoroughbreds can trace back to in the male line: the Darley Arabian, the Godolphin, and the Byerly Turk, named after their respective owners, Thomas Darley, Lord Godolphin, and Captain Robert Byerly.
In the UK some bookmakers will pay for the first five (some independent firms have even paid the first six) for a place on the Grand National.
Horizontal exotic wagers are bets on multiple horses in one particular race, while vertical exotic wagers involve predicting results across multiple races.
Both chariot and mounted horse racing were events in the ancient Greek Olympics by 648 BC and were important in the other Panhellenic Games.
Several July winners have gone on to win major international races, such as Colorado King, London News, and Ipi Tombe.
Speed horse racing (速度赛马) was an event in the National Games of China, mainly introduced to cater for minority peoples, such as the Mongols.
Fifteen to 20 riderless horses, originally imported from the Barbary Coast of North Africa, ran the length of the Via del Corso, a long, straight city street, in about 2½ minutes.
In recent years, however, the sport in the country has suffered a major funding crisis, culminating in its expulsion from the European Pattern.
At this time, they were mainly used for chores such as plowing and cattle work.
Japan's top jump race is the Nakayama Grand Jump, run every April at Nakayama Racecourse.
Historically, equestrians honed their skills through games and races.
In 2003–2005 the mare Makybe Diva (bred in Great Britain) became the only racehorse to ever win the Melbourne Cup three times, let alone in consecutive years.
The longest endurance race in the world is the Mongol Derby, which is  long.
The world's largest Thoroughbred stud, Coolmore Stud, has its main farm there (in addition to major operations in the U.S. and Australia).
In Malaysia, horse racing was introduced during the British colonial era and remains to the present day as a gambling activity.
In a bet to place, you are betting on your horse to finish either first, second, and/or third, depending on how many horses are in the race; for example, in a race with 5 horses a place bet would only be for first and second place, but in a race with 10 horses you bet on your horse to finish first, second, or third.
This allows the gambler to 'lock in' odds on a horse at a particular time (known as 'taking the price' in the UK).
In North American racing, the three most common ways to bet money are to win, to place, and to show.
The South Westbury section is (appropriately) known as Salisbury.
The Hall of Fame honors remarkable horses, jockeys, owners, and trainers.
In most horse races, entry is restricted to certain breeds; that is, the horse must have a sire (father) and a dam (mother) who are studbook-approved individuals of whatever breed is racing.
The Carlos Gardel's tango Por una cabeza is about horse racing, sport of which he was a known fan.
When Quarter Horse racing began, it was very expensive to lay a full mile of track so it was agreed that a straight track of four hundred meters, or one quarter of a mile would be laid instead.
Short races are generally referred to as "sprints", while longer races are known as "routes" in the US or "staying races" in Europe.
The major racetrack in Poland is Warsaw's Służewiec Racecourse.
These fibers allow muscles to contract quickly resulting in a great deal of power and speed.
Muscles are simply bundles of stringy fibers that are attached to bones by tendons.
Thoroughbred horse racing came to China with British settlements in the middle 1800s and most notably centered around the treaty ports, including the two major race courses in Shanghai, the Shanghai Racecourse and the International Recreation Grounds (in Kiang-wan), and the racecourses of Tianjin.
Racetrack owners, horse trainers and state governments sometimes receive a cut of ADW revenues.
Horse racing has also left its mark in the naming of roads in Singapore such as Race Course Road in Little India, where horse racing was first held in Singapore, and Turf Club Road in Bukit Timah where Singapore Turf Club used to be situated before moving to its current location in 1999.
Horse racing was a popular pastime for the aristocracy at least by the Zhou Dynasty - 4th century B.C.
It is the home of the Meadowlands Cup.
In all endurance events there are rigorous vet checks, conducted before, during and after the competition, in which the horses' welfare is of the utmost concern.
(The official figure for 2008 was 15,003 horses.)
The sport's governing body is France Galop.
Both have specific options for which bets are available and are detailed below.
They allow the muscles to generate both speed and endurance.
Horse racing in India is over 200 years old, making India quite possibly the oldest racing jurisdiction in Asia where racing was conducted under rules.
Picking the winner of three, four, five or six straight races is referred to as a Pick 3, Pick 4, Pick 5 and Pick 6 respectively.
Rather, it has its own Mongolian style of horse racing in which the horses run for at least a distance of 25 kilometers.
Often, countries have developed their own particular horse racing traditions.
Aside these three and their crosses, horse racing are conducted using various breeds: Appaloosa, American Paint Horse, mules, Selle Français, AQPS and Korean Jeju.
This first racing meet in North America was supervised by New York's colonial governor, Richard Nicolls.
Organized groups dedicated to protecting animals, such as the Humane Society of the United States and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, target some horse sports with claims of animal cruelty.
The history of Philippine horseracing has three divisions according to the breeds of horses used.
A takeout, or "take", is removed from each betting pool and distributed according to state law, among the state, race track and horsemen.
The two broad types of exotic wagers are horizontal and vertical.
The Champ de Mars is situated on a prestigious avenue in Port Louis, the capital city and is the oldest racecourse in the southern hemisphere.
In 1665, the first racetrack was constructed on Long Island.
The premier event, which attracts 50,000 people to Durban, is the Durban July Handicap, which has been run since 1897 at Greyville Racecourse.
It remains a highly popular form of entertainment with the local Singaporean community to this day.
Archaeological records indicate that horse racing occurred in Ancient Greece, Babylon, Syria, and Egypt.
Pedigrees of stallions are recorded in various books and websites, such as ''Weatherbys Stallion Book'', the ''Australian Stud Book'' and ''Thoroughbred Heritage''.
and from the mid-15th century until 1882, spring carnival in Rome closed with a horse race.
Arabians have an abundance of Type I fibers.
Equestrian sports provided entertainment for crowds and honed the excellent horsemanship that was needed in battle.
Horse races are held in Pakistan at four different clubs.
In some countries, such as the UK, Ireland, and Australia, an alternative and more popular facility is provided by bookmakers who effectively make a market in odds.
Almost all Chinese trainers and jockeys stabled in Wuhan.
The Quarter Horse has much larger hind limb muscles than the Arabian, which make it much less suitable for endurance racing.
They also have more Type II-b fibers, which allow the Quarter Horse to accelerate rapidly.
The Czech horse racing season usually starts at the beginning of April and ends some time in November.
A high level of professionalism has been attained in the organisation of races over the last decades preserving the unique electrifying ambiance prevailing on race days at the Champ de Mars.
American betting on horse racing is sanctioned and regulated by the state where the race is located.
If these were to occur, they may negatively affect a horse's willingness to learn.
The American Stud Book was started in 1868, prompting the beginning of organized horse racing in the United States.
The only exception to this is in Quarter Horse racing where an Appendix Quarter Horse may be considered eligible to race against (standard) Quarter Horses.
AQHA also issues a "Racing Register of Merit" which allows a horse to race on Quarter Horse tracks, but not be considered a Quarter Horse for breeding purposes (unless other requirements are met).
The indirect impact of expenditures on racing was estimated to have generated more than $1.4 billion in economic activity in 2004 and created 18,300 full-time equivalent jobs.
Its mile-and-a-half main track is the largest dirt Thoroughbred race course in the world, and it has the sport's largest grandstand.
For instance, if a $2 across-the-board bet (total outlay of $6) were staked on a horse which finished second, paying $4.20 to place and $3.00 to show, the bettor would receive $7.20 on what is essentially a $6 wager.
Based on findings of 2009 and fate of 1986 Kentucky Derby Winner Ferdinand, PETA has called ban for exporting race horses to Japan,even amount young horses exported to Japan for racing purposes is insignificant compared to overall amount and only adult horses exported to Japan are breeding stock.
The Kiang-wan racecourse was destroyed in the lead-up to the Second Sino-Japanese War and the Shanghai Race Club closed in 1954.
Flat racing is the most common form of racing, seen worldwide.
Until the formation of the Arabian Horse Registry of America in 1908, Arabians were recorded with the Jockey Club in a separate subsection from Thoroughbreds.
In the United States, Thoroughbred flat races are run on surfaces of either dirt, synthetic or turf.
However, it wasn't until the in 1920s that modern horse racing involving betting developed.
The sport annually draws millions of dollars of tax revenue.
The late Italian horse breeder Federico Tesio is one of the towering figures of the Thoroughbred breeding industry.
Phar Lap carried  to win the 1930 Melbourne Cup.
In the 6 runnings of the Epsom Derby between 2008 and 2013, Irish horses filled 20 of the first 30 placings, winning the race 5 times.
The most famous horse from Canada is generally considered to be Northern Dancer, who after winning the Kentucky Derby, Preakness and Queen's Plate in 1964 went on to become the most successful Thoroughbred sire of the 20th century; his two-minute-flat Derby was the fastest on record until Secretariat in 1973.
One of the latest major horse track opened in the United States was the Meadowlands Racetrack opened in 1977 for Thoroughbred racing.
More recently, Blacks A Fake has won four Inter Dominion Championships, making him the only horse to complete this feat in Australasia's premier harness race.
The conditioning program for the different horses varies depending on the race length.
Racing takes place mostly at weekends and there is usually one meeting on a Saturday and one on Sunday.
The American Quarter Horse was not recognized as an official breed until the formation of the American Quarter Horse Association in 1940.
Horse racing was banned in the Republic of China from 1945, and the People's Republic of China maintained the ban after 1949, although allowances were made for ethnic minority peoples for whom horse sports are a cultural tradition.
There is less jockeying for position, as turns are rare, and many races end with several contestants grouped together at the wire.
Simulcast betting exists across state lines with minimal oversight except the companies involved through legalized parimutuel gambling.
On 25 June 1812, the Champ de Mars Racecourse was inaugurated by The Mauritius Turf Club which was founded earlier in the same year by Colonel Edward A. Draper.
As a result, every year Irish horse racing fans travel in huge numbers to the highlight event of the National Hunt calendar, the Cheltenham Festival, and in recent years Irish owned or bred horses have dominated the event.
Some people may consider poor living conditions or use of whip abusive, while some may have concern with end-use of horses.
Mongolia does not have Thoroughbred horse racing.
In 2009, animal rights group PETA released undercover video of alleged abuses of former race horses at a slaughterhouse in Kumamoto, Japan.
Because each race is very long, trails of natural terrain are generally used.
The Mauritius Turf Club is the third oldest active turf club in the world.
In 2008, the China Speed Horse Race Open in Wuhan was organized as the qualification round for the speed horse race event at the National Games the next year, but was also seen by commentators as a step towards legalizing both horse racing and gambling on the races.
All forms of competition, requiring demanding and specialized skills from both horse and rider, resulted in the systematic development of specialized breeds and equipment for each sport.
Horse racing in Great Britain is predominantly thoroughbred flat and jumps racing.
For example, in a race with seven or less runners in the UK, only the first two finishers would be considered winning bets with most bookmakers.
Founded in 1972, the American Endurance Ride Conference was the United States' first national endurance riding association.
A wheel is when a horse is selected in a specific position with multiple horses finishing ahead or behind the one being wheeled.
Ireland has a rich history of horse racing; point to pointing originated there and even today, jump racing is more popular than racing on the flat.
Racing in Japan is mainly flat racing, but Japan also has jump racing and a sled-pulling race known as Ban'ei (also called Draft Racing).
Horse racing in one form or another has been a part of Chinese culture for millennia.
Although racing in Hungary is neither as popular, nor as prestigious as it is in Western Europe, the country is notable for producing some fine international racehorses.
However, with the demise of the event at the National Games and the government not relenting from the ban on commercial racing, various racecourses built in recent years are all in a state of disuse:  The Nanjing Racecourse, which previously hosted National Games equestrian events, is now used as a car park; the Beijing Jockey Club was shut down in 2008.
Horse racing is a significant part of the New Zealand economy which in 2004 generated 1.3% of the GDP.
A bet to show wins if the horse finishes first, second or third.
Thoroughbreds may be bay, black, dark bay/brown, chestnut, gray, roan, white or palomino.
Chariot racing was one of the most popular ancient Greek, Roman and Byzantine sports.
While horses are sometimes raced purely for sport, a major part of horse racing's interest and economic importance lies in the gambling associated with it, an activity that in 2008 generated a world-wide market worth around US$115 billion.
Some are very short, only ten miles, while others can be up to one hundred miles.
In 2014, the Wuhan Jockey Club organized more than 80 races.
Foremost of these is Kincsem, foaled in 1874, and the most successful Thoroughbred race horse ever, having won 54 races for 54 starts.
Light coldblood horses, such as Finnhorses and Scandinavian coldblood trotter are also used in harness racing on their respective geographical areas.
In later times, Thoroughbred racing was, and is, popular with the aristocrats and royalty of British society, earning it the title "Sport of Kings".
Hungary has a long-standing horse racing tradition.
Other major races include the Grand Prix de Paris, the Prix du Jockey Club (the French Derby) and the Prix de Diane.
In Europe, Australia, and Asia, betting to place is different since the number of "payout places" varies depending on the size of the field that takes part in the race.
In recent years the Breeders' Cup races, run at the end of the year, have challenged the Triple Crown events as determiners of the three-year-old Champion.
Also, the muscles of the Arabian are not nearly as massive as those of the Quarter Horse, which allow it to travel longer distances at quicker speeds.
In Wassenaar in the Hague there is a grass course at Duindigt.
The resultant foals were the first generation of Thoroughbreds, and all modern Thoroughbreds trace back to them.
Country also produced Overdose, a horse who won his first 12 races, including Group races in Germany and Italy, and finished fourth in the King's Stand Stakes at Royal Ascot.
More than 100 jockeys were killed in the US between 1950 and 1987.
In the most basic horizontal wager, an exacta, the bettor selects the first and second place horses in the exact order.
During the 2008–09 racing season 19 New Zealand bred horses won 22 Group One races around the world.
The Quarter Horse received its name due to the length of the race.
The longer race led to deaths and injuries to participating horses in both 2005 and the 11th National Games in 2009.
Breeds that are used for flat racing include the Thoroughbred, Quarter Horse, Arabian, Paint, and Appaloosa.
Horses also face dangers in racing.
Within and only within the turf clubs, betting on horse racing is a legal form of gambling.
Type I muscles are absolutely necessary for aerobic exercise because they rely on the presence of oxygen in order to work.
The sport is regulated by the British Horseracing Authority.
Other key races include Woodbine Oaks (1956), Prince of Wales Stakes (1929), Breeders' Stakes (1889) and Canadian Derby (1930).
The Wuhan Racecourse was the only racecourse that organized races in China.
In harness racing, Standardbreds are used Australia, New Zealand and North America, when in Europe, Russian and French Trotter are used with Standardbred.
Horseracing in the Philippines began in 1867.
In Lahore at Lahore Race Club, Rawalpindi at Chakri, in Karachi at Karachi Race Club and in Gujrat at  Gujrat Race Club.
Horse racing of all types evolved from impromptu competitions between riders or drivers.
She added that almost 20% of these were serious head or neck injuries.
Individual flat races are run over distances ranging from  up to two and a half miles, with distances between five and twelve furlongs being most common.
Most of the horses are imported from South Africa but some are also acquired from Australia, the United Kingdom and France.
Picking the first three finishers in exact order is called a trifecta and a superfecta refers to the specific finishing order of the top four horses.
Since 1907 races have also held on a central racecourse in Prague - Velka Chuchle.
Horse races vary widely in format.
However, the other notable major races are the Summer Cup, held at Turffontein Racecourse in Johannesburg, and The J & B Met, which is held at Kenilworth race track in Cape Town.
Genetics, training, age, and skeletal soundness are all factors that contribute to a horse's performance.
Horse racing and rodeo are most commonly targeted, due both to their high visibility and to the level of stress and potential physical dangers to the equines involved.
Woodbine Racetrack (1956) in Toronto is home of the Queen's Plate (1860), Canada's premier Thoroughbred stakes race, and the North America Cup (1984), Canada's premier Standardbred stakes race.
The traditional high point of US horse racing is the Kentucky Derby, held on the first Saturday of May at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Kentucky.
In contrast to ADW, credit shops allow wagers without advance funding; accounts are settled at month-end.
In recent years, Irish bred and trained horses have enjoyed considerable success in major races worldwide.
Japan has two governing bodies that control its horseracing - the Japan Racing Association (JRA), and National Association of Racing (NAR).
Typically, horses progress to bigger obstacles and longer distances as they get older, so that a European jumps horse will tend to start in National Hunt flat races as a juvenile, move on to hurdling after a year or so, and then, if thought capable, move on to steeplechasing.
Type I fibers are slow-twitch fibers.
Races are typically held on Friday evenings and Sundays at the Singapore Turf Club in Kranji.
Undeniably, racing is one of the most popular sports in Mauritius now attracting regular crowds of 20,000 people or more to the only racecourse of the island.
The only challenger to his title of greatest Canadian horse would be his son Nijinsky II, who is the last horse to win the English Triple Crown.
The Pleasanton Fairgrounds Racetrack at the Alameda County Fairgrounds is the oldest horse racing track in America, dating back to 1858, when it was founded by the sons of the Spaniard Don Agustin Bernal.
It is the oldest Thoroughbred race in North America.
There are three race courses in Malaysia, namely Penang Turf Club, Perak Turf Club and Selangor Turf Club.
General Tian Ji's strategem for a horse race remains perhaps the best known story about horse racing in that period.
The NAR, meanwhile, is responsible for 'Chihou Keiba' (meaning 'local horse racing').
Artificial insemination, cloning and embryo transfer are not allowed in the Thoroughbred breed.
The JRA is responsible for 'Chuo Keiba' (meaning 'central horse racing'), taking place on the ten main Japanese tracks.
For example, in a normal harness race, the horse's sire and dam must both be pure Standardbreds.
Contemporary organized Endurance racing began in California around 1955, and the first race marked the beginning of the Tevis Cup This race was a one-hundred-mile, one-day-long ride starting in Squaw Valley, Placer County, and ending in Auburn.
A stallion who has won many races may be put up to stud when he is retired.
Gardel was a good friend of Irineo Leguisamo, who is the most recognized Argentine jockey.
Jump racing can be subdivided into steeplechasing and hurdling, according to the type and size of obstacles being jumped.
Horse racing has a long and distinguished history and has been practised in civilisations across the world since ancient times.
There were 314 tracks operating in the United States by 1890; and in 1894, the American Jockey Club was formed.
Artificial insemination and Embryo transfer technology (only allowed in some breeds) has brought changes to the traditions and ease of breeding.
At the 2009 National Games, Hubei won both the gold and silver medals, with Inner Mongolia winning bronze.
