Halfway through gestation the fetus is the size of between a rabbit and a beagle.
Foals may also learn the "language of intimidation and submission" from their dam, and this imprinting may affect the foal's status and rank within the herd.
Because stallions can produce far more offspring than mares, a single stallion can have a greater overall impact on a breed.
This animal was later adapted through selective breeding to create a strong but rideable animal suitable for the heavily armored knight in warfare.
Today's warmblood breeds, although still used for competitive driving, are more often seen competing in show jumping or dressage.
From birth forward, the costs of care and training are added to the value of the foal, with a sale price going up accordingly.
When an early foal is desired, barn managers will put the mare "under lights" by keeping the barn lights on in the winter to simulate a longer day, thus bringing the mare into estrus sooner than she would in nature.
Mares signal estrus and ovulation by urination in the presence of a stallion, raising the tail and revealing the vulva.
Some mares are aggressive when protecting their foals, and may attack other horses or unfamiliar humans that come near their newborns.
Mares are given vaccinations against diseases such as the Rhinopneumonitis (EHV-1) virus (which can cause abortions) as well as vaccines for other conditions that may occur in a given region of the world.
Test breedings have been done with draft horse stallions bred to small mares with no increase in the number of difficult births.
While it is difficult to determine how far back the Bedouin passed on pedigree information via an oral tradition, there were written pedigrees of Arabian horses by CE 1330.
One of the earliest people known to document the breedings of their horses were the Bedouin of the Middle East, the breeders of the Arabian horse.
In the 18th century, James Burnett, Lord Monboddo noted the importance of selecting appropriate parentage to achieve desired outcomes of successive generations.
However, because there was also a need for animals suitable for sprint racing, the modern Quarter Horse has two distinct types: the sleeker racing type and the stock horse type.
This favors a horse with a good galloping stride, powerful hindquarters that can change speed or direction easily, plus a good shoulder angle and length of neck.
Heavy harness horses are now used as an outcross with lighter breeds, such as the Thoroughbred, to produce the modern warmblood breeds popular in sport horse disciplines, particularly at the Olympic level.
*'''Gamete Intrafallopian Transfer (GIFT)''': The mare's ovum and the stallion's sperm are deposited in the oviduct of a surrogate dam.
Most mares foal at night or early in the morning, and prefer to give birth alone when possible.
The lighter horse suited the raids and battles of desert people, allowing them to outmaneuver rather than overpower the enemy.
After birth, a foal's navel is dipped in antiseptic to prevent infection, it is sometimes given an enema to help clear the meconium from its digestive tract, and the newborn is monitored to ensure that it stands and nurses without difficulty.
It is important to review each breed registry's rules to determine which applies to any specific foal.
Mares are dewormed a few weeks prior to foaling, as the mare is the primary source of parasites for the foal.
Then, centuries later, when people in Europe wanted faster horses than could be produced from local horses through simple selective breeding, they imported Arabians and other oriental horses to breed as an outcross to the heavier, local animals.
The mare will then be presented to the stallion, usually with one handler controlling the mare and one or more handlers in charge of the stallion.
A jumper has a more powerful build than either the hunter or the racehorse.
Foals are typically weaned at 4–8 months of age, although in the wild a foal may nurse for a year.
As a stallion's career, either performance or breeding, improves, his stud fee tends to increase in proportion.
Horses were needed for heavy draft and carriage work until replaced by the automobile, truck, and tractor.
* Frozen semen may be stored and used to breed mares even after the stallion is dead, allowing his lines to continue.
However, the mare may have a greater influence on an individual foal because its physical characteristics influence the developing foal in the womb and the foal also learns habits from its dam when young.
In addition, separation allows the mare to be monitored more closely by humans for any problems that may occur while giving birth.
The Jockey Club, the organization that oversees the Thoroughbred industry in the United States, requires all registered foals to be bred through live cover.
During the last 3–4 months of gestation, rapid growth of the fetus increases the mare's nutritional requirements.
The nomads of the Mongolian steppes bred horses for several thousand years as well.
If the foal wins awards in some form of competition, that may also enhance the price.
The warmblood breeds have been exceptionally good at adapting to changing times, and from their carriage horse beginnings they easily transitioned during the 20th century into a sport horse type.
impregnated) mares.
They must learn quickly, have conformation that allows quick stops and fast, low turns, and the best competitors have a certain amount of independent mental ability to anticipate and counter the movement of a cow, popularly known as "cow sense."
She may also be turned out in a pasture with the stallion for several days to breed naturally ('pasture bred').
As the days shorten, the mare returns to a period when she is not sexually receptive, known as anestrus.
A horse is "bred" where it is foaled (born).
same dam) or who are by the same sire.
The Thoroughbred was developed 40 years later, bred to be the ultimate racehorse, through the lines of three foundation Arabian stallions.
The estrous cycle lasts about 19–22 days, with the average being 21 days.
Instead of speed, value is placed on appearance and upon giving the equestrian a comfortable ride, with natural jumping ability that shows bascule and good form.
In a very short time, the foal will attempt to stand and get milk from its mother.
The predecessor of the American Quarter Horse was developed in the 18th century, mainly for quarter racing (racing ¼ of a mile).
Thoroughbreds and Arabians are also classified through the "distaff" or direct female line, known as their "family" or "tail female" line, tracing back to their taproot foundation bloodstock or the beginning of their respective stud books.
The lowest stud fees to breed to a grade horse or an animal of low-quality pedigree may only be $100–$200, but there are trade-offs: the horse will probably be unproven, and likely to produce lower-quality offspring than a horse with a stud fee that is in the typical range for quality breeding stock.
A stallion is usually trained to mount a phantom (or dummy) mare, although a live mare may be used, and he is most commonly collected using an artificial vagina (AV) which is heated to simulate the vagina of the mare.
This presents a problem, as the mare will usually be quite old by the time she is retired from her competitive career, at which time it is more difficult to impregnate her.
These crosses ultimately produced new breeds such as the American Quarter Horse and the Criollo of Argentina.
To help decrease the risk of financial loss should the mare die or abort the foal while pregnant, many studs have a live foal guarantee (LFG) - also known as "no foal, free return" or "NFFR" - allowing the owner to have a free breeding to their stallion the next year.
The offspring, or "get", of a stallion are often excellent indicators of his ability to pass on his characteristics, and the particular traits he actually passes on.
The Thoroughbred continues to dominate the horseracing world, although its lines have been more recently used to improve warmblood breeds and to develop sport horses.
This cycle contains 2 phases:
On the other hand, for an event known as cutting, where the horse must separate a cow from a herd and prevent it from rejoining the group, the best horses are smaller, quick, alert, athletic and highly trainable.
*'''Embryo Transfer''': This relatively new method involves flushing out the mare's fertilized embryo a few days following insemination, and transferring to a surrogate mare, which has been synchronized to be in the same phase of the estrous cycle as the donor mare.
The AV has a filter and collection area at one end to capture the semen, which can then be processed in a lab.
If one or two offspring are especially successful, winning several stakes races or an Olympic medal, the stud fee will generally greatly increase.
Mares due to foal are usually separated from other horses, both for the benefit of the mare and the safety of the soon-to-be-delivered foal.
Anestrus - occurring in the majority of, but not all, mares - prevents the mare from conceiving in the winter months, as that would result in her foaling during the harshest part of the year, a time when it would be most difficult for the foal to survive.
Alternatively, a breeder could, using individuals of differing phenotypes, create a new breed with specific characteristics.
In domestic breeding, the foal and dam are usually separated from the herd for a while, but within a few weeks are typically pastured with the other horses.
A second check is usually performed at 28 days.
Exercise is healthy, though should be moderated when a mare is heavily in foal.
While horses in the wild mate and foal in mid to late spring, in the case of horses domestically bred for competitive purposes, especially horse racing and various futurities, it is desirable that they be born as close to January 1 in the northern hemisphere or August 1 in the southern hemisphere as possible, so as to be at an advantage in size and maturity when competing against other horses in the same age group.
The corpus luteum secretes progesterone.
Live cover can also be done in liberty on a paddock or on pasture, although due to safety and efficacy concerns, it is not common at professional breeding farms.
Depending on breed, on average, 16% of mares have double ovulations, allowing them to twin, though this does not affect the length of time of estrus or diestrus.
Ovulation occurs in the final 24–48 hours of estrus.
The stock horse type, used in western events, is bred for a shorter stride, docile temperament, and cow sense.
The semen may be chilled or frozen and shipped to the mare owner or used to breed mares "on-farm".
*'''Egg Transfer''': An oocyte is removed from the mare's follicle and transferred into the oviduct of the recipient mare, who is then bred.
When breeding live cover, the mare is usually boarded at the stud.
However, the term is often used more loosely, describing horses with duplication of ancestors closer than the fourth generation.
The types of horse bred varied with culture and with the times.
Sometimes, purebred bloodlines are an absolute requirement:  For example, most racehorses in the world must be recorded with a breed registry in order to race.
The Europeans, however, responded by crossing their native breeds with "oriental" type horses such as the Arabian, Barb, and Turkoman horse  This cross-breeding led both to a nimbler war horse, such as today's Andalusian horse, but also created a type of horse known as a Courser, a predecessor to the Thoroughbred, which was used as a message horse.
By contrast, the U.S. standardbred industry allows registered foals to be bred by live cover, or by artificial insemination (AI) with fresh or frozen (not dried) semen.
Many stud farms worldwide employ technology to alert human managers when the mare is about to foal, including webcams, closed-circuit television, or assorted types of devices that alert a handler via a remote alarm when a mare lies down in a position to foal.
Others sire fillies of great abilities but not colts.
Some bloodlines are also fashionable or otherwise marketable, which is an important consideration should the mare owner wish to sell the foal.
A rule of thumb is that a foal intended for sale should be worth three times the cost of the stud fee if it were sold at the moment of birth.
While most horse births happen without complications, many owners have first aid supplies prepared and a veterinarian on call in case of a birthing emergency.
Similar rules apply in other countries.
Her reaction to the teaser, whether hostile or passive, is noted.
A mare that is in heat will generally tolerate a teaser (although this is not always the case), and may present herself to him, holding her tail to the side.
During the first several months of pregnancy, the nutritional requirements do not increase significantly since the rate of growth of the fetus is very slow.
However, evidence of planned breeding has a more blurry history.
At times, a horse of mediocre ability sires foals of outstanding quality.
Thus, Arabians and Thoroughbreds were crossed on Spanish horses, both domesticated animals descended from those brought over by the Conquistadors, and feral horses such as the Mustangs, descended from the Spanish horse, but adapted by natural selection to the ecology and climate of the west.
This technique is very useful for subfertile stallions, as fewer sperm are needed, so a stallion with a low sperm count can still successfully breed.
*'''Live cover''': the mare is brought to the stallion's residence and is covered "live" in the breeding shed.
The stallion should be chosen to complement the mare, with the goal of producing a foal that has the best qualities of both animals, yet avoids having the weaker qualities of either parent.
Domestic mares receive specific care and nutrition to ensure that they and their foals are healthy.
Furthermore, modern breeding management and technologies can increase the rate of conception, a healthy pregnancy, and successful foaling.
Medieval Europe bred large horses specifically for war, called destriers.
The female line of descent always appears at the bottom of a tabulated pedigree and is therefore often known as the ''bottom line''.
After the mare is bred or artificially inseminated, she is checked using ultrasound 14–16 days later to see if she "took", and is pregnant.
Later, the people who settled the Americas needed a hardy horse that was capable of working with cattle.
In addition, the maternal grandfather of a horse has a special term: damsire.
When Middle Eastern warriors and European knights collided in warfare, the heavy knights were frequently outmaneuvered.
It is considered safe to breed a mare to a stallion of much larger size.
On the other hand, without careful thought, foals bred without a potential market for them may wind up being sold at a loss, and in a worst-case scenario, sold for "salvage" value—a euphemism for sale to slaughter as horsemeat.
It was during this time that firearms were developed, and so the light cavalry horse, a faster and quicker war horse, was bred for "shoot and run" tactics rather than the shock action as in the Middle Ages.
Many times, a mature horse will achieve status in a herd similar to that of its dam; the offspring of dominant mares become dominant themselves.
The history of horse breeding goes back millennia.
No other artificial fertility treatment is allowed.
A purebred horse is usually worth more than a horse of mixed breeding, though this matters more in some disciplines than others.
To create a bond with her foal, the mare licks and nuzzles the foal, enabling her to distinguish the foal from others.
However, there are now several options for breeding these mares.
If the placenta is not removed from the stall after it is passed, a mare will often eat it, an instinct from the wild, where blood would attract predators.
It generally occurs during the spring and summer months, although some mares may be sexually receptive into the late fall, and is controlled by the photoperiod (length of the day), the cycle first triggered when the days begin to lengthen.
Colts are carried on average about 4 days longer than fillies.
Bloodlines are often considered, as some bloodlines are known to cross well with others.
"Linebreeding" technically is the duplication of fourth generation or more distant ancestors.
Trace minerals such as copper are extremely important, particularly during the tenth month of pregnancy, for proper skeletal formation.
After the formation of the endometrial cups and early placentation is initiated (35–40 days of gestation) the terminology changes, and the embryo is referred to as a fetus.
Weighing almost twice as much as a normal riding horse, the destrier was a powerful weapon in battle.
However, during this time, the mare may be provided supplemental vitamins and minerals, particularly if forage quality is questionable.
A foal will begin to eat hay, grass and grain alongside the mare at about 4 weeks old; by 10–12 weeks the foal requires more nutrition than the mare's milk can supply.
Shortly after fixation, the embryo proper (so called up to about 35 days) will become visible on trans-rectal ultrasound (about day 21) and a heartbeat should be visible by about day 23.
These horses were the ancestors of the great heavy horses of today, and their size was preferred not simply because of the weight of the armor, but also because a large horse provided more power for the knight's lance.
Monboddo worked more broadly in the abstract thought of species relationships and evolution of species.
Often an owner does not want to take a valuable competition mare out of training to carry a foal.
Some stallions are fantastic performers but never produce offspring of comparable quality.
These options also allow a mare to produce multiple foals each breeding season, instead of the usual one.
A stallion, approaching with a high head, will usually nicker, nip and nudge the mare, as well as sniff her urine to determine her readiness for mating.
A show jumper, however, is bred less for overall form and more for power over tall fences, along with speed, scope, and agility.
Therefore, a mare owner must consider their reasons for breeding, asking hard questions of themselves as to whether their motivations are based on either emotion or profit and how realistic those motivations may be.
Many feeds designed for pregnant and lactating mares provide the careful balance required of increased protein, increased calories through extra fat as well as vitamins and minerals.
Mare care boarding fees and semen collection fees can be a major cost.
The uses to which a horse was put also determined its qualities, including smooth amblers for riding, fast horses for carrying messengers, heavy horses for plowing and pulling heavy wagons, ponies for hauling cars of ore from mines, packhorses, carriage horses and many others.
Both are genetically important, as each parent provides half of the genetic makeup of the ensuing offspring, called a foal.
Some breeders consider the quality of the sire to be more important than the quality of the dam.
She may be "teased" several times with a stallion that will not breed to her, usually with the stallion being presented to the mare over a barrier.
The terms paternal half-sibling, and maternal half-sibling are also often used.
Estrogen is secreted by the follicle.
Foals develop rapidly, and within a few hours a wild foal can travel with the herd.
If the mare is not pregnant, she may be bred again during her next cycle.
A stallion may not be able to breed naturally, or old age may decrease his performance.
While most representatives of this breed are bred for horse racing, there are also specialized bloodlines suitable as show hunters or show jumpers.
Planned matings can be used to produce specifically desired characteristics in domesticated horses.
*'''Artificial Insemination (AI)''': the mare is inseminated by a veterinarian or an equine reproduction manager, using either fresh, cooled or frozen semen.
Smaller breeders often use a small pen with a large shed for foaling, or they may remove a wall between two box stalls in a small barn to make a large stall.
That individual may not have had anything to do with the mating of the mare.
Draft horses today are used on a few small farms, but today are seen mainly for pulling and plowing competitions rather than farm work.
The fetus sex can be determined by day 70 of the gestation using ultrasound.
Artificial insemination, listed below, is not permitted.
'''Horse breeding''' is reproduction in horses, and particularly the human-directed process of selective breeding of animals, particularly purebred horses of a given breed.
Another example is the Thoroughbred.
Pre-foaling vaccines are recommended 4–6 weeks prior to foaling to maximize the immunoglobulin content of the colostrum in the first milk.
Energy requirements during these last few months, and during the first few months of lactation are similar to those of a horse in full training.
The Akhal-Teke of West-Central Asia is another breed with roots in ancient times that was also bred specifically for war and racing.
"Full" (or "own") siblings have both the same dam and the same sire.
A foal should stand and nurse within the first hour of life.
Stallions in other disciplines often have stud fees that begin in the range of $1,000 to $3,000, with top contenders who produce champions in certain disciplines able to command as much as $20,000 for one breeding.
Once fertilized, the oocyte (egg) remains in the oviduct for approximately 5.5 more days, and then descends into the uterus.
Other times, a mare may have physical problems that prevent or discourage breeding.
Another cross between oriental and European horses produced the Andalusian, a horse developed in Spain that was powerfully built, but extremely nimble and capable of the quick bursts of speed over short distances necessary for certain types of combat as well as for tasks such as bullfighting.
The 17th and 18th centuries saw more of a need for fine carriage horses in Europe, bringing in the dawn of the warmblood.
Therefore, mares may have an even greater value for breeding.
Some breeds denote the country, or state, where conception took place as the origin of the foal.
Once the foal is born, the mare will lick the newborn foal to clean it and help blood circulation.
In the horse breeding industry, the term "half-brother" or "half-sister" only describes horses which have the same dam, but different sires.
However, the semen of some stallions does not freeze well.
If the parents have not yet proven themselves by competition or by producing quality offspring, the bloodlines of the horse are often a good indicator of quality and possible strengths and weaknesses.
Once a general-purpose working ranch horse, different bloodlines now specialize in different events.
A veterinarian may also determine if the mare is ready to be bred, by ultrasound or palpating daily to determine if ovulation has occurred.
On the other hand, during this same time, lighter horses were bred in northern Africa and the Middle East, where a faster, more agile horse was preferred.
After this time, draft and carriage horse numbers dropped significantly, though light riding horses remained popular for recreational pursuits.
Because of the mare's type of placenta and its attachment and blood supply, the foal will be limited in its growth within the uterus to the size of the mare's uterus, but will grow to its genetic potential after it is born.
In the meantime, in northern Europe, the locally adapted heavy horse with a thick, warm coat was domesticated and put to work as a farm animal that could pull a plow or wagon.
True implantation - invasion into the endometrium of any sort - does not occur until about day 35 of pregnancy with the formation of the endometrial cups, and true placentation (formation of the placenta) is not initiated until about day 40-45 and not completed until about 140 days of pregnancy.
Horse breeders also consider conformation, size and temperament.
The breed of the horse is sometimes secondary when breeding for a sport horse, but some disciplines may prefer a certain breed or a specific phenotype of horse.
However, this is not offered for every breeding.
* Estrus, or Follicular, phase: 5–7 days in length, when the mare is sexually receptive to a stallion.
The male parent of a horse, a stallion, is commonly known as the ''sire'' and the female parent, the mare, is called the ''dam''.
During the early days of pregnancy, the conceptus is mobile, moving about in the uterus until about day 16 when "fixation" occurs.
The Thoroughbred breeding hub in Lexington, Kentucky was developed in the late 18th century, and became a mainstay in American racehorse breeding.
The former situation is often preferred, as it provides a more controlled environment, allowing the breeder to ensure that the mare was covered, and places the handlers in a position to remove the horses from one another should one attempt to kick or bite the other.
For example, the Arabian horse of the desert naturally developed speed and endurance to travel long distances and survive in a harsh environment, and domestication by humans added a trainable disposition to the animal's natural abilities.
When it has been determined that the mare is ready, both the mare and intended stud will be cleaned.
This led to the development of breeds such as the Thoroughbred, a horse taller than the Arabian and faster over the distances of a few miles required of a European race horse or light cavalry horse.
People who supervise foaling should also watch the mare to be sure that she passes the placenta in a timely fashion, and that it is complete with no fragments remaining in the uterus, where retained fetal membranes could cause a serious inflammatory condition (endometritis) and/or infection.
Younger, unproven stallions will generally have a lower stud fee earlier on in their careers.
Overfeeding the pregnant mare, particularly during early gestation, should be avoided, as excess weight may contribute to difficulties foaling or fetal/foal related problems.
Exercise in excessively high temperatures has been suggested as being detrimental to pregnancy maintenance during the embryonic period; however ambient temperatures encountered during the research were in the region of 100 degrees F and the same results may not be encountered in regions with lower ambient temperatures.
Some bloodlines are known not only for their athletic ability, but could also carry a conformational or genetic defect, poor temperament, or for a medical problem.
Though the precise date is in dispute, humans could have domesticated the horse as far back as approximately 4500 BCE.
Three-quarter siblings are horses out of the same dam, and are by sires that are either half-brothers (i.e.
Multiple handlers are preferred, as the mare and stallion can be easily separated should there be any trouble.
Thus a foal conceived in England but foaled in the United States is regarded as being bred in the US.
In modern times, these breeds themselves have since been selectively bred to further specialize at certain tasks.
Mare owners also look into the question of if the stallion is fertile and has successfully "settled" (i.e.
However, other breeders maintain that the mare is the most important parent.
The highest stud fees are generally for racing Thoroughbreds, which may charge from two to three thousand dollars for a breeding to a new or unproven stallion, to several hundred thousand dollars for a breeding to a proven producer of stakes winners.
