He was appointed Vice-President of Egypt by President Anwar Sadat in 1975 and assumed the presidency on 14 October 1981, eight days after Sadat's assassination.
The next year he was promoted to Air Chief Marshal in recognition of service during the October War of 1973 against Israel.
General Kofi Annan.
He was fined LE200 millionabout which the court ordered he must pay from his personal assets.
Two and a half hours after Mubarak's resignation, an Egyptian military member came on air and thanked Mubarak for "putting the interests of the country first."
Upon his return, Mubarak is said to have authorized bombings on Al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya settlements, which by 1999 had seen 20,000 persons placed in detention related to the revolutionary Islamic organizations.
During his meetings with the Saudi government, Mubarak developed a friendship with the nation's powerful Crown Prince Fahd, whom Sadat had refused to meet or contact and who was now seen as major player who could help mend the failing relationship between Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
After his resignation, Egypt's ambassador to the United States Sameh Shoukry reported that his personal sources said Mubarak "is possibly in somewhat of bad health", while several Egyptian and Saudi Arabian newspapers reported that Mubarak was in a coma and close to death.
The election was scheduled for 7 September 2005; according to civil organizations that observed the election it was marred by mass rigging activities.
Egypt's heavy dependence on US aid and its hopes for US pressure on Israel for a Palestinian settlement continued under Mubarak.
They were charged with corruption and the premeditated killing of peaceful protesters during the mass movement to oust the Mubarak government, the latter of which carries the death penalty.
Sadat also sent Mubarak to numerous meetings with foreign leaders outside the Arab world.
Mubarak was injured during the assassination of President Sadat in October 1981 by soldiers led by Lieutenant Khalid Islambouli.
Egypt ranked 98th out of the 178 countries included in the report.
Chairman Yasser Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, King Abdullah of Jordan, NATO Sec.
He was released from prison in August 2013.
On 13 January 2015, Egypt's Court of Cassation overturned Mubarak's and his sons' embezzlement charges, the last remaining conviction against him, and ordered a retrial.
On 21 August 2013, a Cairo court ordered his release.
It was reported that Mubarak was in contact with his lawyer in case of possible criminal charges against him.
Mubarak was concerned that Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson didn't trust him on the issue and considered meeting him in New York.
Mubarak stepped down after 18 days of demonstrations during the Egyptian Revolution of 2011.
In 2005 Freedom House, a non-governmental organization that conducts research into democracy, reported that the Egyptian government under Mubarak expanded bureaucratic regulations, registration requirements, and other controls that often feed corruption.
The statement, which said "The Supreme Council is currently studying the situation," did not state what the council would do next.
Mubarak said on 1 February 2011 that he had no intention of standing in the 2011 presidential election.
Mubarak also expressed great admiration and gratitude towards the late Sheikh Zayed Bin Sultan al-Nahyan of the United Arab Emirates and his children, for their continuous support of Egypt and its people.
According to Tarek Osman, the experience of seeing his predecessor assassinated "right in front of him" and his lengthy military careerwhich was longer than those of Nasser or Sadatmay have instilled in him more focus and absorption with security than seemed the case with the latter heads of state.
''Nigerian Tribune'' journalist Abiodun Awolaja described a possible succession by Gamal Mubarak as a "hereditary pseudo-monarchy."
In 1987, Mubarak won an election to a second six-year term.
After increased domestic and international pressure for democratic reform in Egypt, Mubarak asked Parliament on 26 February 2005 to amend the constitution to allow multi-candidate presidential elections by September 2005.
President Mubarak spoke out against the 2003 Iraq War, arguing that the Israeli–Palestinian conflict should have been resolved first.
On 26 July 2011, Mubarak was reported to be depressed and refusing solid food while in hospital being treated for a heart condition and in custody awaiting trial.
On 28 July 2005, Mubarak announced his candidacy.
Gamal and Alaa were jailed in Tora Prison; state television reported that Mubarak was in police custody in a hospital near his residence following a heart attack.
This was the first court ruling against Mubarak, who would next have to answer to the murder charges.
"The people want Sisi, and the people's will shall prevail," Mubarak noted.
In 1972, Mubarak became Commander of the Air Force and Egyptian Deputy Minister of Defense.
In 1989, Egypt was re-admitted as a full member and the League's headquarters were moved to their original location in Cairo.
Before he entered politics, Mubarak was a career officer in the Egyptian Air Force.
During his presidency, Mubarak upheld the U.S. brokered Camp David Accords treaty signed between Egypt and Israel in 1978.
The source denied that Mubarak was writing his memoirs, stating that he was almost completely unconscious.
Former Israeli Cabinet minister Benjamin Ben Eliezer told Israeli Radio that he had offered Mubarak refuge in the southern Israeli city of Eilat.
Though supportive of Sadat's earlier efforts made to bring the Sinai Peninsula back into Egyptian control, Mubarak agreed with the views of various Arab figureheads and opposed the Camp David Accords for failing to address other issues relating to the Arab–Israeli conflict.
At the Beirut Summit on 28 March 2002, the league adopted the Arab Peace Initiative, a Saudi-inspired plan to end the Arab–Israeli conflict.
Mubarak had undergone surgery for the condition in Germany in 2010 and also suffered from circulatory problems with an irregular heart beat.
Mubarak is serving a three-year sentence for corruption and is also awaiting retrial regarding the killing of protesters during his regime.
At the end of the session, Rifaat announced that the third session would take place on 5 September and that the remainder of the proceedings would be off-limits to television cameras.
All other charges against Mubarak, including profiteering and economic fraud, were dismissed.
Two years later, he became Chief of Staff for the Egyptian Air Force.
In February 2011, ABC News reported that experts believed the personal wealth of Mubarak and his family was between  and  from military contracts made during his time as an air force officer.
A retrial on the corruption charges led to a conviction and sentencing to three years in prison in May 2015 for Mubarak, with four-year terms for his sons, Gamal and Alaa.
Upon hearing the charges against him, Mubarak pleaded not guilty.
The court also cleared Mubarak of corruption charges.
The announcement sparked cheers, flag-waving, and celebrations from protesters in Egypt.
In July 2010, the media said Egypt was about to undergo dramatic change because Mubarak was thought to have cancer and because of the scheduled 2011 presidential election.
A day later, interim prime minister Hazem el-Beblawi ordered that Mubarak be put under house arrest.
She also said photographs pertaining to the discussions in the military command room were altered and Saad El-Shazli was erased and replaced with Mubarak.
Hamas criticized Israel for its continued blockade while Israel accused Hamas of continued weapons smuggling via tunnels to Egypt and pointed to continued rocket attacks.
Intelligence sources said he had esophageal cancer, stomach or pancreatic cancer; this was denied by Egyptian authorities.
Mass protests against Mubarak and his regime erupted in Cairo and other Egyptian cities on 25 January 2011.
According to ''The Guardian'', the relatives of those killed by Mubarak's forces were angered by the verdict.
In 2009, US Ambassador Margaret Scobey said, "despite incessant whispered discussions, no one in Egypt has any certainty about who will eventually succeed Mubarak nor under what circumstances."
In an interview with the Egyptian independent newspaper Almasry Alyoum (26 February 2011), El-Shazli said Mubarak altered documents to take credit from her father for the initial success of the Egyptian forces in 1973.
On 21 February 2011, the Egyptian Military Council, which was temporarily given the presidential authorities following 25 January 2011 Revolution, said it had no objection to a trial of Mubarak on charges of corruption.
The full list of charges released by the public prosecutor was "intentional murder, attempted killing of some demonstrators&nbsp;...&nbsp;misuse of influence, deliberately wasting public funds and unlawfully making private financial gains and profits".
Mubarak was then ordered to stand trial on charges of negligence for failing to halt the killing of peaceful protesters during the revolution.
The second court session scheduled for 15 August.
Egypt was a member of the allied coalition during the 1991 Gulf War; Egyptian infantry were some of the first to land in Saudi Arabia to remove Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
The trial resumed in December 2011 and lasted until January 2012.
No other candidates could run against the president because a restriction in the Egyptian constitution in which the People's Assembly played the main role in electing the President of the Republic.
These amounts were previously paid after the first trial.
Discussions about the nation's future direction began.
In April 1975, Sadat appointed Mubarak Vice President of Egypt.
He closely monitored his officials; he dismissed ministers at the first sign of wrongdoing and fined members of parliament for unnecessary absences.
On 13 January 2013, Egypt's Court of Cassation (the nation's high court of appeal) overturned Mubarak's sentence and ordered a retrial.
He also said the war would cause "100 Bin Ladens."
Freedom House said, "corruption remained a significant problem under Mubarak, who promised to do much, but in fact never did anything significant to tackle it effectively".
General Javier Solana, and U.N. Sec.
After leaving high school, he joined the Egyptian Military Academy where he received a Bachelor's degree in Military Sciences in 1949.
Mubarak was involved in the Arab League, supporting Arab efforts to achieve a lasting peace in the region.
In attendance were: U.S. President Bill Clinton, P.L.O.
According to Egyptian media, Mubarak's condition worsened after he went into exile in Sharm el-Sheikh.
In a move widely seen as political persecution, Ayman Nour, a dissident and candidate for the El-Ghad Party ("Tomorrow party") was convicted of forgery and sentenced to five years' hard labor on 24 December 2005.
The trial was broadcast on Egyptian television; Mubarak made an unexpected appearancehis first since his resignation.
He remained in custody and returned to court on 11 May 2013 for a retrial on charges of complicity in the murder of protesters.
The National Democratic Party of Egypt continued to state that Hosni Mubarak was to be the party's only candidate in the 2011 Presidential Election.
While in office, political corruption in the Mubarak administration's Ministry of the Interior rose dramatically.
Mubarak was quick to deny that his policies would result in difficulties for Egyptian-Israeli dealings in the future.
However, Mubarak has remained at the military hospital since January 2014 due to his ongoing health issues.
His health was speculated to be rapidly deteriorating; some reports said he was in a coma.
On 2 February 1949, he left the Military Academy and joined the Air Force Academy, gaining his commission as a pilot officer on 13 March 1950 and eventually receiving a Bachelor's degree in aviation sciences.
In 2010, Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index report assessed Egypt with a CPI score of 3.1, based on perceptions of the degree of corruption from business people and country analysts, with 10 being very clean and 0 being highly corrupt.
This did not satisfy most protesters, who expected Mubarak to depart immediately.
On 12 February 2011, the government of Switzerland announced it was freezing the Swiss bank accounts of Mubarak and his family.
It was not immediately clear whether the sentence would take into account time already served – Mubarak and his sons have already spent more than three years in prison, so potentially will not have to serve any additional time.
On 6 October 1973, the Egyptian Air Force launched a surprise attack on Israeli soldiers on the east bank of the Suez Canal.
Opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei paid no attention to Mubarak's remarks and labeled it as a trick designed to help Mubarak to stay in power.
Hosni Mubarak is married to Suzanne Mubarak and has two sons: Alaa, and Gamal.
Hosni Mubarak was born on 4 May 1928 in Kafr El-Meselha, Monufia Governorate, Egypt.
On 11 May 2013, he told ''El-Watan'' in his first media appearance since his resignation said, "History will judge and I am still certain that the coming generations will view me fairly."
He was reportedly depressed, refused to take medications, and was slipping in and out of consciousness.
On 2 June 2012, an Egyptian court sentenced Mubarak to life imprisonment.
He served as its commander from 1972 to 1975 and rose to the rank of air chief marshal in 1973.
Some time in the 1950s, he returned to the Air Force Academy as an instructor, remaining there until early 1959.
These trials began on 3 August 2011.
The demonstrations continued and on 2 February, violent clashes occurred between pro-Mubarak and anti-Mubarak protesters.
On 19 June 2008, the Egypt-brokered pause in hostilities between Israel and Hamas went into effect.
According to ''The Economist'': The programme worked like a charm: a textbook case, says the International Monetary Fund.
''The Guardian'' reported that Mubarak and his family might be worth up to  garnered from corruption, bribes and legitimate business activities.
On 21 May 2014 a Cairo court convicted Mubarak and his sons of embezzling the equivalent of  of state funds which were allocated for renovation and maintenance of presidential palaces but were instead diverted to upgrade private family homes.
The Egyptian analyst Mohamed Hassanein Heikal said the Air Force played a mostly psychological role in the war, providing an inspirational sight for the Egyptian ground troops who carried out the crossing of the Suez Canal, rather than for any military necessity.
On 15 August, the resumed trial lasted three hours.
From February 1959 to June 1961, Mubarak undertook further training in the Soviet Union, attending a Soviet pilot training school in Moscow and another at Kant Air Base near Bishkek in the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic.
In September 1975, Mubarak went on a mission to Riyadh and Damascus to persuade the Saudi Arabian and Syrian governments to accept the disengagement agreement signed with the Israeli government ("Sinai II"), but was refused a meeting by the Syrian President Hafez Al-Assad.
At one time, his release was ordered.
This compromise was not acceptable for the protestors and violent demonstrations occurred in front of the Presidential Palace.
Judicial sources confirmed that the court had upheld a petition from Mubarak's longtime lawyer that called for his release.
President Mubarak and his son denied this; they said "a multi-candidate electoral system introduced in 2005 has made the political process more transparent".
The defense strategy was that Mubarak never actually resigned, was still president, and thus had immunity.
On 23 February 2011, the Egyptian newspaper ''Eldostor'' reported that a "knowledgeable source" described the order of the Prosecutor General to freeze Mubarak's assets and the threats of a legal action as nothing but a signal for Mubarak to leave Egypt after a number of attempts were made to encourage him to leave willingly.
Mubarak is detained in a military hospital and his sons were freed 12 October 2015 by a Cairo court.
He quietly improved relations with the former Soviet Union.
On 2 June 2012, Mubarak was reported as have suffered a health crisis while being transported to prison after his conviction on the charges of complicity in the killing of protestors.
After the war, his reward was that America, the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, and Europe forgave Egypt around $20&nbsp;billion of debt.
Through his son Alaa, Mubarak has two grandsons, Muhammed and Omar; and through his son Gamal, he has a granddaughter Farida.
Egyptian pilots hit 90% of their targets, making Mubarak a national hero.
Sadat even transferred his decisionmaking authority to Mubarak temporarily at times he went on vacations.
Most sources said he was no longer interested in performing any duties and wanted to "die in Sharm El-Sheikh".
According to ''Newsweek'', these allegations are poorly substantiated and lack credibility.
In January 2013, an appeals court overturned Mubarak's life sentence and ordered a retrial.
Previously, Mubarak secured his position by having himself nominated by Parliament then confirmed without opposition in a referendum.
The agreement required Hamas to end rocket attacks on Israel and to enforce the ceasefire throughout Gaza.
Mubarak undertook training on the Ilyushin Il-28 and Tupolev Tu-16 jet bombers.
Mubarak stated in a speech that he would not leave, and would die on Egyptian soil.
Throughout the 1980s, Mubarak increased the production of affordable housing, clothing, furniture, and medicine.
In April 2016, Alaa Mubarak was named in the Panama Papers as someone with financial interests that intersect with that of Mossack Fonseca, the firm implicated in that scandal.
He added that President Mohammed Morsi faced a tough time and that it was too early to judge him.
Egypt's participation in the war solidified its central role in the Arab World and brought financial benefits for the Egyptian government.
Supporters of Mubarak jeered the decision when it was announced in a Cairo courtroom on 9 May.
However, as President he did not support an immediate US withdrawal from Iraq because he believed it would probably lead to chaos.
The court found Mubarak not guilty of ordering the crackdown on Egyptian protesters.
On 20 February 2011, the Egyptian Prosecutor General ordered the freezing of Mubarak's assets and those of his wife Suzanne, his sons Alaa and Gamal Mubarak, and his daughters-in-law Heidi Rasekh and Khadiga Gamal.
By the time he became President, Mubarak was one of a few Egyptian officials who refused to visit Israel and vowed to take a less enthusiastic approach to normalizing relations with the Israeli government.
Speculation about his ill health increased after  his resignation from the presidency.
In this position, he took part in government consultations that dealt with the future disengagement of forces agreement with Israel.
Though mostly out of the public eye, Mubarak granted a rare interview in February 2014 with Kuwaiti journalist Fajer al-Saeed, expressing support for then-Minister of Defense and Commander-in-Chief of the Egyptian Armed Forces Abdel Fattah el-Sisi as the next President of Egypt, recognizing that Sisi was working to restore the confidence of the Egyptian people.
The money was said to be spread out in various bank accounts, including some in Switzerland and the UK, and invested in foreign property.
The Prosecutor General also ordered the Egyptian Foreign Minister to communicate this to other countries where Mubarak and his family could have assets.
Egyptian regulations mandate government officials to submit a financial statement listing their assets and sources of income while performing government work.
According to the BBC, Mubarak survived six attempts on his life.
In November 2014, conspiracy to kill charges were dismissed by the Cairo Criminal Court on a technicality.
In June 2011, Mubarak's lawyer Farid el-Deeb said his client "has stomach cancer, and the cancer is growing".
On 21 May 2014, while awaiting retrial, Mubarak and his sons were convicted on charges of embezzlement; Mubarak was sentenced to three years in prison, while his sons received four-year sentences.
The sentence also included a 125 million Egyptian pound (US$16.3 million) fine, and required the return of 21 million embezzled Egyptian pounds (US$2.7 million).
Mubarak, on occasion also hosted meetings relating to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and made a number of attempts to serve as a broker between them.
It was widely believed that the Egyptian military abandoned Mubarak in large part because his succession plan, which would put his sons (Alaa and Gamal) in power following his death, constituted a threat to the military's extensive economic, political and financial interests and its vast privileges in Egypt.
Fahmy told Eilts that "Mobarek  is, for the time being at least, likely to be a regular participant in all sensitive meetings" and he advised the Ambassador not to antagonize Mubarak because he was Sadat's personal choice.
Muhammad died in 2014 from a fatal head injury.
Mubarak's presidency lasted almost thirty years, making him Egypt's longest-serving ruler since Muhammad Ali Pasha, who ruled the country from 1805 to 1848, a reign of 43 years.
In June 2007, Mubarak held a summit meeting at Sharm el-Sheik with King Abdullah II of Jordan, President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Ehud Olmert.
On 24 May 2011, Mubarak was ordered to stand trial on charges of premeditated murder of peaceful protesters during the revolution and, if convicted, could face the death penalty.
On 10 February, contrary to rumours, Mubarak said he would not resign until the September election, though he would be delegating responsibilities to Vice President Omar Suleiman.
In February 2011, Voice of America reported that Egypt's top prosecutor had ordered a travel ban and an asset freeze for Mubarak and his family as he considered further action.
On 2 June 2012, Mubarak was found guilty of not halting the killing of protesters by the Egyptian security forces; he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
Because of his positions against Islamic fundamentalism and his diplomacy towards Israel, Mubarak was the target of repeated assassination attempts.
Further reports stated that Mubarak's health continued to decline; some said he had to be treated with a defibrillator.
She said Mubarak exaggerated his role in the 1973 war.
He also promised constitutional reform.
After sentencing, he was reported to have suffered a series of health crises.
However, Mubarak expressed his dislike of opposition politician Hamdeen Sabbahi, a Nasserist following the policies of Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Both sons served four years in Egyptian jail for corruption and were released in 2015.
In exchange, Hamas expected the blockade to end, commerce in Gaza to resume, and truck shipments to be restored to 2005 levels.
He was also reportedly injured by a knife-wielding assailant in Port Said in September 1999.
Until Libya's suspension from the Arab League at the beginning of the Libyan Civil War, Egypt was the only state in the history of the organization to have had its membership suspended, because of President Sadat's peace treaty with Israel.
When this declaration failed to ease the protests, Mubarak's vice president stated that Gamal Mubarak would not run for president.
On 13 April 2011, a prosecutor originally appointed by Mubarak ordered the former president and both his sons to be detained for 15 days of questioning about allegations of corruption and abuse of power amid growing suspicion that the Egyptian military was more aligned with the Mubaraks than with the revolution.
The court ordered the repayment of , fined the trio , and sentenced Mubarak to three years in prison and each of his sons to four years.
In a state televised broadcast on 1 February 2011, Mubarak announced that he would not seek re-election in September but would like to finish his current term and promised constitutional reform.
The three were fined the equivalent of , and were ordered to repay .
On 25 January 2011, protests against Mubarak and his government erupted in Cairo and around Egypt calling for Mubarak's resignation.
President Mubarak was re-elected by majority votes in a referendum for successive terms on four occasions: in 1987, 1993, and 1999.
She said presidential son Gamal Mubarak was the most likely successor; some thought intelligence chief Omar Suleiman might seek the office, or Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa might stand.
The trial of Hosni Mubarak, his sons Ala'a and Gamal, former interior minister Habib el-Adly and six former top police officials began on 3 August 2011 at a temporary criminal court at the Police Academy in north Cairo.
The September 2005 ballot was a multiple-candidate election rather than a referendum, but the electoral institutions and security apparatus remain under the control of the President.
This order came two days after Egyptian newspapers reported that Mubarak filed his financial statement.
According to the sourcean unnamed Egyptian security official"Mubarak wants to be left alone and die in his homeland".
Some sources reported he had had a heart attack.
However Mubarak's influence was also disputed by Shahdan El-Shazli, the daughter of the former Egyptian military Chief of Staff Saad el-Shazly.
In his early years in power, Mubarak expanded the Egyptian State Security Investigations Service (''Mabahith Amn ad-Dawla'') and the Central Security Forces (anti-riot and containment forces).
On 13 April 2011, a prosecutor ordered Mubarak and both of his sons (Alaa and Gamal) to be detained for 15 days of questioning about allegations of corruption and abuse of power.
Mubarak also developed friendships with several other important Arab figureheads, including Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud, Oman's Sultan Qaboos, Morocco's King Hassan II, and Sudan's President Jaafar Nimeiry.
Following Sadat's death, Mubarak became the fourth president of Egypt and the chairman of the National Democratic Party (NDP).
Israel tied an easing of the blockade to a reduction in rocket fire and gradually re-opened supply lines and permitted around 90 daily truck shipments to enter Gaza.
Mubarak made no media appearances after his resignation.
On 28 February 2011, the General Prosecutor of Egypt issued an order prohibiting Mubarak and his family from leaving Egypt.
On 13 July 2011, unconfirmed reports stated that Mubarak had slipped into a coma at his residence after giving his final speech, and on 17 July, el-Deeb confirmed the reports.
On his return to Egypt, he served as a wing commander, then as a base commander; he commanded the Cairo West Air Base in October 1966 then briefly commanded the Beni Suef Air Base.
Mubarak served as an Egyptian Air Force officer in various formations and units; he spent two years in a Spitfire fighter squadron.
On 11 February, then Vice President Omar Suleiman announced Mubarak had resigned and that power would be turned over to the Egyptian military.
The newspaper said some of the information about the family's wealth might be ten years old.
On 1 February, Mubarak announced he would not contest the presidential election due in September.
