The water is the same for all, but the prices charged for the baths have varied according to the equipment, accommodations and services offered by each facility.
On August 24, 1818, the Quapaw Indians ceded the land around the hot springs to the United States in a treaty after having been forced to a reservation south of the site.
File:Hot Springs NP Ozark BH.JPG|Ozark Bathhouse
100,000 baths a year were given to the poor.
Twelve years later, in 1832, the 22nd United States Congress formed the national reservation, granting federal protection of the thermal waters and giving Hot Springs the honor of being the first area to be designated for federal government protection.
Drinking water is dispensed from several hot water jug fountains.
* The Hot Springs Sandstone Member of the Stanley Shale, hereafter referred to as the Hot Springs Sandstone, consists of fine- to medium-grained sandstone with some shale and conglomerate.
File:Hot Springs NP Bathhouse Row (Fordyce BH) VC.JPG|Fordyce Bathhouse
The elevation of the city is  above sea level, with surrounding hills rising another 600 feet.
Just days later, the city of Hot Springs had the building razed.
Two cold water springs (Happy Hollow and Whittington Springs) are treated using ozone filtration.
Pines predominate on the south sides of the ridges.
It is the smallest national park by area in the United States and could fit into the largest National Park in the United States, Wrangell-St. Elias National Park, almost 2,400 times.
The Polk Creek Shale is a black, fissile, graphitic shale.
Plains bison, elk, cougar and red wolf left the region after European settlement.
Physicians began arriving in the 1850s, although many visitors did without their services; visitors remained from one week to two months.
After a bath of about , the patient might spend 2–5 minutes in a vapor cabinet, get 15 minutes of packs (wet, hot or cold), followed by a tepid needle shower and light massage and alcohol rub.
As the daily treatments required only an hour or two, the visitors' idle time created opportunities for other businesses in the town.
It later was expanded to .
Its development has extended beyond the narrow valley in which the springs are located, spreading out over the open plain to the south and east.
Some rainwater from near the springs mixes with the deep hot water before discharge.
In many cases medicine was required before using the waters, although it had been observed that the amount of drugs given was "enough to sicken a well man."
During most of the Paleozoic Era, what became the Ouachita Mountains was the bottom of a shallow sea, where several sedimentary layers were created.
The entire Bathhouse Row area is designated as a National Historic Landmark District that contains the grandest collection of bathhouses of its kind in North America, including many outstanding examples of Gilded Age architecture.
The thermal springs emerge from the plunging crest line of a large overturned anticline in the Zigzag Mountains of the Ouachita anticlinorium.
It has been proposed that a fault splits away from the southern fault, trends west and connects with the northern fault.
Under artesian pressure, the thermal waters rise and emerge through the Hot Springs Sandstone between the traces of two thrust faults, along several northeast-trending lineaments.
Not long afterward trappers John Perciful and Isaac Cates arrived; Perciful put up more cabins for visitors.
The sandstone, when freshly exposed, is a hard, fine-grained, feldspathic, silty sandstone, but weathers easily to a soft, clayey porous material ranging from green to brown in color.
The sandstone is gray, hard and quartzitic, reaching thicknesses up to  The shale predominantly occurs at the top of the unit, and the principal bed of the conglomerate occurs at the bottom.
The mountains within the park are also managed within this conservation philosophy in order to preserve the hydrological system that feeds the springs.
The park includes portions of downtown Hot Springs, making it one of the most accessible national parks.
They found one log cabin and a few rudimentary shelters used by people visiting the springs for their healing properties.
While this was a reservation, the area developed into a well-known resort nicknamed The American Spa; it attracted not only the wealthy but indigent health seekers from around the world.
In the 1930s a tub bath could not take more than 20 minutes and shower no more than 90 seconds.
About 500 million years ago a collision of the South American Plate with the North American Plate caused the shale and sandstone layers to fracture and fissure, creating mountains of the folded rocks.
The period of time for tub baths became six to ten minutes and the time in the steam bath shortened to two minutes, with only one bath a day.
For thousands of years, this area was visited by chiefs and tribes of numerous indigenous peoples.
The hot water is naturally potable.
The blanket-covered customer then would walk briskly back to their quarters to lie down for at least a half-hour to let the body recover its normal temperature.
The process described in 1878 was a hot bath of  for about 3 minutes (timed with a sand-glass).
The poor applied at park headquarters and upon approval by a physician were sent to a participating bathhouse, which was reimbursed by the government.
There are two recognized major thrust faults trending nearly parallel to fold axes that define the northern and southern limits of the thermal springs discharge area.
'''Hot Springs National Park''' is a United States National Park in central Garland County, Arkansas, adjacent to the city of Hot Springs, the county seat.
File:Hot Springs NP Maurice BH.JPG|Maurice Bathhouse
Some of the tufa covering the hillside was excavated to accommodate the bathhouses.
Applicants for free baths were required to make an oath that they were without and unable to obtain means to pay for the baths, with violations being a misdemeanor subject to fine and/or imprisonment.
The Fordyce is open as a visitors center; its staff gives tours of the facilities that have been historically renovated to their original appearance.
The earliest bathing procedure consisted of merely reclining in natural pools of hot springs and cool creek water for long periods of time.
The Arlington Hotel, Austin Hotel and Convention Center, and The Springs Hotel & Spa also offer hot spring baths using the Park water.
Established before the concept of a national park existed, it was the first time that a piece of land had been set aside by the federal government to preserve its use as an area for recreation.
During this the bather is also drinking hot water from their coffee-pot.
The level of exposure to radiation that results from bathing appears to be similar to the level that would result from sitting in the sun for the same period of time.
Maximum temperatures have declined about  since records have been kept.
File:Hot Springs National Park Buckstaff BH (active).JPG|Buckstaff Bathhouse
The Ozark is housing the Museum of Contemporary Art; its space  can be rented as reception hall.
The '''Hot Springs Reservation''' was set aside for public use as a park on June 16, 1880.
After he regained his health following two years of bathing in the hot water and eating local foods, he returned home to his plantation on the Red River in Louisiana.
The temperature averages about .
A new free bathhouse was built in 1904, with separate facilities for black and white patrons.
The city starts on the other side of Central Avenue from Bathhouse Row.
The area is primarily forest.
The result is the mildly alkaline, pleasant tasting solution with dissolved calcium carbonate.
Following federal protection in 1832, the city developed into a successful spa town.
Following 8,000 years of use by Indigenous peoples, European Americans discovered and appropriated the springs.
A second three weeks' course was then taken, followed again by an abstinence from bathing for several days.
This was followed by another three minutes with all but the head in a steam box, or if milder treatment was prescribed, sitting atop the steam box covered with a blanket.
Bathing in spring water is available in approved facilities at extra cost.
A new bathhouse was built off the reservation in 1922.
The ''Ral Hole'' mudpit and pool were closed, and the first Government Free Bathhouse operated at the site.
The springs emerge in a gap between Hot Springs Mountain and West Mountain in an area about  long by  wide at altitudes from .
Since Hot Springs National Park is the oldest park maintained by the National Park Service, it was the first to receive its own US quarter in April 2010 as part of the America the Beautiful Quarters coin series.
File:Hot Springs NP (Nat Bapt Hotel n Sanitorium).JPG|National Baptist Hotel and Sanitorium (bathhouse for 'colored peoples')
The sedimentary rocks in the vicinity of the thermal springs consist of shale, chert, novaculite, sandstone, and conglomerate.
In 1905 curative characteristics were being ascribed to radium and Professor Bertram Boltwood of Yale examined these waters.
At present on Bathhouse Row only the Buckstaff and Quapaw are operating as bathhouses.
The overturned anticline plunges toward the southwest into the Mazarn Basin.
On February 15, 1956, a severe flood filled Central Avenue with three feet of rushing water, causing significant property damage.
Nine of the bathhouses were associated with hotels, hospitals, or sanatoria.
The Government free bathhouse was a concrete building fully equipped for bathing large numbers of people under sanitary conditions.
At the time collection and distribution equipment was designed to retain the radon gas, while now it is designed to allow it to escape.
Entrepreneurs soon developed more elaborate bathing facilities, featuring wooden troughs delivering water from hillside springs to bathhouses along the east bank of Hot Springs Creek.
They were removed to Indian Territory in the 1830s.
The hot spring water has been popularly believed for centuries to possess medicinal properties, and was a subject of legend among several Native American tribes.
All the squatters were evicted, rubbish cleaned up, and a centralized plumbing system was begun.
In 1807 Jean Emmanual Prudhomme, of French colonial descent, became the first European-American settler of modern Hot Springs.
Toward the end of the 1880s Russian and Turkish baths were offered, and in the 1890s German needle baths and Scotch douches (concentrated stream of hot or cold water, often used on the back) were added.
It is black, hard, and argillaceous shale.
The treatment was by drinking and bathing in the waters, producing a profuse perspiration, which was considered an active agent in fighting disease.
They called it the "Valley of the Vapors" at the time of Spanish explorer Hernando de Soto's arrival in the area in 1541.
* The Arkansas Novaculite consists of lower, middle, and upper members.
It was believed that trespassers had started the blaze.
It is located behind the south end of Bathhouse Row along the base of Hot Springs Mountain.
The water from many springs is now combined in one supply, with the total amount of water varying from  a day.
Regulations prohibit private individuals from selling the park's waters.
Facilities were segregated until civil rights legislation in the 1960s.
The Army and Navy General Hospital (now the Rehabilitation Center) was also supplied with water from the springs.
Extensive cracks, joints, and fissures in the Bigfork Chert, Arkansas Novaculite, and the Hot Springs Sandstone allow the water to flow in the thermal springs area.
The exposed rock types in the vicinity of the thermal springs are sedimentary rocks of Mississippian to Ordovician age, with the exception of younger igneous rocks (Cretaceous age) exposed in two small areas about   southeast of the thermal springs (Potash Sulphur Spring and Magnet Cove, respectively), and in many small dikes and sills.
There have been 80 dikes noted about  southeast of Hot Springs, on and near the Ouachita River.
The bather sat in the cabinet for 10–20 minutes with the lid closed tightly around the neck, with vapor from the hot water rising through the floor of the cabinet, with temperatures around .
Tickets were issued to those who, after examination, were found to be suffering from diseases which were reasonably expected to be benefited from the baths.
On February 26, 1905, a fire started in the Grand Central Hotel on Chapel Street and burned 25 blocks of the southern section of Hot Springs.
There was agreement among the tribes that they would put aside their weapons and partake of the healing waters in peace while in the valley.
The springs are all grouped about the base of the Hot Springs Mountain, with a flow of well over a half million gallons a day.
The current modern facilities are oriented toward spa style or pool services.
The southern fault extends northeastward about  roughly along the axis of the Hot Springs anticline, and dips about 44 degrees north.
Admission to the hospital was reserved for cases "of a serious and obstinate character, which, though resisting ordinary methods of relief, were promised a rapid and permanent recovery from the use of the waters of the spring."
The thermal springs are situated in the Ouachita Mountains of central Arkansas.
The chert is very brittle and intensely fractured from folding.
In May 1990, a series of storms dropped more than  of rain into the city, causing flash floods.
Free carbon dioxide (CO2)
The charges for the services of the attendants are the same and include the necessities except towels, blankets, bathrobes, laundering, rubbing mercury, and handling of invalids.
The park water is considered well within safe limits and similar to other natural waters throughout the world.
There were churches of various denominations, including Baptist for white and black congregations.
The Treaty of Paris 1763 ceded the land back to Spain; however, in 1800 control was returned to France until the Louisiana Purchase of 1803.
The park has miles of roads and trails over the mountains.
Sleeping at this stage was considered dangerous.
During the flood, Carpenter Dam Bridge was washed away.
The trip down takes about 4,000 years while the hot water takes about a year to reach the surface.
As in many other cities, fire has been a risk, especially before city services were developed.
It reaches a maximum thickness of  in the area.
It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The heat comes from the natural heating of rocks as depth increases.
Incorporated January 10, 1851, the city has been home to Major League Baseball spring training, illegal gambling, speakeasies and gangsters such as Al Capone, horse racing at Oaklawn Park, the Army and Navy Hospital, and 42nd President Bill Clinton.
During the peak popularity of the hot springs, until the 1950s, the many patients staying for three weeks, six weeks, or longer were a large source of business for the numerous hotels, boarding houses, doctors, and drugstores.
In 1929, prices for single baths ranged from $1 to $1.40, while a course of 21 baths was $16 to $24.
Around the 18th century the Caddo settled in the area, followed by the Choctaw, Cherokee, and other tribes from the Southeast across the Mississippi River.
The facility now known as the Hot Springs Rehabilitation Center was built in 1933 as the second Army-Navy hospital.
The area was made a national park on March 4, 1921.
The northern fault extends nearly parallel to Fountain Street northeastward about  onto the southeast flank of North Mountain, and dips about 26 degrees north.
In 1673 Father Marquette and Jolliet explored the area and claimed it for France.
It has been used and operated by the state for over 50 years.
Dissolved minerals in the water precipitate to form the white to tan travertine or "tufa rock" seen near the openings of the hot springs.
Some migratory birds following the Mississippi Flyway spend part of the year in the vicinity.
There is a measurable level of radioactivity primarily due to dissolved radon gas, with some radium.
Bicarbonate (HCO3−)
File:Hale and Superior Bathhouses, Hot Springs National Park.JPG|Hale and Superior Bathhouses
The creek was covered with stone arches, and above it a street 100 feet wide was built.
Thermal water from 33 of the thermal springs is collected and monitored at a central reservoir, which distributes the combined discharge for public use and consumption.
Present day fauna include white tail deer, turkey, squirrel, rabbit, Virginia opossum, gray fox, coyote, skunk, raccoon, gopher, long-tailed weasel, mink, rat, chipmunk, frog, and nine-banded armadillo.
After Arkansas became its own territory in 1819, the Arkansas Territorial Legislature requested in 1820 that the springs and adjoining mountains be set aside as a federal reservation.
By 1980 one reporter described getting a 20-minute bath, two minutes in a steam bath, 15 minutes wrapped with hot packs, and resting in a cooling room for 20–30 minutes.
The park has become increasingly popular in recent years, and recorded over 1.5 million visitors in 2003, as well as nearly 2.5 million non-recreational visitors.
The city has also been subject to flooding because of the narrow valley.
There have been nearly two dozen pay bathhouses operating at the same time, with about nine of those within the park's "Bathhouse Row."
The Quapaw lived in the Arkansas River delta area and visited the springs.
''Corn Hole'', a popular spring where people soaked their feet, dried up in 1882.
Flowing downward through cracked rock at about one foot per year, the meteoric water migrates to estimated minimum depths of   and achieves high temperatures in the deep section of the flow path before rising along fault and fracture conduits.
* The Womble Shale is the oldest geologic unit that underlies all other exposed units.
The usual stay at the springs was from one to three months, but many invalids stayed a year and longer.
A lightning strike during the storm caused a fire that destroyed several commercial businesses in downtown Hot Springs.
The northern slopes of the ridges and basins provide a suitable habitat for deciduous forest dominated by oak and hickory.
In the first half of the 20th century, the city operated primarily as a summer resort, but hotels have now long stayed open during the winter due to many northerly patrons coming to escape the winter cold.
* The Stanley Shale is predominantly a clayey, thinly fissile, black to green shale, with large amounts of sandstone interbedded throughout the formation.
The city of Hot Springs (incorporated 1851) is governed under State and municipal law.
There are  of unlogged pine and oak forests on North and Hot Springs Mountains, and  on Sugarloaf Mountain.
The narrow street along the west side of the creek was connected to the bathhouses by narrow bridges.
The free bathhouse closed in 1957, as it was more economical to have the few indigent customers served by the commercial bathhouses.
The hot springs flow from the western slope of Hot Springs Mountain, part of the Ouachita Mountain range.
'''Hot Springs Reservation''' was initially created by an act of the United States Congress on April 20, 1832 to be preserved for future recreation.
Members of many Native American tribes had been gathering in the valley for over 8,000 years to enjoy the healing properties of the thermal springs.
The row's Fordyce Bathhouse serves as the park's visitor center; the Buckstaff and Quapaw are the only facilities in 2015 still operating as bathhouses.
The composition of the water indicates it is heated rainwater which has not approached a magmatic source, so no volcanic action is involved in the formation of these hot springs.
On March 5, 1878 a large fire burned for eight hours in the city, claiming nearly 150 buildings, including hotels, bath houses, and restaurants.
The park operates a public campground at Gulpha Gorge, about two miles (3&nbsp;km) from downtown Hot Springs.
It was administered by the War Department for the benefit of military members, officers of the Public Health Service, and honorably discharged veterans.
They have used the hot spring water in therapeutic baths for more than 200 years to treat rheumatism and other ailments.
Although details of services were left to bathhouse operators, the Park's superintendent set various rules.
Almost all of the low-lying areas in the city of Hot Springs are composed of the Stanley Shale, and it surrounds Hot Springs Mountain on the south, east, and west sides.
The springs predominantly are composed of hot water from thousands of feet underground mixed with some shallow cold ground water.
* The Bigfork Chert overlies the Womble Shale and consists almost entirely of chert and silty chert in layers   thick, separated by minor thin beds of black shale.
The hot baths were usually taken once a day for three weeks, when a rest was necessary (often with a week at the sulphur springs near the Ouachita River).
On May 14, 1923, a severe rainstorm hit the city.
File:Hot Springs National Park Quapaw BH.JPG|Quapaw Bathhouse
The water comes from rain which falls in mountains to the north and northeast.
There are numerous hiking trails and camping areas.
During the 1870s the bathing regimen became more diverse, and physicians prescribed various types of baths for patients.
The Park Service reminded people that they had to provide their own board and lodging and to have return travel fare, due to many destitute invalids who arrived each year in the mistaken belief that there was a public institution at which they would be cared for free of charge.
At the northern extent of the thermal springs, this fault is suggested to form along the bedding contact of the Hot Springs Sandstone and Stanley Shale, with the Stanley Shale forming the hanging wall of the fault.
The government acquired more land, expanding it to more than , including Hot Springs Mountain, North Mountain, West Mountain, Sugar-Loaf Mountain and Whittington Lake Park.
The hot water is supplied to the various bathhouses, with resulting income from concession fees going to the U.S. Treasury.
* The Polk Creek Shale and Missouri Mountain Shale overlie the Bigfork Chert and generally consist of shale with minor thin layers of quartzitic sandstone.
On September 5, 1913, a laundry worker was ironing and accidentally started a fire at 424 Church Street, which spread rapidly due to strong winds and burned nearly 60 blocks of the south part of the city.
During the 1820s crude vapor baths stood over the springs, and bathers breathed in the vapors for extended periods of time.
After these eight to ten minutes of treatment, the bather is well rubbed down and thoroughly dried.
They have instead been managed to conserve the production of uncontaminated hot water for public use.
The bathhouses began using vapor cabinets around 1884.
Other buildings of the row are being restored or are used for other purposes.
During the next decade shower time was reduced to a minute, with maximum temperatures specified for several services.
The materials used in construction were of poor quality.
Rock types in the area include shale units which generally impede ground-water movement, while fractured chert, novaculite, and sandstone units generally support ground-water movement.
In 1878 the Army and Navy opened a free dispensary on the second floor, which remained open for two years.
There is no indication that igneous rock occurs where the thermal springs discharge.
Although Hot Springs National Park is the oldest park managed by the National Park System, by act of Congress in 1921, the site's name was officially changed from the Hot Springs Reservation to the '''Hot Springs National Park'''.
The Missouri Mountain Shale varies in color, and is soft and argillaceous.
These old-growth forests contain shortleaf pine, blackjack oak, and white oak; many of the trees over 130 years old, and a few over 200 years old.
The waters of the hot springs had an established reputation in benefiting.
Other open springs were either covered over by the National Park Service or the bathhouse owners to prevent their pollution.
With mountains surrounding three sides of the city, water flooded down the slopes of the mountains, funneling to Central Avenue and reaching a depth of nine feet.
