In 1968, the Labour Government of Harold Wilson attempted to reform the House of Lords by introducing a system under which hereditary peers would be allowed to remain in the House and take part in debate, but would be unable to vote.
In April 2011, a cross-party group of former leading politicians, including many senior members of the House of Lords, called on the Prime Minister David Cameron to stop creating new peers.
After this date, the Committee will cease to exist unless it is granted an extension.
Critics argue the House of Lords is the second largest legislature after the Chinese National People's Congress and dwarfs Upper Houses in other bi-cameral democracies such as the United States (100 senators), France (348 senators), Australia (76 senators) and India (250 members).
There are two motions which have grown up through custom and practice and which govern questionable conduct within the House.
Prior to 2010 peers from outside London could claim an overnight allowance of £174.
* The upper chamber shall continue to be known as the House of Lords for legislative purposes.
The Lord Chancellor is no longer the head of the judiciary of England and Wales.
If the motion is passed, its effect is to prevent the member from continuing their speech on the motion then under debate.
In July 2008, Jack Straw, the Secretary of State for Justice and Lord Chancellor, introduced a white paper to the House of Commons proposing to replace the House of Lords with an 80–100% elected chamber, with one third being elected at each general election, for a term of approximately 12–15 years.
Moreover, feudalism was dying, and the feudal armies controlled by the barons became obsolete.
This proposal was also not implemented.
An exception applies, however, if the individual convicted of high treason receives a full pardon.
Members may not refer to each other in the second person (as "you"), but rather use third person forms such as "the noble Duke", "the noble Earl", "the noble Lord", "my noble friend", "The most Reverend Primate", etc.
Like the House of Commons, the Lords also has a Government Chief Whip as well as several Junior Whips.
Outright abolition, a wholly appointed house, a 20% elected house, a 40% elected house, a 50% elected house and a 60% elected house were all defeated in turn.
No Lord of Appeal in Ordinary or Lord of Appeal could sit judicially beyond the age of seventy-five.
Furthermore, only citizens of the United Kingdom, Commonwealth citizens, and citizens of Ireland may sit in the House of Lords.
Hume later accepted the Order of Merit, a personal appointment of the Queen, shortly before his death.
In this capacity, the House of Lords acts as a check on the House of Commons that is independent from the electoral process.
The term committee is also used to describe Grand Committee, where the same rules of procedure apply as in the main chamber, except that no divisions may take place.
While the House of Commons has a defined 650-seat membership, the number of members in the House of Lords is not fixed.
Publicly non-partisan Lords are called crossbenchers.
In 1999, the Labour government brought forward the House of Lords Act removing the right of several hundred hereditary peers to sit in the House.
Whilst some hereditary peers were at best apathetic the Labour Party's clear commitments were not lost on Baron Sudeley, who for decades was considered an expert on the House of Lords.
The Lord Chancellor was not only the Speaker of the House of Lords, but also a member of the Cabinet; his or her department, formerly the Lord Chancellor's Department, is now called the Ministry of Justice.
The Speaker or Deputy Speaker sits on the Woolsack, a large red seat stuffed with wool, at the front of the Lords Chamber.
The Labour Government introduced legislation to expel all hereditary peers from the Upper House as a first step in Lords reform.
When the House subsequently suspended Lord Truscott and Lord Taylor of Blackburn for their role in the scandal, they were the first to meet this fate since 1642.
Hitherto, the Lord Chancellor was part of all three branches of government: the legislative, the executive, and the judicial.
Most of the remainder were to be appointed by a Commission to ensure a mix of "skills, knowledge and experience".
Public bills may also be committed to pre-legislative committees.
The Lords Spiritual are 26 bishops in the established Church of England.
The Lord Speaker may be replaced as presiding officer by one of his or her deputies.
The Lords were far more powerful than the Commons because of the great influence of the great landowners and the prelates of the realm.
During 2006, a cross-party committee discussed Lords reform, with the aim of reaching a consensus: its findings were published in early 2007.
When Scotland united with England to form Great Britain in 1707, it was provided that the Scottish hereditary peers would only be able to elect 16 representative peers to sit in the House of Lords; the term of a representative was to extend until the next general election.
Much of the nobility was killed on the battlefield or executed for participation in the war, and many aristocratic estates were lost to the Crown.
Detailed proposals for Lords reform including a draft House of Lords Reform Bill were published on 17 May 2011.
Note that an individual serving a prison sentence for an offence other than high treason is ''not'' automatically disqualified.
Under the proposals, members would also serve single non-renewable terms of 15&nbsp;years.
Benches in the Lords Chamber are coloured red.
Several different qualifications apply for membership of the House of Lords.
A vital reform was effected by the House itself in 1868, when it changed its standing orders so as to prevent noble Lords from voting without taking the trouble to attend.
This procedure is known as Closure, and is extremely rare.
Prime Minister H. H. Asquith then proposed that the powers of the House of Lords be severely curtailed.
Of the remaining 92 political appointments from outside public life, 27 had made significant donations to political parties.
The first Lord Speaker, elected on 4 May 2006, was Baroness Hayman, a former Labour peer.
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg introduced the House of Lords Reform Bill 2012 on 27 June 2012 which built on proposals published on 17 May 2011.
* Elected Members will serve a single, non renewable term of 15&nbsp;years.
These committees are typically empowered to make reports to the House "from time to time", that is, whenever they wish.
Traditionally there was no mechanism by which members could resign or be removed from the House of Lords (compare the situation as regards resignation from the House of Commons).
This royal council came to be composed of ecclesiastics, noblemen, and representatives of the counties of England (afterwards, representatives of the boroughs as well).
The most prominent case, the 2006 Cash for Honours scandal, saw a police investigation, with no charges being brought.
The House of Lords and the House of Commons assemble in the Palace of Westminster.
Entire cities such as Manchester were not represented by a single individual in the House of Commons, but the 11 voters of Old Sarum retained their ancient right to elect two members of parliament.
After a further general election in December 1910, and with an undertaking by King George V to create sufficient new Liberal peers to overcome Lords' opposition to the measure if necessary, the Asquith Government secured the passage of a bill to curtail the powers of the House of Lords.
The nationality restrictions were previously more stringent: under the Act of Settlement 1701, and prior to the British Nationality Act 1948, only natural-born subjects were qualified.
Other committees are ''ad-hoc committees'', which are set up to investigate a specific issue.
These include a 300-member hybrid house, of which 80% are elected.
In August 2015, following the creation of a further 45 peers in the Dissolution Honours, the total number of eligible members of the Lords increased to 826.
Unlike the Lords Spiritual, they may be publicly partisan, aligning themselves with one or another of the political parties that dominate the House of Commons.
The House of Lords Reform Act 2014 received the Royal Assent in 2014.
There have been no Roman Catholic clergymen appointed, though it was rumoured that Cardinal Basil Hume and his successor Cormac Murphy O'Connor were offered peerages, by James Callaghan, Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair respectively, but declined.
In Meg Russell's article "Is the House of Lords already reformed?
Members of the Lords may also take on roles as government ministers.
As the Speaker is expected to be an impartial presiding officer, Baroness Hayman resigned from the Labour Party.
The House of Lords debates legislation, and has power to amend or reject bills.
While it is unable to prevent Bills passing into law, except in certain limited circumstances, it can delay Bills and force the Commons to reconsider their decisions.
It is also possible for the House to end the debate entirely, by approving a motion "that the Question be now put".
It regularly reviews and amends Bills from the Commons.
This made the House of Lords the largest parliamentary chamber in any democracy.
This hypothetical process is known as the "circumnavigation of power theory".
The House of Lords, she argues, currently has enough power to make it relevant.
If this happens, then the perceived legitimacy of the Lords could arguably outweigh the legitimacy of the Commons.
By convention, however, the Prime Minister allows leaders of other parties to nominate some life peers, so as to maintain a political balance in the House of Lords.
However, hereditary peeresses continued to be excluded until the passage of the Peerage Act 1963.
This plan, however, was defeated in the House of Commons by a coalition of traditionalist Conservatives (such as Enoch Powell), and Labour members who continued to advocate the outright abolition of the Upper House (such as Michael Foot).
The Act no longer guarantees that the office holder of Lord Chancellor is the presiding officer of the House of Lords, and therefore allows the House of Lords to elect a speaker of their own.
* The reformed House of Lords should have 300 members of which 240 are "Elected Members" and 60 appointed "Independent Members".
In a confusing series of votes in February 2003, all of these options were defeated, although the 80% elected option fell by just three votes in the Commons.
O'Connor said he had his maiden speech ready, but Roman Catholics who have received Holy Orders are prohibited by Canon Law from holding major offices connected with any government other than the Holy See.
This motion also is debatable, and the debate which ensues has sometimes offered a chance for the member whose conduct has brought it about to come to order so that the motion can be withdrawn.
The popular measure, however, was defeated in the heavily Conservative House of Lords.
Section 3 of the House of Lords Reform Act 2014 now provides that any member of the House of Lords convicted of a crime and sentenced to imprisonment for more than one year loses their seat.
It was not meant to be a permanent solution; more comprehensive reforms were planned.
The House of Lords may appoint a chairman for a committee; if it does not do so, the Chairman of Committees or a Deputy Chairman of Committees may preside instead.
It is therefore unlikely that future appointees to the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom will be made Lords of Appeal in Ordinary.
The overlap of the legislative and executive roles is a characteristic of the Westminster system, as the entire cabinet consists of members of the House of Commons or the House of Lords; however, in June 2003, the Blair Government announced its intention to abolish the post of Lord Chancellor because of the office's mixed executive and judicial responsibilities.
She made her remarks days before a new batch of peers were due to be appointed.
They are brought into play by a member standing up, possibly intervening on another member, and moving the motion without notice.
Life peerages rank only as barons or baronesses, and are created under the Life Peerages Act 1958.
The Clerk, who is appointed by the Crown, advises the presiding officer on the rules of the House, signs orders and official communications, endorses bills, and is the keeper of the official records of both Houses of Parliament.
The number of Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (excluding those who were no longer able to hear cases because of age restrictions) was limited to twelve, but could be changed by statutory instrument.
A person may not sit in the House of Lords if he or she is the subject of a Bankruptcy Restrictions Order (applicable in England and Wales only), or if he or she is adjudged bankrupt (in Northern Ireland), or if his or her estate is sequestered (in Scotland).
The bulk of the House's judicial business was conducted by the twelve Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, who were specifically appointed for this purpose under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876.
Some aristocrats were patrons of numerous "pocket boroughs", and therefore controlled a considerable part of the membership of the House of Commons.
Women were excluded from the House of Lords until the Life Peerages Act 1958, passed to address the declining number of active members, made possible the creation of peerages for life.
Conflicts between the King and the Parliament (for the most part, the House of Commons) ultimately led to the English Civil War during the 1640s.
As a part of a compromise, however, it agreed to permit 92 hereditary peers to remain until the reforms were complete.
Elections for Irish representatives ended in 1922, when most of Ireland became an independent state; elections for Scottish representatives ended with the passage of the Peerage Act 1963, under which all Scottish peers obtained seats in the Upper House.
Another officer of the body is the Leader of the House of Lords, a peer selected by the Prime Minister.
From Scotland, appeals were possible only in civil cases; Scotland's High Court of Justiciary is the highest court in criminal matters.
No further appeal lay from the House of Lords, although the House of Lords could refer a "preliminary question" to the European Court of Justice in cases involving an element of European Union law, and a case could be brought at the European Court of Human Rights if the House of Lords did not provide a satisfactory remedy in cases where the European Convention on Human Rights was relevant.
No person may sit in the House of Lords if under the age of 21.
Black Rod (as the Gentleman Usher is normally known) is responsible for ceremonial arrangements, is in charge of the House's doorkeepers, and may (upon the order of the House) take action to end disorder or disturbance in the Chamber.
The Labour Party had for most of the twentieth century a commitment, based on the party's historic opposition to class privilege, to abolish the House of Lords, or at least expel the hereditary element.
The last such trial in the House was of Edward Southwell Russell, 26th Baron de Clifford in 1935.
Similarly, the House of Lords was once the court that tried peers charged with high treason or felony.
When the House of Commons passed a Reform Bill to correct some of these anomalies in 1831, the House of Lords rejected the proposal.
Only peers, their wives, and their widows (unless remarried) were entitled to trials in the House of Lords or the Lord High Steward's Court; the Lords Spiritual were tried in Ecclesiastical Courts.
At each lobby are two Tellers (themselves members of the House) who count the votes of the Lords.
* Elections to the reformed Lords should take place at the same time as elections to the House of Commons.
Of the Lords Temporal, the majority are life peers who are appointed by the monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister, or on the advice of the House of Lords Appointments Commission.
Originally, the Lords Temporal included several hundred hereditary peers (that is, those whose peerages may be inherited), who ranked variously as dukes, marquesses, earls, viscounts, and barons (as well as Scottish Lords of Parliament).
The exclusion of other hereditary peers removed the Prince of Wales (who is also Earl of Chester) and all other Royal Peers, including the Duke of Edinburgh, Duke of York, Earl of Wessex, Duke of Gloucester and Duke of Kent.
Issues related to devolution were transferred from the Privy Council to the Supreme Court in 2009.
In 1949, the Parliament Act reduced the delaying power of the House of Lords further to two sessions or one year.
Thus all but 92 hereditary peers were expelled under the House of Lords Act 1999 (see below for its provisions), making the House of Lords predominantly an appointed house.
* The current powers of the House of Lords would not change and the House of Commons shall retain its status as the primary House of Parliament.
* Independent Members will be appointed by the Queen after being suggested by the Prime Minister acting on advice of an Appointments Commission.
A distinct judicial function—one in which the whole House used to participate—is that of trying impeachments.
In 2011, Baroness D'Souza was elected as the second Lord Speaker, replacing Baroness Hayman in September 2011.
Significantly this last vote represented an overall majority of MPs.
In 1958, the predominantly hereditary nature of the House of Lords was changed by the Life Peerages Act 1958, which authorised the creation of life baronies, with no numerical limits.
The Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition agreed, following the 2010 general election, to clearly outline a provision for a wholly or mainly elected second chamber, elected by a proportional representation system.
Peers can elect to receive a reduced attendance allowance of £150 per day instead.
The 19th century was marked by several changes to the House of Lords.
Impeachments were brought by the House of Commons, and tried in the House of Lords; a conviction required only a majority of the Lords voting.
From 1999 to 2010 the Attorney General for England and Wales was a Member of the House of Lords; the most recent was Baroness Scotland of Asthal.
The primary function of Select Committees is to scrutinise and investigate Government activities; to fulfil these aims, they are permitted to hold hearings and collect evidence.
The House of Lords remains a source for junior ministers and members of government.
In August 2014, former Speaker of the House of Commons Baroness Boothroyd requested that “older peers should retire gracefully” to ease the overcrowding in the House of Lords.
An illustrative dramatisation circa 1928 of a trial of a peer (the fictional Duke of Denver) on a charge of murder (a felony) is portrayed in the 1972 BBC Television adaption of Dorothy L. Sayers' Lord Peter Wimsey mystery ''Clouds of Witness''.
The electoral system of the House of Commons was not, at the time, democratic: property qualifications greatly restricted the size of the electorate, and the boundaries of many constituencies had not been changed for centuries.
A further restriction is a constitutional convention known as the Salisbury Convention, which means that the House of Lords does not oppose legislation promised in the Government's election manifesto.
At the 2005 election, the Labour Party proposed further reform of the Lords, but without specific details.
Unlike the politically neutral Speaker of the House of Commons, the Lord Chancellor and Deputy Speakers originally remained members of their respective parties, and were permitted to participate in debate; however, this is no longer true of the new role of Lord Speaker.
The proposals were considered by a Joint Committee on House of Lords Reform made up of both MPs and Peers, which issued its final report on 23 April 2012, making the following suggestions:
The House of Lords did not assemble again until the Convention Parliament met in 1660 and the monarchy was restored.
Proxies were then abolished.
(Alec Douglas-Home, who became Prime Minister in 1963 whilst still an Earl, disclaimed his peerage and was elected to the Commons soon after his term began.)
In this scenario, there may well come a time when the Lords twice reject a Bill from the Commons and it is forced through.
Secondly, as to the composition of the Lords, Meg Russell suggests that the composition must be distinct from the Commons, otherwise it would render the Lords useless.
In 2014, the House of Lords Reform Act 2014 made provision for members' resignation from the House, removal for non-attendance, and automatic expulsion upon conviction for a serious criminal offence (if resulting in a jail sentence of at least one year).
Their subsequent election victory in 1997 under Tony Blair finally heralded the demise of the traditional House of Lords.
One of the main justifications for the new Supreme Court was to establish a separation of powers between the judiciary and the legislature.
The Wakeham Commission proposed introducing a 20% elected element to the Lords, but this plan was widely criticised.
Having made the powers of the House of Lords a primary campaign issue, the Liberals were narrowly re-elected in January 1910.
A further 20% would be appointed, and reserve space would be included for some Church of England bishops.
In 1649, after the defeat and execution of King Charles I, the Commonwealth of England was declared, but the nation was effectively under the overall control of Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of England.
The House also has a Church of England role, in that Church Measures must be tabled within the House by the Lords Spiritual.
The Chairman of Committees, the Principal Deputy Chairman of Committees, and several Chairmen are all deputies to the Lord Speaker, and are all appointed by the House of Lords itself at the beginning of each session.
Of the remaining ninety peers sitting in the Lords by virtue of a hereditary peerage, 15 are elected by the whole House and 75 are chosen by fellow hereditary peers in the House of Lords, grouped by party.
An Appellate Committee hearing an important case could consist of more than five members.
Members of the House enter one of two lobbies (the ''content'' lobby or the ''not-content'' lobby) on either side of the Chamber, where their names are recorded by clerks.
Bishops of Welsh sees in the Church of England originally sat in the House of Lords (after 1847, only if their seniority within the Church entitled them to), but the Church in Wales ceased to be a part of the Church of England in 1920 and was simultaneously disestablished in Wales.
Socialist MPs favouring outright abolition voted against all the options.
By custom, the Crown appoints each Chairman, Principal Deputy Chairman and Deputy Chairman to the additional office of Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords.
The number of Life Peers then gradually increased, though not at a constant rate.
This would in turn trigger questions about the amount of power the Lords should have and there would be pressure for it to increase.
The Journals of the House of Lords record only four instances on which the House has ordered the Standing Order to be read since the procedure was invented in 1871.
Very few of these are female since most hereditary peerages can only be inherited by men.
Typically, these are ''sessional committees'', meaning that their members are appointed by the House at the beginning of each session, and continue to serve until the next parliamentary session begins.
If fewer than three or 30 members (as appropriate) are present, the division is invalid.
The authority of Parliament continued to grow, and, during the early fifteenth century, both Houses exercised powers to an extent not seen before.
*Peers can be disqualified for non-attendance.
Most Cabinet ministers are from the House of Commons rather than the House of Lords.
The Constitutional Reform Act 2005 resulted in the creation of a separate Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, to which the judicial function of the House of Lords, and some of the judicial functions of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, were transferred.
Further developments occurred during the reign of Edward II's successor, Edward III.
The House of Lords cannot delay a money bill (a bill that, in the view of the Speaker of the House of Commons, solely concerns national taxation or public funds) for more than one month.
Speeches in the House of Lords are addressed to the House as a whole ("My Lords") rather than to the presiding officer alone (as is the custom in the Lower House).
Moreover, the power of the House as a whole experienced a decrease, whilst that of the House of Commons grew.
The quorum of the House of Lords is just three members for a general or procedural vote, and 30 members for a vote on legislation.
A Deputy Leader is also appointed by the Prime Minister, and takes the place of an absent or unavailable leader.
", she states three essential features of a legitimate House of Lords.
The House of Lords was reduced to a largely powerless body, with Cromwell and his supporters in the Commons dominating the Government.
The judicial functions could also be exercised by Lords of Appeal (other members of the House who happened to have held high judicial office).
He or she only acts as the mouthpiece of the House, performing duties such as announcing the results of votes.
In recent history, it has been very rare for major cabinet positions (except Lord Chancellor and Leader of the House of Lords) to have been filled by peers.
Until 2009, the Lords Temporal also included the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, a group of individuals appointed to the House of Lords so that they could exercise its judicial functions.
Of the Church of Ireland's ecclesiastics, four (one archbishop and three bishops) were to sit at any one time, with the members rotating at the end of every parliamentary session (which normally lasted approximately one year).
A 2015 study found that of 303 people nominated for peerages in the period 2005–14, a total of 211 were former senior figures within politics (including former MPs), or were non-political appointments.
For more serious problems with an individual Lord, the option is available to move "That the noble Lord be no longer heard".
This does not apply to the five bishops who sit by right.
Unlike the elected House of Commons, all members of the House of Lords (excluding 92 hereditary peers elected among themselves) are appointed.
The Church of Ireland, however, was disestablished in 1871, and thereafter ceased to be represented by Lords Spiritual.
The Clerk of the Parliaments is the chief clerk and officer of the House of Lords (but is not a member of the House itself).
* Twenty Independent Members (a third) shall take their seats within the reformed house at the same time as elected members do so and for the same 15-year term.
If the Lords have a distinct and elected composition, this would probably come about through fixed term proportional representation.
A pre-legislative Committee is specifically constituted for a particular bill.
Crossbenchers, sit on the benches immediately opposite the Woolsack.
In the House of Lords, members need not seek the recognition of the presiding officer before speaking, as is done in the House of Commons.
In addition, the office of Lord Chancellor was reformed by the act, removing his ability to act as both a government minister and a judge.
*All peers can retire or resign from the chamber (prior to this only hereditary peers could disclaim their peerages).
However, when the choices were announced in April 2001, from a list of 3,000 applicants, the choices were treated with criticism in the media, as all were distinguished in their field, and none were "ordinary people" as some had originally hoped.
Such hereditary dignities can be created by the Crown; in modern times this is done on the advice of the Prime Minister of the day (except in the case of members of the Royal Family).
If Parliament was not in session, then peers could be tried in a separate court, known as the Lord High Steward's Court.
Members of the House of Lords who sit by virtue of their ecclesiastical offices are known as Lords Spiritual.
The scandal over expenses in the Commons was at its highest pitch only six months before, and the Labourite leadership under Janet Royall determined that something sympathetic should be done.
