It tolerates a variety of climates, but prefers drier conditions, especially in moist tropical climates.
In particular, sparrows were associated by the ancient Greeks with Aphrodite, the goddess of love, due to their perceived lustfulness, an association echoed by later writers such as Chaucer and Shakespeare.
Since the mid-19th century, it has reached most of the world, chiefly due to deliberate introductions, but also through natural and shipborne dispersal.
Some birds breeding for the first time in tropical areas are only a few months old and still have juvenile plumage.
In South America, it was first introduced near Buenos Aires around 1870, and quickly became common in most of the southern part of the continent.
Especially in warmer areas, the house sparrow may build its nests in the open, on the branches of trees, especially evergreens and hawthorns, or in the nests of large birds such as storks or magpies.
Juveniles have broader buff feather edges, and tend to have looser, scruffier plumage, like moulting adults.
The median mass on the European continent for both sexes is about , and in more southerly subspecies is around .
Similar observations have been made in New Zealand, and in South Africa.
Even birdwatchers often hold it in little regard because of its molestation of other birds.
d. domesticus''-group birds intergrade in a large part of Iran, so this split is rarely recognised.
The house sparrow originated in the Middle East and spread, along with agriculture, to most of Eurasia and parts of North Africa.
Transcribed as ''chirrup'', ''tschilp'', or ''philip'', this note is made as a contact call by flocking or resting birds, or by males to proclaim nest ownership and invite pairing.
The eggs are white, bluish-white, or greenish-white, spotted with brown or grey.
d. domesticus'' group birds.
d. persicus'' Zarudny and Kudashev, 1916, described from the Karun River in Khuzestan, Iran, is found in the western and central Iran south of the Alborz mountains, intergrading with ''indicus'' in eastern Iran, and Afghanistan.
Eggs laid later in a clutch are larger, as are those laid by larger females, and egg size is hereditary.
d. bactrianus'' Zarudny and Kudashev, 1916, described from Tashkent, is found in southern Kazakhstan to the Tian Shan and northern Iran and Afghanistan.
Some young birds disperse long distances, especially on coasts, and mountain birds move to lower elevations in winter.
''Salmonella'' epidemics in the spring and winter can kill large numbers of sparrows.
d. indicus'' group as a separate species.
Various noninsect arthropods are eaten, as are molluscs and crustaceans where available, earthworms, and even vertebrates such as lizards and frogs.
Most house sparrow vocalisations are variations on its short and incessant chirping call.
The male is duller in fresh nonbreeding plumage, with whitish tips on many feathers.
The house sparrow is strongly associated with human habitations, and can live in urban or rural settings.
Captive birds have been recorded diving and swimming short distances under water.
The badge is variable in width and general size, and may signal social status or fitness.
d. domesticus'' group
The female has no black markings or grey crown.
Tree hollows are more commonly used in North America than in Europe, putting the sparrows in competition with bluebirds and other North American cavity nesters, and thereby contributing to their population declines.
It is the subspecies with the smallest range.
In the breeding season, the male gives this call repetitively, with emphasis and speed, but not much rhythm, forming what is described either as a song or an "ecstatic call" similar to a song.
They start feeding themselves partly after one or two days, and sustain themselves completely after 7 to 10 days, 14 at the latest.
Juveniles are similar to the adult female, but deeper brown below and paler above, with paler and less defined supercilia.
d. hufufae'' Ticehurst and Cheeseman, 1924, described from Hofuf in Saudi Arabia, is found in north-eastern Arabia.
Only about 20–25% of birds hatched survive to their first breeding season.
The house sparrow now occurs from the Northwest Territories to southern Panama, and it is one of the most abundant birds in North America.
By their first breeding season, young birds generally are indistinguishable from other adults, though they may still be paler during their first year.
The house sparrow has an extremely large range and population, and is not seriously threatened by human activities, so it is assessed as least concern for conservation on the IUCN Red List.
In the day between ovulation and laying, egg white forms, followed by eggshell.
Males may try to mate with females while calling or displaying.
Its introduced range encompasses most of North America, Central America, southern South America, southern Africa, part of West Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and islands throughout the world.
The subspecies ''P.
Attempts to control house sparrows include the trapping, poisoning, or shooting of adults; the destruction of their nests and eggs; or less directly, blocking nest holes and scaring off sparrows with noise, glue, or porcupine wire.
In temperate areas, the house sparrow has an unusual habit of tearing flowers, especially yellow ones, in the spring.
Males take up nesting sites before the breeding season, by frequently calling beside them.
The plumage of the house sparrow is mostly different shades of grey and brown.
A number of chewing lice occupy different niches on the house sparrow's body.
Nest sites are varied, though cavities are preferred.
Where introduced, it can extend its range quickly, sometimes at a rate over  per year.
Its underparts are pale grey-brown.
Grit can be either stone, often grains of masonry, or the shells of eggs or snails; oblong and rough grains are preferred.
House sparrows can breed in the breeding season immediately following their hatching, and sometimes attempt to do so.
When fewer clutches are laid in a year, especially at higher latitudes, the number of eggs per clutch is greater.
It intergrades with ''bibilicus'' in the Sinai, and with ''rufidorsalis'' in a narrow zone around Wadi Halfa.
House sparrows give a nasal alarm call, the basic sound of which is transcribed as ''quer'', and a shrill ''chree'' call in great distress.
A sparrow sometimes excavates its own nests in sandy banks or rotten branches, but more frequently uses the nests of other birds such as those of swallows in banks and cliffs, and old tree cavity nests.
Despite this success, native relatives such as the Cape sparrow also occur in towns, competing successfully with it.
d. parkini'' is larger and darker with more black on the breast than any other subspecies.
d. indicus'' Jardine and Selby, 1831, described from Bangalore, is found in the Indian subcontinent south of the Himalayas, in Sri Lanka, western Southeast Asia, eastern Iran, south-western Arabia and southern Israel.
The animal's conservation status is listed as least concern on the IUCN Red List.
All the young in the nest leave it during the same period of a few hours.
Similarly, even when blind, house sparrows continue to be photoperiodic, i.e.
Declines have not been universal, as no serious declines have been reported from Eastern Europe, but have even occurred in Australia, where the house sparrow was introduced recently.
Arboviruses such as the West Nile virus, which most commonly infect insects and mammals, survive winters in temperate areas by going dormant in birds such as the house sparrow.A few records indicate disease extirpating house sparrow populations, especially from Scottish islands, but this seems to be rare.
The house sparrow is closely associated with humans.
In Europe, the most common mite found on sparrows is ''Proctophyllodes'', the most common ticks are ''Argas reflexus'' and ''Ixodes arboricola'', and the most common flea on the house sparrow is ''Ceratophyllus gallinae''.
Juvenile males tend to have darker throats and white postoculars like adult males, while juvenile female tend to have white throats.
Outside of the reproductive season, they often roost communally in trees or shrubs.
It is the most widely introduced subspecies.
d. persicus'' is paler and smaller, and ''P.
The bird's scientific name and its usual English name have the same meaning.
The house sparrow is monogamous, and typically mates for life.
Eggs decrease slightly in size from laying to hatching.
Unlike the birds in sedentary populations that migrate, birds of migratory subspecies prepare for migration by putting on weight.
Some congregating sites separate from the roost may be visited by the birds prior to settling in for the night.
Male house sparrows guard their mates carefully to avoid being cuckolded, and most extra-pair copulation occurs away from nest sites.
In London, the house sparrow almost disappeared from the central city.
On the Mediterranean islands of Malta, Gozo, Crete, Rhodes, and Karpathos, the other apparently intermediate birds are of unknown status.
It now occurs almost continuously from Tierra del Fuego to the fringes of Amazonia, with isolated populations as far north as coastal Venezuela.
The parents swallow the droppings produced by the hatchlings during the first few days; later, the droppings are moved up to  away from the nest.
A few introductions have died out or been of limited success, such as those to Greenland and Cape Verde.
However,  how much this is caused by evolution or by environment is not clear.
Finally, house sparrows in constant darkness can be entrained to a cycle of high and low temperature, but only if the difference between the two temperatures is large (38 versus 6°C); some of the tested sparrows matched their activity to the warm phase, and others to the cold phase.
This call is also used by females in the breeding season, to establish dominance over males while displacing them to feed young or incubate eggs.
Less common nesting sites include street lights and neon signs, favoured for their warmth; and the old open-topped nests of other songbirds, which are then domed over.
In most of the Mediterranean, one or both species occur, with some degree of hybridisation.
d. indicus'' was described as a species, and was considered to be distinct by many ornithologists during the 19th century.
It can swim when pressed to do so by pursuit from predators.
d. domesticus'' group.
The house sparrow can be confused with a number of other seed-eating birds, especially its relatives in the genus ''Passer''.
Where these two species overlap, the house sparrow is usually more common than the Eurasian tree sparrow, but one species may replace the other in a manner that ornithologist Maud Doria Haviland described as "random, or even capricious".
Later, the genus name ''Fringilla'' came to be used only for the common chaffinch and its relatives, and the house sparrow has usually been placed in the genus ''Passer'' created by French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760.
The commonly recorded bacterial pathogens of the house sparrow are often those common in humans, and include ''Salmonella'' and ''Escherichia coli''.
However, the house sparrow can be beneficial to humans, as well, especially by eating insect pests, and attempts at the large-scale control of the house sparrow have failed.
As an adult, the house sparrow mostly feeds on the seeds of grains and weeds, but it is opportunistic and adaptable, and eats whatever foods are available.
Many of the diseases hosted by the house sparrow are also present in humans and domestic animals, for which the house sparrow acts as a reservoir host.
Females usually are slightly smaller than males.
d. bactrianus'' and ''P.
d. domesticus'' birds without hybridising in the 1970s, so the Soviet scientists Edward I. Gavrilov and M. N. Korelov proposed the separation of the ''P.
As the breeding season approaches, hormone releases trigger enormous increases in the size of the sexual organs and changes in day length lead males to start calling by nesting sites.
Birds of a pair copulate frequently until the female is laying eggs, and the male mounts the female repeatedly each time a pair mates.
It resembles a hybrid between the two species, and is in other respects intermediate.
At feeding stations and nests, female house sparrows are dominant despite their smaller size, and in the reproductive period (usually spring or summer), being dominant, they can fight  for males.
Head scratching is done with the leg over the drooped wing.
This variation follows predictable patterns, with birds at higher latitudes being larger and those in arid areas being paler.
d. tingitanus'' (Loche, 1867), described from Algeria, is found in the Maghreb from Ajdabiya in Libya to Béni Abbès in Algeria, and to Morocco's Atlantic coast.
Much communal chirping occurs before and after the birds settle in the roost in the evening, as well as before the birds leave the roost in the morning.
It has been recorded in Somaliland.
In many parts of the world, it has been characterised as a pest, and poses a threat to native birds.
However, limited migration occurs in all regions.
Its tail is short, at  long.
Holes in cliffs and banks, or tree hollows, are also used.
Immature males have paler versions of the adult male's markings, which can be very indistinct in fresh plumage.
The female spends the night incubating during this period, while the male roosts near the nest.
The wing chord is , and the tarsus is .
The house sparrow is also called by a number of alternative English names, including English sparrow, chiefly in North America; and Indian sparrow or Indian house sparrow, for the birds of the Indian subcontinent and Central Asia.
These vocalisations are not unique to the house sparrow, but are shared, with small variations, by all sparrows.
Over the recent years, the house sparrow population has been on the decline in many Asian countries and this decline is quite evident in India.To promote the conservation of these birds, in 2012, the then Chief Minister of Delhi, Ms. Sheila Dikshit, declared the house sparrow as the state bird of Delhi.
A primary cause of the decline seems to be an insufficient supply of insect food for nestling sparrows.
They were among the first bird species to be seriously studied in terms of their circadian activity and photoperiodism, in part because of their availability and adaptability in captivity, but also because they can "find their way" and remain rhythmic in constant darkness.
The house sparrow is infested by a number of external parasites, which usually cause little harm to adult sparrows.
It has black around its bill, on its throat, and on the spaces between its bill and eyes (lores).
If both parents perish, the ensuing intensive begging sounds of the young often attract replacement parents which feed them until they can sustain themselves.
In turn, the house sparrow has once been recorded as a brood parasite of the American cliff swallow.
As newly hatched house sparrows do not have sufficient insulation, they are brooded for a few days, or longer in cold conditions.
The male's bill is black in the breeding season and horn (dark grey) during the rest of the year.
It is gregarious at all seasons when feeding, often forming flocks with other types of birds.
d. indicus''-group and ''P.
d. indicus'' group subspecies, ''P.
It frequently prefers wetter habitats than the house sparrow, and it is often colonial and nomadic.
Though it is widespread and abundant, its numbers have declined in some areas.
A shortage of nesting sites caused by changes in urban building design is probably a factor, and conservation organisations have encouraged the use of special nest boxes for sparrows.
To many people across the world, the house sparrow is the most familiar wild animal and, because of its association with humans and familiarity, it is frequently used to represent the common and vulgar, or the lewd.
Wild birds were trapped in nets in large numbers, and sparrow pie was a traditional dish, thought, because of the association of sparrows with lechery, to have aphrodisiac properties.
In North Africa, the two species hybridise extensively, forming highly variable mixed populations with a full range of characters from pure house sparrows to pure Spanish sparrows.
House sparrows express strong circadian rhythms of activity in the laboratory.
Its bill is stout and conical with a culmen length of , strongly built as an adaptation for eating seeds.
It usually uses deserted nests, though sometimes it usurps active ones.
Many of these relatives are smaller, with an appearance that is neater or "cuter", as with the Dead Sea sparrow.
d. biblicus'' Hartert, 1910, described from Palestine, is found in the Middle East from Cyprus and south-eastern Turkey to the Sinai in the west and from Azerbaijan to Kuwait in the east.
It hybridises extensively with the Spanish sparrow, especially in the eastern part of its range.
Eggs from the tropical subspecies are distinctly smaller.
Most house sparrows do not move more than a few kilometres during their lifetimes.
Most species of birds of prey have been recorded preying on the house sparrow in places where records are extensive.
An alternative view is that the hieroglyph meant "a prolific man" or "the revolution of a year".
The female assists in building, but is less active than the male.
The house sparrow has become highly successful in most parts of the world where it has been introduced.
In North America, house sparrow populations are more differentiated than those in Europe.
d. niloticus'' is nearly identical but smaller.
Subelliptical in shape, they range from  in length and  in width, have an average mass of , and an average surface area of .
The yolk comprises 25% of the egg, the egg white 68%, and the shell 7%.
The house sparrow is closely associated with human habitation and cultivation.
d. parkini'', are predominantly migratory.
Central Asian house sparrows, which migrate and have only one clutch a year, average 6.5&nbsp;eggs in a clutch.
The taxonomy of the house sparrow and its Mediterranean relatives is highly complicated.
Birds usually described later as sparrows are referred to in many works of ancient literature and religious texts in Europe and western Asia.
d. indicus'' group, and the Palaearctic ''P.
It has a small white stripe between the lores and crown and small white spots immediately behind the eyes (postoculars), with black patches below and above them.
A large number of subspecies have been named, of which 12 were recognised in the ''Handbook of the Birds of the World''.
The subspecies ''P.
The typical ratio of males to females in a population is uncertain due to problems in collecting data, but a very slight preponderance of males at all ages is usual.
The building of the nest is initiated by the unmated male while displaying to females.
The house sparrow is a victim of interspecific brood parasites, but only rarely, since it usually uses nests in holes too small for parasites to enter, and it feeds its young foods unsuitable for young parasites.
Young birds also give a true song, especially in captivity, a warbling similar to that of the European greenfinch.
The Latin word ''domesticus'' means "belonging to the house", like the common name a reference to its association with humans.
d. domesticus'', the nominate subspecies, is found in most of Europe, across northern Asia to Sakhalin and Kamchatka.
It has several adaptations to dry areas, including a high salt tolerance and an ability to survive without water by ingesting berries.
The house sparrow also eats some plant matter besides seeds, including buds, berries, and fruits such as grapes and cherries.
The male has a dark grey crown from the top of its bill to its back, and chestnut brown flanking its crown on the sides of its head.
d. indicus'' were introduced around 1900.
Two subspecies, ''P.
The length of the incubation period decreases as ambient temperature increases later in the breeding season.
Such foreign eggs are sometimes recognised and ejected by females.
The dull-coloured female can often not be distinguished from other females, and is nearly identical to the those of the Spanish and Italian sparrows.
Another vocalisation is the "appeasement call", a soft ''quee'' given to inhibit aggression, usually given between birds of a mated pair.
Females and young birds are coloured pale brown and grey, and males have brighter black, white, and brown markings.
The female's bill is brownish-grey and becomes darker in breeding plumage approaching the black of the male's bill.
Its specific status and origin are the subject of much debate.
One of the reasons for the introduction of house sparrows throughout the world was their association with the European homeland of many immigrants.
Copulation is typically initiated by the female giving a soft ''dee-dee-dee'' call to the male.
Of the less widespread ''P.
They are believed to have become associated with humans around 10,000 years ago.
It will eat almost any seeds, but where it has a choice, it prefers oats and wheat.
''Menacanthus'' lice occur across the house sparrow's body, where they feed on blood and feathers, while ''Brueelia'' lice feed on feathers and ''Philopterus fringillae'' occurs on the head.
These declines are not unprecedented, as similar reductions in population occurred when the internal combustion engine replaced horses in the 1920s and a major source of food in the form of grain spillage was lost.
Birds from pairs often engage in extra-pair copulations, so about 15% of house sparrow fledglings are unrelated to their mother's mate.
Migratory birds of the subspecies ''P.
d. parkini'' Whistler, 1920, described from Srinagar, Kashmir, is found in the western Himalayas from the Pamir Mountains to south-eastern Nepal.
The house sparrow was among the first animals to be given a scientific name in the modern system of biological classification, since it was described by Carl Linnaeus, in the 1758 10th edition of ''Systema Naturae''.
Eggs are watery, being 79% liquid, and otherwise mostly protein.
Young house sparrows are fed mostly on insects until about 15 days after hatching.
In most of its range, the house sparrow is extremely common, despite some declines, but in marginal habitats such as rainforest or mountain ranges, its distribution can be spotty.
House sparrows have been kept as pets at many times in history, though they have no bright plumage or attractive songs, and raising them is difficult.
The numbers of house sparrows in the Netherlands have dropped in half since the 1980s, so the house sparrow is even considered an endangered species.
The '''house sparrow''' (''Passer domesticus'') is a bird of the sparrow family Passeridae, found in most parts of the world.
It has an outer layer of stems and roots, a middle layer of dead grass and leaves, and a lining of feathers, as well as of paper and other soft materials.
It is found in open country rather than in settlements, which are occupied by the Eurasian tree sparrow in its range.
It intergrades with ''persicus'' in Baluchistan and with ''indicus'' across central Afghanistan.
In most of the world, the house sparrow is not protected by law.
