The most popular symbol of the house of Tudor was the Tudor rose (see top of page).
On 28 January 1457, his widow Margaret Beaufort, who had just attained her fourteenth birthday, gave birth to a son, Henry Tudor, at her brother-in-law's Pembroke Castle.
The lady in charge of his upbringing was Blanche Herbert, Lady Troy, whose ancestors had residual Lollard connections.
He ordered churches to be stripped of all traditional Catholic symbolism, resulting in the simplicity often seen in Church of England churches today.
** The Other Boleyn Girl (2003 film)
As noted above Tewdur or Tudor is derived from the words tud "territory" and rhi "king".
A further parallelism was effected by turning Ireland into a kingdom and sharing the same episcopal establishment as England, whilst enlarging England by the annexation of Wales.
Tudor monarchs ruled the Kingdom of England and its realms, including their ancestral Wales and the Lordship of Ireland (later the Kingdom of Ireland) from 1485 until 1603, with five monarchs in that period.
After him, his daughter Mary I lost control of all territory in France permanently with the fall of Calais in 1558.
Evidence suggests that the two were secretly married in 1429.
In total, five Tudor monarchs ruled their domains for just over a century.
Catherine was Henry's older brother's wife, making the path for their marriage a rocky one from the start.
On his marriage, Henry adopted the Tudor Rose badge conjoining the White Rose of York and the Red Rose of Lancaster.
Numerous feature film are based on Tudor history.
After the death of her father, she was raised by his widow, Catherine Parr and her husband Thomas Seymour, 1st Baron Seymour of Sudeley.
Mary also welcomed the first Russian ambassador to England, creating relations between England and Russia for the first time.
During her questioning, Catherine first denied everything but eventually she was broken down and told of her infidelity and her pre-nuptial relations with other men.
When he did, he did not choose, as was generally the custom, his father's name, Maredudd, but chose that of his grandfather, Tudur ap Goronwy, instead.
Coat of Arms of Jasper Tudor, Duke of Bedford, and Earl of Pembroke, brother of Edmund Tudor
Under Mary, he had been spared, and often visited Elizabeth, ostensibly to review her accounts and expenditure.
Lady Margaret remained in England and remarried, living quietly while advancing the Lancastrian, and her son's cause.
Mary's government took a number of steps towards reversing the inflation, budgetary deficits, poverty, and trade crisis of her kingdom.
Henry's concern about having an heir to secure his family line and increase his security while alive would have prompted him to ask for a divorce sooner or later, whether Anne had precipitated it or not.
Henry Tudor, the future Henry VII, spent his childhood at Raglan Castle, the home of William Herbert, 1st Earl of Pembroke, a leading Yorkist.
Northumberland effectively became Lord Protector, but he did not use this title, learning from the mistakes his predecessor made.
Unfortunately, the young King's kingdom was usually in turmoil between nobles who were trying to strengthen their own positions in the kingdom by using the Regency in their favour.
Despite this, Elizabeth would not name Mary her heir; as she had experienced during the reign of her predecessor Mary I, the opposition could flock around the heir if they were disheartened with Elizabeth's rule.
Elizabeth had a long, turbulent path to the throne.
All the money Elizabeth had borrowed from Parliament in 12 of the 13 parliamentary sessions was paid back; by the time of her death, Elizabeth not only had no debts, but was in credit.
Edmund died on 3 November 1456.
This rumour was just one of many that swirled around the two's long-standing friendship.
There are many reasons debated as to why Elizabeth never married.
He was the cousin and friend of Blanche Parry, the closest person to Elizabeth for 56 years.
No proof could be found that Elizabeth was involved and she was released and retired to the countryside until the death of her sister, Mary I of England.
This allowed Henry to marry one of his courtiers: Anne Boleyn, the daughter of a minor diplomat Sir Thomas Boleyn.
By far the most dangerous threat to the Tudor line during Elizabeth's reign was the Spanish Armada of 1588.
She had a number of problems during her childhood, one of the main ones being after the execution of her mother, Anne Boleyn.
Wyatt never implicated Elizabeth, and he was beheaded.
Thomas Cromwell stepped in again, claiming that Anne had taken lovers during her marriage to Henry, and she was tried for high treason, witchcraft and incest; these charges were most likely fabricated, but she was found guilty, and executed in May 1536.
At her coronation in January 1559, many of the bishops – Catholic, appointed by Mary, who had expelled many of the Protestant clergymen when she became queen in 1553 – refused to perform the service in English.
The rebellion worried Somerset, now Lord Protector, and he sent an army to impose military solution to the rebellion.
* ''Horrible Histories Terrible Tudors.
He let others control the kingdom for the first two years of his reign, and then when he became more interested in military strategy, he took more interest in ruling his own throne.
Catherine was young and vivacious, but Henry's age made him less inclined to use Catherine in the bedroom; rather, he preferred to admire her, which Catherine soon grew tired of.
However, Mary soon announced that she was intending to marry the Spanish prince Philip, son of her mother's nephew Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor.
The descendants of an illegitimate child of English royalty would normally have no claim on the throne, but the situation was complicated when Gaunt and Swynford eventually married in 1396, when John Beaufort was 25.
One of the objectives of Henry VII's foreign policy was dynastic security, which is portrayed through the alliance forged with the marriage of his daughter Margaret to James IV of Scotland and through the marriage of his eldest son.
Wyatt himself was tortured, in the hope that he would give evidence that Elizabeth was involved so that Mary could have her executed for treason.
Only Wolsey's sudden death at Leicester on his journey to the Tower of London saved him from the public humiliation and inevitable execution he would have suffered upon his arrival at the Tower.
Although the historian Gilbert Burnet claimed that Henry called her a ''Flanders Mare'', there is no evidence that he said this; in truth, court ambassadors negotiating the marriage praised her beauty.
Henry died on 28 January 1547.
a 1969 British costume drama.
* The Other Boleyn Girl (2001) is a historical novel by Philippa Gregory, based on Mary Boleyn, the sister of Queen Anne Boleyn.
The new King Henry VIII married Catherine of Aragon on 11 June 1509; they were crowned at Westminster Abbey on 24 June the same year.
Philip found her unattractive, and only spent a minimal amount of time with her.
Somerset's army eventually defeated the Scots, but the young Queen Mary was smuggled to France, where she was betrothed to the Dauphin, the future Francis II of France.
Although it is debated whether Henry VII was a great king, he certainly was a successful one if only because he restored the nation's finances, strengthened the judicial system and successfully denied all other claimants to the throne, thus further securing it for his heir.
He had a good relationship with his sister Elizabeth, who was a Protestant, albeit a moderate one, but this was strained when Elizabeth was accused of having an affair with the Duke of Somerset's brother, Thomas Seymour, 1st Baron Seymour of Sudeley, the husband of Henry's last wife Catherine Parr.
Lady Jane's mother was Lady Frances Brandon, the daughter of Suffolk and Princess Mary.
Henry married again, for the third time, to Jane Seymour, the daughter of a Wiltshire knight, and with whom he had become enamoured while she was still a lady-in-waiting to Queen Anne.
The two sons born of the marriage, Edmund and Jasper, were among the most loyal supporters of the House of Lancaster in its struggle against the House of York.
However, she managed to reconcile with the King after vowing that she had only argued about religion with him to take his mind off the suffering caused by his ulcerous leg.
These acts, known collectively as the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, made it compulsory to attend church services every Sunday; and imposed an oath on clergymen and statesmen to recognise the Church of England, the independence of the Church of England from the Catholic Church, and the authority of Elizabeth as Supreme Governor.
When Henry Tudor took the crown of England from Richard III in battle, he brought about the end of the Wars of the Roses between the House of Lancaster (whose badge was a red rose) and the House of York (whose badge was a white rose).
Perhaps surprisingly, it was the dying Edward himself who feared a return to Catholicism, and wrote a new will repudiating the 1544 will of Henry VIII.
When it became clear to Henry that the Tudor line was at risk, he consulted his chief minister Cardinal Thomas Wolsey about the possibility of annulling his marriage to Catherine.
One in ten of the indigenous Cornish population was slaughtered.
In essence, the Tudors followed a composite of Lancastrian (the court party) and Yorkist (the church party) policies.
Elizabeth was interviewed by one of Edward's advisers, and she was eventually found not to be guilty, despite forced confessions from her servants Catherine Ashley and Thomas Parry.
Anne had become pregnant by the end of 1532 and gave birth on 7 September 1533 to Elizabeth, named in honour of Henry's mother.
* ''The Tudors'' is a British/Irish/Canadian produced historical fiction television series loosely based upon the reign of Henry VIII.
The House of Stuart came to power in 1603 when the Tudor line failed, as Elizabeth I died without a legitimate heir.
* ''The Virgin Queen'' is a BBC and Power co-production, four-part miniseries based upon the life of Queen Elizabeth I, starring Anne-Marie Duff.
Crowned Fleur de lys (Tudor Crown) showing the claim to crown of France.
The Tudors claim to the throne was the strongest one at the end of the Wars of the Roses, as it combined the Lancastrian claim in their descent from the Beauforts and the Royal Yorkist claim by the marriage of Henry VII to the heiress of Edward IV.
The prospect of a marriage alliance with Spain proved unpopular with the English people, who were worried that Spain would use England as a satellite, involving England in wars without the popular support of the people.
Mary's dream of a resurrected Catholic Tudor line was finished, and her popularity further declined when she lost the last English area on French soil, Calais, to Francis, Duke of Guise, on 7 January 1558.
Launched by Elizabeth's old suitor Philip II of Spain, this was commanded by Alonso de Guzmán El Bueno, the seventh Duke of Medina Sidonia.
However, more important to focus on were the disasters that many women, such as Lady Jane Grey, suffered due to being married into the royal family.
Most of Edward's council signed the ''Devise for the Succession'', and when Edward VI died on 6 July 1553 from his battle with tuberculosis, Lady Jane was proclaimed queen.
:fast-forward across film history, unforgettable, iconic images: the stately bearing; the red wigs; the high forehead; the long, aristocratic nose; the alabaster makeup; the pearl-drop earrings; the stiff, ornate ruffs; the fingers dripping with jewels; and the gowns, with yards and yards of white satin, purple velvet, gold, and silver ornamented and sparkling with rubies, diamonds, and more pearls.
It was used by every British Monarch since Henry VII as a Royal Badge.
Popular discontent grew; a Protestant courtier, Thomas Wyatt the younger led a rebellion against Mary, with the aim of deposing and replacing her with her half-sister Elizabeth.
A further set of stillborn children were conceived, until a daughter Mary was born in 1516.
When Anne was beheaded, Henry declared Elizabeth an illegitimate child and she would, therefore, not be able to inherit the throne.
Because of her actions against the Protestants, Mary is to this day referred to as "Bloody Mary."
In May 1536, Anne was arrested, along with six courtiers.
England had never been one of the wealthier European countries, and after the War of the Roses this was even more true.
The medieval practice of colloquially calling princes after their place birth (e.g.
Upon this victory, Henry Tudor proclaimed himself King Henry VII.
The duke himself was still a committed Catholic, and he was nearly persuaded to arrest Catherine for preaching Lutheran doctrines to Henry while she attended his ill health.
**A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)
Elizabeth knew that the continuation of the Tudor line was now impossible; she was forty-eight in 1581, and too old to bear children.
Numerous threats to the Tudor line occurred during Elizabeth's reign.
Two years after Richard III was crowned, Henry and Jasper sailed from the mouth of the Seine to the Milford Haven Waterway and defeated Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth Field.
Despite Somerset's disappointment that no Scottish marriage would take place, his victory at Pinkie Cleugh made his position appear unassailable.
** A Man for All Seasons (1988 film)
In response to famine across England due to bad harvests in the 1590s, Elizabeth introduced the poor law, allowing peasants who were too ill to work a certain amount of money from the state.
The fifth marriage was to the Catholic Catherine Howard, the niece of Thomas Howard, the third Duke of Norfolk, who was promoted by Norfolk in the hope that she would persuade Henry to restore the Catholic religion in England.
Elizabeth spent her time between different prisons, including the Tower of London.
Anne may have had later pregnancies which ended in miscarriage or stillbirth.
Although Henry had specified a group of men to act as regents during Edward's minority, Edward Seymour, Edward's uncle, quickly seized complete control, and created himself Duke of Somerset on 15 February 1547.
In order to allow Henry to divorce his wife, the English parliament enacted laws breaking ties with Rome, and declaring the king Supreme Head of the Church of England (from Elizabeth I the monarch is known as the Supreme Governor of the Church of England), thus severing the ecclesiastical structure of England from the Catholic Church and the Pope.
Issues around the royal succession (including marriage and the succession rights of women) became major political themes during the Tudor era.
After the rebellion of Thomas Wyatt the younger, Elizabeth was imprisoned in the Tower of London.
Tudor Rose Royal Badge of England combining the Red Rose of Lancaster and White Rose of York.
Henry VII made peace with France in 1492 and the war against Scotland was abandoned because of the Western Rebellion of 1497.
After forcibly removing Edward VI to Windsor Castle, with the intention of keeping him hostage, Somerset was removed from power by members of the council, led by his chief rival, John Dudley, the first Earl of Warwick, who created himself Duke of Northumberland shortly after his rise.
Monarchs were not anxious to publicize their descent in the paternal line from a Welsh adventurer, stressing instead continuity with the historic English and French royal families.
The next major uprising was in 1601, when Robert Devereux, the second Earl of Essex, attempted to raise the city of London against Elizabeth's government.
Her execution also marked the end of the Howard family's power within the court.
In 1571, the Protestant-turned-Catholic Thomas Howard, the fourth Duke of Norfolk, had plans to marry Mary, Queen of Scots, and then replace Elizabeth with Mary.
The first monarch, Henry VII, descended through his mother from a legitimised branch of the English royal House of Lancaster.
It is doubtful whether the Tudor kings used the name on the throne.
Henry, first enraged, threatened to torture her to death but later became overcome with grief and self-pity.
Capitalizing on the growing unpopularity of King Richard III of England, she was able to forge an alliance with discontented Yorkists in support of her son.
Henry of Bolingbroke for Henry IV or Henry of Monmouth for Henry V) was not followed.
This caused the Prayer Book Rebellion, in which groups of Cornish non-conformists gathered round the mayor.
The harp was later quartered into the royal arms.
Mary's reign, however, introduced a new coining system that would be used until the 18th century, and her marriage to Philip II created new trade routes for England.
However, her chief minister Sir Robert Cecil had corresponded with the Protestant King James VI of Scotland, son of Mary, Queen of Scots, and James's succession to the English throne was unopposed.
* Anne of the Thousand Days.
It is unclear how far Wolsey was actually responsible for the Reformation, but it is very clear that Henry's desire to marry Anne Boleyn precipitated the schism with the Church.
Even a schoolchild would be hard-pressed to mistake her for any other monarch.
Lord Protector Somerset was also losing favour.
Somerset led a large and well equipped army to Scotland, where he and the Scottish regent James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran, commanded their armies at the Battle of Pinkie Cleugh on 10 September 1547.
A revision of the Book of Common Prayer was published in 1552.
When Edward VI became ill in 1553, his advisers looked to the possible imminent accession of the Catholic Lady Mary, and feared that she would overturn all the reforms made during Edward's reign.
Mary's main goal was to restore the Catholic faith to England; however, the Marian Persecutions were unpopular with the Protestant majority of England, though naturally supported by the Catholic minority.
Despite the uncertainty of Elizabeth's – and therefore the Tudor's – hold on England, she never married.
During the examinations, she answered truthfully and boldly and all charges were dropped.
A scandal arose with her and the Lord Admiral to which she stood trial.
Even though Elizabeth was only twenty-five when she came to the throne, she was absolutely sure of her God-given place to be the queen and of her responsibilities as the 'handmaiden of the Lord'.
** The Other Boleyn Girl (2008 film)
It symbolized the Tudor's right to rule as well the uniting of the kingdom after the Wars of the Roses.
The plot was discovered, and Wyatt's supporters were hunted down and killed.
Despite Mary believing she was pregnant numerous times during her five-year reign, she never reproduced.
**Elizabeth: The Golden Age, 2007 sequel.
His victory was reinforced by his marriage to Elizabeth of York, daughter of King Edward IV, symbolically uniting the former warring factions under a new dynasty.
The progress to Northern/Roses government would thenceforth pass across the border into Scotland, in 1603, due not only to the civil warring, but also because the Tudors' own line was fragile and insecure, trying to reconcile the mortal enemies who had weakened England to the point of having to bow to new pressures, rather than dictate diplomacy on English terms.
Numerous suitors from nearly all European nations sent ambassadors to English court to put forward their suit.
She had been brought up by Blanche Herbert Lady Troy.
In Cornwall at the time, many of the people could only speak the Cornish language, so the uniform English Bibles and church services were not understood by many.
* Sandra Worth chronicles the origins of Tudor rule in her novel, ''The King's Daughter: A Novel of the First Tudor Queen'' (Penguin Group, December 2008).
The Tudor family rose to power in the wake of the Wars of the Roses, which left the House of Lancaster, to which the Tudors were aligned, extinct.
Henry VII was likely known as "Henry of Richmond" before his taking of the throne.
Tudor Portcullis Badge taken from their Beaufort ancestors
However, he never planned that Henry would marry Anne Boleyn, with whom the king had become enamoured while she was lady-in-waiting in Queen Catherine's household.
Whatever the circumstances were, the marriage failed, and Anne agreed to a peaceful annulment, assumed the title ''My Lady, the King's Sister'', and received a massive divorce settlement, which included Richmond Palace, Hever Castle, and numerous other estates across the country.
The Henry that many people picture when they hear his name is the Henry of his later years, when he became obese, volatile, and was known for his great cruelty.
Mary married Philip at Winchester Cathedral, on 25 July 1554.
In 1549, Edward ordered the publication of the Book of Common Prayer, containing the forms of worship for daily and Sunday church services.
His will had reinstated his daughters by his annulled marriages to Catherine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn to the line of succession, but did not legitimise them.
Queen Elizabeth has been in special favorite for filmmakers for generations.
Following the Coronation, two important Acts were passed through parliament: the Act of Uniformity and the Act of Supremacy, establishing the Protestant Church of England and creating Elizabeth Supreme Governor of the Church of England (''Supreme Head'', the title used by her father and brother, was seen as inappropriate for a woman ruler).
Crowned Harp of Ireland (Tudor Crown) showing the Tudors as Kings of Ireland.
Royal Roses Badge of England showing the red rose of Lancaster, the white rose of York, and the combined Tudor rose.
This name is sometimes given as ''Tewdwr'', the Welsh form of Theodore, but Modern Welsh ''Tudur'', Old Welsh ''Tutir'' is originally not a variant but a different and completely unrelated name, etymologically identical with Gaulish ''Toutorix'', from Proto-Celtic ''*toutā'' "people, tribe" and ''*rīxs'' "king" (compare Modern Welsh ''tud'' "territory" and ''rhi'' "king" respectively), corresponding to Germanic Theodoric.
Concerned for his young nephew's life, Jasper Tudor took Henry to Brittany for safety.
Wolsey visited Rome, where he hoped to get the Pope's consent for an annulment.
In 1570, Pope Pius V issued a Papal bull, ''Regnans in Excelsis'', excommunicating Elizabeth, and releasing her subjects from their allegiance to her.
He married Elizabeth of York to bring all factions together.
Thomas Seymour was arrested and beheaded on 20 March 1549.
Tudor Rose Uncrowned
Along with Henry's concern that he would not have an heir, it was also obvious to his court that he was becoming tired of his aging wife, who was six years older than he.
The city of London proved unwilling to rebel; Essex and most of his co-rebels were executed.
However, the popular support for the rightful successor Mary – even though she was Catholic – overruled Northumberland's plans, and Jane, who had never wanted to accept the crown, was deposed after just nine days.
Although many Catholics were loyal to Elizabeth, many also believed that, because Elizabeth was declared illegitimate after her parents' marriage was annulled, Mary was the strongest legitimate claimant.
The popularity of Elizabeth was extremely high, but her Privy Council, her Parliament and her subjects thought that the unmarried queen should take a husband; it was generally accepted that, once a queen regnant was married, the husband would relieve the woman of the burdens of head of state.
The controversial new book was not welcomed by either reformers or Catholic conservatives; it was especially condemned in Devon and Cornwall, where traditional Catholic loyalty was at its strongest.
Mary's supporters joined her in a triumphal procession to London, accompanied by her younger sister Elizabeth.
The Tudors are descended on Henry VII's mother's side from John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset, one of the illegitimate children of the 14th century English prince John of Gaunt (the third surviving son of Edward III of England) by Gaunt's long-term mistress Katherine Swynford.
In her determination to restore England to the Catholic faith and to secure her throne from Protestant threats, she had many Protestants burnt at the stake between 1555 and 1558.
Mary was executed at Fotheringay Castle on 8 February 1587, to the outrage of Catholic Europe.
* Elizabeth I (miniseries), 2005 television drama.
Despite his failure to produce the results that Henry wanted, Wolsey actively pursued the annulment — divorce was synonymous with annulment at that time.
However, the church was reluctant to rescind the earlier papal dispensation and felt heavy pressure from Catherine's nephew, Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, in support of his aunt.
Somerset aimed to unite England and Scotland by marrying Edward to the young Scottish queen Mary, and aimed to forcibly impose the English Reformation on the Church of Scotland.
This extended to Edward's elder sister, the daughter of Catherine of Aragon, Mary Tudor, who was a pious and devout Catholic.
In his younger years, Henry was described as a man of gentle friendliness, gentle in debate, and who acted as more of a companion than a king.
Catherine was removed from Court, and she spent the last three years of her life in various English houses under "protectorship," similar to house arrest.
One of the main concerns of Henry VII during his reign was the re-accumulation of the funds in the royal treasury.
Wolsey fell from favour as a result of his failure to procure the annulment, and Henry appointed Thomas Cromwell in his place.
When Elizabeth came to the throne, there was much apprehension among members of the council appointed by Mary, due to the fact that many of them (as noted by the Spanish ambassador) had participated in several plots against Elizabeth, such as her imprisonment in the Tower, trying to force her to marry a foreign prince and thereby sending her out of the realm, and even pushing for her death.
Also, without an heir, the Tudor line would end; the risk of civil war between rival claimants was a possibility if Elizabeth died childless.
Henry VII and Queen Elizabeth had several children, four of whom survived infancy: Arthur, Prince of Wales; Henry, Duke of Richmond; Margaret, who married James IV of Scotland; and Mary, who married Louis XII of France.
English author Charles Dickens stated that "as bloody Queen Mary this woman has become famous, and as Bloody Queen Mary she will ever be remembered with horror and detestation"
They also maintained the nominal English claim to the Kingdom of France; although none of them made substance of it, Henry VIII fought wars with France trying to reclaim that title.
Meanwhile, Edward was brought up as a strict and devout Protestant by numerous tutors, including Bishop Richard Cox, John Belmain, and Sir John Cheke.
Threats also came from abroad.
Kings and princes were not seen as needing a name, and a " 'Tudor' name for the royal family was hardly known in the sixteenth century.
Elizabeth made it clear that if they refused the oath the first time, they would have a second opportunity, after which, if the oath was not sworn, the offenders would be deprived of their offices and estates.
Nevertheless, the Beauforts remained closely allied with Gaunt's legitimate descendants from his first marriage, the House of Lancaster.
The marriage unified the warring houses of Lancaster and York and gave his children a strong claim to the throne.
Catherine, forced into a marriage to an unattractive, obese man over 30 years her senior, had never wanted to marry Henry, and conducted an affair with the King's favourite, Thomas Culpeper, while Henry and she were married.
Devastated that she rarely saw her husband, and anxious that she was not bearing an heir to Catholic England, Mary became bitter.
After her recovery, she appointed Dudley to the Privy Council and created him Earl of Leicester, in the hope that he would marry Mary, Queen of Scots.
By the time Henry conducted another Protestant marriage with his final wife Catherine Parr in 1543, the old Roman Catholic advisers, including the powerful third Duke of Norfolk, had lost all their power and influence.
* ''A Man for All Seasons'' a play by Robert Bolt produced for radio, television and stage.
Henry VIII tried to extend his father's balancing act between the dynasties for opportunistic interventionism in the Italian Wars, which had unfortunate consequences for his own marriages and the Papal States; the King furthermore tried to use similar tactics for the "via media" concept of Anglicanism.
