The industries located along the ship channel are a major cause of the city's air pollution.
Since the increase of oil prices in the 2000s, the petroleum industry has again increased its share of the local economy.
The Houston area has over 150 active faults (estimated to be 300 active faults) with an aggregate length of up to , including the Long Point–Eureka Heights fault system which runs through the center of the city.
The only other major publication to serve the city is the ''Houston Press''—a free alternative weekly with a weekly readership of more than 300,000.
Twenty-five foreign banks representing 13 nations operate in Houston, providing financial assistance to the international community.
At the 2000 Census,  1,953,631 people inhabited the city, and the population density was 3,371.7 people per square mile (1,301.8/km²).
Houston's mayor serves as the city's chief administrator, executive officer, and official representative, and is responsible for the general management of the city and for seeing that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
More heart surgeries are performed at the Texas Medical Center than anywhere else in the world.
Much of the city was built on forested land, marshes, swamp, or prairie which resembles the Deep South, and are all still visible in surrounding areas.
While not located in "Tornado Alley", like much of the rest of Texas, spring supercell thunderstorms sometimes bring tornadoes to the area.
Venues across Houston regularly host local and touring rock, blues, country, dubstep, and Tejano musical acts.
American Indians made up 0.7% of the population.
In 2006, the United States Department of Transportation named IAH the fastest-growing of the top ten airports in the United States.
In 2010, mining (which consists almost entirely of exploration and production of oil and gas in Houston) accounted for 26.3% of Houston's GAP up sharply in response to high energy prices and a decreased worldwide surplus of oil production capacity, followed by engineering services, health services, and manufacturing.
Most of Houston is located on the gulf coastal plain, and its vegetation is classified as temperate grassland and forest.
In 2008, Houston received top ranking on ''Kiplinger's Personal Finance'' Best Cities of 2008 list, which ranks cities on their local economy, employment opportunities, reasonable living costs, and quality of life.
In September 2008, Houston was hit by Hurricane Ike.
In June 2001, Tropical Storm Allison dumped up to  of rain on parts of Houston, causing the worst flooding in the city's history.
It is where one of the first—and still the largest—air emergency service, Life Flight, was created, and a very successful inter-institutional transplant program was developed.
Sam Houston Park contains restored and reconstructed homes which were originally built between 1823 and 1905.
Amtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service three times a week to Houston via the  (Los&nbsp;Angeles–New&nbsp;Orleans), which stops at a train station on the north side of the downtown area.
Hispanic or Latino (of any race)
The northwestern through northeastern parts of the city are served by various campuses of the Lone Star College System, while the southeastern portion of Houston is served by San Jacinto College, and a northeastern portion is served by Lee College.
The Theater District is a 17-block area in the center of downtown Houston that is home to the Bayou Place entertainment complex, restaurants, movies, plazas, and parks.
Houston has the largest number of bike commuters in Texas with over 160 miles of dedicated bikeways.
After the war, Houston's economy reverted to being primarily port-driven.
In 2012,  there was a 25 percent increase in ridership to 20,327 passengers embarking from the Houston Amtrak station.
By December of that same year, Houston-based energy company Enron collapsed into the third-largest ever U.S. bankruptcy during an investigation surrounding fabricated partnerships that were allegedly used to hide debt and inflate profits.
Within Hermann Park are the Houston Zoo and the Houston Museum of Natural Science.
They have won two NBA Championships: in 1994 and 1995 under star players Hakeem Olajuwon, Otis Thorpe, Clyde Drexler, Vernon Maxwell, and Kenny Smith.
Ronald Green is the city controller, serving his first term as of January 2010.
Land in some areas southeast of Houston is sinking because water has been pumped out of the ground for many years.
In 1983, the 71-floor, -tall Wells Fargo Plaza (formerly Allied Bank Plaza) was completed, becoming the second-tallest building in Houston and Texas.
The Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center stands on the George Bush Intercontinental Airport grounds.
The Houston Theater District, located downtown, is home to nine major performing arts organizations and six performance halls.
Much of its success as a petrochemical complex is due to its busy ship channel, the Port of Houston.
After five years, 80.5% of graduates are still living and working in the region.
Of the total population, 26% of those under the age of 18 and 14% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.
Males had a median income of $32,000 versus $27,000 for females.
Other nicknames often used by locals include "Bayou City", "Clutch City", "Magnolia City", "New Houston" (a tribute to the cultural contributions of New Orleans natives who left their city during the 2005 Hurricane Katrina catastrophe), and "H-Town".
Furthermore, Jankowski stated that "more than 100 foreign-owned companies relocated, expanded or started new businesses in Houston" between 2008 and 2010, and this openness to external business boosted job creation during a period when domestic demand was problematically low.
The Houston area is a leading center for building oilfield equipment.
Seventeen school districts exist within the city of Houston.
Recent snow events in Houston include a storm on December 24, 2004 when 1.0 in (2.5&nbsp;cm) of snow accumulated in parts of the metro area.
The Brown Shipbuilding Company was founded in 1942 to build ships for the U.S. Navy during World War II.
Both areas offer a picturesque view of Houston's multicultural makeup.
Beltway 8 encircles the city another  farther out.
While Houston has never been widely known for its music scene, Houston hip-hop has become a significant, independent music scene that is influential nationwide.
The Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land MSA's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2012 was $489&nbsp;billion, making it the fourth-largest of any metropolitan area in the United States and larger than Austria's, Venezuela's, or South Africa's GDP.
Houston has historically received an ample amount of rainfall, averaging about  annually per 1981–2010 normals.
The following year, oil discovered at the Spindletop oil field near Beaumont prompted the development of the Texas petroleum industry.
The Bayport Cruise Terminal on the Houston Ship Channel is port of call for both Princess Cruises and Norwegian Cruise Line.
Houston is home to 337 parks, including Hermann Park, Terry Hershey Park, Lake Houston Park, Memorial Park, Tranquility Park, Sesquicentennial Park, Discovery Green, and Sam Houston Park.
The great majority of slaves in Texas came with their owners from the older slave states.
Houston is one of few United States cities with permanent, professional, resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Houston Grand Opera), ballet (Houston Ballet), music (Houston Symphony Orchestra), and theater (The Alley Theatre, Theatre Under the Stars).
Houston's aviation history is showcased in the 1940 Air Terminal Museum located in the old terminal building on the west side of the airport.
Railroad spurs from the Texas inland converged in Houston, where they met rail lines to the ports of Galveston and Beaumont.
Houston attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions for a variety of interests.
The city controller and city council members are also subject to the same two-year, three-term limitations.
In 1900, after Galveston was struck by a devastating hurricane, efforts to make Houston into a viable deep-water port were accelerated.
Houston was granted incorporation on June 5, 1837, with James S. Holman becoming its first mayor.
African Americans formed a large part of the city's population, numbering 23,929 people, or nearly one-third of the residents.
In the early 1970s, Houston, Pasadena and several coastal towns were the site of the Houston Mass Murders, which at the time were the deadliest case of serial killing in American history.
Super Bowl LI is currently slated to be hosted in NRG Stadium in 2017.
The city also has over 200 additional green spaces—totaling over  that are managed by the city—including the Houston Arboretum and Nature Center.
Blacks or African Americans made up 25% of Houston's population.
Bush Intercontinental currently ranks fourth in the United States for non-stop domestic and international service with 182 destinations.
Foreign governments have established 92 consular offices in Houston's metropolitan area, the third-highest in the nation.
Houston is multicultural, in part because of its many academic institutions and strong industries, as well as being a major port city.
The October 2013 event was held using a tweaked version of the 2006–2007 course.
This was the largest urban evacuation in the history of the United States.
These faults also tend to move at a smooth rate in what is termed "fault creep", which further reduces the risk of an earthquake.
To cope with the strong humidity and heat, people use air conditioning in nearly every vehicle and building.
During the summer, temperatures commonly reach over , with an average of 106.5&nbsp;days per year, including a majority from June to September, with a high of  or above and 4.6 days at or over .
The tallest building in Uptown is the 64-floor, -tall, Philip Johnson and John Burgee designed landmark Williams Tower (known as the Transco Tower until 1999).
Houston's climate is classified as humid&nbsp;subtropical (''Cfa'' in the Köppen climate classification system), typical of the lower South.
The Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metropolitan area is served by one public television station and one public radio station.
Anderson Foundation formed the Texas Medical Center.
Additionally, more than one in five foreign-born residents are from Asia.
METRO is currently in the design phase of a 10-year expansion plan that will add five more lines.
TDECU Stadium is where the University of Houston Houston Cougars football team plays.
The Houston Community College System serves most of Houston.
Toyota Center also has the largest screen for an indoor arena in the United States built to coincide with the arena's hosting of the 2013 NBA All-Star Game.
In the same year, the city ranked second on the annual ''Fortune'' 500 list of company headquarters, first for ''Forbes'' magazine's  Best Cities for College Graduates, and first on their list of Best Cities to Buy a Home.
Other annual events include the Houston Greek Festival, Art Car Parade, the Houston Auto Show, the Houston International Festival, and the Bayou City Art Festival, which is considered to be one of the top five art festivals in the United States.
In 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt approved a $1&nbsp;million improvement project for the Houston Ship Channel.
Since 2000 more than 30 high-rise buildings have gone up in Houston; all told, 72 high-rises tower over the city, which adds up to about 8,300 units.
Three community college districts exist with campuses in and around Houston.
The space industry also suffered in 1986 after the Space Shuttle ''Challenger'' disintegrated shortly after launch.
In 2006, Houston's air quality was comparable to that of Los Angeles.
The Houston Texans are a National Football League  expansion team formed in 2002.
The thick, rich, sometimes black, surface soil is suitable for rice farming in suburban outskirts where the city continues to grow.
Economic gains of blacks who entered defense industries continued in the postwar years.
Of the 10 most populous U.S. cities, Houston has the most total area of parks and green space, .
Individuals from two or more races made up 3.3% of the city.
During the late 1970s, Houston had a population boom as people from the Rust Belt states moved to Texas in large numbers.
By 1890, Houston was the railroad center of Texas.
Regulations include mandatory lot size for single-family houses and requirements that parking be available to tenants and customers.
With the increase in professional jobs, Houston has become a destination for many college-educated persons, including African Americans in a reverse Great Migration from northern areas.
About 19% of the population and 16% of families were below the poverty line.
All 49 member institutions of the Texas Medical Center are non-profit organizations.
Houston is the most diverse city in Texas and has been described as the most diverse in the United States.
The increased production of the expanded shipbuilding industry during World War II spurred Houston's growth, as did the establishment in 1961 of NASA's "Manned Spacecraft Center" (renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in 1973).
A succession of skyscrapers was built throughout the 1970s—many by real estate developer Gerald D. Hines—culminating with Houston's tallest skyscraper, the 75-floor, -tall JPMorgan Chase Tower (formerly the Texas Commerce Tower), completed in 1982.
File:JPMorgan Chase Tower, Houston, Texas.jpg|JPMorgan Chase Tower in Houston, Texas is the tallest composite building in the world.
An estimated 400,000 undocumented immigrants reside in the Houston area.
It is the tallest structure in Texas, 15th tallest building in the United States, and the 85th-tallest skyscraper in the world, based on highest architectural feature.
The city has a population from various ethnic and religious backgrounds and a large and growing international community.
In the 1960s, Downtown Houston consisted of a collection of midrise office structures.
Another large celebration is the annual night-time Houston Pride Parade, held at the end of June.
The Houston Dynamo is a Major League Soccer  franchise that has been based in Houston since 2006 after it won two MLS Cup titles in 2006 and 2007.
In 1950, the availability of air conditioning provided impetus for many companies to relocate to Houston, where wages were lower than the North; this resulted in an economic boom and produced a key shift in the city's economy toward the energy sector.
It was founded in 1960 and is located in the Sharpstown area in Southwest Houston.
Beltway&nbsp;8 and its freeway core, the Sam Houston Tollway, form the middle loop at a diameter of roughly .
The Houston Rockets are a National Basketball Association  franchise based in the city since 1971.
The racial makeup of the city was 49.3% White, 25.3% African American, 6.3% Asian, 0.7% American Indian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 16.5% from some other race, and 3.1% from two or more races.
Localized flooding often occurs, owing to the extremely flat topography and widespread typical clay-silt prairie soils, which do not drain quickly.
It may be associated with slip along the faults; however, the slippage is slow and not considered an earthquake, where stationary faults must slip suddenly enough to create seismic waves.
In 2002, Uptown had more than 23&nbsp;million square feet (2,100,000&nbsp;m²) of office space with 16&nbsp;million square feet (1,500,000&nbsp;m²) of class A office space.
At-large council members represent the entire city.
The Menninger Clinic, a renowned psychiatric treatment center, is affiliated with Baylor College of Medicine and The Methodist Hospital System.
Many of them near the city worked on sugar and cotton plantations, while most of those in the city limits had domestic and artisan jobs.
The ward designation is the progenitor of the 11 current-day geographically oriented Houston City Council districts.
Located in the American South, Houston is a diverse city with a large and growing international community.
The Port of Houston ranks first in the United States in international waterborne tonnage handled and second in total cargo tonnage handled.
Houston is located  east of Austin,  west of the Louisiana border, and  south of Dallas.
Nicknamed the "Space City", Houston is a global city, with strengths in business, international trade, entertainment, culture, media, fashion, science, sports, technology, education, medicine, and research.
In 1997, Houstonians elected Lee P. Brown as the city's first African American mayor.
Some of the academic and research health institutions at the center include MD Anderson Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, UT Health Science Center, Memorial Hermann Hospital, The Methodist Hospital, Texas Children's Hospital, and University of Houston College of Pharmacy.
In 2006, the Houston metropolitan area ranked first in Texas and third in the U.S. within the category of "Best Places for Business and Careers" by ''Forbes'' magazine.
In August 1836, two real estate entrepreneurs from New York—Augustus Chapman Allen and John Kirby Allen—purchased  of land along Buffalo Bayou with the intent of founding a city.
Houston is also home to folk artists, art groups and various small progressive arts organizations.
In the same year, Houston became the county seat of Harrisburg County (now Harris County) and the temporary capital of the Republic of Texas.
The Houston area encompasses more than 300 private schools, many of which are accredited by Texas Private School Accreditation Commission recognized agencies.
In 2012, the Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land area recorded $110.3 billion in merchandise exports.
According to the 2010 Census, Whites made up 51% of Houston's population; 26% of the total population was non-Hispanic Whites.
The Scrap Yard Dawgs, a women's professional softball team, are expected to play in the National Pro Fastpitch from 2016.
Much of the city's wealthier areas vote Republican while the city's working class and minority areas vote Democratic.
Wet'n'Wild SplashTown is a water park located north of Houston.
The per capita income was $20,000.
In 1860, 49% of the city's population was enslaved.
The same study says that other religions (including Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism) collectively make up about 7% of the population
Such restrictions have had mixed results.
Individuals from some other race made up 15.2% of the city's population, of which 0.2% were non-Hispanic.
The second-largest commercial airport is William P. Hobby Airport (named Houston International Airport until 1967) which operates primarily short- to medium-haul domestic flights.
The Houston area is the top U.S. market for exports, surpassing New York City in 2013, according to data released by the U.S. Department of Commerce's International Trade Administration.
In the mid-20th century, Houston became the home of the Texas Medical Center—the world's largest concentration of healthcare and research institutions—and NASA's Johnson Space Center, where the Mission Control Center is located.
A few slaves, perhaps as many as 2,000 between 1835 and 1865, came through the illegal African trade.
In August 2005, Houston became a shelter to more than 150,000 people from New Orleans, who evacuated from Hurricane Katrina.
In the late 1980s, the city's economy suffered from the nationwide recession.
Prevailing winds are from the south and southeast during most of the year, which bring heat and moisture from the nearby Gulf of Mexico.
A new Bicycle sharing system known as Houston B-Cycle currently operates 29 different stations in downtown and neighboring areas
Houston's freeway system is monitored by Houston TranStar—a partnership of four government agencies that are responsible for providing transportation and emergency management services to the region.
The Houston Independent School District (HISD) is the seventh-largest school district in the United&nbsp;States.
Space Center Houston is the official visitors' center of NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.
71.7 percent of residents drive alone to work.
The city was named after former General Sam Houston, who was president of the Republic of Texas and had commanded and won at the Battle of San Jacinto  east of where the city was established.
Post-war Texas grew rapidly as migrants poured into the cotton lands; they also brought or purchased enslaved African Americans, whose numbers more than tripled in the state from 1850 to 1860, from 58,000 to 182,566.
The Space Center has many interactive exhibits including moon rocks, a shuttle simulator, and presentations about the history of NASA's manned space flight program.
With a census-estimated 2014 population of 2.239 million within a land area of , it also is the largest city in the Southern United States, as well as the seat of Harris&nbsp;County.
Located near the Museum District are The&nbsp;Menil&nbsp;Collection, Rothko Chapel, and the Byzantine Fresco Chapel Museum.
Thousands of enslaved African Americans lived near the city before the Civil War.
Rice, with a total enrollment of slightly more than 6,000 students, has a number of distinguished graduate programs and research institutes, such as the James A. Baker Institute for Public Policy.
The new 20-story Skanska building and BBVA Compass Plaza are the newest office buildings built in Uptown after 30&nbsp;years.
The Piney Woods are north of Houston.
and expand the current Red Line.
Due to the boom in defense jobs, thousands of new workers migrated to the city, both blacks and whites competing for the higher-paying jobs.
The museum houses the original Popemobile used by Pope John Paul II in the 1980s along with numerous hearses, embalming displays, and information on famous funerals.
The flatness of the local terrain, when combined with urban sprawl, has made flooding a recurring problem for the city.
The new residents came for numerous employment opportunities in the petroleum industry, created as a result of the Arab oil embargo.
The city's outlying areas, suburbs, and enclaves are located outside of the loop.
Houston is a home rule city and all municipal elections in the state of Texas are nonpartisan.
By 1930, Houston had become Texas' most populous city and Harris County the most populous county.
Black or African American
Houston Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises one NPR member station, KUHF (''KUHF News'').
Houston has mild winters in contrast to most areas of the United States.
The University of Houston&nbsp;System owns and holds broadcasting licenses to KUHT and KUHF.
Beneath the layers of sediment is a water-deposited layer of halite, a rock salt.
In addition to the Sam Houston Tollway loop mentioned above, the Harris County Toll Road Authority currently operates four spoke tollways: The Katy Managed Lanes of Interstate 10, the Hardy Toll Road, the Westpark Tollway, and the Fort Bend Parkway Extension.
Houston is considered to be a politically divided city whose balance of power often sways between Republicans and Democrats.
Houston has four major bayous passing through the city.
Houston was the headquarters of Continental Airlines until its 2010 merger with United Airlines with headquarters in Chicago; regulatory approval for the merger was granted in October of that year.
A cutback in some activities existed for a period.
The Baylor College of Medicine has annually been considered within the top ten medical schools in the nation; likewise, the MD Anderson Cancer Center has consistently ranked as one of the top two U.S. hospitals specializing in cancer care by ''U.S.
Of worthy mention are Houston's current Chinatown and the Mahatma Gandhi District.
The current mayor of Houston is Sylvester Turner, a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot.
Only 26 countries other than the United States have a gross domestic product exceeding Houston's regional gross area product (GAP).
By 1860, Houston had emerged as a commercial and railroad hub for the export of cotton.
Ellington Field, initially built during World War I, was revitalized as an advanced training center for bombardiers and navigators.
Centered on Post Oak Boulevard and Westheimer Road, the Uptown District boomed during the 1970s and early 1980s when a collection of midrise office buildings, hotels, and retail developments appeared along Interstate&nbsp;610 West.
Houston proper began to spread across the region.
METRO began light rail service on January 1, 2004, with the inaugural track ("Red&nbsp;Line") running about  from the University of  (UHD), which traverses through the Texas Medical Center and terminates at NRG Park.
Downtown was on the threshold of an energy industryled boom in 1970.
According to the 2005 Houston Area Survey, 68&nbsp;percent of non-Hispanic whites in Harris County are declared or favor Republicans while 89 percent of non-Hispanic blacks in the area are declared or favor Democrats.
The burgeoning port and railroad industry, combined with oil discovery in 1901, has induced continual surges in the city's population.
Bayou Place is a large multilevel building containing full-service restaurants, bars, live music, billiards, and Sundance Cinema.
As it pushed upward, the salt dragged surrounding sediments into salt dome formations, often trapping oil and gas that seeped from the surrounding porous sands.
Buffalo Bayou runs through downtown and the Houston Ship Channel, and has three tributaries: White Oak Bayou, which runs through the Houston&nbsp;Heights community northwest of Downtown and then towards Downtown; Brays Bayou, which runs along the Texas Medical Center; and Sims Bayou, which runs through the south of Houston and downtown Houston.
At the time of construction, it was believed to be the world's tallest skyscraper outside of a central business district.
Facilities in the Theater District include the Jones Hall—home of the Houston Symphony Orchestra and Society for the Performing Arts—and the Hobby Center for the Performing Arts.
