While directing ''The Outlaw'', Hughes became fixated on a small flaw in one of Jane Russell's blouses, claiming that the fabric bunched up along a seam and gave the appearance of two nipples on each breast.
The man asked for a ride to Las Vegas.
The two had not lived together for many years.
In 1947, Howard Hughes was summoned to testify before the Senate War Investigating Committee to explain why the H-4 development had been so troubled, and why the F-11 had resulted in only two prototypes after $22 million spent.
Upon assuming ownership, Hughes was prohibited by federal law from building his own aircraft.
The Desert Inn ended up distributing free banana nut ice cream to casino customers for a year.
His average ground speed over the flight was .
Later, when Tierney's daughter Daria was born deaf and blind and with a severe learning disability, because of Tierney's being exposed to rubella during her pregnancy, Hughes saw to it that Daria received the best medical care and paid all expenses.
He reportedly wrote a detailed memorandum to the crew on how to fix the problem.
He also retained Jane Russell's contract.
The original will, that included payments to aides, never surfaced, and was apparently in a home surrounding the Desert Inn Golf Course, belonging to the mother of an assistant.
Originally known as Summa Corporation, The Howard Hughes Corporation was formed in 1972 when the oil tools business of Hughes Tool Company, then owned by Howard Hughes Jr., was floated on the New York Stock Exchange under the Hughes Tool name.
(The Hercules is no longer the longest or heaviest aircraft ever built; both of those titles are currently held by the Antonov An-225 ''Mriya''.)
Hughes was deeply involved in the American real estate industry where he amassed vast holdings of undeveloped land both in Las Vegas and in the desert surrounding the city that had gone unused during his lifetime.
When the tests finally went through despite Hughes' efforts, the detonations were powerful enough that the entire hotel where he was staying trembled with the shock waves.
He played frequently with top players, including Gene Sarazen.
It earned nearly $8 million, about double the production and advertising costs.
He stayed in the studio's darkened screening room for more than four months, never leaving.
It has particularly emphasized capabilities in high performance integrated circuits, high power lasers, antennas, networking, and smart materials.
Hughes reportedly walked away from RKO having made $6.5&nbsp;million in personal profit.
An unusual incident marked an earlier Hughes connection to Las Vegas: during his 1954 engagement at the Last Frontier hotel in Las Vegas, flamboyant entertainer Liberace mistook Howard Hughes for his lighting director, instructing him to instantly bring up a blue light should he start to play ''Clair de lune''.
In 1953, Howard Hughes gave all his stock in the Hughes Aircraft Company to the newly formed Howard Hughes Medical Institute, thereby turning the aerospace and defense contractor into a tax-exempt charitable organization.
The result was the revolutionary Constellation and TWA purchased the first 40 of the new airliners off the production line.
In a 1996 interview, ex–Howard Hughes communicator Robert Maheu said, "There is a rumor that there is still some banana nut ice cream left in the freezer.
Much of his fortune was later used for philanthropic causes, notably towards health care and medical research.
Hughes left his entire estate, in his last will, and according to his senior counsel (Frank P. Morse), to the Hughes Medical Institute, as he had no connection to family and was seriously ill.
In one year, Hughes spent an estimated $11&nbsp;million at the hotel.
Six months later, Hughes sold the studio to the General Tire and Rubber Company for $25&nbsp;million.
He was an indifferent student, with a liking for mathematics, flying, and mechanics.
On July 16, 1936, Hughes was held blameless by a coroner's jury at the inquest into Meyer's death.
Morse ordered the pilots to announce Hughes' death once they entered U.S. airspace.
After Hughes left the Desert Inn, hotel employees discovered his drapes had not been opened in the nine years he lived there, and had rotted through.
On June 1, 1925, he married Ella Botts Rice, daughter of David Rice and Martha Lawson Botts of Houston.
Hughes attempted to save the aircraft by landing it at the Los Angeles Country Club golf course, but just seconds before reaching the course, the XF-11 started to drop dramatically and crashed in the Beverly Hills neighborhood surrounding the country club.
This was the last time in history that the world airspeed record was set in an aircraft built by a private individual.
Air West had been formed in 1968 by the merger of Bonanza Air Lines, Pacific Air Lines and West Coast Airlines, all of which operated in the western U.S.  By the late 1970s, Hughes Airwest operated an all-jet fleet of Boeing 727-200, Douglas DC-9-10, and McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30 jetliners serving an extensive route network in the western U.S. with flights to Mexico and western Canada as well.
Richard Fleischer, who directed ''His Kind of Woman'' with Hughes as executive producer, wrote at length in his autobiography about the difficulty of dealing with the tycoon.
A 1941 affidavit birth certificate of Hughes that was signed by his aunt Annette Gano Lummis and Estelle Boughton Sharp states that he was born on December 24, 1905, in Harris County, Texas.
In 1953, Hughes was involved with a high profile lawsuit as part of the settlement of the ''United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc.'' Antitrust Case.
His hair, beard, fingernails, and toenails were long—his tall  frame now weighed barely , and the FBI had to use fingerprints to conclusively identify the body.
After his death in 1976, many thought that the balance of Hughes' estate would go to the institute, although it was ultimately divided among his cousins and other heirs, given the lack of a will to the contrary.
In 1933, Hughes purchased unseen the ''Rover'', a luxury steam yacht previously owned by British shipping magnate Lord Inchcape.
On July 14, 1938, Hughes set another record by completing a flight around the world in just 91 hours (3 days, 19 hours, 17 minutes), beating the previous record set in 1933 by Wiley Post in a single engine Lockheed Vega by almost four days.
Before Hughes' removal, the TWA jet financing issue precipitated the end of Hughes' relationship with Noah Dietrich.
Hughes suffered a severe gash on the top of his head when he hit the upper control panel and had to be rescued by one of the others on board.
Hughes did not insist on a confidentiality agreement from Peters as a condition of the divorce.
Meier, in collaboration with former Vice President of the United States Hubert Humphrey and others, wanted to feed misinformation to the Nixon campaign.
The recovery plan used the special-purpose salvage vessel ''Glomar Explorer''.
At Rogers Airport in Los Angeles, he learned to fly from pioneer aviators, including Moye Stephens.
The Sikorsky crashed into Lake Mead, killing CAA inspector Ceco Cline and Hughes employee Richard Felt.
Hughes had a good relationship with Lockheed since they had built the aircraft he used in his record flight around the world in 1938.
As he lay in his hospital bed, he decided that he did not like the bed's design.
"I have never seen the ''Rover'' but bought it on the blue prints, photographs and the reports of Lloyd's surveyors.
His parents were Howard R. Hughes Sr., a successful inventor and businessman from Missouri of English descent, and Allene Stone Gano.
While he had previously been relatively obscure despite his wealth, being better known for dating Katharine Hepburn, New York City now gave Hughes a ticker-tape parade in the Canyon of Heroes.
In two separate, last-ditch maneuvers, Hughes instructed his representatives to offer million-dollar bribes to both presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard Nixon.
During and after World War II, Hughes fashioned his company into a major defense contractor.
After the screening room incident, Hughes moved into a bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel where he also rented rooms for his aides, his wife, and numerous girlfriends.
Hughes dated many famous women, many of them decades younger, including Billie Dove, Faith Domergue, Bette Davis, Ava Gardner, Olivia de Havilland, Katharine Hepburn, Ginger Rogers, Rita Hayworth and Gene Tierney.
To inject codeine into his muscles, Hughes had used glass syringes with metal needles that easily became detached.
Hughes was in extremely poor physical condition at the time of his death.
The couple met in the 1940s, before Peters became a film actress.
Hughes was a lifelong aircraft enthusiast and pilot.
The red brick house where Hughes lived as a teenager at 3921 Yoakum St., Houston today serves as the headquarters of the Theology Department of the University of St. Thomas.
On January 12, 1957, Hughes married actress Jean Peters.
The project was opposed by the military services, thinking it would siphon resources from higher priority programs, but was advocated by Hughes' powerful allies in Washington, D.C. After disputes, Kaiser withdrew from the project and Hughes elected to continue it as the H-4 Hercules.
He had not bathed nor cut his hair and nails for weeks, although this may have been due to allodynia (pain response to stimuli that would normally not cause pain).
The weather conditions at the lake during the day were ideal and he enjoyed Las Vegas at night.
As Hughes wrote in a memo to an aide, "I like to think of Las Vegas in terms of a well-dressed man in a dinner jacket and a beautifully jeweled and furred female getting out of an expensive car."
On November 24, 1966 (Thanksgiving Day), Hughes arrived in Las Vegas by railroad car and moved into the Desert Inn.
In 1929 Hughes' wife, Ella, returned to Houston and filed for divorce.
On May 17, 1943, Hughes flew the Sikorsky from California carrying two CAA aviation inspectors, two of his employees and actress Ava Gardner.
He bought the small Silver Slipper casino just so he could have its trademark neon silver slipper moved.
Howard Sr.'s will had not been updated since Allene's death, and Hughes inherited 75 percent of the family fortune.
For Howard Hughes, this was the virtual end of his 25-year involvement in the motion picture industry.
The prototype was brought to Harper's Dry Lake California in great secrecy in 1943 and first flew on June 20 of that year.
A steady stream of lawsuits from RKO's minority shareholders had grown to be extremely annoying to Hughes.
After receiving a call, his senior counsel, Frank P. Morse, ordered his staff to get his body on a plane and return him to the United States.
It is primarily involved in aerospace and defense, electronics, mass media, manufacturing, and hospitality industries, but has maintained a strong presence in a wide variety of industries including real estate, petroleum drilling and oilfield services, consulting, entertainment, and mining.
An oft-told story said that Hughes sent a check to the Marine weekly for the remainder of his life as a sign of gratitude.
Hughes retained the rights to pictures that he had personally produced, including those made at RKO.
The Hercules flew only once for one mile (1.6&nbsp;km), and  above the water, with Hughes at the controls, on November 2, 1947.
He placed ownership of the restaurants with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and all licenses were resold shortly after.
He had no desire to leave any money to family, aides, churches, including William Gay and Frank Morse.
Hughes was so reclusive that he did not immediately publicly refute Irving's statement, leading many to believe the Irving book was genuine.
This may have been because Hughes found the touch of clothing painful due to his allodynia.
Dietrich agreed to go to Texas to implement the plan on the condition that Hughes agreed to a capital gains arrangement he had long promised Dietrich.
In 1948, Hughes created a new division of the company, the Hughes Aerospace Group.
A combination of Boeing, GM and Raytheon acquired the Hughes Research Laboratories, where it focused on advanced developments in microelectronics, information & systems sciences, materials, sensors, and photonics; their workspace spans from basic research to product delivery.
On July 11, 1936, Hughes struck and killed a pedestrian named Gabriel S. Meyer with his car, at the corner of 3rd Street and Lorraine in Los Angeles.
Another portion of Hughes' business interests lay in aviation, airlines, and the aerospace and defense industries.
Hughes sustained significant injuries in the crash, including a crushed collar bone, multiple cracked ribs, crushed chest with collapsed left lung, shifting his heart to the right side of the chest cavity, and numerous third-degree burns.
William L. Durkin, who happened to be in the area visiting friends.
Hughes extended his financial empire to include Las Vegas real estate, hotels and media outlets, spending an estimated $300 million, and using his considerable powers to take-over many of the well known hotels, especially the organized crime connected venues.
He suffered from malnutrition.
They put in a request for the smallest amount the company could provide for a special order, 200 gallons (750 L), and had it shipped from Los Angeles.
Within weeks of acquiring the studio, Hughes dismissed three-quarters of the work force and production was shut down for six months during which time investigations were conducted of each employee who remained with RKO as far as their political leanings were concerned.
This was especially true of the women who were under contract to RKO at that time.
According to his obituary in the ''New York Times'', Hughes never bothered to come to Washington to pick up the Congressional Gold Medal, which was eventually mailed to him.
Hughes was concerned about the risk from residual nuclear radiation, and attempted to halt the tests.
First making a name for himself as a film producer, he then became an influential figure in the aviation industry.
However, Durkin's daughter denied that he took any money for the rescue.
Visible from Hughes' bedroom, it apparently had kept him up at night.
Hughes' involvement provided the CIA with a plausible cover story, having to do with civilian marine research at extreme depths and the mining of undersea manganese nodules.
It is most likely true."
"Noah", Dietrich quoted Hughes as replying, "I cannot exist without you!"
Gay has devoted his life to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
In 1977, ''The Hoax'' by Clifford Irving was published in the United Kingdom, telling his story of these events.
A witness to the accident told police that Hughes was driving erratically and too fast, and that Meyer had been standing in the safety zone of a streetcar stop.
Hughes enjoyed a highly successful business career beyond engineering, aviation, and filmmaking, though many of his career endeavors involved varying entrepreneurial roles.
They had accused him with financial misconduct and corporate mismanagement.
However, before the book's publication Hughes finally denounced Irving in a teleconference and the entire project was eventually exposed as a hoax.
It was common that foreign countries would hold a corpse as ransom so that an estate could not be settled.
The collection consists of over 200 items including 35mm and 16mm elements of feature films, documentaries, and television programs made or accumulated by Hughes.
The H-1 Racer was donated to the Smithsonian in 1975 and is on display at the National Air and Space Museum.
By the time of the coroner's inquiry, however, the witness had changed his story and claimed that Meyer had moved directly in front of Hughes' car.
Hughes nodded in compliance—but the hotel's entertainment director arrived and introduced Hughes to Liberace.
Dropping him off at the Sands Hotel, Dummar said the man told him he was Hughes.
During the 1960s and early 1970s, he disapproved of underground nuclear testing at the Nevada Test Site.
Hughes insisted on using tissues to pick up objects to insulate himself from germs.
X-rays revealed five broken-off hypodermic needles in the flesh of his arms.
''Hell's Angels'' received one Academy Award nomination for Best Cinematography.
In 1953, Hughes launched the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Miami, Florida, and currently located in Chevy Chase, Maryland, formed with the expressed goal of basic biomedical research, including trying to understand, in Hughes' words, the "genesis of life itself," due to his lifelong interest in science and technology.
In 1938, the William P. Hobby Airport in Houston, Texas&mdash;known at the time as Houston Municipal Airport&mdash;was renamed after Hughes, but the name was changed back after people objected to naming the airport after a living person.
Other accounts indicate that he died on the flight from Freeport, Grand Bahama, to Houston.
In 1939, at the urging of Jack Frye, president of '''Trans World Airlines''' ('''TWA'''), Hughes quietly purchased a majority share of TWA stock for nearly $7&nbsp;million and took control of the airline.
Howard Hughes Sr. died of a heart attack in 1924.
Hughes told reporters outside the inquiry, "I was driving slowly and a man stepped out of the darkness in front of me."
Hughes dropped Gardner off in Las Vegas and proceeded to Lake Mead to conduct qualifying tests in the S-43.
He had gained near-total control of RKO by the end of 1954 at a cost of nearly $24&nbsp;million, becoming the closest thing to a sole owner of a Hollywood studio seen in three decades.
He quickly became one of the most powerful men in Las Vegas.
In 1970, Hughes went back into the airline business, buying San Francisco-based '''Air West''' and renaming it '''Hughes Airwest.'''
'''Howard Robard Hughes Jr.''' (December 24, 1905 – April 5, 1976) was an American entrepreneur, known during his life as one of the most financially successful individuals in the world.
He repeatedly claimed that his birthday was on Christmas Eve.
Hughes Airwest was then acquired by and merged into Republic Airlines (1979–1986) in late 1980.
In 1968, the Hughes Tool Company purchased the North Las Vegas Air Terminal.
Allene Hughes died in March 1922 from complications of an ectopic pregnancy.
In 1956, Hughes placed an order for 63 Convair 880s for TWA at a cost of $400&nbsp;million.
Aides reported that Hughes never spoke ill of her.
Between 1966 and 1968, he bought several other hotel-casinos—including the Castaways, New Frontier, the Landmark Hotel and Casino, and the Sands.
In 1984, Hughes' estate paid an undisclosed amount to Terry Moore, who claimed she and Hughes had secretly married on a yacht in international waters off Mexico in 1949, and never divorced.
My experience is that the English are the most honest race in the world."
He wrote detailed memos to his aides giving them explicit instructions not to look at him nor speak to him unless spoken to.
Meier told Donald that he was sure the Democrats would win the election because Larry O'Brien had a great deal of information on Richard Nixon's illicit dealings with Howard Hughes that had never been released; O'Brien didn't actually have any such information, but Meier wanted Nixon to think he did.
Hughes then attempted to get the military to pay for the development of the D-2.
Peters requested a lifetime alimony payment of $70,000 a year, adjusted for inflation, and waived all claims to Hughes' estate.
When the XF-11 finally came to a halt after destroying three houses, the fuel tanks exploded, setting fire to the aircraft and a nearby home at 808 North Whittier Drive, owned by Lt Col. Charles E. Meyer.
In his 1971 book, ''Howard: The Amazing Mr. Hughes'', Dietrich said that Hughes genuinely liked and respected Jane Russell, but never sought romantic involvement with her.
Hughes wanted to change the image of Las Vegas to something more glamorous.
Hughes was booked on suspicion of negligent homicide and held overnight in jail until his attorney, Neil McCarthy, obtained a writ of habeas corpus for his release pending a coroner's inquest.
This is contrary to the many wills that have surfaced after his death.
He was en route from his penthouse at the Acapulco Fairmont Princess Hotel in Mexico to the Methodist Hospital in Houston, Texas.
A year and a half later, on January 19, 1937, flying the same H-1 Racer fitted with longer wings, Hughes set a new transcontinental airspeed record by flying non-stop from Los Angeles to Newark in 7 hours, 28 minutes and 25 seconds (beating his own previous record of 9 hours, 27 minutes).
Such reports were confirmed by actor Max Showalter, who became a close friend of Peters while shooting ''Niagara'' (1953).
Unsure if the will was genuine, and unsure of what to do, Dummar left the will at the LDS Church office.
He subsequently moved into the Penthouse at the Xanadu Princess Resort on Grand Bahama Island, which he had recently purchased.
Hughes was involved in a near-fatal aircraft accident on July 7, 1946, while performing the first flight of the prototype U.S. Army Air Forces reconnaissance aircraft, the XF-11, near Hughes airfield at Culver City, California.
The two maintained a professional and private friendship for many years.
Hughes rarely played competitively, and gradually gave up his passion for the sport to pursue other interests.
As a maverick film tycoon, Hughes gained prominence in Hollywood from the late 1920s, making big-budget and often controversial films like ''The Racket'' (1928), ''Hell's Angels'' (1930), ''Scarface'' (1932), and ''The Outlaw'' (1943).
Hughes had spent a total of $300&nbsp;million on his many properties in Las Vegas.
Hughes designed a special bra for his leading lady, although Russell decided against wearing it.
Lockheed agreed to Hughes and Frye's request that the new aircraft be built in secrecy.
Originally from Mystic, Iowa, Albert I Lodwick provided excellent organizational skills as his flight operations manager which directly contributed to Hughes' record breaking flight.
Hughes once became fond of Baskin-Robbins' banana nut ice cream, so his aides sought to secure a bulk shipment for him—only to discover that Baskin-Robbins had discontinued the flavor.
Russell (who was married at the time) refused him, and Hughes promised it would never happen again.
In 1966, a U.S. federal court forced Hughes to sell his TWA shares because of concerns over conflict of interest between his ownership of both TWA and Hughes Aircraft.
Hughes, however, believed that neither miracle nor modern medicine contributed to his recovery, instead asserting the natural life-giving properties of fresh squeezed orange juice were responsible.
Peters would state only that she had not seen Hughes for several years before their divorce and had only dealt with him by phone.
In 1952, an abortive sale to a Chicago-based group with no experience in the industry also disrupted studio operations at RKO even further.
There, his body was received by Dr. Jack Titus.
Hughes was reported to have died on April 5, 1976, at 1:27&nbsp;p.m. on board an aircraft owned by Robert Graf and piloted by Jeff Abrams.
Hughes was living in the Intercontinental Hotel near Lake Managua in Nicaragua, seeking privacy and security, when a magnitude 6.5 earthquake damaged Managua in December 1972.
A few days after the order arrived, Hughes announced he was tired of banana nut and wanted only chocolate marshmallow ice cream.
Hughes entered the entertainment industry after dropping out of Rice University and moving to Los Angeles.
The test flight did not go well.
Because he refused to leave the hotel, and to avoid further conflicts with the owners, Hughes bought the Desert Inn in early 1967.
While his kidneys were damaged, his other internal organs, including his brain, were deemed perfectly healthy.
The Summa Corporation was the name adopted for the business interests of Howard Hughes after he sold the tool division of Hughes Tool Company in 1972.
Dummar then claimed that days after Hughes' death, a "mysterious man" appeared at his gas station, leaving an envelope containing the will on his desk.
It was built in Hughes' Westchester, California facility.
A further $156&nbsp;million was endowed to a gas-station owner named Melvin Dummar, who told reporters that late one evening in December 1967, he found a disheveled and dirty man lying along U.S. Highway 95,  north of Las Vegas.
The H-1 Racer is thought to have influenced the design of a number of World War II fighters such as the Mitsubishi Zero, the Focke-Wulf Fw 190 and the F8F Bearcat; although that has never been reliably confirmed.
If Hughes felt that his stars did not properly represent the political views of his liking or if a film's anti-communist politics were not sufficiently clear, he pulled the plug.
Dietrich stood firm and eventually had to sue to retrieve personal possessions from his office after Hughes ordered it locked.
In 1947, after the U.S. Government rejected his massive H-4 Hercules, Hughes, who had suffered a near-fatal aircraft crash in 1946, told his aides that he wanted to screen some movies at a film studio near his home.
Hughes also had a role in the design and financing of both the Boeing 307 Stratoliner and Lockheed L-049 Constellation.
Beyond extending his business prowess in the manufacturing, aviation, entertainment, and hospitality industries, Hughes was a successful real estate investor.
Initially staying in the Desert Inn, Hughes refused to vacate his room, and instead decided to purchase the entire hotel.
General Tire was interested mainly in exploiting the value of the RKO library for television programming even though it made some attempts to continue producing films.
As a precaution, Hughes moved to the Nicaraguan National Palace and stayed there as a guest of Anastasio Somoza Debayle before leaving for Florida on a private jet the following day.
In 1997, General Motors sold Hughes Aircraft to Raytheon and in 2000, sold Hughes Space & Communications to Boeing.
In 1960, Hughes was ultimately forced out of TWA, although he owned 78% of the company and battled to regain control.
Only after ensuring that the stars under contract to RKO had no Communist affiliations would Hughes approve completed pictures to be sent back for re-shooting.
Hughes renamed the yacht ''Southern Cross'' and later sold her to Swedish entrepreneur Axel Wenner-Gren.
A subsequent autopsy recorded kidney failure as the cause of death.
The Howard Hughes Medical Institute sold Hughes Aircraft in 1985 to General Motors for $5.2 billion.
Hughes is buried in the Glenwood Cemetery in Houston, Texas, next to his parents.
The court rejected suits by the states of California and Texas that claimed they were owed inheritance tax.
The birthplace of Howard Hughes is recorded as either Humble or Houston, Texas.
