Huguenot regiments fought for William of Orange in the Williamite war in Ireland, for which they were rewarded with land grants and titles, many settling in Dublin.
By the time Louis XIV of France revoked the Edict of Nantes, Huguenots accounted for 800,000 to 1 million people.
Others refugees practised the variety of occupations necessary to sustain the community as distinct from the indigenous population.
Henry of Navarre and the House of Bourbon allied with the Huguenots, adding wealth and holdings to the Protestant strength.
Nearby villages are Hengoed, and Ystrad Mynach.
That included Languedoc-Roussillon, Gascony and even streched into the Dauphiné.
They established a major weaving industry in and around Spitalfields (see Petticoat Lane and the Tenterground) in East London.
The Edict simultaneously protected Catholic interests by discouraging the founding of new Protestant churches in Catholic-controlled regions.
In relative terms, this was one of the largest waves of immigration ever of a single ethnic community to Britain.
Persecution of Protestants diminished in France after 1724, finally ending with the Edict of Versailles, commonly called the Edict of Tolerance, signed by Louis XVI in 1787.
A couple of ships with around 500 people arrived at the Guanabara Bay, present-day Rio de Janeiro, and settled in a small island.
Those Huguenots who stayed in France became Catholics and were called "new converts".
Then he imposed penalties, closed Huguenot schools and excluded them from favoured professions.
Their descendants in many families continued to use French first names and surnames for their children well into the nineteenth century.
The house derives its name from a weaving school which was moved there in the last years of the 19th century, reviving an earlier use.)
After petitioning the British Crown in 1697 for the right to own land in the Baronies, they prospered as slave owners on the Cooper, Ashepoo, Ashley and Santee River plantations they purchased from the British Landgrave Edmund Bellinger.
But the light of the Gospel has made them vanish, and teaches us that these spirits were street-strollers and ruffians.
A group of Huguenots was part of the French colonisers who arrived in Brazil in 1555 to found ''France Antarctique''.
The persecution and flight of the Huguenots greatly damaged the reputation of Louis XIV abroad, particularly in England.
Many of the farms in the Western Cape province in South Africa still bear French names.
Some Huguenot immigrants settled in Central and Eastern Pennsylvania, such as Philip Woodring born 1741 in Alsace, France, and died 1819 in Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
Approximately one million Protestants in modern France represent some 2% of its population.
A series of three small civil wars known as the Huguenot rebellions broke out, mainly in southwestern France, between 1621 and 1629. revolted against royal authority.
The church was eventually replaced by a third, Trinity-St. Paul's Episcopal Church, which contains heirlooms including the original bell from the French Huguenot Church "Eglise du St. Esperit" on Pine Street in New York City, which is preserved as a relic in the tower room.
They were very successful at marriage and property speculation.
Overall, Huguenot presence was heavily concentrated in the western and southern portions of the French kingdom, as nobles there secured practise of the new faith.
They purchased from John Pell, Lord of Pelham Manor, a tract of land consisting of six thousand one hundred acres with the help of Jacob Leisler.
In the Dutch-speaking North of France, Bible students who gathered in each other's houses to study secretly were called ''Huis Genooten'' ('housemates') while on the Swiss and German borders they were termed ''Eid Genossen,'' or 'oath fellows,' that is, persons bound to each other by an oath.
The Huguenot cemetery, or "Huguenot Burial Ground", has since been recognised as a historic cemetery that is the final resting place for a wide range of the Huguenot founders, early settlers and prominent citizens dating back more than three centuries.
I'll say a word about it to settle the doubts of those who have strayed in seeking its origin.
War at home again precluded a resupply mission, and the colony struggled.
Stadtholder William III of Orange, who later became King of England, emerged as the strongest opponent of king Louis XIV after the French attacked the Dutch Republic in 1672.
Protestant preachers rallied a considerable army and a formidable cavalry, which came under the leadership of Admiral Gaspard de Coligny.
They also settled elsewhere in Kent, particularly Sandwich, Faversham and Maidstone—towns in which there used to be refugee churches.
The Society has chapters in numerous states, with the one in Texas being the largest.
The kingdom did not fully recover for years.
By 1562, the estimated number of Huguenots peaked at approximately two million, concentrated mainly in the southern and central parts of France, compared to approximately sixteen million Catholics during the same period.
Following the accidental death of Henry II in 1559, his son succeeded as King Francis II along with his wife, the Queen Consort, also known as Mary Queen of Scots.
In World War II, Huguenots led by André Trocmé in the village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon in Cévennes helped save many Jews.
In 1705, Amsterdam and the area of West Frisia were the first areas to provide full citizens rights to Huguenot immigrants, followed by the Dutch Republic in 1715.
In addition, a dense network of Protestant villages permeated the rural montainous region of the Cevennes.
The rebellions were implacably suppressed by the French Crown.
It precipitated civil bloodshed, ruined commerce, and resulted in the illegal flight from the country of hundreds of thousands of Protestants, many of whom became intellectuals, doctors and business leaders in Britain as well as Holland, Prussia, and South Africa.
By 1620 the Huguenots were on the defensive, and the government increasingly applied pressure.
The first Huguenots to leave France sought freedom from persecution in Switzerland and the Netherlands.
Since the Huguenots had political and religious goals it was commonplace to refer to the Calvinists as "Huguenots of religion" and those who opposed the monarchy as "Huguenots of the state", who were mostly nobles.
It proved disastrous to the Huguenots and costly for France.
In 1564, Ribault's former lieutenant René Goulaine de Laudonnière launched a second voyage to build a colony; he established Fort Caroline in what is now Jacksonville, Florida.
During this time, their opponents first dubbed the Protestants ''Huguenots''; but they called themselves ''reformés'', or "Reformed".
Huguenot refugees flocked to Shoreditch, London.
The Huguenot population of France dropped to 856,000 by the mid-1660s, of which a plurality lived in rural areas.
Louise de Coligny, daughter of the murdered Huguenot leader Gaspard de Coligny, married William the Silent, leader of the Dutch (Calvinist) revolt against Spanish (Catholic) rule.
The Gallicans briefly achieved independence for the French church, on the principle that the religion of France could not be controlled by the Bishop of Rome, a foreign power.
They lived on the Atlantic coast in La Rochelle, and spread across provinces of Normandy and Poitou.
In what became known as the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre of 24 August – 3 October 1572, Catholics killed thousands of Huguenots in Paris.
The new teaching attracted sizeable portions of the nobility and urban bourgeoisie.
Following this exodus, Huguenots remained in large numbers in only one region of France: the rugged Cévennes region in the south.
Three hundred refugees were granted asylum at the court of George William, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg in Celle.
On 31 December 1687 the first organised group of Huguenots set sail from the Netherlands to the Dutch East India Company post at the Cape of Good Hope.
It is now an official symbol of the ''Église des Protestants réformés'' (French Protestant church).
One of the most prominent Huguenot refugees in the Netherlands was Pierre Bayle.
The country had a long history of struggles with the papacy by the time the Protestant Reformation finally arrived.
Gradually they intermarried with their English neighbours.
A fort, named Fort Coligny, was built to protect them from attack from the Portuguese troops and Brazilian Native Americans.
In this last connection, the name could suggest the derogatory inference of superstitious worship; popular fancy held that ''Huguon,'' the gate of King Hugo, was haunted by the ghost of ''le roi Huguet'' (regarded by Roman Catholics as an infamous scoundrel) and other spirits, who instead of being in Purgatory came back to harm the living at night.
Elie Prioleau from the town of Pons in France, was among the first to settle there.
Hundreds of French soldiers were stranded and surrendered to the numerically inferior Spanish forces led by Pedro Menendez.
When Paul Roux, a pastor who arrived with the main group of Huguenots, died in 1724, the Dutch administration, as a special concession, permitted another French cleric to take his place "for the benefit of the elderly who spoke only French".
The French Huguenot Church of Charleston, which remains independent, is the oldest continuously active Huguenot congregation in the United States.
While this and the many other theories offer their own measure of plausibility, attesting at least to the wit of later partisans and historians, "no one of the several theories advanced has afforded satisfaction."
Long after the sect was suppressed by Francis I, the remaining French Waldensians, then mostly in the Luberon region, sought to join William Farel, Calvin and the Reformation, and Olivetan published a French Bible for them.
The Huguenots became organised as a definitive political movement thereafter.
Menéndez' forces routed the French and executed most of the Protestant captives.
At the same time, the government released a special postage stamp in their honour reading "France ''is'' the home of the Huguenots" (''Accueil des Huguenots'').
Several prominent German military, cultural, and political figures were ethnic Huguenot, including poet Theodor Fontane, General Hermann von François, the hero of the First World War Battle of Tannenberg, Luftwaffe General and fighter ace Adolf Galland, Luftwaffe flying ace Hans-Joachim Marseille, and famed U-boat captain Lothar von Arnauld de la Perière.
The pattern of warfare, followed by brief periods of peace, continued for nearly another quarter-century.
Two years later, with the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789, Protestants gained equal rights as citizens.
Gallicised into 'Huguenot', often used deprecatingly, the word became, during two and a half centuries of terror and triumph, a badge of enduring honour and courage."
In 1628 the Huguenots established a congregation as ''L'Église française à la Nouvelle-Amsterdam'' (the French church in New Amsterdam).
The official policy in the Dutch East India governors was to integrate the Huguenot and the Dutch communities.
By the end of the sixteenth century Huguenots constituted 7-8% of the whole population, or 1.2 million people.
By the time of the French and Indian War (the North American front of the Seven Years' War), a sizeable population of Huguenot descent lived in the British colonies, and many participated in the British defeat of New France in 1759–60.
Henry of Navarre and the House of Bourbon allied themselves to the Huguenots, adding wealth and holdings to the Protestant strength, which at its height grew to sixty fortified cities, and posed a serious threat to the Catholic crown and Paris over the next three decades.
du Pont, a former student of Lavoisier, established the Eleutherian gunpowder mills.
The couple left for the Far East ten years later.
A series of religious conflicts followed, known as the French Wars of Religion, fought intermittently from 1562 to 1598.
Although large portions of peasant population became Reformed, the people remained majority Catholic.
Examples include: Blignaut, Cilliers,  de Klerk (Le Clercq), de Villiers, du Plessis, Du Preez (Des Pres), du Randt (Durand), du Toit, Duvenhage(Du Vinage), Franck, Fouche, Fourie (Fleurit), Gervais, Giliomee (Guilliaume), Gous/Gouws (Gauch), Hugo, Jordaan (Jourdan), Joubert, Kriek, Labuschagne (la Buscagne), le Roux, Lombard, Malan, Malherbe, Marais, Maree, Minnaar (Mesnard), Nel (Nell),Naude', Nortje (Nortier), Pienaar (Pinard), Retief (Retif), Rossouw (Rousseau), Taljaard (Taillard), TerBlanche, Theron, Viljoen (Villion) and Visagie (Visage).
The Berlin Huguenots preserved the French language in their church services for nearly a century.
Calvinist lived primarily in the Midi; about 200,000 Lutherans lived in Alsace, where the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia still protected them.
During the eighteen months of the reign of Francis II, Mary encouraged a policy of rounding up French Huguenots on charges of heresy, in front of Catholic judges, and employing torture and burning as punishments for dissenters.
André Trocmé preached against discrimination as the Nazis were gaining power in neighbouring Germany and urged his Protestant Huguenot congregation to hide Jewish refugees from the Holocaust.
Early ties were already visible in the "Apologie" of William the Silent, condemning the Spanish Inquisition, which was written by his court minister, the Huguenot Pierre L'Oyseleur, lord of Villiers.
The uprising occurred a decade following the death of Henry IV, a Huguenot before converting to Catholicism, who had protected Protestants through the Edict of Nantes.
Hans J. Hillerbrand, an expert on the subject, in his ''Encyclopedia of Protestantism: 4-volume Set'' claims the Huguenot community reached as much as 10% of the French population on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, declining to 7-8% by the end of the 16th century, and further after heavy persecution began once again with the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes by Louis XIV of France.
William formed the League of Augsburg as a coalition to oppose Louis and the French state.
The practice has continued to the present day.
Huguenots endorsed the Reformed tradition of Protestantism, as opposed to largely German Lutheran population in Alsace and Moselle.
The move would have had the side effect of fostering relations with the Swiss.
Huguenot descendants sometimes display this symbol as a sign of ''reconnaissance'' (recognition) between them.
The Edict reaffirmed Catholicism as the state religion of France, but granted the Protestants equality with Catholics under the throne and a degree of religious and political freedom within their domains.
A September 1565 French naval attack against the new Spanish colony at St. Augustine failed when its ships were hit by a hurricane on their way to the Spanish encampment at Fort Matanzas.
Montpellier was among the most important of the 66 "villes de sûreté" that the Edict of 1598 granted to the Huguenots.
In Bad Karlshafen, Hessen, Germany is the Huguenot Museum and Huguenot archive.
Some Huguenot preachers and congregants were attacked as they attempted to meet for worship.
Examples include the Huguenot District and French Church Street in Cork City; and D'Olier Street in Dublin, named after a High Sheriff and one of the founders of the Bank of Ireland.
The French crown's refusal to allow non-Catholics to settle in New France may help to explain that colony's slow rate of population growth compared to that of the neighbouring British colonies, which opened settlement to religious dissenters.
"All persons born in a foreign country and descending in any degree of a French man or woman expatriated for religious reason are declared French nationals (''naturels français'') and will benefit from rights attached to that quality if they come back to France, establish their domicile there and take the civic oath."
This was a huge influx as the entire population of the Dutch Republic amounted to ca.
The flight of Huguenot refugees from Tours, France drew off most of the workers of its great silk mills which they had built.
Nevertheless, now tiny minority of Huguenots remained, and faced continued persecution under Louis XV.
His successor Louis XIII, under the regency of his Italian Catholic mother Marie de' Medici, became more intolerant of Protestantism.
* The Huguenots of religion were influenced by John Calvin's works and established Calvinist synods.
In October 1985, to commemorate the tricentenary of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, President François Mitterrand of France announced a formal apology to the descendants of Huguenots around the world.
Tension with Paris led to a siege by the royal army in 1622.
Both before and after the 1708 passage of the Foreign Protestants Naturalization Act, an estimated 50,000 Protestant Walloons and Huguenots fled to England, with many moving on to Ireland and elsewhere.
Many Huguenots from the Lorraine region also eventually settled in the area around Stourbridge in Worcestershire where they found the raw materials and fuel to continue their glassmaking tradition.
It is now located at Soho Square.
Previous to the erection of it, the strong men would often walk twenty-three miles on Saturday evening, the distance by the road from New Rochelle to New York, to attend the Sunday service.
It was in this place in Tours that the ''prétendus réformés'' ("these supposedly 'reformed'") habitually gathered at night, both for political purposes, and for prayer and singing psalms.
Some disagree with such double or triple non-French linguistic origins, arguing that for the word to have spread into common use in France, it must have originated in the French language.
The French Confession of 1559 shows a decidedly Calvinistic influence.
This group of Huguenots from Southern France had frequent issues with the strict Calvinist tenets that are outlined in many of John Calvin's letters to the synods of the Languedoc.
Paul Revere was descended from Huguenot refugees, as was Henry Laurens, who signed the Articles of Confederation for South Carolina; Jack Jouett, who made the ride from Cuckoo Tavern to warn Thomas Jefferson and others that Tarleton and his men were on their way to arrest him for crimes against the king; Francis Marion, and a number of other leaders of the American Revolution and later statesmen.
The nickname may have been a combined reference to the Swiss politician Besançon Hugues (died 1532) and the religiously conflicted nature of Swiss republicanism in his time, using a clever derogatory pun on the name ''Hugues'' by way of the Dutch word ''Huisgenoten'' (literally ''housemates''), referring to the connotations of a somewhat related word in German ''Eidgenosse'' (''Confederates'' as in "a citizen of one of the states of the Swiss Confederacy").
It was named New Rochelle after La Rochelle, their former strong-hold in France.
As both spoke French in daily life, their court church in the Prinsenhof in Delft held services in French.
Most French Huguenots were either unable or unwilling to emigrate to avoid forced conversion to Catholicism.
The number of French Protestants steadily swelled to ten percent of the population since John Calvin introduced the Reformation in France, or roughly 1.8 million people in the decade between 1560 and 1570.
In 1700 several hundred French Huguenots migrated from England to the colony of Virginia, where the English Crown had promised them land grants in Lower Norfolk County.
At its height, they controlled sixty fortified cities and posed a serious threat to the Catholic crown and Paris over the next three decades.
* The Huguenots of the state opposed the monopoly of power the Guise family had and wanted to attack the authority of the crown.
Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, invited Huguenots to settle in his realms, and a number of their descendants rose to positions of prominence in Prussia.
One of the more notable Huguenot descendants in Ireland was Seán Lemass (1899–1971), who was appointed as ''Taoiseach,'' serving from 1959 until 1966.
Upon their arrival in New Amsterdam, Huguenots were offered land directly across from Manhattan on Long Island for a permanent settlement and chose the harbour at the end of Newtown Creek, becoming the first Europeans to live in Brooklyn, then known as Boschwick, in the neighbourhood now known as Bushwick.
In the early years, many Huguenots also settled in the area of present-day Charleston, South Carolina.
This document, the Guanabara Confession of Faith, became the first Protestant confession of faith in the whole of the Americas.
They settled at the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa and New Netherland in North America.
The first Huguenot to arrive at the Cape of Good Hope was however Maria de la Queillerie, wife of commander Jan van Riebeeck (and daughter of a Walloon church minister), who arrived on 6 April 1652 to establish a settlement at what is today Cape Town.
Another 4,000 Huguenots settled in the German territories of Baden, Franconia (Principality of Bayreuth, Principality of Ansbach), Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel, Duchy of Württemberg, in the Wetterau Association of Imperial Counts, in the Palatinate and Palatinate-Zweibrücken, in the Rhine-Main-Area (Frankfurt), in modern-day Saarland; and 1,500 found refuge in Hamburg, Bremen and Lower Saxony.
A number of French Huguenots settled in Wales, in the upper Rhymney valley of the current Caerphilly County Borough.
A French church in Portarlington dates back to 1696, and was built to serve the significant new Huguenot community in the town.
Such explanations have been traced to the contemporary, Reguier de la Plancha (d. 1560), who in ''De l'Estat de France'' offered the following account as to the origin of the name, as cited by ''The Cape Monthly'':
John Calvin was a Frenchman and largely responsible for the introduction and spread of the Reformed tradition in France.
After this, Huguenots (with estimates ranging from 200,000 to 1,000,000) fled to surrounding Protestant countries: England, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Norway, Denmark, and Prussia – whose Calvinist Great Elector Frederick William welcomed them to help rebuild his war-ravaged and underpopulated country.
Janet Gray and other supporters of the hypothesis suggest that the name ''huguenote'' would be roughly equivalent to ''little Hugos'', or ''those who want Hugo''.
Following the French Crown's revocation of the Edict of Nantes, many Huguenots settled in Ireland in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, encouraged by an act of parliament for Protestants' settling in Ireland.
(It has been adapted as a restaurant—see illustration above.
After the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the Dutch Republic received the largest group of Huguenot refugees, an estimated total of 75,000 to 100,000 people.
In Wandsworth, their gardening skills benefited the Battersea market gardens.
Louis XIV claimed the French Huguenot population of 800,000 to 900,000 individuals was reduced to 1,000 or 1,500 individuals; a huge overestimate, although dragonnades were indeed the most devastating event for the minority.
The Wars of Religion precluded a return voyage, and the outpost was abandoned.
They also spread to the Dutch Cape Colony in South Africa, the Dutch East Indies, the Caribbean, New Netherland, several of the English colonies in North America, and Quebec, where they were generally accepted and allowed to worship freely.
Many Walloon and Huguenot families were granted asylum there.
By 1700, one-fifth of the city's population was French speaking.
He became pastor of the first Huguenot church in North America in that city.
Other founding families created enterprises based on textiles and such traditional Huguenot occupations in France.
Consequently, many Huguenots considered the wealthy and Calvinist Dutch Republic, which led the opposition to Louis XIV, as the most attractive country for exile after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.
The Catholic Church in France and many of its members opposed the Huguenots.
Many of their descendents rose to positions of prominence.
An amnesty granted in 1573 pardoned the perpetrators.
The cities of Bourges, Montauban and Orleans saw substantial activity in this regard.
Jean Cauvin (John Calvin), another student at the University of Paris, also converted to Protestantism.
They were determined to end religious oppression.
The main provincial towns and cities experiencing the Massacre were Aix, Bordeaux, Bourges, Lyons, Meaux, Orleans, Rouen, Toulouse, and Troyes.
Four thousand emigrated to the North American colonies, where they settled in New York and Virginia, especially.
Many families, today mostly Afrikaans-speaking, have surnames indicating their French Huguenot ancestry.
Some have suggested the name was derived, with similar intended scorn, from ''les guenon de Hus'' (the monkeys or apes of Jan Hus).
The French Protestant Church of London was established by Royal Charter in 1550.
In Geneva, Hugues, though Catholic, was a leader of the "Confederate Party", so called because it favoured independence from the Duke of Savoy through an alliance between the city-state of Geneva and the Swiss Confederation.
Now, it happens that those whom they called Lutherans were at that time so narrowly watched during the day that they were forced to wait till night to assemble, for the purpose of praying God, for preaching and receiving the Holy Sacrament; so that although they did not frighten nor hurt anybody, the priests, through mockery, made them the successors of those spirits which roam the night; and thus that name being quite common in the mouth of the populace, to designate the evangelical ''huguenands'' in the country of Tourraine and Amboyse, it became in vogue after that enterprise."
On 23–24 August, between about 2,000 and 3,000 Protestants were killed in Paris and between 3,000 and 7,000 more in the French provinces.
He was regarded by the Gallicans and Protestants as a noble man who respected people's dignity and lives.
It was no longer a favourite religion of the elite; most Protestants were peasants.
Prior to its establishment, Huguenots used the Cabbage Garden near the Cathedral.
The population around the Massif Central and the area around Dordogne was almost entirely Reformed.
Some of these immigrants moved to Norwich, which had accommodated an earlier settlement of Walloon weavers.
Huguenot numbers peaked near an estimated two million by 1562, concentrated mainly in the southern and western parts of France.
The Prinsenhof is one of the 14 active Walloon churches of the Dutch Reformed Church.
Most of the Huguenot congregations (or individuals) in North America eventually affiliated with other Protestant denominations with more numerous members.
Anglicised names such as Tyzack, Henzey and Tittery are regularly found amongst the early glassmakers, and the region went on to become one of the most important glass regions in the country.
The wars finally ended with the granting of the Edict of Nantes, which granted the Huguenots substantial religious, political, and military autonomy.
The first known translation of the Bible into one of France's regional languages, Arpitan or Franco-Provençal, had been prepared by the 12th-century pre-reformer Peter Waldo (Pierre de Vaux).
Huguenot numbers grew rapidly between 1555 and 1561, chiefly amongst nobles and city dwellers.
Mary returned to Scotland a widow, in the summer of 1561.
Huguenots controlled sizeable areas in central and southern France.
The Huguenot Society of America maintains Manakin Episcopal Church in Virginia as an historic shrine with occasional services.
Some Huguenots fought in the Low Countries alongside the Dutch against Spain during the first years of the Dutch Revolt (1568–1609).
By the 1760s, Protestants comprised about 700,000 people, or 2% of the population.
The only reference to immigrant lacemakers in this period is of twenty-five widows who settled in Dover, and there is no contemporary documentation to support there being Huguenot lacemakers in Bedfordshire.
The "Huguenot Street Historic District" in New Paltz has been designated a National Historic Landmark site and contains the oldest street in the United States of America.
As a result, more than three-quarters of the Protestant population accepted the change in faith; some 500,000 fled in exodus.
''L'Eglise du Saint-Esprit'' in New York, founded in 1628, is older, but it left the French Reformed movement in 1804 to become part of the Episcopal Church.
Some Huguenot descendants in the Netherlands may be noted by French family names, although they typically use Dutch given names.
Louis XIV gradually increased persecution of them until he issued the Edict of Fontainebleau (1685), ending any legal recognition of Protestantism in France, and forcing the Huguenots to convert or flee in a wave of violent dragonnades.
Escalating, he instituted dragonnades, which included the occupation and looting of Huguenot homes by military troops, in an effort to forcibly convert them.
It officially ended with the Edict of Versailles, commonly called the Edict of Tolerance, signed by Louis XVI in 1787.
They ultimately decided to switch to German in protest against the occupation of Prussia by Napoleon in 1806–07.
However, enforcement of the Edict grew increasingly irregular over time, making life so intolerable that many fled the country.
Reguier de la Plancha accounts for it as follows: — "The name ''huguenand'' was given to those of the religion during the affair of Amboyse, and they were to retail it ever since.
