Bogart's drinking sometimes inflamed tensions.
Despite the thrilling win and the recognition, Bogart later commented, "The way to survive an Oscar is never to try to win another one&nbsp;... too many stars&nbsp;... win it and then figure they have to top themselves&nbsp;... they become afraid to take chances.
On August 21, 1946, Bogart was honored in a ceremony at Grauman's Chinese Theater to record his hand and footprints in cement.
Both had major roles as inmates.
He almost never spoke of his failing health and refused to see a doctor until January 1956.
Bogart's sharp timing and facial expressions were praised by the cast and director as vital to the quick action and rapid-fire dialogue.
With time, he grew too weak to walk up and down stairs, valiantly fighting the pain yet still able to joke: "Put me in the dumbwaiter and I'll ride down to the first floor in style."
He let her steal scenes and even encouraged it.
James Agee wrote, "Bogart does a wonderful job with this character&nbsp;... miles ahead of the very good work he has done before".
Bogart is recorded as a model sailor who spent most of his sea time after the Armistice ferrying troops back from Europe.
In 1997, ''Entertainment Weekly'' magazine named Bogart the number one movie legend of all time.
His last film was ''The Harder They Fall'' (1956).
Bogart, a liberal Democrat, organized a delegation to Washington, D.C., called the Committee for the First Amendment, against what he perceived to be the House Un-American Activities Committee's harassment of Hollywood screenwriters and actors.
In real life Bogart played tournament level chess one division below master, often enjoying games with crew members and cast, but finding his better in the superior Paul Henreid.
Bogart then had a minor supporting role in ''Bad Sister'' with Bette Davis in 1931.
Bogart's cremated remains were interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery, Glendale, California in the Garden of Memory, Columbarium of Eternal Light, Garden Niche 647.
Our mother and father didn't glug over my two sisters and me."
In the film's trailer, Bogart is repeatedly mentioned first, but Robinson's name is listed above Bogart's in a cast list at the trailer's end.
Despite the acrimony, the film was successful.
Bogart enjoyed intense, provocative conversation and stiff drinks, as did Huston.
Bogart, a heavy smoker and drinker, had developed cancer of the esophagus.
Bogart's performance was generally praised as the strongest part of the film.
The name "Bogart" comes from the Dutch surname "Bogaert".
Later, the glamor would be gone and Bacall would make herself useful as a cook, nurse and clothes washer, earning her husband's praise: "I don't know what we'd have done without her.
After his naval service, he worked as a shipper and then bond salesman.
Thank you very much&nbsp;... No one does it alone.
Bogart calmed her down and then went after Hawks.
His parents were busy in their careers and frequently fought.
Bogart fell into a coma and died in his bed the next day.
He also joined the Coast Guard Temporary Reserve offering the use of his own yacht, Santana, for Coast Guard use.
While Bogart had been raised to believe that acting was beneath a gentleman, he liked the late hours actors kept and enjoyed the attention gotten on stage.
It was Tracy, in 1930, who first called him "Bogie".
Producer Hal Wallis initially offered the leading man role to George Raft, a more established box office name than Bogart whose contract stipulated he did not have to appear in remakes.
At the root was Wilder being the opposite of Bogart's ideal director, John Huston, in both style and personality.
Belmont and Maud married in June 1898, he was Presbyterian of English and Dutch descent, she an Episcopalian of English heritage.
Later he went to the equally elite boarding school Phillips Academy, where he was admitted based on family connections.
He rarely saw his own films and avoided premieres.
An avid chess player, Bogart reportedly had the idea that Rick Blaine be portrayed as one, a metaphor for the sparring relationship he maintained with friends, enemies, and tenuous allies.
As a boy, Bogart was teased for his curls, tidiness, the "cute" pictures his mother had him pose for, the Little Lord Fauntleroy clothes she dressed him in, and even for the name "Humphrey".
His second marriage was on the rocks, and he was less than happy with his acting career.
He even issued phony press releases about his private life to satisfy the curiosity of  newspapers and the public.
When he feigns ignorance, she persists, "Play it, Sam.
Play 'As Time Goes By.'"
Another version, which Bogart's long-time friend, author Nathaniel Benchley, holds to, is that Bogart was injured while taking a prisoner to Portsmouth Naval Prison in Kittery, Maine.
The precise date of Bogart's birth was long a matter of dispute, but has been cleared up.
Huston was reported to be easily bored during production, and admired Bogart (also bored easily off camera) not just for his acting talent but for his intense concentration on the set.
Bogart played violent roles so often that in Nevil Shute's 1939 novel ''What Happened to the Corbetts'' the protagonist, when asked whether he knows how to operate an automatic weapon, jokes "I've seen Humphrey Bogart with one often enough ...".
Bogart was to get 30 percent of the profits and Hepburn 10 percent, plus a relatively small salary for both.
Bogart inherited his father's gold ring which he always wore, even in many of his films.
Bogart's Santana Productions released its films through Columbia Pictures.
Originally a novel written by Dashiell Hammett, it was first published in the pulp magazine ''Black Mask'' in 1929, and had also served as the basis of two other movie versions including ''Satan Met a Lady'' (1936) starring Bette Davis.
The "corrected" January birthdate subsequently appeared—and in some cases, remains—in many otherwise authoritative sources.
Spiegel sent Katharine Hepburn the book and she suggested Bogart for the male lead, firmly believing that "he was the only man who could have played that part".
An alternate version has Bogart struck in the mouth by a handcuff loosened while freeing his charge, the other still around the prisoner's wrist.
For a while he was stage manager for Brady's daughter Alice's play ''A Ruined Lady''.
Bogart later said of co-star (and John Huston's father) Walter Huston, "He's probably the only performer in Hollywood to whom I'd gladly lost a scene".
There he met Spencer Tracy, a serious Broadway actor whom Bogart liked and admired, and they became close friends and drinking companions.
The film was shot in the heat of summer for greater realism and atmosphere, proving grueling to make.
Bogart rounded out 1955 with ''The Desperate Hours'', directed by William Wyler.
She used a drawing of baby Humphrey in a well-known advertising campaign for Mellins Baby Food.
The studio system, then at its most entrenched, restricted actors to their home lot, with only occasional loan-outs.
However, his persistent cough and difficulty eating became too serious to ignore and he dropped the project.
Bogart starred in the Broadway play ''Invitation to a Murder'' at the Theatre Masque, now the John Golden Theatre, in 1934.
He considered himself Bacall's protector and mentor, and Bogart was usurping that role.
During the filming of the Edward Dmytryk directed ''The Left Hand of God'' (1955), he noticed his co-star Gene Tierney having a hard time remembering her lines and behaving oddly.
Bogart performed in his final films for Warners, ''Chain Lightning'', released early in 1950, and ''The Enforcer'', early in 1951.
With an image that is small and yet as powerful as the ones he left in celluloid, we will begin today to bring his artistry, his power, his unique star quality, to the messages that travel the world."
Belmont was the only child of the unhappy marriage of Adam Watkins Bogart, a Canandaigua, New York innkeeper, and his wife, Julia, a wealthy heiress.
Bogart was lukewarm about the part, but agreed to it on a handshake with Wilder, sans finished script but with the director's assurances he would take good care of Bogart during the filming.
Bogart was proud of his success, but the fact that it came from playing a gangster weighed on him.
Despite the discomfort of jumping from the boat into swamps, rivers and marshes the film apparently rekindled Bogart's early love of boats.
He played juveniles or romantic second-leads in drawing room comedies, and is said to have been the first actor to ask "Tennis, anyone?"
Warner Bros. bought the screen rights to ''The Petrified Forest''.
The couple next starred in the future classic, ''Key Largo''.
Later that night, alone with Sam, Rick demands, "You played it for her - you can play it for me."
The film was completed and slated for release in 1945, then withdrawn and substantially re-edited to add new, juiced-up scenes exploiting both the box office chemistry that shone between Bogart and Bacall in ''To Have and Have Not'', and the notoriety of their personal relationship.
In 1997, the United States Postal Service honored Bogart with a stamp bearing his image in its "Legends of Hollywood" series as the third figure to be recognized.
In 1939, Bogart played a mad scientist in ''The Return of Doctor X'',his only horror film.
Very formal, they showed little emotion towards their children.
Robert E. Sherwood remained a close friend of Bogart's.
His parents hoped he would go on to Yale, but in 1918 Bogart was expelled.
''The New York Times'' crowed that Bogart was "incredibly adroit&nbsp;... the skill with which this old rock-ribbed actor blends the gags and such duplicities with a manly manner of melting is one of the incalculable joys of the show."
The next year, his performance in ''Casablanca'' (1943; Oscar nomination) raised him to the peak of his profession and, at the same time, cemented his trademark film persona, that of the hard-boiled cynic who ultimately shows his noble side.
In the wake of Santana Productions he had formed a new company and had anxious plans for a film ''Melville Goodwin, U.S.A.'', in which he would play a general and Bacall a press magnate.
He never forgot Howard's favor, and in 1952 named his only daughter "Leslie Howard Bogart" after Howard, who had died in World War II under mysterious circumstances.
She believed his scar had nothing to do with his distinctive speech pattern, and said his "lip wound gave him no speech impediment, either before or after it was mended.
Lauren Bacall confirmed in her autobiography that his birthday was always celebrated on Christmas Day, adding that he joked that he was cheated out of a present every year because of it.
He made films like ''Racket Busters'', ''San Quentin'', and ''You Can't Get Away with Murder''.
Quite contrary to Hollywood norm, their affair was Bogart's first with a leading lady.
In the end, the crew overcame illness, soldier ant invasions, leaking boats, poor food, attacking hippos, poor water filters, fierce heat, isolation, and a boat fire to complete a memorable film.
Bogart's film debut was with Helen Hayes in the 1928 two-reeler ''The Dancing Town'', of which a complete copy has never been found.
He stated, "I was born to be indolent and this was the softest of rackets."
Just about everyone in the cast came down with dysentery except Bogart and Huston, who subsisted on canned food and alcohol.
Later, Gardner credited Bogart with helping her both on and offscreen.
He also appeared with Joan Blondell and Ruth Etting in a Vitaphone short, ''Broadway's Like That'' (1930) which was re-discovered in 1963.
Complementing Bogart were co-stars Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, Elisha Cook, Jr., and Mary Astor as the treacherous female foil.
In ''High Sierra'', Bogart used his own pet dog Zero to play his character's dog, Pard.
Claire Trevor won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her heart-wrenching performance as Rocco's physically abused alcoholic girlfriend.
However, he was always professional and generally respected by other actors.
Bogart returned home to find his father suffering from poor health, his medical practice faltering, and  much of the family's wealth lost on bad investments in timber.
In 1995 newly developed digital technology allowed Bogart's image to be inserted in the ''Tales from the Crypt'' television episode "You, Murderer" as one of its many ''Casablanca'' references.
Whenever a fly bit Huston or me, it dropped dead."
Sperber and Lax also noted that a birth announcement, printed in the ''Ontario County Times'' on January 10, 1900, effectively rules out the possibility of a January 23 birthdate; and state and federal census records from 1900 report a Christmas 1899 birthdate as well.
His first great success was as Duke Mantee in ''The Petrified Forest'' (1936), and this led to a period of typecasting as a gangster with films such as ''Angels with Dirty Faces'' (1938) and B-movies like ''The Return of Doctor X'' (1939).
He advised Robert Mitchum that the only way to stay alive in Hollywood was to be an "againster."
Despite his proclamations that, "I like a jealous wife," "We get on so well together (because) we don't have illusions about each other," and, "I wouldn't give you two cents for a dame without a temper," it was a highly destructive relationship.
Hawks said of Bacall: "Bogie fell in love with the character she played, so she had to keep playing it the rest of her life."
Sinatra was tabbed Pack Leader, Bacall Den Mother, Bogie  Director of Public Relations, and Sid Luft Acting Cage Manager.
The movie has many similarities with ''Casablanca''—the same enemies, the same kind of hero, even a piano player sidekick (played by Hoagy Carmichael).
Bogart said the play "marked my deliverance from the ranks of the sleek, sybaritic, stiff-shirted, swallow-tailed 'smoothies' to which I seemed condemned to life."
Early in his career, while playing double roles in the play ''Drifting'' at the Playhouse Theatre in 1922, Bogart met actress Helen Menken.
As in tennis, you need a good opponent or partner to bring out the best in you.
Maud told her offspring to call her "Maud" not "Mother", and showed little if any physical affection for them.
Hepburn, a teetotaler in and out of character, fared worse in the difficult conditions, losing weight and at one point falling very ill. Bogart resisted Huston's insistence on using real leeches in a key scene where Charlie has to drag his tramp steamer through an infested marsh, until reasonable fakes were employed.
Bergman, who had a reputation for affairs with her leading men, later said of Bogart, "I kissed him but I never knew him."
He subscribed to the ''Harvard Law Review''.
Huston's love of adventure, deep, longstanding friendship–and success–with Bogart, and a chance to work with Hepburn, convinced the actor to leave the comfortable confines of Hollywood for a difficult shoot on location in the Belgian Congo in Africa.
Bogart resumed his friendship with boyhood pal Bill Brady, Jr., whose father had show business connections.
In this Hollywood back-story Bogart is again a broken-down man, the cynical director-narrator who saves his career by making a star of a flamenco dancer modeled on real life movie sex goddess Rita Hayworth.
He nicknamed her "Baby."
A few months later he made his stage debut as a Japanese butler in Alice's 1921 play ''Drifting'', nervously speaking one line of dialog.
The sea was his sanctuary, spending about thirty weekends a year on the water, with a particular fondness for sailing around Catalina Island.
Bogart groused to the press that Wilder was "overbearing" and "is the kind of Prussian German with a riding crop.
Amenities at Warners were few compared to the prestigious Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.
He reminded the gathered mourners that while Bogart's life had ended far too soon, it had been a rich one:
Bogart complained, "An intelligent script, beautifully directed—something different—and the public turned a cold shoulder on it".
''High Sierra'', a 1941 film directed by Raoul Walsh, had a screenplay written by Bogart's friend and drinking partner, John Huston, adapted from the novel by W. R. Burnett (''Little Caesar'', etc.).
Though he griped with some of his old bitterness about having to do so, he delivered a strong performance in the lead, earning him his final Oscar nomination as well as being the subject of the cover story in the June 7, 1954 issue of TIME.
Bogart gained his first real romantic lead in 1942's ''Casablanca'', playing Rick Blaine, a hard-pressed expatriate nightclub owner hiding from a shady past while negotiating a fine line among Nazis, the French underground, the Vichy prefect and unresolved feelings for his ex-girlfriend.
Without letting up, Bogart starred in ''Knock on Any Door'' (1949), ''Tokyo Joe'' (1949), ''In a Lonely Place'' (1950), ''Sirocco'' (1951) and ''Beat the Devil'' (1954).
The studio tested several Hollywood veterans for the Duke Mantee role, and chose Edward G. Robinson, who had first-rank star appeal and was due to make a film to fulfill his expensive contract.
Critic Alexander Woollcott wrote of Bogart's early work that he "is what is usually and mercifully described as inadequate."
In addition to the pressure they were bearing from freelancing actors like Bogart, James Stewart, Henry Fonda and others, they were beginning to buckle from the eroding impact of television and enforcement of anti-trust laws breaking up theater chains.
The leading men ahead of Bogart at Warner Bros. included not only such marquee names as James Cagney and Edward G. Robinson, but also journeymen leads such as Victor McLaglen, George Raft, and Paul Muni.
"Goddamn doctor", Bogart later told Niven, "instead of stitching it up, he screwed it up."
He once said: "I can't get in a mild discussion without turning it into an argument.
She Luxed my undies in darkest Africa".
His simple funeral was held at All Saints Episcopal Church, with musical selections from favorite composers Johann Sebastian Bach and Claude Debussy.
Shooting on a new movie might begin days or only hours after the previous one wrapped.
Just three years after his Best Actor triumph in ''African Queen'', Bogart dropped his asking price to get the role of Captain Queeg in Edward Dmytryk's 1954 drama ''The Caine Mutiny''.
In ''Black Legion'' (1937), for a change, he played a good man caught up and destroyed by a racist organization, a movie Graham Greene described as "intelligent and exciting, if rather earnest".
Mark Robson's ''The Harder They Fall'' (1956) was his last film.
After the play closed she relented, but insisted on continuing her career and the couple divorced in 1937.
He was persistent and worked steadily at his craft, appearing in at least seventeen Broadway productions between 1922 and 1935.
They were married on May 20, 1926, at the Gramercy Park Hotel in New York City.
The film cemented a strong personal and professional connection between Bogart and Huston.
His post-service physical makes no mention of the lip scar, even though it mentions many smaller scars.
The film was directed by Michael Curtiz and produced by Hal Wallis, and featured Ingrid Bergman, Claude Rains, Sydney Greenstreet, Paul Henreid, Conrad Veidt, Peter Lorre and Dooley Wilson.
Bogart's disputes with Warner Bros. over roles and money were similar to those the studio waged with other high-spirited, less-than-obedient stars such as Bette Davis, James Cagney, Errol Flynn, and Olivia de Havilland.
The surviving kinescope of the live telecast captures him in his only TV sketch comedy outing.
''New York Times'' critic Brooks Atkinson said of the play, "a peach&nbsp;... a roaring Western melodrama&nbsp;... Humphrey Bogart does the best work of his career as an actor."
We'll have a lot of fun together".
''The Caine Mutiny''
Sensitive yet caustic, he was once again disgusted by the inferior movies he was performing in.
There must be something in my tone of voice, or this arrogant face—something that antagonizes everybody.
A third has him withdrawn by his father for failing to improve his grades.
Bogart cabled news of this to Howard in Scotland, who replied: "Att: Jack Warner Insist Bogart Play Mantee No Bogart No Deal L.H.".
In an interview, Hepburn described the last time she and Tracy saw their dear friend, on January 13, 1957:
''Casablanca'' won the 1943 Academy Award for Best Picture.
He was an indifferent, sullen student who showed no interest in after-school activities.
Preferring to learn as he went, Bogart never took acting lessons.
Co-written by Truman Capote, the eccentrically filmed tale follows an amoral group of rogues chasing an unattainable treasure.
The more the two drifted apart, the more she drank, in her fury throwing plants, crockery, anything close at hand, at him.
On his return to California he bought a classic mahogany Hacker-Craft runabout, which he kept until his death.
He used these "B movie" years to start developing his enduring film persona—the wounded, stoical, cynical, charming, vulnerable, self-mocking loner with a code of honor.
The "Ingrid Bergman" character was played by her daughter Isabella Rossellini.
Though a poor student, Bogart was a lifelong reader.
She wrote that the film "gave him a role that he could play with complexity, because the film character's pride in his art, his selfishness, drunkenness, lack of energy stabbed with lightning strokes of violence were shared by the real Bogart".
Married, and not usually drawn to his starlets, he too fell for Bacall, telling her she meant nothing to Bogart and even threatening to send her to Monogram, the worst studio in Hollywood.
I suppose that's why I'm cast as the heavy."
A kiss, in our family, was an event.
Bogart began acting in 1921 after a hitch in the U.S. Navy in World War I and little success in various jobs in finance and the production side of the theater.
Bogart admired and somewhat envied Huston for his skill as a writer.
It was rumored Bogart attempted to enlist but was turned down because of his age.
Bogart was born on December 25, 1899, in New York City, the eldest child of Dr. Belmont DeForest Bogart (1867 – 1934) and Maud Humphrey (1868 – 1940).
Frank Sinatra was a frequent visitor, as were Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy.
The marriage proved a happy one, though there were tensions due to their differences.
"Bogie would never have believed it," Lauren Bacall expressed to the assembled group of city officials and onlookers in attendance.
Bogart explained: "All I ate was baked beans, canned asparagus and Scotch whisky.
Jack Warner settled the dispute and filming resumed.
He once said, "An actor needs something to stabilize his personality, something to nail down what he really is, not what he is currently pretending to be."
Sometimes he turned violent.
A wag observed that there was "madness in his Methot."
Most of the studio's better movie scripts went to them, leaving Bogart with what was left.
At his father's deathbed, Bogart finally told him how much he loved him.
The film was Bogart's last major film playing a gangster (only a supporting role in 1942's ''The Big Shot'' followed).
Directed by John Huston, the film highlighted Edward G. Robinson as gangster "Johnny Rocco," a seething older synthesis of many of his vicious early bad guy roles.
Riding high in 1947 with a new contract which provided limited script refusal and the right to form his own production company, Bogart reunited with John Huston for ''The Treasure of the Sierra Madre'', a stark tale of greed played out by three gold prospectors in Mexico.
Bogart and Bacall also worked together on an early color telecast in 1955, an NBC adaptation of ''The Petrified Forest'' for ''Producers' Showcase'', with Bogart receiving top billing and Henry Fonda playing Leslie Howard's role; a black and white kinescope of the live telecast has also survived.
It was then altered to accommodate his wheelchair.
The result: A lot of dull performances in dull pictures".
He cracked, "If it'd been Jack Warner's blood&nbsp;...
She had been a model since 16 and had acted in two failed plays.
By chance, a 35-mm nitrate composite master positive (fine grain) of the 1945 version survived.
Bogart's roles were not only repetitive, but physically demanding and draining (studios were not yet air-conditioned), and his regimented, tightly scheduled job at Warners was anything but the indolent and "peachy" actor's life he hoped for.
He did not, however, forsake good manners, articulateness, punctuality, modesty, and a dislike of being touched.
He was also annoyed by her inexperienced performance.
He came to be a liberal who hated pretensions, phonies, and snobs, and at times defied conventional behavior and authority, traits he displayed in both life and the movies.
He also stood behind Joan Bennett and insisted on her as his co-star in Michael Curtiz's ''We're No Angels'' when an ugly public scandal made her persona non grata with Jack Warner.
On February 8, 1960, he was posthumously given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6322 Hollywood Boulevard.
