Each side drew many allies into the war.
This victory opened the way for the Dauphin to march to Reims for his coronation as Charles VII, on 16 July 1429.
By 1410, both sides were bidding for the help of English forces in a civil war.
Gascony was not the only sore point.
The English argued that, as Charles IV had not acted in a proper way towards his tenant, Edward should be able to hold the duchy free of any French suzerainty.
On 22 March 1421 Henry V's progress in his French campaign experienced an unexpected reverse.
The English began using lightly armoured mounted troops, known as hobelars.
Although anti-war and pro-peace spokesmen generally failed to influence outcomes at the time, they had a long-term impact.
By proximity of blood, the nearest male relative of Charles IV was his nephew Edward III of England.
The English army captured the completely unguarded Caen in just one day, surprising the French.
In 1348, the Black Death, which had just arrived in Paris, began to ravage Europe.
The wider introduction of weapons and tactics supplanted the feudal armies where heavy cavalry had dominated.
His supporters would be able to claim that they were loyal to the "true" King of France and were not rebels against Philip.
By its end, feudal armies had been largely replaced by professional troops, and aristocratic dominance had yielded to a democratisation of the manpower and weapons of armies.
In 1316, a principle was established denying women succession to the French throne.
The Dauphin, Charles VII, was declared illegitimate.
After that, he expected to be left undisturbed while he made war on Scotland.
On 26 January 1340, Edward III formally received homage from Guy, half-brother of the Count of Flanders.
To recover his duchy, Edward II had to compromise: he sent his son, the future Edward III, to pay homage.
In August 1415, Henry V sailed from England with a force of about 10,500 and laid siege to Harfleur.
The hostages included two of his sons, several princes and nobles, four inhabitants of Paris, and two citizens from each of the nineteen principal towns of France.
France's sea power led to economic disruptions for England, shrinking the wool trade to Flanders and the wine trade from Gascony.
After Louis's assassination, the Armagnac family took political power in opposition to John.
Edward was the son of Isabella, the sister of the dead Charles IV, but the question arose whether she should be able to transmit a right to inherit that she did not herself possess.
The Angevin kings  directly ruled over more French territory than the kings of France.
In no wise did they defend their country from its enemies; rather did they trample it underfoot, robbing and pillaging the peasants' goods...
The French kings had endeavored, over the centuries, to reduce these possessions, to the effect that only Gascony was left to the English.
The domestic and dynastic difficulties faced by England and France in this period quieted the war for a decade.
Bubonic plague and warfare reduced population numbers throughout Europe during this period.
For the first 10 years of Edward III's reign, Gascony had been a major point of friction.
Peter was restored to power after Trastámara's army was defeated at the Battle of Najera.
Henry was apparently concerned that the large number of prisoners taken were a security risk (there were more French prisoners than there were soldiers in the entire English army) and he ordered their deaths.
Tradition demanded that vassals should approach their liege unarmed with heads uncovered; however, Edward demonstrated his reluctance by attending the ceremony by wearing his crown and sword.
War broke out again and Edward III resumed the title of King of France.
In 1389, Richard's uncle and supporter, John of Gaunt, returned from Spain and Richard was able to rebuild his power gradually until 1397, when he reasserted his authority and destroyed the principal three among the Lords Appellant.
English anti-war critics thus had more to work with than the French.
The civic authorities of Ghent, Ypres and Bruges proclaimed Edward King of France.
Joan was condemned for heresy and burned at the stake on 30 May 1431.
The appearance of Joan of Arc at the siege of Orléans sparked a revival of French spirit, and the tide began to turn against the English.
Edward responded to the confiscation of Aquitaine by challenging Philip's right to the French throne.
The assemblies of the French barons and prelates and the University of Paris decided that males who derive their right to inheritance through their mother should be excluded.
In 1429 Joan convinced the Dauphin to send her to the siege, saying she had received visions from God telling her to drive out the English.
The Angevin kings of England became Dukes of Aquitaine after Henry II married the former Queen of France, Eleanor of Aquitaine, in 1152, from which point the lands were held in vassalage to the French crown.
At the beginning of Edward III's reign on 1 February 1327, the only part of Aquitaine that remained in his hands was the Duchy of Gascony.
The treaty at Brétigny left Edward III and England with enlarged holdings in France; however, a small professional French army under the leadership of du Guesclin pushed the English back and, by the time of Charles V's death in 1380, the English only held Calais.
Although the will was there, the funds to pay the troops was lacking, so in the autumn of 1388 the Council agreed to resume negotiations with the French crown, beginning on 18 June 1389 with the signing of a three-year truce at Leulinghen.
While these hostages were held, John returned to France to try and raise funds to pay the ransom.
Then, in May 1337, Philip met with his Great Council in Paris.
The Lords Appellant were  able to gain control of the council in 1388 and tried, unsuccessfully, to reignite the
Edward III was famous for dismounting his men-at-arms and having them and his archers stand in closely integrated battle lines; the horses only being used for transport or pursuit.
The French artillery developed a reputation as the best in the world.
The French crown had been at odds with Navarre (near southern Gascony) since 1354, and in 1363 the Navarrese used the captivity of John II in London and the political weakness of the Dauphin to try to seize power.
It was agreed that the Duchy of Aquitaine, effectively Gascony, should be taken back into the king's hands on the grounds that Edward III was in breach of his obligations as  vassal and had sheltered the king's 'mortal enemy' Robert d'Artois.
The French rejected the claim, maintaining that Isabella could not transmit a right that she did not possess.
The English fleet apparently tricked the French into believing they were withdrawing.
The root causes of the conflict can be found in the demographic, economic and social crises of 14th century Europe.
Talbot had been persuaded to engage the French army at Castillon near Bordeaux.
In 1420, Henry met with King Charles VI.
The nation of maritime islanders found itself well-suited to take advantage of its location and seafaring abilities to explore, and later conquer, much of the remaining world.
If the unborn child was male, he would become king; if not, Charles left the choice of his successor to the nobles.
The Hundred Years' War almost resumed in 1474, when the duke Charles of Burgundy, counting on English support, took up arms against Louis XI of France.
Richemont's force  attacked the English army from the flank and rear just as they were on the verge of beating Clermont's army.
During the War of Saint-Sardos, Charles of Valois, father of Philip VI, invaded Aquitaine on behalf of Charles IV and conquered the duchy after a local insurrection, which the French believed had been incited by Edward II of England.
Edward, with his fleet, sailed from England on 22 June 1340, and arrived the next day off the Zwyn estuary.
The war marked both the height of chivalry and its subsequent decline, and the development of strong national identities in both countries.
Through his mother, Isabella of France, Edward III of England was the grandson of Philip IV of France and nephew of Charles IV of France, the last king of the senior line of the House of Capet.
France lost half its population during the Hundred Years' War.
Among the factions, the Duke of Bedford wanted to defend Normandy, the Duke of Gloucester was committed to just Calais, whereas Cardinal Beaufort was inclined to peace.
At this point, Edward's funds ran out and the war probably would have ended were it not for the death of the Duke of Brittany precipitating a succession dispute between the duke's half brother John of Montfort and Charles of Blois, nephew of Philip VI.
However, Philip II of France acted decisively to exploit the weaknesses of John, both legally and militarily, and by 1204 had succeeded in taking control of most of the Angevin continental possessions.
Clarence engaged a Franco-Scottish force of 5000 men, led by Gilbert Motier de La Fayette and John Stewart, Earl of Buchan at the Battle of Baugé.
Philip VI had assembled a large naval fleet off Marseilles as part of an ambitious plan for a crusade to the Holy Land.
Charles IV formally renewed the treaty in 1326, promising Scotland that if England invaded then France would support the Scots.
The French king, John II, had been held captive in England.
Henry V was well aware of these divisions and hoped to exploit them.
By 1449, the French had retaken Rouen.
Charles V succeeded him as king of France.
They subjected and despoiled the peasants and the men of the villages.
However, future Kings of England (and later of Great Britain) continued to claim the title until 1803, when they were dropped in deference to the exiled Count of Provence, titular King Louis XVIII of France, who was living in England after the French Revolution.
It was one of the most notable conflicts of the Middle Ages, in which five generations of kings from two rival dynasties fought for the throne of the largest kingdom in Western Europe.
After Charles VII's successful Normandy campaign in 1450, he concentrated his efforts on Gascony, the last province held by the English.
Contemporary conflicts in neighbouring areas, which were directly related to this conflict, included the War of the Breton Succession (1341–1364), the Castilian Civil War (1366–1369), the War of the Two Peters (1356–1375) in Aragon, and the 1383–85 Crisis in Portugal.
On his deathbed, Henry V had given the Duke of Bedford responsibility for English France (as Henry VI was only an infant).
In 1295 a treaty was signed between France and Scotland during the reign of Philip the Fair.
Richard's increasing disinterest in the war together with his preferential treatment of a select few close friends and advisors  angered  an alliance of lords that included one of his uncles.
The treaty was ratified at Calais in October.
It devastated France as a land, but it also awakened French nationalism.
In February 1340, Edward returned to England to try to raise more funds and also deal with political difficulties.
In the ensuing melée, the Scot, John Carmichael of Douglasdale, broke his lance unhorsing the Duke of Clarence.
However, Edward wanted the crown and chose the cathedral city of Reims for his coronation (Reims was the traditional coronation city).
Henry formally entered Paris later that year and the agreement was ratified by the Estates-General.
At the end of May, Henry was joined by his queen and together with the French court, they went to rest at Senlis.
The Burgundians transferred her to the English, who organised a trial headed by Pierre Cauchon, a pro-English clergyman.
In 1362 John's son Louis of Anjou, a hostage in English-held Calais, escaped captivity.
During the battle the French appeared to retreat towards their camp.
When the war ended, England was bereft of its Continental possessions (with the exception of the Pale of Calais), leaving it an island nation on the periphery of Europe, which greatly affected the English mind-set.
In 1366 there was a civil war of succession in Castile (part of modern Spain).
In practical terms, a judgment in Guyenne might be subject to an appeal to the French royal court.
The Kings of England had attempted to subjugate the Scots for some time, which made Scotland a natural ally of France.
Although the Castilians had agreed to fund the Black Prince, they failed to do so.
In the 11th century, Gascony in southwest France had been incorporated into Aquitaine (also known as ''Guyenne'' or ''Guienne'') and formed with it the province of Guyenne and Gascony (French: ''Guyenne-et-Gascogne'').
The elderly and insane Charles VI of France died two months later, on 21 October 1422.
The French advance was contained, at which point de Grailly led a flanking movement with his horsemen cutting off the French retreat and succeeding in capturing King John II of France (known as John the Good) and many of his nobles.
At the same time ambassadors were to be sent to France with a proposed treaty for the French king.
At Verneuil the archers fought to devastating effect against the Franco-Scottish army.
Henry retook much of Normandy, including Caen in 1417, and Rouen on 19 January 1419, turning Normandy English for the first time in two centuries.
Joan of Arc was captured by the Burgundians at the siege of Compiegne on 23 May 1430.
This was a major blow to English sovereignty in France.
This came just as the Age of Exploration was about to begin.
Weapons, tactics, army structure and the social meaning of war all changed, partly in response to the war's costs, partly through advancement in technology and partly through lessons that warfare taught.
Thus the nearest heir through male ancestry was Charles IV's first cousin, Philip, Count of Valois, and it was decided that he should be crowned Philip VI.
Shorn of its continental possessions, England was left with the sense of being an island nation, which profoundly affected its outlook and development for more than 500 years.
The outbreak of war was motivated by a gradual rise in tension between the Kings of France and England about Guyenne, Flanders and Scotland.
In Wales, Owain Glyndŵr was declared Prince of Wales on 16 September 1400.
The dispute over Guyenne is even more important than the dynastic question in explaining the outbreak of the war.
With John held hostage, his son the Dauphin (later to become Charles V of France) assumed the powers of the king as regent.
The French responded in kind and French pirates, under Scottish protection, raided many English coastal towns.
However, when the wind turned in the late afternoon, the English attacked with the wind and sun behind them.
The Treaty of Brétigny set his ransom at 3&nbsp;million&nbsp;crowns and allowed for hostages to be held in lieu of John.
So, with his stand-in hostage gone, John felt honour-bound to return to captivity in England.
Although primarily a dynastic conflict, the war gave impetus to ideas of French and English nationalism.
In return for increased lands in Aquitaine, Edward renounced Normandy, Touraine, Anjou and Maine and consented to reducing King John's ransom by a million crowns.
Most of Henry's royal advisers were against making peace.
Action for the next few years focused around a back and forth struggle in Brittany.
Thieves and robbers rose up everywhere in the land.
The war stimulated nationalistic sentiment.
The English retreated from the Loire Valley, pursued by a French army.
His attempts to raise taxes to pay for his Scottish adventure and for the protection of Calais against the French made him increasingly unpopular.
Negotiations stalled.
The '''Hundred Years' War''' is the modern term for a series of conflicts waged from 1337 to 1453 by the House of Plantagenet, rulers of the Kingdom of England, against the House of Valois, rulers of the Kingdom of France, for control of the Kingdom of France.
It seems that at the congress of Arras, in the summer of 1435, where the duke of Beaufort was mediator, the English were unrealistic in their demands.
However, between 1377 and 1380, actual power was in the hands of a series of councils.
Despite Edward complying, albeit reluctantly, the French continued to pressure the English administration.
From the 11th century onward, the Angevins had autonomy within their French domains, effectively neutralising the issue.
There were constant rumours in England that the French meant to invade and destroy the English language.
The new Castilian regime provided naval support to French campaigns against Aquitaine and England.
Near the village of Patay, French cavalry broke through a unit of English longbowmen that had been sent to block the road, then swept through the retreating English army.
In 1399, after John of Gaunt died, Richard II disinherited Gaunt's son, the exiled Henry of Bolingbroke.
Edward also abandoned his claim to the crown of France.
It turned out to be more difficult to overcome than first thought.
This greatly reduced the threat from Scotland.
The new standing army had a more disciplined and professional approach to warfare than its predecessors.
The Dauphin's strategy was that of non-engagement with the English army in the field.
The French fleet assumed a defensive formation off the port of Sluis.
Henry IV of England died in 1413 and was replaced by his eldest son Henry V. Charles VI of France's mental illness allowed his power to be exercised by royal princes whose rivalries caused deep divisions in France.
The Prince was suffering from ill health and returned with his army to Aquitaine.
By the end of the Hundred Years' War, these various factors caused the decline of the expensively outfitted, highly trained heavy cavalry and the eventual end of first the armoured knight as a military force and later of the nobility as a political one.
Philip, Count of Poitiers, brother of Louis X, asserted that women were ineligible to succeed to the French throne.
Rather than fight while seated on the horse, they would dismount to engage the enemy.
Peter appealed to England and Aquitaine's Black Prince for help, but none was forthcoming, forcing Peter into exile in Aquitaine.
The Hundred Years' War accelerated the process of transforming France from a feudal monarchy to a centralised state.
For about nine years (1328–1337), the English had accepted the Valois succession to the French throne.
The Nobles despised and hated all others and took no thought for usefulness and profit of lord and men.
Furthermore, French kings found alternative ways to finance the war – sales taxes, debasing the coinage – and were less dependent than the English on tax levies passed by national legislatures.
For Edward, the homage did not imply the renunciation of his claim to the extorted lands.
Henry left an only child, his nine-month-old son, Henry, later to become Henry VI.
The mercenary companies were given a choice of either joining the Royal army as compagnies d'ordonnance on a permanent basis, or being hunted down and destroyed if they refused.
Charles V declared that all the English possessions in France were forfeited, and before the end of 1369 all of Aquitaine was in full revolt.
Charles V provided a force of 12,000, with du Guesclin at their head, to support Trastámara in his invasion of Castile.
... all went ill with the kingdom and the State was undone.
However, this line of argument could not be maintained by the English, so in 1329 the 17-year-old Edward III paid homage to Philip VI.
King David II of Scotland responded by invading northern England, but his army was defeated and he was captured at the Battle of Neville's Cross, on 17 October 1346.
Edward besieged the city for five weeks, but the defences held and there was no coronation.
In Scotland, the English regime change prompted border raids that were countered by an invasion in 1402 and the defeat of a Scottish army at the Battle of Homildon Hill.
The French rejected his demands, leading Henry to prepare for war.
However, at the ceremony, Philip VI had it recorded that the homage was not due to the fiefs detached from the duchy of Guyenne by Charles IV (especially Agen).
Largely due to the English sympathies of the Gascon people, this was reversed when John Talbot and his army retook the city on 23 October 1452.
The French nobility, moreover, balked at the prospect of being ruled by Isabelle and her lover Roger Mortimer, who were widely suspected of having murdered the previous English king, Edward II.
Bordeaux, Gascony's capital, was besieged and surrendered to the French on 30 June 1451.
The prince's illness was debilitating, and he died on 8 June 1376.
He then joined a group of Gascon lords who appealed to Charles V for support in their refusal to pay the tax.
Several overwhelming English victories in the war—especially at Crecy, Poitiers, and Agincourt—raised the prospects of an ultimate English triumph.
Edward invaded France, for the third and last time, hoping to capitalise on the discontent and seize the throne.
Lowe (1997) argued that opposition to the war helped to shape England's early modern political culture.
With this in mind Edward deliberately slowed the peace negotiations.
The confiscation or threat of confiscating this duchy had been part of French policy to check the growth of English power, particularly whenever the English were at war with the Kingdom of Scotland, an ally of France.
Edward revived his claim and in 1340 formally assumed the title 'King of France and the French Royal Arms'.
But the interference of the French king, Philip VI, in Edward III's war against Scotland permitted Edward III to reassert his claim to the French throne.
The term Gascony came to be used for the territory held by the Angevin (Plantagenet) Kings of England in southwest France, although they still used the title Duke of Aquitaine.
The French camp at Castillon had been laid out by Charles VII's ordnance officer Jean Bureau and this was instrumental in the French success as when the French cannon opened fire, from their positions in the camp, the English took severe casualties losing both Talbot and his son.
Philip appealed to his Scottish allies to help with a diversionary attack on England.
Robert was an exile from the French court, having fallen out with Philip VI over an inheritance claim.
This devastated Edward's army and forced him to negotiate when approached by the French.
Normandy lost three-quarters of its population, and Paris two-thirds.
At the end of April 1337, Philip of France was invited to meet the delegation from England but refused.
Henry had left his brother and presumptive heir Thomas, Duke of Clarence in charge while he returned to England.
After the Norman Conquest, the kings of England were vassals of the kings of France for their possessions in France.
The King of France agreed to restore Guyenne, minus Agen.
Bolingbroke returned to England  with his supporters and deposed Richard and had himself crowned Henry IV.
At the Battle of Baugé, Clarence had rushed into battle without the support of his archers.
Following John's reign, the Battle of Bouvines (1214), the Saintonge War (1242), and finally the War of Saint-Sardos (1324) resulted in the complete loss of Normandy and the reduction of England's holdings on the continent to a few provinces in Gascony.
Louis X left only a daughter, and his posthumous son John I lived only a few days.
The rebellion was finally put down only in 1415 and resulted in Welsh semi-independence for a number of years.
England showed decreasing enthusiasm for conflict deemed not in the national interest, yielding only losses in return for high economic burdens.
The English won an emphatic victory at the Battle of Verneuil, (17 August 1424).
Later historians invented the term "Hundred Years' War" as a periodization to encompass all of these events, thus constructing the longest military conflict in history.
In a campaign reminiscent of Crécy, he found himself outmaneuvered and low on supplies and had to fight a much larger French army at the Battle of Agincourt, north of the Somme.
The population of England was reduced by 20 to 33 percent due to plague in the same period.
The effect of the battle was to virtually destroy the Dauphin's field army and to eliminate the Scots as a significant military force for the rest of the war.
England dominated the English Channel for the rest of the war, preventing French invasions.
