A liberal party emerged and focused on providing for the peasantry.
Hungarian troops fought on the Eastern Front for two years.
, the key trading partners of Hungary were Germany, Austria, Romania, Slovakia, France, Italy, Poland and Czech Republic.
To counter the successes of the Hungarian revolutionary army, Habsburg Emperor Franz Joseph I asked for help from the "Gendarme of Europe", Czar Nicholas I, whose Russian armies invaded Hungary.
The legislature consequently approved a new constitution, among other sweeping governmental and legal changes.
Hungary formally entered World War II as an Axis Power on 26 June 1941, declaring war on the Soviet Union after unidentified planes bombed Kassa, Munkács, and Rahó.
Initially, the rising Principality of Hungary ("Western Tourkia" in medieval Greek sources) was a state consisting of a semi-nomadic people.
Unicum is a bitter, dark-coloured liqueur that can be drunk as an apéritif or after a meal, thus helping the digestion.
By the time Kádár died in 1989, the Soviet Union was in steep decline and a younger generation of reformists saw liberalization as the solution to economic and social issues.
Only seven countries (United States, USSR/Russia, United Kingdom, France, China, Italy and Germany) have won more Olympic medals than Hungary.
Later came the Huns, who built a powerful empire.
The lesser nobles also began to present Andrew with grievances, a practice that evolved into the institution of the parliament (''parlamentum publicum'').
This is leading to gradual population decline and rapid aging.
Foreigners have unexpectedly "discovered" that a significantly large portion of the citizens live in old and architecturally valuable buildings.
Some modern Hungarian authors have become increasingly popular in Germany and Italy especially Sándor Márai, Péter Esterházy, Péter Nádas and Imre Kertész.
The remains of their bath complexes are still to be seen in Óbuda.
Orthodox Christianity in Hungary is associated with the country's ethnic minorities: Romanians, Rusyns, Ukrainians, and Serbs.
''Onogur'' was the collective name for the tribes who later joined the Bulgar tribal confederacy that ruled the eastern parts of Hungary after the Avars.
Hungary has a continental climate, with hot summers with low overall humidity levels but frequent rainshowers and mildly cold snowy winters.
He was a successful crusader against the Ottoman Turks, one of his greatest victories being the Siege of Belgrade in 1456.
The imprints are made by the thumb or a finger of the ceramist who makes the piece.
After King Louis died without a male heir, the country was stabilized only when Sigismund of Luxembourg (1387–1437) succeeded to the throne, who in 1433 also became Holy Roman Emperor.
Kádár proclaimed a new policy line, according to which the people were no longer compelled to profess loyalty to the party if they tacitly accepted the Socialist regime as a fact of life.
By the 12th century, Hungary became a middle power within the Western world, reaching a golden age by the 15th century.
There are five international airports in Hungary: Budapest Liszt Ferenc, Debrecen, Sármellék (also called Hévíz-Balaton Airport), Győr-Pér, and Pécs-Pogány.
In the year 1276, the university of Veszprém was destroyed by the troops of Peter Csák and it was never rebuilt.
A later defeat at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 signaled a provisory end to most campaigns on foreign territories, at least towards the West.
In Hungary proper, Sárköz in Transdanubia and the Matyóföld in the Great Hungarian Plain produce the finest embroideries.
These include the very eastern stretch of the Alps, ''Alpokalja'', in the west of the country, the Transdanubian Mountains in the central region of Transdanubia, and the Mecsek Mountains and Villány Mountains in the south.
Hungary has 10 national parks, 145 minor nature reserves, and 35 landscape protection areas.
The first enlightened writers were Maria Theresia's bodyguards (György Bessenyei, János Batsányi and others).
Tokaji wine has received accolades from numerous great writers and composers including Beethoven, Liszt, Schubert and Goethe; Joseph Haydn's favorite wine was a Tokaji .
Romania declared war.
Although the Hungarian upper class has long had cultural and political connections with the rest of Europe, leading to an influx of European musical ideas, the rural peasants maintained their own traditions such that by the end of the 19th century Hungarian composers could draw on rural peasant music to (re)create a Hungarian classical style.
Following the firing on peaceful demonstrations by Soviet soldiers and secret police, and rallies throughout the country on 23 October 1956, protesters took to the streets in Budapest, initiating the 1956 Revolution.
Despite great Eastern successes, Germany suffered complete defeat on the more important Western front.
The Little Entente, sensing an opportunity, invaded the country from three sides—Romania invaded Transylvania, Czechoslovakia annexed Upper Hungary (today's Slovakia), and a joint Serb-French coalition annexed Vojvodina and other southern regions.
More than one quarter of the population lived in the Budapest metropolitan area, 6,903,858 people (69.5%) in cities and towns overall.
Since 1989, Hungary's top foreign policy goal has been achieving integration into Western economic and security organizations.
Hungary is an OECD high-income mixed economy with very high human development index and skilled labour force with the 16th lowest income inequality in the world, furthermore it is the 15th most complex economy according to the Economic Complexity Index.
Wine: As Hugh Johnson says in ''The History of Wine'', the territory of Hungary is ideal for wine-making.
The second Angevin Hungarian king, Louis the Great (1342–1382), led many successful military campaigns from Lithuania to Southern Italy (Kingdom of Naples), and was also King of Poland from 1370.
File:Hungarian_Grey_Cattle.jpg|Hungarian grey cattle in the Hortobágy National Park
Hussar (huszár) refers to a number of types of light cavalry created in Hungary in the 15th century and used throughout Europe and even in America since the 18th century.
Like most other European countries, Hungary is experiencing sub-replacement fertility, with the total fertility rate (TFR) in 2015 estimated at 1.43 children born/woman, lower than the replacement rate of 2.1.
Its legal successor is the University of Miskolc in Hungary.
Some 13,000 were interned and 230 brought to trial and executed.
Rákosi eventually managed to discredit Nagy and replace him with the more hard-line Ernő Gerő.
Following the war of 18481849, the whole country was in "passive resistance".
By 1918, the economic situation had deteriorated (strikes in factories were organized by leftist and pacifist movements) and uprisings in the army had become commonplace.
The Prime Minister selects Cabinet ministers and has the exclusive right to dismiss them.
Also, the national teams have produced some surprise successes such as beating Euro 2004 winner Greece 3–2 and 2006 FIFA World Cup winner Italy 3–1.
Some 600,000 Hungarians were deported to Soviet labor camps, where at least 200,000 died.
(See Bible translations into Hungarian for more details.)
On 13 February 1945, Budapest surrendered; by April, German troops left the country under Soviet military occupation.
Importantly, the President may veto a piece of legislation or send it to the 15-member Constitutional Court for review.
The first Hungarian Bible translation was completed in 1439.
The Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BME) is considered the oldest institute of technology in the world with university rank and structure.
This building is a noted example of modern Renaissance Style.
Budapest is the financial and business capital of Hungary.
Hungary became a member of NATO on 12 March 1999.
In imitation of Stalin's KGB, the Rákosi government established a secret political police, the ÁVH, to enforce the new regime.
Located on the Buda side of Budapest, the Gellért spa is the most famous and luxurious thermal complex of the capital city.
Another, Universitas Istropolitana, was established 1465 in Pozsony (now Bratislava in Slovakia) by Mattias Corvinus.
The latter is a contemporary Jewish writer who survived the Holocaust and won the Nobel Prize for literature in 2002.
Hungarian traditional music tends to have a strong dactylic rhythm, as the language is invariably stressed on the first syllable of each word.
Lake Balaton and Lake Hévíz, the largest lake in Central Europe and the largest thermal lake in the world, respectively, are in Transdanubia as well.
Hungary's record of implementing CSCE ''Helsinki Final Act'' provisions, including those on reunification of divided families, remains among the best in Central and Eastern Europe.
Hungary also has a number of internationally renowned composers of contemporary classical music, György Ligeti, György Kurtág, Péter Eötvös, Zoltán Kodály and Zoltán Jeney among them.
It was in the beginning of the 18th-century that the present style of Hungarian folk art took shape, incorporating both Renaissance and Baroque elements, depending on the area, as well as Persian Sassanide influences.
During the latter part of the Cold War Hungary's GDP per capita was fourth only to East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union itself.
Nearly all the manifestations of folk art practiced elsewhere in Europe also flourished among the Magyar peasantry at one time or another, their ceramics and textile being the most highly developed of all.
In July 1849 the Hungarian Parliament proclaimed and enacted the first laws of ethnic and minority rights in the world.
As a result of this relatively high standard of living, a more liberalized economy, a less censored press, and less restricted travel rights, Hungary was generally considered one of the more liberal countries in which to live in Central Europe during communism.
Scientific research in the country is supported partly by industry and partly by the state, through the network of Hungarian universities and by scientific state-institutions such as Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
The capital is a significant economic hub, classified as an Alpha- world city in the study by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network and it is the second fastest-developing urban economy in Europe as GDP per capita in the city increased by 2.4 per cent and employment by 4.7 per cent compared to the previous year in 2014.
Count István Széchenyi, one of the most prominent statesmen of the country, recognized the urgent need of modernization and his message got through.
The power to grant the officially recognized status of a church is vested in the legislature, and not the judiciary; this setup has been the subject of criticism.
Catholics are the largest Christian group in Hungary, accounting for 58% of Hungary citizens, while Protestants make up 7%, and Other Christian make up 6%.
He receives foreign heads of state and formally nominates the Prime Minister at the recommendation of the National Assembly.
From a small noble family in Transylvania, John Hunyadi grew to become one of the country's most powerful lords, thanks to his outstanding capabilities as a mercenary commander.
Among the religious literary works the most important is the Bible translation by Gáspár Károli (The second Hungarian Bible translation in the history), the Protestant pastor of Gönc, in 1590.
His Golden Bull of 1222 was the first constitution in Continental Europe.
The Military of Hungary, or "Hungarian Armed Forces", currently has two branches, the "Hungarian Ground Force" and the "Hungarian Air Force".
For the first time in Hungarian football's history, they hosted the 2010 UEFA Futsal Championship in Budapest and Debrecen, the first time the MLSZ staged a UEFA finals tournament.
The invading Mongol force was defeated near Pest by the royal army of Ladislaus IV of Hungary.
Hungary's higher education and training has been ranked 44 out of 148 countries in the Global competitiveness Report 2013/2014.
English (1,589,180 speakers, 16.0%), and German (1,111,997 speakers, 11.2%) are the most widely spoken foreign languages, while there are several recognized minority languages in Hungary (Croatian, German, Romanian, Romani, Serbian, Slovak, Slovenian, and Ukrainian).
Matthias' mercenary standing army, the Black Army of Hungary, was an unusually large army for its time, and it conquered parts of Austria, Vienna (1485) and parts of Bohemia.
It is home to the largest thermal water cave system, the second-largest thermal lake in the world (Lake Hévíz), the largest lake in Central Europe (Lake Balaton), and the largest natural grasslands in Europe (the Hortobágy National Park).
Hungary was invited to join both the NATO and the European Union in 1997.
Hungary is a unicameral parliamentary representative democratic republic.
Hungary is the largest electronics producer in Central and Eastern Europe.
Hungary participated in the Holocaust.
Hungary's international role declined, its political stability shaken, and social progress was deadlocked.
Lajos Kossuth escaped into exile.
The system consists of four lines.
Since the fall of communism there has been a renaissance in Hungarian wine-making.
Following the Battle of Mohács in 1526 and about 150 years of partial Ottoman occupation (1541–1699), Hungary came under Habsburg rule, and later formed a significant part of the Austro–Hungarian Empire (1867–1918).
The ''bisztró'' is an inexpensive restaurant often with self-service.
During the German occupation in May–June 1944, the Arrow Cross and Hungarian police deported nearly 440,000 Jews, mainly to Auschwitz.
The ''csárda'' is the most distinctive type of Hungarian inn, an old-style tavern offering traditional cuisine and beverages.
The second element ''eri'', 'man, men, lineage', survives in Hungarian ''férj'' 'husband', and is cognate with Mari ''erge'' 'son', Finnish archaic ''yrkä'' 'young man'.
For over 150 years, a blend of 40 Hungarian herbs has been used to create the liqueur Unicum.
Following the defeat of Nazi Germany, Hungary became a satellite state of the Soviet Union.
The Magyars advancing through the Carpathian Basin encountered the Hungarian-speaking Székely people who inhabited the land at that time.
Many Hungarian scientists, including Erdős, von&nbsp;Neumann, Leó Szilárd, Eugene Wigner, Rudolf E. Kálmán, and Edward Teller emigrated to the US during the 20th century dictatorships.
Zrínyi's most significant work, the epic ''Szigeti veszedelem'' ("Peril of Sziget", written in 1648/49) is written in a fashion similar to the ''Iliad'', and recounts the heroic Battle of Szigetvár, where his great-grandfather died while defending the castle of Szigetvár.
The Hungarian Fidesz government since 2010 evoked criticism from the European Union partners and Council of Europe concerning a press and media law seen by some as anti-democratic and a new constitution that was feared to undermine the rule of law and human rights protection.
Hungarian forces deploy the Gepárd anti-materiel rifle, which is a heavy  portable gun.
The most powerful and wealthiest king of the Árpád dynasty was Béla III, who disposed of the equivalent of 23 tonnes of pure silver a year.
Up until 2012, 386 MPs were elected to the National Assembly in two rounds of voting guaranteeing proportional representation with an election threshold of 5%.
Since then, however, the Hungarian music industry has begun to recover, producing successful performers in the fields of jazz such as trumpeter Rudolf Tomsits, pianist-composer Károly Binder and, in a modernized form of Hungarian folk, Ferenc Sebő and Márta Sebestyén.
The Catholic Church in Hungary remained strong through the centuries, and the Archbishop of Esztergom (''Esztergomi érsek'') was granted extraordinary temporal privileges as prince-primate (''hercegprímás'') of Hungary.
Renaissance literature flourished under the reign of King Matthias (1458–1490).
Nearly 20,000 Hungarians were killed resisting the intervention, while an additional 21,600 were imprisoned afterwards for political reasons.
Hungary's geography has traditionally been defined by its two main waterways, the Danube and Tisza rivers.
It accomplished an enormous transformation into a Christian realm during the 10th century.
Many freethinkers, democrats, and Horthy-era dignitaries were secretly arrested and extrajudicially interned in domestic and foreign Gulags.
Hungary provided airbases and support for NATO's air campaign against Serbia and has provided military units to serve in Kosovo as part of the NATO-led KFOR operation.
Gustav III never had any other wine to drink .
In the Eurostat – Eurobarometer poll of 2005, 44% of Hungarians answered that they believed there is a God, 31% answered they believed there is some sort of spirit or life force, and 19% that they do not believe there is a God, spirit, nor life force.
The Hungarian Parliament was reconvened in 1825 to handle financial needs.
Non believer/Agnostic account 21%, Atheist account's 1%.
In 2015, as a partial response to the European migrant crisis, a border fence was built on some of the southern borders of Hungary, which evoked international criticisms.
The Antall government's austerity measures proved unpopular, and the Communist Party's legal and political heir, the Socialist Party, won the subsequent 1994 elections.
King Matthias died without lawful sons, and the Hungarian magnates procured the accession of the Pole Vladislaus II (1490–1516), supposedly because of his weak influence on Hungarian aristocracy.
On the expenditure side, household consumption is the main component of GDP and accounts for 50 percent of its total use, followed by gross fixed capital formation with 22 percent and government expenditure with 20 percent.
The country gained widespread international attention regarding the Revolution of 1956 and the seminal opening of its previously-restricted border with Austria in 1989, which accelerated the collapse of the Eastern Bloc.
Large Hungarian companies are included in the BUX, the Hungarian stock market index listed on Budapest Stock Exchange.
The last raid into Hungary by the Ottoman vassals Tatars from Crimea took place in 1717.
File:Somló-hegy szőlőültetvény.JPG|Today Hungary has 22 designated wine regions, Somló is one of them.
In October 1918, Hungary's union with Austria was dissolved.
From the 1960s through the late 1980s, Hungary was often referred to as "the happiest barrack" within the Eastern bloc.
In a significant move for modernization, Hungary decided in 2001 to buy 14 JAS 39 Gripen fighter aircraft (the contract includes 2 dual-seater airplanes and 12 single-seaters as well as ground maintenance facilities, a simulator, and training for pilots and ground crews) for 210 billion HUF (about 800 million EUR).
The Soviet leadership selected Mátyás Rákosi to front the Stalinization of the country, and Rákosi ruled ''de facto'' ruled Hungary from 1949 to 1956.
Eastern parts of the country, especially around Debrecen ("the Calvinist Rome"), retained strong Protestant communities.
It is a spirit native to Hungary and comes in a variety of flavours including apricot (''barack'') and cherry (''cseresznye'').
"Every experiment, made from Hungarian antedecents and on Hungarian soil, to create a conscious musical culture (music written by composers, as different from folk music), had instinctively or consciously striven to develop widely and universally the musical world of the folk song.
With the removal of state subsidies and rapid privatization in 1991, Hungary was affected by a severe economic recession.
Because of external and internal problems, reforms seemed inevitable and major military defeats of Austria forced the Habsburgs to negotiate the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, by which the dual Monarchy of Austria–Hungary was formed.
Cabinet nominees must appear before consultative open hearings before one or more parliamentary committees, survive a vote in the National Assembly, and be formally approved by the President.
The ethnic composition of Hungary was fundamentally changed as a consequence of the prolonged warfare with the Turks.
Hungary joined the Partnership for Peace program in 1994 and has actively supported the IFOR and SFOR missions in Bosnia.
Hungary is a historically Christian country.
In the capital cities, the Austrian and Hungarian leftist liberal movements (the maverick parties) and their leaders supported the separatism of ethnic minorities.
Budapest is also among the Top100 GDP performing cities in the world, measured by PricewaterhouseCoopers and in a global city competitiveness ranking by EIU, Budapest is stands before Tel Aviv, Lisbon, Moscow and Johannesburg among others.
Traditional dishes such as the world-famous Goulash (''gulyás'' stew or ''gulyás'' soup) feature prominently.
13 Hungarian scientists have received the Nobel Prize.
Jewish (0.1%), and Muslim (0.06%) communities are in the minority, although this is complicated by the fact that 27.2% of respondents did not declare their religion while 16.7% declared themselves irreligious, another 1.5% atheist.
Szolnok is the most important railway hub outside Budapest, while Tiszai Railway Station in Miskolc and the main stations of Pécs, Győr, Szeged, and Székesfehérvár are also key to the network.
For a time, the Soviet leadership was unsure how to respond to developments in Hungary, but eventually decided to intervene to prevent a destabilization of the Soviet bloc.
Over the centuries, they were fully assimilated into the Hungarian population.
Although the MSzMP began Round Table Talks with various opposition groups in March 1989, the reburial of Imre Nagy as a revolutionary martyr that June is widely considered the symbolic end of communism in Hungary.
In the 2000s, the army bought new minesweepers and restored or retired the old ones.
Free elections were held in May 1990, which saw the Hungarian Democratic Forum, a major conservative opposition group, elected to the head of a coalition government.
As a consequence, after the Mongols retreated, King Béla ordered the construction of hundreds of stone castles and fortifications, to defend against a possible second Mongol invasion.
Since the fall of communism, Hungary has had a multi-party system.
Under his rule, in 1479, the Hungarian army destroyed the Ottoman and Wallachian troops at the Battle of Breadfield.
Despite some successes on the Czechoslovak front, Kun's forces were ultimately unable to resist the Romanian invasion; by August 1919, Romanian troops occupied Budapest and ousted Kun.
The Little Hungarian Plain (''Kisalföld'') is found in northern Transdanubia.
To the north of the Plain are the foothills of the Carpathians in a wide band near the Slovakian border.
Louis XV and Frederick the Great tried to outdo one another in the excellence of the vintages they stocked when they treated guests like Voltaire to Tokaji.
Notable architectural styles in Hungary include Historicism and Art Nouveau, or rather several variants of Art Nouveau.
The Mongols returned to Hungary in 1285, but the newly built stone-castle systems and new tactics (using a higher proportion of heavily armed knights) stopped them.
Some modern military units retain the title 'hussar' for reasons of tradition.
The Austro-Hungarian Empire then withdrew from all defeated countries.
The era witnessed impressive economic development.
They have also seen success in canoe.
Nagy was captured to be executed in 1958.
Hungary is a land of thermal water.
Hungary has a highly developed road, railway, air and water transport system.
The Széchenyi Thermal Bath is the largest spa complex in Europe  and it was the first thermal bath built in the Pest side of Budapest .
The average yearly rainfall is approximately .
''Perec'' and ''kifli'' are widely popular pastries.
Five Gripens (3 single-seaters and 2 two-seaters) arrived in Kecskemét on 21 March 2006, expected to be transferred to the Hungarian Air Force on 30 March.
At the age of six, pupils enter primary schools: the curriculum is divided into two phases of 4 years each.
According to the WWF, the territory of Hungary belongs to the ecoregion of Pannonian mixed forests.
The highest point of the area is the Írott-kő in the Alps, at .
* Conductors: Eugene Ormandy, George Szell, Antal Doráti, János Ferencsik, Fritz Reiner, sir Georg Solti, István Kertész, Ferenc Fricsay, Zoltán Rozsnyai, Sándor Végh, Árpád Joó, Ádám Fischer, Iván Fischer, Péter Eötvös, Zoltán Kocsis, Tamás Vásáry, Gilbert Varga and others
In January 1920, parliamentary elections were held and Horthy was proclaimed Regent of the reestablished Kingdom of Hungary, inaugurating the so-called "Horthy age" (''Horthy-kor'').
After the fall of communism in Hungary the factory was privatised and is now 75% owned by its management and workers, exporting to over 60 countries of the world.
Learning of the planned defection, German troops occupied Hungary on 19 March 1944 to guarantee Horthy's compliance.
The Danube flows north-south right through the center of contemporary Hungary, and the entire country lies within its drainage basin.
Nagyszombat University was founded in 1635 and moved to Buda in 1777 and it is called Eötvös Loránd University today.
This made Artúr Görgey surrender in August 1849.
According to the 2014 Global Peace Index, Hungary is one of the world's most peaceful countries (21st on the list).
The freshly unified Hungarians led by Árpád settled in the Carpathian Basin starting in 895.
Nagy promised market liberalization and political openness, while Rákosi opposed both vigorously.
The Hungarians defeated no fewer than three major East Frankish Imperial Armies between 907 and 910.
10 or 14 more aircraft of this type might follow up in the coming years.
After 8 years of war with the Habsburg Empire, the Hungarian Kuruc army lost the last main battle at Trencsén (1708).
The employment rate in the economy was 65.0% in 2015, the employment structure shows the characteristics of post-industrial economies, 63.2% of employed workforce work in service sector, the industry contributed by 29.7%, while agriculture with 7.1%.
The best quality of paprika comes from the city of Kalocsa .
Major industries include food processing, pharmaceuticals, motor vehicles, information technology, chemicals, metallurgy, machinery, electrical goods, and tourism (in 2014 Hungary welcomed 12.1 million international tourists).
In 2009, the Hungarian national ice hockey team qualified for their first IIHF World Championship.
The greatest figure of the language reform was Ferenc Kazinczy.
One of the greatest Hungarian composers, Béla Bartók, was also among the most significant musicians of the 20th century.
Hungary has remarkable football history, having won three Olympic titles, finishing runners-up in the 1938 and 1954 FIFA World Cups, and third in the 1964 UEFA European Football Championship.
His government's policies of militarization, industrialization, collectivization, and war compensation led to a severe decline in living standards.
