Hunnish mercenaries were also seen on several occasions in the succession struggles of the Eastern and Western Roman Empire during the late 4th century.
On the basis of the existing name records, a number of scholars suggest that the Huns spoke a Turkic language of the Oghur branch, which also includes Bulgar, Khazar and Chuvash languages.
In 451, Attila's forces entered Gaul, accumulating contingents from the Franks, Goths and Burgundian tribes en route.
However, Austrian traveler Maenchen-Helfen wrote in the 20th century: "Ammianus' description begins with a strange misunderstanding&nbsp;...
It is uncertain though, whether or not Eutropius' forces defeated the Huns or whether the Huns left on their own.
Edward Arthur Thompson said, the similarity between the two ethnonyms (Chuni and Huns) is only a coincidence: Western Roman authors often wrote ''Chunni'' or ''Chuni'' in reference to the Huns, East Romans never used the guttural Voiceless velar fricative|"x" at the beginning of their name.
It again started to spread among the local inhabitants of the region of the Talas River and in the Pamir Mountains in the .
Based on some etymological interpretation of the words ''strava'', ''medos'', and ''kamos'' and subsequent historical appearance, the other languages have been taken to include a form of Proto-Slavic language.
The Thervingi were followed by the Greuthingi, and also by the Taifali and "other tribes that formerly dwelt with the Goths and Taifali" to the north of the Lower Danube, according to Zosimus.
With his brother gone, Attila was able to establish undisputed control over his subjects.
However, there is no scholarly consensus on a direct connection between the dominant element of the Xiongnu and that of the Huns.
The Greuthingi under the leadership of Alatheus and Saphrax also marched to the river.
The term "Hun" from this speech was later used for the Germans by British propaganda during World War I.
Variants of the Hun name are recorded in the Caucasus until the early 8th century.
Attila's brother Bleda is called Buda in modern Hungarian.
An example would be the Germanic or Germanized names of noted Huns like Laudaricus.
The idea that the Hun horsemen fought their way to the walls of Constantinople and to the Marne with bartered and captured swords is absurd."
When the Romans breached the treaty in 440, Attila and Bleda attacked Castra Constantias, a Roman fortress and marketplace on the banks of the Danube.
These were countered by another small band of Huns hired by Honorius' minister Olympius.
He does not exclude either that the Urugundi who invaded the Roman Empire from the steppes to the north of the Lower Danube in , according to Zosimus, were identical with the Vurugundi, whom Agathias listed among the Hunnic tribes.
The Huns do not then appear to have been a single force with a single ruler.
A symbol of status among the Huns was a gilded bow.
From the Pannonian Basin, Attila mobilised to attack Constantinople.
Thereafter the identification of the Xiongnu as the Huns' ancestors became controversial among some.
The Hun sword was a long, straight, double-edged sword of early Sassanian style.
In 2013, Hyun Jin Kim suggested that "from the names that we do know, most of which seem to be Turkic... the Hunnic elite was predominantly Turkic-speaking".
After this, the Huns invaded the Sassanid Empire.
Maenchen-Helfen held that by Turkic origin of Hunnic tribal and proper names, the Huns spoke a Turkic language.
They invaded the land of the Alans, which was located to the east of the Don River, slaughtering many of them and forcing the survivors to submit themselves to them or to flee across the Don.
Jordanes also recounted how Priscus had described Attila the Hun, the Emperor of the Huns from 434-453, as: "Short of stature, with a broad chest and a large head; his eyes were small, his beard thin and sprinkled with grey; and he had a flat nose and tanned skin, showing evidence of his origin."
Once in Gaul, the Huns first attacked Metz, then his armies continued westwards, passing both Paris and Troyes to lay siege to Orléans.
Many Huns were employed as mercenaries by both East and West Romans and by the Goths.
However, according to Zhengzhang Shangfang, Xiongnu was pronounced hoŋ.naː in Late Old Chinese, corresponding well to Huna.
Ammianus' explanation of the thin beards is wrong.
Both the Xiongnu and Huns used bronze cauldrons, similarly to all peoples of the steppes.
However, in 453 he married a girl with the Germanic name Ildico, and died of a haemorrhage on his wedding night.
With their southern border protected by the terms of this treaty, the Huns could turn their full attention to the further subjugation of tribes to the west.
In 91 AD, the Huns were said to be living near the Caspian Sea and by about 150 had migrated southeast into the Caucasus.
In forming their view of Attila's people, the Romans tapped into attitudes inherited from the Greeks.
There is also a medieval legend of a lineage that makes Attila the sixth-generation ancestor of Árpád conqueror of the modern Pannonian basin, through Attila's son Csaba, his son Ed, his son Ügyek, his son Előd, his son Álmos.
Frisia was often called Hunaland in the Middle Ages.
The Huns practised artificial cranial deformation, but there is no evidence of such practice among the Xiongnu.
The comparison was helped by the spiked ''Pickelhaube'' helmet worn by German forces until 1916, which would be reminiscent of images depicting ancient Hun helmets.
A style that arrived in Europe with the Huns (after centuries of use on the borders of China), was stiffened by two laths on each siyah, and additionally reinforced on the grip by three laths, for a total of seven per bow.
The Eastern Roman Empire was already beset by internal problems, such as famine and plague, as well as riots and a series of earthquakes in Constantinople itself.
The lengthy pony-tail, which was a characteristic of the Xiongnu, was not documented among the Huns.
Since Guignes' time, considerable scholarly effort has been devoted to investigating such a connection.
None of them have any Mongoloid features and all the skulls appear Europid; these skulls may have belonged to Germanic or other subject groups whose parents wished to elevate their status by following a custom introduced by the Huns.
This demonization of the Huns is also reflected in Jordanes's ''Getica'', written in the , which portrayed them as a people descending from "unclean spirits" and expelled Gothic witches.
There is no record of a notable victory by Eutropius and there is evidence that the Hunnish forces were already leaving the area by the time he gathered his forces.
Denis Sinor suggests if Balamber existed, he may have been a chief of a small faction of Huns, since Vithimiris utilized Hun mercenaries against him, which suggests a lack of unity among the Huns.
Gainas' head was given to the East Romans for display in Constantinople in an apparent exchange of gifts.
According to Roman sources, their other sources of food consisted of wild game and the roots of wild plants.
Attila claimed her as his bride and half the Western Roman Empire as dowry.
Walter Pohl explicitly states: "All we can say safely is that the name ''Huns'', in late antiquity, described prestigious ruling groups of steppe warriors."
The Chinese ''Book of Wei'' contain references to "the remains of the descendants of the Xiongnu" who lived in the region of the Altai Mountains in the early .
They had no buildings, of course, not so much as a reed hut, indeed, they feared the very idea of venturing under a roof.
Victory over a Roman army left the Huns virtually unchallenged in Eastern Roman lands and they raided as far south as Thermopylae.
The similarity of their ethnonyms is one of the most important links between the two peoples.
Their sudden appearance in the written sources suggests that the Huns crossed the Volga River from the east not much earlier.
A Sogdian merchant described the invasion of northern China by the "Xwn" people in a letter, written in .
By 370, the Huns had established a vast, if short-lived, dominion in Europe.
Based on the study and categorization of cauldrons from archaeological sites of the Eurasian Steppes, archaeologist Toshio Hayashi concludes that the spread of the cauldrons "may indicate the route of migration of the Hunnic tribes" from Mongolia to the northern region of Central Asia in the 2nd or , and from Central Asia towards Europe in the second half of the , which also implies the Huns' association with the Xiongnu.
(The Scythian and Sarmatian bows, used for centuries on the European steppes until the arrival of the Huns, had no such laths.)
After these invasions, the Huns begin to be noted as Foederati and mercenaries.
Due to the devastating  defeat by the Chinese Han dynasty, the northern branch of the Xiongnu had retreated north-westward; their descendants may have migrated through Eurasia and consequently they may have some degree of cultural and genetic continuity with the Huns.
Christopher P. Atwood rejects that identification because of the "very poor phonological match" between the three words.
Women would embroider the edges of the garments and often stitch small colorful stone beads on them as well.
Although Magyar tribes only began to settle in the geographical area of present-day Hungary in the very end of the 9th century, some 450 years after the dissolution of the Hunnic tribal confederation, Hungarian prehistory includes Magyar origin myths, which may have preserved some elements of historical truth.
The Hunnic kings turned their attention back to the Eastern Romans.
The Romans also agreed to give up Hunnic refugees (individuals who could have threatened the brothers' grip on power) for execution.
The description of Huns given by the Romans has prompted some historians to believe they were of East Asian origin.
Although a truce was signed in 441, two years later Constantinople again failed to deliver the tribute and war resumed.
The literary sources preserve many names, and three Indo-European words (medos, kamos, strava), which have been studied for more than a century and a half.
Sword and dagger grips also were decorated with gold.
From 434 the brothers Attila and Bleda ruled the Huns together.
However, Maenchen-Helfen proposes that Ammianus Marcellinus referred to Ptolemy's report of the Chuni when stating that the Huns "are mentioned only cursorily in ancient writers".
The Chuni lived "between the Bastarnae and the Roxolani", according to Ptolemy.
Otto Maenchen-Helfen noted that the thesis Huns spoke a Turkic language has a long history behind it.
Subjects of the Huns also included Iranian-speaking Alans and Sarmatians.
The East Romans tried to buy Uldin off, but his sum was too high so they instead bought off Uldin's subordinates.
The Huns were "a confederation of warrior bands", ready to integrate other groups to increase their military power, in the Eurasian Steppe in the 4th to .
Attila retreated without Honoria or her dowry.
The Huns who invaded Europe represented a loose coalition of various peoples, so some Magyars might have been part of it, or may later have joined descendants of Attila's men, who still claimed the name of Huns.
He hired Huns to fight against the Alans who invaded the Greuthungi's land, but he was killed in a battle.
Most aspects of their ethnogenesis (including their language and their links to other peoples of the steppes) are uncertain.
Finally, Attila's ability to distribute treasure to favoured followers was an important support to his power, and the repeated extortion from the Eastern Roman Empire had left it with little to plunder.
Those who decided to resist marched to the Dniester River which was the border between the lands of the Greuthungi and the Thervingi, or western Goths.
Only disease forced them to retreat, and the war came to an end in 449 with an agreement in which the Romans agreed to pay Attila an annual tribute of 2100 pounds of gold.
For example, Winston Churchill 1941 said in a broadcast speech: "There are less than 70,000,000 malignant Huns, some of whom are curable and others killable, most of whom are already engaged in holding down Austrians, Czechs, Poles and the many other ancient races they now bully and pillage."
Emperor Valens permitted the Thervingi to cross the Lower Danube and to settle in the Roman Empire in the autumn of 376.
To advance on Rome would have required supplies which were not available in Italy, and taking the city would not have improved Attila's supply situation.
Otto J. Maenchen-Helfen was the first to challenge the traditional approach, based primarily on the study of written sources, and to emphasize the importance of archaeological research.
In 395 the Huns began their first large-scale attack on the Eastern Roman Empire.
The Romans became aware of the Huns when the Hunnic invasion of the Pontic steppes forced thousands of Goths to move to the Lower Danube to seek refuge in the Roman Empire in 376, according to the contemporaneous Ammianus Marcellinus.
Prosper of Aquitaine describes the historic meeting, giving all the credit of the successful negotiation to Leo.
Some medieval chronicles and literary works derive the name of the city of Buda from him.
They knew nothing of metal, had no religion and lived like savages, without fire, eating their food raw, living off roots, and meat tenderized by placing it under their horses' saddles.
The French songwriter Theodore Botrel described the Kaiser as "an Attila, without remorse", launching "cannibal hordes".
Jerome associated them with the Scythians  in a letter, written four years after the Huns invaded the empire's eastern provinces in 395.
Aetius was given the duty of relieving Orléans by Emperor Valentinian III.
In 447, Attila turned the Huns back toward the Eastern Roman Empire once more.
As early as 380, a group of Huns was given Foederati status and allowed to settle in Pannonia.
This invasion was initially successful, coming close to the capital of the empire at Ctesiphon; however, they were defeated badly during the Persian counterattack and retreated toward the Caucasus Mountains via the Derbend Pass.
According to Edwin G. Pulleyblank, European Huns comprised two groups of tribes with different ethnic affinities and the ruling group that bore the name Hun was directly connected with the Xiongnu.
The ensuing war between the Goths and the Romans lasted for more than five years.
When writing of the relationship between the Xiongnu and Huns, historian Hyun Jin Kim concludes: "Thus to refer to Hun-Xiongnu links in terms of old racial theories or even ethnic affiliations simply makes a mockery of the actual historical reality of these extensive, multiethnic, polyglot steppe empires".
The language had strong ties to Bulgar language and to modern Chuvash, but also had some important connections, especially lexical and morphological, to Ottoman Turkish and Yakut".
His great-nephew, Vithimiris, succeeded him.
In the 18th century, the French scholar Joseph de Guignes became the first to propose a link between the Huns and the Xiongnu people, who were northern neighbours of China in the 3rd century BC.
This resulted in many desertions from Uldin's group of Huns.
Whether put to flight by Eutropius, or leaving on their own, the Huns had left the Eastern Roman Empire by 398.
Maenchen-Helfen and Denis Sinor also dispute the association of the Chuni with Attila's Huns.
Reports that the Bishop of Margus had crossed into Hun lands and desecrated royal graves further angered the Hun kings.
Many recent scholars agree that Hunnic was related to Turkic and Mongolian languages.
The Greuthungic king, Ermanaric, resisted for a while, but finally "he found release from his fears by taking his own life", according to Ammianus Marcellinus.
After they subjugated the Alans, the Huns and their Alan auxiliaries started plundering the wealthy settlements of the Greuthungi, or eastern Goths, to the west of the Don.
Denis Sinor argued that "at least part of the Hun leadership was Turkic speaking".
Priscus noted that the Hunnic language differed from other languages spoken at Attila's court.
Additionally, a dispute arose between Attila and Aetius about the rightful heir to a king of the Salian Franks.
Artificial cranial deformation was practiced by the Huns and sometimes by tribes under their influence.
Álmos was ruler of the Magyars and the father of Arpad
The Buddhist monk Dharmarakṣa, who was an important translator of Indian religious texts in the , applied the word Xiongnu when translating the references to the Huna people into Chinese.
A last-minute rebuilding of its walls preserved Constantinople unscathed.
Hoping to avoid the sack of Rome, Emperor Valentinian III sent three envoys, the high civilian officers Gennadius Avienus and Trigetius, as well as Pope Leo I, who met Attila at Mincio in the vicinity of Mantua, and obtained from him the promise that he would withdraw from Italy and negotiate peace with the emperor.
Since Joseph de Guignes in the , modern historians have associated the Huns who appeared on the borders of Europe in the  with the Xiongnu ("howling slaves") who had invaded China from the territory of present-day Mongolia between the  and the .
In the following campaign, Hun armies came alarmingly close to Constantinople, sacking Sardica, Arcadiopolis and Philippopolis along the way.
Though they live in the form of men, they have the cruelty of wild beasts."
:"They made their foes flee in horror because their swarthy aspect was fearful, and they had, if I may call it so, a sort of shapeless lump, not a head, with pin-holes rather than eyes.
However, it is most likely that these were individual mercenary bands, not a Hunnish kingdom.
He noted that people in Attila's court spoke beside Hunnic, also Gothic and Latin, and that in the western part of the Empire, where lived subjected Goths, people described as Huns probably spoke both the Hunnic and Gothic languages.
Their descendants, or successors with similar names, are recorded by neighbouring populations to the south, east and west as having occupied parts of Eastern Europe and Central Asia approximately from the 4th century to the 6th century.
The forces of Emperor Theodosius were fully committed in the west so the Huns moved unopposed until the end of 398 when the eunuch Eutropius gathered together a force composed of Romans and Goths and succeeded in restoring peace.
Although a tactical defeat for Attila, thwarting his invasion of Gaul and forcing his retreat back to non-Roman lands, the macrohistorical significance of the allied and Roman victory is a matter of debate.
The ancient sources are thus clear that there was a Hunnic language.
This defeat and Ellac's death ended the European supremacy of the Huns, and soon afterwards they disappear from contemporary records.
Bleda died in 445, with some historians speculating that his death was at the hands of Attila.
Jordanes reports that the Huns were led at this time by Balamber.
Throughout their raids on the Eastern Roman Empire, the Huns had maintained good relations with the Western Empire, and in particular with Flavius Aetius, a powerful Roman general (sometimes even referred to as the ''de facto ''ruler of the Western Empire) who in his youth had spent time as a hostage with the Huns.
Pritsak in his study (1982),"''The Hunnic Language of the Attila Clan''", who analyzing the 33 survived personal names concluded: "It was not a Turkic language, but one between Turkic and Mongolian, probably closer to the former than the latter.
After Attila's death, while his sons Ellac, Dengizich and Ernak fought for the throne, former subjects soon united under Ardaric, leader of the Gepids, attacked the Huns at the Battle of Nedao in 454.
However, this all changed in 450 when Honoria, sister of the Western Roman Emperor Valentinian III, sent Attila a ring and requested his help to escape her betrothal to a senator.
Uldin was also known for defeating Gothic rebels giving trouble to the East Romans around the Danube and beheading the Goth Gainas around 400-401.
Priscus said that Attila's "Scythian" subjects spoke "''besides their own barbarian tongues, either Hunnish, or Gothic, or, as many have dealings with the Western Romans, Latin; but not one of them easily speaks Greek, except captives from the Thracian or Illyrian frontier regions''".
The Huns returned to their lands with a vast train full of plunder.
Later in 409, the West Romans stationed ten thousand Huns in Italy and Dalmatia to fend off Alaric, who then abandoned plans to march on Rome.
His invasion of the Balkans and Thrace was devastating.
They went to the Lower Danube, requesting asylum in the Roman Empire.
Their main military technique was mounted archery.
Priscus describes Attila's clothes as different from those of his men only in being clean.
It is the unusual that most attracts attention."
Attila and Bleda were as ambitious as their uncle Rugila.
The usage of the term "Hun" to describe Germans resurfaced during World War II.
Most Roman troops had been transferred from the Balkan Peninsula to fight against the Sassanid Empire in Armenia.
They formed a unified empire under Attila the Hun, who died in 453; their empire broke up the next year.
Hence they grow old beardless and their young men are without comeliness, because a face furrowed by the sword spoils by its scars the natural beauty of a beard.
Uldin crossed the Danube and captured a fortress in Moesia named Castra Martis, which was betrayed from within.
Food shortage and abuse stirred the Goths to revolt in early 377.
They were under the command of Alatheus and Saphrax, because Vithimiris's son, Viderichus, was a child.
Taking into account the historical gap between the Chinese reports of the Xiongnu and the European records of the Huns, Peter Heather states: "Even if we do make some connection between fourth-century Huns and first-century Xiongnu, therefore, an awful lot of water had passed under an awful lot of bridges during 300 years worth of lost history."
Most ancient texts in Europe and Asia, including Chinese, Indian and Islamic studies state that Huns originally came from north of China.
The Huns kept herds of cattle, horses, goats and sheep.
After rejecting several possible reasons (including a climate change in the steppes and the neighboring peoples' pressure), Peter Heather concludes that the Hunnic Empire developed from "warbands on the make", launching profitable plundering raids, which enabled them to increase their military power and to impose their authority on the neighboring peoples.
The reasons for the Huns' sudden attack on the neighboring peoples are unknown.
Athanaric, the leader of the Thervingi, met the refugees along the Dniester at the head of his troops.
Leading his horde across the Alps and into Northern Italy, he sacked and razed the cities of Aquileia, Vicetia, Verona, Brixia, Bergamum and Milan.
Alaric's brother-in-law, Athaulf, appears to have had Hun mercenaries in his employ south of the Julian Alps in 409.
The Huns may have stimulated the Great Migration, a contributing factor in the collapse of the Western Roman Empire.
Support for the Gothic chieftains diminished as refugees headed into Thrace and towards the safety of the Roman garrisons.
The equation of the Huns with the Scythians, together with a general fear of the coming of the Antichrist in the late , gave rise to their identification with Gog and Magog (whom Alexander the Great had shut off behind inaccessible mountains, according to a popular legend).
These swords were hung from a belt using the scabbard-slide method, which kept the weapon vertical.
There is a legend among the Székely people that says: "After the death of Attila, in the bloody Battle of Krimhilda, 3000 Hun warriors managed to escape, to settle in a place called "Csigle-mező" (today Transylvania) and they changed their name from Huns to Szekler (Székely)."
They also fought using iron swords and lassos in close combat.
Later that year Churchill referred to the invasion of the Soviet Union as "the dull, drilled, docile brutish masses of the Hun soldiery, plodding on like a swarm of crawling locusts."
This usage, emphasising the idea that the Germans were barbarians, was reinforced by Allied propaganda throughout the war.
They entered parts of Syria, threatened Antioch, and swarmed through the province of Euphratesia.
Uldin then proceeded to ransack Thrace.
It has been supposed that by the 440s, the "Huns" were more Germanic-speaking subject than speakers of Hunnic, and as such Gothic may have been a lingua franca of the Empire.
The Huns also employed a smaller short sword or large dagger which was hung horizontally across the belly.
This was repeated by Claudian and Sidonius and reinterpreted by Cassiodorus.
Their hardihood is evident in their wild appearance, and they are beings who are cruel to their children on the very day they are born.
As per European tradition, they were first reported living east of the Volga River, in an area that was part of Scythia at the time; the Huns' arrival is associated with the migration westward of a Scythian people, the Alans.
In the German "Saga of Tidreck of Bern", its written versions beginning from the 13th century, the Huns are called Frisians.
The people who practiced annular type artificial cranial deformation in Central Asia were Yuezhi/Kushans.
Most Thervingi realized that they could not resist the Huns.
Artificial cranial deformation of the circular type can be used to trace the route that the Huns took from north China to the Central Asian steppes and subsequently to the southern Russian steppes.
Priscus reports that superstitious fear of the fate of Alaric—who died shortly after sacking Rome in 410—gave him pause.
In 435 they forced the Eastern Roman Empire to sign the Treaty of Margus, giving the Huns trade rights and an annual tribute from the Romans.
Étienne de la Vaissière asserts both documents prove that Huna or Xwn were the "exact transcriptions" of the Chinese "Xiongnu" name.
For clothes they had pointed caps, trousers or leggings made from ibex skin, and either linen or rodent skin tunics.
The 2nd-century geographer Ptolemy mentioned a people called Chuni (''Χοῦνοι'' or ''Χουνοί'') when listing the peoples of the western region of the Eurasian Steppes.
He recounts how Zerco made Attila's guests laugh also by the "''promiscuous jumble of words, Latin mixed with Hunnish and Gothic''".
Numerous other ethnic groups were included under Attila's rule, including very many speakers of Gothic, which some modern scholars describe as a lingua franca of the Empire.
Sinor also cites Ammianus' statement that the Huns "''are subject to no royal restraint, but they are content with the disorderly government of their important men, and led by them they force their way through every obstacle''", casting further doubt on Balamber's status as king.
Maenchen-Helfen states: "Had the Huns been unable to forge their swords and cast their arrow-heads, they never could have crossed the Don.
The national anthem of Hungary describes the Hungarians as "blood of Bendegúz'" (the medieval and modern Hungarian version of Mundzuk, Attila's father).
He also emphasizes that "the ancestors of the Hunnic core  were part of the Xiongnu Empire and possessed a strong Xiongnu element, and the ruling elite of the  claimed to belong to the political tradition of this imperial entity."
The Pannonian basin then was occupied by the Gepids, while various Gothic groups remained in the Balkans.
Suffering a complete defeat at the Battle of Chersonesus, the Eastern Roman Emperor Theodosius II gave in to Hun demands and in autumn 443 signed the Peace of Anatolius with the two Hun kings.
Our only first-hand account of conditions among the Huns and of Attila himself is by Priscus, an official in the peace embassy to Attila.
