Towards the end of the 18th century, British light dragoon regiments began to adopt hussar style accoutrements such as laced jackets, pelisses and sabretaches.
The Danish Guard Hussars provide a ceremonial mounted squadron, which is the last to wear the slung pelisse.
French official website :  1rhp.info
The hussar's accoutrements included a Hungarian-style saddle covered by a shabraque, a decorated saddlecloth with long, pointed corners surmounted by a sheepskin.
This unit was raised in 1815,  and served under Bolivar during the Venezuelan War of Independence and the larger Spanish American wars of independence.
In the late 17th and 18th Centuries, many Hungarian hussars fled to other Central and Western European countries and became the core of similar light cavalry formations created there.
In the British Army (although amalgamations have reduced their number to only two), the French Army, the Swedish Army (Livregementets husarer, the Life Regiment Hussars), the Dutch Army and the Canadian Forces, they are usually tank forces or light mechanised infantry.
The Húsares de Pavía were created in 1684 by the Count of Melgar to serve in Spanish possessions in Italy and were named after the Spanish victory over the French army at Pavia, Italy, south of Milan.
The modern regiment has the Totenkopf as its insignia as well as on the regimental camp flag.
At present, this regiment is named Regimiento Acorazado de Caballería Pavía nr 4 (Cavalry armored regiment Pavia nr 4) and is garrisoned in Zaragoza (Spain).
in the enlightenment of citizens in a democracy.
Thus, both the Belgian Guides (prior to World War I) and the Mounted Escort, the so-called Blue Hussars, of the Irish Defence Forces (during the 1930s) wore hussar-style uniforms.
These light hussars were ideal for reconnaissance and raiding sources of fodder and provisions in advance of the army.
The brigade also performs public-duty functions as required.
At the same time, he exempted the hussars from the usual disciplinary measures of the Prussian Army, such as physical punishments including cudgeling.
Traditionally called "Chamborant".
The phrase is still commonly used in public discourse, to emphasize the moral and civic role played by school teachers (or occasionally, journalists, etc.)
In battle, they were used in such light cavalry roles as harassing enemy skirmishers, overrunning artillery positions, and pursuing fleeing troops.
Hussar regiments still exist today and horses are sometimes used for ceremonial purposes.
Recipients included the Hungarian generals Pal Werner and Ferenc Kőszeghy, who received the highest Prussian military order, the "Pour le Merite"; General Tivadar Ruesh was awarded the title of baron; Mihály Székely was promoted from the rank of captain to general after less than fifteen years of service.
His son, Matthias Corvinus, later king of Hungary, is unanimously accepted as the creator of these troops, commonly called ''Rac'' (Hungarian exonym for Serbs).
Unlike their lighter counterparts, the Polish hussars were used as a heavy cavalry for line-breaking charges against enemy infantry.
The Hussars of Central and Western Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries were typically armed with a curved sabre, one or two pistols carried in holsters at the front of the saddle and a carbine.
The verbunkos was an important component of the Hungarian hussar tradition.
They were raised from the above-mentioned Hussar companies and converted to regular service after the Russian–Turkish War 1736–39.
Originally written by essayist Charles Péguy in 1913, the phrase “Hussard noir de la République” (≈‘the black knights of the Republic’) has a military undertone: It is meant to capture the tense atmosphere of the late 19th century in France, as school teachers felt entrusted with a superior mission to actively promote Republican and secular values, among a largely illiterate population still much influenced by the authority of royalist or Catholic powers.
Russia relied on its native cossacks to provide irregular light cavalry until 1741.
During the battle, the King of France, Francis I, was captured by the Spanish Cavalry.
In 1805, four light dragoon regiments were permitted to use the "hussar" name, initially in parentheses after their regimental title, and adopted full hussar uniforms.
A hussar regiment under the command of Colonel Sigismund Dabasi-Halász won the Battle of Hohenfriedberg at Striegau on May 4, 1745, by attacking the Austrian combat formation on its flank and capturing all of its artillery.
The origin of the word ''huszár'' remains uncertain with even the theory of a Serbian origin being disputed.A recent premise is that the word originates from the Hunnic language because the word ''huszár'' can be found in Uyghur - which is believed to be Hunnish - translated to ''lineman'' in English.
Recruited largely from Christian Orthodox communities along the Turkish frontier, the newly raised Russian hussar units increased to 12 regiments by the Seven Years' War.
Later, in 1759–60, three more Hussar regiments were raised:
Formerly the "Hussards d'Esterhazy".
Both wore fur busbies and white plumes.
The dolman or tunic, which was also decorated in braid, was worn under it.
During the French occupation from 1795–1813, there was a maximum of two hussar regiments.
Possibly due to a daring and impudent surprise raid on his capital, Berlin, by the hussars of Hungarian general András Hadik, Frederick also recognised the national characteristics of his Hungarian recruits and, in 1759, issued a royal order which warned the Prussian officers never to offend the self-esteem of his hussars with insults and abuse.
General Lasalle, an archetypal showoff hussar officer, epitomized this attitude by his remarks, among which the most famous is: "Any hussar who is not dead by the age of thirty is a blackguard."
In many countries, the hussars and bosniaks actually retained their original Asiatic uniforms.
They were created in 1932 and disbanded in 1948.
Founded in 1764, currently stationed in Metz, France.
Hussars outside the Polish Kingdom followed a different line of development.
The colourful military uniforms of hussars from 1700 onwards were inspired by the prevailing Hungarian fashions of the day.
Located in garrisons far away from Hungary, some deserted from the Austrian army and joined that of Prussia.
Up to and including the Battle of Vienna in 1683, the Polish–Lithuanian hussars fought countless actions against a variety of enemies.
According to ''Webster's'' Dictionary, the word ''hussar'' stems from the Hungarian ''huszár,'' which in turn originates from the Serbian ''хусар'' (''Husar'', or ''гусар'', ''Gusar''), meaning pirate, from the Medieval Latin ''cursarius'' (cf.
French hussars also wore ''cadenettes'', braids of hair hanging on either side of the face, until the practice was officially proscribed when shorter hair became universal.
* 2ème régiment de Hussards (2e RH) (2nd Hussar Regiment).
Due to the same resemblance, the Polish heavy hussars came with their own style, the Polish winged hussars or Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth winged ''husaria''.
Usually, this uniform consisted of a short jacket known as a ''dolman'', or later a medium-length "attila" jacket, both with heavy, horizontal gold braid on the breast and yellow braided or gold Austrian knots (''sújtás'') on the sleeves, a matching pelisse (a short-waisted over-jacket often worn slung over one shoulder), coloured trousers, sometimes with yellow braided or gold Austrian knots at the front, a busby (''kucsma'') (a high, fur hat with a cloth bag hanging from one side, although some regiments wore the shako (''csákó'') of various styles), and high riding boots (often Hessian boots).
These regiments were created in the second part of the 19th century, under the rule of Alexandru Ioan Cuza, creator of Romania by the unification of Moldavia and Wallachia.
The French hussar of the Napoleonic period was armed with a brass-hilted sabre, a carbine and sometimes with a brace of pistols, although these were often unavailable.
In addition to commandeering local food-stocks for the army, hussars were known to also use the opportunity for personal looting and pillaging.
A number of armored or ceremonial mounted units in modern armies retain the designation of hussars.
10th-century Byzantine military manuals mention ''chonsarioi'', light cavalry, recruited in the Balkans, especially Serbs, "ideal for scouting and raiding".
Initially, they fought in small bands, but were reorganised into larger, trained formations during the reign of King Matthias Corvinus.
In 1867, all remaining cavalry regiments were transferred to hussar regiments.
Then, it served in campaigns against Algerian pirates and in the sieges of Oran and Algiers.
'''' (‘black hussar’) was the nickname given to primary-school teachers during the Third Republic, referring to their black coats.
The regiment has a mounted troop and mounted military band.
This word was subsequently reintroduced to Western European military practice after its original usage had been lost with the collapse of Rome in the west.
* 3ème régiment de Hussards (3e RH) (3rd Hussar Regiment).
In most respects, they had now become regular light cavalry, recruited solely from their own countries and trained and equipped along the same lines as other classes of cavalry.
The Presidential Honor Guard Brigade of Venezuela wear hussar style full-dress uniforms, thus maintaining the traditions and legacy of Simón Bolívar's Hussar Troop.
Although the Romanian cavalry were not formally designated as hussars, their pre-1915 uniforms, as described below, were of the classic hussar type.
British hussars were armed with, in addition to firearms, the highly regarded 1796-pattern light-cavalry sabre.
Potential recruits were dressed in items of hussar uniform, given wine to drink and invited to dance to this music.
The brigade is commanded by a general officer and includes a Presidential mounted escort.
the English word ''corsair'').
Following their example, hussar regiments were introduced into many of the armies of Europe.
A characteristic of both the Imperial German and Russian Hussars was the variety of colours apparent in their dress uniforms.
European hussars traditionally wore long moustaches (but no beards) and long hair, with two plaits hanging in front of the ears as well as a larger queue at the back.
During and after Rákóczi's War for Independence, many Hungarians served in the Habsburg army.
There is also a mounted unit for ceremonies:  Cavalerie Ere-Escorte.
During the Spanish War of Independence against Napoleon (1808–1814), the unit fought the Battles of Bailén, Tudela, Velez, Talavera and Ocaña and the actions of Baza, Cuellar, Murviedro and Alacuas.
Hussars of the Polish Commonwealth were also famous for the huge wings worn on their backs or attached to the saddles of their horses.
Bavaria raised its first hussar regiment in 1688 and a second one in about 1700.
He died at the Battle of Wagram at the age of 34.
Ifni was a Spanish colony in North Africa that was attacked by irregulars from Morocco.
Until the 17th century, it included a cavalry sabre, lance, long, wooden shield and, optionally, light, metal armour or simple leather vest.
Until the 18th century, they were considered the elite of the Commonwealth's armed forces.
The King's Troop, Royal Horse Artillery have a hussar-style full-dress uniform, with a busby and frogged dolmen, and a pelisse for officers; the present uniform was finalised in 1928.
The name is derived from the German word ''werben'' that means, in particular, "to enroll in the army"; verbunkos means recruiter.
Another premise is offered by Byzantinist scholars, who argue the term originated in Roman military practice, and the ''cursarii'' (singular ''cursarius'').
Several theories attempt to explain the meaning of the wings.
This tradition remains to this day.
The three (later expanded to ten) Roșiori regiments were the regular units, while the Călărași were territorial reserve cavalry who supplied their own horses.
Each regiment was supposed to have a fixed organization of 10 companies, each of about 100 men, but these regiments were recruited from different sources, so they were less than the indicated strength.
In the Battle of Lubieszów, in 1577, the 'Golden Age' of the husaria began.
France established a number of hussar regiments from 1692 onward, recruiting originally from Hungary and Germany, then subsequently from German-speaking frontier regions within France itself.
Hussars had a reputation for being the dashing, if unruly, adventurers of the army.
The Regimentul 1 Roșiori "General de armată Alexandru Averescu" was formed in 1871, while the Regimentul 4 Roșiori "Regina Maria" was created in 1893.
As light cavalrymen mounted on fast horses, they would be used to fight skirmish battles and for scouting.
A sabretache, an ornate pouch hung from the belt, often completed the accoutrements.
Today, Livregementets husarer, also known as K 3, is the last active hussar regiment in Sweden and trains an airborne battalion and an intelligence battalion, and hosts the Swedish Army's Parachute Ranger School and the Armed Forces Survival School.
The Dutch Republic raised its first Hussar regiment in 1784, and a second in 1787.
For this heroic action, the "Hussars of Junín" Light Cavalry Regiment was declared the ''Liberator of Perú'' with an inscription on the regimental flag.
They often retained the queue, which used to be common to all soldiers, after other regiments had dispensed with it and adopted short hair.
The only remaining hussar unit in the Chilean Army is the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment "Hussars" ''(Regimiento de Caballería Blindada n. 3 "Húsares")'' in Angol.
The hussars reportedly originated in bands of mostly Serbian warriors, crossing into southern Hungary after the Ottoman conquest of Serbia at the end of the 14th century.
The colours of the dolman, pelisse and breeches varied greatly by regiment, even within the same army.
In the British Army, hussar cavalry were introduced at a later date than in other major European armies.
The fourteen French hussar regiments were an exception to this rule – they wore the same relatively simple uniform, with only minor distinctions, as the other branches of French light cavalry.
After World War I, the differences between the two branches of Romanian cavalry disappeared, although the titles of Roșiori and Călărași remained.
According to some, they were designed to foil attacks by Tatar lasso; another theory maintains that the sound of vibrating feathers attached to the wings made a strange sound that frightened enemy horses during the charge.
* Bolgarskiy (Bulgarian)
Under Corvinus' command, the hussars took part in the war against the Ottoman Empire in 1485 and proved successful against the ''sipahis'' (Ottoman cavalry) as well as against the Bohemians and Poles.
These troops played an important role in the Romanian Independence War of 1877, on the Russo-Turkish front.
Less romantically, 18th-century hussars were also known (and feared) for their poor treatment of local civilians.
The traditional image of the hussar is of a reckless, hard-drinking, hard-swearing, womanising, moustachioed swashbuckler.
Founded in 1720, this regiment is currently stationed in Tarbes, Hautes-Pyrénées, France.
The modern brigade serves as a ceremonial escort to the President of Venezuela at Miraflores Palace and attends all state arrival ceremonies conducted there, as well as providing security for the palace complex.
The Habsburg emperors hired Hungarian hussars as mercenaries to serve against the Ottomans and on various battlefields throughout Western Europe.
Their usual form of attack was a rapid charge in compact formation against enemy infantry or cavalry units.
The famous low losses were achieved by the unique tactic of ''late concentration''.
Also, if a hussar's horse was wounded, the following lines had time to steer clear of him.
It is linked to the Huzaren Prins Alexander, although riders from other regiments participate as well.
Hussar influences were apparent even in those armies which did not formally include hussar regiments.
An example of such occasions is the annual ceremony commemorating the 1929 reintegration of the Tacna Region into Peru.
The 1930 operetta Viktoria und ihr Husar (''Victoria and her Hussar'') has been filmed several times.
The first hussar regiments comprised the light cavalry of the Black Army of Hungary.
The Mounted Escort, popularly known as ''Blue Hussars'', was an Irish Army unit which was used for state and ceremonial functions and wore bright blue hussar-style uniforms.
During the early decades of the 17th century, hussars in Hungary ceased to wear metal body armour; and, by 1640, most were light cavalry.
* Makedonskiy (Macedonian)
The hussars played a prominent role as cavalry in the Revolutionary Wars (1792–1802) and Napoleonic Wars (1803–15).
While Hungarian hussars served in the opposing armies of Frederick and Maria Theresa, there were no known instances of  fratricidal clashes between them.
By  the reign of King Stefan Bathory, the hussars had replaced medieval-style lancers in the Polish–Lithuanian army, and they now formed the bulk of the Polish cavalry.
Most Russian hussar regiments wore red breeches, as did all the Austro-Hungarian hussars of 1914.
They were disbanded (nr.
(The word "călăraș" means "mounted soldier", and "roșior" means "of red colour" which derived from the colour of their uniform.)
The hussars of the period created the tradition of sabrage, the opening of a champagne bottle with a sabre.
If the first attack failed, they would retire to their supporting troops, who re-equipped them with fresh lances, and then would charge again.
On the outside of such breeches, running up each outer side, was a row of buttons, and sometimes a stripe in a different colour.
Romania diplomatically avoided the word "hussar" due to its connotation at the time with Austro-Hungary, traditional rival of the Romanian principates.
When Stefan Bathory, a Transylvanian-Hungarian prince, was elected king of Poland in 1576, he reorganised the Polish-Lithuanian hussars of his Royal Guard along Hungarian lines, making them a heavy formation, equipped with a long lance as their main weapon.
Brigade personnel come from all branches of the National Armed Forces of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and public-security services.
Armour became heavier and was eventually replaced by shield armour.
A famous military commander in Bonaparte's army who began his military career as a hussar was Marshal Ney, who, after being employed as a clerk in an iron works, joined the 5th Hussars in 1787.
These included red, black, green, dark and light blue, brown and even pink (the Russian 15th Hussars) dolmans.
After horse cavalry became obsolete, hussar units were generally converted to armoured units, though retaining their traditional titles.
The first hussar regiment in France was founded by a Hungarian lieutenant named Ladislas Ignace de Bercheny.
But Hussars were still notable for their colourful and elaborate parade uniforms, the most spectacular of which were those worn by the two Spanish regiments, Húsares de Pavía and Húsares de la Princesa.
Livregementets husarer (English: Life Regiment Hussars).
The wings were probably worn only during parades and not during combat, but this explanation is also disputed.
Sweden had hussars from about 1756 and Denmark introduced this class of cavalry in 1762.
The Húsares de Pavía fought in Italy during the War of Piedmont (1692–1695) and the War of Spanish Succession, it was transferred back to Spain.
As noted above, The Hussars of Junín no longer serve as the presidential escort, but are now based in the Peruvian Army Education Command and still participates in ceremonies and parades, representing the Peruvian Army.
Regent-Governor John Hunyadi created mounted units inspired by the Ottomans.
Moustaches were universally worn by Napoleonic-era hussars; the British hussars were the only moustachioed troops in the British Army—leading to their being taunted as being "foreigners", at times.
Apart from the Polish sabre and the lance, Polish heavy hussars were usually equipped with two pistols, a small, rounded shield and koncerz, a long (up to 2 metres) stabbing sword used in charges when the lance was broken; some had horseman's picks.
Britain converted a number of light dragoon regiments to hussars in the early 19th century.
In 1741, he established a further five regiments, largely from Polish deserters.
In 1719, the regiment was sent again to Italy until 1746.
In the case of Britain, four light dragoon regiments were converted to hussars in 1806–1807.
The brigade also provides honor guards (i) at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at Carabobo Field, Carabobo commemorating the memory of national heroes and the fallen of the Battle of Carabobo; (jj) at the Montana Barracks in Caracas in memory of the late Hugo Chávez; and (iii) at the National Pantheon in Caracas in memory of Bolívar and other national heroes buried there.
The armies of France, Austria, Prussia, and Russia had included hussar regiments since the mid-18th century.
The uniform of the Napoleonic hussars included the pelisse, a short fur-edged jacket which was often worn slung over one shoulder in the style of a cape and was fastened with a cord.
The twelve British hussar regiments were distinguished by different coloured busby bags and a few other distinctions such as the yellow plumes of the 20th, the buff collars of the 13th and the crimson breeches of the 11th Hussars.
Founded in 1735, currently stationed in Haguenau, Bas-Rhin, France.
Most of the great European powers raised hussar regiments.
Hussar armament varied over time.
The Roșiori, as their Romanian name implies, wore red dolmans with black braiding while the Călărași wore dark blue dolmans with red loopings.
In the battles of Byczyna (1588), Kokenhusen (1601), Kircholm (1605), Kłuszyn (1610), Trzciana (1629), Chocim (1673) and Lwów (1675), the Polish–Lithuanian hussars proved to be the decisive factor, often against overwhelming odds.
* 1st Airborne Hussars Regiment (or ''1st Hussar Parachute battalion''): 1er Régiment de Hussards Parachutistes (1er RHP).
The corresponding music and dance were performed during military recruiting, which was a  frequent event during this period, hence the character of the music.
Part of the Franco-German Brigade.
A shako or fur ''kolpac'' (busby) was worn as headwear.
However, recent experiments performed by Polish historians in 2001 did not support any of these theories and the phenomenon remains unexplained.
There were several Russian regiments of hussars by the time of Napoleonic Wars and extensive use was made of them.
Brigadier Gerard's boast that the Hussards de Conflans (an actual regiment) could set a whole population running, the men away from them and the women towards them, may be taken as a fair representation of the esprit de corps of this class of cavalry.
Spain disbanded its first hussars in 1747 and then raised new units of Húsares in 1795.
Prussia followed suit in 1721 when Frederick the Great used hussar units extensively during the War of the Austrian Succession.
Three more regiments were raised for Prussian service in 1744 and another in 1758.
It should be noted that, because of political upheavals such as the French Revolution and the Restoration of 1815, the French Hussar regiments do not have the same historical continuity as their counterparts in some other armies.
After the king's death, in 1490, hussars remained the preferred form of cavalry in Hungary.
The effectiveness of the hussars in Frederick's army can be judged by the number of promotions and decorations awarded to their officers.
While the hussars were increasingly drawn from Prussian and other German cavalrymen, they continued to wear the traditional Hungarian uniform, richly decorated with braid and gold trim.
On active service, the hussar normally wore reinforced breeches which had leather on the inside of the leg to prevent them from wearing due to the extensive time spent in the saddle.
The Húsares de Pavía regiment also was involved in the Ten Years' War in Cuba, the Spanish–American War (1898), the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), and in the Campaign of Ifni (1958).
The Roșiori regiments were distinguished by the different colours of their cloth busby bags (yellow, white, green, light blue, light green, dark blue, light brown, lilac, pink and light grey according to regiment).
It is named after one of the nation's founding fathers, José Miguel de Carrera, and is informally named "The Hussars of Death", as the successor regiment to Manuel Rodríguez's cavalry unit of that name.
On the eve of World War I, there were still hussar regiments in the British (including Canadian), French, Spanish, German, Russian, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Romanian and Austro-Hungarian armies.
This rainbow-effect harked back to the 18th-century origins of hussar regiments in these armies and helped regrouping after battle or a charge.
After the salvo, the cavalry rapidly accelerated and tightened the ranks.
They were formerly the "''Hussards de Bercheny''", after their founder, Count Bercheny, a Hungarian noble.
These regiments were enlisted, not conscripted as the rest of the Russian army, and were on a level between regular and irregular cavalry.
A rare exception to the usual pattern of German police uniforms were those of the ''Mecklenburg-Strelitzsche Districts-Husaren''.
The Hussars of Junin carry lances and sabers on parade and perform as a ceremonial guard together with the Marshal Nieto Dragoon Guards and the other ceremonial units of the Peruvian Armed Forces and the National Police of Peru.
Frederick II (later called "The Great") recognised the value of hussars as light cavalry and encouraged their recruitment.
The founder of the first Russian hussar regiment was Ádám Mányoki, a Hungarian officer.
The 'Regimiento Húsares de Pueyrredón' (Pueyrredon Hussars Regiment) currently serves as an armoured regiment (the 'RCT No 10 Húsares de Pueyrredón') in the 10th Tank Cavalry Regiment of the Argentine Army using its revolution-era uniforms in full regalia during formal parades.
The name is sometimes used to refer to their successors: the motorcycle unit that has provided presidential escort since then.
He rose through the ranks of the hussars in the wars of Belgium and the Rhineland (1794–1798), fighting against the forces of Austria and Prussia before receiving his marshal's baton in 1804, after the Emperor Napoleon's coronation.
The people of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth recognized the ''winged'' hussars as ''husarskie anioły'' (hussar angels).
It was hussars of this 'light' pattern, rather than the Polish heavy hussar, that were later to be copied across Europe.
After regaining independence, the new Royal Netherlands Army raised two hussar regiments (nrs.
The value of the Hungarian hussars as light cavalry was recognised and, in 1721, two Hussaren Corps were organised in the Prussian Army.
In certain German states, notably Rheinpfalz, Mecklenburg-Schwerin and Mecklenburg-Strelitz, hussars were sometimes used as a mounted police force or gendarmerie.
It forms part of the 3rd Army Mountain Division, and is the only horse-mounted regiment remaining in the army, aside from the Horse Grenadiers.
