Hyderabad's light rail transportation system, the Multi-Modal Transport System (MMTS), is a three line suburban rail service used by over 160,000 passengers daily.
The Secunderabad Cantonment Board established the first radio station in Hyderabad State around 1919.
Osmania University, established in 1918, was the first university in Hyderabad and  is India's second most popular institution for international students.
On 3 October 2013 the Union Cabinet approved the proposal, and in February 2014 both houses of Parliament passed the Telangana Bill.
There are 3,500,802 male and 3,309,168 female citizens—a sex ratio of 945 females per 1000 males, higher than the national average of 926 per 1000.
The socio-economic strata consist of 20% upper class, 50% middle class and 30% working class.
Hyderabad's first dial-up internet access became available in the early 1990s and was limited to software development companies.
The jurisdictions of the city's administrative agencies are, in ascending order of size: the Hyderabad Police area, Hyderabad district, the GHMC area ("Hyderabad city") and the area under the Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority (HMDA).
Since 1956, the Rashtrapati Nilayam in Hyderabad has been the second official residence and business office of the President of India; the President stays once a year in winter and conducts official business particularly relating to Southern India.
About 22% of the slum-dwelling households had migrated from different parts of India in the last decade of the 20th century, and 63% claimed to have lived in the slums for more than 10 years.
Technical and engineering schools include the International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad (IIITH), Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani – Hyderabad (BITS Hyderabad) and Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad (IIT-H) as well as agricultural engineering institutes such as the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Acharya N. G. Ranga Agricultural University.
Hyderabad is also the headquarters of the Indian Heart Association, a non-profit foundation for cardiovascular education.
The historic city established by Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah on the southern side of the Musi River forms the "Old City", while the "New City" encompasses the urbanised area on the northern banks.
Hyderabad produces around 4,500&nbsp;tonnes of solid waste daily, which is transported from collection units in Imlibun, Yousufguda and Lower Tank Bund to the dumpsite in Jawaharnagar.
The jurisdiction is divided into two police commissionerates: Hyderabad and Cyberabad, which are again divided into four and five police zones respectively.
A previous franchise was the Deccan Chargers, which won the 2009 Indian Premier League held in South Africa.
The city has numerous lakes referred to as ''sagar'', meaning "sea".
Although not a purely music oriented event, Numaish, a popular annual exhibition of local and national consumer products, does feature some musical performances.
South Indian music and dances such as the Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam styles are popular in the Deccan region.
Its 74&nbsp;billion GDP made it the fifth-largest contributor city to India's overall GDP in 2011–12.
Besides western and Indian popular music genres such as filmi music, the residents of Hyderabad play city-based ''marfa music'', ''dholak ke geet'' (household songs based on local Folklore), and qawwali, especially at weddings, festivals and other celebratory events.
The Charminar, Golconda fort and the Qutb Shahi tombs are considered to be monuments of national importance in India; in 2010 the Indian government proposed that the sites be listed for UNESCO World Heritage status.
In 2014, the newly formed state of Telangana split from Andhra Pradesh and the city became joint capital of the two states, a transitional arrangement scheduled to end by 2025.
The HMDA is an apolitical urban planning agency that covers the GHMC and its suburbs, extending to 54 ''mandals'' in five districts encircling the city.
In the past, Qutb Shahi rulers and Nizams attracted artists, architects and men of letters from different parts of the world through patronage.
The Commissionerate of Health and Family Welfare is responsible for planning, implementation and monitoring of all facilities related to health and preventive services.
In more recent times, motorsports has become popular with the Andhra Pradesh Motor Sports Club organising popular events such as the Deccan ¼ Mile Drag, TSD Rallies and 4x4 off-road rallying.
However, industrialisation throughout the  attracted major Indian manufacturing, research and financial institutions, including Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, the National Geophysical Research Institute and the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology.
Since 1956, Rashtrapati Nilayam in the city has been the winter office of the President of India.
The coolest temperatures occur in December and January, when the lowest temperature occasionally dips to .
On 21 September 1687, the Golkonda Sultanate came under the rule of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb after a year-long siege of the Golkonda fort.
This gave rise to certain styles of court music, dance and poetry.
According to John Everett-Heath, the author of ''Oxford Concise Dictionary of World Place Names'', ''Hyderabad'' means "Haydar's city" or "lion city", from ''haydar'' (lion) and ''ābād'' (city).
Consequently, the population increased by 87%, from 3,637,483 in the 2001 census to 6,809,970 in the 2011 census, 24% of which are migrants from elsewhere in India, making Hyderabad the nation's fourth most populous city.
In 1724, Mughal viceroy Asif Jah I declared his sovereignty and created his own dynasty, known as the Nizams of Hyderabad.
Admission to professional graduation colleges in Hyderabad, many of which are affiliated with either Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University Hyderabad (JNTUH) or Osmania University (OU), is through the Engineering Agricultural and Medical Common Entrance Test (EAM-CET).
Hadhrami Arabs, African Arabs, Armenians, Abyssinians, Iranians, Pathans and Turkish people are also present; these communities, of which the Hadhrami are the largest, declined after Hyderabad State became part of the Indian Union, as they lost the patronage of the Nizams.
Hyderabad has three national parks (Mrugavani National Park, Mahavir Harina Vanasthali National Park and Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park), and the Manjira Wildlife Sanctuary is about  from the city.
Examples include artificial lakes created by dams on the Musi, such as Hussain Sagar (built in 1562 near the city centre), Osman Sagar and Himayat Sagar.
The northern end contains industrial areas such as Sanathnagar, Moosapet, Balanagar, Patancheru and Chanda Nagar.
In 1724, Asif Jah I defeated Mubariz Khan to establish autonomy over the ''Deccan Suba'', named the region ''Hyderabad Deccan'', and started what came to be known as the Asif Jahi dynasty.
Many of the city's traditional bazaars, including Laad Bazaar, Begum Bazaar and Sultan Bazaar, have remained open for centuries.
Another example of a handicraft drawn to Hyderabad is Kalamkari, a hand-painted or block-printed cotton textile that comes from cities in Andhra Pradesh.
The death of Asif Jah I in 1748 resulted in a period of political unrest as his sons, backed by opportunistic neighbouring states and colonial foreign forces, contended for the throne.
Literary development is further aided by state institutions such as the State Central Library, the largest public library in the state which was established in 1891, and other major libraries including the Sri Krishna Devaraya Andhra Bhasha Nilayam, the British Library and the Sundarayya Vignana Kendram.
During this period, Alauddin Khilji took the ''Koh-i-Noor'' diamond, which is said to have been mined from the Kollur Mines of Golkonda, to Delhi.
In his 1955 report ''Thoughts on Linguistic States'', B. R. Ambedkar, then chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Indian Constitution, proposed designating the city of Hyderabad as the second capital of India because of its amenities and strategic central location.
In 2013, the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) facility in Hyderabad was forecast to provide operations and transactions services to BSE-Mumbai by the end of 2014.
A significant minority speak other languages, including Hindi (which can conflate with colloquial Urdu, see Hindi–Urdu controversy), Marathi, Odia, Tamil, Bengali and Kannada.
The city is home to Hyderabad Securities formerly known as Hyderabad Stock Exchange (HSE), and houses the regional office of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
–11, the city had 50 government hospitals, 300 private and charity hospitals and 194 nursing homes providing around 12,000 hospital beds, fewer than half the required 25,000.
Intercity rail services also operate from Hyderabad; the main, and largest, station is Secunderabad Railway Station, which serves as Indian Railways' South Central Railway zone headquarters and a hub for both buses and MMTS light rail services connecting Secunderabad and Hyderabad.
Such crafts include: Bidriware, a metalwork handicraft from neighbouring Karnataka, which was popularised during the 18th century and has since been granted a Geographical Indication (GI) tag under the auspices of the WTO act; and Zari and Zardozi, embroidery works on textile that involve making elaborate designs using gold, silver and other metal threads.
For every 10,000 people in the city, there are 17.6 hospital beds, 9 specialist doctors, 14 nurses and 6 physicians.
The city and its suburbs contain the highest number of special economic zones of any Indian city.
The Lower City Civil Court and the Metropolitan Criminal Court are under the jurisdiction of the High Court.
Hyderabad is the largest contributor to the gross domestic product (GDP), tax and other revenues, of Telangana, and the sixth largest deposit centre and fourth largest credit centre nationwide, as ranked by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in June 2012.
As the seat of the government of Telangana, Hyderabad is home to the state's legislature, secretariat and high court, as well as various local government agencies.
As of October 2014, there were 15 fire stations in the city, operated by the Telangana State Disaster and Fire Response Department.
The region is well known for its Golconda and Hyderabad painting styles which are branches of Deccani painting.
The city is home to the Telugu film industry, popularly known as Tollywood and , produces the second largest number of films in India behind Bollywood.
At an average altitude of , much of Hyderabad is situated on hilly terrain around artificial lakes, including Hussain Sagar—predating the city's founding—north of the city centre.
Hyderabadi cuisine comprises a broad repertoire of rice, wheat and meat dishes and the skilled use of various spices.
The Government Nizamia Tibbi College is a college of Unani medicine.
Films in the local Hyderabadi dialect are also produced and have been gaining popularity since 2005.
Several protests, known collectively as the Telangana movement, attempted to invalidate the merger and demanded the creation of a new Telangana state.
North of the river are hospitals, colleges, major railway stations and business areas such as Begum Bazaar, Koti, Abids, Sultan Bazaar and Moazzam Jahi Market, along with administrative and recreational establishments such as the Reserve Bank of India, the Telangana Secretariat, the Hyderabad Mint, the Telangana Legislature, the Public Gardens, the Nizam Club, the Ravindra Bharathi, the State Museum, the Birla Temple and the Birla Planetarium.
The state government organises the Golconda Music and Dance Festival, the Taramati Music Festival and the Premavathi Dance Festival to further encourage the development of music.
Languages of instruction include English, Hindi, Telugu and Urdu.
Organisations engaged in environmental and wildlife preservation include the Telangana Forest Department, Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), the Animal Welfare Board of India, the Blue Cross of Hyderabad and the University of Hyderabad.
There are also Christian, Sikh, Jain, Buddhist and Parsi communities and iconic temples, mosques and churches can be seen.
Literacy stands at 82.96% (male 85.96%; female 79.79%), higher than the national average of 74.04%.
Hyderabad is home to a unique dialect of Urdu called Hyderabadi Urdu, which is a type of Dakhini, and is the mother tongue of most Hyderabadi Muslims, a unique community who owe much of their history, language, cuisine, and culture to Hyderabad, and the various dynasties who previously ruled.
The oldest surviving Qutb Shahi structure in Hyderabad is the ruins of Golconda fort built in the 16th century.
Complementing these government services are minibus routes operated by Setwin (Society for Employment Promotion & Training in Twin Cities).
In 1769 Hyderabad city became the formal capital of the Nizams.
, the city manufactured one third of India's bulk drugs and 16% of biotechnology products, contributing to its reputation as "India's pharmaceutical capital" and the "Genome Valley of India".
Hyderabad has hosted many international cricket matches, including matches in the 1987 and the 1996 ICC Cricket World Cups.
In addition to the traditional Indian and Muslim garments, increasing exposure to western cultures has led to a rise in the wearing of western style clothing among youths.
Most of the city's parks and recreational centres, such as Sanjeevaiah Park, Indira Park, Lumbini Park, NTR Gardens, the Buddha statue and Tankbund Park are located here.
According to the 2011 census, Hyderabad district's religious make-up was: Hindus (51.89%), Muslims (43.45%), Christians (2.22%), Jains (0.5%), Sikhs (0.29%) and Buddhists (0.03%); 1.58% did not state any religion.
According to a 2005 survey, 77% of males and 19% of females in the city were employed.
, the largest employers in the city were the governments of Andhra Pradesh (113,098 employees) and India (85,155).
Hyderabadi cuisine is highly influenced by Mughlai and to some extent by French, Arabic, Turkish, Iranian and native Telugu and Marathwada cuisines.
After the 1908 flooding of the Musi River, the city was expanded and civic monuments constructed, particularly during the rule of Mir Osman Ali Khan (the VIIth Nizam), whose patronage of architecture led to him being referred to as the maker of modern Hyderabad.
The fifth sultan, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, established Hyderabad on the banks of the Musi River in 1591, to avoid the water shortages experienced at Golkonda.
The two are connected by many bridges across the river, the oldest of which is Purana Pul ("old bridge").
After India gained independence, the Nizam declared his intention to remain independent rather than become part of the Indian Union.
In response to regular threats from Hyder Ali (Dalwai of Mysore), Baji Rao I (Peshwa of the Maratha Empire), and Basalath Jung (Asif Jah II's elder brother, who was supported by the Marquis de Bussy-Castelnau), the Nizam signed a subsidiary alliance with the East India Company in 1798, allowing the British Indian Army to occupy Bolarum (modern Secunderabad) to protect the state's capital, for which the Nizams paid an annual maintenance to the British.
Hyderabad's lakes and the sloping terrain of its low-lying hills provide habitat for an assortment of flora and fauna.
The city hosts a number of venues suitable for professional competition such as the Swarnandhra Pradesh Sports Complex for field hockey, the G. M. C. Balayogi Stadium in Gachibowli for athletics and football, and for cricket, the Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium and Rajiv Gandhi International Cricket Stadium, home ground of the Hyderabad Cricket Association.
With an output of 74&nbsp;billion, Hyderabad is the fifth-largest contributor to India's overall gross domestic product.
The Osmania University campus is administered independently by the university authority.
In modern times, the major Telugu dailies published in Hyderabad are  ''Eenadu'', ''Andhra Jyothy'', ''Sakshi'' and ''Namaste Telangana'', while the major English papers are ''The Times of India'', ''The Hindu'' and ''The Deccan Chronicle''.
The reign of the Nizams saw many literary reforms and the introduction of Urdu as a language of court, administration and education.
Summers (March–June) are hot and humid, with average highs in the mid-to-high 30s Celsius; maximum temperatures often exceed  between April and June.
A third of the slums have basic service connections, and the remainder depend on general public services provided by the government.
The Qutb Shahis and Nizams established Hyderabad as a cultural hub, attracting men of letters from different parts of the world.
In 2011, Airports Council International, an autonomous body representing the world's airports, judged RGIA the world's best airport in the  passenger category and the world's fifth best airport for service quality.
Its per capita annual income in 2011 was .
Industrialisation began under the Nizams in the late 19th century, helped by railway expansion that connected the city with major ports.
It was named to honour the Caliph Ali Ibn Abi Talib, who was also known as Haydar because of his lion-like valour in battles.
In 1768 he signed the treaty of Masulipatnam, surrendering the coastal region to the East India Company in return for a fixed annual rent.
Satellite TV channels are accessible via cable subscription, direct-broadcast satellite services or internet-based television.
To reduce traffic and its emissions, the government has undertaken a metro rail project, Hyderabad metro rail which is under construction in different phases.
Most of the historical bazaars that still exist were constructed on the street north of Charminar towards the fort.
The highest temperature ever recorded was  on 2 June 1966, and the lowest was  on 8 January 1946.
Referred to as "Hyderabadi", the residents of Hyderabad are predominantly Telugu and Urdu speaking people, with minority Bengali, Gujarati (including Memon), Kannada (including Nawayathi), Malayalam, Marathi, Marwari, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil and Uttar Pradeshi communities.
The remaining 8% include buses, goods vehicles and taxis.
Like the rest of India, Hyderabad has a large informal economy that employs 30% of the labour force.
With the final assent of the President of India in June 2014, Telangana state was formed.
The Hyderabad State Congress, with the support of the Indian National Congress and the Communist Party of India, began agitating against Nizam VII in 1948.
The Inner Ring Road, the Outer Ring Road, the Hyderabad Elevated Expressway, the longest flyover in India, and various interchanges, overpasses and underpasses were built to ease the congestion.
The resulting ethnic mix popularised cultural events such as ''mushairas'' (poetic symposia).
Among children aged  years, 373,794 are boys and 352,022 are girls—a ratio of 942 per 1000.
Since the 1990s, the growth of information technology (IT), IT-enabled services (ITES), insurance and financial institutions has expanded the service sector, and these primary economic activities have boosted the ancillary sectors of trade and commerce, transport, storage, communication, real estate and retail.
, the population density is .
The Secunderabad Cantonment Board is a civic administration agency overseeing an area of , where there are several military camps.
The most commonly used forms of medium distance transport in Hyderabad include government owned services such as light railways and buses, as well as privately operated taxis and auto rickshaws.
Public and private schools in Hyderabad are governed by the Central Board of Secondary Education and follow a "10+2+3" plan.
The influence of Mughlai culture is also evident in the region's distinctive cuisine, which includes Hyderabadi biryani and Hyderabadi haleem.
Vendor earnings vary from  to  per day.
These styles are reflected in the Falaknuma Palace and many civic monuments such as the Hyderabad High Court, Osmania Hospital, Osmania University, the State Central Library, City College, the Telangana Legislature, the State Archaeology Museum, Jubilee Hall, and Hyderabad and Kachiguda railway stations.
''Hyderabadi biryani'' and ''Hyderabadi haleem'', with their blend of Mughlai and Arab cuisines, have got the national Geographical Indications tag.
The Telugu dialect spoken in Hyderabad is called Telangana Mandalika, and the Urdu spoken is called Dakhini.
The northeast end is dotted with residential areas.
Muhammad bin Tughluq succeeded to the Delhi sultanate in 1325, bringing Warangal under the rule of the Tughlaq dynasty until 1347 when Ala-ud-Din Bahman Shah, a governor under bin Tughluq, rebelled against Delhi and established the Bahmani Sultanate in the Deccan Plateau, with Gulbarga,  west of Hyderabad, as its capital.
Developed during the 16th century, the Golconda style is a native style blending foreign techniques and bears some similarity to the Vijayanagara paintings of neighbouring Mysore.
About two-thirds of pupils attend privately run institutions.
Hyderabad is a global centre of information technology, for which it is known as ''Cyberabad'' (Cyber City).
Examples of Hyderabad's arts and crafts are housed in various museums including the Salar Jung Museum (housing "one of the largest one-man-collections in the world"), the AP State Archaeology Museum, the Nizam Museum, the City Museum and the Birla Science Museum.
Although the city is not particularly noted for theatre and drama, the state government promotes theatre with multiple programmes and festivals in such venues as the Ravindra Bharati, Shilpakala Vedika and Lalithakala Thoranam.
Many coffee table magazines, professional magazines and research journals are also regularly published.
The Nizams ruled their princely state from Hyderabad during the British Raj.
Deccan Radio was the first radio public broadcast station in the city starting on 3 February 1935, with FM broadcasting beginning in 2000.
The forest region in and around the city encompasses areas of ecological and biological importance, which are preserved in the form of national parks, zoos, mini-zoos and a wildlife sanctuary.
This shortage is further exacerbated by inadequately treated effluent discharged from industrial treatment plants polluting the water sources of the city.
The city receives 2,731&nbsp;hours of sunshine per year; maximum daily sunlight exposure occurs in February.
Hyderabad is also home to a number of centres specialising in particular fields such as biomedical sciences, biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, such as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) and National Institute of Nutrition (NIN).
Other unorganised economic sectors include dairy, poultry farming, brick manufacturing, casual labour and domestic help.
Many Irani cafes serve Hyderabadi Irani tea.
The most popular sports played in Hyderabad are cricket and association football.
There are 405 government schools, 267 government aided schools, 175 private schools and 528 community halls in the slum areas.
Other popular native dishes include ''nihari'', ''chakna'', ''baghara baingan'' and the desserts ''qubani ka meetha'', ''double ka meetha'' and ''kaddu ki kheer'' (a sweet porridge made with sweet gourd).
As a result of their culture policies, North Indian music and dance gained popularity during the rule of the Mughals and Nizams, and it was also during their reign that it became a tradition among the nobility to associate themselves with tawaif (courtesans).
The GHMC was formed in April 2007 by merging the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad (MCH) with 12 municipalities of the Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy and Medak districts covering a total area of .
, it contributed 15% of India's and 98% of Andhra Pradesh's exports in IT and ITES sectors and 22% of NASSCOM's total membership is from the city.
Many historic and tourist sites lie in south central Hyderabad, such as the Charminar, the Mecca Masjid, the Salar Jung Museum, the Nizam's Museum, the Falaknuma Palace, and the traditional retail corridor comprising the Pearl Market, Laad Bazaar and Madina Circle.
Although not a centre for handicrafts itself, the patronage of the arts by the Mughals and Nizams attracted artisans from the region to Hyderabad.
The other palaces include Falaknuma Palace (inspired by the style of Andrea Palladio), Purani Haveli, King Kothi and Bella Vista Palace all of which were built at the peak of Nizam rule in the 19th century.
The Hyderabad style originated in the 17th century under the Nizams.
In 2005, ''Guinness World Records'' declared Ramoji Film City to be the world's largest film studio.
Private clinics are preferred by many residents because of the distance to, poor quality of care at and long waiting times in government facilities, despite the high proportion of the city's residents being covered by government health insurance: 24% according to a National Family Health Survey in 2005.
During British rule, Secunderabad became a well-known sporting centre and many race courses, parade grounds and polo fields were built.
The annexed area was renamed ''Deccan Suba'' (Deccan province) and the capital was moved from Golkonda to Aurangabad, about  northwest of Hyderabad.
This craft is distinguished in having both a Hindu style, known as Srikalahasti and entirely done by hand, and an Islamic style, known as Machilipatnam that uses both hand and block techniques.
The largest employers of child labour are street shops and construction sites.
Following the dissolution of the Chalukya empire into four parts in the 11th century, Golkonda came under the control of the Kakatiya dynasty from 1158, whose seat of power was at Warangal,  northeast of modern Hyderabad.
''Lazzat Un Nisa'', a book compiled in the 15th century at Qutb Shahi courts, contains erotic paintings with diagrams for secret medicines and stimulants in the eastern form of ancient sexual arts.
One popular theory suggests that Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, the founder of the city, named it "Bhagyanagar" or "Bhāgnagar" after Bhagmati, a local ''nautch'' (dancing) girl with whom he had fallen in love.
According to another source, the city was named after Haidar, the son of Quli Qutb Shah.
Hyderabad's role in the pearl trade has given it the name "City of Pearls" and up until the 18th century, the city was also the only global trading centre for large diamonds.
The development of HITEC City, a township with extensive technological infrastructure, prompted multinational companies to establish facilities in Hyderabad.
Since records began in November 1891, the heaviest rainfall recorded in a 24-hour period was  on 24 August 2000.
The population of the Hyderabad urban agglomeration has since been estimated by electoral officials to be 9.1 million as of early 2013 but is expected to exceed 10 million by the end of the year.
Among the street vendors, 84% are male and 16% female, and four fifths are "stationary vendors" operating from a fixed pitch, often with their own stall.
Hyderabad also has outpatient and inpatient facilities that use Unani, homoeopathic and Ayurvedic treatments.
Most Muslim women wear ''burqa'' and ''hijab'' outdoors.
International-level sportspeople from Hyderabad include: cricketers Ghulam Ahmed, M. L. Jaisimha, Mohammed Azharuddin, V. V. S. Laxman, Venkatapathy Raju, Shivlal Yadav, Arshad Ayub, Syed Abid Ali, Mithali Raj and Noel David; football players Syed Abdul Rahim, Syed Nayeemuddin and Shabbir Ali; tennis player Sania Mirza; badminton players S. M. Arif, Pullela Gopichand, Saina Nehwal, P. V. Sindhu, Jwala Gutta and Chetan Anand; hockey players Syed Mohammad Hadi and Mukesh Kumar; rifle shooters Gagan Narang and Asher Noria and bodybuilder Mir Mohtesham Ali Khan.
One of Hyderabad's earliest newspapers, ''The Deccan Times'', was established in the 1780s.
Hyderabad was historically known as a pearl and diamond trading centre, and it continues to be known as the City of Pearls.
In the 2016 municipal election, the Telangana Rashtra Samithi formed the majority and the present Mayor is Bonthu Ram Mohan.
North of central Hyderabad lie Hussain Sagar, Tank Bund Road, Rani Gunj and the Secunderabad Railway Station.
Hindus are in the majority.
Between 1946 and 1951, the Communist Party of India fomented the Telangana uprising against the feudal lords of the Telangana region.
After the fall of Delhi in 1857, the migration of performing artists to the city particularly from the north and west of the Indian sub continent, under the patronage of the Nizam, enriched the cultural milieu.
Maximum speed limits within the city are  for two-wheelers and cars,  for auto rickshaws and  for light commercial vehicles and buses.
In 2009 the World Bank Group ranked the city as the second best Indian city for doing business.
As stipulated in sections 3 and 18(1) of the Reorganisation Act, city MLAs are members of Telangana state assembly.
Heritage buildings constructed during the Qutb Shahi and Nizam eras showcase Indo-Islamic architecture influenced by Medieval, Mughal and European styles.
The Hyderabad cricket team represents the city in the Ranji Trophy—a first-class cricket tournament among India's states and cities.
The city has also hosted international film festivals such as the International Children's Film Festival and the Hyderabad International Film Festival.
At the professional level, the city has hosted national and international sports events such as the 2002 National Games of India, the 2003 Afro-Asian Games, the 2004 AP Tourism Hyderabad Open women's tennis tournament, the 2007 Military World Games, the 2009 World Badminton Championships and the 2009 IBSF World Snooker Championship.
Until 1874 there were no modern industries in Hyderabad.
Those involved in the informal economy constitute a major portion of urban poor.
Hyderabad sits at the junction of three National Highways linking it to six other states: NH-7 runs  from Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, in the north to Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu, in the south; NH-9, runs  east-west between Machilipatnam, Andhra Pradesh, and Pune, Maharashtra; and the  NH-163 links Hyderabad to Bhopalpatnam, Chhattisgarh NH-765 links Hyderabad to  Srisailam.
Hyderabad has continued with these traditions in its annual Hyderabad Literary Festival, held since 2010, showcasing the city's literary and cultural creativity.
This lasted until 1321, when the Kakatiya dynasty was annexed by Malik Kafur, Allaudin Khilji's general.
English is also used.
With an average altitude of , Hyderabad lies on predominantly sloping terrain of grey and pink granite, dotted with small hills, the highest being Banjara Hills at .
Rapid urbanisation and increased economic activity has also led to increased industrial waste, air, noise and water pollution, which is regulated by the Telangana Pollution Control Board (TPCB).
As of 2016, the tree cover is 1.66% of total city area, a decrease from 2.71% in 1996.
The city continued as the capital of Hyderabad State after it was brought into the Indian Union in 1948, and became the capital of Andhra Pradesh after the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
Muslims form a very large minority, and are present throughout the city and predominate in and around the Old City.
The accession of Asif Jah II, who reigned from 1762 to 1803, ended the instability.
Ground water around Hyderabad, which has a hardness of up to 1000 ppm, around three times higher than is desirable, is the main source of drinking water but the increasing population and consequent increase in demand has led to a decline in not only ground water but also river and lake levels.
Special economic zones dedicated to information technology have encouraged companies from across India and around the world to set up operations and the emergence of pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries in the 1990s led to the area's naming as India's "Genome Valley".
Hyderabad emerged as the foremost centre of culture in India with the decline of the Mughal Empire in the mid-19th century, with artists migrating to the city from the rest of the Indian subcontinent.
According to a survey published in 2007, it had 40–50,000 street vendors, and their numbers were increasing.
The corporators elect the Mayor, who is the titular head of GHMC; executive powers rest with the Municipal Commissioner, appointed by the state government.
