Eventually the gas is converted to sulfite in the mitochondria by thiosulfate reductase, and the sulfite is further oxidized to thiosulfate and sulfate by sulfite oxidase.
The increased levels of hydrogen sulfide could have killed oxygen-generating plants as well as depleted the ozone layer, causing further stress.
(In fact, this mode of photosynthesis is older than the mode of cyanobacteria, algae, and plants, which uses water as electron donor and liberates oxygen.)
After investigation it was determined that the large amount of gas originated from imperfect treatment and disposal of waste water in the building.
In this model of the origin of life on Earth, geologically produced hydrogen sulfide is postulated as an electron donor driving the reduction of carbon dioxide.
arises from virtually anywhere where elemental sulfur comes in contact with organic material, especially at high temperatures.
Increased BH4 cofactor contributes to increased production of NO within the body.
Scientists from the University of Exeter discovered that cell exposure to small amounts of hydrogen sulfide gas can prevent mitochondrial damage.
elemental sulfur) to oxidize organic compounds or hydrogen; this produces hydrogen sulfide as a waste product.
A similar process known as hibernation occurs naturally in many mammals and also in toads, but not in mice.
also occurs in volcanic gases, natural gas, and in some sources of well water.
Water heaters can aid the conversion of sulfate in water to hydrogen sulfide gas.
Small  blooms have been detected in modern times in the Dead Sea and in the Atlantic ocean off the coast of Namibia.
As mentioned above, hydrogen sulfide binds to cytochrome oxidase and thereby prevents oxygen from binding, which leads to the dramatic slowdown of metabolism.
This is exploited in the Claus process, the main way to convert hydrogen sulfide into elemental sulfur.
The standard lab preparation is to react ferrous sulfide (FeS) with a strong acid in a Kipp generator:
Treatment involves immediate inhalation of amyl nitrite, injections of sodium nitrite or administration of 4-dimethylaminophenol in combination with inhalation of pure oxygen, administration of bronchodilators to overcome eventual bronchospasm, and in some cases hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT).
Though both nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen sulfide have been shown to relax blood vessels, their mechanisms of action are different: while NO activates the enzyme guanylyl cyclase,  activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels in smooth muscle cells.
It acts as a relaxant of smooth muscle and as a vasodilator and is also active in the brain, where it increases the response of the NMDA receptor and facilitates long term potentiation, which is involved in the formation of memory.
Animals and humans naturally produce some hydrogen sulfide in their body; researchers have proposed that the gas is used to regulate metabolic activity and body temperature, which would explain the above findings.
It can also be produced by reacting hydrogen gas with molten elemental sulfur at about 450&nbsp;°C.
In H2S therapy immediately following an AMI, increased cGMP triggers an increase in protein kinase G (PKG) activity.
* Concentrations over 1000&nbsp;ppm cause immediate collapse with loss of breathing, even after inhalation of a single breath.
The cardioprotective role effect of garlic is caused by catabolism of the polysulfide group in allicin to , a reaction that could depend on reduction mediated by glutathione.
Oxygen is added to water and a reaction between oxygen and hydrogen sulfide react to produce odorless sulfate
Recent findings suggest strong cellular crosstalk of NO and , demonstrating that the vasodilatatory effects of these two gases are mutually dependent.
Being heavier than air, it tends to accumulate at the bottom of poorly ventilated spaces.
Depending on environmental conditions, it is responsible for deterioration of material through the action of some sulfur oxidizing microorganisms.
In a certain rat model of Parkinson's disease, the brain's hydrogen sulfide concentration was found to be reduced, and administering hydrogen sulfide alleviated the condition.
Besides living near a gas and oil drilling operations, ordinary citizens can be exposed to hydrogen sulfide by being near waste water treatment facilities, landfills and farms with manure storage.
*Continuous chlorination
*:For concentrations of hydrogen sulfide less than 2&nbsp;mg/L aeration is an ideal treatment process.
If the -induced hibernation can be made to work in humans, it could be useful in the emergency management of severely injured patients, and in the conservation of donated organs.
The sulfide dianion S2− exists only in strongly alkaline aqueous solutions; it is exceptionally basic with a p''K''a&nbsp;>&nbsp;14.
If hydrogen sulfide is pressurized at higher temperatures, then cooled, the critical temperature reaches , the highest accepted superconducting critical temperature as of 2015.
Some of the hydrogen sulfide will react with metal ions in the water to produce metal sulfides, which are not water-soluble.
It forms a complex bond with iron in the mitochondrial cytochrome enzymes, thus preventing cellular respiration.
A 2008 study failed to reproduce the effect in pigs, concluding that the effects seen in mice were not present in larger mammals.
*:For levels up to 75&nbsp;mg/L chlorine is used in the purification process as an oxidizing chemical to react with hydrogen sulfide.
Hydrogen sulfide production can be costly because of the dangers involved in production.
The critical temperature increases with pressure, ranging from 23&nbsp;K at 100&nbsp;GPa to 150&nbsp;K at 200&nbsp;GPa.
This reaction yields insoluble solid sulfur.
Hydrogen sulfide reacts with alcohols to form thiols, an important class of organosulfur compounds.
By substituting a small part of sulfur with phosphorus and using even higher pressures, it has been predicted that it may be possible to raise the critical temperature to above  and achieve room-temperature superconductivity.
These first responders, such as emergency services workers or family members are at risk of death from inhaling lethal quantities of the gas, or by fire.
Like nitric oxide, hydrogen sulfide is involved in the relaxation of smooth muscle that causes erection of the penis, presenting possible new therapy opportunities for erectile dysfunction.
For small-scale laboratory use in analytic chemistry, the use of thioacetamide has superseded  as a source of sulfide ions.
The components of the resulting precipitate redissolve with some selectivity.
Furthermore, decreased accumulation of ROS lowers oxidative stress in vascular smooth muscle cells, decreasing oxidative degeneration of BH4.
Lead(II) acetate paper is used to detect hydrogen sulfide because it turns grey in the presence of the gas as lead(II) sulfide is produced.
Increased H2S levels within the body will react with oxygen to produce sulfane sulfur, a storage intermediate for H2S.
Short-term, high-level exposure can induce immediate collapse, with loss of breathing and a high probability of death.
Usually the chlorine used is in the form of sodium hypochlorite.
Metal sulfides often have a dark color.
* 50–100&nbsp;ppm leads to eye damage.
Dissolved in water, hydrogen sulfide is known as '''hydrosulfuric acid''' or '''sulfhydric acid''', a weak acid.
Two recent studies cast doubt that the effect can be achieved in larger mammals.
H2S pools in the body attracts oxygen to react with excess H2S and eNOS to increase NO production.
Free radical accumulation occurs due to increased electron transport uncoupling at the active site of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), an enzyme involved in converting L-arginine to NO.
Increased NO production enables soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) activity, leading to an increased conversion of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to 3′,5′-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP).
However, there exists some evidence to suggest that nitric oxide does most of the vessel-relaxing work in large vessels and hydrogen sulfide is responsible for similar action in smaller blood vessels.
The products of eNOS are reduced to superoxides, increasing free radical production and oxidative stress within the cells.
For well over a century, hydrogen sulfide was important in analytical chemistry, in the qualitative inorganic analysis of metal ions.
Hydrogen sulfide can be removed effectively from drinking water and there are a number of processes designed for this purpose.
The British English spelling of this compound is ''hydrogen sulphide'', but this spelling is not recommended by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the Royal Society of Chemistry.
A hydrogen sulfide (H2S) deficiency can be detrimental to the vascular function after an acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
This study could have further implications on preventing strokes, heart disease and arthritis.
It is called biogenic sulfide corrosion.
In 2011 it was reported that increased concentration of , possibly due to oil field practices, was observed in the Bakken formation crude and presented challenges such as "health and environmental risks, corrosion of wellbore, added expense with regard to materials handling and pipeline equipment, and additional refinement requirements".
The toxicity of  is comparable with that of carbon monoxide.
* 320–530&nbsp;ppm leads to pulmonary edema with the possibility of death.
Exposure to lower concentrations can result in eye irritation, a sore throat and cough, nausea, shortness of breath, and fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema).
Sulfate-reducing (resp.
In 2015, hydrogen sulfide under extremely high pressure (around 150 gigapascals/1.5 million bar) was found to undergo superconducting transition near , the highest temperature superconductor known to date.
With increased use of oxygen to produce more NO, less oxygen is available to react with eNOS to produce superoxides during an AMI, ultimately lowering the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
H2S therapy uses a H2S donor, such as diallyl trisulfide (from garlic), to increase the supply of H2S to an AMI patient.
As of 2010, this phenomenon has occurred in a number of US cities, prompting warnings to those arriving at the site of the suicide.
:6&nbsp;H2O + Al2S3 → 3&nbsp;H2S + 2&nbsp;Al(OH)3
Researchers are not clear how the vessel-relaxing responsibilities are shared between nitric oxide and hydrogen sulfide.
*:Calcium nitrate can be used to prevent hydrogen sulfide formation in wastewater streams.
Hydrogen sulfide is most commonly obtained by its separation from sour gas, which is natural gas with high content of .
* 800&nbsp;ppm is the lethal concentration for 50% of humans for 5 minutes' exposure (LC50).
When the cell is stressed with disease, enzymes are drawn into the cell to produce small amounts of hydrogen sulfide.
One may die from the second inhalation of the gas, and a warning itself may be too late.
A dump of toxic waste containing hydrogen sulfide is believed to have caused 17 deaths and thousands of illnesses in Abidjan, on the West African coast, in the 2006 Côte d'Ivoire toxic waste dump.
By far the largest industrial source of  is petroleum refineries: The hydrodesulfurization process liberates sulfur from petroleum by the action of hydrogen.
Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele is credited with having discovered hydrogen sulfide in 1777.
Hydrogen sulfide acts as an endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF) and as an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF).
Although very pungent at first, it quickly deadens the sense of smell, so victims may be unaware of its presence until it is too late.
Some ores are sulfides.
In 2006 it was shown that the blood pressure of mice treated in this fashion with hydrogen sulfide did not significantly decrease.
Other anthropogenic sources of hydrogen sulfide include coke ovens, paper mills (using the Kraft process), tanneries and sewerage.
Upon combining with alkali metal bases, hydrogen sulfide converts to alkali hydrosulfides such as sodium hydrosulfide and sodium sulfide, which are used in the degradation of biopolymers.
The purple sulfur bacteria and the green sulfur bacteria use hydrogen sulfide as electron donor in photosynthesis, thereby producing elemental sulfur.
Local governments have also initiated campaigns to prevent such suicides.
As indicated above, many metal ions react with hydrogen sulfide to give the corresponding metal sulfides.
:FeS + 2&nbsp;HCl → FeCl2 + H2S
HBOT has clinical and anecdotal support.
Movile Cave life forms are also adapted to high levels of the gas.
This gas is also produced by heating sulfur with solid organic compounds and by reducing sulfurated organic compounds with hydrogen.
Although respiratory paralysis may be immediate, it can also be delayed up to 72 hours.
noted that there is no induction of hypometabolism in sheep, either.
The beta cells of the pancreas in type 1 diabetes produce an excess of the gas, leading to the death of these cells and to a reduced production of insulin by those that remain.
These metal sulfides, such as ferrous sulfide FeS, are often black or brown, leading to the dark color of sludge.
Residents living in the area were urged to stay indoors by the emergencies ministry.
If gaseous hydrogen sulfide (a strong reducing agent) is put into contact with concentrated nitric acid (a strong oxidizer), it reacts explosively to give NO''x'', SO''x'', nitrogen, and water.
This conversion is widely exploited.
PKG reduces intracellular Ca2+ in vascular smooth muscle to increase smooth muscle relaxation and promote blood flow.
Long-term, low-level exposure may result in fatigue, loss of appetite, headaches, irritability, poor memory, and dizziness.
Instead, eNOS reacts with oxygen, another cosubstrates involved in NO production.
If death does not occur, high exposure to hydrogen sulfide can lead to cortical pseudolaminar necrosis, degeneration of the basal ganglia and cerebral edema.
In these analyses, heavy metal (and nonmetal) ions (e.g., Pb(II), Cu(II), Hg(II), As(III)) are precipitated from solution upon exposure to .
The resulting  is converted to elemental sulfur by partial combustion via the Claus process, which is a major source of elemental sulfur.
The gas is produced from cysteine by the enzymes cystathionine beta-synthase, cystathionine gamma-lyase and 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase.
A less well-known and more convenient alternative is to react aluminium sulfide with water:
As organic matter decays under low-oxygen (or hypoxic) conditions (such as in swamps, eutrophic lakes or dead zones of oceans), sulfate-reducing bacteria will use the sulfates present in the water to oxidize the organic matter, producing hydrogen sulfide as waste.
AMIs can lead to cardiac dysfunction through two distinct changes; increased oxidative stress via free radical accumulation and decreased NO bioavailability.
Hydrogen sulfide may have anti-aging properties by blocking destructive chemicals within the cell, bearing similar properties to resveratrol, an antioxidant found in red wine.
The biochemistry of hydrogen sulfide is an important part of the chemistry of the iron-sulfur world.
In trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) the body produces an excess of hydrogen sulfide.
These include methanethiol, ethanethiol, and thioglycolic acid.
Chronic exposure to low level  (around 2 ppm) has been implicated in increased miscarriage and reproductive health issues among Russian and Finnish wood pulp workers, but the reports have not (as of circa 1995) been replicated.
In Alzheimer's disease the brain's hydrogen sulfide concentration is severely decreased.
Organic residues from these extinction boundaries indicate that the oceans were anoxic (oxygen-depleted) and had species of shallow plankton that metabolized .
At pressures above 90&nbsp;GPa (Gigapascal), hydrogen sulfide becomes a metallic conductor of electricity.
Hydrogen sulfide is created by the human body in small doses through bacterial breakdown of proteins containing sulfur in the intestinal tract.
Since hydrogen sulfide occurs naturally in the body, the environment and the gut, enzymes exist in the body capable of detoxifying it by oxidation to (harmless) sulfate.
At high temperature or in the presence of catalysts, sulfur dioxide can be made to react with hydrogen sulfide to form elemental sulfur and water.
It is also produced in the mouth and is a cause of halitosis.
* 10–20&nbsp;ppm is the borderline concentration for eye irritation.
However, the preferred method can change according to the level of concentration in water.
In 2005, it was shown that mice can be put into a state of suspended animation-like hypothermia by applying a low dosage of hydrogen sulfide (81&nbsp;ppm ) in the air.
(Mice can fall into a state called clinical torpor when food shortage occurs.)
This phosphorylation process upregulates eNOS activity, catalyzing more conversion of L-arginine to NO.
PKG also limits smooth muscle cell proliferation, reducing intima thickening following AMI injury, ultimately decreasing myocardial infarct size.
A solution of hydrogen sulfide in water, known as ''sulfhydric acid'' or ''hydrosulfuric acid'', is initially clear but over time turns cloudy.
Instead, Akt activity is increased to phosphorylate the eNOST495 inhibition site, downregulating eNOS production of NO.
* At 100–150&nbsp;ppm the olfactory nerve is paralyzed after a few inhalations, and the sense of smell disappears, often together with awareness of danger.
Hydrogen sulfide is also involved in the disease process of type 1 diabetes.
Additionally,  reacts with intracellular ''S''-nitrosothiols to form the smallest ''S''-nitrosothiol (HSNO), and a role of hydrogen sulfide in controlling the intracellular 'S''-nitrosothiol pool has been suggested.
A H2S deficiency impairs eNOS activity by limiting Akt activation and inhibiting Akt phosphorylation of the eNOSS1177 activation site.
The mice survived this procedure for 6 hours and afterwards showed no negative health consequences.
* 530–1000&nbsp;ppm causes strong stimulation of the central nervous system and rapid breathing, leading to loss of breathing.
Small amounts of hydrogen sulfide occur in crude petroleum, but natural gas can contain up to 90%.
When cooled below a critical temperature this high-pressure phase exhibits superconductivity.
It is also present in natural halite type rock salts, most notably in Himalayan Black Salt, which is mostly harvested from the mineral-rich Salt Range mountains of Pakistan.
* 20&nbsp;ppm is the acceptable ceiling concentration established by OSHA.
In 1975, a hydrogen sulfide release from an oil drilling operation in Denver City, Texas, killed nine people and caused the state legislature to focus on the deadly hazards of the gas.
A diagnostic clue of extreme poisoning by  is the discolouration of copper coins in the pockets of the victim.
This is due to providing a warm environment sustainable for sulfur bacteria and maintaining the reaction which interacts between sulfate in the water and the water heater anode, which is usually made from magnesium metal.
A portion of global  emissions are due to human activity.
Reacting metal sulfides with strong acid liberates hydrogen sulfide.
At some threshold level, believed to average around 300–350 ppm, the oxidative enzymes become overwhelmed.
Hydrogen sulfide is a highly toxic and flammable gas (flammable range: 4.3–46%).
Hydrogen sulfide often results from the prokaryotic breakdown of organic matter in the absence of oxygen gas, such as in swamps and sewers; this process is commonly known as anaerobic digestion.
Many personal safety gas detectors, such as those used by utility, sewage and petrochemical workers, are set to alarm at as low as 5 to 10 ppm and to go into high alarm at 15 ppm.
The human body produces small amounts of  and uses it as a signaling molecule.
Hydrogen sulfide is slightly heavier than air; a mixture of  and air can be explosive.
The formation of  may have been initiated by massive volcanic eruptions, which emitted carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere, which warmed the oceans, lowering their capacity to absorb oxygen that would otherwise oxidize .
Hence, low levels of hydrogen sulfide may be tolerated indefinitely.
State Representative E L Short took the lead in endorsing an investigation by the Texas Railroad Commission and urged that residents be warned "by knocking on doors if necessary" of the imminent danger stemming from the gas.
Higher concentrations of H2S directly increase eNOS activity through Akt activation to increase phosphorylation of the eNOSS1177 activation site, and decrease phosphorylation of the eNOST495 inhibition site.
Volcanoes and some hot springs (as well as cold springs) emit some , where it probably arises via the hydrolysis of sulfide minerals, i.e.
Hydrogen sulfide is slightly soluble in water and acts as a weak acid, giving the hydrosulfide ion HS− (p''K''a&nbsp;=&nbsp;6.9 in 0.01–0.1&nbsp;mol/litre solutions at 18&nbsp;°C).
The depilation of hides and the delignification of pulp by the Kraft process both are effected by alkali sulfides.
Metal parts are sometimes passivated with hydrogen sulfide.
Although the exact source of the gas was not known, blame had been placed on a Moscow oil refinery.
H2S donors reduce myocardial injury and reperfusion complications.
Catalysts used in hydrodesulfurization are routinely activated with hydrogen sulfide, and the behavior of metallic catalysts used in other parts of a refinery is also modified using hydrogen sulfide.
Hydrogen sulfide can be present naturally in well water, often as a result of the action of sulfate-reducing bacteria.
At the February 2010 TED conference, Mark Roth announced that hydrogen sulfide induced hypothermia ''in humans'' had completed Phase I clinical trials.
Hydrocarbons can replace hydrogen in this process.
Drinking water should be checked for hydrogen sulfide levels, especially if using ground water due to low dissolved oxygen levels.
The breathing rate of the animals sank from 120 to 10 breaths per minute and their temperature fell from 37&nbsp;°C to just 2&nbsp;°C above ambient temperature (in effect, they had become cold-blooded).
This is due to the slow reaction of hydrogen sulfide with the oxygen dissolved in water, yielding elemental sulfur, which precipitates out.
For safe handling procedures, a hydrogen sulfide material safety data sheet (MSDS) should be consulted.
During an AMI, oxidative degradation of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), a cofactor in NO production, limits BH4 availability and limits NO productionby eNOS.
These symptoms usually go away in a few weeks.
In the purification of metal ores by flotation, mineral powders are often treated with hydrogen sulfide to enhance the separation.
The clinical trials commissioned by the company he helped found, Ikaria, were however withdrawn or terminated by August 2011.
Hydrogen sulfide is considered a broad-spectrum poison, meaning that it can poison several different systems in the body, although the nervous system is most affected.
* 0.00047&nbsp;ppm or 0.47&nbsp;ppb is the odor threshold, the point at which 50% of a human panel can detect the presence of an odor without being able to identify it.
In November 2014, a substantial amount of hydrogen sulfide gas shrouded the central, eastern and southeastern parts of Moscow.
* 10&nbsp;ppm is the OSHA permissible exposure limit (PEL) (8 hour time-weighted average).
Shop tenants at the mall reported health complications such as sinus inflammation, breathing difficulties and eye irritation.
In general, hydrogen sulfide acts as a reducing agent.
In 2008, hypothermia induced by hydrogen sulfide for 48 hours was shown to reduce the extent of brain damage caused by experimental stroke in rats.
* 50&nbsp;ppm is the acceptable maximum peak above the ceiling concentration for an 8-hour shift, with a maximum duration of 10 minutes.
Several groups of bacteria can use hydrogen sulfide as fuel, oxidizing it to elemental sulfur or to sulfate by using dissolved oxygen, metal oxides (e.g., Fe oxyhydroxides and Mn oxides) or nitrate as oxidant.
Hydrogen sulfide and oxygen burn with a blue flame to form sulfur dioxide () and water.
Hydrogen sulfide reacts with metal ions to form metal sulfides, which may be considered the salts of hydrogen sulfide.
In 2014, Levels of Hydrogen Sulfide as high as 83&nbsp;ppm have been detected at a recently built mall in Thailand called Siam Square One at the Siam Square area.
Due to its effects similar to nitric oxide (without its potential to form peroxides by interacting with superoxide), hydrogen sulfide is now recognized as potentially protecting against cardiovascular disease.
Exposure occurs through breathing contaminated air or drinking contaminated water.
For example, gases or waters contaminated by hydrogen sulfide can be cleaned with metal sulfides.
The sulfates are excreted in the urine.
Several organosulfur compounds are produced using hydrogen sulfide.
sulfur-reducing) bacteria generate usable energy under low-oxygen conditions by using sulfates (resp.
These effects are believed to be due to the fact that hydrogen sulfide combines with alkali present in moist surface tissues to form sodium sulfide, a caustic.
Likewise a paper by Haouzi et al.
