However, according to the American Cancer Society, "available scientific evidence does not support the idea that hypnosis can influence the development or progression of cancer."
André Weitzenhoffer and Ernest R. Hilgard developed the Stanford Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility in 1959, consisting of 12 suggestion test items following a standardised hypnotic eye-fixation induction script, and this has become one of the most widely referenced research tools in the field of hypnosis.
Hypnosis is not exactly a new concept.
Among the board members were founding father of modern chemistry Antoine Lavoisier, Benjamin Franklin, and an expert in pain control, Joseph-Ignace Guillotin.
Some traditional cognitive behavioral therapy methods were based in classical conditioning.
In 1941, Robert White wrote: "It can be safely stated that nine out of ten hypnotic techniques call for reclining posture, muscular relaxation, and optical fixation followed by eye closure."
Daniel Araoz subsequently coined the acronym "TEAM" to symbolise the subject's orientation to hypnosis in terms of "trust", "expectation", "attitude", and "motivation".
Barber, Spanos, and Chaves introduced the term "cognitive-behavioural" to describe their "nonstate" theory of hypnosis in ''Hypnosis, imagination, and human potentialities''.
Erickson had no hesitation in presenting any suggested effect as being "hypnosis", whether or not the subject was in a hypnotic state.
Physicians and psychologists may use hypnosis to treat depression, anxiety, eating disorders, sleep disorders, compulsive gaming, and posttraumatic stress, while certified hypnotherapists who are not physicians or psychologists often treat smoking and weight management.
Hypnosis is usually induced by a procedure known as a hypnotic induction involving a series of preliminary instructions and suggestion.
Hypnotherapy has been studied for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome.
Despite briefly toying with the name "rational Mesmerism", Braid ultimately chose to emphasise the unique aspects of his approach, carrying out informal experiments throughout his career in order to refute practices that invoked supernatural forces and demonstrating instead the role of ordinary physiological and psychological processes such as suggestion and focused attention in producing the observed effects.
Hypnosis has been used as a supplemental approach to cognitive behavioral therapy since as early as 1949.
Joe Griffin and Ivan Tyrrell (the originators of the human givens approach) define hypnosis as "any artificial way of accessing the REM state, the same brain state in which dreaming occurs", and they suggest that this definition, when properly understood, resolves "many of the mysteries and controversies surrounding hypnosis".
Hence, research and clinical practice inspired by their interpretation has led to growing interest in the relationship between hypnotherapy and cognitive behavioural therapy.
In 1784, at the request of King Louis XVI, a Board of Inquiry started to investigate whether animal magnetism existed.
For other cases, he spoke of a "mono-ideodynamic" principle to emphasise that the eye-fixation induction technique worked by narrowing the subject's attention to a single idea or train of thought ("monoideism"), which amplified the effect of the consequent "dominant idea" upon the subject's body by means of the ideo-dynamic principle.
The Stanford, Harvard, HIP, and most other susceptibility scales convert numbers into an assessment of a person's susceptibility as "high", "medium", or "low".
There is a general consensus that heightened suggestibility is an essential characteristic of hypnosis.
Contemporary hypnotism uses a variety of suggestion forms including direct verbal suggestions, "indirect" verbal suggestions such as requests or insinuations, metaphors and other rhetorical figures of speech, and non-verbal suggestion in the form of mental imagery, voice tonality, and physical manipulation.
I do not allege that this condition is induced through the transmission of a magnetic or occult influence from my body into that of my patients; nor do I profess, by my processes, to produce the higher i.e., supernatural phenomena of the Mesmerists.
Struggling with the great expense of time that psychoanalysis required, Freud later suggested that it might be combined with hypnotic suggestion to hasten the outcome of treatment, but that this would probably weaken the outcome: "It is very probable, too, that the application of our therapy to numbers will compel us to alloy the pure gold of analysis plentifully with the copper of direct hypnotic suggestion."
Psychiatric nurses in most medical facilities are allowed to administer hypnosis to patients in order to relieve symptoms such as anxiety, arousal, negative behaviours, uncontrollable behaviour, and to improve self-esteem and confidence.
The use of hypnotism for therapeutic purposes is referred to as "hypnotherapy", while its use as a form of entertainment for an audience is known as "stage hypnosis".
Hypnosis has been used as a pain relieving technique during dental surgery and related pain management regimens as well.
At first, Freud was an enthusiastic proponent of hypnotherapy.
Émile Coué (1857–1926) assisted Ambroise-Auguste Liébeault for around two years at Nancy.
Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytic theory describes conscious thoughts as being at the surface of the mind and unconscious processes as being deeper in the mind.
On much recommendation I immediately sent for a copy of the ''Dabistan'', in which I found many statements corroborative of the fact, that the eastern saints are all self-hypnotisers, adopting means essentially the same as those which I had recommended for similar purposes.
It has been used as an aid or alternative to chemical anesthesia, and it has been studied as a way to soothe skin ailments.
Increasing the signal-to-noise ratio enables messages to be more clearly received.
In writing the majority opinion, Franklin said: "This fellow Mesmer is not flowing anything from his hands that I can see.
The induction phase of hypnosis may also affect the activity in brain regions that control intention and process conflict.
During hypnosis, a person is said to have heightened focus and concentration.
There is some controversy as to whether this is distributed on a "normal" bell-shaped curve or whether it is bi-modal with a small "blip" of people at the high end.
Hence, the ''social constructionism and role-taking theory'' of hypnosis suggests that individuals are enacting (as opposed to merely ''playing'') a role and that really there is no such thing as a hypnotic trance.
Braid extended Carpenter's theory to encompass the influence of the mind upon the body more generally, beyond the muscular system, and therefore referred to the "ideo-dynamic" response and coined the term "psycho-physiology" to refer to the study of general mind/body interaction.
The hypnotherapeutic ones are often repeated in multiple sessions before they achieve peak effectiveness.
Braid's original description of his induction is as follows:
After decades of debate, Bernheim's view dominated.
In his later works, however, Braid placed increasing emphasis upon the use of a variety of different verbal and non-verbal forms of suggestion, including the use of "waking suggestion" and self-hypnosis.
Hypnotherapy should not be used for repairing or refreshing memory because hypnosis results in memory hardening, which increases the confidence in false memories.
One part responds to the hypnotist while the other retains awareness of reality.
Modern hypnotherapy has been used, with varying success, in a variety of forms, such as:
In adaptive systems, feedback increases the signal-to-noise ratio, which may converge towards a steady state.
In fact, he was not hesitant in passing off behaviour that was dubiously hypnotic as being hypnotic.
This interpretation of hypnosis is particularly relevant to understanding stage hypnosis, in which there is clearly strong peer pressure to comply with a socially constructed role by performing accordingly on a theatrical stage.
Social psychologists Sarbin and Coe ... have described hypnosis in terms of role theory.
Stage hypnosis is a form of entertainment, traditionally employed in a club or theatre before an audience.
At the request of Azam, Paul Broca, and others, the French Academy of Science, which had investigated Mesmerism in 1784, examined Braid's writings shortly after his death.
It may here be requisite for me to explain, that by the term Hypnotism, or Nervous Sleep, which frequently occurs in the following pages, I mean a peculiar condition of the nervous system, into which it may be thrown by artificial contrivance, and which differs, in several respects, from common sleep or the waking condition.
The technique is often used to increase motivation for a diet, to quit smoking, or to reduce stress.
Later, Coué developed a new approach (c.1901) based on Braid-style "hypnotism", direct hypnotic suggestion, and ego-strengthening which eventually became known as
However, Sarbin emphasised the difference between faking, in which there is little subjective identification with the role in question, and role-taking, in which the subject not only acts externally in accord with the role but also subjectively identifies with it to some degree, acting, thinking, and feeling "as if" they are hypnotised.
Only a handful of Freud's followers, however, were sufficiently qualified in hypnosis to attempt the synthesis.
He observed that the various degrees of hypnosis did not significantly differ physiologically from the waking state and hypnosis depended on insignificant changes of environmental stimuli.
* Age regression hypnotherapy (or "hypnoanalysis")
Hypnotism has also been used in forensics, sports, education, physical therapy, and rehabilitation.
The term "hypnosis" comes from the Ancient Greek word ὕπνος ''hypnos'', "sleep", and the suffix -ωσις -''osis'', or from ὑπνόω ''hypnoō'', "put to sleep" (stem of aorist ''hypnōs''-) and the suffix -''is''.
Research into hypnosis in military applications is further verified by the Project MKULTRA experiments, also conducted by the CIA.
Systems theory considers the nervous system's organization into interacting subsystems.
Pavlov's ideas combined with those of his rival Vladimir Bekhterev and became the basis of hypnotic psychotherapy in the Soviet Union, as documented in the writings of his follower K.I.
The hypnosis instructs the stomach that it is smaller than it really is, and hypnopedia reinforces alimentary habits.
Approximately 80% of the population are medium, 10% are high, and 10% are low.
* Sports performance
The hypnotized individual appears to heed only the communications of the hypnotist and typically responds in an uncritical, automatic fashion while ignoring all aspects of the environment other than those pointed out by the hypnotist.
Many variations of the eye-fixation approach exist, including the induction used in the Stanford Hypnotic Susceptibility Scale (SHSS), the most widely used research tool in the field of hypnotism.
The eminent neurologist Dr. George Miller Beard took Braid's theories to America.
In the first few decades of the 20th century, these early clinical "depth" scales were superseded by more sophisticated "hypnotic susceptibility" scales based on experimental research.
Nausea and other symptoms related to incurable diseases may also be managed with hypnosis.
Charcot subsequently appointed him director of the psychological laboratory at the Salpêtrière in 1889, after Janet had completed his PhD, which dealt with psychological automatism.
In her 1998 book of hypnotherapy case studies, she reviews the clinical research on hypnosis with dissociative disorders, smoking cessation, and insomnia, and describes successful treatments of these complaints.
In contrast, ''nonstate'' theories see hypnosis as a form of imaginative role-enactment.
Weitzenhoffer describes hypnosis via this theory as "dissociation of awareness from the majority of sensory and even strictly neural events taking place."
Barber has produced "hypnotic deafness" and "hypnotic blindness", analgesia and other responses seen in hypnosis—all without hypnotizing anyone…Orne has shown that unhypnotized persons can be motivated to equal and surpass the supposed superhuman physical feats seen in hypnosis.
Braid later acknowledged that the hypnotic induction technique was not necessary in every case, and subsequent researchers have generally found that on average it contributes less than previously expected to the effect of hypnotic suggestions.
Erickson ... is considered the leading exponent of the position that hypnosis is a special, inner-directed, altered state of functioning.
Dissociaters often have a history of childhood abuse or other trauma, learned to escape into numbness, and to forget unpleasant events.
It is used by licensed physicians, psychologists, and others.
Barber, Spanos, and Chaves (1974) proposed a nonstate "cognitive-behavioural" theory of hypnosis, similar in some respects to Sarbin's social role-taking theory and building upon the earlier research of Barber.
Harvard hypnotherapist Deirdre Barrett writes that most modern research suggestions are designed to bring about immediate responses, whereas hypnotherapeutic suggestions are usually post-hypnotic ones that are intended to trigger responses affecting behaviour for periods ranging from days to a lifetime in duration.
noted that similar factors appeared to mediate the response both to hypnotism and to cognitive behavioural therapy, in particular systematic desensitization.
The use of hypnotism in the medical ﬁeld was made popular by Surgeons and physicians like Elliotson and James Esdaille and researchers like James Braid who helped to reveal the biological and physical beneﬁts of hypnotism.
''Altered state'' theories see hypnosis as an altered state of mind or trance, marked by a level of awareness different from the ordinary conscious state.
State theorists interpret the effects of hypnotism as due primarily to a specific, abnormal, and uniform psychological or physiological state of some description, often referred to as "hypnotic trance" or an "altered state of consciousness".
The person can concentrate intensely on a specific thought or memory, while blocking out sources of distraction.
Systems theory, in this context, may be regarded as an extension of Braid's original conceptualization of hypnosis as involving "the brain and nervous system generally".
Researchers like Jerjes and his team have reported that hypnosis can help even those patients who have acute to severe orodental pain.
He wrote several books and journal articles on the subject.
It is probably significant that in the long history of hypnosis, where the potential application to intelligence has always been known, there are no reliable accounts of its effective use by an intelligence service.
Although he rejected the transcendental/metaphysical interpretation given to these phenomena outright, Braid accepted that these accounts of Oriental practices supported his view that the effects of hypnotism could be produced in solitude, without the presence of any other person (as he had already proved to his own satisfaction with the experiments he had conducted in November 1841); and he saw correlations between many of the "metaphysical" Oriental practices and his own "rational" neuro-hypnotism, and totally rejected all of the fluid theories and magnetic practices of the mesmerists.
Last May 1843, a gentleman residing in Edinburgh, personally unknown to me, who had long resided in India, favored me with a letter expressing his approbation of the views which I had published on the nature and causes of hypnotic and mesmeric phenomena.
Hypnotists who believe that responses are mediated primarily by an "unconscious mind", like Milton Erickson, make use of indirect suggestions such as metaphors or stories whose intended meaning may be concealed from the subject's conscious mind.
Put simply, it is often claimed that, whereas the older "special state" interpretation emphasises the difference between hypnosis and ordinary psychological processes, the "nonstate" interpretation emphasises their similarity.
The use of hypnosis in intelligence would present certain technical problems not encountered in the clinic or laboratory.
Modern day hypnosis however started in the late 1700s and was made popular by Franz Mesmer, an Austrian physician who became known as the father of ‘modern hypnotism’.
Braid's main therapeutic strategy involved stimulating or reducing physiological functioning in different regions of the body.
Indeed, the earliest theories and practices of hypnotism, even those of Braid, resemble the cognitive-behavioural orientation in some respects.
In a hypnotic state an individual tends to see, feel, smell, and otherwise perceive in accordance with the hypnotist's suggestions, even though these suggestions may be in apparent contradiction to the actual stimuli present in the environment.
Preliminary research has expressed brief hypnosis interventions as possibly being a useful tool for managing painful HIV-DSP because of its history of usefulness in pain management, its long-term effectiveness of brief interventions, the ability to teach self-hypnosis to patients, the cost-effectiveness of the intervention, and the advantage of using such an intervention as opposed to the use of pharmaceutical drugs.
When James Braid first described hypnotism, he did not use the term "suggestion" but referred instead to the act of focusing the conscious mind of the subject upon a single dominant idea.
In fact, hypnosis used to be known as ‘Mesmerism’ as it was named after Mesmer.
Past life regression, meanwhile, is often viewed with skepticism.
However, the effects of stage hypnosis are probably due to a combination of psychological factors, participant selection, suggestibility, physical manipulation, stagecraft, and trickery.
Comparisons between hypnotised and non-hypnotised subjects suggest that, if a "hypnotic trance" does exist, it only accounts for a small proportion of the effects attributed to hypnotic suggestion, most of which can be replicated without hypnotic induction.
Braid extended Carpenter's theory to encompass the observation that a wide variety of bodily responses besides muscular movement can be thus affected, for example, the idea of sucking a lemon can automatically stimulate salivation, a secretory response.
Bernheim's conception of the primacy of verbal suggestion in hypnotism dominated the subject throughout the 20th century, leading some authorities to declare him the father of modern hypnotism.
Braid, therefore, adopted the term "ideo-dynamic", meaning "by the power of an idea", to explain a broad range of "psycho-physiological" (mind–body) phenomena.
Hilgard then asked the subjects to lift their index finger if they felt pain and 70% of the subjects lifted their index finger.
Self-hypnosis is claimed to help with stage fright, relaxation, and physical well-being.
Milton Erickson (1901–1980) was one of the most influential post-war hypnotherapists.
At that time, hypnosis as a medical treatment was seldom used until the German doctor Franz Mesmer, reintroduced it in the 18th century.
Ernest Hilgard, who developed the "neodissociation" theory of hypnotism, hypothesized that hypnosis causes the subjects to divide their consciousness voluntarily.
He drew analogies between his own practice of hypnotism and various forms of Hindu yoga meditation and other ancient spiritual practices, especially those involving voluntary burial and apparent human hibernation.
Anna Gosline claims:
Azam's enthusiasm for hypnotism influenced Ambroise-Auguste Liébeault, a country doctor.
Soviet theories of hypnotism subsequently influenced the writings of Western behaviourally oriented hypnotherapists such as Andrew Salter.
Traditionally, this was interpreted as a method of putting the subject into a "hypnotic trance"; however, subsequent "nonstate" theorists have viewed it differently, seeing it as a means of heightening client expectation, defining their role, focusing attention, etc.
Hull published many quantitative findings from hypnosis and suggestion experiments and encouraged research by mainstream psychologists.
One of the most influential methods was Braid's "eye-fixation" technique, also known as "Braidism".
They see the REM state as being vitally important for life itself, for programming in our instinctive knowledge initially (after Dement and Jouvet) and then for adding to this throughout life.
The effects of hypnosis are not limited to sensory change; even the subject's memory and awareness of self may be altered by suggestion, and the effects of the suggestions may be extended (posthypnotically) into the subject's subsequent waking activity.
Both score equally high on formal scales of hypnotic susceptibility.
After practising for several months employing the "hypnosis" of Liébeault and Bernheim's Nancy School, he abandoned their approach altogether.
Soon after, in 1962, Ronald Shor and Emily Carota Orne developed a similar group scale called the Harvard Group Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility (HGSHS).
Variations of the basic ideo-motor, or ideo-dynamic, theory of suggestion have continued to exercise considerable influence over subsequent theories of hypnosis, including those of Clark L. Hull, Hans Eysenck, and Ernest Rossi.
He first discussed some of these oriental practices in a series of articles entitled ''Magic, Mesmerism, Hypnotism, etc., Historically & Physiologically Considered''.
Different views regarding the nature of the mind have led to different conceptions of suggestion.
Hypnosis is normally preceded by a "hypnotic induction" technique.
In many cultures and religions, it was regarded as a form of meditation.
Before long, hypnotism started ﬁnding its way into the world of modern medicine.
This effect is obtained either through the process of selective attention or dissociation, in which both theories involve the presence of activity in pain receptive regions of the brain, and a difference in the processing of the stimuli by the hypnotised subject.
Clark L. Hull (1884–1952), an eminent American psychologist, published the first major compilation of laboratory studies on hypnosis, ''Hypnosis & Suggestibility'' (1933), in which he proved that hypnosis and sleep had nothing in common.
Hypnosis is effective in reducing pain from and coping with cancer and other chronic conditions.
A socially constructed relationship is built depending on how much rapport has been established between the "hypnotist" and the subject (see Hawthorne effect, Pygmalion effect, and placebo effect).
There is no good evidence, clinical or experimental, that this can be done.
Braid, Bernheim, and other Victorian pioneers of hypnotism did not refer to the unconscious mind but saw hypnotic suggestions as being addressed to the subject's ''conscious'' mind.
Psychologists such as Robert Baker and Graham Wagstaff claim that what we call hypnosis is actually a form of learned social behaviour, a complex hybrid of social compliance, relaxation, and suggestibility that can account for many esoteric behavioural manifestations.
* Ericksonian hypnotherapy
However, this method is still considered authoritative.
The study found that highly suggestible individuals experienced a greater reduction in pain from hypnosis compared with placebo, whereas less suggestible subjects experienced no pain reduction from hypnosis when compared with placebo.
Variations and alternatives to the original hypnotic induction techniques were subsequently developed.
* Fears and phobias
According to Charles Baudouin Coué founded what became known as the New Nancy School, a loose collaboration of practitioners who taught and promoted his views.
T. X. Barber ... defined hypnosis in terms of nonhypnotic behavioural parameters, such as task motivation and the act of labeling the situation as hypnosis.
He "initially hypnotised patients and pressed on their foreheads to help them concentrate while attempting to recover (supposedly) repressed memories", and he soon began to emphasise hypnotic regression and ab reaction (catharsis) as therapeutic methods.
He wrote a favorable encyclopedia article on hypnotism, translated one of Bernheim's works into German, and published an influential series of case studies with his colleague Joseph Breuer entitled ''Studies on Hysteria'' (1895).
The words "hypnosis" and "hypnotism" both derive from the term "neuro-hypnotism" (nervous sleep), all of which were coined by Étienne Félix d'Henin de Cuvillers in 1820.
Changes in brain activity have been found in some studies of highly responsive hypnotic subjects.
The most influential were the Davis–Husband and Friedlander–Sarbin scales developed in the 1930s.
However, Freud gradually abandoned hypnotism in favour of psychoanalysis, emphasizing free association and interpretation of the unconscious.
A 1996 meta-analysis studying hypnosis combined with cognitive behavioural therapy found that people using both treatments lost more weight than people using cognitive behavioural therapy alone.
The study of hypnotism subsequently revolved around the fierce debate between Bernheim and Jean-Martin Charcot, the two most influential figures in late 19th-century hypnotism.
Another study has demonstrated that a colour hallucination suggestion given to subjects in hypnosis activated colour-processing regions of the occipital cortex.
The first neuropsychological theory of hypnotic suggestion was introduced early on by James Braid who adopted his friend and colleague William Carpenter's theory of the ideo-motor reflex response to account for the phenomenon of hypnotism.
The overall conclusion of the study was that there was no evidence that hypnosis could be used for military applications, and no clear evidence whether "hypnosis" is a definable phenomenon outside ordinary suggestion, motivation, and subject expectancy.
There are numerous applications for hypnosis across multiple fields of interest, including medical/psychotherapeutic uses, military uses, self-improvement, and entertainment.
Hypnotherapy is a helpful adjunct having additive effects when treating psychological disorders, such as these, along with scientifically proven cognitive therapies.
For some psychologists who uphold the altered state theory of hypnosis, pain relief in response to hypnosis is said to be the result of the brain's dual-processing functionality.
Indeed, Braid actually defines hypnotism as focused (conscious) attention upon a dominant idea (or suggestion).
In 1933, Clark L. Hull wrote:
Nonstate theorists rejected the idea of hypnotic trance and interpret the effects of hypnotism as due to a combination of multiple task-specific factors derived from normal cognitive, behavioural, and social psychology, such as social role-perception and favorable motivation (Sarbin), active imagination and positive cognitive set (Barber), response expectancy (Kirsch), and the active use of task-specific subjective strategies (Spanos).
Some people have drawn analogies between certain aspects of hypnotism and areas such as crowd psychology, religious hysteria, and ritual trances in preliterate tribal cultures.
There are several different induction techniques.
A distinction is commonly made between suggestions delivered "permissively" and those delivered in a more "authoritarian" manner.
Sarbin argued that hypnotic responses were motivated attempts to fulfill the socially constructed roles of hypnotic subjects.
Carpenter had observed instances of expectation and imagination apparently influencing involuntary muscle movement.
Hypnosis would remove some control from the conscious mind, and the individual would respond with autonomic, reflexive behaviour.
The psychiatrist Albert Moll subsequently continued German research, publishing ''Hypnotism'' in 1889.
To obtain compliance from a resistant source, for example, it would be necessary to hypnotise the source under essentially hostile circumstances.
Hypnosis may be useful as an adjunct therapy for weight loss.
He led many courses for physicians, and in 1964 wrote the book ''Findings in Hypnosis'', later to be retitled ''Hypnotherapy'' (published by Westwood Publishing).
Although Coué argued that he was no longer using hypnosis, followers such as Charles Baudouin viewed his approach as a form of light self-hypnosis.
Fantasizers score high on absorption scales, find it easy to block out real-world stimuli without hypnosis, spend much time daydreaming, report imaginary companions as a child, and grew up with parents who encouraged imaginary play.
''La méthode Coué''.
At the outset of cognitive behavioural therapy during the 1950s, hypnosis was used by early behaviour therapists such as Joseph Wolpe and also by early cognitive therapists such as Albert Ellis.
This has led to the misconception that hypnotic subjects are simply "faking".
For example, in 1994, Irving Kirsch characterised hypnosis as a "nondeceptive placebo", i.e., a method that openly makes use of suggestion and employs methods to amplify its effects.
Mesmer held the opinion that hypnosis was a sort of mystical force that ﬂga-sw from the hypnotist to the person being hypnotized but his theory was dismissed by critics who asserted that there was no magical element to hypnotism.
One way of inducing the relaxed state was through hypnosis.
Hypnotic phenomena thus involve not only increased or decreased activity of particular subsystems, but also their interaction.
Charcot's theory is now just a historical curiosity.
By around 1774, he had concluded that the same effect could be created by passing the hands in front of the subject's body, later referred to as making "Mesmeric passes".
The state of light to medium hypnosis, where the body undergoes physical and mental relaxation, is associated with a pattern mostly of alpha waves  However, what these results indicate is unclear.
Pierre Janet originally developed the idea of ''dissociation of consciousness'' from his work with hysterical patients.
Edmonston ... has assessed hypnosis as being merely a state of relaxation.
document obtained by the US Freedom of Information Act archive shows that hypnosis was investigated for military applications.
Additionally, Meyerson and Uziel have suggested that hypnotic methods have been found to be highly fruitful for alleviating anxiety in patients suffering from severe dental phobia.
A hypnotic trance is not therapeutic in and of itself, but specific suggestions and images fed to clients in a trance can profoundly alter their behavior.
Whereas the older "depth scales" tried to infer the level of "hypnotic trance" from supposed observable signs such as spontaneous amnesia, most subsequent scales have measured the degree of observed or self-evaluated ''responsiveness'' to specific suggestion tests such as direct suggestions of arm rigidity (catalepsy).
Stage hypnotists typically attempt to hypnotise the entire audience and then select individuals who are "under" to come up on stage and perform embarrassing acts, while the audience watches.
These concepts were introduced into hypnotism at the end of the 19th century by Sigmund Freud and Pierre Janet.
It could be said that hypnotic suggestion is explicitly intended to make use of the placebo effect.
Bernheim argued that anyone could be hypnotised, that it was an extension of normal psychological functioning, and that its effects were due to suggestion.
Carpenter had observed from close examination of everyday experience that, under certain circumstances, the mere idea of a muscular movement could be sufficient to produce a reflexive, or automatic, contraction or movement of the muscles involved, albeit in a very small degree.
I define hypnotism as the induction of a peculiar psychical i.e., mental condition which increases the susceptibility to suggestion.
This may therefore indicate that highly suggestible hypnotic subjects are simply activating to a greater extent the areas of the brain used in imagination, without real perceptual changes.
Jean-Martin Charcot made a similar distinction between stages which he named somnambulism, lethargy, and catalepsy.
Hypnosis for IBS has received moderate support in the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidance published for UK health services.
