He later recalled the long periods of time he spent in the area: "I recalled the places I had seen with my mother when I was a little boy—the mountaintop Buddhist retreats.
He also set the complex back on the mesa overlooking the city, and designed the approaching road to be long, winding, and indirect.
The Fragrant Hill Hotel opened on October 17, 1982 but quickly fell into disrepair.
Pei drew inspiration for his adjustments from the designs of the German architect Johann Balthasar Neumann, especially the Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers.
Pei's choice had two roots.
"I certainly don't regret the time at MIT", he said later.
In 1955 Pei's group took a step toward institutional independence from Webb and Knapp by establishing a new firm called I.&nbsp;M. Pei & Associates.
Revenue was secured in part by including a subterranean parking garage.
Pei was also meticulous about the arrangement of items in the garden behind the hotel; he even insisted on transporting  of rocks from a location in southwest China to suit the natural aesthetic.
Pei admitted that he did not completely know how everything would come together.
Likewise, he considered modernist styles inappropriate for the setting.
In an attempt to soothe public ire, Pei took a suggestion from then-mayor of Paris Jacques Chirac and placed a full-sized cable model of the pyramid in the courtyard.
After the firm's first plan was discarded due to a need for more office space, Cobb developed a new plan around a towering parallelogram, slanted away from the Trinity Church and accented by a wedge cut into each narrow side.
Allan Greenberg had scorned the design when it was first unveiled, but wrote later to J. Carter Brown: "I am forced to admit that you are right and I was wrong!
The city's global architectural flavors had a profound influence on Pei, from the Bund waterfront area to the Park Hotel, built in 1934.
Pei was also influenced by the work of US architect Frank Lloyd Wright.
"Going through this trial toughened us," he said.
"After the Louvre," he said later, "I thought no project would be too difficult."
The project was risky: its goals were ambitious and any unforeseen acoustic flaws would be virtually impossible to remedy after the hall's completion.
His father later married a woman named Aileen, who moved to New York later in her life.
These and other problems led to media comparisons with the disastrous Hancock Tower.
The site housed a decrepit hotel; Pei was invited to tear it down and build a new one.
Pei's background in architecture was seen as a considerable asset; one member of the committee told him: "If you know how to build you should also know how to destroy."
The group deliberated for months and considered many famous architects.
She enrolled in the landscape architecture program at Harvard University, and Pei was thus introduced to members of the faculty at Harvard's Graduate School of Design (GSD).
He later returned to the world of the arts by designing the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center in Dallas, the Miho Museum in Japan, the Suzhou Museum in Suzhou, and the Museum of Islamic Art in Qatar.
The project differed from Pei's earlier urban work; it would rest in an open area in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains.
Considering his work on such bastions of high culture as the Louvre and US National Gallery, some critics were surprised by his association with what many considered a tribute to low culture.
Nevertheless, at that time it was very attractive to me.
I decided that was the country for me."
Cobb worked in Australia and Pei took on jobs in Singapore, Iran, and Kuwait.
The building was demolished in February 2013 although the front facade will be retained as part of an apartment development.
Pei involved himself in the construction process at Kips Bay, even inspecting the bags of concrete to check for consistency of color.
One of the goals was a new city hall, which could be a "symbol of the people".
They began dating and they married in the spring of 1942.
Pei was inspired by the innovative designs of the new International style, characterized by simplified form and the use of glass and steel materials.
He was especially impressed with the elegant simplicity of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo.
Pei finally saw his architecture come to life in 1949, when he designed a two-story corporate building for Gulf Oil in Atlanta, Georgia.
The main part of the building is a distinctive conical shape with a spiral walkway and large atrium inside, similar to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York.
Shanghai's many international elements gave it the name "Paris of the East".
Soon, however, Pei and his team won the support of several key cultural icons, including the conductor Pierre Boulez and Claude Pompidou, widow of former French President Georges Pompidou, after whom another controversial museum was named.
The forged steel globes to be used in the space frame came to the site with hairline cracks and other defects; 12,000 were rejected.
The trees in the area were of special concern, and particular care was taken to cut down as few as possible.
Chieng Chung and Li Chung, who are both Harvard Graduate School of Design alumni, founded and run Pei Partnership Architects.
In the spring of 1948 Pei was recruited by New York real estate magnate William Zeckendorf to join a staff of architects for his firm of Webb and Knapp to design buildings around the country.
He also learned rudimentary English skills by reading the Bible and novels by Charles Dickens.
Serious issues of execution became evident in the tower almost immediately.
From 1958 to 1963 Pei and Ray Affleck developed a key downtown block of Montreal in a phased process that involved one of Pei's most admired structures in the commonwealth, the cruciform tower known as the Royal Bank Plaza (Place Ville Marie).
A committee was formed to advise Kennedy's widow Jacqueline, who would make the final decision.
In 1992, Pei was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George H.W.
To minimize the visual impact, the building was covered in large reflective glass panels; Cobb said this would make the building a "background and foil" to the older structures around it.
He drove with his wife around the region, visiting assorted buildings and surveying the natural environs.
The museum's coordinators were pleased with the project; its official website describes its "true splendour unveiled in the sunlight", and speaks of "the shades of colour and the interplay of shadows paying tribute to the essence of Islamic architecture".
After waiting for two hours, however, he left without meeting Wright.
Pei attended Saint Johns Middle School, run by Protestant missionaries.
Although these projects were satisfying, Pei wanted to establish an independent name for himself.
As Pei neared the end of his secondary education, he decided to study at a university.
After the assassination, the list expanded to include a fitting memorial tribute to the slain president.
The cost of such an unusual design was too high, however, and the building never moved beyond the model stage.
Some condemnations carried nationalistic overtones.
Pei's father urged him to remain in the United States, and he worked for two years at the Boston engineering firm of Stone & Webster.
"I wanted to give something very special to the memory of President Kennedy," he said in 2000.
He once said: "The talk about modernism versus post-modernism is unimportant.
The conceptualization stages were important for Pei, presenting a need and an opportunity to break from the Bauhaus tradition.
The investigation of the place became a kind of religious experience for me."
This triangular shape became a singular vision for the architect.
The public also reacted harshly to the design, mostly because of the proposed pyramid.
The architect made three secretive trips to Paris, to determine the feasibility of the project; only one museum employee knew why he was there.
The success of NCAR brought renewed attention to Pei's design acumen.
Younger Chinese who had hoped the building would exhibit some of Cubist flavor for which Pei had become known were disappointed, but the new hotel found more favour with government officials and architects.
He spoke later of his fondness for the garden's blending of natural and human-built structures.
In response, the entire tower was reglazed with smaller panels.
One block away, Pei's team also redesigned Denver's Courthouse Square, which combined office spaces, commercial venues, and hotels.
The rectangular boxes rotate evenly to create a subtle movement, with small arched windows at regular intervals into the limestone exterior.
Pei was fascinated by the representations of college life in the films of Bing Crosby, which differed tremendously from the academic atmosphere in China.
The museum's early beginnings in New York combined with an unclear mission created a fuzzy understanding among project leaders for precisely what was needed.
In 1983, he won the Pritzker Prize, sometimes called the Nobel Prize of architecture.
Pei also worked at this time on two projects for a new Japanese religious movement called ''Shinji Shumeikai''.
He did and, although it would be his first concert hall, the committee voted unanimously to offer him the commission.
The new site was less than ideal; it was located on an old landfill, and just over a large sewage pipe.
As the tower neared completion, Pei was shocked to witness the government's massacre of unarmed civilians at the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.
Materials for the building's exterior were chosen with careful precision.
Pei's approach to the new Dallas City Hall mirrored those of other projects; he surveyed the surrounding area and worked to make the building fit.
His use of marble for the exterior curtain wall brought praise from the journal ''Architectural Forum''.
Pei's design was based on a circular tower with concentric rings.
He later explained that his actions included "shouting and pounding the table" in frustration.
The plan generated mixed results and opinion, largely succeeding in re-developing office building and parking infrastructure but failing to attract its anticipated retail and residential development.
She invited him, his brothers, and his sisters to join her on meditation retreats.
He went on to design Dallas City Hall and the East Building of the National Gallery of Art.
In 1945 Eileen gave birth to a son, T'ing Chung; she withdrew from the landscape architecture program in order to care for him.
The opening of the Louvre Pyramid coincided with four other projects on which Pei had been working, prompting architecture critic Paul Goldberger to declare 1989 "the year of Pei" in ''The New York Times''.
Dallas was known and disliked as the city where the president had been killed, but Jonsson began a program designed to initiate a community renewal.
At the age of seventy-two, Pei had begun thinking about retirement, but continued working long hours to see his designs come to light.
The younger Pei, drawn more to music and other cultural forms than to his father's domain of banking, explored art on his own.
1946) and Li Chung (b.
The experience was exhausting for Pei, but also rewarding.
In being awarded the 2003 Henry C. Turner Prize by the National Building Museum, then-museum board chair Carolyn Brody praised his impact on construction innovation: "His magnificent designs have challenged engineers to devise innovative structural solutions, and his exacting expectations for construction quality have encouraged contractors to achieve high standards."
The project to build the science center was conceived in 2001 and construction started in 2006.
Their iconoclastic focus on modern architecture appealed to Pei, and he worked closely with both men.
"I have cultivated myself", he said later.
Lacking inspiration and unsure of how to approach the building, Pei took a weekend vacation to the family home in Katonah, New York.
The tower was planned around a visible truss structure, which distributed stress to the four corners of the base.
The Green Building continued the grid design of Kips Bay and Society Hill.
Its unusual rock formations, stone bridges, and waterfalls remained etched in Pei's memory for decades.
These lessons, he said, became essential for later projects.
Returning to the challenge of the East Building of the US National Gallery, Pei worked to combine a modernist approach with a classical main structure.
He resigned from his post, complaining that the project was "unfeasible" and posed "architectural risks".
Pei refers to his own "analytical approach" when explaining the lack of a "Pei School".
Pei was able to return to hands-on design when he was approached in 1961 by Walter Orr Roberts to design the new Mesa Laboratory for the National Center for Atmospheric Research outside Boulder, Colorado.
As one member put it: "We were convinced that we would get the world's greatest architect putting his best foot forward."
In 1935 Pei boarded the boat of China, and sailed to San Francisco, then traveled by train to Philadelphia.
One of these was a delegation of the American Institute of Architects in 1974, which Pei joined.
He was recruited to work on a variety of projects, including the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University, the Sundrome terminal at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City, and dormitories at New College of Florida.
"It helped to cement us as partners; we did not give up on each other."
The small parcel of land made a tall tower necessary, and Pei had usually shied away from such projects; in Hong Kong especially, the skyscrapers lacked any real architectural character.
There in the Colorado mountains, I tried to listen to the silence again—just as my mother had taught me.
Pei's dissatisfaction reached its peak at a time when financial problems began plaguing Zeckendorf's firm.
The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum was dedicated on October 20, 1979.
Starting in 2005, the joints attaching the marble panels to the walls began to show signs of strain, creating a risk of panels falling off the building onto the public below.
These events pained Pei, who had sent all three of his sons to Harvard, and although he rarely discussed his frustration, it was evident to his wife.
Pei took to the project with vigor, and set to work with two young architects he had recently recruited to the firm, William Pedersen and Yann Weymouth.
The new project was the Miho Museum, to display Koyama's collection of tea ceremony artifacts.
"For me," he said, "the important distinction is between a stylistic approach to the design; and an analytical approach giving the process of due consideration to time, place, and purpose&nbsp;... My analytical approach requires a full understanding of the three essential elements&nbsp;... to arrive at an ideal balance among them."
It's not real, we know that.
The Nazi regime had condemned the Bauhaus school, and its leaders left Germany.
Some critics disliked the unusual design, however, and criticized the reliance on triangles throughout the building.
Although the city of Cleveland benefited greatly from the new tourist attraction, Pei was unhappy with it.
As he said: "It was a search for the sort of expression that is not at all technical."
Soon after the move to Shanghai, Pei's mother developed cancer.
It was influenced by Le Corbusier's High Court building in Chandigarh, India; Pei sought to use the significant overhang to unify building and plaza.
He said: "It's perhaps stronger than I would have liked; it's got more strength than finesse."
Pei designed the Society Hill Towers, a three-building residential block injecting cubist design into the 18th-century milieu of the neighborhood.
In 1982, he returned to design the 16th Street Mall, essentially converting a street into a pedestrian only shopping district.
As a result, he felt disconnected from the actual creative work.
First, she appreciated the variety of ideas he had used for earlier projects.
Pei finally agreed that a reconstruction project was not only possible, but necessary for the future of the museum.
Pei then spoke with his father at length about the proposal.
In the case of Dallas, he spent days meeting with residents of the city and was impressed by their civic pride.
City regulations forbid a general contractor having final authority over the project, so architects and program manager Richard Kahan had to coordinate the wide array of builders, plumbers, electricians, and other workers.
Soon Pei was so inundated with projects that he asked Zeckendorf for assistants, which he chose from his associates at the GSD, including Henry N. Cobb and Ulrich Franzen.
Calling it "really an emotional decision", she explained: "He was so full of promise, like Jack; they were born in the same year.
An individual building, the style in which it is going to be designed and built, is not that important.
In 1995 Pei was hired to design an extension to the ''Deutsches Historisches Museum'', or German Historical Museum in Berlin.
The project took one year and exceeded its budget, but Zeckendorf was delighted with the results.
His colleague John Portman once told him: "Just once, I'd like to do something like the East Building."
He then spent six months touring the region and surveying mosques in Spain, Syria, and Tunisia.
Using a glass wall for the entrance, similar in appearance to his Louvre pyramid, Pei coated the exterior of the main building in white metal, and placed a large cylinder on a narrow perch to serve as a performance space.
Vlastimil Koubek was the architect for the East Building (L'Enfant Plaza Hotel, located at 480 L'Enfant Plaza SW), and for the Center Building (475 L'Enfant Plaza SW; now the United States Postal Service headquarters).
Critics generally liked the finished building, but the architect himself was unsatisfied.
Although the architect remained pained by his experience with Fragrant Hill, he agreed to accept the commission.
In his review for ''Artforum'', critic Richard Hennessy described a "shocking fun-house atmosphere" and "aura of ancient Roman patronage".
One critic called it a "gigantic, ruinous gadget"; another charged Mitterrand with "despotism" for inflicting Paris with the "atrocity".
The tower's smooth aluminum and glass surface and crisp unadorned geometric form demonstrate Pei's adherence to the mainstream of 20th-century modern design."
The soaring structure, commissioned by the same organisation that had run his middle school in Shanghai, broke severely from the cubist grid patterns of his urban projects.
"He seemed to approach each commission thinking only of it and then develop a way to make something beautiful."
Zeckendorf loved the design and even showed it off to Le Corbusier when they met.
Pei's ancestry traces back to the Ming Dynasty, when his family moved from Anhui province to Suzhou.
The city of Dallas received the building well, and a local television news crew found unanimous approval of the new city hall when it officially opened to the public in 1978.
In 1938 he drove to Spring Green, Wisconsin, to visit Wright's famous Taliesin building.
All three companies settled out of court in 1981.
Significant public resentment also developed as a result of the destruction of multiple historic structures.
Pei's style is described as thoroughly modernist, with significant cubist themes.
One of these was the renovation of the Louvre Museum.
The experience was rewarding for Pei, and he agreed immediately to work with the group again.
1949), and a daughter, Liane (b.
They likened the scope of the new facility to the Library of Alexandria.
The success of city's performing artists, particularly the Dallas Symphony Orchestra then being led by conductor Eduardo Mata, led to interest by city leaders in creating a modern center for musical arts that could rival the best halls in Europe.
"Design is something you have to put your hand to," he said.
The building is in a prominent position by the sea and is now a landmark of Macau.
These projects helped Pei conceptualize architecture as part of the larger urban geography.
In the library he found three books by the Swiss-French architect Charles-Édouard Jeanneret-Gris, better known as Le Corbusier.
Because its main purpose was the presentation of live music, the hall needed a design focused on acoustics first, then public access and exterior aesthetics.
Although it was a difficult time for everyone involved, Pei later reflected with patience on the experience.
Pei himself refused to discuss it for many years.
Billionaire tycoon Ross Perot made a donation of US$10&nbsp;million, on the condition that it be named in honor of Morton H. Meyerson, the longtime patron of the arts in Dallas.
Pei estimated that 90&nbsp;percent of Parisians opposed his design.
"His footsteps were dragging.
An associate of Pei's said later that he never saw the architect so involved in a project.
As the date for groundbreaking approached, Pedersen suggested to his boss that a slightly different approach would make construction easier.
The project became an albatross for Pei's firm.
Pei and his team also designed a united urban area for Washington, D.C., L'Enfant Plaza (named for French-American architect Pierre Charles L'Enfant).
The pyramid was constructed at the same time as the subterranean levels below, which caused difficulties during the building stages.
With an eye toward the transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong from the British in 1997, authorities in China sought Pei's aid on a new tower for the local branch of the Bank of China.
The other major factor was Hollywood.
"The rest will be as surprising to me as to everyone else."
One of his colleagues from that project, however, insisted that he meet with the committee.
Pei's first proposed design included a large glass pyramid that would fill the interior with sunlight, meant to represent the optimism and hope that Kennedy's administration had symbolized for so many in the US.
Pei also found the pyramid shape best suited for stable transparency, and considered it "most compatible with the architecture of the Louvre, especially with the faceted planes of its roofs".
To this end, a professional sound technician was hired to design the interior.
Large crowds visited the new museum, and critics generally voiced their approval.
"There I learned the science and technique of building, which is just as essential to architecture."
Because of Koyama's considerable wealth, money was rarely considered an obstacle; estimates at the time of completion put the cost of the project at US$350&nbsp;million.
"While my people had the luxury of doing one job at a time, I had to keep track of the whole enterprise."
After inspecting Pei's work at the Des Moines Art Center in Iowa and the Johnson Museum at Cornell University, they offered him the commission.
As a result, Oklahoma City's leadership avoided large-scale urban planning for downtown throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, until the passage of the Metropolitan Area Projects (MAPS) initiative in 1993.
Ultimately, however, Kennedy made her choice based on her personal connection with Pei.
Over the years he went on to design five additional buildings in the Dallas area.
Pei's design included a large central atrium covered by glass panels that functioned much like the large central space in his East Building of the National Gallery.
Leaks in the roof caused difficulties for researchers, and the shifting of clay soil beneath caused cracks in the buildings which were expensive to repair.
The pedestrian walkway at the ground floor, however, was prone to sudden gusts of wind, which embarrassed Pei.
