Fleming envisaged that Bond would resemble the composer, singer and actor Hoagy Carmichael, although others, such as author and historian Ben Macintyre, identify aspects of Fleming's own looks in his description of Bond.
In March 1944 Fleming oversaw the distribution of intelligence to Royal Navy units in preparation for Operation Overlord.
The unit was based on a German group headed by Otto Skorzeny, who had undertaken similar activities in the Battle of Crete in May 1941.
Fleming's books had always sold well, but in 1961 sales increased dramatically.
* Free World—Soviet Union
At first, they were unenthusiastic about the novel, but Fleming's brother Peter, whose books they managed, persuaded the company to publish it.
He was killed by German shelling on the Western Front on 20 May 1917; Winston Churchill wrote an obituary that appeared in ''The Times''.
However, Fleming withdrew from the project following a request from Eon Productions, who were keen to avoid any legal problems that might occur if the project overlapped with the Bond films.
He started writing the book at Goldeneye on 17 February 1952, gaining inspiration from his own experiences and imagination.
The influence of Bond in the cinema and in literature is evident in films and books as diverse as the ''Austin Powers'' series, ''Carry On Spying'' and the Jason Bourne character.
Fleming's widow, Ann, died in 1981 and was buried with her husband and their son.
In October McClory introduced experienced screenwriter Jack Whittingham to the newly formed team, and by December 1959 McClory and Whittingham sent Fleming a script.
His mother was Evelyn St Croix Rose, and his father was Valentine Fleming, the Member of Parliament for Henley from 1910.
Fleming's last two books, ''The Man with the Golden Gun'' and ''Octopussy and The Living Daylights'', were published posthumously.
I understand there is no difficulty in obtaining corpses at the Naval Hospital, but, of course, it would have to be a fresh one."
The success of 30AU led to the August 1944 decision to establish a "Target Force", which became known as T-Force.
In 1961, aged 53, he suffered a heart attack and struggled to recuperate.
Although Fleming was aware of this tension between the two countries, he did not focus on it strongly.
His last recorded words were an apology to the ambulance drivers for having inconvenienced them, saying "I am sorry to trouble you chaps.
His mother again intervened in his affairs, lobbying Sir Roderick Jones, head of Reuters News Agency, and in October 1931 he was given a position as a sub-editor and journalist for the company.
* Great Britain—Non-Anglo-Saxon Countries
He joined the organisation full-time in August 1939, with the codename "17F", and worked out of Room 39 at The Admiralty.
It was a success and three print runs were needed to cope with the demand.
Peter served with the Grenadier Guards during the Second World War, was later commissioned under Colin Gubbins to help establish the Auxiliary Units, and became involved in behind-the-lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war.
After the publication of ''Casino Royale'', Fleming used his annual holiday at his house in Jamaica to write another Bond story.
According to Fleming's niece, Lucy, an official of the Royal Air Force pointed out that if they were to drop a downed Heinkel bomber in the English Channel, it would probably sink rather quickly.
Eleven Bond novels and two short-story collections followed between 1953 and 1966.
In 1941 he liaised with Donovan over American involvement in a measure intended to ensure that the Germans did not dominate the seaways.
In 1927, to prepare Fleming for possible entry into the Foreign Office, his mother sent him to the Tennerhof in Kitzbühel, Austria, a small private school run by the Adlerian disciple and former British spy Ernan Forbes Dennis and his novelist wife, Phyllis Bottome.
While in Geneva, Fleming began a romance with Monique Panchaud de Bottomes and the couple were briefly engaged in 1931.
In the aftermath of the Second World War, tensions surfaced between a British government trying to retain its empire and the American desire for a capitalist new world order, but Fleming did not focus on this directly, instead creating "an impression of the normality of British imperial rule and action".
That began to change in March 1958 when Bernard Bergonzi, in the journal ''Twentieth Century'', attacked Fleming's work as containing "a strongly marked streak of voyeurism and sado-masochism" and wrote that the books showed "the total lack of any ethical frame of reference".
Because of its successes in Sicily and Italy, 30AU became greatly trusted by naval intelligence.
Much to the annoyance of Alan Turing and Peter Twinn at Bletchley Park, the mission was never carried out.
A theme throughout the series was the effect of the Second World War.
Fleming died at age 56 in the early morning of 12 August 1964—his son Caspar's twelfth birthday.
Fleming was a heavy smoker and drinker for most of his life and succumbed to heart disease in 1964 at the age of 56.
In 1935 he moved to Rowe and Pitman on Bishopsgate as a stockbroker.
30 Commando or 30 Assault Unit (30AU), composed of specialist intelligence troops.
He also edited a school magazine, ''The Wyvern''.
The article compared Fleming unfavourably with John Buchan and Raymond Chandler on both moral and literary criteria.
* Perversion—Innocence
Benson sees no evidence of discrimination in their relationship and notes Bond's genuine remorse and sadness at Quarrel's death.
Raymond Benson considered the most obvious theme of the series to be good versus evil.
Similarly, in ''Moonraker'', Drax (Graf Hugo von der Drache) is a "megalomaniac German Nazi who masquerades as an English gentleman", and his assistant, Krebbs, bears the same name as Hitler's last Chief of Staff.
In the late 1950s the author Geoffrey Jenkins had suggested to Fleming that he write a Bond novel set in South Africa, and sent him his own idea for a plot outline which, according to Jenkins, Fleming felt had great potential.
Operation Ruthless, a plan aimed at obtaining details of the Enigma codes used by Nazi Germany's navy, was instigated by a memo written by Fleming to Godfrey on 12 September 1940.
This crystallised in ''Goldfinger'' with the Saint George motif, which is stated explicitly in the book: "Bond sighed wearily.
His lifestyle at Eton brought him into conflict with his housemaster, E. V. Slater, who disapproved of Fleming's attitude, his hair oil, his ownership of a car and his relations with women.
As the series progressed, the threat of a re-emergent Germany was overtaken by concerns about the Cold War, and the novels changed their focus accordingly.
Lycett notes that Fleming "went into a personal and creative decline" after marital problems and the attacks on his work.
Kingsley Amis called this "the Fleming effect", describing it as "the imaginative use of information, whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond's world&nbsp;... is bolted down to some sort of reality, or at least counter-balanced."
Furthermore, in Britain foreign villains used foreign servants and employees&nbsp;...
Black and Linder both classify the remaining books—''The Man with the Golden Gun'', ''Octopussy and The Living Daylights'' and ''The Spy Who Loved Me''—as "the later Fleming stories".
Those books written between 1953 and 1960 tend to concentrate on "mood, character development, and plot advancement", while those released between 1961 and 1966 incorporate more detail and imagery.
In 1940 Fleming and Godfrey contacted Kenneth Mason, Professor of Geography at Oxford University, about the preparation of reports on the geography of countries involved in military operations.
His genius was to repackage these antiquated adventures to fit the fashion of postwar Britain&nbsp;...
In 1914, with the start of the First World War, Valentine joined "C" Squadron, Queen's Own Oxfordshire Hussars, and rose to the rank of major.
His friend Ivar Bryce helped find a plot of land in Saint Mary Parish where, in 1945, Fleming had a house built, which he named Goldeneye.
Both Fleming and Ann had affairs during their marriage, she, most notably, with Hugh Gaitskell, the Leader of the Labour Party and Leader of the Opposition.
Germans, in the wake of the Second World War, made another easy and obvious target for bad press."
In this, Fleming "exploits another British cultural antipathy of the 1950s.
Connery's depiction of Bond affected the literary character; in ''You Only Live Twice'', the first book written after ''Dr.
Fleming's first work of non-fiction, ''The Diamond Smugglers'', was published in 1957 and was partly based on background research for his fourth Bond novel, ''Diamonds Are Forever''.
The name of the house and estate where he wrote his novels has many possible sources.
The most strongly worded of the critiques came from Paul Johnson of the ''New Statesman'', who, in his review "Sex, Snobbery and Sadism", called the novel "without doubt, the nastiest book I have ever read".
I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written&nbsp;... By following my formula, you write 2,000 words a day."
In December 1944 Fleming was posted on an intelligence fact-finding trip to the Far East on behalf of the Director of Naval Intelligence.
The unit's most notable discoveries came during the advance on the German port of Kiel, in the research centre for German engines used in the V-2 rocket, Messerschmitt Me 163 fighters and high-speed U-boats.
McClory gained the literary and film rights for the screenplay, while Fleming was given the rights to the novel, provided it was acknowledged as "based on a screen treatment by Kevin McClory, Jack Whittingham and the Author".
While working for Britain's Naval Intelligence Division during the Second World War, Fleming was involved in planning Operation Goldeneye and in the planning and oversight of two intelligence units, 30 Assault Unit and T-Force.
Starting with Kingsley Amis's ''Colonel Sun'', under the pseudonym "Robert Markham" in 1968, several authors have been commissioned to write Bond novels, including Sebastian Faulks, who was asked by Ian Fleming Publications to write a new Bond novel in observance of what would have been Fleming's 100th birthday in 2008.
This wasted the men's specialist skills, risked their safety on operations that did not justify the use of such skilled operatives, and threatened the vital gathering of intelligence.
The Bond stories rank among the best-selling series of fictional books of all time, having sold over 100&nbsp;million copies worldwide.
Kingsley Amis, in his exploration of Bond in ''The James Bond Dossier'', pointed out that "Leiter, such a nonentity as a piece of characterization&nbsp;... he, the American, takes orders from Bond, the Britisher, and that Bond is constantly doing better than he".
He applied for entry to the Foreign Office, but failed the examinations.
Fleming was awarded the Danish Frihedsmedalje in October 1947 for his contribution in assisting Danish officers escaping from Denmark to Britain during the occupation of Denmark.
Fleming's biographer, Andrew Lycett, notes that Fleming had "no obvious qualifications" for the role.
The Eon Productions series of Bond films, which started in 1962 with ''Dr.
Fleming's biographer Henry Chandler observes that the novel "received polite and rather sad reviews, recognising that the book had effectively been left half-finished, and as such did not represent Fleming at the top of his game".
The author Raymond Benson, who later wrote a series of Bond novels, noted that Fleming's books fall into two distinct periods along stylistic lines.
In ''Live and Let Die'', agents Quarrel and Leiter represent the importance of male friends and allies, seen especially in  Bond's response to the shark attack on Leiter; Benson observes that "the loyalty Bond feels towards his friends is as strong as his commitment to his job".
Slater persuaded Fleming's mother to remove him from Eton a term early for a crammer course to gain entry to the Royal Military College at Sandhurst.
Fleming and Charteris had a son, Caspar.
Fleming's creation has appeared in film twenty-six times, portrayed by seven actors.
Eco also noted that the Bond villains tend to come from Central Europe or from Slavic or Mediterranean countries and have a mixed heritage and "complex and obscure origins".
Much of the trip was spent identifying opportunities for 30AU in the Pacific, although the unit ultimately saw little action because of the Japanese surrender.
In Bond, he created a Bulldog Drummond for the jet age."
Jeremy Black divides the series based on the villains Fleming created, a division supported by fellow academic Christoph Linder.
I don't know how you get along so fast with the traffic on the roads these days."
Because the family owned an estate at Arnisdale, Valentine's death was commemorated on the Glenelg War Memorial.
Benson identified what he described as the "Fleming Sweep", the use of "hooks" at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next.
* Excess—Moderation
The infantry component of T-Force was in part made up of the 5th Battalion, King's Regiment, which supported the Second Army.
On 13 April 1953 ''Casino Royale'' was released in the UK in hardcover, priced at 10s 6d, with a cover designed by Fleming.
The book received mixed reviews in the UK and US.
On 28 June 1945, she married the second Viscount Rothermere.
The German unit was thought by Fleming to be "one of the most outstanding innovations in German intelligence".
Lieutenant Commander Ian Fleming", according to historian Ben Macintyre.
in liberated and enemy territory."
In 2002 Ian Fleming Publications announced the launch of the CWA Ian Fleming Steel Dagger award, presented by the Crime Writers' Association to the best thriller, adventure or spy novel originally published in the UK.
The publishers had passed the manuscript to Kingsley Amis to read on holiday, although they did not use his suggestions.
Two of his James Bond books were published posthumously; other writers have since produced Bond novels.
Fleming bowed to family pressure in October 1933, and went into banking with a position at the financiers Cull & Co.
Before the 1944 Normandy landings, most of 30AU's operations were in the Mediterranean, although it secretly participated in the Dieppe Raid in a failed pinch raid for an Enigma machine and related materials.
As a result, the novel was thought by publishing company Jonathan Cape to be thin and "feeble".
Despite this, Plomer thought the book had sufficient promise and sent a copy to the publishing house Jonathan Cape.
Fleming's second non-fiction book was published in November 1963: ''Thrilling Cities'', a reprint of a series of ''Sunday Times'' articles based on Fleming's impressions of a number of world cities in trips taken during 1959 and 1960.
In 1942 Fleming attended an Anglo-American intelligence summit in Jamaica and, despite the constant heavy rain during his visit, he decided to live on the island once the war was over.
Upon Fleming's demobilisation in May 1945, he became the Foreign Manager in the Kemsley newspaper group, which at the time owned ''The Sunday Times''.
After Fleming's death, Jenkins was commissioned by Bond publishers Glidrose Productions to write a continuation Bond novel, ''Per Fine Ounce'', but it was never published.
No'', continued after Fleming's death.
From the opening novel in the series, the theme of treachery was strong.
The Bond novels also dealt with the question of Anglo-American relations, reflecting the central role of the US in the defence of the West.
Fleming was married to Ann Charteris, who was divorced from the second Viscount Rothermere owing to her affair with the author.
No'' was released, Fleming gave Bond a sense of humour that was not present in the previous stories.
Kennedy and Fleming had previously met in Washington.
On 11 August 1964, while staying at a hotel in Canterbury, Fleming went to the Royal St George's Golf Club for lunch and later dined at his hotel with friends.
General references in the novels describe Bond as having "dark, rather cruel good looks".
Clare Blanchard, a former girlfriend, advised him not to publish the book, or at least to do so under a pseudonym.
The plot of ''From Russia, with Love'' uses a fictional Soviet Spektor decoding machine as a lure to trap Bond; the Spektor had its roots in the wartime German Enigma machine.
The work had started in 1958 when Fleming's friend Ivar Bryce introduced him to a young Irish writer and director, Kevin McClory, and the three, together with Fleming and Bryce's friend Ernest Cuneo, worked on a script.
The novel centres on the exploits of James Bond, an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service, commonly known as MI6.
In October 1975, Fleming's son Caspar, aged 23, committed suicide by drug overdose and was buried with his father.
The novels revolved around James Bond, an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service, commonly known as MI6.
Two of the defections had taken place shortly before Fleming wrote ''Casino Royale'', and the book can be seen as the writer's "attempt to reflect the disturbing moral ambiguity of a post-war world that could produce traitors like Burgess and Maclean", according to Lycett.
He also followed the unit into Germany after it located, in Tambach Castle, the German naval archives from 1870.
Fleming also wrote the children's story ''Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang'' and two works of non-fiction.
Fleming himself mentioned both his wartime Operation Goldeneye and Carson McCullers' 1941 novel ''Reflections in a Golden Eye'', which described the use of British naval bases in the Caribbean by the American navy.
Saltzman formed the production vehicle Eon Productions along with  Albert R. "Cubby" Broccoli, and after an extensive search, they hired Sean Connery on a five-film deal, beginning with ''Dr.
The "traitor within" theme continued in ''Live and Let Die'' and ''Moonraker''.
Fleming worked full-time for the paper until December 1959, but continued to write articles and attend the Tuesday weekly meetings until at least 1961.
Ian Fleming was born on 28 May 1908, at 27 Green Street in the wealthy London district of Mayfair.
Author and journalist Christopher Hitchens observed that "the central paradox of the classic Bond stories is that, although superficially devoted to the Anglo-American war against communism, they are full of contempt and resentment for America and Americans".
Black argues that SPECTRE provides a measure of continuity to the remaining stories in the series.
Benson argues that Fleming had become "a master storyteller" by the time he wrote ''Thunderball'' in 1961.
Fleming also worked with Colonel "Wild Bill" Donovan, President Franklin D. Roosevelt's special representative on intelligence co-operation between London and Washington.
He additionally told McClory that if MCA rejected the film because of McClory's involvement, then McClory should either sell himself to MCA, back out of the deal, or file a suit in court.
After improving his language skills there, he studied briefly at Munich University and the University of Geneva.
Afterwards, the management of these units was revised.
Uncertain and shifting geopolitics led Fleming to replace the Russian organisation SMERSH with the international terrorist group SPECTRE in ''Thunderball'', permitting "evil unconstrained by ideology".
In April 1961, shortly before the second court case on ''Thunderball'', Fleming had a heart attack during a regular weekly meeting at ''The Sunday Times''.
In 2011 Fleming became the first English-language writer to have an international airport named after him: Ian Fleming International Airport, near Oracabessa, Jamaica, was officially opened on 12 January 2011 by Jamaican Prime Minister Bruce Golding and Fleming's niece, Lucy.
Fleming became increasingly unhappy with the book and considered rewriting it, but was dissuaded by Plomer, who considered it viable for publication.
According to Fleming: "The Oil Company expressed approval of the book but felt it their duty to submit the typescript to members of the Kuwait Government for their approval.
Fleming also endowed Bond with many of his own traits, including the same golf handicap, his taste for scrambled eggs, his love of gambling, and use of the same brand of toiletries.
Fleming said of his work, "while thrillers may not be Literature with a capital L, it is possible to write what I can best describe as 'thrillers designed to be read as literature.
Rothermere divorced Charteris in 1951 because of her relationship with Fleming, and the couple married on 24 March 1952 in Jamaica, a few months before their son Caspar was born in August.
'''Ian Lancaster Fleming''' (28 May 1908&nbsp;– 12 August 1964) was an English author, journalist and naval intelligence officer who is best known for his James Bond series of spy novels.
''The Times'' journalist Ben Macintyre considers that Bond was "the ideal antidote to Britain's postwar austerity, rationing and the looming premonition of lost power", at a time when coal and many items of food were still rationed.
Johnson went on to say that "by the time I was a third of the way through, I had to suppress a strong impulse to throw the thing away".
While there he applied for an interview with Soviet premier Joseph Stalin, and was amazed to receive a personally signed note apologising for not being able to attend.
Black points to the defections of four members of MI6 to the Soviet Union as having a major impact on how Britain was viewed in US intelligence circles.
While he was convalescing, one of his friends, Duff Dunbar, gave him a copy of Beatrix Potter's ''The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin'' and suggested that he take the time to write up the bedtime story that Fleming used to tell to his son Caspar each evening.
As the series progressed, the British Empire was in decline; journalist William Cook observed that "Bond pandered to Britain's inflated and increasingly insecure self-image, flattering us with the fantasy that Britannia could still punch above her weight."
Bond was also known by his code number, 007, and was a commander in the Royal Naval Reserve.
Among those types were his brother Peter, whom he worshipped, and who had been involved in behind-the-lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war.
Working at Goldeneye between January and March 1960, Fleming wrote the novel ''Thunderball'', based on the screenplay written by himself, Whittingham and McClory.
The Bond books were written in post-war Britain, when the country was still an imperial power.
No'', an article in ''Life'' listed ''From Russia, with Love'' as one of US President John F. Kennedy's ten favourite books.
Sir Fitzroy Maclean was another possible model for Bond, based on his wartime work behind enemy lines in the Balkans, as was the MI6 double agent Dušan Popov.
For three of the novels, ''Goldfinger'', ''Live and Let Die'' and ''Dr.
Umberto Eco considered Mickey Spillane to have been another major influence.
''The Man with the Golden Gun'' was published eight months after Fleming's death and had not been through the full editing process by Fleming.
The Eon Productions series has grossed over $6.2 billion worldwide, making it the one of the highest-grossing film series.
Fleming was buried in the churchyard of Sevenhampton village, near Swindon.
His wartime service and his career as a journalist provided much of the background, detail and depth of the James Bond novels.
His manuscript was typed in London by Joan Howe (mother of travel writer Rory MacLean), and Fleming's red-haired secretary at ''The Times'' on whom the character Miss Moneypenny was partially based.
Fleming's plan involved maintaining communication with Gibraltar and launching sabotage operations against the Nazis.
On its formation the unit was only thirty strong, but it grew to five times that size.
His contract allowed him to take three months holiday every winter, which he took in Jamaica.
Johnson saw no positives in ''Dr.
The final Bond book, containing two short stories, ''Octopussy and The Living Daylights'', was published in Britain on 23 June 1966.
* Luxury—Discomfort
Fleming became increasingly jaundiced about America, and his comments in the penultimate novel ''You Only Live Twice'' reflect this; Bond's responses to Tanaka's comments reflect the declining relationship between Britain and America—in sharp contrast to the warm, co-operative relationship between Bond and Leiter in the earlier books.
Fleming had been having second thoughts on McClory's involvement and, in January 1960, explained his intention of delivering the screenplay to MCA, with a recommendation from him and Bryce that McClory act as producer.
As part of his appointment, Fleming was commissioned into the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in July 1939, initially as lieutenant, but promoted to commander a few months later.
His mother disapproved and made him break off the relationship.
The unit was filled with men from other commando units, and trained in unarmed combat, safe-cracking and lock-picking at the SOE facilities.
Many of the names used in the Bond works came from people Fleming knew: Scaramanga, the principal villain in ''The Man with the Golden Gun'', was named after a fellow Eton schoolboy with whom Fleming fought; Goldfinger, from the eponymous novel, was named after British architect Ernő Goldfinger, whose work Fleming abhorred; Sir Hugo Drax, the antagonist of ''Moonraker'', was named after Fleming's acquaintance Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax; Drax's assistant, Krebs, bears the same name as Hitler's last Chief of Staff; and one of the homosexual villains from ''Diamonds Are Forever'', "Boofy" Kidd, was named after one of Fleming's close friends—and a relative of his wife—Arthur Gore, 8th Earl of Arran, known as Boofy to his friends.
Amaryllis was conceived during a long-term affair between John and Evelyn that started in 1923, some six years after the death of Valentine.
In late 1942 Captain (later Rear-Admiral) Edmund Rushbrooke replaced Godfrey as head of the Naval Intelligence Division, and Fleming's influence in the organisation declined, although he retained control over 30AU.
Fleming would later use elements of the activities of T-Force in his writing, particularly in his 1955 Bond novel ''Moonraker''.
During ''Casino Royale's'' final draft stages, Fleming allowed his friend William Plomer to see a copy, and remarked "so far as I can see the element of suspense is completely absent".
In 1948 she gave birth to Fleming's daughter, Mary, who was stillborn.
The Sheikhs concerned found unpalatable certain mild comments and criticisms and particularly the passages referring to the adventurous past of the country which now wishes to be 'civilised' in every respect and forget its romantic origins."
It was responsible for securing targets of interest for the British military, including nuclear laboratories, gas research centres and individual rocket scientists.
No'', and said, "Mr Fleming has no literary skill, the construction of the book is chaotic, and entire incidents and situations are inserted, and then forgotten, in a haphazard manner."
He spent less than a year there, leaving in 1927 without gaining a commission, after contracting gonorrhea.
This accolade and the associated publicity led to a surge in sales that made Fleming the biggest-selling crime writer in the US.
As a boy, Fleming devoured the Bulldog Drummond tales of Lieutenant Colonel H. C. McNeile (aka "Sapper") and the Richard Hannay stories of John Buchan.
Fleming did not fight in the field with the unit, but selected targets and directed operations from the rear.
Although not a high achiever academically, he excelled at athletics and held the title of ''Victor Ludorum'' ("Winner of the Games") for two years between 1925 and 1927.
In 1921 Fleming enrolled at Eton College.
The briefing between Bond and M is the first time in the twelve books that Fleming acknowledges the defections.
He claimed afterwards that he wrote the novel to distract himself from his forthcoming wedding to the pregnant Charteris, and called the work his "dreadful oafish opus".
During his lifetime Fleming sold thirty million books; double that number were sold in the two years following his death.
The decline was also reflected in Bond's use of US equipment and personnel in several novels.
In 2008, ''The Times'' ranked Fleming 14th on its list of "The 50 greatest British writers since 1945".
In 1960 Fleming was commissioned by the Kuwait Oil Company to write a book on the country and its oil industry.
