A 1797 engraving unearthed by Swedish sport historians Carl Gidén and Patrick Houda shows a person on skates with a stick and bung on the River Thames, probably in December 1796.
This was followed by the first IIHF World Championship in 1990 in Ottawa.
The offending player is ejected from the game and must immediately leave the playing surface (he does not sit in the penalty box); meanwhile, if an additional minor or major penalty is assessed, a designated player must serve out of that segment of the penalty in the box (similar to the above-mentioned "two-and-ten").
In 1967, the NHL doubled in size to 12 teams, undertaking one of the greatest expansions in professional sports history.
The highest junior league in Eurasia is the Junior Hockey League (MHL).
There are many other little tactics used in the game of hockey.
Left and right defence began to replace the point and cover-point positions in the OHA in 1906.
Officials are selected by the league they work for.
One woman, Manon Rhéaume, has played in the NHL, as a goaltender for the Tampa Bay Lightning in pre-season games against the St. Louis Blues and the Boston Bruins.
In the simplest case, the offending player is sent to the "penalty box" and their team has to play with one fewer player on the ice for a designated amount of time.
Occurrences of death from these injuries are rare, but occur all too much in a variety of sports.
There are two major women's hockey leagues, the National Women's Hockey League with teams in the Northeastern United States which is a professional league and the Canadian Women's Hockey League with teams in Canada and the United States, which is semi-professional and is developing toward becoming a fully professional league.
NHL rules restrict the total number of players per game to 18, plus two goaltenders.
Lord Stanley's five sons were instrumental in bringing ice hockey to Europe, defeating a court team (which included the future Edward VII and George V) at Buckingham Palace in 1895.
Offensive tactics are designed ultimately to score a goal by taking a shot.
Ice hockey is a full contact sport and carries a high risk of injury.
Even a shallow cut to the head results in a loss of a large amount of blood.
When play is stopped, it is restarted with a "faceoff".
Players may not intentionally bat the puck into the net with their hands.
In some rare cases, a player may receive up to nineteen minutes in penalties for one string of plays.
In 1877, ''The Gazette'' (Montreal) published a list of seven rules, six of which were largely based on six of the Hockey Association's twelve rules, with only minor differences (even the word "ball" was kept); the one added rule explained how disputes should be settled.
In ice hockey, infractions of the rules lead to play stoppages whereby the play is restarted at a face off.
The National League A in Switzerland, Swedish Hockey League in Sweden, Liiga in Finland, and Czech Extraliga in the Czech Republic are all very popular in their respective countries.
Many of these early games absorbed the physical aggression of what the Mi'kmaq in Nova Scotia called ''dehuntshigwa'es'' (lacrosse).
The WPHL and IPHL hired players from Canada; in response, Canadian leagues began to pay players (who played with amateurs).
The ECHL (called the East Coast Hockey League before the 2003–04 season) is a mid-level minor league in the United States with a few players under contract to NHL or AHL teams.
This can prove to be dangerous if a player decides to return to play without receiving proper medical attention.
Regardless of the number of goals scored during the shootout by either team, the final score recorded will award the winning team one more goal than the score at the end of regulation time.
It features 32 teams from post-Soviet states, predominantly Russia.
Its unique shape contributed to the early development of the game.
The Kontinental Hockey League (KHL) is the largest and most popular ice hockey league in Eurasia.
Ties no longer occur in the NHL.
Offensive tactics include improving a team's position on the ice by advancing the puck out of one's zone towards the opponent's zone, progressively by gaining lines, first your own blue line, then the red line and finally the opponent's blue line.
In this case, the team designates another player to serve the minor or major; both players go to the penalty box, but only the designee may not be replaced, and he is released upon the expiration of the two or five minutes, at which point the ten-minute misconduct begins.
Since the initial women's world championships in 1990, there have been fifteen tournaments.
The team that has been given a penalty is said to be playing "short-handed" while the opposing team is on a "power play."
More egregious fouls may be penalized by a four-minute double-minor penalty, particularly those that injure the victimized player.
William Pierre Le Cocq stated, in a 1799 letter written in Chesham, England:
The 2010 games were the first played on NHL-sized ice rinks, which are narrower than the IIHF standard.
Goaltenders use different equipment.
In the early 1900s, the Canadian rules were adopted by the Ligue Internationale de Hockey sur Glace, the precursor of the IIHF and the sport was played for the first time in the Olympics in the Olympic Games of 1920.
Its first known mention is from the 1773 book ''Juvenile Sports and Pastimes, to Which Are Prefixed, Memoirs of the Author: Including a New Mode of Infant Education'', by Richard Johnson (Pseud.
Goaltenders' equipment has continually become larger and larger, leading to fewer goals in each game and many official rule changes.
Others claim that the origins of hockey come from games played in the area of Dartmouth and Halifax in Nova Scotia.
Stick-and-ball games date back to pre-Christian times.
Crowds seem to like fighting in ice hockey and cheer when fighting erupts.
From 1999–2000 until 2003–04, the National Hockey League decided ties by playing a single five-minute sudden death overtime period with each team having four players (plus a goalie) per side to "open-up" the game.
On March 3, 1875, the first organized indoor game was played at Montreal's Victoria Skating Rink between two nine-player teams, including James Creighton and several McGill University students.
As of the 2005–2006 season, a minor penalty is also assessed for "diving", where a player embellishes or simulates an offence.
The ''defencemen'' usually stay together as a pair generally divided between left and right.
Ice hockey is one of the fastest growing women's sports in the world, with the number of participants increasing 350 percent in the last 10 years.
Another strategy is the left wing lock, which has two forwards pressure the puck and the left wing and the two defencemen stay at the blueline.
Due to the danger of delivering a check from behind, many leagues, including the NHL have made this a major and game misconduct penalty (called "boarding").
Hockey players usually adjust these parameters based on their skill level, position, and body type.
Rigidity also improves the overall maneuverability of the skate.
In 1896, the first ice hockey league in the U.S. was formed.
Players may be also assessed personal extended penalties or game expulsions for misconduct in addition to the penalty or penalties their team must serve.
Shinney was played on the St. Lawrence River at Montreal and Quebec City, and in Kingston, Ontario and Ottawa, Ontario.
The record was approached but not broken at the 2014 NHL Winter Classic, which also held at Michigan Stadium, with the Detroit Red Wings as the home team and the Toronto Maple Leafs as the opposing team with an announced crowd of 105,491.
Winnipeg hockey players used cricket pads to better protect the goaltender's legs; they also introduced the "scoop" shot, or what is now known as the wrist shot.
In this circumstance the team with possession of the puck is allowed to complete the play; that is, play continues until a goal is scored, a player on the opposing team gains control of the puck, or the team in possession commits an infraction or penalty of their own.
In 1876, the first game played in Montreal was reportedly "conducted under the 'Hockey Association' rules"; the Hockey Association was England's field hockey organization.
''Loafing'', also known as ''cherry-picking'', is when a player, usually a forward, skates behind an attacking team, instead of playing defence, in an attempt to create an easy scoring chance.
A two-minute minor penalty is often charged for lesser infractions such as "tripping", "elbowing", "roughing", "high-sticking", "delay of the game", "too many players on the ice", "boarding", illegal equipment, "charging" (leaping into an opponent or body-checking him after taking more than two strides), "holding", holding the stick (grabbing an opponent's stick), "interference", "hooking", "slashing", "kneeing", "unsportsmanlike conduct" (arguing a penalty call with referee, extremely vulgar or inappropriate verbal comments), "butt-ending" (striking an opponent with the knob of the stick—a very rare penalty), "spearing", or "cross-checking".
Soon afterwards, Chace put together a team of men from Yale, Brown, and Harvard, and toured across Canada as captain of this team.
The only exception to this rule is if a team opts to pull their goalie in exchange for an extra skater during overtime and is subsequently scored upon (an 'empty net' goal), in which case the losing team receives no points for the overtime loss.
Studies show that, ice hockey causes 44.3% of all traumatic brain injuries among Canadian children.
In 1910, the National Hockey Association (NHA) was formed in Montreal.
One of the first was the Swiss National League A, founded in 1916.
A fight will also break out if one of the team's skilled players gets hit hard or someone gets hit by what the team perceives as a dirty hit.
Some infractions result in the imposition of a ''penalty'' to a player or team.
The league is the direct successor to the Russian Super League, which in turn was the successor to the Soviet League, the history of which dates back to the Soviet adoption of ice hockey in the 1940s.
By 1999, the NHL had expanded to 30 teams, and after a realignment in 2013, these teams were divided into two conferences and four divisions.
Five-minute major penalties are called for especially violent instances of most minor infractions that result in intentional injury to an opponent, or when a "minor" penalty results in visible injury (such as bleeding), as well as for fighting.
For many years, the tournament was an amateur-only tournament, but this restriction was removed, beginning in the 1970s.
It is quite distinct from sticks in other sports games and most suited to hitting and controlling the flat puck.
The Memorial Cup, a competition for junior-level (age 20 and under) clubs is held annually from a pool of junior championship teams in Canada and the United States.
In the event of a tie, each team would still receive one point in the standings but in the event of a victory the winning team would be awarded two points in the standings and the losing team one point.
The Stannus Street Rink in Windsor, Nova Scotia (built in 1897) may be the oldest still in existence; however, it is no longer used for ice hockey.
The league expanded beyond the former Soviet countries beginning in the 2011–12 season, with clubs in Croatia and Slovakia.
Yale, led by captain Chace, beat Hopkins 2-1.
Players are moving at speeds around approximately  and quite a bit of the game revolves around the physical contact between the players.
This system is very close to the regular three-man system except for a few procedure changes.
The flex of the stick also impacts the performance.
Several tournaments, such as at the Banff Winter Carnival, were held in the early 20th Century and numerous women's teams such as the Seattle Vamps and Vancouver Amazons existed.
''Stick checking'', ''sweep checking'', and ''poke checking'' are legal uses of the stick to obtain possession of the puck.
In the NHL, a unique penalty applies to the goalies.
Thomas Chandler Haliburton, in ''The Attache: Second Series'' (published in 1844) imagined a dialogue, between two of the novel's characters, which mentions playing "hurly on the long pond on the ice".
Since 2006, the U.S. Pond Hockey Championships have been played in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and the Canadian National Pond Hockey Championships have been played in Huntsville, Ontario.
After these six total shots, the team with the most goals is awarded the victory.
Only in the area in-front of the goal line and immediately behind the net (marked by two red lines on either side of the net) the goalie can play the puck.
The overtime mode for the NHL playoffs differ from the regular season.
Players are now able to pass to teammates who are more than the blue and centre ice red line away.
At the professional level in North America fights are unofficially condoned.
Since 1986, considered the 100th anniversary of the rivalry, teams of the two colleges play for the Carr-Harris Cup.
In international competitions, the national teams of six countries (The "Big Six") predominate: Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Russia, Sweden and the United States.
A deep curve allows for lifting the puck easier while a shallow curve allows for easier backhand shots.
Teams are selected from the available players by the individual federations, without restriction on amateur or professional status.
One of the causes of head injury is checking from behind.
The most dangerous result of a head injury in hockey can be classified as a concussion.
Goaltenders wear specialty goalie skates (these skates are built more for movement side to side rather than forwards and backwards), a jock or jill, large leg pads (there are size restrictions in certain leagues), blocking glove, catching glove, a chest protector, a goalie mask, and a large jersey.
The game was divided into thirty-minute halves.
The objective of the game is to score ''goals'' by shooting a hard vulcanized rubber disc, the ''puck'', into the opponent's goal net, which is placed at the opposite end of the rink.
In the case of a goal scored during the first two minutes of a double-minor, the penalty clock is set down to two minutes upon a score, effectively expiring the first minor penalty.
With the arrival of offside rules, the forward pass transformed hockey into a truly team sport, where individual performance diminished in importance relative to team play, which could now be coordinated over the entire surface of the ice as opposed to merely rearward players.
Ice hockey, partially because of its popularity as a major professional sport, has been a source of inspiration for numerous films, television episodes and songs in North American popular culture.
The sport grew further in Europe in the 1920s, after ice hockey became an Olympic sport.
Checks to the head have accounted for nearly 50% of concussions that players in the National Hockey League have suffered.
In Europe, these games included the Irish game of hurling, the closely related Scottish game of shinty and versions of field hockey (including "bandie ball," played in England).
According to the Hughston Health Alert, "Lacerations to the head, scalp, and face are the most frequent types of injury in hockey."
A penalty shot allows the obstructed player to pick up the puck on the centre red-line and attempt to score on the goalie with no other players on the ice, to compensate for the earlier missed scoring opportunity.
According to the Austin Hockey Association, the word "puck" derives from the Scots Gaelic ''puc'' or the Irish ''poc'' (to poke, punch or deliver a blow).
The USSR won all but two gold medals from 1956 to 1988 as well as a final time as the Unified Team at the 1992 Albertville Olympics.
Play can be stopped if the goal is knocked out of position.
A typical game of hockey is governed by two to four ''officials'' on the ice, charged with enforcing the rules of the game.
In 1843 another British Army officer in Kingston, Ontario wrote, "Began to skate this year, improved quickly and had great fun at hockey on the ice."
Of the 69 medals awarded all-time in men's competition at the Olympics, only six medals were not awarded to one of those countries.
Several women have competed in North American minor leagues, including Rhéaume, goaltenders Kelly Dyer and Erin Whitten and defenceman Angela Ruggiero.
In the playoffs there are no shootouts nor ties.
A similar game (''knattleikr'') had been played for a thousand years or more by the Norse, as documented in the Icelandic sagas.
With a goal, the winning team would be awarded two points and the losing team none (just as if they had lost in regulation).
The governing body for United States amateur hockey has implemented many new rules to reduce the number of stick-on-body occurrences, as well as other detrimental and illegal facets of the game ("zero tolerance").
Master Michel Angelo), whose chapter XI was titled "New Improvements on the Game of Hockey".
Most skate's width are about an 1/8 of an inch (3&nbsp;mm) thick.
A record was set on December 11, 2010, when the University of Michigan's men's ice hockey team faced cross-state rival Michigan State in an event billed as "The Big Chill at the Big House."
Women's ice hockey players can have contact but are not allowed to body check.
Teams typically employ alternate sets of forward lines and defensive pairings when ''shorthanded'' or on a ''power play''.
The Kontinental Hockey League (KHL) is the highest league in Russia and much of Eastern Europe.
The United States Hockey League (USHL) welcomed the first female professional hockey player in 1969–70, when the Marquette Iron Rangers signed Karen Koch.
The number of teams has since increased to 28 from eight different countries.
It also does not matter if the puck comes back onto the ice surface from those areas as the puck is considered dead once it leaves the perimeter of the rink.
The McGill team won the tournament and was awarded the "Carnival Cup."
The third division is the Russian Hockey League, which features only teams from Russia.
The most widespread system in use today is the "three-man system," that uses one referee and two linesmen.
Sticks made by the Mi'kmaq were used by the British for their games.
In Canada, to some extent ringette serves as the female counterpart to ice hockey, in the sense that in many families, the boys play hockey while the girls play ringette.
Those rules favoured individual stick-handling as a key means of driving the puck forward.
By 1893, there were almost a hundred teams in Montreal alone; in addition, there were leagues throughout Canada.
The Canada Cup tournament later became the World Cup of Hockey, played in 1996 and 2004.
Not all physical contact is legal&nbsp;— in particular, hits from behind, hits to the head and most types of forceful stick-on-body contact are illegal.
In 1892, realizing that there was no recognition for the best team in Canada (although a number of leagues had championship trophies), he purchased a silver bowl for use as a trophy.
The IPHL, cut off from its largest source of players, disbanded in 1907.
While there are not as many organized leagues for women as there are for men, there exist leagues of all levels, including the Canadian Women's Hockey League, Western Women's Hockey League, National Women's Hockey League, Mid-Atlantic Women's Hockey League, and various European leagues; as well as university teams, national and Olympic teams, and recreational teams.
A check to the head can be defined as delivering a hit while the receiving player's head is down and their waist is bent and the aggressor is targeting the opponent player's head.
Since 2002, the World Pond Hockey Championship has been played on Roulston Lake in Plaster Rock, New Brunswick, Canada.
Two NHL versus USSR series were also held: the 1979 Challenge Cup and Rendez-vous '87.
In the case of two players being assessed five-minute fighting majors, both the players serve five minutes without their team incurring a loss of player (both teams still have a full complement of players on the ice).
The NHL has taken steps to speed up the game of hockey and create a game of finesse, by retreating from the past where illegal hits, fights, and "clutching and grabbing" among players were commonplace.
Another type of check that accounts for many of the player-to-player contact concussions is a check to the head resulting in a misconduct penalty (called "head contact").
The number of teams grew, enough to hold the first "world championship" of ice hockey at Montreal's annual Winter Carnival in 1883.
On the way to winning the gold medal at the 1980 Lake Placid Olympics amateur US college players defeated the heavily favoured Soviet squad – an event known as the "Miracle on Ice" in the United States.
An 1859 ''Boston Evening Gazette'' article referred to an early game of hockey on ice in Halifax that year.
A tournament in 1902 between Montreal and Trois-Rivieres was billed as the first championship tournament.
A form of this word was thus being used in the 16th century, though much removed from its current usage.
In this case, the player is ejected and two teammates must serve the double-minor and major penalties.
Blade length, thickness (width), and curvature (rocker/radius (front to back) and radius of hollow (across the blade width) are quite different from speed or figure skates.
Prior to the 2005–06 NHL season, play was stopped when a pass from inside a team's defending zone crossed the centre line, with a face-off held in the defending zone of the offending team.
However, it is possible for the controlling team to mishandle the puck into their own net.
The IIHF manages international tournaments and maintains the IIHF World Ranking.
This has been interpreted by some historians from Windsor, Nova Scotia as reminiscence of the days when the author was a student at King's College School in that town in 1810 and earlier.
This includes a helmet (cage worn if certain age or clear plastic visor can be worn), shoulder pads, elbow pads, mouth guard, protective gloves, heavily padded shorts (also known as hockey pants) or a girdle, athletic cup (also known as a jock, for males; and jill, for females), shin pads, skates, and (optionally) a neck protector.
International play and several North American professional leagues, including the NHL (in the regular season), now use an overtime period identical to that from 99–00 – 03–04 followed by a penalty shootout.
Pre-season tournaments include the European Trophy, Tampere Cup and the Pajulahti Cup.
The puck goes "out of play" whenever it goes past the perimeter of the ice rink (onto the player benches, over the "glass," or onto the protective netting above the glass) and a stoppage of play is called by the officials using whistles.
In the spirit of best-versus-best without restrictions on amateur or professional status, the series were followed by five Canada Cup tournaments, played in North America.
In the NHL, the players are usually divided into four lines of three forwards, and into three pairs of defenceman.
Levinge, a British Army officer in New Brunswick during Campbell's time, wrote about "hockey on ice" on Chippewa Creek (a tributary of the Niagara River) in 1839.
One of the oldest international ice hockey competition for clubs is the Spengler Cup, held every year in Davos, Switzerland, between Christmas and New Year's Day.
Pond hockey is commonly referred to in hockey circles as shinny.
The women of Lord Stanley's family were known to participate in the game of ice hockey on the outdoor ice rink at Rideau Hall, the residence of Canada's Governor-General.
On-ice officials are assisted by off-ice officials who act as goal judges, time keepers, and official scorers.
Several games were recorded in the 1890s in Ottawa, Canada.
The positions were now named: left and right wing, centre, rover, point and cover-point, and goaltender.
The boards surrounding the ice help keep the puck in play and they can also be used as tools to play the puck.
Pond hockey is a form of ice hockey played generally as pick-up hockey on lakes, ponds and artificial outdoor rinks during the winter.
Canadian oral histories describe a traditional stick-and-ball game played by the Mi'kmaq in eastern Canada, and Silas Tertius Rand (in his 1894 ''Legends of the Micmacs'') describes a Mi'kmaq ball game known as ''tooadijik''.
The types of injuries associated with hockey include: lacerations, concussions, contusions, ligament tears, broken bones, hyperextensions, and muscle strains.
These penalties end either when the time runs out or when the other team scores during the power play.
Under many situations, a player may not "ice the puck", shoot the puck all the way across both the centre line and the opponent's goal line.
Rules are now more strictly enforced, resulting in more penalties, which in turn provides more protection to the players and facilitates more goals being scored.
The NHL is by far the best attended and most popular ice hockey league in the world.
This created a 21 team league.
shooting the puck into the offensive zone and then chasing after it).
In 2003, Hayley Wickenheiser played with the Kirkkonummi Salamat in the Finnish men's Suomi-sarja league.
The match was won by the Oxford Dark Blues, 6–0; the first photographs and team lists date from 1895.
A "penalty shot" is awarded to a player when the illegal actions of another player stop a clear scoring opportunity, most commonly when the player is on a "breakaway".
The McGill University Hockey Club, the first ice hockey club, was founded in 1877 (followed by the Quebec Bulldogs named Quebec Hockey Club and organized in 1878 and the Montreal Victorias, organized in 1881).
''Headmanning the puck'', also known as  ''breaking out'', is the tactic of rapidly passing to the player farthest down the ice.
A team that is losing by one or two goals in the last few minutes of play will often elect to ''pull the goalie''; that is, remove the goaltender and replace him or her with an ''extra attacker'' on the ice in the hope of gaining enough advantage to score a goal.
The competition is meant to serve as a Europe-wide ice hockey club championship.
The English historian and biographer John Strype did not use the word "hockey" when he translated the proclamation in 1720.
Linesmen can, however, report to the referee(s) that a penalty should be assessed against an offending player in some situations.
Most of the early indoor ice rinks have been demolished; Montreal's Victoria Rink, built in 1862, was demolished in 1925.
Concurrent five-minute major penalties in the NHL usually result from fighting.
Officials also stop play for puck movement violations, such as using one's hands to pass the puck in the offensive end, but no players are penalized for these offences.
Starting in the 1960s, the game spread to universities.
The league expanded to the United States beginning in 1924.
Most concussions occur during player-to-player contact rather than when a player is checked into the boards.
The second tier to this league is the Junior Hockey League Championships (MHL-B).
There are two sides one of them knocks one way and the other side the other way.
