Handball is often referred to as the national sport, and Iceland's men's national team is ranked among the top 12 in the world.
Many Icelanders, however, have remained unhappy with the state of the economy and government austerity policies.
Eyjafjallajokull-April-17.JPG | The eruption of Eyjafjallajökull
Nursery school, or ''leikskóli'', is non-compulsory education for children younger than six years, and is the first step in the education system.
The OECD ''Economic Survey of Iceland 2008'' had highlighted Iceland's challenges in currency and macroeconomic policy.
Most famously, the television show Lazytown, starring and created by former gymnastics champion Magnus Scheving.
Iceland has excellent conditions for skiing, fishing, snowboarding, ice climbing and rock climbing, although mountain climbing and hiking are preferred by the general public.
On rare occasions, bats have been carried to the island with the winds, but they are not able to breed there.
Iceland's signature alcoholic beverage is ''Brennivín'' (literally "burnt (i.e.
Polish is mostly spoken by the local Polish community (the biggest minority of Iceland), and Danish is mostly spoken in a way largely comprehensible to Swedes and Norwegians—it is often referred to as ''skandinavíska'' (i. e. ''Scandinavian'') in Iceland.
The constitution explicitly prohibits the enactment of noble privileges, titles, and ranks.
Among 25- to 34-year-olds, only 69% have earned the equivalent of a high-school degree, significantly lower than the OECD average of 80%.
Upper secondary education, or ''framhaldsskóli'', follows lower secondary education.
There is also a value added tax, whereas a net wealth tax was eliminated in 2006.
Additionally, boiled or mashed potatoes, pickled cabbage, green beans, and rye bread are prevalent side dishes.
Only scientists researching the growth of new life are allowed to visit the island.
On 5 May 1951, a defence agreement was signed with the United States.
After the rate hike, trading on the Icelandic króna finally resumed on the open market, with valuation at around 250 ISK per Euro, less than one-third the value of the 1:70 exchange rate during most of 2008, and a significant drop from the 1:150 exchange ratio of the week before.
A great number of roads remain unpaved, mostly little-used rural roads.
The national currency of Iceland is the Icelandic króna (ISK).
Wild mammals include the Arctic fox, mink, mice, rats, rabbits and reindeer.
Consequently, "it is arguably the world's oldest parliamentary democracy."
Industrialisation of the fisheries and Marshall Plan aid following World War II brought prosperity and Iceland became one of the wealthiest and most developed nations in the world.
In 1941, the occupation was taken over by the United States so that Britain could use its troops elsewhere.
Originating in the 14th century, ''rímur'' were popular into the 19th century, when the development of new literary forms was provoked by the influential, National-Romantic writer Jónas Hallgrímsson.
The average life expectancy is 81.8 (compared to an OECD average of 79.5), the 4th highest in the world.
Since May 2008, NATO nations have periodically deployed fighters to patrol Icelandic airspace under the Icelandic Air Policing mission.
Iceland has a left–right multi-party system.
Icelandic contemporary music consists of a big group of bands, ranging from pop-rock groups such as Bang Gang, Quarashi and Amiina to solo ballad singers like Bubbi Morthens, Megas and Björgvin Halldórsson.
Marine mammals include the grey seal (''Halichoerus grypus'') and harbor seal (''Phoca vitulina'').
Iceland ranked 12th in the World Economic Forum's 2009–2010 Network Readiness Index, which measures a country's ability to competitively exploit communications technology.
Instead, new banks were established to take on the domestic operations of the banks, and the old banks will be run into bankruptcy.
Due to the island's climate, fruits and vegetables are not generally a component of traditional dishes, although the use of greenhouses has made them more common in contemporary food.
Iceland's unemployment rate has declined consistently since the crisis, with 4.8% of the labour force being unemployed as of June 2012, compared to 6% in 2011 and 8.1% in 2010.
Thorfinn Karlsefni 1918.jpg|Statue of Thorfinn Karlsefni by Icelandic sculptor Einar Jónsson in Philadelphia
With the widespread availability of geothermal power, and the harnessing of many rivers and waterfalls for hydroelectricity, most residents have access to inexpensive hot water, heating and electricity.
In addition, the eruption caused dust clouds and haze to appear over most of Europe and parts of Asia and Africa for several months afterward, and affected climates in other areas.
The original population of Iceland was of Nordic and Gaelic origin.
The capital and largest city is Reykjavík.
The Icelandic Commonwealth lasted until the 13th century, when the political system devised by the original settlers proved unable to cope with the increasing power of Icelandic chieftains.
The Government of Iceland established an embassy in Copenhagen and requested that Denmark handle Icelandic foreign policy.
Regions in the world with similar climates include the Aleutian Islands, the Alaska Peninsula, and Tierra del Fuego, although these regions are closer to the equator.
In 2014 the Icelandic men's national basketball team qualified into the EuroBasket 2015 for the first time in the country history.
As a result of its commitment to renewable energy, the 2016 Global Green Economy Index ranked Iceland among the top 10 greenest economies in the world.
Emigration to the United States and Canada began in the 1870s.
Some of the planted forests include introduced species.
Iceland ranks high in economic, political and social stability and equality.
Náttfari settled in what is now known as Náttfaravík and he and his slaves became the first permanent residents of Iceland.
Its high latitude and marine influence still keeps summers chilly, with most of the archipelago having a tundra climate.
Important compositions since the 15th to the 19th century include sacred verse, most famously the Passion Hymns of Hallgrímur Pétursson, and ''rímur'', rhyming epic poems.
To this day, it remains a significant pastime.
In grammar and vocabulary, it has changed less from Old Norse than the other Nordic languages; Icelandic has preserved more verb and noun inflection, and has to a considerable extent developed new vocabulary based on native roots rather than borrowings from other languages.
Iceland has a market economy with relatively low taxes compared to other OECD countries.
Centuries of isolation have helped to insulate the country's Nordic culture from external influence; a prominent example is the preservation of the Icelandic language, which remains the closest to Old Norse of all modern Nordic languages.
The artist run gallery space Kling og Bang, members of which later ran the studio complex and exhibition venue Klink og Bank, has been a significant part of the trend of self-organised spaces, exhibitions and projects.
The elections for president, the Althing and local municipal councils are all held separately every four years.
It is often prepared in a wide variety of ways, either smoked, pickled, boiled, or dried.
Icelanders are avid consumers of literature, with the highest number of bookstores per capita in the world.
Hymns, both religious and secular, are a particularly well-developed form of music, due to the scarcity of musical instruments throughout much of Iceland's history.
Traditional dishes also include skyr, hákarl (cured shark), cured ram, singed sheep heads, and black pudding.
Additionally, Iceland has a very low level of pollution, thanks to an overwhelming reliance on cleaner geothermal energy, a low population density, and a high level of environmental consciousness among citizens.
Other commonly spoken languages are Swedish, Norwegian, German and French.
On 20 November 2008, the Nordic countries agreed to lend Iceland $2.5&nbsp;billion.
Lamb is by far the most common meat, and it tends to be either smoke-cured (known as ''hangikjöt'') or salt-preserved (''saltkjöt'').
Utilization of abundant hydroelectric and geothermal power has made Iceland the world's largest electricity producer per capita.
Einar Hákonarson is an expressionistic and figurative painter who by some is considered to have brought the figure back into Icelandic painting.
On 22 January 2009, Iceland announced its first round of offshore licences for companies wanting to conduct hydrocarbon exploration and production in a region northeast of Iceland, known as the Dreki area.
Nearly 70% of Icelanders have favoured the adoption of the Canadian dollar (CAD) - more than any other currency in the world.
According to a poll conducted by the OECD, 66% of Icelanders were satisfied with their lives, while 70% believed that their lives will be satisfying in the future.
Affected by the ongoing worldwide financial crisis, the nation's entire banking system systemically failed in October 2008, leading to a severe depression, substantial political unrest, the Icesave dispute, and the institution of capital controls.
The daily newspapers are Morgunblaðið and Fréttablaðið.
On 17 June 2010, the parliament passed the Icelandic Modern Media Initiative, a resolution proposing greater protection of free speech rights and the identity of journalists and whistle-blowers, the strongest journalist protection law in the world.
This was expanded in 1904, and Hannes Hafstein served as the first Minister for Iceland in the Danish cabinet.
It maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for its citizens.
On 26 January 2009, the coalition government collapsed due to the public dissent over the handling of the financial crisis.
A considerable portion of the government budget is assigned to health care, and Iceland ranks 11th in health care expenditures as a percentage of GDP and 14th in spending per capita.
Iceland has a high level of car ownership per capita; with a car for every 1.5 inhabitants; it is the main form of transport.
Horseback riding, which was historically the most prevalent form of transportation on the island, remains a common pursuit for many Icelanders.
The country's cultural heritage includes traditional Icelandic cuisine, Icelandic literature and medieval sagas.
The biopharmaceutical company deCODE genetics has funded the creation of a genealogy database which attempts to cover all of Iceland's known inhabitants.
People from Greenland attempted to set up a colony at Vinland in North America, but it was abandoned in the face of hostility from the indigenous residents.
About 8,000 Poles now live in Iceland, 1,500 of them in Fjarðabyggð where they make up 75% of the workforce who are constructing the Fjarðarál aluminium plant.
Puffins, skuas, and kittiwakes nest on its sea cliffs.
There are no native or free-living reptiles or amphibians on the island.
Another large eruption occurred on 21 May 2011.
Kjarval in particular is noted for the distinct techniques in the application of paint that he developed in a concerted effort to render the characteristic volcanic rock that dominates the Icelandic environment.
The extent of the political power possessed by the office of the president is disputed by legal scholars, in Iceland; several provisions of the constitution appear to give the president some important powers, but other provisions and traditions suggest differently.
Regions of Iceland.png|Regions of Iceland
ISLANDIA.jpg | South of Iceland, off the Ring Road, looking north, late afternoon in winter 2001
Briem starred in the 2008 film ''Journey to the Center of the Earth'', which shot scenes in Iceland.
In 2006, parliament voted unanimously to grant same-sex couples the same rights as heterosexual couples in adoption, parenting and assisted insemination treatment.
The island is composed primarily of basalt, a low-silica lava associated with effusive volcanism as has occurred also in Hawaii.
A Gallup poll conducted in 2012 found that 57% of Icelanders considered themselves "a religious person", 31% considered themselves "a non religious person", while 10% defined themselves as "a convinced atheist", placing Iceland among the ten countries with the highest proportions of atheists in the world.
Similarly, 83% of people in Iceland reported having more positive experiences in an average day than negative ones, compared to an OECD average of 72%, which makes Iceland one of the happiest countries in the OECD.
Throughout the 1990s, the country expanded its international role and developed a foreign policy oriented toward humanitarian and peacekeeping causes.
A new left-wing government was formed a week later and immediately set about removing Central Bank governor Davíð Oddsson and his aides from the bank through changes in law.
The temperature records for Reykjavík are  on 30 July 2008, and  on 21 January 1918.
Iceland is one of the few countries that have filling stations dispensing hydrogen fuel for cars powered by fuel cells.
In the ensuing centuries, Iceland became one of the poorest countries in Europe.
Icelanders are known for their deep sense of community: an OECD survey found that 98% believe they know someone they could rely on in a time of need, higher than in any other industrialised country.
Iceland is a representative democracy and a parliamentary republic.
Another Capacent Gallup poll conducted in February 2012 found that 67.4% of Icelanders would reject EU membership in a referendum.
Iceland's best-known classical works of literature are the Icelanders' sagas, prose epics set in Iceland's age of settlement.
Popular sports include association football, track and field, handball and basketball.
Iceland had been hit especially hard by the Great Recession that began in December 2007, because of the failure of its banking system and a subsequent economic crisis.
Employment regulations are relatively flexible and the labour market is one of the freest in the world.
On average, Iceland receives around 1.1&nbsp;million visitors annually, which is more than three times the native population.
Jökulsárlón is the deepest lake, at .
The animals of Iceland include the Icelandic sheep, cattle, chickens, goats, the sturdy Icelandic horse, and the Icelandic Sheepdog, all descendants of animals imported by Europeans.
The former outbreak killed 50% to 60% of the population, and the latter 30% to 50%.
Polar bears occasionally come over from Greenland, but they are just visitors, and no Icelandic populations exist.
Domestic flights, flights to Greenland and the Faroe Islands, and business flights operate mostly out of Reykjavík Airport, which lies in the city centre.
A month later, British armed forces invaded and occupied the country, violating Icelandic neutrality.
The US withdrew the last of its forces on 30 September 2006.
The Norwegian-Norse chieftain Ingólfr Arnarson built his homestead in present-day Reykjavík in the year 874.
The warm North Atlantic Current ensures generally higher annual temperatures than in most places of similar latitude in the world.
The 1970s were marked by the Cod Wars&nbsp;— several disputes with the United Kingdom over Iceland's extension of its fishing limits to 200&nbsp;miles offshore.
Iceland supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq despite much domestic controversy, deploying a Coast Guard EOD team to Iraq, which was replaced later by members of the Iceland Crisis Response Unit.
Coca-Cola is also widely consumed, to the extent that the country is said to have one of the highest per capita consumption rates in the world.
The only native land mammal when humans arrived was the Arctic fox, which came to the island at the end of the ice age, walking over the frozen sea.
According to a study published in 2001, 23% of the inhabitants were either atheist or agnostic.
:* ''South'' (southern half of Iceland, excluding Reykjavík and suburbs).
The main hub for international transport is Keflavík International Airport, which serves Reykjavík and the country in general.
Ingólfr was followed by many other emigrant settlers, largely Scandinavians and their thralls, many of whom were Irish or Scottish.
This stage of education is governed by the Upper Secondary School Act of 1996.
The latest assessment by the OECD determined that Iceland has made progress in many areas, particularly in creating a sustainable fiscal policy and restoring the health of the financial sector; however, challenges remain in making the fishing industry more efficient and sustainable, as well as in improving monetary policy in order to address inflation.
The corporate tax rate is a flat 18%, one of the lowest in the world.
The resultant cloud of volcanic ash brought major disruption to air travel across Europe.
This high level of social cohesion is attributed to the small size and homogeneity of the population, as well as to a long history of harsh survival in an isolated environment, which reinforced the importance of unity and cooperation.
Iceland is a very secular country: as with other Nordic nations, religious attendance is relatively low.
There was a currency crisis that started in the spring of 2008, and on 6 October trading in Iceland's banks was suspended as the government battled to save the economy.
In 1992 the Icelandic film industry achieved its greatest recognition hitherto, when Friðrik Þór Friðriksson was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film for his film, ''Children of Nature''.
Christianity was adopted by consensus around 999–1000, although Norse paganism persisted among some segments of the population for some years afterwards.
Iceland is a member of the European Economic Area (EEA), which allows the country access to the single market of the European Union (EU).
Among Iceland's best-known classical composers are Daníel Bjarnason and Anna S. Þorvaldsdóttir (Anna Thorvaldsdottir), who in 2012 received the Nordic Council Music Prize and in 2015 was chosen as the New York Philharmonic's Kravis Emerging Composer, an honor that includes a $50,000 cash prize and a commission to write a composition for the orchestra; she is the second recipient.
The population of the island is believed to have varied from 40,000 to 60,000 in the period ranging from initial settlement until the mid-19th century.
Although the country's environment is generally ill-suited for golf, there are nevertheless lots of golf courses throughout the island, and Iceland has a greater percentage of the population playing golf than Scotland with over 17,000 registered golfers out of a population of approximately 300,000.
Whale watching has become an important part of Iceland's economy since 1997.
Egalitarianism is highly valued among the people of Iceland, with income inequality being among the lowest in the world.
The head of government is the prime minister who, together with the cabinet, is responsible for executive government.
Iceland had prospered during the war.
Other landscape artists quickly followed in the footsteps of Þórarinn and Ásgrímur.
Actress Guðrún S. Gísladóttir, who is Icelandic, played one of the major roles in Russian filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky's 1986 film, ''The Sacrifice''.
Davíð was removed on 26 February 2009 in the wake of protests outside the Central Bank.
The Living Art Museum, Reykjavík Municipal Art Museum, Reykjavík Art Museum and the National Gallery of Iceland are the larger, more established institutions, curating shows and festivals.
The regent had, for all practical purposes, the position of a president, and Sveinn would later become the country's first president in 1944.
30 volcanic systems active.
All new names must be decided upon by the Icelandic Naming Committee.
Strong voices within the community expressed concerns with this, stating that it is impossible to block access to pornography without compromising the freedom of speech.
Possession of Iceland passed from the Norwegian Empire to the Kalmar Union in 1415, when the kingdoms of Norway, Denmark and Sweden were united.
Students must adhere closely to the government mandated curriculum, and the parent teaching must acquire a government approved teaching certificate.
Grassodenhäuser.jpg|Traditional Icelandic turf houses.
Geysir has since grown quieter and does not erupt often.
Lakes and glaciers cover 14.3% of its surface; only 23% is vegetated.
A 2010 UNESCO report found that out of 72 countries that spend the most on R&D (100&nbsp;million US dollars or more), Iceland ranked 9th by proportion of GDP, tied with Taiwan, Switzerland, and Germany and ahead of France, the UK, and Canada.
Iceland was the first country in the world to have a political party formed and led entirely by women.
With a fertility rate of 2.1, Iceland is one of only a few European countries with a birth rate sufficient for long-term population growth (see table on the left).
The main meal of the day for most Icelanders is dinner, which usually involves fish or lamb as the main course.
The climate of Iceland's coast is subpolar oceanic.
Several other Icelandic men and women artists studied at Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts at that time, including Ásgrímur Jónsson, who together with Þórarinn created a distinctive portrayal of Iceland's landscape in a romantic naturalistic style.
Population projection (1 January)
Iceland has a highly developed internet culture, with around 95% of the population having internet access, the highest proportion in the world.
Reykjavík is by far the most populous municipality, about four times more populous than Kópavogur, the second one.
It views the database, called ''Íslendingabók'', as a valuable tool for conducting research on genetic diseases, given the relative isolation of Iceland's population.
Christopher Nolan's 2014 film, ''Interstellar'' was also filmed in Iceland for some of its scenes.
Iceland has also produced many chess masters and hosted the historic World Chess Championship 1972 in Reykjavík during the height of the Cold War.
The largest towns outside the Greater Reykjavík area are Akureyri and Reykjanesbær, although the latter is relatively close to the capital.
Consequently, Icelanders refer to one another by their given name, and the Icelandic telephone directory is listed alphabetically by first name rather than by surname.
The modern parliament, ''Alþingi'' (English: Althing), was founded in 1845 as an advisory body to the Danish monarch.
Icelandic officials, including central bank governor Davíð Oddsson, stated that the state did not intend to take over any of the banks' foreign debts or assets.
The Icelandic national football team qualified for the UEFA European football championship for the first time in 2016 and advanced to the quarter-final to play against France.
Nevertheless, Iceland's education system is considered to be of excellent quality: the Programme for International Student Assessment currently ranks it as the 16th best performing, above the OECD average.
Infertile soil, volcanic eruptions, deforestation and an unforgiving climate made for harsh life in a society where subsistence depended almost entirely on agriculture.
Most Icelanders are descendants of Germanic and Gaelic (Celtic) settlers.
Students were particularly proficient in reading and mathematics.
Iceland has many campaigns for health and wellbeing.
The country lies between latitudes 63° and 68° N, and longitudes 25° and 13° W.
Iceland has hundreds of volcanoes with approx.
There are 74 municipalities in Iceland which govern local matters like schools, transport and zoning.
Iceland2008-Sudureyri.JPG | Suðureyri
, Canada had over 88,000 people of Icelandic descent, while there are more than 40,000 Americans of Icelandic descent, according to the 2000 US census.
The centre-right Independence Party was returned to power in coalition with the Progressive Party in the 2013 elections.
It was not a member of the EU, but in July 2009 the Icelandic parliament, the Althing, voted in favour of application for EU membership and officially applied on 17 July 2009.
The cabinet is appointed by the president after a general election to the Althing; however, the appointment is usually negotiated by the leaders of the political parties, who decide among themselves after discussions which parties can form the cabinet and how its seats are to be distributed, under the condition that it has a majority support in the Althing.
Property rights are strong and Iceland is one of the few countries where they are applied to fishery management.
The Ministry of Education, Science and Culture is responsible for the policies and methods that schools must use, and they issue the National Curriculum Guidelines.
The most popular websites are the news sites Vísir and Mbl.is.
The redistricting change was made in order to balance the weight of different districts of the country, since previously a vote cast in the sparsely populated areas around the country would count much more than a vote cast in the Reykjavík city area.
Renewable sources—geothermal and hydropower—provide effectively all of Iceland's electricity and around 85% of the nation's total primary energy consumption, with most of the remainder consisting of imported oil products used in transportation and in the fishing fleet.
Only a few small birch stands now exist in isolated reserves.
To that end, Iceland provided aid and expertise to various NATO-led interventions in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Iraq.
Garðar departed the following summer but one of his men, Náttfari, decided to stay behind with two slaves.
Laxness portrett einar hakonarson 1984.jpg|The writer Halldór Laxness by Einar Hákonarson, 1984
The crisis resulted in the greatest migration from Iceland since 1887, with a net emigration of 5,000 people in 2009.
Snowfall in winter is more common in the north than the south.
Iceland is warmed by the Gulf Stream and has a temperate climate, despite a high latitude just outside the Arctic Circle.
The nation formally became a member of NATO on 30 March 1949, amid domestic controversy and riots.
The closest bodies of land in Europe are the Faroe Islands (); Jan Mayen Island (); Shetland and the Outer Hebrides, both about ; and the Scottish mainland and Orkney, both about .
Two exploration licenses have been awarded.
Danish embassies around the world displayed two coats of arms and two flags: those of the Kingdom of Denmark and those of the Kingdom of Iceland.
