However, even the spine became a simple structure.
This is again confirmed by stomach contents: in 2009 e.g., a plesiosaur specimen was reported with an ichthyosaur embryo in its gut.
Derived species have a ''foramen internasale'', a midline opening separating the rear of the nasal bones.
However, during the 1980s the German paleontologist Jürgen Riess proposed an alternative model.
Pterygoid teeth are typically lacking.
The asymmetry differed from that of sharks in that the lower lobe was largest, instead of the upper lobe.
This model thus emphasised evolutionary stagnation, the only innovation shown by ''Platypterygius'' being its ten fingers.
Public awareness was increased by the works of the eccentric collector Thomas Hawkins, a pre-Adamite believing that ichthyosaurs were monstrous creations by the devil: ''Memoirs of Ichthyosauri and Plesiosauri'' of 1834 and ''The Book of the Great Sea-Dragons'' of 1840.
The ulna lacks the part behind the original shaft axis.
This would explain the non-degenerated shoulder girdle and the evolution of the hand bones, whose perfect hydrofoil profile would have been useless if it was not functionally employed.
Two had already been expelled while a third was present in the birth canal.
Their heads were pointed, the jaws often equipped with conical teeth to catch smaller prey.
Finely preserved specimens from the Holzmaden ''Lagerstätten'' in Germany found in the late nineteenth century revealed additional traces, usually preserved in black, of the outline of the entire body, including the first evidence of dorsal fins in ichthyosaurs.
Little evidence is available about the nature of ichthyosaur social behaviour.
In 1987 however, Michael A. Taylor suggested an alternative hypothesis: as ichthyosaurs could vary their lung content, contrary to sharks (which lack a swimming bladder), they could also regulate their buoyancy.
Modern researchers generally concur that ichthyosaurs were negatively buoyant.
''Thalattoarchon'', an apex predator, had larger teeth formed like flattened blades.
The only process that kept its function was the spine at the top, serving as an attachment for the dorsal muscles.
Recent studies, however, show that ichthyosaurs were actually far more diverse in the Cretaceous than previously thought.
This gave them a broadly similar appearance, possibly implied similar activity levels (including thermoregulation), and presumably placed them broadly in a similar ecological niche.
The tail thus mainly served for a neutral propulsion, while small variations in buoyancy were stabilised by slight changes in the flipper angles.
However, after an article on the subject by Philip Grey Egerton, Owen considered the possibility that the oblique section could have supported the lower lobe of a tail fin.
Scrutiny of the find revealed that while hunting ammonites (as evidenced by an ammonite shell in the throat region), the ichthyosaur was ambushed and attacked, likely by a pliosaurid (known from the same habitat), which severed its tail.
A first extinction event in the beginning of the Cenomanian eliminated two of the three icthyosaur feeding guilds then present, the 'soft-prey specialists' and the 'generalists', leaving only an apex predator group, which probably was not particularly specialized.
Other specimens are embedded in the rock and visible at Berlin–Ichthyosaur State Park in Nye County.
It was concluded that ichthyosaurs were likely uniformly dark coloured for thermoregulation and to camouflage them in deep water while hunting.
The similarities were explained as a case of convergent evolution.
In the Posidonia Shale at Holzmaden, dating from the early Jurassic, already in the early nineteenth century the first ichthyosaur skeletons had been found.
The coracoid shape is very variable but usually it is rather low.
Ichthyosaurs ranged so widely in size, and survived for so long, that they are likely to have had a wide range of prey.
This hypothesis was confirmed by new finds from Germany.
However, this last possibility is contradicted by the fact that, with modern animals, damage is not caused by a limited number of rapid ascension incidents, but by a gradual accumulation of non-invalidating degeneration during normal diving behaviour.
McGowan speculated that forms with protruding upper jaws, in the Eurhinosauria, would have used their pointy snouts to slash prey, as has been assumed for swordfish.
This might be a result of the, in general, poor fossil record of this epoch.
Ichthyosaurs were air-breathing, bore live young, and were probably warm-blooded.
Within Motani's phylogeny, the Ichthyopterygia were the larger parent clade of a smaller stem clade Ichthyosauria that was defined as the group consisting of ''Ichthyosaurus communis'' and all species more closely related to ''Ichthyosaurus'' than to ''Grippia longirostris''.
The second major ichthyosaur extinction took place during the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary event, an 'anoxic event', eliminating the apex predators, after which just a single lineage survived, ''Platypterygius hercynicus'', which disappeared shortly afterwards, about 93 million years ago.
Ichthyosauria ''sensu'' Motani might materially be identical to a clade that Maisch & Matzke in 2000 called Hueneosauria, depending on the actual relationships.
This argument does not cover basal forms with a more eel-like body and undulating swimming movement.
However, the adaptations are very variable.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century, British fossil collections quickly increased in size.
However, they were already rather advanced in having limbs that had been completely transformed into flippers.
The latter belonged to a parvipelvian subgroup, the Thunnosauria.
, thus not caused by a common descent but by a similar adaptation to an identical environment:
The front flippers would be used to push the front of the body further downwards and control pitch.
In 1880, Harry Govier Seeley, heading a special British paleontological committee studying the problem of ichthyosaur reproduction, concluded that birth was given in the water and that fossils containing fetuses in the birth canal probably represented cases of premature death of the juvenile, causing the demise of the mother animal as well.
The second explanation saw the extinction as caused by competition.
In 1807, the last specimen was described by the latter's cousin Joseph Hawker.
Both in the relative and absolute sense, ichthyosaurs have the largest eye sockets of all known vertebrates.
It was usually assumed that the top rear element of the skull was the supratemporal bone while the squamosal and quadratojugal were sometimes fused.
In one female of ''Stenopterygius'' seven have been identified, in another eleven.
Like the snout, the lower jaws are elongated.
In the summer of 1834, Hawkins, after a taxation by William Buckland and Gideon Mantell, sold his extensive collection, then the largest of its kind in the world, to the ''British Museum''.
At least some species possessed a dorsal fin.
Early ichthyosaurs proper had rear dorsal vertebrae that had become disc-shaped, like those of typical fishes.
Their limbs had been fully transformed into flippers, which sometimes contained a very large number of digits and phalanges.
Early Triassic species already show these traits.
In 2013, a study concluded that broad ichthyosaur flippers, like those of ''Platyptergygius'', were not used for propulsion but as a control surface.
During the nineteenth century, the number of described ichthyosaur genera gradually increased.
Other species were perhaps suction feeders, sucking animals into their mouths by quickly opening their relatively short jaws.
Derived species usually also have a reduced number of dorsals, the total of presacral vertebrae totalling about forty to fifty.
Sometimes the number of fingers is reduced, to as low as two.
Between the paired supratemporal openings, the skull roof is narrow; some species have a longitudinal crest on it as an attachment for the jaw muscles.
Sight thus seems to have been one of the main senses employed while hunting.
Initially, this possibility was largely neglected because Hupehsuchia have a fundamentally different form of propulsion, with an extremely stiffened trunk.
In 2012, it was reported that even the very basal form ''Utatsusaurus'' had this bone type, indicating that the ancestors of ichthyosaurs were already warm-blooded.
In 1990 though, John Steve Massare convinced most researchers that the original identification had been the correct one after all.
These later diversified into a variety of forms, including the still sea serpent-like ''Cymbospondylus'', a problematic form which reached ten metres in length, and smaller more typical forms like ''Mixosaurus''.
Another confirmation is provided by fossilised stomach contents.
Often the bones of the back of the skull and the palate are incompletely ossified, apparently having partly remained cartilage.
Some species have ten fingers per hand.
Ultimately, over four thousand would be uncovered, forming the bulk of ichthyosaur specimens displayed today.
However, in 1973, McGowan, while studying the natural endocast of a well-preserved specimen, pointed out that the telencephalon was not very small.
Ichthyosaur teeth are typically conical.
Its lifestyle might have been amphibian.
Fragments referred to ''Platypterygius'' in fact represented diverse species.
In 1835, the order Ichthyosauria was named by Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville.
The toe phalanges also show hyperphalangy; exceptionally, ''Ophthalmosaurus'' shows a reduced number of phalanges.
Air-breathing marine creatures must either come ashore to lay eggs, like turtles and some sea snakes, or else give birth to live young in surface waters, like whales and dolphins.
Some basal forms show a hatchet or crescent-shaped shoulder blade or scapula; derived forms have an elongated blade positioned on a broader base.
They occupied many ecological niches.
Ichthyosaurs would be a fifth faster than plesiosaurs, though half of the difference was explained by assuming a 30% higher metabolism for ichthyosaurs.
In 1992, Canadian ichthyologist Dr. Elizabeth Nicholls (curator of marine reptiles at the Royal Tyrrell Museum) uncovered the largest known specimen, a 23&nbsp;m-long (75&nbsp;ft) example, though this larger specimen was later reclassified as the related ''Shastasaurus''.
Although ichthyosaurs looked like fish, they were not.
If so, it was not caused by mosasaurid competition; large mosasaurs did not appear until 3 million years after the ichthyosaur extinction, likely to fill the resulting ecological void.
In 1996, Richard Cowen, while accepting endothermy for the group, presumed that ichthyosaurs would have been subject to ''Carrier's constraint'', a limitation to reptilian respiration pointed out in 1987 by David Carrier: their undulated locomotion forces the air out of the lungs and thus prevents them from taking breath while moving.
There are several conflicting hypotheses on the subject.
Ichthyosaur species varied from one to over sixteen metres in length.
Motani found it to be more basal than the Ichthyopterygia and named an encompassing clade Ichthyosauriformes.
The fetuses have at most a quarter of the length of the mother animal.
In 1819, he considered it a form in-between newts, like ''Proteus'', and lizards; he now gave a formal generic name: ''Proteo-Saurus''.
In 1804, Edward Donovan at St. Donats uncovered a four metres long ichthyosaur specimen containing a jaw, vertebrae, ribs and a shoulder girdle.
There are some indications that a level of sexual dimorphism was present.
"This sea-going reptile with terrestrial ancestors converged so strongly on fishes that it actually evolved a dorsal fin and tail in just the right place and with just the right hydrological design.
These large (ten to fifteen metres long) ichthyosaurs have by some been placed into the genus ''Shonisaurus''.
The neural arch, of which it was an out-growth, typically no longer fused to the vertebral centre.
The thighbone is short and broad, often with a narrow waist and an expanded lower end.
Generally the brain shows the limited size and elongated shape of that of modern cold-blooded reptiles.
When a high number of fingers is present, it is difficult to determine their identity.
However, in 2002, Motani corrected certain mistakes in Massare's formulae and revised the estimated cruising speed to less than two kilometres per hour, somewhat below that of modern Cetacea.
In 1819, he wrote two articles about specimens found by Henry Thomas De la Beche and Thomas James Birch.
New finds allowed for a better understanding of their anatomy.
Von Huene also travelled widely abroad, describing many fossils from locations outside of Europe.
Some species had larger bladed teeth to attack large animals.
Forms specialised in catching larger prey have shorter, broader and straighter teeth; sometimes cutting edges are present.
An exception is a study in 1997 by John Merck, which showed monophyletic archosauromorph euryapsids.
More derived forms had a nearly vertical symmetric tail fin.
This was contradicted in 2014 by the discovery of melanosomes, black melanin bearing structures, in the skin of ichthyosaur specimen YORYM 1993.338 by Johan Lindgren of Lund University.
However, in 2013 a study concluded that the hyoid bone of ichthyosaurs, at the tongue base, was insufficiently ossified to support a sucking movement and suggested the alternative that such species were ram feeders, gathering food by constantly swimming forwards with a wide open mouth.
About half of the ichthyosaur genera today seen as valid were described after 1990.
This hypothesis has become unpopular for being inherently vague because the Anapsida are an unnatural paraphyletic group.
Plesiosaurian Polycotylidae perhaps also filled some of the niches previously occupied by ichthyosaurs, although they had coexisted for 19 million years.
These were fully adapted to an efficient thunniform locomotion, propelling themselves with the end of the tail only, equipped with a vertical tail fin.
Triassic species typically have a very derived humerus, changed into a disc.
Fragmentary finds suggest the presence of a  long form in the Early Jurassic.
Towards the end of the late Triassic, there seems to have been a decline of variability.
Typical ichthyosaurs had very large eyes, protected within a bony ring, suggesting that they may have hunted at night or at great depths; the only extant animals with similarly large eyes are the giant and colossal squids.
Stomach remains can also contain larger animals, including small ichthyosaurs.
The front rim of the supratemporal opening is typically formed by the postfrontal; only with the very basal ''Utatsusaurus'' the postorbital and the squamosal still reach the edge.
Not all were convinced that ichthyosaurs had gone extinct: Reverend George Young found a skeleton in 1819 at Whitby; in his 1821 description, he expressed the hope that living specimens could still be found.
The tibia, fibula and metatarsals are merged into a mosaic of bone discs supporting the hydrofoil.
The short neck positions the skull close to the trunk, usually in a slight oblique elevation to it.
This text would only be published in 1822, just after De la Beche's friend William Conybeare published a description of these species, together with a fourth one.
Live-bearing reptiles do not regulate sex through incubation temperature.
In modern phylogeny, clades are defined that contain all species forming a certain branch of the evolutionary tree.
At these depths, such eyes would have been especially useful to see large objects.
Like the dinosaurs, the ichthyosaurs and their contemporaries, the plesiosaurs, survived the End-Triassic extinction event, and quickly diversified again to fill the vacant ecological niches of the early Jurassic.
Like land animals, their pectoral girdles and pelves were robustly built, and their vertebrae still possessed the usual interlocking processes to support the body against the force of gravity.
During the twentieth century, North America became an important source of new fossils.
Norian Shonisauridae are known from both sides of the Pacific.
Ichthyosaurs were viviparous, i.e.
Some direct evidence is available that ichthyosaurs too might have been endothermic.
For their food, many of the fish-shaped ichthyosaurs relied heavily on ancient cephalopods called Belemnoidea.
Additional evidence is provided by the eyes of ichthyosaurs that among vertebrates are both relatively and absolutely the largest known.
Modern exact quantitative cladistic analyses consistently indicate that ichthyosaurs are Diapsida.
The vertebral bodies became much shorter.
''Shonisaurus popularis'', known from a number of specimens from the Carnian of Nevada, was  long.
Much of this description reflected the insights of their friend, the anatomist Joseph Pentland.
However, these remains are not impressions per se, but outlines formed from bacterial growth.
This was first assumed for ''Shonisaurus'', which giant by this means might have secured a constant food supply for its huge body, and in 2011 for the short-snouted ''Guanlingsaurus liangae''.
Their smooth skin and streamlined bodies prevented excessive turbulence.
In 1905, the Saurian Expedition led by John Campbell Merriam of the University of California and financed by Annie Montague Alexander, found twenty-five specimens in central Nevada, which was under a shallow ocean during the Triassic.
At least one specimen, R158 (in the collections of the Paleontologiska Museet, Uppsala Universitet) shows the expected faded edges of a bacterial mat, so it has not been altered by preparators, yet still preserves a generally tuna-like body outline including a dorsal fin.
The external nostril is located on the side of the skull, and is hardly visible from above.
The vertebral column, made of simplified disc-like vertebrae, continued into the lower lobe of the tail fin.
Ichthyosaur forelimbs and hindlimbs had been fully transformed into flippers.
This could be a sign that basal forms did not dive as deeply, but might also be explained by a greater predation pressure during the later epochs, more often necessitating a fast flight to the surface.
This alternative interpretation was generally not adopted by other workers.
The ichthyosaurs would thus have disappeared much earlier than other large Mesozoic reptile groups that generally survived until the end of the Cretaceous.
This way, swimming forwards will generate enough lift to equal the sinking force caused by their weight.
Additionally, female individuals were discovered with embryos.
Clear transitional forms with land-dwelling vertebrate groups have not yet been found, the earliest known species of the ichthyosaur lineage being already fully aquatic.
For these species porpoising was not a necessity.
Motani's concept of Ichthyopterygia was thus more limited than the traditional one that also contained basal forms, such as ''Grippia'', ''Utatsusaurus'' and ''Parvinatator''.
Represented by the  ''Ophthalmosaurus'' and related genera, they were very similar in general build to ''Ichthyosaurus''.
This led to the misunderstanding that they really had an amphibious lifestyle.
The stapes, the bone transmitting sound waves from the eardrum to the middle ear, is elongated and not pierced by a ''foramen''.
The pubic bone typically does not connect to the ischium behind it: the space in between is by some workers identified as the ''fenestra thyreoidea''; other researchers deny that the term is applicable given the general loose structure of the pelvis.
A postparietal and tabular bone are lacking.
With ichthyosaurs in the narrow sense the snout became very pointy.
In 1999, a node clade Ichthyopterygia was defined by Motani as the group consisting of the last common ancestor of ''Ichthyosaurus communis'', ''Utatsusaurus hataii'' and ''Parvinatator wapitiensis''; and all its descendants.
Discovered in Australia, and analyzed by Benjamin Kear ''et alii'' in 2011, measurements of the wounds reveal that the bite marks were inflicted by another ichthyosaur, likely of the same species, a probable case of face biting during a conflict.
A strongly derived condition show the phalanges, small disc-shaped elements positioned in long rows.
It was considered to be a giant lizard.
Of ichthyosaurs it was traditionally assumed that they were cold-blooded, being reptiles.
Gastroliths, stomach stones that might have assisted digestion or regulated buoyancy, have only on a few occasions been found associated with ichthyosaur skeletons: once with a specimen of ''Nannopterygius'' and a second time in a ''Panjiangsaurus'' fossil.
In 1708, the Swiss naturalist Johann Jakob Scheuchzer described two ichthyosaur vertebrae assuming they belonged to a man drowned in the Universal Deluge.
Unique, however, for derived tetrapods, is the fact that some species show non-pathological polydactyly, the number of fingers being higher than five.
Other researchers have tended to assume that for at least derived ichthyosaurs Carrier's constraint did not apply, because of their stiff bodies, which seems to be confirmed by their good diving capacity, implying an effective respiration and oxygen storage system.
All ichthyosaurs belonged to the thunnosaurian clade Ophthalmosauria.
Derived forms have a shorter tail with the characteristic kink at the end: a section of wedge-shaped vertebrae, itself supporting the fleshy upper tail fin lobe, forced the tail end into the lower fin lobe.
The fossil also documented that early ichthyosaurs were also born head first, perhaps opposed to later genera.
Basal euichthyosaurs were ''Californosaurus'' and ''Toretocnemus''.
In the early twentieth century, ichthyosaur research was dominated by the German paleontologist Friedrich von Huene, who wrote an extensive series of articles, taking advantage of an easy access to the many specimens found in his country.
The pools in the park were at the time subjected to tidal changes, so that fluctuations in the water level at intervals submerged the ichthyosaur statues, adding a certain realism.
Owen had noted that many fossils showed a downward bend in the rear tail.
In 1973, McGowan concluded that, because ichthyosaurs have a reversed tail fin asymmetry compared to sharks, they were apparently positively buoyant, lighter than water, which would be confirmed by their lack of gastroliths and of pachyostosis or dense bone.
They defined a node clade Ichthyosauria as the group consisting of the last common ancestor of ''Thaisaurus chonglakmanii'', ''Utatsusaurus hataii'' and ''Ophthalmosaurus icenicus''; and all its descendants.
However, in 1817, Karl Dietrich Eberhard Koenig had already referred to the animal as ''Ichthyosaurus'', "fish saurian" from Greek ἰχθύς, ''ichthys'', "fish".
Apart from the obvious similarities to fish, ichthyosaurs also shared parallel developmental features with dolphins, lamnid sharks, and tuna.
However, as the speeds estimated for plesiosaurs and mosasaurids were also revised downwards, ichthyosaurs maintained their relative position.
With more derived species, the front dorsals also became discs.
The new finds have allowed us to gradually improve our knowledge about the anatomy and physiology of what had already been seen as rather advanced "Mesozoic dolphins".
Another parvipelvian branch were the Eurhinosauria like ''Leptonectes'' and ''Eurhinosaurus'', which were specialised forms having a very elongated and pointy snout.
The fossil specimens that preserved dorsal fins also showed that the flippers were pointy and often far wider than the underlying bones would suggest.
Sharks use their asymmetric tail fin to compensate for the fact that they are negatively buoyant, heavier than water, by making the downward pressure exerted by the tail force the body as a whole in an ascending angle.
Many extant lung-breathing marine vertebrates are capable of deep diving.
It is usually assumed that fingers were added at both the front and at the rear, perhaps to a core of four original fingers.
After a slack during the middle of the century, no new genera being named between the 1930s and the 1970s, the rate of discoveries picked up towards its end.
Indirect evidence for endothermy is provided by the body shape of derived ichthyosaurs, which with its short tail and vertical tail fin seems optimised for a high cruising speed that can only be sustained by a high metabolism: all extant animals swimming this way are either fully warm-blooded or, like sharks and tuna, maintain a high temperature in their body core.
All fossils from this period were referred to a single genus: ''Platypterygius''.
Of these, the majority show them as basal Lepidosauromorpha; a minority as basal Archosauromorpha.
Accordingly, the number of premaxillary teeth is high, while the maxillary teeth are fewer in number or even completely absent.
The lower side of the chest is formed by gastralia.
In the Late Cretaceous, ichthyosaurs became extinct for unknown reasons.
Since 1959, a second enigmatic group of ancient sea reptiles is known, the Hupehsuchia.
In 1840, Richard Owen named an order Ichthyopterygia as an alternative concept.
Early forms employed an anguilliform or eel-like movement, with undulations of the entire trunk and tail.
This is even true of the earliest Ichthyopterygia, making it impossible to identify a certain area as their place of origin.
More analyses result in their being Neodiapsida, a derived diapsid subgroup.
