His family was originally called Soulima-Stravinsky, and they were landowners in eastern Poland as far back as can be traced.
''Agon'' (1954–57) was the first of his works to include a twelve-tone series and  (1955) was the first piece to contain a movement entirely based on a tone row.
Performances of his music were banned from around 1933 until 1962, the year Nikita Khrushchev invited him to the USSR for an official state visit.
Over the next four years, Stravinsky and his family lived in Russia during the summer months and spent each winter in Switzerland.
His interest in art propelled him to develop a strong relationship with Picasso, whom he met in 1917, announcing that in “a whirlpool of artistic enthusiasm and excitement I at last met Picasso.” From 1917 to 1920, the two engaged in an artistic dialogue in which they exchanged small-scale works of art to each other as a sign of intimacy, which included the famous portrait of Stravinsky by Picasso, and Stravinsky's "Sketch of Music for the Clarinet".
He became a naturalized United States citizen in 1945.
From then until his wife's death in 1939, Stravinsky led a double life, dividing his time between his family in Anglet, and Vera in Paris and on tour.
During the remainder of the summer, Stravinsky turned his attention to completing his first opera, ''The Nightingale'' (usually known by its French title ''Le Rossignol''), which he had begun in 1908 (that is, ''before'' his association with the Ballets Russes).
In the 1950s, Stravinsky began using serial compositional techniques such as dodecaphony, the twelve-tone technique originally devised by Arnold Schoenberg.
Stravinsky was reputed to have been a philanderer and was rumoured to have had affairs with high-profile partners, such as Coco Chanel.
During this period, Stravinsky composed two further works for the Ballets Russes: ''Petrushka'' (1911), and ''Le Sacre du printemps'' (''The Rite of Spring''; 1913).
I can say, however, that for some years before my actual "conversion", a mood of acceptance had been cultivated in me by a reading of the Gospels and by other religious literature.
The last of these transformed the way in which subsequent composers thought about rhythmic structure and was largely responsible for Stravinsky's enduring reputation as a musical revolutionary who pushed the boundaries of musical design.
Part of the composer's error, in Adorno's view, was his neo-classicism, but of greater importance was his music's "pseudomorphism of painting", playing off  (time-space) rather than  (time-duration) of Henri Bergson.
In gratitude, Stravinsky dedicated the work to Reinhart and gave him the original manuscript.
In the 1950s, Stravinsky adopted serial procedures.
His "Russian phase" which continued with works such as ''Renard'', ''The Soldier's Tale'' and ''Les Noces'', was followed in the 1920s by a period in which he turned to neoclassical music.
At the same time, Chanel also guaranteed the new (December 1920) Ballets Russes production of Stravinsky's ''Le Sacre du Printemps'' (''The Rite of Spring'') with an anonymous gift to Diaghilev, said to have been 300,000 francs.
Among the compositions that were issued on the Pleyela piano rolls are ''The Rite of Spring'', ''Petrushka'', ''The Firebird'' and ''Song of the Nightingale''.
Shortly following the premiere of ''The Rite of Spring'', Stravinsky contracted typhoid from eating bad oysters, and was confined to a Paris nursing home, unable to depart for Ustilug until 11 July.
I was not reasoned into my disposition.
He spent more time living in Los Angeles than any other city.
There were reports of fistfights in the audience and the need for a police presence during the second act.
During the 1920s, Stravinsky recorded Duo-Art rolls for the Aeolian Company in both London and New York, not all of which have survived.
Despite these alleged liaisons, Stravinsky was considered a family man and devoted to his children.
They are merely successions of notes that can conveniently be divided into groups of three, five, and seven and set against other mathematical groups" and he described the cadenza for solo drums as "musical purity...achieved by a species of musical castration".
In addition, the original version calls for 3 onstage trumpets and 4 onstage Wagner tubas (2 tenor and 2 bass).
Bach, conceding that, "there is no denying the greatness of Stravinsky.
He first achieved international fame with three ballets commissioned by the impresario Sergei Diaghilev and first performed in Paris by Diaghilev's Ballets Russes: ''The Firebird'' (1910), ''Petrushka'' (1911) and ''The Rite of Spring'' (1913).
Adorno's criticism of Stravinsky is more concerned with the "transition to positivity" Adorno found in his neoclassical works.
Stravinsky and Huxley had a tradition of Saturday lunches for west coast avant-garde and luminaries.
Satie had met Stravinsky for the first time in 1910.
With Alexis Roland-Manuel and Pierre Souvtchinsky, he wrote his 1939–40 Harvard University Charles Eliot Norton Lectures, which were delivered in French and first collected under the title  in 1942 and then translated in 1947 as ''Poetics of Music''.
Adorno maintained that the "rhythmic procedures closely resemble the schema of catatonic conditions.
Earlier writers, such as Aaron Copland, Elliott Carter, Boris de Schloezer, and Virgil Thomson, writing in ''Modern Music'' (a quarterly review published between 1925 and 1946), could find only a common "'seriousness' of 'tone' or of 'purpose', 'the exact correlation between the goal and the means', or a dry 'ant-like neatness'".
''Le Rossignol'' enjoyed only lukewarm success with the public and the critics, apparently because its delicacy did not meet their expectations of the composer of ''The Rite of Spring.''
Stravinsky later remembered this last European address as his unhappiest, as his wife's tuberculosis infected both himself and his eldest daughter Ludmila, who died in 1938.
Stravinsky proved adept at playing the part of a 'man of the world', acquiring a keen instinct for business matters and appearing relaxed and comfortable in public.
Stravinsky's unconventional dominant seventh chord in his arrangement of "The Star-Spangled Banner" led to an incident with the Boston police on 15 January 1944, and he was warned that the authorities could impose a $100 fine upon any "rearrangement of the national anthem in whole or in part".
The three ballets composed for Diaghilev's Ballets Russes call for particularly large orchestras.
Igor and the family took up residence nearby, and he completed ''Le Rossignol'' there on 28 March.
He rejoined the Russian Orthodox Church and afterwards remained a committed Christian.
Despite his enthusiasm for music, his parents expected him to study law.
On 8 June, the entire family left Morges for the last time, and moved to the fishing village of Carantec in Brittany for the summer while also seeking a new home in Paris.
The university was closed for two months in 1905 in the aftermath of Bloody Sunday: Stravinsky was prevented from taking his final law examinations and later received a half-course diploma in April 1906.
He was posthumously inducted into the National Museum of Dance's Mr. & Mrs. Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney Hall of Fame in 2004.
In 1951, he completed his last neo-classical work, the opera ''The Rake's Progress'', to a libretto by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman that was based on the etchings of William Hogarth.
Practically the whole lot are already on the shelf, and they will remain there until a few jaded neurotics once more feel a desire to eat ashes and fill their belly with the east wind.
Blitzstein's Marxist position was that Stravinsky's wish to "divorce music from other streams of life", which is "symptomatic of an escape from reality", resulted in a "loss of stamina", naming specifically ''Apollo'', the ''Capriccio'', and ''Le Baiser de la fée''.
In the late 1940s he made several recordings for RCA Victor at the Republic Studios in Los Angeles.
Stravinsky's professional life encompassed most of the 20th century, including many of its modern classical music styles, and he influenced composers both during and after his lifetime.
This is not surprising, as the works were as much exercises in orchestration as in composition.
The Stravinsky family returned to Switzerland (as usual) in the fall of 1913.
Well, after having seen so many events and so many more or less representative men, I have an overpowering urge to render homage to your Duce.
Stravinsky was born on 17 June 1882 in Oranienbaum, a suburb of Saint Petersburg, the Russian imperial capital, and was brought up in Saint Petersburg.
On hearing of their dilemma, couturière Coco Chanel invited Stravinsky and his family to reside at her new mansion "Bel Respiro" in the Paris suburb of Garches until they could find a more suitable residence; they arrived during the second week of September.
He first experimented with non-twelve-tone serial techniques in small-scale vocal and chamber works such as the ''Cantata'' (1952), the Septet (1953) and ''Three Songs from Shakespeare'' (1953).
In April, they were finally able to return to Clarens.
Stravinsky was named by ''Time'' magazine as one of the 100 most influential people of the century.
In April 1915, Stravinsky received a commission from Winnaretta Singer (Princesse Edmond de Polignac) for a small-scale theatrical work to be performed in her Paris salon.
In 1959, he was awarded the Sonning Award, Denmark's highest musical honour.
In 1905, he began to take twice-weekly private lessons from Rimsky-Korsakov, whom he came to regard as a second father.
In spite of being extremely busy, Mussolini did me the great honour of conversing with me for three-quarters of an hour.
That was exactly what Jean Cocteau did when he commented deprecatingly on Stravinsky in his 1918 book, .
Although he made an appearance, the actual performance was conducted by Robert Craft.
In 1905 Stravinsky was betrothed to his cousin Yekaterina Gavrilovna Nosenko (called "Katya"), whom he had known since early childhood.
Stravinsky's output is typically divided into three general style periods: a Russian period, a neoclassical period, and a serial period.
In 1972, an official proclamation by the Soviet Minister of Culture, Ekaterina Furtseva, ordered Soviet musicians to "study and admire" Stravinsky's music and she made hostility toward it a potential offence.
Stravinsky had adapted to life in France, but moving to America at the age of 57 was a very different prospect.
Bernard Holland claimed Stravinsky was especially fond of British writers, who visited him in Beverly Hills, "like W. H. Auden, Christopher Isherwood, Dylan Thomas.
In February 1909, two orchestral works, the  and  (''Fireworks'') were performed at a concert in Saint Petersburg, where they were heard by Sergei Diaghilev, who was at that time involved in planning to present Russian opera and ballet in Paris.
While Stravinsky's music has been criticized for its range of styles, scholars had "gradually begun to perceive unifying elements in Stravinsky's music" by the 1980s.
Stravinsky expanded his use of dodecaphony in works such as ''Threni'' (1958) and ''A Sermon, a Narrative and a Prayer'' (1961), which are based on biblical texts, and ''The Flood'' (1962), which mixes brief biblical texts from the Book of Genesis with passages from the York and Chester Mystery Plays.
The composer Constant Lambert described pieces such as  as containing "essentially cold-blooded abstraction".
By age fifteen, he had mastered Mendelssohn's Piano Concerto in G minor and finished a piano reduction of a string quartet by Glazunov, who reportedly considered Stravinsky unmusical, and thought little of his skills.
For a while, he maintained a circle of contacts and emigré friends from Russia, but he eventually found that this did not sustain his intellectual and professional life.
He approached the Swiss philanthropist Werner Reinhart for financial assistance during the time he was writing ''Histoire du soldat'' (''The Soldier's Tale'').
In 1935, the American composer Marc Blitzstein compared Stravinsky to Jacopo Peri and C.P.E.
He is the saviour of Italy and – let us hope – Europe".
However, composers including Maurice Ravel, Béla Bartók, and Reynaldo Hahn found much to admire in the score's craftsmanship, even alleging to detect the influence of Arnold Schoenberg.
As a conductor of his own music, he recorded primarily for Columbia Records, beginning in 1928 with a performance of the original suite from ''The Firebird'' and concluding in 1967 with the 1945 suite from the same ballet.
He did so in a way that made full use of all of the piano's eighty-eight notes, without regard for human fingers or hands.
I do not believe in bridges of reason or, indeed, in any form of extrapolation in religious matters.
Later, after a private audience with Mussolini, he added, "Unless my ears deceive me, the voice of Rome is the voice of ''Il Duce''.
This trick, however, soon exhausts itself".
Glass mentions Stravinsky's "primitive, offbeat rhythmic drive".
Stravinsky's reputation in Russia and the USSR rose and fell.
The law in question merely forbade using the national anthem "as dance music, as an exit march, or as a part of a medley of any kind", but the incident soon established itself as a myth, in which Stravinsky was supposedly arrested, held in custody for several nights, and photographed for police records.
Patronage was never far away.
He was drawn to the growing cultural life of Los Angeles, especially during World War II, when so many writers, musicians, composers and conductors settled in the area: these included Otto Klemperer, Thomas Mann, Franz Werfel, George Balanchine and Arthur Rubinstein.
In May 1921, Stravinsky and his family moved to Anglet, near Biarritz, southwestern France.
After her delivery, Katya was discovered to have tuberculosis and confined to the sanatorium at Leysin, high in the Alps.
According to Andrew J. Browne, "Stravinsky is perhaps the only composer who has raised rhythm in itself to the dignity of art".
Stravinsky settled in West Hollywood.
''The Rite of Spring'' (1913) calls for the largest orchestra Stravinsky ever employed:  piccolo, 3 flutes (3rd doubles 2nd piccolo), alto flute, 4 oboes (4th doubles 2nd cor anglais), cor anglais, piccolo clarinet in D/E, 3 clarinets (3rd doubles 2nd bass clarinet), bass clarinet, piccolo clarinet, 4 bassoons (4th doubles 2nd contrabassoon), contrabassoon, 8 horns (7th and 8th double tenor Wagner tubas), piccolo trumpet in D, 4 trumpets in C (4th doubles bass trumpet in E-flat), 3 trombones (2 tenor, 1 bass), 2 tubas.
Katya reportedly bore her husband's infidelity "with a mixture of magnanimity, bitterness, and compassion".
The Stravinskys became French citizens in 1934 and moved to the rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré in Paris.
The War and subsequent Russian Revolution made it impossible for Stravinsky to return to his homeland, and he did not set foot upon Russian soil again until October 1962.
Following the model of his teacher, Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, Stravinsky’s student works such as the Symphony in E-flat, Opus 1 (1907), ''Scherzo fantastique'', Opus 3 (1908), and ''Fireworks'' (''Feu d'artifice''), Opus 4 (1908), call for large orchestral forces.
Reinhart sponsored and largely underwrote its first performance, conducted by Ernest Ansermet on 28 September 1918 at the Théâtre Municipal de Lausanne.
In gratitude to his benefactor, Stravinsky also dedicated his ''Three Pieces for Clarinet'' (October–November 1918) to Reinhart, who was an excellent amateur clarinetist.
According to the composer Philip Glass, "the idea of pushing the rhythms across the bar lines ... led the way ....
Baptized at birth, he later rebelled against the Church and abandoned it by the time he was fourteen or fifteen years old.
Stravinsky's compositional career was notable for its stylistic diversity.
In his 1949 book ''Philosophy of Modern Music'', Theodor W. Adorno described Stravinsky as an acrobat and spoke of hebephrenic and psychotic traits in several of Stravinsky's works.
The rolls were not recorded, but were instead marked up from a combination of manuscript fragments and handwritten notes by Jacques Larmanjat, musical director of Pleyel's roll department.
The Symphony, for example, calls for 3 flutes (3rd doubles piccolo); 2 oboes; 3 clarinets in B-flat; 2 bassoons; 4 horns in F; 3 trumpets in B-flat; 3 trombones, tuba, timpani, bass drum, triangle, cymbals, and strings.
Stravinsky was honored in 1982 by the United States Postal Service with a 2¢ Great Americans series postage stamp.
In 1959, several interviews between the composer and Robert Craft were published as ''Conversations with Igor Stravinsky'', which was followed by a further five volumes over the following decade.
Pleyel essentially acted as his agent in collecting mechanical royalties for his works and provided him with a monthly income and a studio space at its headquarters in which he could work and entertain friends and business acquaintances.
According to ''The Musical Times'' in 1923:
In September 1924, Stravinsky bought "an expensive house" in Nice:  the Villa des Roses.
In 1923, Erik Satie wrote an article about Igor Stravinsky in ''Vanity Fair''.
His family joined him before the end of the ballet season and they decided to remain in the West for a time, as his wife was expecting their third child.
Thereafter, he concentrated on studying music.
During his stay in the USSR, he visited Moscow and met several leading Soviet composers, including Dmitri Shostakovich and Aram Khachaturian.
In June 1915, Stravinsky and his family moved from Clarens to Morges, a town 6 miles south-west of Lausanne on the shore of Lake Geneva.
Over the course of his career, Stravinsky called for a wide variety of orchestral, instrumental, and vocal forces, ranging from single instruments in such works as ''Three Pieces for Clarinet'' (1918) or ''Elegy for Solo Viola'' (1944) to the enormous orchestra of ''The Rite of Spring'' (''Le Sacre du printemps''; 1913) which Aaron Copland characterized as "the foremost orchestral achievement of the 20th century."
Although Stravinsky was not outspoken about his faith, he was a deeply religious man throughout some periods of his life.
Robert Craft noted that Stravinsky prayed daily, before and after composing, and also prayed when facing difficulty.
Under the terms of his contract with the company, Stravinsky agreed to arrange (and to some extent re-compose) many of his early works for the Pleyela, Pleyel's brand of player piano.
The work also contains passages where several ostinati clash against one another.
In 1962, he accepted an invitation to return to Leningrad for a series of concerts.
All the signs indicate a strong reaction against the nightmare of noise and eccentricity that was one of the legacies of the war.... What (for example) has become of the works that made up the program of the Stravinsky concert which created such a stir a few years ago?
According to Adorno, "one trick characterizes all of Stravinsky's formal endeavors: the effort of his music to portray time as in a circus tableau and to present time complexes as though they were spatial.
His great-great-grandfather, Stanisław Strawiński, was of Polish noble descent, of the Strawiński family of Sulima.
The first of his compositions fully based on such techniques was ''In Memoriam Dylan Thomas'' (1954).
The accuracy of Chanel's claims has been disputed by both Stravinsky's widow, Vera, and by Craft.
The work had been commissioned by the Moscow Free Theatre for the handsome fee of 10,000 roubles.
A fictionalization of the supposed affair formed the basis of the novel ''Coco and Igor'' (2002) and a film, ''Coco Chanel & Igor Stravinsky'' (2009).
He has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame and in 1987 he was posthumously awarded the Grammy Award for Lifetime Achievement.
During his lifetime, Stravinsky appeared on several telecasts, including the 1962 world premiere of ''The Flood'' on CBS Television.
His successful career as a pianist and conductor took him to many of the world's major cities, including Paris, Venice, Berlin, London, Amsterdam and New York and he was known for his polite, courteous and helpful manner.
It is just that he is not great enough".
In the published article, Satie argued that measuring the "greatness" of an artist by comparing him to other artists, as if speaking about some "truth", is illusory and that every piece of music should be judged on its own merits and not by comparing it to the standards of other composers.
A collection of Stravinsky's writings and interviews under the title ''Confidences sur la musique'' (Actes Sud, 2013).
Stravinsky enrolled at the University of Saint Petersburg in 1901, but he attended fewer than fifty class sessions during his four years of study.
After befriending a Russian Orthodox priest, Father Nicholas, after his move to Nice in 1924, he reconnected with his faith.
It was staged by the Santa Fe Opera in a 1962 Stravinsky Festival in honor of the composer's 80th birthday and was revived by the Metropolitan Opera in 1997.
The rhythmic structure of music became much more fluid and in a certain way spontaneous".
It premiered in Venice that year and was produced around Europe the following year, before being staged in the New York Metropolitan Opera in 1953.
In 1969, Stravinsky moved to the Essex House in New York, where he lived until his death in 1971 at age 88 of heart failure.
Stravinsky formed a business and musical relationship with the French piano manufacturing company Pleyel.
Percussion includes 5 timpani (2 players), bass drum, tamtam, triangle, tambourine, cymbals, antique cymbals, guiro, and strings.
Chanel's fashion house avers there is no evidence that any affair between Chanel and Stravinsky ever occurred.
In July, with war looming, Stravinsky made a quick trip to Ustilug to retrieve personal effects including his reference works on Russian folk music.
Igor Stravinsky found recordings a practical and useful tool in preserving his thoughts on the interpretation of his music.
His compositions of this period shared traits with examples of his earlier output: rhythmic energy, the construction of extended melodic ideas out of a few two- or three-note cells and clarity of form, and of instrumentation.
On 15 January 1914, a fourth child, Marie Milène (or Maria Milena), was born in Lausanne.
In the early 1920s, Leopold Stokowski gave Stravinsky regular support through a pseudonymous 'benefactor'.
I know many exalted personages, and my artist's mind does not shrink from political and social issues.
He also had an inexhaustible desire to explore and learn about art, which manifested itself in several of his Paris collaborations.
In spite of the Orthodox Church's opposition to marriage between first cousins, the couple married on 23 January 1906: their first two children, Fyodor (Theodore) and Ludmila, were born in 1907 and 1908, respectively.
Stravinsky published a number of books throughout his career, almost always with the aid of a (sometimes uncredited) collaborator.
In 1930, he remarked, "I don't believe that anyone venerates Mussolini more than I ...
Contrary to a common misconception, Adorno didn't believe the hebephrenic and psychotic imitations that the music was supposed to contain were its main fault, as he pointed out in a postscript that he added later to his book.
The real extent of the tumult is open to debate and the reports may be apocryphal.
The particularly prominent role of the piano is the result of the music's origin as a ''Konzertstück'' for piano and orchestra.
The result was ''Renard'' (1916), which he called "A burlesque in song and dance".
This exchange was essential to establish how the artists would approach their collaborative space in ''Pulcinella''.
His parents were Fyodor Stravinsky, a bass singer at the Mariinsky Theatre in St. Petersburg, and Anna (née Kholodovsky).
Stravinsky's father died of cancer that year, by which time his son had already begun spending more time on his musical studies than on law.
As a child, he was brought up by his parents in the Russian Orthodox Church.
We talked about music, art and politics".
In 1890, he saw a performance of Tchaikovsky's ballet ''The Sleeping Beauty'' at the Mariinsky Theatre.
In his late seventies, Stravinsky said:I cannot now evaluate the events that, at the end of those thirty years, made me discover the necessity of religious belief.
Important works in this period include the Octet (1923) the Concerto for Piano and Winds (1924) and the Serenade in A (1925).
Numerous films and videos of the composer have been preserved.
According to Igor Stravinsky,  the name "Stravinsky" originated from "Strava", a small river in eastern Poland, tributary to the Vistula.
He returned to Switzerland just before national borders closed following the outbreak of World War I.
When the Nazis placed Stravinsky's works on the list of "Entartete Musik", he lodged a formal appeal to establish his Russian genealogy and declared, "I loathe all communism, Marxism, the execrable Soviet monster, and also all liberalism, democratism, atheism, etc."
Although most of his recordings were made with studio musicians, he also worked with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, the Cleveland Orchestra, the CBC Symphony Orchestra, the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and the Bavarian Broadcasting Symphony Orchestra.
The family continued to live there (at three different addresses) until 1920.
In certain schizophrenics, the process by which the motor apparatus becomes independent leads to infinite repetition of gestures or words, following the decay of the ego".
Towards the end of his life, he was no longer able to attend church services.
The texts and literary sources for his work began with a period of interest in Russian folklore, which progressed to classical authors and the Latin liturgy and moved on to contemporary France (André Gide, in ''Persephone'') and eventually English literature, including Auden, T. S. Eliot and medieval English verse.
Katya, to whom he had been married for 33 years, died of tuberculosis a year later, in March 1939.
Russia (and its successor, the USSR) did not adhere to the Berne convention and this created problems for Stravinsky when collecting royalties for the performances of all his Ballets Russes compositions.
Stravinsky struggled financially during this period.
The works from this period tended to make use of traditional musical forms (concerto grosso, fugue and symphony), drawing on earlier styles, especially from the 18th century.
''Renard'' was Stravinsky's first venture into experimental theatre: the composer's preface to the score specifies a trestle stage on which all the performers (including the instrumentalists) were to appear simultaneously and continuously.
''The Firebird'' (1910) requires winds in fours, 4 horns, 3 trumpets (in A), 3 trombones, tuba, celesta, 3 harps, piano, and strings.
Following the premiere of ''Pulcinella'' by the Ballets Russes in Paris on 15 May 1920, Stravinsky returned to Switzerland.
Stravinsky's rhythm and vitality greatly influenced the composer Aaron Copland.
After spending the summer in La Baule, Brittany, they moved to Switzerland in early September.
The ''Scherzo fantastique'' calls for a slightly larger orchestra but completely omits trombones: this was Stravinsky’s response to Rimsky’s criticism of their overuse in the Symphony.
Stravinsky’s creation of unique and idiosyncratic ensembles arising from the specific musical nature of individual works is a basic element of his style.
On the 23rd, their second son Sviatoslav Soulima was born at a maternity clinic in Lausanne; at the end of the month, they took up residence in Clarens.
Though I admire the structured thought of theology (Anselm's proof in the ''Fides Quaerens Intellectum'', for instance) it is to religion no more than counterpoint exercises are to music.
''The Rite of Spring'' is notable for its relentless use of ostinati, for example in the eighth-note ostinato on strings accented by eight horns in the section "Augurs of Spring (Dances of the Young Girls)".
Reinhart supported Stravinsky further when he funded a series of concerts of his chamber music in 1919: included was a suite from ''Histoire du soldat'' arranged for violin, piano and clarinet, which was first performed on 8 November 1919, in Lausanne.
He never referred to it himself, but Chanel spoke about the alleged affair at length to her biographer Paul Morand in 1946; the conversation was published thirty years later.
Stravinsky blamed Diaghilev for his financial troubles, accusing him of failing to live up to the terms of a contract they had signed.
The composer had travelled from his estate in Ustilug, Ukraine, to Paris in early June to attend the final rehearsals and the premiere of ''The Firebird''.
According to Robert Craft, Stravinsky remained a confirmed monarchist throughout his life and loathed the Bolsheviks from the very beginning.
Stravinsky himself spent five months in hospital, during which time his mother died.
The original version of ''Petrushka'' (1911) calls for a similar orchestra (without onstage brass, but ''with'' the addition of onstage snare drum).
By then, the Moscow Free Theatre had gone bankrupt.
Not only was he the principal composer for Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, but he also collaborated with Picasso (''Pulcinella'', 1920), Jean Cocteau (, 1927), and George Balanchine (, 1928).
Stravinsky began piano lessons as a young boy, studying music theory and attempting composition.
