Together with ''Megalosaurus'' and ''Hylaeosaurus'', it was one of the three genera originally used to define Dinosauria.
It is classified as ''cf.''
bernissartensis'', a larger and much more robust animal than the English remains had yet revealed, but one specimen was referred to the nebulous, gracile ''I.
The discovery of much better specimens in later years revealed that the horn was actually a modified thumb.
Furthermore, it appears that ''Iguanodon'' became more quadrupedal as it got older and heavier; juvenile ''I.
This specimen, along with several others, first opened for public viewing in an inner courtyard of the palace in July 1883.
The Nehden find, however, with its greater span of individual ages, more even mix of ''Dollodon'' or ''Mantellisaurus'' to ''Iguanodon bernissartensis'', and confined geographic nature, may record mortality of herding animals migrating through rivers.
At one time, it was suggested that the Bernissart ''I.''
The giraffe-tongue idea has also been incorrectly attributed to Dollo via a broken lower jaw.
In May 1822 he first presented the herbivorous teeth to the Royal Society of London but the members, among them William Buckland, dismissed them as fish teeth or the incisors of a rhinoceros from a Tertiary stratum.
Some authors associated them with dinosaurs early on.
The cladogram below follows an analysis by Andrew McDonald, 2012.
In fact, to get the bend in the tail for a more wallaby or kangaroo-like posture, the tail would have had to be broken.
Because ''Iguanodon'' is one of the first dinosaur genera to have been named, numerous species have been assigned to it.
Because the tooth rows are deeply inset from the outside of the jaws, and because of other anatomical details, it is believed that, as with most other ornithischians, ''Iguanodon'' had some sort of cheek-like structure, muscular or non-muscular, to retain food in the mouth.
Further attempts to reopen the mine were hindered by financial problems and were stopped altogether in 1921 when the mine flooded.
Later fossils revealed the true nature of the thumb spikes, although their exact function is still debated.
Unlike hadrosaurids, which had columns of replacement teeth, ''Iguanodon'' only had one replacement tooth at a time for each position.
The Allies recaptured Bernissart just as the first fossiliferous layer was about to be uncovered.
His initial idea for a name was ''Iguana-saurus'' ("Iguana lizard"), but his friend William Daniel Conybeare suggested that that name was more applicable to the iguana itself, so a better name would be ''Iguanoides'' ("Iguana-like") or ''Iguanodon''.
"mantelli", or ''I.
Owen, a firm creationist, opposed the early versions of evolutionary science ("transmutationism") then being debated and used what he would soon coin as dinosaurs as a weapon in this conflict.
A problem that was later recognised was the bend he introduced into the tail.
The genus was named in 1825 by English geologist Gideon Mantell, based on fossil specimens that are now assigned to ''Therosaurus'' and ''Mantellodon''.
Evidence of a fractured hip bone was found in a specimen of ''Iguanodon'', which had an injury to its ischium.
'''''Iguanodon''''' ( ; meaning "iguana-tooth") is a genus of ornithopod dinosaur that existed roughly halfway between the first of the swift bipedal hypsilophodontids of the mid-Jurassic and the duck-billed dinosaurs of the late Cretaceous.
While many species have been classified in the genus ''Iguanodon'', dating from the late Jurassic Period to the late Cretaceous Period of Asia, Europe, and North America, research in the first decade of the 21st century suggests that there is only one well-substantiated species: ''I.
One author has suggested that the spike was attached to a venom gland, but this has not been accepted, as the spike was not hollow, nor were there any grooves on the spike for conducting venom.
Most of the remains were referred to a new species, ''I.
With its correct, straight tail and back, the animal would have walked with its body held horizontal to the ground, arms in place to support the body if needed.
Distinctive features include large thumb spikes, which were possibly used for defense against predators, combined with long prehensile fifth fingers able to forage for food.
The discovery of ''Iguanodon'' has long been accompanied by a popular legend.
This thumb is typically interpreted as a close-quarter stiletto-like weapon against predators, although it could also have been used to break into seeds and fruits, or against other ''Iguanodon''.
The little finger was elongated and dextrous, and could have been used to manipulate objects.
In early restorations, the spike was placed on the animal's nose.
The skull was structured in such a way that as it closed, the bones holding the teeth in the upper jaw would bow out.
Two other individuals were observed with signs of osteoarthritis as evidenced by bone overgrowths in their anklebones which are called osteophytes.
At least 38 ''Iguanodon'' individuals were uncovered, most of which were adults.
''Mantellisaurus atherfieldensis'' by Norman (2012); and made the holotype of a separate species ''Mantellodon carpenteri'' by Paul (2012).
He neglected to add a specific name to form a proper binomial, but one was supplied in 1829 by Friedrich Holl: ''I.
When in the ground, the bones were isolated by anoxic moist clay that prevented this from happening, but when removed into the drier open air, the natural chemical conversion began to occur.
The genus ''Iguanodon'' belongs to the larger group Iguanodontia, along with the duck-billed hadrosaurs.
bernissartensis'', is estimated to have weighed about 3.08 tonnes (3.4 tons) on average, and measured about  long as an adult, with some specimens possibly as long as .
''Iguanodon'' has also made appearances in some of the many ''Land Before Time'' films, as well as episodes of the television series.
(This would not be the last time a dinosaur's modified thumb claw would be misinterpreted; ''Noasaurus'', ''Baryonyx'', and ''Megaraptor'' are examples since the 1980s where an enlarged thumb claw was first put on the foot, as in dromaeosaurids.)
Because the teeth were always replaced, the animal could have used this mechanism throughout its life, and could eat tough plant material.
Angiosperm growth, according to this hypothesis, would have been encouraged by iguanodont feeding because gymnosperms would be removed, allowing more space for the weed-like early angiosperms to grow.
One of the first details noted about ''Iguanodon'' was that it had the teeth of a herbivorous reptile, although there has not always been consensus on how it ate.
Despite the lack of direct evidence, these tracks are often attributed to ''Iguanodon''.
orientalis'', and in North America based on ''I.
In 1824 Buckland described ''Megalosaurus'' and was on that occasion invited to visit Mantell's collection.
He was led to identify it as an ''Iguanodon'' based on its distinctive teeth.
Crystalline pyrite in the bones was being oxidized to iron sulphate, accompanied by an increase in volume that caused the remains to crack and crumble.
Its bipedal nature was revealed with the discovery of the Bernissart skeletons.
To limit this effect, De Pauw immediately, in the mine-gallery, re-covered the dug-out fossils with wet clay, sealing them with paper and plaster reinforced by iron rings, forming in total about six hundred transportable blocks with a combined weight of a hundred and thirty tons.
The thumb spike is one of the best-known features of ''Iguanodon''.
However, there is no evidence that Mantell took his wife with him while seeing patients.
bernissartensis'' have shorter arms than adults (60% of hindlimb length versus 70% for adults).
An argument against herding is that juvenile remains are very uncommon at this site, unlike modern cases with herd mortality.
However, this is not supported today.
Additionally, the front ends of the animal's jaws were toothless and tipped with bony nodes, both upper and lower, providing a rough margin that was likely covered and lengthened by a keratinous material to form a cropping beak for biting off twigs and shoots.
Seeing the bones on 6 March he agreed that these were of some giant saurian&nbsp;— though still denying it was a herbivore.
''Iguanodon'' was not part of the initial work of the dinosaur renaissance that began with the description of ''Deinonychus'' in 1969, but it was not neglected for long.
In Brussels after opening the plaster he impregnated the bones with boiling gelatine mixed with oil of cloves as a preservative.
Emboldened nevertheless, Mantell again sent some teeth to Cuvier, who answered on 22 June 1824 that he had determined that they were reptilian and quite possibly belonged to a giant herbivore.
In 1891 they were moved to the Royal Museum of Natural History, where they are still on display; nine are displayed as standing mounts, and nineteen more are still in the Museum's basement.
He was not completely correct, but he also had the disadvantage of being faced with some of the first complete dinosaur remains.
The numerous specimens of this genus, including nearly complete skeletons from two well-known bonebeds, have allowed researchers to make informed hypotheses regarding many aspects of the living animal, including feeding, movement, and social behaviour.
Furthermore, he admitted in 1851 that he himself had found the teeth.
However, as more bones were discovered, Mantell observed that the forelimbs were much smaller than the hindlimbs.
Putting the animal in a horizontal posture makes many aspects of the arms and pectoral girdle more understandable.
The genus was also recorded from Mongolia based on the description of ''I.
To get the tripodal pose, the tail would literally have to be broken.
ottingeri'' from Utah.
This organ was more or less straight, as shown by the skeletons he was excavating, and the presence of ossified tendons.
In research by Graham Embery ''et al.,'' ''Iguanodon'' bones were processed to look for remnant proteins.
Because also theropod teeth were found, thus belonging to carnivores, he at first interpreted these bones, which he tried to combine into a partial skeleton, as those of a giant crocodile.
''Iguanodon'' lies between ''Camptosaurus'' and ''Ouranosaurus'' in cladograms, and is probably descended from a camptosaur-like animal.
He instead modelled the skeletal mounts after the cassowary and wallaby, and put the spike that had been on the nose firmly on the thumb.
A more complete specimen of similar animal was discovered in a quarry in Maidstone, Kent, in 1834 (lower Lower Greensand Formation), which Mantell soon acquired.
In practice, animals like ''Callovosaurus'', ''Camptosaurus'', ''Craspedodon'', ''Kangnasaurus'', ''Mochlodon'', ''Muttaburrasaurus'', ''Ouranosaurus'', and ''Probactrosaurus'' were usually assigned to this family.
bernissartensis'', would have allowed them access to food from ground level to tree foliage at  high.
However, assistant-curator Samuel Stutchbury recognised that they resembled those of an iguana he had recently prepared, albeit twenty times longer.
The size of the larger species, such as ''I.
The Maidstone specimen, also known as Gideon Mantell's "Mantel-piece", and formally labelled NHMUK 3741 was subsequently excluded from ''Iguanodon''.
bernissartensis'' were long (up to 75% the length of the legs) and robust, with rather inflexible hands built so that the three central fingers could bear weight.
With the advent of cladistic analyses, Iguanodontidae as traditionally construed was shown to be paraphyletic, and these animals are recognised to fall at different points in relation to hadrosaurs on a cladogram, instead of in a single distinct clade.
The three toed pes (''foot'') of ''Iguanodon'' was relatively long, and when walking, both the hand and the foot would have been used in a digitigrade fashion (walking on the fingers and toes).
In 1846, E. Tagert went so far as to assign them to an ichnogenus he named ''Iguanodon'', and Samuel Beckles noted in 1854 that they looked like bird tracks, but might have come from dinosaurs.
In the Disney film ''Dinosaur'', an ''Iguanodon'' named Aladar served as the protagonist with three other iguanodonts as other main characters; a loosely related ride of the same name at Disney's Animal Kingdom is based around bringing an ''Iguanodon'' back to the present.
The largest find of ''Iguanodon'' remains to that date occurred on 28 February 1878 in a coal mine at Bernissart in Belgium, at a depth of , when two mineworkers, Jules Créteur and Alphonse Blanchard, accidentally hit on a skeleton that they initially took for petrified wood.
These animals had large, tall but narrow skulls, with toothless beaks probably covered with keratin, and teeth like those of iguanas, but much larger and more closely packed.
They more likely were the periodic victims of flash floods whose carcasses accumulated in a lake or marshy setting.
At one point, Jack Horner suggested, based mostly on skull features, that hadrosaurids actually formed two more distantly related groups, with ''Iguanodon'' on the line to the flat-headed hadrosaurines, and ''Ouranosaurus'' on the line to the crested lambeosaurines, but his proposal has been rejected.
The Maidstone slab was utilized in the first skeletal reconstructions and artistic renderings of ''Iguanodon'', but due to its incompleteness, Mantell made some mistakes, the most famous of which was the placement of what he thought was a horn on the nose.
''Iguanodon'' is one of the three dinosaur genera that inspired Godzilla; the other two were ''Tyrannosaurus'' and ''Stegosaurus''.
His rival Owen was of the opinion it was a stumpy creature with four pillar-like legs.
The backbone and tail were supported and stiffened by ossified tendons, which were tendons that turned to bone during life (these rod-like bones are usually omitted from skeletal mounts and drawings).
The phalangeal formula is 2-3-3-2-4, meaning that the innermost finger (phalange) has two bones, the next has three, etc.
Their thumb spikes were mistaken for horns, and they were depicted as elephant-like quadrupeds, yet this was the first time an attempt was made at constructing full-size dinosaur models.
The identity of the trackmakers was greatly clarified upon the discovery in 1857 of the hind leg of a young ''Iguanodon'', with distinctly three-toed feet, showing that such dinosaurs could have made the tracks.
''Iguanodon'' were large, bulky herbivores.
Mantell tried to corroborate his theory further by finding a modern-day parallel among extant reptiles.
bernissartensis'' became one of the first ever dinosaur skeletons mounted for display.
The job of overseeing the first lifesize reconstruction of dinosaurs was initially offered to Mantell, who declined due to poor health, and Owen's vision subsequently formed the basis on which the sculptures took shape.
These features all suggest that the animal spent time on all fours.
In this research, identifiable remains of typical bone proteins, such as phosphoproteins and proteoglycans, were found in a rib.
The science of conserving fossil remains was in its infancy, and new techniques had to be improvised to deal with what soon became known as "pyrite disease".
The upper jaw held up to 29 teeth per side, with none at the front of the jaw, and the lower jaw 25; the numbers differ because teeth in the lower jaw are broader than those in the upper.
bernissartensis'' to the famous sample from Bernissart, ornithopod workers like Norman and McDonald have disagreed with Paul's recommendations, except exercising caution when accepting records of ''Iguanodon'' from France and Spain as valid.
In older sources, Iguanodontidae was shown as a distinct family.
In September 1824 he visited the Royal College of Surgeons but at first failed to find comparable teeth.
''Iguanodon'' was initially portrayed as a quadrupedal horn-nosed beast.
While never becoming the wastebasket taxon several other early genera of dinosaurs became (such as ''Megalosaurus''), ''Iguanodon'' has had a complicated history, and its taxonomy continues to undergo revisions.
Before the sculpture of the standing iguanodont was completed, he held a banquet for twenty inside it.
Removing most of the visible pyrite he then hardened them with hide glue, finishing with a final layer of tin foil.
This would have allowed them to bear weight.
The story goes that Gideon Mantell's wife, Mary Ann, discovered the first teeth of an ''Iguanodon'' in the strata of Tilgate Forest in Whitemans Green, Cuckfield, Sussex, England, in 1822 while her husband was visiting a patient.
Unlike other purported herding dinosaurs (especially hadrosaurs and ceratopsids), there is no evidence that ''Iguanodon'' was sexually dimorphic, with one sex appreciably different from the other.
This specimen has become linked with the name ''I.
This combination was intended to simultaneously penetrate the fossils (with alcohol), prevent the development of mold (with arsenic), and harden them (with shellac).
They could have been used for defense, or for foraging for food.
Its food gathering would have been aided by its flexible little finger, which could have been used to manipulate objects, unlike the other fingers.
During World War I, when the town was occupied by German forces, preparations were made to reopen the mine for palaeontology, and Otto Jaekel was sent from Berlin to supervise.
The taxonomy of this genus continues to be a topic of study as new species are named or long-standing ones reassigned to other genera.
anglicus'', but it actually comes from a different formation than the original ''I.
The legs were powerful, but not built for running, and each foot had three toes.
On 23 June 1823 Charles Lyell showed some to Georges Cuvier, during a soiree in Paris, but the famous French naturalist at once dismissed them as those of a rhinoceros.
In 1849, a few years before his death in 1852, Mantell realised that iguanodonts were not heavy, pachyderm-like animals, as Owen was putting forward, but had slender forelimbs; however, his passing left him unable to participate in the creation of the Crystal Palace dinosaur sculptures, and so Owen's vision of the dinosaurs became that seen by the public for decades.
A trackway in England shows what may be an ''Iguanodon'' moving on all fours, but the foot prints are poor, making a direct connection difficult.
Two lifesize reconstructions of ''Mantellodon'' (considered ''Iguanodon'' at the time) built at the Crystal Palace in London in 1852 greatly contributed to the popularity of the genus.
During his re-examination of ''Iguanodon'', David Norman was able to show that this posture was unlikely, because the long tail was stiffened with ossified tendons.
bernissartensis'', which lived from the late Barremian to the earliest Aptian ages (Early Cretaceous) in Belgium and possibly elsewhere in Europe, between about 126 and 125&nbsp;million years ago.
The maximum speed of ''Iguanodon'' has been estimated at , which would have been as a biped; it would not have been able to gallop as a quadruped.
''Iguanodon'' teeth are, as the name suggests, like those of an iguana, but larger.
Aside from appearances in movies, ''Iguanodon'' has also been featured on the television documentary miniseries ''Walking with Dinosaurs'' (1999) produced by the BBC, and played a starring role in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's book, ''The Lost World'' as well as featuring in an episode of the Discovery Channel documentary, ''Dinosaur Planet'' (incorrectly portrayed being able to run on all fours and living in the Late Cretaceous).
Scientific understanding of ''Iguanodon'' has evolved over time as new information has been obtained from fossils.
From December 1935 to August 1936 the staff at the museum in Brussels treated the problem with a combination of alcohol, arsenic, and 390 kilograms of shellac.
The fossil arrived in New Zealand following the move of Gideon Mantell's son Walter there; after the elder Mantell's death, his fossils went to Walter.
The borough of Maidstone commemorated this find by adding an ''Iguanodon'' as a supporter to their coat of arms in 1949.
David B. Weishampel's work on ornithopod feeding mechanisms provided a better understanding of how it fed, and David B. Norman's work on numerous aspects of the genus has made it one of the best-known dinosaurs.
In a new edition that year of his ''Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles'' Cuvier admitted his earlier mistake, leading to an immediate acceptance of Mantell, and his new saurian, in scientific circles.
lakotaensis'', has since been reclassified as the genus ''Dakotadon''.
Exactly what ''Iguanodon'' ate with its well-developed jaws is not known.
A replica of one of these is on display at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History and at the Sedgwick Museum in Cambridge.
atherfieldensis'' (''Dollodon'' and ''Mantellisaurus'', respectively) represented a sex, possibly female, of the larger and more robust, possibly male, ''I.
Because it is both one of the first dinosaurs described and one of the best-known dinosaurs, ''Iguanodon'' has been well-placed as a barometer of changing public and scientific perceptions on dinosaurs.
atherfieldensis'', at that time believed to be another species of ''Iguanodon'').
Mantell formally published his findings on 10 February 1825, when he presented a paper on the remains to the Royal Society of London.
He also suggested that ''Iguanodon'' had a prehensile tongue which could be used to gather food, like a giraffe.
Not everyone agrees that the story is false, though.
The evidence is not conclusive, though.
Aside from ''Iguanodon'', the best-known members of the clade include ''Dryosaurus'', ''Camptosaurus'', ''Ouranosaurus'', and the duck-bills, or hadrosaurs.
In 1882, the holotype specimen of ''I.
mantelli'', a species named in 1832 by Christian Erich Hermann von Meyer in place of ''I.
Though the very next day Cuvier retracted, Lyell reported only the dismissal to Mantell, who became rather diffident about the issue.
The wrist is also relatively immobile, and the arms and shoulder bones robust.
A new species that would become the subject of much study and taxonomic controversy, ''I.
However, it was depicted in an upright posture, with the tail dragging along the ground, acting as the third leg of a tripod.
It is known from his notebooks that Mantell first acquired large fossil bones from the quarry at Whitemans Green in 1820.
The original ''Iguanodon'' tooth is held at Te Papa Tongarewa, the national museum of New Zealand in Wellington, although it is not on display.
anglicum'', which was later amended to ''I.
anglicus'' was the original type species, but the holotype was based on a single tooth and only partial remains of the species have been recovered since.
At the same time, tension began to build between Mantell and Richard Owen, an ambitious scientist with much better funding and society connections in the turbulent worlds of Reform Act–era British politics and science.
A main belt asteroid, , has been named 9941 Iguanodon in honour of the genus.
This would cause the lower surfaces of the upper jaw teeth to rub against the upper surface of the lower jaw's teeth, grinding anything caught in between and providing an action that is the rough equivalent of mammalian chewing.
Research on ''Iguanodon'' decreased during the early part of the 20th century as World Wars and the Great Depression enveloped Europe.
Mantell sent a letter detailing his discovery to the local Portsmouth Philosophical Society in December 1824, several weeks after settling on a name for the fossil creature.
When walking as a quadruped, the animal's hands would have been held so that the palms faced each other, as shown by iguanodontian trackways and the anatomy of this genus's arms and hands.
Large three-toed footprints are known in Early Cretaceous rocks of England, particularly Wealden beds on the Isle of Wight, and these trace fossils were originally difficult to interpret.
Based on isometric scaling, he estimated that the creature might have been up to  long, more than the  length of ''Megalosaurus''.
The only well-supported species, ''I.
Essentially, the modern concept of Iguanodontidae currently includes only ''Iguanodon''.
Several motion pictures have featured ''Iguanodon''.
Whatever its exact diet, due to its size and abundance, ''Iguanodon'' is regarded as a dominant medium to large herbivore for its ecological communities.
However, in his 1822 publication ''Fossils of the South Downs'' he as yet did not dare to suggest a connection between the teeth and his very incomplete skeleton, presuming that his finds presented two large forms, one carnivorous ("an animal of the Lizard Tribe of enormous magnitude"), the other herbivorous.
Groups like Iguanodontoidea are still used as unranked clades in the scientific literature, though many traditional iguanodontids are now included in the superfamily Hadrosauroidea.
In March 2000, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature changed the type species to the much better known ''I.
With Benjamin Waterhouse Hawkins, he had nearly two dozen lifesize sculptures of various prehistoric animals built out of concrete sculpted over a steel and brick framework; two iguanodonts (based on the ''Mantellodon'' specimen), one standing and one resting on its belly, were included.
The letter was read to members of the Society at a meeting on 17 December, and a report was published in the ''Hampshire Telegraph'' the following Monday, 20 December, which announced the name, mis-spelt as "Iguanadon".
In 1821 Mantell mentioned the find of herbivorous teeth and began to consider the possibility that a large herbivorous reptile was present in the strata.
More complete remains have shown this to be an error; for example, the hyoid bones that supported the tongue are heavily built, implying a muscular, non-prehensile tongue used for moving food around in the mouth.
With the paper describing Dinosauria, he scaled down dinosaurs from lengths of over , determined that they were not simply giant lizards, and put forward that they were advanced and mammal-like, characteristics given to them by God; according to the understanding of the time, they could not have been "transmuted" from reptiles to mammal-like creatures.
Although it was originally placed on the animal's nose by Mantell, the complete Bernissart specimens allowed Dollo to place it correctly on the hand, as a modified thumb.
A diet of horsetails, cycads, and conifers was suggested by David Norman, although iguanodonts in general have been tied to the advance of angiosperm plants in the Cretaceous due to the dinosaurs' inferred low browsing habits.
Still encased in rock, the Maidstone skeleton is currently displayed at the Natural History Museum in London.
Another North American species, from South Dakota, once assigned to ''Iguanodon'' as ''I.
In 1910 Heinrich Harder portrayed a group of ''Iguanodon'' in the classic German collecting cards about extinct and prehistoric animals "Tiere der Urwelt".
bernissartensis'', with the new holotype being IRSNB 1534.
Tracks assigned to the ichnogenus ''Iguanodon'' are known from locations including places in Europe where the body fossil ''Iguanodon'' is known, to Spitsbergen, Svalbard, Norway.
In recognition of the resemblance of the teeth to those of the iguana, Mantell decided to name his new animal ''Iguanodon'' or "iguana-tooth", from ''iguana'' and the Greek word ὀδών (''odon'', ''odontos'' or "tooth").
In England, this included the small predator ''Aristosuchus'', larger predators ''Eotyrannus'', ''Baryonyx'', and ''Neovenator'', low-feeding herbivores ''Hypsilophodon'' and ''Valdosaurus'', fellow "iguanodontid" ''Mantellisaurus'', the armoured herbivore ''Polacanthus'', and sauropods like ''Pelorosaurus''.
The thumbs were conical spikes that stuck out away from the three main digits.
Although Gregory Paul recommended restricting ''I.
Damage was repaired with papier-mâché.
Its reconstructions have gone through three stages: the elephantine quadrupedal horn-snouted reptile satisfied the Victorians, then a bipedal but still fundamentally reptilian animal using its tail to prop itself up dominated the early 20th century, but was slowly overturned during the 1960s by its current, more agile and dynamic representation, able to shift from two legs to all fours.
The fossils entered a third round of conservation from 2003 until May 2007, when the shellac, hide glue and gelatine were removed and impregnated with polyvinyl acetate and cyanoacrylate and epoxy glues.
In 1932 museum director Victor van Straelen decided that the specimens had to be completely restored again to safeguard their preservation.
Excavations at the quarry were stopped in 1881, although it was not exhausted of fossils, as recent drilling operations have shown.
atherfieldensis'', was named in 1925 by R. W. Hooley, for a specimen collected at Atherfield Point on the Isle of Wight.
