Agamemnon rouses the Greeks, and battle is joined.
my return home is gone, but my glory shall be everlasting;
Even without Homer, the Trojan War story had remained central to Western European medieval literary culture and its sense of identity.
The Greeks agree to burn their dead and build a wall to protect their ships and camp, while the Trojans quarrel about returning Helen.
Much debate has surrounded the nature of the relationship of Achilles and Patroclus, as to whether it can be described as a homoerotic one or not.
Robert Browning's poem ''Development'' discusses his childhood introduction to the matter of the ''Iliad'' and his delight in the epic, as well as contemporary debates about its authorship.
Homer is thus separated from his subject matter by about 400 years, the period known as the Greek Dark Ages.
**Ares (Achaeans, then Trojans)
That will hurt our charge.
The biggest issue in reconciling the connection between the epic fighting of the ''Iliad'' and later Greek warfare is the phalanx, or hoplite, warfare seen in Greek history well after Homer's ''Iliad''.
In ''The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind'', psychologist Julian Jaynes uses the ''Iliad'' as a major supporting evidence for his theory of Bicameralism, which posits that until about the time described in the ''Iliad'', humans had a much different mentality than present day humans, essentially lacking in what we call consciousness.
death and powerful destiny are standing beside you,
Despite Mycenae and Troy being maritime powers, the ''Iliad'' features no sea battles.
The many characters of the ''Iliad'' are catalogued; the latter-half of Book II, the "Catalogue of Ships", lists commanders and cohorts; battle scenes feature quickly slain minor characters.
The ''Iliad'' is paired with something of a sequel, the ''Odyssey'', also attributed to Homer.
The ''Iliad'' expresses a definite disdain for tactical trickery, when Hector says, before he challenges the great Ajax:
Patroclus is set upon by Apollo and Euphorbos, and is finally killed by Hector.
This overall depiction of war runs contrary to many other ancient Greek depictions, where war is an aspiration for greater glory.
Ultimately, while Homeric (or epic) fighting is certainly not completely replicated in later Greek warfare, many of its ideals, tactics, and instruction are.
It has been on display in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City since 2013.
but if I return home to the beloved land of my fathers,
:As Ajax cautiously pulled his shield aside,
So it was here that the lord of men Agamemnon angered me.
Men and their gods continually speak of heroic acceptance and cowardly avoidance of one's slated fate.
to go down under the hands of Aiakos' great son, Achilleus.
Robert Fagles (Penguin Classics, 1990) and Stanley Lombardo (1997) are bolder than Lattimore in adding dramatic significance to Homer's conventional and formulaic language.
:Any man whose chariot confronts an enemy's
The passage reads (the translation is Lattimore's):
''Nostos'' (, "homecoming") occurs seven times in the poem.
Thematically, the concept of homecoming is much explored in Ancient Greek literature, especially in the post-war homeward fortunes experienced by the Atreidae (Agamemnon and Menelaus), and Odysseus (see the ''Odyssey'').
who struck him as he first came forward beside the nipple
Published October 2011, Alice Oswald's sixth collection, ''Memorial'', is based on the ''Iliad'' but departs from the narrative form of the ''Iliad'' to focus on, and so commemorate, the individually-named characters whose deaths are mentioned in that poem.
Spartan commanders, often seen as the pinnacle of Greek military prowess, were known for their tactical trickery, and, for them, this was a feat to be desired in a commander.
Accepting the prospect of death as fair price for avenging Patroclus, he returns to battle, dooming Hector and Troy, thrice chasing him 'round the Trojan walls, before slaying him, then dragging the corpse behind his chariot, back to camp.
Subjects from the Trojan War were a favourite among ancient Greek dramatists.
Once set, gods and men abide it, neither truly able nor willing to contest it.
μήτηρ γάρ τέ μέ φησι θεὰ Θέτις ἀργυρόπεζα (410)
() Hector duels with Ajax, but nightfall interrupts the fight and both sides retire.
In Book I, the Greek troubles begin with King Agamemnon's dishonorable, unkingly behavior—first, by threatening the priest Chryses (1.11), then, by aggravating them in disrespecting Achilles, by confiscating Briseis from him (1.171).
It is literal, unlike older verse renderings.
After that, only Athena stays Achilles's wrath.
how much greater I am than you, and another man may shrink back
your prize, I myself going to your shelter, that you may learn well
Achilles relents and lends Patroclus his armor, but sends him off with a stern admonition not to pursue the Trojans, lest he take Achilles's glory.
Other accounts read in the Middle Ages were antique Latin retellings such as the ''Excidium Troiae'' and works in the vernaculars such as the Icelandic Troy Saga.
() Meanwhile, the Greeks are desperate.
Although the story covers only a few weeks in the final year of the war, the ''Iliad'' mentions or alludes to many of the Greek legends about the siege; the earlier events, such as the gathering of warriors for the siege, the cause of the war, and related concerns tend to appear near the beginning.
Before dying, Hector reminds Achilles that he too is fated to die in the war.
Agamemnon heeds the dream, but decides to first test the morale of the Greek army by telling them to go home.
:Just as a man constructs a wall for some high house,
Much of the detailed fighting in the ''Iliad'' is done by the heroes in an orderly, one-on-one fashion.
After a meal, the Greeks deploy in companies upon the Trojan plain.
Thetis comforts her mourning son, who tells her:
Zeus took the Air and the Sky, Poseidon the Waters, and Hades the Underworld, the land of the dead—yet they share dominion of the Earth.
There Telamonian Ajax struck down the son of Anthemion,
:And don't lag behind.
Nestor spearheads his troops with chariots; he advises them:
Although most of the Greek army is in favour of the offer, Agamemnon refuses.
In Book IX (IX.410–16), he poignantly tells Agamemnon's envoys—Odysseus, Phoenix, Ajax—begging his reinstatement to battle about having to choose between two fates (, 9.411).
ὤλετό μοι κλέος ἐσθλόν, ἐπὶ δηρὸν δέ μοι αἰὼν (415)
:Ajax would then conceal him with his shining shield.
Recent statistical modelling based on language evolution gives a date of 760–710 BC.
Angered, Achilles declares that he and his men will no longer fight for Agamemnon, but will go home.
:that's how close their helmets and bossed shields lined up,
The ''Catalogue of Ships'' in particular has the striking feature that its geography does not portray Greece in the Iron Age, the time of Homer, but as it was before the Dorian invasion.
To wit, the Classical-era historian Herodotus says that Homer, and his contemporary, the poet Hesiod, were the first artists to name and describe their appearance and characters.
Achilles is moved to tears, and the two lament their losses in the war.
In describing infantry combat, Homer names the phalanx formation, but most scholars do not believe the historical Trojan War was so fought.
Hector, ignoring an omen, leads the terrible fighting.
The Trojans prevail and force the Greeks back to their wall, while Hera and Athena are forbidden to help.
Translator Lattimore renders ''kleos aphthiton'' as ''forever immortal'' and as ''forever imperishable''—connoting Achilles's mortality by underscoring his greater reward in returning to battle Troy.
Homer also came to be of great influence in European culture with the resurgence of interest in Greek antiquity during the Renaissance, and it remains the first and most influential work of the Western canon.
Odysseus confronts and beats Thersites, a common soldier who voices discontent at fighting Agamemnon's war.
Achilles sends Patroclus from his camp to inquire about the Greek casualties, and while there Patroclus is moved to pity by a speech of Nestor.
The stars conjure profound images of the place of a single man, no matter how heroic, in the perspective of the entire cosmos.
must go down under the hands of Menoitios' son Patroclus.
Here, Patroclus alludes to fated death by Hector's hand, and Hector's fated death by Achilles's hand.
The connection, in this case, between guileful tactics of the Greeks in the ''Iliad'' and those of the later Greeks is not a difficult one to find.
Othryades, the remaining Spartan, goes back to stand in his formation with mortal wounds while the remaining two Argives go back to Argos to report their victory.
:men wiped out city strongholds long ago —
It made its return to Italy and Western Europe beginning in the 15th century, primarily through translations into Latin and the vernacular languages.
When Agamemnon takes Briseis from Achilles, he takes away a portion of the kleos he had earned.
**Aphrodite (Trojans)
() Zeus lifts the ban on the gods' interference, and the gods freely help both sides.
Achilles becomes very upset, sits by the seashore, and prays to his mother, Thetis.
Apollo faces Diomedes, and warns him against warring with gods.
() In the morning, Agamemnon gives Achilles all the promised gifts, including Briseis, but he is indifferent to them.
His forceful version is freer, with shorter lines that increase the sense of swiftness and energy.
Later in October 2011, ''Memorial'' was shortlisted for the T. S. Eliot Prize, but in December 2011, Oswald withdrew the book from the shortlist, citing concerns about the ethics of the prize's sponsors.
Achilles and his companion Patroclus receive the embassy well, but Achilles angrily refuses Agamemnon's offer and declares that he would only return to battle if the Trojans reach his ships and threaten them with fire.
*The minor deities:
ἔσσεται, οὐδέ κέ μ’ ὦκα τέλος θανάτοιο κιχείη.
() Many fall on both sides.
''Age of Bronze'' is an American comics series by writer/artist Eric Shanower retelling the legend of the Trojan War.
In the Bronze Age, the chariot was the main battle transport-weapon (e.g.
Achilles, burning with rage and grief, slays many.
The embassy returns empty-handed.
: (''Iliad'' 4.301–09, Ian Johnston, translator)
In ''Greek Gods Human Lives: What We Can Learn From Myths'', Mary Lefkowitz discusses the relevance of divine action in the ''Iliad'', attempting to answer the question of whether or not divine intervention is a discrete occurrence (for its own sake), or if such godly behaviors are mere human character metaphors.
It is destined that he shall be the survivor,
The insulted priest prays his god's help, and a nine-day rain of divine plague arrows falls upon the Greeks.
εἰ μέν κ’ αὖθι μένων Τρώων πόλιν ἀμφιμάχωμαι,
the Battle of Kadesh).
The battle dress and armour of hero and soldier are well-described.
Yet great as you are I would not strike you by stealth, watching
Hector enters the city, urges prayers and sacrifices, incites Paris to battle, bids his wife Andromache and son Astyanax farewell on the city walls, and rejoins the battle.
when she had followed her father and mother to tend the
:That's the most effective tactic, the way
Thus, ''nostos'' is impossible without sacking Troy—King Agamemnon's motive for winning, at any cost.
Again, the Wrath of Achilles turns the war's tide in seeking vengeance when Hector kills Patroclus.
for my chance, but openly, so, if perhaps I might hit you.
Simoeisios in his stripling's beauty, whom once his mother
They enter battle in chariots, launching javelins into the enemy formations, then dismount—for hand-to-hand combat with yet more javelin throwing, rock throwing, and if necessary hand to hand sword and a shoulder-borne ''hoplon'' (shield) fighting.
In the modern vulgate (the standard accepted version), the ''Iliad'' contains 15,693 lines; it is written in Homeric Greek, a literary amalgam of Ionic Greek and other dialects.
Paris offers to return the treasure he took and give further wealth as compensation, but not Helen, and the offer is refused.
:right where he stood, ending his life—then he'd duck back,
() The armies approach each other, but before they meet, Paris offers to end the war by fighting a duel with Menelaus, urged by his brother and head of the Trojan army, Hector.
that the generation of Dardanos shall not die&nbsp;...
The Greeks are overwhelmed and routed, the wall's gate is broken, and Hector charges in.
Richmond Lattimore's version (1951) is "a free six-beat" line-for-line rendering that explicitly eschews "poetical dialect" for "the plain English of today".
Patroclus leads the Myrmidons into battle and arrives as the Trojans set fire to the first ships.
Chryses  prays for Apollo's help, and Apollo causes a plague to afflict the Greek army.
George Chapman published his translation of the ''Iliad'', in installments, beginning in 1598, published in "fourteeners", a long-line ballad metre that "has room for all of Homer's figures of speech and plenty of new ones, as well as explanations in parentheses.
The first instance of this doubt occurs in Book XVI.
:don't any of you charge ahead of others,
Achilles takes Hector's body and dishonours it.
The gods fight among themselves.
Do it, then; but not all the rest of us gods shall approve you.
The West, however, had tended to look at Homer as a liar as they believed they possessed much more down to earth and realistic eyewitness accounts of the Trojan War written by Dares and Dictys Cretensis who were supposedly present at the events.
However, the phalanx did have its heroic aspects.
() Achilles is mad with grief when he hears of Patroclus' death, and vows to take vengeance on Hector; his mother Thetis grieves, too, knowing that Achilles is fated to die young if he kills Hector.
After a meal, Priam carries Hector's body back into Troy.
Each accepts the outcome of his life, yet, no-one knows if the gods can alter fate.
The poem dates to the archaic period of Classical Antiquity.
Do you wish to bring back a man who is mortal, one long since
the son of Kronos may be angered if now Achilleus
:He stood beneath the shield of Ajax, son of Telamon.
:crouching down by Ajax, like a child beside its mother.
However, as these events are prefigured and alluded to more and more vividly, when it reaches an end the poem has told a more or less complete tale of the Trojan War.
() Patroclus cannot stand to watch any longer and begs Achilles to be allowed to defend the ships.
How fate is set is unknown, but it is told by the Fates and by Zeus through sending omens to seers such as Calchas.
Yet, by the 1920s, Milman Parry (1902–1935) had launched a movement claiming otherwise.
So, the Trojan shipwright (of the ship that transported Helen to Troy), Phereclus, fights afoot, as an infantryman.
εἰ δέ κεν οἴκαδ’ ἵκωμι φίλην ἐς πατρίδα γαῖαν,
*The major deities:
Venetus A, copied in the 10th century AD, is the oldest fully extant manuscript of the ''Iliad.''
Intense scholarly debate has surrounded the question of which portions of the poem preserve genuine traditions from the Mycenaean period.
Aeschylus' trilogy, the ''Oresteia,'' comprising ''Agamemnon'', ''The Libation Bearers'', and ''The Eumenides'', follows the story of Agamemnon after his return from the war.
Moreover, it can be argued that the warfare shown in the ''Iliad'', and the way in which it was depicted, had a profound and very traceable effect on Greek warfare in general.
Achilles asks his mother to request Zeus to bring the Greeks to the breaking point by the Trojans, so Agamemnon will realize how much the Greeks need Achilles.
An 1898 translation by Samuel Butler was published by Longmans, Butler had read Classics at Cambridge University.
For example, there are multiple passages in the ''Iliad'' with commanders such as Agamemnon or Nestor discussing the arraying of troops so as to gain an advantage.
Thetis does so, and Zeus agrees.
doomed by his destiny, from ill-sounding death and release him?
the excellence of my glory is gone, but there will be a long life
The Trojans are routed by the sudden onslaught, and Patroclus begins his assault by killing the Trojan hero Sarpedon.
In 1870, the American poet William Cullen Bryant published a blank verse version, that Van Wyck Brooks describes as "simple, faithful".
Poseidon cautiously speaks:
In forgoing his ''nostos'', he will earn the greater reward of ''kleos aphthiton'' (, "fame imperishable").
He clasps Achilles by the knees and begs for his son's body.
Finally, Athena tricks him into stopping, and he turns to face his opponent.
Odysseus takes a ship and brings Chryseis to her father, whereupon Apollo ends the plague.
Indeed, the Trojan War is won by a notorious example of Greek guile in the Trojan Horse.
Prior to this reintroduction, a shortened Latin version of the poem, known as the ''Ilias Latina,'' was very widely studied and read as a basic school text.
In the lectures ''On Translating Homer'' (1861), Matthew Arnold addresses the matters of translation and interpretation in rendering the ''Iliad'' to English; commenting upon the versions contemporarily available in 1861, he identifies the four ''essential'' poetic qualities of Homer to which the translator must do justice:
() Hera seduces Zeus and lures him to sleep, allowing Poseidon to help the Greeks, and the Trojans are driven back onto the plain.
Do it, then; but not all the rest of us gods shall approve you.
It quickly established itself as a classic in English poetry.
The great gates of the city are opened to receive the fleeing Trojans, and Apollo leads Achilles away from the city by pretending to be a Trojan.
In particular, the effect of epic literature can be broken down into three categories: tactics, ideology, and the mindset of commanders.
Meanwhile, Hector leads the Trojans to almost pushing the Greeks back to the sea (Book XII).
Wolf's narrator presents a feminist's view of the war, and of war in general.
About his dilemma, Hera asks Zeus:
Fate implies the primeval, tripartite division of the world that Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades effected in deposing their father, Cronus, for its dominion.
In the ''Iliad'', occasional syntactic inconsistency may be an oral tradition effect—for example, Aphrodite is "laughter-loving", despite being painfully wounded by Diomedes (Book V, 375); and the divine representations may mix Mycenaean and Greek Dark Age (ca.
The poem's initial word,  (''mēnin'', accusative of , ''mēnis'', "wrath, rage, fury"), establishes the ''Iliad's'' principal theme: The "Wrath of Achilles".
These in turn spawned many others in various European languages, such as the first printed English book, the 1473 ''Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye.''
They camp in the field to attack at first light, and their watchfires light the plain like stars.
Though the film received mixed reviews, it was a commercial success, particularly in international sales.
Now I shall go, to overtake that killer of a dear life,
() In the fighting, Diomedes kills many Trojans, including Pandaros, and defeats Aeneas, whom Aphrodite rescues, but Diomedes attacks and wounds the goddess.
Fate does not determine every action, incident, and occurrence, but it does determine the outcome of life—before killing him, Hector calls Patroclus a fool for cowardly avoidance of his fate, by attempting his defeat; Patroclus retorts:
"Laborious as this meter was, there were at least half a dozen attempts to translate the entire ''Iliad'' or ''Odyssey'' in hexameters; the last in 1945.
Polydamas urges Hector again to withdraw into the city; again Hector refuses, and the Trojans camp on the plain at nightfall.
:horsehair plumes touched when warriors moved their heads.
This motif recurs when he considers sparing Hector, whom he loves and respects.
Ah me, that it is destined that the dearest of men, Sarpedon,
Much like the ''Odyssey'', there is even a set ritual which must be observed in each of these conflicts.
Likewise, in ''The Arming Motif'', Prof. James Armstrong reports that the poem's ''formulae'' yield richer meaning because the "arming motif" ''diction''—describing Achilles, Agamemnon, Paris, and Patroclus—serves to "heighten the importance of&nbsp;... an impressive moment", thus, "reiteration creates an atmosphere of smoothness", wherein, Homer distinguishes Patroclus from Achilles, and foreshadows the former's death with positive and negative turns of phrase.
Later, Agamemnon contemplates defeat and retreat to Greece (Book XIV).
On the bright ridges of the helmets,
A loose film adaptation of the ''Iliad'', ''Troy'', was released in 2004.
ὤλετο μέν μοι νόστος, ἀτὰρ κλέος ἄφθιτον ἔσται
A two-word stock epithet (e.g.
Therefore they called him Simoeisios; but he could not
Originally, Classical scholars treated the ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey'' as written poetry, and Homer as a writer.
It is used by Herodotus.
I carry two sorts of destiny toward the day of my death.
through the shoulder.
:Teucer would peer out quickly, shoot off an arrow,
