Peoria, which decades ago was the second-most populous city in the state, is seventh with 115,007.
John Deere's invention of the self-scouring steel plow turned Illinois' rich prairie into some of the world's most productive and valuable farmlands, attracting new immigrant farmers from Germany and Sweden.
Current Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel is the Windy City's first Jewish Mayor.
The Northern Illinois Huskies from DeKalb, Illinois compete in the Mid-American Conference winning 4 conference championships and earning a bid in the Orange Bowl along with producing Heisman candidate Jordan Lynch at quarterback.
, the state's unemployment rate was 6%.
The Lincoln Park Zoo is located in huge Lincoln Park on Chicago's North Side, approximately  north of the Loop.
After the war's end, the federal government re-established forts such as Fort Dearborn (in 1816&mdash;now the site is within Chicago) and army patrols west of the Mississippi diminished the threat from Amerindian raids, so settlers were able to move into all of Illinois from the eastern and southern emigrant trails.
Whites were 98% of the state's population.
Chicago is the largest city in the state and the third most populous city in the United States, with its 2010 population of 2,695,598.
As of 2006, the leading manufacturing industries in Illinois, based upon value-added, were chemical manufacturing ($18.3&nbsp;billion), machinery manufacturing ($13.4&nbsp;billion), food manufacturing ($12.9&nbsp;billion), fabricated metal products ($11.5&nbsp;billion), transportation equipment ($7.4&nbsp;billion), plastics and rubber products ($7.0&nbsp;billion), and computer and electronic products ($6.1&nbsp;billion).
It is the 5th most populous state and 25th largest state in terms of land area, and is often noted as a microcosm of the entire country.
Illinois is a leader in music education having hosted the Midwest Clinic: An International Band and Orchestra Conference since 1946, as well being home to the Illinois Music Educators Association (IMEA), one of the largest professional music educator's organizations in the country.
Illinois has an extensive passenger and freight rail transportation network.
The administrative divisions of Illinois are counties, townships, precincts, cities, towns, villages, and special-purpose districts.
Other highlands include the Shawnee Hills in the south, and there is varying topography along its rivers; the Illinois River bisects the state northeast to southwest.
Chicago, the third most populous city in the United States, is the center of the Chicago metropolitan area.
The zoo covers over  within the park.
As the Illini declined during the Beaver Wars era, members of the Algonquian-speaking Potawatomi, Miami, Sauk, and other tribes including the Fox (Mesquakie), Ioway, Kickapoo, Mascouten, Piankashaw, Shawnee, Wea, and Winnebago (Ho-Chunk) came into the area from the east and north around the Great Lakes.
A portion of southeastern Illinois is part of the extended Evansville, Indiana Metro Area, locally referred to as the Tri-State with Indiana and Kentucky.
It represents the end of Indian resistance to white settlement in the Chicago region.
Midway served 17.3&nbsp;million domestic and international passengers in 2008.
The franchise is now known as the Washington Wizards.
In 1853, John A. Logan helped pass a law to prohibit all African Americans, including freedmen, from settling in the state.
In some cases, these services clustered around institutions that hearkened back to Illinois' earlier economies.
It is  high,  long,  wide and covers .
The Illinois Constitution of 1848 was written with a provision for exclusionary laws to be passed.
The Chicago metropolitan area also has two zoos: The very large Brookfield Zoo, located approximately 13 miles west of the city center in suburban Brookfield, contains over 2300 animals and covers .
Also, the Illinois General Assembly mandated in 2007 that by 2025, 25% of all electricity generated in Illinois is to come from renewable resources.
Many people from other parts of the country were attracted to the state by employment caused by the then-expanding industrial base.
At the turn of the 20th century, Illinois had a population of nearly 5&nbsp;million.
Although Chicago may no longer be "Hog Butcher for the World," the Chicago area remains a global center for food manufacture and meat processing, with many plants, processing houses, and distribution facilities concentrated in the area of the former Union Stock Yards.
After the American Revolutionary War established the United States, American settlers began arriving crossing the Appalachians barrier range in the 1810s  via the gaps of the Allegheny to boat building centers in Pittsburgh, from Cumberland, Maryland via the Cumberland Narrows pass to outfit in Brownsville, Pennsylvania, from North Carolina and Virginia via the Cumberland Gap to Kentucky and Tennessee, all on the Ohio River.
Agriculture, particularly corn and soybeans, as well as educational institutions and manufacturing centers, figure prominently in Central Illinois.
* 0.3% American Indian and Alaska Native
Schools are commonly but not exclusively divided into three tiers of primary and secondary education: elementary school, middle school or junior high school, and high school.
The official language of Illinois is English, although between 1923 and 1969 state law gave official status to "the American language."
The Illinois Fighting Illini and Northwestern Wildcats are rival college sports teams in the Big Ten Conference.
In 2012, President Obama easily carried Illinois again with 58% to Republican Mitt Romney's 41%.
Additionally, Illinois supports 49 public community colleges in the Illinois Community College System.
85 Of the 102 counties are in turn divided into townships and precincts.
However, as Indiana had successfully been granted a 10-mile northern extension of its boundary to provide it with a usable lakefront, the original bill for Illinois statehood, submitted to Congress on January 23, 1818, stipulated a northern border at the same latitude as Indiana's, which is defined as  north of the southernmost extremity of Lake Michigan.
The floodplain on the Mississippi River from Alton to the Kaskaskia River is known as the American Bottom.
Illinois also has several short tracks and dragstrips.
The ISM is among only 5% of the nation's museums that are accredited by the American Alliance of Museums.
Illinois has one of the largest concentrations of Missouri Synod Lutherans in the United States.
The government of Illinois, under the Constitution of Illinois, has three branches of government: Executive, legislative and judicial.
Illinois is a Democratic stronghold and considered one of the most Democratic states in the nation.
It was topped by a structure thought to have measured about  in length and  in width, covered an area , and been as much as  high, making its peak  above the level of the plaza.
Major U.S. Interstate highways crossing the state include: Interstate&nbsp;24 (I-24), I-39, I-41, I-55, I-57, I-64, I-70, I-72, I-74, I-80, I-88, I-90, and I-94.
In most years, Illinois is either the first or second state for the highest production of soybeans, with a harvest of 427.7&nbsp;million bushels (11.64&nbsp;million metric tons) in 2008, after Iowa's production of 444.82&nbsp;million bushels (12.11&nbsp;million metric tons).
Seventeen cavalry regiments were also gathered, as well as two light artillery regiments.
The largest Protestant denominations were the United Methodist Church with 314,461, and the Southern Baptist Convention, with 283,519 members.
In 1778, George Rogers Clark claimed Illinois County for Virginia.
It consists of the Supreme Court, Appellate Court, and Circuit Courts.
Such a boundary would have left Illinois with no shoreline on Lake Michigan at all.
Most of the coal produced in Illinois is exported to other states, while much of the coal burned for power in Illinois (21&nbsp;million tons in 1998) is mined in the Powder River Basin of Wyoming.
Chicago gained prominence as a Great Lakes port and then as an Illinois and Michigan Canal port after 1848, and as a rail hub soon afterward.
Monks Mound, the center of the site, is the largest Pre-Columbian structure north of the Valley of Mexico.
In 1847, after lobbying by Dorothea L. Dix, Illinois became one of the first states to establish a system of state-supported treatment of mental illness and disabilities, replacing local almshouses.
Illinois is a leader in food manufacturing and meat processing.
After construction of the Erie Canal with increasing traffic and trade through the Great Lakes, Chicago was founded in the 1830s on the banks of the Chicago River, at one of the few natural harbors on southern Lake Michigan.
The six elected officers are the: Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Secretary of State, Comptroller, and Treasurer.
According to the 2007 estimates, 21.1% of the population had German ancestry, 13.3% had Irish ancestry, 8% had British ancestry, 7.9% had Polish ancestry, 6.4% had Italian ancestry, 4.6% listed themselves as American, 2.4% had Swedish ancestry, 2.2% had French ancestry, other than Basque, 1.6% had Dutch ancestry, and 1.4% had Norwegian ancestry.
In 2010, incumbent Governor Pat Quinn was re-elected with 47% of the vote, while Republican Mark Kirk was elected to the Senate with 48% of the vote.
From 1962 until 1998, Chicago's O'Hare International Airport (ORD) was the busiest airport in the world, measured both in terms of total flights and passengers.
These ratings are for wind turbines with  hub heights; newer wind turbines are taller, enabling them to reach stronger winds farther from the ground.
According to the Illinois State Geological Survey, 211&nbsp;billion tons of bituminous coal are estimated to lie under the surface, having a total heating value greater than the estimated oil deposits in the Arabian Peninsula.
Muslims constituted the largest non-Christian group with 359,264 adherents.
News & World Report'' rankings: the University of Chicago (4), Northwestern University (12), the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (41), Loyola University Chicago (99), the Illinois Institute of Technology (108), DePaul University (123), University of Illinois at Chicago (129), Illinois State University (149), Southern Illinois University Carbondale (153), and Northern Illinois University (194).
The property tax in Illinois is imposed only on real property.
Slavery was nominally banned by the Northwest Ordinance, but that was not enforced for those already holding slaves.
Most of the western border with Missouri and Iowa is the Mississippi River; Kaskaskia is an exclave of Illinois, lying west of the Mississippi and reachable only from Missouri.
The first Farm Aid concert was held in Champaign to benefit American farmers, in 1985.
The Judiciary of Illinois is the unified court system of Illinois.
As of 2000, the state's center of population was at , located in Grundy County, northeast of the village of Mazon.
Railroads freed most of the land of Illinois and other mid-western states from the tyranny of water transport; no longer was a location near a river or canal a need to ship bulk goods.
The Illinois General Assembly is the state legislature, composed of the 118-member Illinois House of Representatives and the 59-member Illinois Senate.
The French borrowed these forms, changing the /we/ ending to spell it as ''-ois,'' a transliteration for its pronunciation in French of that time.
While it was surpassed by Atlanta's Hartsfield in 1998, with 59.3&nbsp;million domestic passengers annually, along with 11.4&nbsp;million international passengers in 2008, O'Hare remains one of the two or three busiest airports in the world, and some years still ranks number one in total flights.
As of 2007, wind energy represented only 1.7% of Illinois' energy production, and it was estimated that wind power could provide 5–10% of the state's energy needs.
* 2.3% Multiracial American
Jacob Bunn contributed to the development of the Illinois coal industry, and was a founder and owner of the Western Coal & Mining Company of Illinois.
Illinois ranks second in U.S. corn production with more than 1.5&nbsp;billion bushels produced annually.
The third division is Southern Illinois, comprising the area south of U.S. Route 50, including Little Egypt, near the juncture of the Mississippi River and Ohio River.
The members of the General Assembly are elected at the beginning of each even-numbered year.
The next major power in the region was the Illinois Confederation or Illini, a political alliance.
These include the John G. Shedd Aquarium, the Field Museum of Natural History, the Art Institute of Chicago, the Adler Planetarium, and the Museum of Science and Industry.
Previously the LPGA State Farm Classic was an LPGA Tour event from 1976 to 2011.
The ISBE also makes recommendations to state leaders concerning education spending and policies.
Chicago itself is a cosmopolitan city, densely populated, industrialized, and the transportation hub of the nation, and settled by a wide variety of ethnic groups.
About 68% of Illinois has coal-bearing strata of the Pennsylvanian geologic period.
At the 2007 estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau, there were 1,768,518 foreign-born inhabitants of the state or 13.8% of the population, with 48.4% from Latin America, 24.6% from Asia, 22.8% from Europe, 2.9% from Africa, 1.2% from Northern America and 0.2% from Oceania.
Large wind farms in Illinois include Twin Groves, Rail Splitter, EcoGrove, and Mendota Hills.
Naperville, a suburb of Chicago, is fifth with 141,853.
Using the criterion established by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, there are eleven "National Universities" in the state.
Ronald Reagan was born in Tampico, raised in Dixon and educated at Eureka College.
The small French settlements continued, although many French migrated west to Ste.
The state's northern border with Wisconsin is fixed at 42° 30' north latitude.
The largest and oldest surviving Bahá'í House of Worship in the world is located in Wilmette, Illinois and the oldest standing mosque in the U.S. is the Al-Sadiq Mosque of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, located in the Bronzeville neighbourhood of Chicago.
Today, Illinois honors Lincoln with its official state slogan, ''Land of Lincoln'', which has been displayed on its license plates since 1954.
And such districts do not necessarily share boundaries.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Illinois was 12,859,995 on July 1, 2015, a 0.23% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
Illinois manufactured 6.1 percent of total United States military armaments produced during World War II, ranking seventh among the 48 states.
However, this coal has a high sulfur content, which causes acid rain unless special equipment is used to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions.
+ '''Illinois Racial Breakdown of Population'''
Illinois is a leading refiner of petroleum in the American Midwest, with a combined crude oil distillation capacity of nearly .
Illinois has long had a reputation as a bellwether both in social and cultural terms and politics.
The original provisions of the Northwest Ordinance had specified a boundary that would have been tangent to the southern tip of Lake Michigan.
In 2008, Illinois exported 3 million tons of coal and was projected to export 9 million tons in 2011, as demand for energy grows in places such as China, India, elsewise in Asia and Europe.
The John Deere Classic is a regular PGA Tour event played at Quad Cities since 1971, whereas the Encompass Championship is a Champions Tour event since 2013.
The Chicago area has a large Jewish community, particularly in the suburbs of Skokie and Morton Grove.
In extreme northwestern Illinois, the Driftless Area, a region of unglaciated and therefore higher and more rugged topography, occupies a small part of the state.
Illinois' major agricultural outputs are corn, soybeans, hogs, cattle, dairy products, and wheat.
The government of Illinois has numerous departments, agencies, boards and commissions, but the so-called code departments provide most of the state's services.
It is a major hub for United Airlines and American Airlines, and a major airport expansion project is currently underway.
It contains about  of earth.
Historically, Illinois was a political swing state, with near-parity existing between the Republican and the Democratic parties.
The judiciary is composed of the Supreme Court and lower courts.
College towns like Carbondale, Champaign and Normal also lean Democratic.
The winter of 1830–1831 is called the "Winter of the Deep Snow"; a sudden, deep snowfall blanketed the state, making travel impossible for the rest of the winter, and many travelers perished.
By 1857, Chicago was Illinois' largest city.
During the discussions leading up to Illinois' admission to the Union, the proposed northern boundary of the state was moved twice.
With the exception of the single-unit Clinton plant, each of these facilities has two reactors.
The Federal government also manages the Shawnee National Forest and the Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie.
Settlers were allowed to bring slaves with them for labor but, in 1822, state residents voted against making slavery legal.
The finely crafted ornaments and tools recovered by archaeologists at Cahokia include elaborate ceramics, finely sculptured stonework, carefully embossed and engraved copper and mica sheets, and one funeral blanket for an important chief fashioned from 20000 shell beads.
The Great Migration from the South established a large community of African Americans in Chicago, who created the city's famous jazz and blues cultures.
The midsection of Illinois is a second major division, called Central Illinois.
Moseley-Braun was the first and, to date, only African-American woman to become a U.S.
A given high school may have several elementary districts that feed into it, yet some of those feeder districts may themselves feed into multiple high school districts.
Illinois also produces wine, and the state is home to two American viticultural areas.
As of September 2009, Illinois had 1116.06 MW of installed wind power nameplate capacity with another 741.9 MW under construction.
The worst upper Mississippi River flood of the century, the Great Flood of 1993, inundated many towns and thousands of acres of farmland.
'''Illinois''' ( ) is a state in the midwestern region of the United States, achieving statehood in 1818.
In the same year of 1818, Illinois achieved statehood and its growth, as yet untroubled by the speed of as yet unrefined railway technology, would be fueled by the new religion of industrialized forward thinking.
The coal industry of Illinois has its origins in the middle 19th century, when entrepreneurs such as Jacob Loose discovered coal in locations such as Sangamon County.
The Pullman Strike and Haymarket Riot, in particular, greatly influenced the development of the American labor movement.
During the American Civil War, Illinois ranked fourth in men who served (more than 250,000) in the Union Army, a figure surpassed by only New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio.
Republicans continue to prevail in the outlying  Chicago exurban areas, as well as rural northern and central Illinois; Republican support is also strong in southern Illinois, outside of the East St. Louis metropolitan area.
With Chicago in the northeast, small industrial cities and great agricultural productivity in central and northern Illinois, and natural resources like coal, timber, and petroleum in the south, Illinois has a diverse economic base and is a major transportation hub.
Charles Mound, located in this region, has the state's highest elevation above sea level at .
Reagan moved to Los Angeles as a young adult and later became Governor of California before being elected President.
Most of Illinois was rated in 2009 as "marginal or fair" for wind energy production by the U.S. Department of Energy, with some western sections rated "good" and parts of the south rated "poor".
Females made up approximately 50.7% of the population.
In 1942, as part of the Manhattan Project, the University of Chicago conducted the first sustained nuclear chain reaction.
In addition to the state's rail lines, the Mississippi River and Illinois River provide major transportation routes for the state's agricultural interests.
With eleven plants currently operating, Illinois leads all states in the amount of electricity generated from nuclear power.
The largest suburban commuter rail system in the United States, operated by Metra, uses existing rail lines to provide direct commuter rail access for hundreds of suburbs to the city and beyond.
In the late 20th century, Congressman Dan Rostenkowski was imprisoned for mail fraud; former governor and federal judge Otto Kerner, Jr. was imprisoned for bribery; Secretary of State Paul Powell was investigated and found to have gained great wealth through bribes, and State Auditor of Public Accounts (Comptroller) Orville Hodge was imprisoned for embezzlement.
Mattoon was recently chosen as the site for the Department of Energy's FutureGen project, a 275 megawatt experimental zero emission coal-burning power plant that the DOE just gave a second round of funding.
In 1680, other French explorers constructed a fort at the site of present-day Peoria, and in 1682, a fort atop Starved Rock in today's Starved Rock State Park.
Mineral finds and timber stands also had spurred immigration&mdash;by the 1810s, the Eastern U.S. had exhausted most timber stands close to the established cities creating a hard felt first energy crisis by the late 1790s, and after 1818 the industrial revolution was being fueled by new canals such as the Lehigh Canal feeding the furnaces of the rapidly industrializing east coast.
Three reactors have been permanently shut down and are in various stages of decommissioning: Dresden-1 and Zion-1 and 2.
American scholars previously thought the name "Illinois" meant "man" or "men" in the Miami-Illinois language, with the original ''iliniwek'' transformed via French into Illinois.
In the area of The Meeting of the Great Rivers Scenic Byway, peach and apple are grown.
Municipal governments are the cities, villages, and incorporated towns.
The code also abrogated common law crimes and established an age of consent of 18.
Three of them have represented Illinois, the most of any single state: Carol Moseley-Braun, Barack Obama, and Roland Burris, who was appointed to replace Obama after his election to the presidency.
Rockford, at 152,871, is the third largest city in the state, and is the largest city in the state not located within the Chicago suburbs.
Naperville and Aurora share a boundary along Illinois Route 59.
It is located in the Illinois portion of Greater St. Louis (often called the Metro-East area), which has a rapidly growing population of over 700,000 people.
Springfield, the state's capital, comes in as sixth most populous with 117,352 residents.
With a production capacity of 1.5 billion gallons per year, Illinois is a top producer of ethanol; ranking third in the United States in 2011.
In 1960, Ray Kroc opened the first McDonald's franchise in Des Plaines (which still exists as a museum, with a working McDonald's across the street).
A number of dialects of American English are spoken, ranging from Inland Northern American English and African American Vernacular English around Chicago, to Midland American English in Central Illinois to Southern American English in the far south.
The Wabash River continues as the eastern/southeastern border with Indiana until the Wabash enters the Ohio River.
Although today the state's largest population center is around Chicago in the northern part of the state, the state's European population grew first in the west, with French Canadians who settled along the Mississippi River, and gave the area the name, ''Illinois''.
This region has a somewhat warmer winter climate, different variety of crops (including some cotton farming in the past), more rugged topography (due to the area remaining unglaciated during the Illinoian Stage, unlike most of the rest of the state), as well as small-scale oil deposits and coal mining.
Nearly 80% of people in Illinois speak English natively, and most of the rest speak it fluently as a second language.
The Koster Site has been excavated and demonstrates 7,000 years of continuous habitation.
The remaining population lives in the smaller cities and rural areas that dot the state's plains.
Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander
French explorers Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet explored the Illinois River in 1673.
The dragstrip at Gateway International Raceway and the Route 66 Raceway, which sits on the same property as the Chicagoland Speedway, both host NHRA drag races.
The survivors were forced back to Iowa.
Located in Hancock County along the Mississippi River, Nauvoo flourished and soon rivaled Chicago for the position of the state's largest city.
More importantly, it added nearly 50 miles of Lake Michigan shoreline and the Chicago River.
With the War of 1812 Illinois growth slowed as Amerindians and Canadian forces oft raided the American Frontier.
* 6.8% some other race
The Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE) is autonomous of the governor and the state legislature, and administers public education in the state.
Of the foreign-born population, 43.7% were naturalized U.S. citizens and 56.3% were not U.S. citizens.
Illinois had a prominent role in the emergence of the nuclear age.
But in 1844, the Latter Day Saint movement founder Joseph Smith was killed in the Carthage Jail, about 30 miles away from Nauvoo.
In 1957, Argonne National Laboratory, near Chicago, activated the first experimental nuclear power generating system in the United States.
The ethnic French had owned black slaves as late as the 1820s, and American settlers had already brought slaves into the area from Kentucky.
Illinois is a net importer of fuels for energy, despite large coal resources and some minor oil production.
In 1967, Fermilab, a national nuclear research facility near Batavia, opened a particle accelerator, which was the world's largest for over 40 years.
Cities include Peoria; Springfield, the state capital; Quincy; Decatur; Bloomington-Normal; and Champaign-Urbana.
The executive branch is split into several statewide elected offices, with the Governor as chief executive.
Illinois has the largest concentration of Muslims by state in the country with 2800 Muslims per 100,000 citizens.
Nine African-Americans have served as members of the United States Senate.
However, the "collar counties" (the suburbs surrounding Chicago's Cook County, Illinois), can be seen as moderate voting districts.
Politics in the state have been infamous for highly visible corruption cases, as well as for crusading reformers, such as governors Adlai Stevenson and James R. Thompson.
The southern part of the state shipped food north and this may have contributed to its name: "Little Egypt", after the Biblical story of Joseph in Egypt supplying grain to his brothers.
The western section (west of the Illinois River) was originally part of the Military Tract of 1812 and forms the conspicuous western bulge of the state.
Currently there is trackwork on the Chicago–St.
The most populated city in the state south of Springfield is Belleville, with 44,478 people at the 2010 census.
In 2000, 23.3% of Illinois' population lived in the city of Chicago, 43.3% in Cook County, and 65.6% in the counties of the Chicago metropolitan area: Will, DuPage, Kane, Lake, and McHenry counties, as well as Cook County.
Each summer since 2004, Southern Illinois University Carbondale has played host to the Southern Illinois Music Festival, which presents dozens of performances throughout the region.
Some localities possess ''home rule'', which allows them to govern themselves to a certain extent.
