Inflammation causes a great deal of oxidative stress and the presence of melatonin during sleep times could actively counteract free radical production during this time.
The ''transformed cells'' of tumors express antigens that are not found on normal cells.
They were named "natural killer" because of the initial notion that they do not require activation in order to kill cells that are "missing self."
One of the functions of specialized cells (located in the thymus and bone marrow) is to present young lymphocytes with self antigens produced throughout the body and to eliminate those cells that recognize self-antigens, preventing autoimmunity.
When suffering from sleep deprivation, active immunizations may have a diminished effect and may result in lower antibody production, and a lower immune response, than would be noted in a well-rested individual.
Most viral vaccines are based on live attenuated viruses, while many bacterial vaccines are based on acellular components of micro-organisms, including harmless toxin components.
Leukocytes (white blood cells) act like independent, single-celled organisms and are the second arm of the innate immune system.
Particularly important was the work of Paul Ehrlich, who proposed the side-chain theory to explain the specificity of the antigen-antibody reaction; his contributions to the understanding of humoral immunity were recognized by the award of a Nobel Prize in 1908, which was jointly awarded to the founder of cellular immunology, Elie Metchnikoff.
First, during the early slow-wave-sleep stage, a sudden drop in blood levels of cortisol, epinephrine, and norepinephrine induce increased blood levels of the hormones leptin, pituitary growth hormone, and prolactin.
Cytotoxic drugs inhibit the immune response by killing dividing cells such as activated T cells.
Many pathogens secrete compounds that diminish or misdirect the host's immune response.
The emerging field of bioinformatics-based studies of immunogenicity is referred to as ''immunoinformatics''.
However, since most antibiotics non-specifically target bacteria and do not affect fungi, oral antibiotics can lead to an "overgrowth" of fungi and cause conditions such as a vaginal candidiasis (a yeast infection).
Unlike animals, plants lack phagocytic cells, but many plant immune responses involve systemic chemical signals that are sent through a plant.
These cytokines and other chemicals recruit immune cells to the site of infection and promote healing of any damaged tissue following the removal of pathogens.
For example, large numbers of human Vγ9/Vδ2 T cells respond within hours to common molecules produced by microbes, and highly restricted Vδ1+ T cells in epithelia respond to stressed epithelial cells.
Anti-inflammatory drugs are often used to control the effects of inflammation.
Here, the immune system fails to properly distinguish between self and non-self, and attacks part of the body.
Gamma delta T cells '''(γδ T cells)''' possess an alternative T cell receptor (TCR) as opposed to CD4+ and CD8+ (αβ) T cells and share the characteristics of helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells and NK cells.
Ribonucleases and the RNA interference pathway are conserved across all eukaryotes, and are thought to play a role in the immune response to viruses.
NK cells also kill tumorous cells in a similar way, especially if the tumor cells have fewer MHC class I molecules on their surface than normal; this is a common phenomenon with tumors.
The adaptive immune response is antigen-specific and requires the recognition of specific "non-self" antigens during a process called antigen presentation.
Vaginal secretions serve as a chemical barrier following menarche, when they become slightly acidic, while semen contains defensins and zinc to kill pathogens.
The cascade results in the production of peptides that attract immune cells, increase vascular permeability, and opsonize (coat) the surface of a pathogen, marking it for destruction.
Cell-mediated and humoral components
Within the genitourinary and gastrointestinal tracts, commensal flora serve as biological barriers by competing with pathogenic bacteria for food and space and, in some cases, by changing the conditions in their environment, such as pH or available iron.
Jawed vertebrates, including humans, have even more sophisticated defense mechanisms, including the ability to adapt over time to recognize specific pathogens more efficiently.
Thus the immune response to infection may result in changes to the sleep cycle, including an increase in slow-wave sleep relative to REM sleep.
Long-term ''active'' memory is acquired following infection by activation of B and T cells.
The immune system is a remarkably effective structure that incorporates specificity, inducibility and adaptation.
These signals induce a pro-inflammatory state through the production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1, interleukin-12, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma.
Antibodies can also neutralize challenges directly, by binding to bacterial toxins or by interfering with the receptors that viruses and bacteria use to infect cells.
Complex feedback loops involving cytokines, such as interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor-α produced in response to infection, appear to also play a role in the regulation of non-rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.
Newborn infants have no prior exposure to microbes and are particularly vulnerable to infection.
Several barriers protect organisms from infection, including mechanical, chemical, and biological barriers.
Both B cells and T cells carry receptor molecules that recognize specific targets.
Second, as a person ages the skin becomes less adept at producing vitamin D.
This allows killer T cells to recognize the tumor cell as abnormal.
Prokaryotes also possess acquired immunity, through a system that uses CRISPR sequences to retain fragments of the genomes of phage that they have come into contact with in the past, which allows them to block virus replication through a form of RNA interference.
Helper T cells express T cell receptors (TCR) that recognize antigen bound to Class II MHC molecules.
Tumor antigens are presented on MHC class I molecules in a similar way to viral antigens.
Type IV hypersensitivity (also known as cell-mediated or ''delayed type hypersensitivity'') usually takes between two and three days to develop.
This reduces the probability that pathogens will reach sufficient numbers to cause illness.
Adaptive immune system
In addition, helper T cell activation causes an upregulation of molecules expressed on the T cell's surface, such as CD40 ligand (also called CD154), which provide extra stimulatory signals typically required to activate antibody-producing B cells.
The entry of another toxin called granulysin (a protease) induces the target cell to undergo apoptosis.
This passive immunity is usually short-term, lasting from a few days up to several months.
Some tumor cells also release products that inhibit the immune response; for example by secreting the cytokine TGF-β, which suppresses the activity of macrophages and lymphocytes.
The complement system and phagocytic cells are also used by most forms of invertebrate life.
In contrast, autoimmunity results from a hyperactive immune system attacking normal tissues as if they were foreign organisms.
The skin and respiratory tract secrete antimicrobial peptides such as the β-defensins.
According to the cellular theory of immunity, represented in particular by Elie Metchnikoff, it was cells&nbsp;– more precisely, phagocytes&nbsp;– that were responsible for immune responses.
No immunological memory
The main response of the immune system to tumors is to destroy the abnormal cells using killer T cells, sometimes with the assistance of helper T cells.
The speed of the response is a result of signal amplification that occurs following sequential proteolytic activation of complement molecules, which are also proteases.
Systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is a type of defensive response used by plants that renders the entire plant resistant to a particular infectious agent.
The innate leukocytes include the phagocytes (macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic cells), innate lymphoid cells, mast cells, eosinophils, basophils, and natural killer cells.
The simplest approach is to rapidly change non-essential epitopes (amino acids and/or sugars) on the surface of the pathogen, while keeping essential epitopes concealed.
A publicly accessible database has been established for the cataloguing of epitopes from pathogens known to be recognizable by B cells.
However, a distinct lymphocyte-derived molecule has been discovered in primitive jawless vertebrates, such as the lamprey and hagfish.
In simple terms, physical barriers prevent pathogens such as bacteria and viruses from entering the organism.
They are named for their resemblance to neuronal dendrites, as both have many spine-like projections, but dendritic cells are in no way connected to the nervous system.
There are two theories as to why the pro-inflammatory state is reserved for sleep time.
Other bacteria generate surface proteins that bind to antibodies, rendering them ineffective; examples include ''Streptococcus'' (protein G), ''Staphylococcus aureus'' (protein A), and ''Peptostreptococcus magnus'' (protein L).
These mechanisms include phagocytosis, antimicrobial peptides called defensins, and the complement system.
Some examples of intracellular pathogens include viruses, the food poisoning bacterium ''Salmonella'' and the eukaryotic parasites that cause malaria (''Plasmodium falciparum'') and leishmaniasis (''Leishmania spp.'').
Many species, however, utilize mechanisms that appear to be precursors of these aspects of vertebrate immunity.
These cells have no cytotoxic activity and do not kill infected cells or clear pathogens directly.
The principle behind vaccination (also called immunization) is to introduce an antigen from a pathogen in order to stimulate the immune system and develop specific immunity against that particular pathogen without causing disease associated with that organism.
This means that they get less sun and therefore produce less cholecalciferol via UVB radiation.
Inflammation is one of the first responses of the immune system to infection.
Other immune system cells that are known to express CYP27B1 and thus activate vitamin D calcidiol, are dendritic cells, keratinocytes and macrophages.
The end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century saw a battle between "cellular" and "humoral" theories of immunity.
Cell-mediated and humoral components
To function properly, an immune system must detect a wide variety of agents, known as pathogens, from viruses to parasitic worms, and distinguish them from the organism's own healthy tissue.
In addition, a combination of hypoxia in the tumor and a cytokine produced by macrophages induces tumor cells to decrease production of a protein that blocks metastasis and thereby assists spread of cancer cells.
Mast cells reside in connective tissues and mucous membranes, and regulate the inflammatory response.
In the mid-1950s, Frank Burnet, inspired by a suggestion made by Niels Jerne, formulated the clonal selection theory (CST) of immunity.
These cells identify and eliminate pathogens, either by attacking larger pathogens through contact or by engulfing and then killing microorganisms.
Such biofilms are present in many successful infections, e.g., the chronic ''Pseudomonas aeruginosa'' and ''Burkholderia cenocepacia'' infections characteristic of cystic fibrosis.
The success of any pathogen depends on its ability to elude host immune responses.
Microorganisms or toxins that successfully enter an organism encounter the cells and mechanisms of the innate immune system.
It originates from medicine and early studies on the causes of immunity to disease.
As with B cells, each type of T cell recognizes a different antigen.
In addition to these effects, the milieu of hormones produced at this time (leptin, pituitary growth hormone, and prolactin) support the interactions between APCs and T-cells, a shift of the Th1/Th2 cytokine balance towards one that supports Th1, an increase in overall Th cell proliferation, and naïve T cell migration to lymph nodes.
Killer T cells only recognize antigens coupled to Class I MHC molecules, while helper T cells and regulatory T cells only recognize antigens coupled to Class II MHC molecules.
Computational methods have been developed to predict the immunogenicity of peptides and proteins, which are particularly useful in designing therapeutic antibodies, assessing likely virulence of mutations in viral coat particles, and validation of proposed peptide-based drug treatments.
The activation of a resting helper T cell causes it to release cytokines that influence the activity of many cell types.
This is called '''immune surveillance'''.
As the activated B cell then begins to divide, its offspring (plasma cells) secrete millions of copies of the antibody that recognizes this antigen.
They are divided into four classes (Type I&nbsp;– IV) based on the mechanisms involved and the time course of the hypersensitive reaction.
Thucydides noted that people who had recovered from a previous bout of the disease could nurse the sick without contracting the illness a second time.
On the basis of CST, Burnet developed a theory of how an immune response is triggered according to the self/nonself distinction: "self" constituents (constituents of the body) do not trigger destructive immune responses, while "nonself" entities (pathogens, an allograft) trigger a destructive immune response.
+ '''Components of the immune system'''
First, they stay indoors more due to decreased activity levels.
In contrast, the B cell antigen-specific receptor is an antibody molecule on the B cell surface, and recognizes whole pathogens without any need for antigen processing.
Immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclosporin prevent T cells from responding to signals correctly by inhibiting signal transduction pathways.
RNA silencing mechanisms are particularly important in this systemic response as they can block virus replication.
Killer T cells are activated when their T cell receptor (TCR) binds to this specific antigen in a complex with the MHC Class I receptor of another cell.
There is good evidence that re-introduction of probiotic flora, such as pure cultures of the lactobacilli normally found in unpasteurized yogurt, helps restore a healthy balance of microbial populations in intestinal infections in children and encouraging preliminary data in studies on bacterial gastroenteritis, inflammatory bowel diseases, urinary tract infection and post-surgical infections.
Killer T cells are a sub-group of T cells that kill cells that are infected with viruses (and other pathogens), or are otherwise damaged or dysfunctional.
Once a pathogen has been engulfed by a phagocyte, it becomes trapped in an intracellular vesicle called a phagosome, which subsequently fuses with another vesicle called a lysosome to form a phagolysosome.
Early techniques relied mainly on the observation that hydrophilic amino acids are overrepresented in epitope regions than hydrophobic amino acids; however, more recent developments rely on machine learning techniques using databases of existing known epitopes, usually on well-studied virus proteins, as a training set.
Adaptive (or acquired) immunity creates immunological memory after an initial response to a specific pathogen, leading to an enhanced response to subsequent encounters with that same pathogen.
Found in nearly all forms of life
One example is an enzyme called tyrosinase that, when expressed at high levels, transforms certain skin cells (e.g.
T-cells have a symbiotic relationship with vitamin D. Not only does the T-cell extend a vitamin D receptor, in essence asking to bind to the steroid hormone version of vitamin D, calcitriol, but the T-cell expresses the gene CYP27B1, which is the gene responsible for converting the pre-hormone version of vitamin D, calcidiol into the steroid hormone version, calcitriol.
After complement proteins initially bind to the microbe, they activate their protease activity, which in turn activates other complement proteases, and so on.
In addition, immunological tolerance may develop against tumor antigens, so the immune system no longer attacks the tumor cells.
Natural killer (NK cells) cells are leukocytes that attack and destroy tumor cells, or cells that have been infected by viruses.
The danger model, suggested by Polly Matzinger and colleagues, has been very influential, arousing many comments and discussions.
Helper T cells have a weaker association with the MHC:antigen complex than observed for killer T cells, meaning many receptors (around 200–300) on the helper T cell must be bound by an MHC:antigen in order to activate the helper cell, while killer T cells can be activated by engagement of a single MHC:antigen molecule.
Inflammation is produced by eicosanoids and cytokines, which are released by injured or infected cells.
More recently, several theoretical frameworks have been suggested in immunology, including "autopoietic" views, "cognitive immune" views, the "danger model" (or "danger theory",  and the "discontinuity" theory.
Basophils and eosinophils are related to neutrophils.
This deposition of complement can also kill cells directly by disrupting their plasma membrane.
AIDS and some types of cancer cause acquired immunodeficiency.
Other bacteria, such as ''Mycobacterium tuberculosis'', live inside a protective capsule that prevents lysis by complement.
Immunological memory can be in the form of either passive short-term memory or active long-term memory.
The earliest known reference to immunity was during the plague of Athens in 430 BC.
These antibodies circulate in blood plasma and lymph, bind to pathogens expressing the antigen and mark them for destruction by complement activation or for uptake and destruction by phagocytes.
Innate immune systems are found in all plants and animals.
Pasteur's theory was in direct opposition to contemporary theories of disease, such as the miasma theory.
Neutrophils are normally found in the bloodstream and are the most abundant type of phagocyte, normally representing 50% to 60% of the total circulating leukocytes.
The age-related decline in immune function is also related to decreasing vitamin D levels in the elderly.
In some cases, the drug itself is not immunogenic, but may be co-administered with an immunogenic compound, as is sometimes the case for Taxol.
Both innate and adaptive immunity depend on the ability of the immune system to distinguish between self and non-self molecules.
Some bacteria form biofilms to protect themselves from the cells and proteins of the immune system.
Pattern recognition receptors are proteins used by nearly all organisms to identify molecules associated with pathogens.
In the 18th century, Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis made experiments with scorpion venom and observed that certain dogs and mice were immune to this venom.
Some autoimmune diseases such as lupus erythematosus strike women preferentially, and their onset often coincides with puberty.
Foods rich in certain fatty acids may foster a healthy immune system.
Innate immune defenses are non-specific, meaning these systems respond to pathogens in a generic way.
T cells recognize a "non-self" target, such as a pathogen, only after antigens (small fragments of the pathogen) have been processed and presented in combination with a "self" receptor called a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule.
Several layers of passive protection are provided by the mother.
This and other observations of acquired immunity were later exploited by Louis Pasteur in his development of vaccination and his proposed germ theory of disease.
These frequent changes in antigens may explain the failures of vaccines directed at this virus.
A B cell identifies pathogens when antibodies on its surface bind to a specific foreign antigen.
In addition there are regulatory T cells which  have a role in modulating immune response.
Evolution of the adaptive immune system occurred in an ancestor of the jawed vertebrates.
The T cell then travels throughout the body in search of cells where the MHC I receptors bear this antigen.
Natural killer cells, or NK cells, are a component of the innate immune system which does not directly attack invading microbes.
For example, female sex hormones are known immunostimulators of both adaptive and innate immune responses.
The B cell then displays these antigenic peptides on its surface MHC class II molecules.
Response is non-specific
On the other hand, the various subsets are also part of the innate immune system, as restricted TCR or NK receptors may be used as pattern recognition receptors.
It is now known that the MHC makeup on the surface of those cells is altered and the NK cells become activated through recognition of "missing self".
When an activated T cell contacts such cells, it releases cytotoxins, such as perforin, which form pores in the target cell's plasma membrane, allowing ions, water and toxins to enter.
In addition to the negative consequences of sleep deprivation, sleep and the intertwined circadian system have been shown to have strong regulatory effects on immunological functions affecting both the innate and the adaptive immunity.
The pathogen is killed by the activity of digestive enzymes or following a respiratory burst that releases free radicals into the phagolysosome.
Eicosanoids include prostaglandins that produce fever and the dilation of blood vessels associated with inflammation, and leukotrienes that attract certain white blood cells (leukocytes).
Neutrophils and macrophages are phagocytes that travel throughout the body in pursuit of invading pathogens.
It is during this time that undifferentiated, or less differentiated, like naïve and central memory T cells, peak (i.e.
First, inflammation would cause serious cognitive and physical impairments if it were to occur during wake times.
Active immunity can also be generated artificially, through vaccination.
during a time of a slowly evolving adaptive immune response).
In humans, this response is activated by complement binding to antibodies that have attached to these microbes or the binding of complement proteins to carbohydrates on the surfaces of microbes.
These reactions are mediated by T cells, monocytes, and macrophages.
Many species have complement systems, including non-mammals like plants, fish, and some invertebrates.
These cytokines then stimulate immune functions such as immune cells activation, proliferation, and differentiation.
One class of non-self molecules are called antigens (short for ''anti''body ''gen''erators) and are defined as substances that bind to specific immune receptors and elicit an immune response.
The self/nonself theory of immunity and the self/nonself vocabulary have been criticized, but remain very influential.
These animals possess a large array of molecules called Variable lymphocyte receptors (VLRs) that, like the antigen receptors of jawed vertebrates, are produced from only a small number (one or two) of genes.
In the stomach, gastric acid and proteases serve as powerful chemical defenses against ingested pathogens.
Paradoxically, macrophages can promote tumor growth  when tumor cells send out cytokines that attract macrophages, which then generate cytokines and growth factors that nurture tumor development.
Recognition of this MHC:antigen complex is aided by a co-receptor on the T cell, called CD8.
Exposure leads to immediate maximal response
This is called antigenic variation.
It contains over 20 different proteins and is named for its ability to "complement" the killing of pathogens by antibodies.
Immunology covers the study of all aspects of the immune system.
The conditions that produce responses from γδ T cells are not fully understood.
In the lungs, coughing and sneezing mechanically eject pathogens and other irritants from the respiratory tract.
Immunology is strongly experimental in everyday practice but is also characterized by an ongoing theoretical attitude.
The cells of the adaptive immune system are special types of leukocytes, called lymphocytes.
The immune system is affected by sleep and rest, and sleep deprivation is detrimental to immune function.
Exposure leads to immunological memory
Diets lacking sufficient protein are associated with impaired cell-mediated immunity, complement activity, phagocyte function, IgA antibody concentrations, and cytokine production.
Immunoproteomics is the study of large sets of proteins (proteomics) involved in the immune response.
Sometimes antibodies are generated against tumor cells allowing for their destruction by the complement system.
Pathogens can rapidly evolve and adapt, and thereby avoid detection and neutralization by the immune system; however, multiple defense mechanisms have also evolved to recognize and neutralize pathogens.
The flushing action of tears and urine also mechanically expels pathogens, while mucus secreted by the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract serves to trap and entangle microorganisms.
melanocytes) into tumors called melanomas.
Those MHC antigens are recognized by killer cell immunoglobulin receptors (KIR) which essentially put the brakes on NK cells.
This produces a catalytic cascade that amplifies the initial signal by controlled positive feedback.
Immunodeficiencies occur when one or more of the components of the immune system are inactive.
Offensive elements of the immune systems are also present in unicellular eukaryotes, but studies of their roles in defense are few.
Pathogen and antigen specific response
This milieu is also thought to support the formation of long-lasting immune memory through the initiation of Th1 immune responses.
The innate response is usually triggered when microbes are identified by pattern recognition receptors, which recognize components that are conserved among broad groups of microorganisms, or when damaged, injured or stressed cells send out alarm signals, many of which (but not all) are recognized by the same receptors as those that recognize pathogens.
B cells are involved in the humoral immune response, whereas T cells are involved in cell-mediated immune response.
However, as organisms cannot be completely sealed from their environments, other systems act to protect body openings such as the lungs, intestines, and the genitourinary tract.
This deliberate induction of an immune response is successful because it exploits the natural specificity of the immune system, as well as its inducibility.
Therefore, pathogens evolved several methods that allow them to successfully infect a host, while evading detection or destruction by the immune system.
These proteins are often used to shut down host defenses.
On one hand, γδ T cells are a component of adaptive immunity as they rearrange TCR genes to produce receptor diversity and can also develop a memory phenotype.
Found only in jawed vertebrates
The mechanisms used to evade the adaptive immune system are more complicated.
Here, a pathogen spends most of its life-cycle inside host cells, where it is shielded from direct contact with immune cells, antibodies and complement.
It is conjectured that a progressive decline in hormone levels with age is partially responsible for weakened immune responses in aging individuals.
Immunodeficiency occurs when the immune system is less active than normal, resulting in recurring and life-threatening infections.
