They claim that European imperialism was influential, and Europeans rejected the notion that "imperialism" required formal, legal control by one government over another country.
European expansion greatly accelerated in the 19th century.
The principles of imperialism are often generalizable to the policies and practices of the British Empire "during the last generation, and proceeds rather by diagnosis than by historical description".
Many others argued that imperialism is justified for several different reasons.
miles) at its height in the 1920s and 1930s.
By the year 1670 Britain imperialist ambitions were well off as she had colonies in Virginia, Bermudas, Honduras, Antigua, Barbados, Jamaica and Nova Scotia.
Imperialism and colonialism have been used in order to describe one's superiority, domination and influence upon a person or group of people.
During the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894, Japan absorbed Taiwan.
Further on, some writers used the term imperialism, in slightly more discriminating fashion, to mean all kinds of domination or control by a group of people over another.
This took place in a large number of military invasions of the lands east, west, and south of it.
Hobson argued that domestic social reforms could cure the international disease of imperialism by removing its economic foundation.
The colonization of India in the mid-18th century offers an example of this focus: there, the "British exploited the political weakness of the Mughal state, and, while military activity was important at various times, the economic and administrative incorporation of local elites was also of crucial significance" for the establishment of control over the subcontinent's resources, markets, and manpower.
Some of the main aspects of trade that went overseas consisted of animals and plant products.
After the First Boer War, the South African Republic and Orange Free State were recognized by Britain but eventually re-annexed after the Second Boer War.
by the races of highest 'social efficiency'".
The country of Australia serves as a case study in relation to British settlement and colonial rule of the continent in the eighteenth century, as it was premised on ''terra nullius'', and its settlers considered it unused by its sparse Aboriginal inhabitants.
The population of indigenous Siberian tribes was so complete that a relatively small population of only 180,000 72 are said to exist today.
European empires in Asia and Africa "have come to be seen as the classic forms of imperialism: and indeed most books on the subject confine themselves to the European seaborne empires".
The British spirit of imperialism was expressed by Joseph Chamberlain and Lord Rosebury, and implemented in Africa by Cecil Rhodes.
put even more pressure on the Soviet-American relations starting a new wave of anti-imperialist propaganda.
Those changes reflect – among other shifts in sensibility – a growing unease, even squeamishness, with the fact of power, specifically, Western power.
Liberal John A. Hobson and Marxist Vladimir Lenin added a more theoretical macroeconomic connotation to the term.
Political power grew from conquering land, however cultural and economic aspects flourished through sea and trade routes.
The greatest distinction of an empire is through the amount of land that a nation has conquered and expanded.
Some of these were later absorbed into the empire, while others were granted various types of autonomy during the course of centuries.
This provided incentives for imperial and colonial powers to obtain "information to fill in blank spaces on contemporary maps".
Its power, both military and economic, remained unmatched.
For Harley, maps serve as an example of Foucault’s power and knowledge concept.
Colonialism can completely change the existing social structure, physical structure and economics of an area; it is not unusual that the characteristics of the conquering peoples are inherited by the conquered indigenous populations.
France fought and lost a bitter war in Vietnam in the 1950s.
Their combined work informed the study of imperialism and its impact on Europe, as well as contributing to reflections on the rise of the military-political complex in the United States from the 1950s.
This is more than just "foreign" music, television or film becoming popular with young people, but that popular culture changing their own expectations of life and their desire for their own country to become more like the foreign country depicted.
The participation of Austria was primarily as a result of Habsburg control of the First Empire, the Spanish throne, and other royal houses.
Cartography is "the art, science and technology of making maps" but this definition is problematic.
The Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China supported post–World War II communist movements in foreign nations and colonies to advance their own interests, but were not always successful.
Britain continued to expand by colonizing countries such as New Zealand and Australia both of which were not empty land as they had their own locals and cultures.
"Formal imperialism" is defined as "physical control or full-fledged colonial rule".
Bismarck was aware that public opinion had started to demand colonies for reasons of German prestige.
The Ottoman Empire was an imperial state that lasted from 1299 to 1923.
This takes two forms, orientalism and tropicality.
According to Siad, orientalism allowed Europe to establish itself as the superior and the norm, which justified its dominance over the essentialized Orient.
The American commitment for self-determination also included a sense of Western superiority over a Third World filled with disorder and in need of guidance.
"Informal imperialism" is less direct; however, it is still a powerful form of dominance.
This technology gave European armies an advantage over their opponents, as armies in less-developed countries were still fighting with arrows, swords, and leather shields (e.g.
The bulk of British emigration, trade, and capital went to areas outside the formal British Empire.
The Russian leader Lenin suggested that "imperialism was the highest form of capitalism, claiming that imperialism developed after colonialism, and was distinguished from colonialism by monopoly capitalism".
However after 1945 anti-colonial movements began to challenge the Empire.
The core consists of high areas of income and profit; the periphery is on the opposing side of the spectrum consisting of areas of low income and profit.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, it was the second-largest colonial empire in the world behind the British Empire, extending over 12,347,000&nbsp;km2 (4,767,000 sq.
Robert Young writes that while imperialism operates from the center, is a state policy and is developed for ideological as well as financial reasons, colonialism is simply the development for settlement or commercial intentions.
By the 1880s, the machine gun had become an effective battlefield weapon.
That cultural differentiation was especially noticeable in the books and paintings of early Oriental studies, the European examinations of the Orient, which misrepresented the East as irrational and backward, the opposite of the rational and progressive West.
Eisenhower blocked British and French attempts to restore their colonial power in the Suez Crisis of 1956.
Cultural imperialism is when a country's influence is felt in social and cultural circles, i.e.
It implies that maps are objective representations of the world when in reality they serve very political means.
The extent to which "informal" imperialism with no formal colonies is properly described remains a controversial topic among historians.
Korea was annexed in 1910.
Some scholars hold that the Soviet Union was a hybrid entity containing elements common to both multinational empires and nation states.
It is mostly accepted that modern-day colonialism is an expression of imperialism and cannot exist without the latter.
Not a maritime power, and not a nation-state, as it would eventually become, Germany’s participation in Western imperialism was negligible until the late 19th century.
At the beginning of the 17th century the empire contained 32 provinces and numerous vassal states.
Sub-Saharan Africa has also featured dozens of empires that predate the European colonial era, for example the Ethiopian Empire, Oyo Empire, Asante Union, Luba Empire, Lunda Empire, and Mutapa Empire.
Britain made compensating gains in India, Australia, and in constructing an informal economic empire through control of trade and finance in Latin America after the independence of Spanish and Portuguese colonies about 1820.
A resurgence came in the late 19th century with the Scramble for Africa and major additions in Asia and the Middle East.
Key to their thinking is the idea of empire 'informally if possible and formally if necessary.'"
It has also allowed for the rapid spread of technologies and ideas.
Historians have debated exactly why Germany made this sudden and short-lived move.
The purportedly scientific nature of "Social Darwinism" and a theory of races formed a supposedly rational justification for imperialism.
The term imperialism has been applied to Western (and Japanese) political and economic dominance especially in Asia and Africa in the 19th and 20th centuries.
The Russian Empire exploited and suppressed Cossacks hosts during this period, before turning them into a special military estate Sosloviye in the late 18th century.
"The word ‘empire’ comes from the Latin word imperium; for which the closest modern English equivalent would perhaps be ‘sovereignty’, or simply ‘rule’".
During the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937, Japan's military invaded central China and by the end of the Pacific War, Japan had conquered much of the Far East, including  Hong Kong,  Vietnam, Cambodia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Indonesia, part of New Guinea and some islands of the Pacific Ocean.
In 1918, Japan occupied parts of far eastern Russia and parts of eastern Siberia as a participant in the Siberian Intervention.
The definition of imperialism has not been finalized for centuries and was confusedly seen to represent the policies of major powers, or simply, general-purpose aggressiveness.
Moreover, the ideas of imperialism were widely spread in action on the higher levels of government.
Cossacks were then used in Imperial Russian campaigns against other tribes.
Political geographers such as Friedrich Ratzel of Germany and Halford Mackinder of Britain also supported imperialism.
According to Bassett, "nineteenth-century explorers commonly requested Africans to sketch maps of unknown areas on the ground.
The establishment of the German colonial empire proceeded smoothly, starting with German New Guinea in 1884.
He felt that colonies did not pay for themselves, that the German bureaucratic system would not work well in the tropics and the diplomatic disputes over colonies would distract Germany from its central interest, Europe itself.
Across the three waves of European colonialism (first in the Americas, second in Asia and lastly in Africa), environmental determinism was used to categorically place indigenous people in a racial hierarchy.
Alongside the formal control it exerted over its own colonies, British dominance of much of world trade meant that it effectively controlled the economies of many regions, such as Asia and Latin America.
The Russian conquest of Siberia over the Khanate of Sibir took place in the 16th and 17th centuries, and resulted in the slaughter of various indigenous tribes by Russians, including the Daur, the Koryaks, the Itelmens, Mansi people and the Chukchi.
These societies also served as a space for travellers to share these stories.
To seek new markets and sources of raw materials, the Conservative Party under Disraeli launched a period of imperialist expansion in Egypt, South Africa, and elsewhere.
Historically recognized Muslim empires number in the dozens.
The importance of soft power is not lost on authoritarian regimes, fighting such influence with bans on foreign popular culture, control of the internet and unauthorised satellite dishes etc.
To obtain raw materials, Europe expanded imports from other countries and from the colonies.
This last conflict led to the ethnic cleansing of Circassians from their lands.
The Ottoman Empire saw military expansion and fiscalism as the source of wealth, with agriculture seen as more important than manufacture and commerce.
Concurrently, industrialization was quickly making Europe the center of manufacturing and economic growth, driving resource needs.
The concept environmental determinism served as a moral justification for domination of certain territories and peoples.
Alternatively, tropical climates yielded lazy attitudes, sexual promiscuity, exotic culture, and moral degeneracy.
With the establishment of trading posts in India, the British were able to maintain strength relative to others empires such as the Portuguese who already had set up trading posts in India.
Halford Mackinder felt that Great Britain needed to be one of the greatest imperialists and therefore justified imperialism.
A distinction about empires is "that although political empires were built mostly by expansion overland, economic and cultural influences spread at least as much by sea".
In his speech on the UN conference in 1960, he announced the continuation of the war on imperialism, stating that soon the people of different countries will come together and overthrow their imperialist leaders.
These scholars believed that Northern Europe and the Mid-Atlantic temperate climate produced a hard-working, moral, and upstanding human being.
Tropicality can be paralleled with Edward Said’s Orientalism as the west’s construction of the east as the “other”.
For example, depictions of opulent American lifestyles in the soap opera Dallas during the Cold War changed the expectations of Romanians; a more recent example is the influence of smuggled South Korean drama series in North Korea.
Particularly, Edward Said distinguishes the difference between imperialism and colonialism by stating; "imperialism involved 'the practice, the theory and the attitudes of a dominating metropolitan center ruling a distant territory', while colonialism refers to the 'implanting of settlements on a distant territory.'
European expansion caused the world to be divided by how developed and developing nation are portrayed through the world systems theory.
The word imperialism became common in Great Britain during the 1870s and was used with a negative connotation.
Imperialism is particularly focused on the control that one group, often a state power, has on another group of people.
In his writings Lenin portrayed Imperialism as the closure of the world market and the end of capitalist free-competition that arose from the need for capitalist economies to constantly expand investment, material resources and manpower in such a way that necessitated colonial expansion.
Such writers have expanded the period associated with the term so that it now designates neither a policy, nor a short space of decades in the late 19th century, but a world system extending over a period of centuries, often going back to Christopher Columbus and, in some accounts, to the Crusades.
His successors Harry S Truman and Dwight  Eisenhower helped facilitate independence for the Philippines (1946) and supported the independence of British and French colonies.
Imperialism has played an important role in the histories of Japan, Korea, India, China, Assyria, Ancient Egypt, Ancient Greece, the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Persian Empire, the Ottoman Empire, the British Empire, and many other empires.
After losing its first Empire to the Americans, Britain then turned its attention towards Asia, Africa, and the Pacific.
It also provided crucial manpower in both World Wars.
During this time, European merchants had the ability to "roam the high seas and appropriate surpluses from around the world (sometimes peaceably, sometimes violently) and to concentrate them in Europe".
John Cabot claimed Newfoundland for the British while the French established colonies along the St. Lawrence River and claiming it as "New France".
British imperialism often used the concept of Terra nullius (Latin expression which stems from Roman law meaning 'empty land').
In 1931 Japan conquered Manchuria from China.
Colonialism in modern usage also tends to imply a degree of geographic separation between the colony and the imperial power.
One year later, a war erupted in the Philippines causing business, labor and government leaders in the US to condemn America's occupation in the Philippines as they also denounced them for causing the deaths of many Filipinos.
With the beginning of the new era, the after Stalin period called the "thaw", in the late 1950s, the new political leader Nikita Khrushchev
Although a substantial number of colonies had been designed  to provide economic profit and to ship resources to home ports in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Fieldhouse suggests that in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in places such as Africa and Asia, this idea is not necessarily valid:
Many of those maps were highly regarded for their accuracy" but were not printed in Europe unless Europeans verified them.
Europe's expansion into territorial imperialism was largely focused on economic growth by collecting resources from colonies, in combination with assuming political control by military and political means.
This is consistent with the general notion of hegemony and imperium of historical empires.
The Royal Geographical Society of London and other geographical societies in Europe had great influence and were able to fund travelers who would come back with tales of their discoveries.
Domestically, political attitudes favoured free trade and laissez-faire policies and a gradual widening of the voting franchise.
Whereas they won the war in Algeria, the French leader at the time, Charles de Gaulle, decided to grant Algeria independence anyway in 1962.
Its colonial ambitions were ended by the victory of the United States in the Second World War and the following treaties which remanded those territories to American administration or their original owners.
Lenin in particular exerted substantial influence over later Marxist conceptions of imperialism with his work ''Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism'', first published in 1917.
In 1898, Americans who opposed imperialism created the Anti-Imperialist League to oppose the US annexation of the Philippines and Cuba.
During the 16th and 17th centuries, in particular at the height of its power under the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent, the Ottoman Empire was a  powerful multinational, multilingual empire, which invaded and colonized much of Southeast Europe, Western Asia, the Caucasus, North Africa, and the Horn of Africa.
Later Marxist theoreticians echo this conception of imperialism as a structural feature of capitalism.
Britain's nationalistic movements were evident with the creation of the common wealth countries where there was a shared nature of national identity.
Along with advancements in communication, Europe also continued to advance in military technology.
Hobson theorized that state intervention through taxation could boost broader consumption, create wealth, and encourage a peaceful, tolerant, multipolar world order.
Between 1800 and 1864, Imperial armies invaded south in the Russian conquest of the Caucasus, the Murid War, and the Russo-Circassian War.
Due to the vast imperialist ambitions of European countries, Britain had several clashes with France.
The British Empire expanded to include India, large parts of Africa and many other territories throughout the world.
The empire allied with Germany in the early 20th century, with the imperial ambition of recovering its lost territories, but it dissolved in the aftermath of World War I, leading to the emergence of the new state of Turkey in the Ottoman Anatolian heartland, as well as the creation of modern Balkan and Middle Eastern states, thus ending Turkish colonial ambitions.
"In their view, historians have been mesmerized by formal empire and maps of the world with regions colored red.
In 1767 political activity caused exploitation of the East India Company causing the plundering of the local economy, almost bringing the company into bankruptcy.
Its name originated from the Latin word ''imperium'', which means to rule over large territories.
In economic terms, neither the Marxian Asiatic mode of production, nor the feudal mode found in medieval Europe reflect the Ottoman economy accurately, as it falls somewhere in between the two — excess peasant production was taxed by the state as opposed to it being paid in rent to feudal lords.
The meaning of imperialism is to create an empire, by conquering the other state's lands and therefore increasing its own dominance.
This is because, with informal rule, the control is spread more subtly through technological superiority, enforcing land officials into large debts that cannot be repaid, ownership of private industries thus expanding the controlled area, or having countries agree to uneven trade agreements forcefully.
This idea has been supported by Ottomanists Halil İnalcik and Suraiya Faroqhi .
In 1884 the leading exponent of colonialism, Jules Ferry declared France had a civilising mission: "The higher races have a right over the lower races, they have a duty to civilize the inferior".
Colonialism is when the imperial nation begins a conquest over an area and then eventually is able to rule over the areas the previous nation had controlled.
Historians and political theorists have long debated the correlation between capitalism, aristocracy, and imperialism.
Nor is such a usage of culture recent, as part of Roman imperialism local elites would be exposed to the benefits and luxuries of Roman culture and lifestyle, with the aim that they would then become willing participants.
The war resulted in Poland being absorbed by Imperial Russia as a colony until 1918.
British imperialism continued after World War II.
Non-Russian Marxists within the Russian Federation and later the USSR, like Sultan Galiev and Vasyl Shakhrai, considered the Soviet Regime a renewed version of the Russian imperialism and colonialism.
It became a moral justification to lift the world up to French standards by bringing Christianity and French culture.
With Istanbul as its capital and control of lands around the Mediterranean basin, the Ottoman Empire was at the center of interactions between the Eastern and Western worlds for six centuries.
There was, however, little cultural integration or national identity, and "Germany" remained largely a conceptual term referring to an amorphous area of central Europe.
Its settlers and many local supporters relocated to France.
As the application of the term has expanded, its meaning has shifted along five distinct but often parallel axes: the moral, the economic, the systemic, the cultural, and the temporal.
Its precise meaning continues to be debated by scholars.
A controversial aspect of imperialism is the defense and justification of empire-building based on seemingly rational grounds.
The Polish-Russian War of 1792 took place after Polish nobility from the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth wrote the Constitution of May 3, 1791.
This is often through various forms of "othering" (see other) based on racial, religious, or cultural stereotypes.
its soft power, such that it changes the moral, cultural and societal worldview of another.
Although imperialism and colonialism focus on the suppression of ''an other'', if colonialism refers to the process of a country taking physical control of another, imperialism refers to the political and monetary dominance, either formally or informally.
European industrialists sought raw materials such as dyes, cotton, vegetable oils, and metal ores from overseas.
The pseudo-sciences of Social Darwinism and theories of race formed an ideological underpinning during this time.
The First British Empire was based on mercantilism, and involved colonies and holdings primarily in North America, the Caribbean, and India.
Following the defeat of Napoleonic France in 1815, Britain enjoyed a century of almost unchallenged dominance and expanded its imperial holdings around the globe.
Never formally revoked, it stopped being implemented after 1932.
As it developed, the new empire took on roles of trade with France, supplying raw materials and purchasing manufactured items, as well as lending prestige to the motherland and spreading French civilization and language as well as Catholicism.
Therefore, Orientalism was the ideological justification of early Western imperialism — a body of knowledge and ideas that rationalized social, cultural, political, and economic control of other, non-white peoples.
The term ''imperialism'' was originally introduced into English in its present sense in the late 1870s by opponents of the allegedly aggressive and ostentatious imperial policies of British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli.
Unchallenged at sea, British dominance was later described as ''Pax Britannica'' ("British Peace"), a period of relative peace in Europe and the world (1815–1914) during which the British Empire became the global hegemon and adopted the role of global policeman.
Defining the East as a negative vision of the Western world, as its inferior, not only increased the sense-of-self of the West, but also was a way of ordering the East, and making it known to the West, so that it could be dominated and controlled.
This idea from Lenin stresses how important new political world order has become in our modern era.
Although by 1000 CE, the Germanic conquest of central, western, and southern Europe (west of and including Italy) was complete, excluding only Muslim Iberia.
The Americas during the pre-Columbian era also had large empires such as the Aztec Empire and the Incan Empire.
Japan also invaded Thailand, pressuring the country into a Thai/Japanese alliance.
In Britain, the word had until then mostly been used to refer to the politics of Napoleon III in obtaining favorable public opinion in France through foreign military interventions.
Other influential spokesmen included Lord Cromer, Lord Curzon, General Kitchner, Lord Milner, and the writer Rudyard Kipling.
With the invention of railroads and telegraphs, it became easier to communicate with other countries and to extend the administrative control of a home nation over its colonies.
Imperialism and colonialism both dictate the political and economic advantage over a land and the indigenous populations they control, yet scholars sometimes find it difficult to illustrate the difference between the two.
During his analysis of nineteenth-century cartographic techniques, he highlights the use of blank space to denote unknown or unexplored territory.
Imperialism was a basic component to the conquests of Genghis Khan during the Mongol Empire, and of other war-lords.
Britain's imperialist ambitions can be seen as early as the sixteenth century.
By the 1840s, Britain had adopted a highly successful policy of free trade that gave it dominance in the trade of much of the world.
From their original homelands in Scandinavia and northern Europe, Germanic tribes expanded throughout northern and western Europe in the middle period of classical antiquity; southern Europe in late antiquity, conquering Celtic and other peoples; and by 800 CE, forming the Holy Roman Empire, the first German Empire.
Soon thereafter the various anti-colonial / anti-imperial movements that erupted throughout the 1950s marked the end of the British Empire
Western mercantilists gave more emphasis to manufacture and industry in the wealth-power-wealth equation, moving towards capitalist economics comprising expanding industries and markets whereas the Ottomans continued along the trajectory of territorial expansion, traditional monopolies, conservative land holding and agriculture.
Although the Soviet Union declared itself anti-imperialist, critics argue that it exhibited tendencies common to historic empires.
It has also been argued that the USSR practiced colonialism as did other imperial powers and was carrying on the old Russian tradition of expansion and control.
the Zulus in Southern Africa during the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879).
Following a long period of military setbacks against European powers, the Ottoman Empire gradually declined into the late nineteenth century.
Its growth was reversed by the loss of the American colonies in 1776.
Beginning in 1923, the policy of "Indigenization" korenizatsiia was intended to support non-Russians develop their national cultures within a socialist framework.
The rhetoric of colonizers being racially superior appears to have achieved its purpose, for example throughout Latin America "whiteness" is still prized today and various forms of blanqueamiento (whitening) are common.
During the 20th century, historians John Gallagher (1919–1980) and Ronald Robinson (1920–1999) constructed a framework for understanding European imperialism.
Republicans, at first hostile to empire, only became supportive when Germany started to build her own colonial empire.
This competition was evident in the colonization of what is now known as Canada.
A. Hobson identifies this justification on general grounds as: "It is desirable that the earth should be peopled, governed, and developed, as far as possible, by the races which can do this work best, i.e.
By the 18th century, the Russian Empire extended its control to the Pacific, forming a common border with the Qing Empire.
Railroads and globalized shipping assisted in transporting massive amounts of goods to and from colonies.
During this century, the population increased at a dramatic rate, accompanied by rapid urbanisation, causing significant social and economic stresses.
