It's unsettling in a wonderful way".
L.A. was also the site of the climactic scene where a Ford Econoline van flies off the Schuyler Heim Bridge in slow motion.
''Mind Crime'' also received a stage&nbsp;2 with more resources, including a hidden trailer for the movie.
He criticized Nolan's "literal-minded" action level sequencing compared to Buñuel, who "silently pushed us into reveries and left us alone to enjoy our wonderment, but Nolan is working on so many levels of representation at once that he has to lay in pages of dialogue just to explain what's going on."
Nolan described Mal as "the essence of the femme fatale", the key ''noir'' reference in the film.
As the film's main antagonist, she is a frequent, malevolent presence in his dreams.
''Inception'' was ranked 84th on ''Hollywood's 100 Favorite Films'', a list compiled by ''The Hollywood Reporter'' in 2014, surveying "Studio chiefs, Oscar winners and TV royalty".
That always felt the right ending to me — it always felt like the appropriate 'kick' to me...
David Denby in ''The New Yorker'' compared Nolan's cinematic treatment of dreams to Luis Buñuel's in ''Belle de Jour'' (1967) and ''The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie'' (1972).
The location manager discovered a temporarily closed ski resort, Fortress Mountain.
Warner Bros. also made available in the United States a limited Blu-ray edition packaged in a metal replica of the PASIV briefcase, which included extras such as a metal replica of the spinning top totem.
Sedated for a few hours of real time, they spent fifty years in dream time constructing a world from their shared memories.
''Empire'' magazine rated it five stars in the August&nbsp;2010 issue and wrote, "it feels like Stanley Kubrick adapting the work of the great sci-fi author William Gibson ... Nolan delivers another true original: welcome to an undiscovered country."
However, "he did get many aspects right," she said, citing the scene in which a sleeping Cobb is shoved into a full bath, and in the dream world water gushes into the windows of the building, waking him up.
The visual effects department then enhanced the sequence, adding more destruction and flying debris.
After the 2002 completion of ''Insomnia'', Nolan presented to Warner Bros. a written 80-page treatment about a horror film envisioning "dream stealers" based on lucid dreaming.
Filming moved to the Los Angeles area, where some sets were built on a Warner Brothers sound stage, including the interior rooms of Saito's Japanese castle (the exterior was done on a small set built in Malibu beach).
Yusuf drives the van as the other dreamers are sedated into the second level.
The majority of the score was also included in high resolution 5.1 surround sound on the 2nd disc of the 2 disc Blu-ray release  Hans Zimmer's music was nominated for an Academy Award in the Best Original Score category in 2011, losing to Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross of ''The Social Network''.
Richard Roeper, also of the ''Sun-Times'', gave ''Inception'' a perfect score of "A+" and called it "one of the best movies of the 21st century."
On June&nbsp;7,&nbsp;2010, a behind-the-scenes featurette on the film was released in HD on Yahoo!
If you can't make those elements work, it's a sad day."
After the revelation of the first teaser trailer, in August&nbsp;2009, the film's official website featured only an animation of Cobb's spinning top.
While some critics have tended to view the film as perfectly straightforward, and even criticize its overarching themes as "the stuff of torpid platitudes," online discussion has been much more positive.
After making ''The Dark Knight'', Nolan decided to make ''Inception'' and spent six months completing the script.
To break up the energy conglomerate of ailing competitor Maurice Fischer (Pete Postlethwaite), Saito wants Cobb to convince Fischer's son and heir, Robert (Cillian Murphy), to dissolve his father's company.
The film currently stands as the 44th-highest-grossing of all time.
In this way, exposition takes precedence over characterisation.
Its official budget was US$160&nbsp;million, split between Warner Bros and Legendary.
Filming moved to France where they shot Cobb entering the college of architecture (the place used for the entrance was the Musée Galliera) and the pivotal scenes between Ariadne and Cobb, in a bistro (a fictional one set up at the corner of Rue César Franck and Rue Bouchut) and then on the Bir-Hakeim bridge.
The majority of the film's plot takes place in these interconnected dream worlds.
The idea was inspired by a technique used in Stanley Kubrick's ''2001: A Space Odyssey'' (1968).
Escher or a state-of-the-biz video game; the backwards splicing of Nolan's own ''Memento'' looks rudimentary by comparison."
Sequences in slow motion were filmed on a Photo-Sonics 35mm camera at speeds of up to 1000 frames per second.
Their relationships are created by their respective skills and roles.
This structure creates a framework where actions in the real or dream worlds ripple across others.
Upon arrival at Los Angeles Airport, Cobb passes the U.S. immigration checkpoint and Professor Miles accompanies him to his home.
Out of the six times we shot with the Photo-Sonics camera and 35mm running through it, every single shot was in the movie."
''Inception''s première was held in London on July&nbsp;8,&nbsp;2010; its wide release to both conventional and IMAX theaters began on July 16, 2010.
That's a tall order.
To capture this sequence, Pfister employed a mix of hand-held camera and steadicam work.
And it has to work on a massive scale."
They point out that the top was Mal's totem; Cobb's was his wedding ring, as he can be seen wearing it whenever he is in a dream and without it whenever he isn't.
I'm the guy who invented the dream."
In the same year, Total Film named it the most rewatchable movie of all time.
Nolan has said that the film "deals with levels of reality, and perceptions of reality which is something I'm very interested in.
In 2014, ''Empire'' ranked ''Inception'' the tenth greatest film ever made on their list of "The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time" as voted by the magazine's readers, while ''Rolling Stone'' magazine named it the second best science fiction film since the turn of the century.
A hotel corridor was also constructed by Guy Hendrix Dyas, the production designer, Chris Corbould, the special effects supervisor, and Wally Pfister, the director of photography; it rotated a full 360&nbsp;degrees to create the effect of alternate directions of gravity for scenes set during the second level of dreaming, where dream-sector physics become chaotic.
Others have argued that the film is itself a metaphor for film-making, and that the filmgoing experience itself, images flashing before one's eyes in a darkened room, is akin to a dream.
And we – FADE OUT".
While Eames sets up a kick by rigging the fortress with explosives, Cobb and Ariadne enter Limbo to rescue Fischer and Saito.
Cobb's house was in Pasadena.
The website offers the consensus: "Smart, innovative, and thrilling, ''Inception'' is that rare summer blockbuster that succeeds viscerally as well as intellectually."
An instrumental track by Joe Budden is titled "Inception."
Nolan also chose not to shoot any of the film in 3D as he prefers shooting on film using prime lenses, which is not possible with 3D cameras.
For the Paris-folding sequence, Franklin had artists producing concept sketches and then they created rough computer animations to give them an idea of what the sequence looked like while in motion.
That's the emotional significance of the thing."
They were based in the principles that the world around you might not be real."
''Inception''s opening weekend gross made it the second-highest-grossing debut for a science-fiction film that was not a sequel, remake or adaptation, behind ''Avatar'' $77&nbsp;million opening weekend gross in 2009.
The first level is Yusuf's dream of a rainy Los Angeles.
For the "Paris folding" sequence and when Ariadne "creates" the bridges, green screen and CGI were used on location.
The team takes Fischer and a wounded Saito to a warehouse, where Cobb reveals that while dying in the dream would normally wake Saito up, the powerful sedatives needed to stabilize the multi-level dream will instead send a dying dreamer into "limbo", a world of infinite subconscious from which escape is difficult and a dreamer risks forgetting they are in a dream.
Nolan began with the structure of a heist movie, since exposition is an essential element of that genre, though adapted it to have a greater emotional narrative suited to the world of dreams and subconscious.
Yusuf, under pursuit by Fischer's projections in the first level, deliberately drives off a bridge and initiates his kick too soon.
The film's script concludes with "Behind him, on the table, the spinning top is STILL SPINNING.
The ''New York Post'' gave the film a four-star rating and Lou Lumenick wrote, "DiCaprio, who has never been better as the tortured hero, draws you in with a love story that will appeal even to non-sci-fi fans."
It has to feel like you could go anywhere by the end of the film.
Paul argued that the experience of going to a picturehouse is itself an exercise in shared dreaming, particularly when viewing ''Inception'': the film's sharp cutting between scenes forces the viewer to create larger narrative arcs to stitch the pieces together.
''Inception'' was released on DVD and Blu-ray on December&nbsp;3,&nbsp;2010, in France, and the week after in the UK and USA (December&nbsp;7,&nbsp;2010).
Rex Reed of ''The New York Observer'' explained the film's development as "pretty much what we've come to expect from summer movies in general and Christopher Nolan movies in particular ... it doesn't seem like much of an accomplishment to me."
''Entertainment Weekly'' gave the film a B+ rating and Lisa Schwarzbaum wrote, "It's a rolling explosion of images as hypnotizing and sharply angled as any in a drawing by M.C.
More pieces of viral marketing began to surface before ''Inception''s release, such as a manual filled with bizarre images and text sent to ''Wired'' magazine, and the online publication of posters, ads, phone applications, and strange websites all related to the film.
By contrast, the world of ''The Matrix'' (1999) is an authoritarian, computer-controlled one, alluding to theories of social control developed by Michel Foucault and Jean Baudrillard.
Some pundits have pointed out that the top was not in fact Cobb's totem, rendering the discussion irrelevant.
"Out of six times that we shot on the digital format, we only had one useable piece and it didn't end up in the film.
Wally Pfister gave each location and dream level a distinctive look to aid the audience's recognition of the narrative's location during the heavily crosscut portion of the film: the mountain fortress appears sterile and cool, the hotel hallways have warm hues, and the scenes in the van are more neutral.
Leonardo DiCaprio was the first actor to be cast in the film.
The production also staged a multi-vehicle car chase on the streets of downtown Los Angeles, which involved a freight train crashing down the middle of a street.
In March 2011, the film was voted by BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 1Xtra listeners as their ninth favorite film of all time.
Kroll declared that "We don't have the brand equity that usually drives a big summer opening, but we have a great cast and a fresh idea from a filmmaker with a track record of making incredible movies.
Several sources have noted many plot similarities between the film and the 2002 Uncle Scrooge comic ''The Dream of a Lifetime'' by Don Rosa.
While a traditional heist movie has a heavy dose of exposition at the beginning as the team assembles and the leader explains the plan, in ''Inception'' this becomes nearly continuous as the group progresses through the various levels of dreaming.
Other critics read ''Inception'' as Christian allegory and focus on the film's use of religious and water symbolism.
Therein the manipulator is often the one who ends up manipulated and Cobb's "not caring" about whether or not his world is real may be the price of happiness and release.
Nolan drew inspiration from the works of Jorge Luis Borges, the anime film ''Paprika'' (2006) by the late Satoshi Kon as an influence on the character "Ariadne", and ''Blade Runner'' (1982) by Ridley Scott.
Kristin Thompson argued that exposition was a major formal device in the film.
It won four Academy Awards for Best Cinematography, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Visual Effects, and was nominated for four more: Best Picture, Best Original Score, Best Art Direction, and Best Original Screenplay.
Writing in ''Wired'', Jonah Lehrer supported this interpretation and presented neurological evidence that brain activity is strikingly similar during film-watching and sleeping.
The production had to wait for a huge snowstorm, which eventually arrived.
''Los Angeles Times'' Kenneth Turan felt that Nolan was able to blend "the best of traditional and modern filmmaking.
I realized I needed to raise the emotional stakes."
The real point of the scene — and this is what I tell people — is that Cobb isn't looking at the top.
Ariadne, like her ancient namesake, creates the maze and guides the others through it, but also helps Cobb navigate his own subconscious, and as the sole student of dream sharing, helps the audience understand the concept of the plot.
It's a breathtaking juggling act."
A foot chase was shot in the streets and alleyways of the historic medina quarter.
"And when they ask you to act, it's a bit of an ask," explained Cillian Murphy.
Chris Nolan really likes people to see his movies in a theater and not see it all beforehand so everything that you do to market that—at least early on—is with an eye to feeding the interest to fans."
The studio also tried to maintain a campaign of secrecy—as reported by the Senior VP of Interactive Marketing, Michael Tritter, "You have this movie which is going to have a pretty big built in fanbase... but you also have a movie that you are trying to keep very secret.
Tokyo in June 19 and ending in Canada in November 22.
For the fight scene that takes place in zero gravity, he used CG-based effects to "subtly bend elements like physics, space and time."
A viral marketing campaign was employed for the film.
At Bir-Hakeim bridge in Paris, Ariadne creates an illusion of infinity by adding facing mirrors underneath its struts, Stephanie Dreyfus in ''la Croix'' asked "Is this not a strong, beautiful metaphor for the cinema and its power of illusion?"
In February 2011 Jonathan Liebesman suggested that Warner Bros were attempting a 3D conversion for Blu-ray release.
Also, Michael Caine explained his interpretation of the ending, saying, "If I'm there it's real, because I'm never in the dream.
''USA Today'' rated the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and Claudia Puig felt that Nolan "regards his viewers as possibly smarter than they are—or at least as capable of rising to his inventive level.
On February 11, 2009, it was announced that Warner Bros. purchased ''Inception'', a spec script written by Nolan.
It's an action film set in a contemporary world, but with a slight science-fiction bent to it," while also describing it as "very much an ensemble film structured somewhat as a heist movie.
In return, Saito promises to use his influence to clear Cobb of a murder charge, allowing Cobb to return home to his children.
Nolan said, "It's always very important to me to do as much as possible in-camera, and then, if necessary, computer graphics are very useful to build on or enhance what you have achieved physically."
Asaf Avidan's "The Labyrinth Song", from his album ''Gold Shadow'', is set in the film and speaks from one of the character's perspectives.
While dream-sharing with Cobb, Ariadne learns his subconscious houses an invasive projection of his late wife Mal (Marion Cotillard).
With ''Inception'', viewers have a chance to see that notion get a state-of-the-art update."
The production moved to the United Kingdom and shot in a converted airship hangar in Cardington, Bedfordshire, north of London.
On July&nbsp;15,&nbsp;2009, filming took place at University College London for the sequences occurring inside a Paris college of architecture in the story, including the library, Flaxman Gallery and Gustav Tuck Theatre.
In his review for the ''Chicago Tribune'', Michael Phillips gave the film 3 stars out of 4 and wrote, "I found myself wishing ''Inception'' were weirder, further out ... the film is Nolan's labyrinth all the way, and it's gratifying to experience a summer movie with large visual ambitions and with nothing more or less on its mind than (as Shakespeare said) a dream that hath no bottom."
The replica was made from fiberglass molds taken from authentic train parts and then matched in terms of color and design.
Later during principal photography, Nolan was able to direct Leonardo DiCaprio and Ellen Page based on this rough computer animation Franklin had created.
This sequence was filmed on and off for months with the van being shot out of a cannon, according to actor Dileep Rao.
As in the film's story, in a cinema one enters into the space of another's dream, in this case Nolan's, as with any work of art, one's reading of it is ultimately influenced by one's own subjective desires and subconscious.
However, when she woke up, Mal was still convinced that she was dreaming.
Really the script is based on those common, very basic experiences and concepts, and where can those take you?
The dining room was inspired by the Nijo Castle built around 1603.
DiCaprio and Nolan spent months talking about the screenplay.
''Telegraph''s Tim Robey stated, "It's a criminal failing of the movie that it purports to be about people’s dreams being invaded, but demonstrates no instinct at all for what a dream has ever felt like, and no flair for making us feel like we're in one, at any point."
In ''Variety'', Justin Chang praised the film as "a conceptual tour de force" and wrote, "applying a vivid sense of procedural detail to a fiendishly intricate yarn set in the labyrinth of the unconscious mind, the writer-director has devised a heist thriller for surrealists, a Jungian's ''Rififi'', that challenges viewers to sift through multiple layers of (un)reality."
David Denby, writing in ''The New Yorker'', considered the film not nearly as much fun as Nolan imagined it to be, concluding, "''Inception'' is a stunning-looking film that gets lost in fabulous intricacies, a movie devoted to its own workings and to little else."
The team abducts Fischer, but they are attacked by armed projections from Fischer's subconscious, which has been trained to defend against extraction.
Revived at the mountain fortress, Fischer enters a safe room to discover and accept the planted idea: a projection of his dying father telling him to be his own man.
The film won many awards in technical categories, such as Academy Awards for Best Cinematography, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Visual Effects, and the British Academy Film Awards for Best Production Design, Best Special Visual Effects and Best Sound.
In 2012, ''Inception'' was ranked the 35th Best Edited Film of All Time by the  Motion Picture Editors Guild.
The film had its world premiere at Leicester Square in London, United Kingdom on July&nbsp;8,&nbsp;2010.
In April 2014, ''The Daily Telegraph'' placed the title on its top ten list of the most overrated films.
Lo ("On the Floor" featuring Pitbull), and B.o.B ("Strange Clouds")' while T.I.
Cobb eventually finds an aged Saito in Limbo and reminds him of their agreement.
If you're searching for smart and nervy popular entertainment, this is what it looks like."
The film won an informal poll by The ''Los Angeles Times'' as the most overrated movie of 2010.
But it's refreshing to find a director who makes us stretch, even occasionally struggle, to keep up."
Not be bound by the scale of those IMAX cameras, even though I love the format dearly".
The whole point of cinematic imagery is it's three dimensional... You know 95% of our depth cues come from occlusion, resolution, color and so forth, so the idea of calling a 2D movie a '2D movie' is a little misleading."
Overall the film made $62.7&nbsp;million and debuted at No.1 on its opening weekend.
The trailer quickly went viral with numerous mashups copying its style, both by amateurs on sites like YouTube and by professionals on sites such as CollegeHumor.
The filmmakers originally planned to make the hallway only 40&nbsp;ft (12&nbsp;m) long, but as the action sequence became more elaborate, the hallway's length grew to 100&nbsp;ft (30&nbsp;m).
Nolan confirmed that the ambiguity was deliberate, saying, "I've been asked the question more times than I've ever been asked any other question about any other film I've made... What's funny to me is that people really do expect me to answer it."
Mal's projection emerges and kills Fischer, Cobb kills Mal, and Saito succumbs to his wounds; all three fall into Limbo.
The ski-chase sequence was inspired by Nolan's favorite James Bond film, ''On Her Majesty's Secret Service'' (1969): "What I liked about it that we've tried to emulate in this film is there's a tremendous balance in that movie of action and scale and romanticism and tragedy and emotion."
Franklin had artists build concepts while Nolan gave his ideal vision: "Something glacial, with clear modernist architecture, but with chunks of it breaking off into the sea like icebergs".
Perhaps playing off the film's game imagery, ''Rolling Stone'' magazine's Peter Travers called ''Inception'' a "wildly ingenious chess game," and concluded "the result is a knockout."
These sets were inspired by a mix of Japanese architecture and Western influences.
Emphasizing on professional-scale experience, Nolan retired the project and instead worked on 2005's ''Batman Begins'', 2006's ''The Prestige'', and ''The Dark Knight'' in 2008.
Cobb tests reality using his totem, a spinning top that spins indefinitely in a dream world, but ignores its result and instead joins his children in the garden.
''Time'' magazine's Richard Corliss wrote the film's "noble intent is to implant one man's vision in the mind of a vast audience ...
He read the script and found it to be "very well written, comprehensive but you really had to have Chris in person, to try to articulate some of the things that have been swirling around his head for the last eight years."
Warner also released an online prequel comic, ''Inception: The Cobol Job''.
The movie is a metaphor for the power of delusional hype—a metaphor for itself."
The film cuts to the closing credits from a shot of the top apparently starting to show an ever so faint wobble, inviting speculation about whether the final sequence was reality or another dream.
Numerous pop and hip hop songs reference ''Inception'', including Common ("Blue Sky"), N.E.R.D ("Hypnotize U"), XV ("The Kick"), The Black Eyed Peas ("Just Can’t Get Enough"), Lil Wayne ("6 Foot 7 Foot" featuring Cory Gunz), J.
The light fixtures on the ceiling are coming around on the floor, and you have to choose the right time to cross through them, and if you don't, you're going to fall."
The film held the top spot of the box office rankings in its second and third weekends, with drops of just 32% ($42.7&nbsp;million) and 36% ($27.5&nbsp;million) respectively, before dropping to second place in its fourth week, behind ''The Other Guys''.
Also, the car chase was supposed to be set in the midst of a downpour but the L.A. weather stayed typically sunny.
In addition Nolan and Pfister tested using Showscan and Super Dimension 70 as potential large format high frame rate camera systems to use for the film, but ultimately decided against either format.
Nolan's world has more in common with the works of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari.
''Relevant Magazine''s David Roark called it Nolan's greatest accomplishment, saying, "Visually, intellectually and emotionally, ''Inception'' is a masterpiece."
Jim Vejvoda of IGN rated the film as perfect, deeming it "a singular accomplishment from a filmmaker who has only gotten better with each film."
Cobb persuades him to go down another level to explore Browning's subconscious (in reality, it is a ruse to enter Fischer's).
In both, the visual cortex is highly active and the prefrontal cortex, which deals with logic, deliberate analysis, and self-awareness, is quiet.
'''''Inception''''' is a 2010 science fiction heist thriller film written, co-produced, and directed by Christopher Nolan, and co-produced by Emma Thomas.
For the explosion that takes place during the bistro scene, the local authorities would not allow the actual use of explosives.
In the United States and Canada, ''Inception'' was released theatrically in 3,792 conventional theaters and 195 IMAX theaters.
In polls conducted by CinemaScore during the opening weekend cinemagoers gave ''Inception'' an average score of "B+".
Nolan said, "I put that cut there at the end, imposing an ambiguity from outside the film.
It's as if someone went into their heads while they were sleeping and planted the idea that ''Inception'' is a visionary masterpiece and—hold on ... Whoa!
Nolan said of the device, "It was like some incredible torture device; we thrashed Joseph for weeks, but in the end we looked at the footage, and it looks unlike anything any of us has seen before.
The hotel lobby was filmed at the CAA building in Century City.
Not all reviewers gave the film positive reviews.
Deirdre Barrett, a dream researcher at Harvard University, said that Nolan did not get every detail accurate regarding dreams, but their illogical, rambling, disjointed plots would not make for a great thriller anyway.
This removes the gravity of Arthur's level, forcing him to improvise a new kick that will synchronize with the van hitting the water, and causes an avalanche in Eames' level.
Nolan took a long time re-writing the script in order "to make sure that the emotional journey of his character was the driving force of the movie."
An elaborate set was assembled near the top station of the Canadian chairlift, taking three months to build.
Tangier was also used to film an important riot scene during the initial foray into Saito's mind.
Numerous television shows have also made reference to or have parodied ''Inception''.
When the elder Fischer dies in Sydney, Robert Fischer accompanies the body on a ten-hour flight back to Los Angeles, which the team (including Saito, who wants to verify their success) uses as an opportunity to sedate and take Fischer into a shared dream.
Nolan himself said, "I tried to work that idea of manipulation and management of a conscious dream being a skill that these people have.
Furthermore, the children were portrayed by different actors, indicating they had aged.
Or, as Denby surmised, "the outer shell of the story is an elaborate caper".
Eames impersonates Fischer's godfather, Peter Browning (Tom Berenger), to suggest Fischer reconsider his father's will.
Through his confession, Cobb makes peace with his guilt over Mal's death.
Mark Fisher argued that "a century of cultural theory" cautions against accepting the author's interpretation as anything more than a supplementary text, and this all the more so given the theme of the instability of any one master position in Nolan's films.
Mr. Nolan's idea of the mind is too literal, too logical, and too rule-bound to allow the full measure of madness."
In most of its artistic nominations, such as Film, Director, and Screenplay at the Oscars, BAFTAs and Golden Globes, the film was defeated by ''The Social Network'' and ''The King's Speech''.
The idea of moviegoing as communal dreaming is a century old.
However, the film did win the two highest honors for a science fiction or fantasy film: the 2011 Bradbury Award for best dramatic production and the 2011 Hugo Award for best dramatic presentation, long form.
The corridor was suspended along eight large concentric rings that were spaced equidistantly outside its walls and powered by two massive electric motors.
This demand of production parallel to consumption of the images, on the part of the audience is analogous to dreaming itself.
Pfister used six high-speed cameras to capture the sequence from different angles and make sure that they got the shot.
Upon revisiting his script, he decided that basing it in that genre did not work because the story "relies so heavily on the idea of the interior state, the idea of dream and memory.
When he first started thinking about making the film, Nolan was influenced by "that era of movies where you had ''The Matrix'' (1999), you had ''Dark City'' (1998), you had ''The Thirteenth Floor'' (1999) and, to a certain extent, you had ''Memento'' (2000), too.
''Inception'' opened to acclaim from critics, who praised its story, score, and ensemble cast.
Nolan has also criticized the dim image that 3D projection produces, and disputes that traditional film does not allow realistic depth perception, saying "I think it's a misnomer to call it 3D versus 2D.
Metacritic, another review aggregator, assigned the film a weighted average score of 74 (out of 100) based on 42 reviews from mainstream critics, considered to be "generally favorable reviews."
The dreamers all awaken on the plane and Saito makes a phone call.
