Stick machines are sometimes used, which coat the stick with paste and perfume, though the bulk of production is done by hand rolling at home.
Joss-stick burning is an everyday practice in traditional Chinese religion.
The basic ingredients are the bamboo stick, the paste (generally made of charcoal dust and joss/jiggit/gum/tabu powder - an adhesive made from the bark of litsea glutinosa and other trees), and the perfume ingredients - which would be a masala (spice mix) powder of ground ingredients into which the stick would be rolled, or a perfume liquid sometimes consisting of synthetic ingredients into which the stick would be dipped.
They are composed of the dried powdered bark of a non-scented species of cinnamon native to Cambodia, ''Cinnamomum cambodianum''.
The higher the oil content relative to the dry mass, the less likely the mixture is to burn effectively.
*Whole: The incense material is burned directly in its raw unprocessed form on top of coal embers.
Gums such as Gum Arabic or Gum Tragacanth are used to bind the mixture together while an oxidizer such as sodium nitrate or potassium nitrate sustains the burning of the incense.
The poet Yu Jianwu (487-551) first recorded them: "By burning incense we know the o'clock of the night, With graduated candles we confirm the tally of the watches."
Kyara is currently worth more than its weight in gold.
In Greece this rolled incense resin is called 'Moskolibano', and generally comes in either a pink or green colour denoting the fragrance, with pink being rose and green being jasmine.
Additional coatings of incense mixture can be applied after each period of successive drying.
The most valued Sandalwood comes from Mysore in the state of Karnataka in India.
Use of incense in religion is prevalent in many cultures and may have their roots in the practical and aesthetic uses considering that many religions with not much else in common all use incense.
*Incense woods:  香木  – a naturally fragrant resinous wood.
There are about 25 main companies who together account for up to 30% of the market, and around 500 of the companies, including a significant number of the main ones, including Moksh Agarbatti, are based in Bangalore.
Therefore, Taoist Chinese believe burning undedicated incense in the home attracts the dreaded hungry ghosts, who consume the smoke and ruin the fortunes of the family.
Sites belonging to Tzu Chi, Chung Tai Shan, Dharma Drum Mountain, Xingtian Temple, Buddhism in Sri Lanka, Buddhism in Burma and Korean Buddhism do not use incense.
Flames on the incense are then fanned or blown out, with the incense continuing to burn without a flame on its own.
*'''Fuel and oxidizer mixtures''': Charcoal or wood powder forms the fuel for the combustion.
Those who used incense heavily also had higher rates of a type of cancer called squamous-cell carcinoma, which refers to tumors that arise in the cells lining the internal and external surfaces of the body.
They are used in Chinese influenced East Asian and Southeast Asian countries, traditionally burned before the threshold of a home or business, before an image of a Chinese popular religion divinity or spirit of place, or in small and humble or large and elaborate shrine found at the main entrance to each and every village.
The glowing ember on the incense will continue to smoulder and burn away the rest of the incense without continued application of heat or flame from an outside source.
Direct-burning incense (or "combustible incense") is lit directly by a flame and then fanned or blown out, leaving a glowing ember that smoulders and releases fragrance.
*Coil: Extruded and shaped into a coil without a core.
This form of incense requires the least skill and equipment to manufacture, since the blanks are pre-formed in China or South East Asia, then simply scented with essential oils.
Evidence suggests oils were used mainly for their aroma.
One of the oldest extant incense burners originates from the 5th dynasty.
**''Xiangnan pi'' (made from the bark of ''Phoebe'' genus trees such as ''Phoebe nanmu'', ''Persea zuihoensis''.
The Sandalwood used in Chinese incenses does not come from India, its native home, but rather from groves planted within Chinese territory.
Here the earth god is propitiated in the hope of bringing wealth and health to the village.
Occasionally some get confused between bukhur and oud, bukhur is the insence ie agarwood, sandlewood etc and oud being the incense sticks (and not the otherway round sometimes wires get twisted)
In contrast, a study by several  showed: "No association was found between exposure to incense burning and respiratory symptoms like chronic cough, chronic sputum, chronic bronchitis, runny nose, wheezing, asthma, allergic rhinitis, or pneumonia among the three populations studied: i.e.
The composition must be adjusted to provide fragrance in the proper concentration and to ensure even burning.
The heat is traditionally provided by charcoal or glowing embers.
An experienced home-worker can produce 4,000 raw sticks a day.
However the art of incense appreciation or Koh-do, is generally practiced as a separate art form from the tea ceremony, however usually practiced within a tea room of traditional Zen design.
This class of incense is made from a moldable substrate of fragrant finely ground (or liquid) incense materials and odourless binder.
Historically there has been a preference for using locally available ingredients.
Ingredients vary from cinnamon, clove, and juniper, to kusum flower, ashvagandha, or sahi jeera.
*Binder: Water-soluble binders such as "makko"  have to be used in the right proportion to ensure that the incense mixture does not crumble when dry but also that the binder does not take up too much of the mixture.
Incense cones were invented in Japan in the 1800s.
The bamboo method originated in India, and is distinct from the Nepal/Tibet and Japanese methods of stick making which don't use a bamboo core.
The incense oil is placed into the container and bamboo reeds are then put into the same container.
This incense can vary in the duration of its burning with the texture of the material.
*Censer/Incense burner: 香爐 – usually small and used for heating incense not burning, or larger and used for burning
The regular burning of direct combustion incense has been used for chronological measurement in incense clocks.
primary school children, their non-smoking mothers, or a group of older non-smoking female controls.
Though the method is also used in the west, particularly in America, it is strongly associated with India.
The recipes have remained unchanged for centuries.
One common motif is incense as a form of sacrificial offering to a deity.
When used for worship in Chinese folk religion, cored incensed sticks are sometimes known as "joss sticks".
Indirect-burning incense, also called "non-combustible incense", is a combination of aromatic ingredients that are not prepared in any particular way or encouraged into any particular form, leaving it mostly unsuitable for direct combustion.
Combustible bouquets were used by the ancient Egyptians, who employed incense within both pragmatic and mystical capacities.
Despite the fact that they contain no sandalwood at all, they often include the Chinese character for sandalwood on the label, as a generic term for incense.
If too little, the incense will not ignite, and if too much, the incense will burn too quickly and not produce fragrant smoke.
At around 2000 BCE, Ancient China began the use of incense in the religious sense, namely for worship.
They are typically packed into long trails on top of wood ash using a stencil and burned in special censers or incense clocks.
The solid particles range between ~10 and 500&nbsp;nm.
The combustible base of a direct burning incense mixture not only binds the fragrant material together but also allows the produced incense to burn with a self-sustained ember, which propagates slowly and evenly through an entire piece of incense with such regularity that it can be used to mark time.
Oil is absorbed by the reed sticks and carried along the entire reed.
The mucilage from the wet binding powder holds the fragrant material together while the cellulose in the powder combusts to form a stable ember when lit.
A study published in 2008 in the medical journal ''Cancer'' found that incense use is associated with a statistically significant higher risk of cancers of the upper respiratory tract, with the exception of nasopharyngeal cancer.
A survey of risk factors for lung cancer, also conducted in Taiwan, noted an inverse association between incense burning and adenocarcinoma of the lung, though the finding was not deemed significant.
*Powdered or granulated: The incense material is broken down into finer bits.
In Japan incense appreciation folklore includes art, culture, history, and ceremony.
These are do-it-yourself incense sticks that do not burn and look almost identical to typical incense sticks.
Incense come in a variety of forms such as blocks, pieces, pellets, granules or powdered, which is placed in the oil burner called mabkharah for several minutes to heat either with coal in the traditional way or via power in the modern way, allowing it to release its rich smell.
The incense mixture is then rolled out into a slab approximately 1 cm thick and left until the slab has firmed.
The egōro is usually made of brass with a long handle and no chain.
A similar utilitarian use of incense can be found in the post-Reformation Church of England.
In the West, the best known incense materials of this type are frankincense and myrrh, likely due to their numerous mentions in the Christian Bible.
Thick joss sticks are used for special ceremonies, such as funerals.
Resin balls were found in many prehistoric Egyptian tombs in El Mahasna, furnishing tangible archaeological substantiation to the prominence of incense and related compounds within Egyptian antiquity.
The study found gaseous aliphatic aldehydes, which are carcinogenic and mutagenic, in incense smoke.
In fact, the word for "''frankincense''" in many European languages also alludes to any form of incense.
Brought to Japan in the 6th century by Korean Buddhist monks, who used the mystical aromas in their purification rites, the delicate scents of Koh (high-quality Japanese incense) became a source of amusement and entertainment with nobles in the Imperial Court during the Heian Era 200 years later.
It is used in part to mask the scent of the many tired, unwashed pilgrims huddled together in the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela.
A variety of materials have been used in making incense.
These may then be allowed to mature in a controlled environment where the fragrances can commingle and unite.
Papier d'Arménie was originally sold as a disinfectant as well as for the fragrance.
This incense burns quickly and provides a short period of intense smells.
The formed incense is then trimmed and slowly dried.
*Solid stick: This stick incense has no supporting core and is completely made of incense material.
Incense materials are available in various forms and degrees of processing.
Their recipes come from ancient Vedic texts that are based on even older Ayurvedic medical texts.
However, the researchers qualified the findings by noting that incense burning in the studied population was associated with certain low-cancer-risk dietary habits, and concluded that "diet can be a significant confounder of epidemiological studies on air pollution and respiratory health."
Chinese incense sticks for use in popular religion are generally without aroma or only the slightest trace of jasmine or rose, since it is the smoke, not the scent, which is important in conveying the prayers of the faithful to heaven.
Although the ceremonial use of incense was abandoned until the Oxford Movement, it was common to have incense (typically frankincense) burned before grand occasions, when the church would be crowded.
A bundle of the supporting material (typically thin bamboo or sandalwood slivers) is soaked in water or a thin water/glue mixture for a short time.
Incense smoke contains various contaminants including gaseous pollutants, such as carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 4–8, and absorbed toxic pollutants (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and toxic metals).
There are about 5,000 incense companies in India which take raw unperfumed sticks hand-rolled by approx 200,000 women working part-time at home, and then apply their own brand of perfume, and package the sticks for sale.
The same could be said for the techniques used to make incense.
The well known choice for incense is the famous agarwood which is very popular in Africa, the Gulf and amongst some south Asians, but there are many many more choices.
Incense is composed of aromatic plant materials, often combined with essential oils.
Within the Eastern Orthodox Christian tradition, raw frankincense is ground into a fine powder and then mixed with various sweet-smelling essential oils.
Inexpensive packs of 300 are often found for sale in Chinese supermarkets.
Such items are often known as "dipped" or "hand-dipped" incense.
The forms taken by incense differ with the underlying culture, and have changed with advances in technology and increasing diversity in the reasons for burning it.
Research carried out in Taiwan in 2001 linked the burning of incense sticks to the slow accumulation of potential carcinogens in a poorly ventilated environment by measuring the levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (including benzopyrene) within Buddhist temples.
These are often sold in America by flea-market and sidewalk vendors who have developed their own styles.
Incense produced in this fashion has a tendency to warp or become misshapen when improperly dried, and as such must be placed in climate-controlled rooms and rotated several times through the drying process.
This use is perhaps best exemplified in the , where (frequently costly) raw incense materials such as agarwood are appreciated in a formal setting.
*'''Natural plant-based binders''': Mucilaginous material, which can be derived from many botanical sources, is mixed with fragrant materials and water.
In the case of cored incensed sticks, several methods are employed to coat the sticks cores with incense mixture:
Although the production of direct- and indirect-burning incense are both blended to produce a pleasant smell when burned, the two differ in their composition due to the former's requirement for even, stale, and sustained burning.
It is then cut into small cubes, coated with clay powder to prevent adhesion, and allowed to fully harden and dry.
Moxa tablets are not incenses; the treatment relies on heat rather than fragrance.
**''Jigit'': a resin based binder used in India
Incense burning did not affect lung cancer risk among non-smokers, but it significantly reduced risk among smokers, even after adjusting for lifetime smoking amount."
The earliest documented instance of incense utilization comes from the ancient Chinese, who employed incense composed of herbs and plant products (such as cassia, cinnamon, styrax, sandalwood, amongst others) as a component of numerous formalized ceremonial rites.
It is important to note that the perfuming pan was used instead of the thurible, as the latter would have likely offended the Protestant sensibilities of the 17th and 18th centuries.
Floral fragrances are the most common, but citrus such as lemon is not uncommon.
*''Compression'': A damp powder is mechanically formed around a cored stick by compression, similar to the way uncored sticks are formed.
Higher quality varieties of this form have fragrant sandalwood cores.
The base is chosen such that it does not produce a perceptible smell.
There are many different types of joss sticks used for different purposes or on different festive days.
Direct-burning incense is either a paste formed around a bamboo stick, or a paste that is extruded into a stick or cone shape.
Incense mixtures can be extruded or pressed into shapes.
This utility led to the use of incense in funerary ceremonies because the incense could smother the scent of decay.
Frankincense has been shown to cause antidepressive behavior in mice.
Many of them are long and thin and are mostly colored yellow, red, and more rarely, black.
Spiral joss sticks are also used on a regular basis, which are found hanging above temple ceilings, with burn times that are exceedingly long.
Incense sticks that are burned in temples of Chinese folk religion produced in this fashion can have a thickness between 2 and 4 millimeters.
Perfume is sometimes sprayed on the coated sticks.
It comes in three parts: a bottle/container, scented essential incense oil, and bamboo reeds.
This comprised the initial usage of subterranean plant parts within the fabrication of incense.
Ketoret was the incense offered in the Temple in Jerusalem and is stated in the Book of Exodus as a mixture of stacte, onycha, galbanum and frankincense.
These generate such a massive amount of smoke and heat that they are only ever burned outside.
These devices can range from a simple trail of incense material calibrated to burn in a specific time period, to elaborate and ornate instruments with bells or gongs, designed to involve and captivate several of the senses.
The stick is then cut to the desired length and dried.
These incenses have a characteristic "earthy" scent to them.
Incense can generally be separated into two main types: "indirect-burning" and "direct-burning".
Kyara is one kind of agarwood (Japanese incense companies divide agarwood into 6 categories depending on the region obtained and properties of the agarwood).
*Powder: The loose incense powder used for making indirect burning incense is sometimes burned without further processing.
Incense was used by Chinese cultures from Neolithic times and became more widespread in the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties.
The core is coated by a thick layer of incense material that burns away with the core.
Many Tibetan incenses are thought to have medicinal properties.
Another important ingredient in Japanese incense is ''kyara'' (伽羅).
A reed diffuser is a form of incense that uses no heat.
The frankincense was carried about by a member of the vestry before the service in a vessel called a 'perfuming pan'.
This use has been deployed in concert with religious uses by Zen Buddhists who claim that the incense that is part of their meditative practice is designed to keep bothersome insects from distracting the practitioner.
The larger end is the bight, and may be stood vertically, in a shallow dish of sand or pebbles.
Currently, more effective pyrethroid-based mosquito repellent incense is widely available in Asia.
This type of incense is highly transportable and stays fresh for extremely long periods.
It activated the poorly understood ion channels in the brain to alleviate anxiety and depression.
Instead of charcoal, makkō powder is poured into a depression made in a bed of ash.
In some states, such as Taiwan, Singapore, or Malaysia, where they celebrate the Ghost Festival, large, pillar-like dragon joss sticks are sometimes used.
Easily broken into pieces, it allows one to determine the specific amount of incense they wish to burn.
Small quantities of water are combined with the fragrance and incense base mixture and kneaded into a hard dough.
Indirect-burning incense (or "non-combustible incense") is not capable of burning on its own, and requires a separate heat source.
In the Middle East, incense burning has been along tradition.
Incense fragrances can be of such great strength that they obscure other, less desirable odours.
Some kinds of direct-burning incense are created from "incense blanks" made of unscented combustible dust immersed into any suitable kind of essential or fragrance oil.
Another example of this use, as well as of religious use, is the giant Botafumeiro thurible which swings from the ceiling of the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela.
These are often quite expensive due to the use of large amounts of sandalwood, aloeswood, or floral scents used.
Much Arabian incense, also called "Bukhoor" or "Bakhoor", is of this type (Bakhoor actually refers to frankincense in Arabic) and Japan has a history of kneaded incense, called nerikō or awasekō, using this method.
However, since Neolithic times, the Chinese have evolved using incense not only for religious ceremonies, but also for personal and environmental aromatherapy.
New herbs like Sarsaparilla seeds, frankincense, and cypress were used by Indians for incense.
The sticks are then gently rolled and packed to maintain roundness while more incense powder is repeatedly tossed onto the sticks.
In Taoist traditions, incense is inextricably associated with the 'yin' energies of the dead, temples, shrines, and ghosts.
This type of incense is able to burn for an extended period, from hours to days, and is commonly produced and used by Chinese culture
During the 14th century Shogunate, a samurai warrior might perfume his helmet and armor with incense to achieve an aura of invincibility (as well as to make a noble gesture to whomever might take his head in battle).
In 2015, the South China University of Technology found toxicity of incense to Chinese hamsters ovary cells to be even higher than cigarettes.
The formula for the charcoal-based incense is superficially similar to black powder, though it lacks the sulfur.
Incense spread from there to Greece and Rome.
'''Incense''' is aromatic biotic material which releases fragrant smoke when burned.
Along with the introduction of Buddhism in China came calibrated incense sticks and incense clocks.
The dry incense powder is then tossed and piled over the stick while they are spread apart.
*Mixture density: Incense mixtures made with natural binders must not be combined with too much water in mixing, or over-compressed while being formed, which would result in either uneven air distribution or undesirable density in the mixture, causing the incense to burn unevenly, too slowly, or too quickly.
Through this process, known as "splitting the foot of the incense stick", the bamboo is trimmed to length, soaked, peeled, and then continuously split in halves until thin sticks of bamboo with square cross sections of less than 3mm  This process has been largely been replaced by machines in modern incense production.
Agarwood is known as "Jinkō" in Japan, which translates as "incense that sinks in water", due to the weight of the resin in the wood.
**''Makko'' (incense powder): made from the bark of various trees from the ''Persea'' such as ''Persea thunbergii'')
Agarwood (沈香　Jinkō) and sandalwood (白檀　Byakudan) are the two most important ingredients in Japanese incense.
*Agarwood:  沈香  – from heartwood from Aquilaria trees, unique, the incense wood most used in incense ceremony, other names are: lignum aloes or aloeswood, gaharu, jinko, or oud.
The coated incense is then allowed to dry in open air.
*Cone: Incense in this form burns relatively fast.
'''Tibetan incense''' refers to a common style of incense found in Tibet, Nepal, and Bhutan.
*Cored stick: This form of stick incense has a supporting core of bamboo.
It wasn't until the Muromachi Era during the 15th and 16th century that incense appreciation (Kōdō) spread to the upper and middle classes of Japanese society.
The following types of direct-burning incense are commonly encountered, though the material itself can take virtually any form, according to expediency or whimsy:
This method is known as Sonae-kō (Religious Burning).
The word "joss" is derived from the Latin ''deus'' (god) via the Portuguese ''deos'' through the Javanese ''dejos'', through Chinese pidgin English.
Three to four layers of powder are coated onto the sticks, forming a 2 mm thick layer of incense material on the stick.
Preference for one form or another varies with culture, tradition, and personal taste.
*Paste: The powdered or granulated incense material is mixed with a sticky and incombustible binder, such as dried fruit, honey, or a soft resin and then formed to balls or small pastilles.
The word bukhur means incense in Arabic.
The term refers to the material itself, rather than to the aroma that it produces.
Incense burning may occasionally  take place within the tea ceremony, just like Calligraphy, Ikebana, and Scroll Arrangement.
It can be compared to and has some of the same qualities as music, art, or literature.
*''Paste rolling'': A wet, malleable paste of incense mixture is first rolled into a long, thin coil, using a paddle.
*Incense Arts: 香道, Kodo
Local knowledge and tools were extremely influential on the style, but methods were also influenced by migrations of foreigners, among them clergy and physicians who were both familiar with incense arts.
Incense is also used often by people who smoke indoors, and do not want the scent to linger.
It is incorrect to assume that the Chinese only burn incense in the home before the family shrine.
Finer ingredients tend to burn more rapidly, while coarsely ground or whole chunks may be consumed very gradually as they have less total surface area.
Direct-burning incense also called "combustible incense", is lit directly by a flame.
In Japan a similar censer called a  is used by several Buddhist sects.
Joss sticks are the name given to incense sticks used for a variety of purposes associated with ritual and religious devotion in China and India.
pubescens'' since this species produces thick wood and easily burns to ashes in the incense stick.
Although several studies have not shown a link between incense and cancer of the lung, many other types of cancer have been directly linked to burning incense.
