All incorporated cities in Indiana have a mayor and council form of municipal government.
The governor may not serve more than two consecutive terms.
Other active installations include Air National Guard fighter units at Fort Wayne, and Terre Haute airports (to be consolidated at Fort Wayne under the 2005 BRAC proposal, with the Terre Haute facility remaining open as a non-flying installation).
While only five Democratic presidential nominees have carried Indiana since 1900, 11 Democrats were elected governor during that time.
He remains the only U.S. President from Indiana.
The Mississippian culture emerged, lasting from 1000 until the 15th century, shortly before the arrival of Europeans.
The lowest point at  above sea level is located in Posey County, where the Wabash River flows into the Ohio River.
Ash, Hickory, Ironwood, etc.)
Indiana was formerly home to two major military installations; Grissom Air Force Base near Peru (realigned to an Air Force Reserve installation in 1994) and Fort Benjamin Harrison near Indianapolis, now closed, though the Department of Defense continues to operate a large finance center there (Defense Finance and Accounting Service).
He went on to lead the Boston Celtics to the NBA championship in 1981, 1984, and 1986.
In 1800 Congress separated Ohio from the Northwest Territory, designating the rest of the land as the Indiana Territory.
Schools fielding NCAA Division I athletic programs include:
Indianapolis is the capital of Indiana and its largest city.
The Purdue Boilermakers were selected as the national champions in 1932 before the creation of the tournament, and have won 22 Big Ten championships.
Indiana's 1816 constitution was the first in the country to implement a state-funded public school system.
In 1732 Sieur de Vincennes built a second fur trading post at Vincennes.
Starting with the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794 and Treaty of Greenville, 1795, Indian titles to Indiana lands were extinguished by usurpation, purchase, or war and treaty.
Indiana was one of only ten states to support Republican Wendell Willkie in 1940.
The state sales tax rate is 7% with exemptions for food, prescription medications and over-the-counter medications.
With British victory in 1763, the French were forced to cede all their lands in North America east of the Mississippi River and north and west of the colonies to the British crown.
Indianapolis is home to the Indianapolis Colts.
The three other independent state universities are Vincennes University (Founded in 1801 by the Indiana Territory), Ball State University (1918) and University of Southern Indiana (1965 as ISU - Evansville).
Only two counties, Clark and Dearborn in the extreme southeast, had been organized.
There are also many U.S. routes and state highways maintained by the Indiana Department of Transportation.
Overall, Indiana ranks fifth among all U.S. states in total sales and shipments of pharmaceutical products and second highest in the number of biopharmaceutical related jobs.
In 1816, when Congress passed an Enabling Act to begin the process of establishing statehood for Indiana, a part of this territorial land became the geographic area for the new state.
Its capital and largest city is Indianapolis.
Second, Indiana's labor force is located primarily in medium-sized and smaller cities rather than in very large and expensive metropolises.
The headquarters of the Missionary Church is located in Fort Wayne.
A high percentage of Indiana's income is from manufacturing.
The Dust Bowl further to the west resulted in many migrants fleeing into the more industrialized Midwest.
On 14 occasions has the Republican candidate defeated the Democrat by a double digit margin in the state, including six times where a Republican won the state by more than 20%.
Tensions rose and the US authorized Harrison to launch a preemptive expedition against Tecumseh's Confederacy; the US gained victory at the Battle of Tippecanoe on November 7, 1811.
The average altitude of Indiana is about  above sea level.
In Fiscal year 2011 Indiana reported one of the largest surpluses among U.S states, with an extra $1.2&nbsp;billion in its accounts.
Marion County, Indiana's most populous county, supported the Republican candidates from 1968 to 2000, before backing the Democrats in the 2004, 2008, and 2012, elections.
The construction of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and the start of auto-related industries were also related to the auto industry boom.
Indiana features the world's largest and most prestigious drag race, the NHRA Mac Tools U.S. Nationals, held each Labor Day weekend at Lucas Oil Raceway at Indianapolis in Clermont, Indiana.
Companies such as Delco Electronics and Delphi began a long series of downsizing that contributed to high unemployment rates in manufacturing in Anderson, Muncie, and Kokomo.
The southeastern part of the state is served by the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport also across the Ohio River in Hebron, Kentucky.
The state includes two natural regions of the United States, the Central Lowlands and the Interior Low Plateaus.
With the conclusion of World War II, Indiana rebounded to levels of production before the Great Depression.
In recent years the Colts have regularly competed in the NFL playoffs.
In Evansville, three public and several private port facilities receive year-round service from five major barge lines operating on the Ohio River.
There are exceptions to this rule in downtown South Bend and Mishawaka.
The Colts have roots back to 1913 as the Dayton Triangles.
Most of the original land was not prairie and had to be cleared of deciduous trees.
Indiana is divided into 92 counties.
They included the Shawnee, Miami, and Illini.
Because of this, it is possible to have international cargo shipped to Evansville in bond.
Northern Indiana is also very similar except for the presence of higher and hillier terminal moraines and many kettle lakes in some regions.
Indiana elects two senators and nine representatives to Congress.
About  have an elevation of less than , mostly concentrated along the Ohio and lower Wabash Valleys, concentrated from Tell City and Terre Haute to Evansville and Mount Vernon.
Although James Naismith developed basketball in Springfield, Massachusetts in 1891, Indiana is where high school basketball was born.
The unglaciated southern segment of the state carries a different and off-balance surface, characterized in places by profound valleys and rugged, hilly terrain much different from the rest of the state.
On several occasions, he declared martial law to put an end to worker strikes.
Three other cities in Indiana have a population greater than 100,000: Fort Wayne (253,617), Evansville (117,429) and South Bend (101,168).
During his administration, spending and taxes were both cut drastically in response to the Depression, and the state government was completely reorganized.
On May 7, 1800, the United States Congress passed legislation to divide the Northwest Territory into two areas and named the western section the Indiana Territory.
Other notable powers include calling out the Indiana Guard Reserve or the Indiana National Guard in times of emergency or disaster, issuing pardons or commuting the sentence of any criminal offenders except in cases of treason or impeachment and possessing an abundant amount of statutory authority.
In 1775 the American Revolutionary War began as the colonists sought more self-government and independence from the British.
While in Baltimore, the Colts won the 1970 Super Bowl.
The etymology of this word is disputed, but the leading theory, as advanced by the Indiana Historical Bureau and the Indiana Historical Society, has "Hoosier" originating from Virginia, the Carolinas, and Tennessee (a part of the Upland South region of the United States) as a term for a backwoodsman, a rough countryman, or a country bumpkin.
Since April 2006 the entire state observes DST.
McNutt ended Prohibition in the state and enacted the state's first income tax.
The economic downturn had a wide-ranging negative impact on Indiana, such as the decline of urbanization.
The international cargo can then clear Customs in Evansville rather than a coastal port.
In college football, the Notre Dame Fighting Irish have won 11 consensus national championships, as well as the Rose Bowl Game, Cotton Bowl Classic, Orange Bowl and Sugar Bowl.
The Friends United Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends, the largest branch of American Quakerism, is based in Richmond, which also houses the oldest Quaker seminary in the United States, the Earlham School of Religion.
The 1986 film ''Hoosiers'' is inspired by the story of the 1954 Indiana state champions Milan High School.
Before the war ended, Indiana contributed 208,367&nbsp;men to fight and serve in the war.
In response to the crisis and in order to avert another, in 1851, a second constitution was adopted.
Both the Senate and House of Representatives can introduce legislation, with the exception that the Senate is not authorized to initiate legislation that will affect revenue.
They became an official team after moving to Baltimore, MD, in 1953.
Most of those citing American ancestry are actually of English descent, but have family that has been in North America for so long, in many cases since the early colonial era, that they identify simply as American.
Indiana has long been considered to be a Republican stronghold, particularly in Presidential races, but the Cook Partisan Voting Index (CPVI) now rates Indiana as only R+5, a smaller Republican edge than is assigned to 20 of the 28 "red" states.
In some jurisdictions an additional Food and Beverage Tax is charged, at a rate of 1% (Marion County's rate is 2%), on sales of prepared meals and beverages.
It also stems from Indiana's territorial history.
Population growth since 1990&nbsp;has been concentrated in the counties surrounding Indianapolis, with four of the top five fastest-growing counties in that area: Hamilton, Hendricks, Johnson, and Hancock.
Much of its appearance is a result of elements left behind by glaciers.
Such new tools included different types of spear points and knives, with various forms of notches.
After calling the RCA Dome home for 25 years, the Colts currently play their home games at Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis.
Evansville has been a U.S. Customs Port of Entry for more than 125 years.
Nearly 498,700&nbsp;Indiana households had incomes from $50,000&nbsp;to $74,999, accounting for 20% of all households.
The lieutenant governor can only vote to break ties.
Many Indiana counties also collect income tax.
Before 2006, most of Indiana did not observe daylight saving time (DST).
Indiana is currently implementing an extensive rail plan that was prepared in 2002 by the Parsons Corporation.
They created stone tools made out of chert by chipping, knapping and flaking.
Tecumseh was killed in 1813&nbsp;during the Battle of Thames.
Huntington serves as the home to the Church of the United Brethren in Christ.
Lawrence Seaway (via Lake Michigan) and the Inland Waterway System (via the Ohio River).
Indianapolis wouldn't be a populated place for 15 more years, and central and northern Indiana Territory remained savage wilderness.
In 2005, the median household income for Indiana residents was $43,993.
During the 1930s, Indiana, like the rest of the nation, was affected by the Great Depression.
French-Canadian fur traders soon arrived, bringing blankets, jewelry, tools, whiskey and weapons to trade for skins with the Native Americans.
Many European immigrants went west to settle in Indiana in the early 19th century.
For example, I-64 and Indiana State Road 64 both exist (rather close to each other) in Indiana, but are two distinct roads with no relation to one another.
An employee who "meets expectations" will get $500, those who "exceed expectations" will receive $750 and "outstanding workers" will see an extra $1,000 in their August paychecks
In the 1980 census 1,776,144 people claimed German ancestry, 1,356,135 claimed English ancestry and 1,017,944 claimed Irish ancestry out of a total population of 4,241,975 making the state 42% German, 32% English and 24% Irish.
During the latter part of the period, they built earthwork mounds and middens, which showed that settlements were becoming more permanent.
With the onset of the industrial revolution, Indiana industry began to grow at an accelerated rate across the northern part of the state.
Indianapolis hosts the Indianapolis 500 mile race over Memorial Day weekend at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway every May.
An early Woodland period group named the Adena people had elegant burial rituals, featuring log tombs beneath earth mounds.
The next highest median incomes in Indiana are also found in the Indianapolis suburbs; Hendricks County has a median of $57,538, followed by Johnson County at $56,251.
Divided into small groups, the Paleo-Indians were nomads who hunted large game such as mastodons.
Indiana is located within the U.S. Corn Belt and Grain Belt.
County officials that are elected to four-year terms include an auditor, recorder, treasurer, sheriff, coroner and clerk of the circuit court.
Butler, Valparaiso, and the University of Evansville are ranked among the top ten in the Regional University Midwest Rankings.
On June 10, 1816, delegates assembled at Corydon to write the constitution, which was completed in 19 days.
If the governor dies in office, becomes permanently incapacitated, resigns or is impeached, the lieutenant governor becomes governor.
Indiana's time zones have fluctuated over the past century.
In 1715 Sieur de Vincennes built Fort Miami at Kekionga, now Fort Wayne.
'''Indiana'''  is a U.S. state located in the midwestern and Great Lakes regions of North America.
The total gross state product in 2010 was $275.7&nbsp;billion.
With a population of 829,817, Indianapolis is the largest city in Indiana and 12th largest in the United States, according to the 2010 Census.
The Ports of Indiana manages three major ports which include Burns Harbor, Jeffersonville, and Mount Vernon.
The Senate is the upper house of the General Assembly and the House of Representatives is the lower house.
By 1702, Sieur Juchereau established the first trading post near Vincennes.
Haynes-Apperson, the nation's first commercially successful auto company, operated in Kokomo until 1925.
Such a system is also almost useless in those situations as well.
Bills are debated and passed separately in each house, but must be passed by both houses before they can be submitted to the Governor.
French Canadian settlers, who had left the earlier post because of hostilities, returned in larger numbers.
About half the state was acquired in the St. Mary's Purchase from the Miami in 1818.
The various highways intersecting in and around Indianapolis, along with its historical status as a major railroad hub, and the canals that once crossed Indiana, are the source of the state's motto, the Crossroads of America.
Despite its reliance on manufacturing, Indiana has been much less affected by declines in traditional Rust Belt manufactures than many of its neighbors.
The major U.S. Interstate highways in Indiana are Interstate&nbsp;64 (I-64), I-65, I-265, I-465, I-865, I-69, I-469, I-70, I-74, I-80, I-90, I-94, and I-275.
After his death, armed resistance to United States control ended in the region.
Indiana has a diverse economy with a gross state product of $298&nbsp;billion in 2012.
As the first western state to mobilize for the United States in the war, Indiana had soldiers participating in all of the major engagements.
The highest point in the state is Hoosier Hill in Wayne County at  above sea level.
The till plains make up the northern and central allotment of Indiana.
Anderson is home to the headquarters of the Church of God.
Fairbanks made another run for Vice-President with Charles Evans Hughes in 1916, but they both lost to Woodrow Wilson and Indiana Governor Thomas R. Marshall, who served as Vice-President from 1913&nbsp;until 1921.
With industrialization, workers developed labor unions and suffrage movements arose in relation to the progress of women.
The Indiana Supreme Court is made up of five judges with a Court of Appeals composed of 15&nbsp;judges.
So many volunteered in the first call that thousands had to be turned away.
Forty-four&nbsp;years later, Democrat Barack Obama narrowly won the state against John McCain 50% to 49%.
A resident of Indiana is known as a Hoosier.
Twenty&nbsp;years later, Franklin D. Roosevelt won the state with 55% of the vote over incumbent Republican Herbert Hoover.
The University of Notre Dame and the University of Saint Francis are popular Roman Catholic schools.
Since 1954, the 181st Fighter Wing of the Indiana Air National Guard has been stationed at the airport.
Although the largest single religious denomination in the state is Catholic (747,706&nbsp;members), most of the population are members of various Protestant denominations.
In 1825, the state capital was moved from Corydon to Indianapolis.
Occasionally, certain counties in the southern part of the state will vote Democratic.
Many recreational trails, such as the Monon Trail and Cardinal Greenway, have been created from abandoned rails routes.
The General Assembly has no authority to create legislation that targets only a particular community.
The Army National Guard conducts operations at Camp Atterbury in Edinburgh, Indiana, helicopter operations out of Shelbyville Airport and urban training at Muscatatuck Urban Training Center.
German is the largest ancestry reported in Indiana, with 22.7% of the population reporting that ancestry in the Census.
The concentrated settlements depended on the agricultural surpluses.
Casualties were over 35% among these men: 24,416&nbsp;lost their lives in the conflict and over 50,000&nbsp;more were wounded.
The governor selects judges for the supreme and appeal courts from a group of applicants chosen by a special commission.
Historically, Republicans have been strongest in the eastern and central portions of the state, while Democrats have been strongest in the northwestern part of the state.
In men's basketball,  the Indiana Hoosiers have won five NCAA national championships and 21 Big Ten Conference championships.
The first inhabitants in what is now Indiana were  the Paleo-Indians, who arrived about 8000&nbsp;BC after the melting of the glaciers at the end of the Ice Age.
The Indiana General Assembly is composed of a 50-member Senate and 100-member House of Representatives.
Roughly 10&nbsp;percent of Indiana's population joined the armed forces, while hundreds of industries earned war production contracts and began making war material.
Indiana is home to the St. Meinrad Archabbey, one of two Catholic archabbeys in the United States and one of 11&nbsp;in the world.
The table below lists the ten largest municipalities in the state based on the 2014 United States Census Estimate.
Most residents of Northwest Indiana, which is primarily in the Chicago Metropolitan Area, use the two Chicago airports, O'Hare International Airport and Chicago Midway International Airport.
Purdue's engineering programs are ranked eighth in the country.
Indiana allows highways of different classifications to have the same number.
Afterward, the Woodland period took place in Indiana, where various new cultural attributes appeared.
As of the 2010 U.S. Census, Indiana's median household income was $44,616, ranking it 36th among the United States and the District of Columbia.
Roosevelt won the state again in 1936.
Indiana has more than 4,255 railroad route miles, of which 91 percent are operated by Class I railroads, principally CSX Transportation and the Norfolk Southern Railway.
The other county is Dearborn County, which is near Cincinnati, Ohio.
However, a "circuit breaker" law enacted on March 19, 2008 limits property taxes to one percent of assessed value for homeowners, two percent for rental properties and farmland and three percent for businesses.
The largest Protestant denomination by number of adherents in 2010&nbsp;was the United Methodist Church with 355,043.
His success is often credited for changing the course of the American Revolutionary War.
The Terre Haute International Airport has no airlines operating out of the facility but is used for private flying.
In 1717, another Canadian, Picote de Beletre, built Fort Ouiatenon on the Wabash River, to try to control Native American trade routes from Lake Erie to the Mississippi River.
This makes it possible for firms to offer somewhat lower wages for these skills than would normally be paid.
The Indiana Gas Boom led to rapid industrialization during the late 19th&nbsp;century by providing cheap fuel to the region.
The race attracts over 250,000 people every year making it the largest single day sporting event in the world.
A portrait of the Indiana frontier about 1810: The frontier was defined by the treaty of Fort Wayne in 1809, adding much of southwestern lands around Vincinnes and southeastern lands adjacent to Cincinnati, to areas along the Ohio River as part of U.S. territory.
Marion County and Indianapolis have a consolidated city-county government.
Most children in Indiana attend public schools, but nearly 10% attend private schools and parochial schools.
In 2005, 77.7% of Indiana residents lived in metropolitan counties, 16.5% lived in micropolitan counties and 5.9% lived in non-core counties.
Fighting between the French and British colonists occurred throughout the 1750s as a result.
The only Civil War battle fought in Indiana was the Battle of Corydon, which occurred during Morgan's Raid.
Indiana's four largest metropolitan areas are Indianapolis, Fort Wayne, Evansville, and South Bend.
*Valparaiso Crusaders
During the war, Clark managed to cut off British troops, who were attacking the eastern colonists from the west.
*Purdue Boilermakers
Also, Naval Operational Support Center Indianapolis is home to several Navy Reserve units, two Marine Reserve units, and a small contingent of active and full-time-support reserve personnel.
Persons citing American (12.0%) and English ancestry (8.9%) are also numerous, as are Irish (10.8%) and Polish (3.0%).
The state has a feedlot-style system raising corn to fatten hogs and cattle.
From 2000 to 2007, it hosted the United States Grand Prix (Formula One).
As of 2010, the state includes 16 metropolitan and 25 micropolitan statistical areas, 117 incorporated cities, 450 towns, and several other smaller divisions and statistical areas.
President Thomas Jefferson chose William Henry Harrison as the governor of the territory and Vincennes was established as the capital.
Governor Paul V. McNutt's administration struggled to build a state-funded welfare system to help the overwhelmed private charities.
Indiana Representative William Hayden English was nominated for Vice-President and ran with Winfield Scott Hancock in the 1880 election.
The lieutenant governor serves as the President of the Senate and is responsible for ensuring that the senate rules are acted in accordance with by its constituents.
The soil is fertile in the valleys of southern Indiana.
The Supreme Court does have original and sole jurisdiction in certain specific areas including the practice of law, discipline or disbarment of Judges appointed to the lower state courts, and supervision over the exercise of jurisdiction by the other lower courts of the State.
Only  have an altitude greater than  and this area is enclosed within 14&nbsp;counties.
Governor Welsh also worked with the General Assembly to pass the Indiana Civil Rights Bill, granting equal protection to minorities in seeking employment.
The state's community college system, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana, serves nearly 200,000 students annually, making it the state's largest public post-secondary educational institution and the nation's largest singly accredited statewide community college system.
A study by the Graduate Center found that 20&nbsp;percent are Roman Catholic, 14&nbsp;percent belong to different Baptist churches, 10&nbsp;percent are other Christians, nine percent are Methodist, and six percent are Lutheran.
