Located on the city's far north side, St. Vincent Indianapolis Hospital is the flagship medical center of St. Vincent Health's 22-hospital system.
The city is the economic and cultural center of the Indianapolis metropolitan area, home to 2 million people, the 34th most populous metropolitan statistical area in the United States.
Founded in 2000, the Indiana Fever of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) have won three conference titles and one championship in 2012.
Finance also reported that the city averaged 52.2 forcible rapes per 100,000 people, double the national average of 26.8 forcible rapes per 100,000 people.
The Colts' tenure in Indianapolis has produced 11 division championships, two conference championships, and two Super Bowl appearances.
The city is home to the greatest number of monuments dedicated to veterans and war dead in the country, outside of Washington, D.C.
Five private universities are based in Indianapolis.
Since the 1970 city-county consolidation, known as Unigov, local government administration has operated under the direction of an elected 25-member city-county council, headed by the mayor.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), the main governing body for U.S. collegiate sports, and the National Federation of State High School Associations are based in Indianapolis.
Northern portions of the city are in the 5th District, represented by Susan Brooks (R).
The Heartland Film Festival, Indianapolis International Film Festival, Indianapolis Jewish Film Festival, Indianapolis Theatre Fringe Festival, and the Indianapolis Alternative Media Festival are annual events held in the city.
Severe weather is not uncommon, particularly in the spring and summer months; the city experiences an average of 20 thunderstorm days annually.
Indianapolis became a major logistics hub during the war, establishing the city as an crucial military base.
The post–World War II economic expansion and subsequent suburbanization had a profound impact on the physical development of the city's neighborhoods.
The city's average annual precipitation is , with snowfall averaging  per season.
The consolidated city boundaries are coterminous with Marion County, with the exception of the autonomous municipalities of Beech Grove, Lawrence, Southport, and Speedway.
The lowest point in the city is about  above mean sea level, with the highest natural elevation at about  above sea level.
Ultimately doomed by the automobile, the terminal closed in 1941, followed by the streetcar system in 1957.
The theater is named for Madame C.J.
It is in the East North Central region of the Midwestern United States.
Hogsett previously held public office as Indiana Secretary of State, and had served in government for over 30 years, giving him greater name recognition than Brewer, a local restaurateur.
A building boom, lasting from 1982 to 1990, saw the construction of six of the city's ten tallest buildings.
A combined county and town government continued until 1832, when Indianapolis incorporated as a town.
Founded in 1883, the Indianapolis Museum of Art (IMA) is the ninth oldest and eighth largest encyclopedic art museum in the U.S.
Broadcast television network affiliates include WTTV (CBS), WRTV (ABC), WISH-TV (CW), WTHR-TV (NBC), WXIN-TV (Fox), WFYI-TV (PBS), WNDY-TV (MyNetworkTV), WDNI-CD (Telemundo), and WIPX-TV (Ion).
In 2011, a private company called the Downtown Indianapolis Streetcar Corporation began studying the feasibility of a streetcar circulator for downtown Indianapolis.
Per capita income for the city was $24,430, 14.7% of families and 18.9% of the city's total population living below the poverty line (28.3% were under the age of 18 and 9.2% were age 65 or older).
By 1850, eight railroads converged in the city, ending its isolation from the rest of the country and ushering in a new era of growth.
The Indiana Convention Center (ICC) and Lucas Oil Stadium are considered mega convention center facilities, with a combined  of exhibition space.
In ''A History of Indiana Literature'', Arthur W. Shumaker remarked on the era's influence: "It was the age of famous men and their famous books.
The ''Cardinal'' makes three weekly trips between New York City and Chicago, while the ''Hoosier State'' operates on the four days the ''Cardinal'' does not operate, running to Chicago.
Founded in 1821 as the city's public market, the Indianapolis City Market has served the community from its current building since 1886.
Led by D. C. Stephenson, the Indiana Klan became the most powerful political and social organization in Indianapolis from 1921 through 1928, controlling City Council, the Board of School Commissioners, and the Board of County Commissioners.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the Indianapolis (balance) encompasses a total area of , of which  is land and  is water.
Hogsett was elected with 63% of the vote, officially taking office on January 1, 2016.
In it Indiana, and particularly Indianapolis, became a literary center which in many ways rivaled the East."
During the American Civil War, Indianapolis was loyal to the Union cause.
The city's consolidated population for the year 2012 was 844,220.
Since the 2000s, downtown Indianapolis and surrounding neighborhoods, like Fountain Square, have seen increased reinvestment attributed to nationwide demographic trends, driven by empty nesters and millennials.
Eagle Creek Park is the largest and most visited park in the city and ranks among the largest urban parks in the United States, covering .
Higher instances of obesity, coronary heart disease, diabetes, smoking, and asthma contributed to the ranking.
Major bodies of water include Indian Lake, Geist Reservoir, and Eagle Creek Reservoir.
The Indianapolis metropolitan area in central Indiana consists of Marion County and surrounding counties of Boone, Brown, Hamilton, Hancock, Hendricks, Johnson, Morgan, Putnam, and Shelby.
Despite this reliance, the city has encouraged enhanced bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure in recent years.
Established in 2013, Indy Eleven of the North American Soccer League (NASL) plays from IU Michael A. Carroll Stadium.
Community Hospital East is currently replacing its 60-year-old facility with a $175 million, 150-bed hospital to be completed in 2019.
Indianapolis is home to the OneAmerica 500 Festival Mini-Marathon, the largest half marathon and seventh largest running event in the U.S.
Considered part of the Triple Crown of Motorsport, the Indianapolis 500 is the world's largest single-day sporting event, hosting more than 257,000 permanent seats.
The 2015 City-County Council elections also left Democrats in control of City-County Council, holding a 13–12 majority over Republicans, only the second time since the creation of Unigov that Democrats controlled both the mayor's office and council.
Most of Indianapolis is within the 7th Congressional District of Indiana, represented by André Carson (D).
The museum's holdings demonstrate the institution's emphasis on the connections among art, design, and the natural environment.
''Food & Wine'' called Indianapolis the "rising star of the Midwest," recognizing Milktooth, Rook, Amelia's, and Bluebeard, all in Fletcher Place.
The city grew beyond the Mile Square, as completion of the National Road and advent of the railroad solidified the city's position as a manufacturing and transportation hub.
In 2014, the museum opened a second public gallery in The Alexander Hotel at CityWay in downtown Indianapolis.
Completed in 1962, the Indianapolis City-County Building was the first skyscraper in the city, surpassing the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument in height by nearly .
What people like about me is Indianapolis."
IMS will host the seventh round of the 2016 Red Bull Air Race World Championship.
Opened in 1932, the Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center is Indiana's tertiary referral hospital for former armed services personnel, treating more than 60,000 veterans annually.
'''Source:''' ''Fortune''
*Landmark for Peace Memorial
Growth occurred with the opening of the National Road through the town in 1827, the first major federally funded highway in the United States.
The Indiana University School of Medicine is the second largest medical school in the United States.
If I ever severed myself from Indianapolis, I would be out of business.
A 1947 study found that Indiana authors ranked second to New York in the number of bestsellers produced in the previous 40 years.
Kessler's 1909 Indianapolis Park and Boulevard Plan linked notable parks, such as Brookside, Ellenberger, and Garfield, with a system of parkways following the city's waterways.
Based on U.S. Census data from the year 2000 for the 50 largest U.S. cities, Indianapolis ranked eighth highest in a University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee study that compared percentages of residents living on black-white integrated city blocks.
According to Indianapolis-based American College of Sports Medicine's 2016 American Fitness Index Data Report, the city scored last of the 50 largest U.S. metropolitan areas for health and community fitness.
The Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument, dedicated on May 15, 1902, would later become an iconic symbol of the city.
Compared to Indiana as a whole, the Indianapolis metropolitan area has a lower proportion of manufacturing jobs and a higher concentration of jobs in wholesale trade; administrative, support, and waste management; professional, scientific, and technical services; and transportation and warehousing.
As a result, the Indianapolis metropolitan area had the highest concentration of chain restaurants per capita of any market in the U.S. in 2008, with one chain restaurant for every 1,459 people, or 44% higher than the national average.
By 1890, the city's population surpassed 100,000.
By 2020, downtown is projected to have 30,000 residential units, compared to 18,300 in 2010.
Since the merger, the Pacers have won one conference title and six division titles, most recently in 2014.
Crown Hill Cemetery, the third largest private cemetery in the United States, covers  on the city's north side and is home to more than 250 species of trees and shrubs.
The candidates had similar plans for addressing the city's issues, and the commonality between them contributed to a very low voter turnout.
Indianapolis is a planned city.
Indianapolis anchors the 26th largest economic region in the United States.
Before its submersion into a sanitary tunnel, Pogue's Run was included into the plan, disrupting the rectilinear street grid to the southeast.
As of 2012, the metropolitan area's population was 1,798,634, the most populous in Indiana.
Most rain is derived from thunderstorm activity; there is no distinct dry season, although occasional droughts occur.
Although many of these first European and American setters were Protestants, a large proportion of the early Irish and German immigrants were Catholics.
The Kurt Vonnegut Memorial Library opened in 2010 in downtown Indianapolis.
The economic development strategy succeeded in revitalizing the central business district through the 1990s, with the openings of the Indianapolis Zoo (1988), Canal Walk (1989–2001), Circle Centre Mall (1995), Victory Field (1996), and Bankers Life Fieldhouse (1999).
The "institution is considered the gold standard of museums for children."
The council passes ordinances for the city and county and also makes appointments to certain boards and commissions.
Noted as one of the finest examples of City Beautiful movement design in the United States, the seven-block Indiana World War Memorial Plaza Historic District began construction in 1921 in downtown Indianapolis.
The legislative body for the city and county is the City-County Council, consisting of 25 members all of whom represent geographic districts.
The Indianapolis Street Car Strike of 1913 and subsequent police mutiny and riots led to the creation of the state's earliest labor-protection laws, including a minimum wage, regular work weeks, and improved working conditions.
Other notable companies based in Indianapolis include media conglomerate Emmis Communications, retailers Finish Line, Lids, and Marsh Supermarkets, regional airline owner Republic Airways Holdings, truckload carrier Celadon Group, and restaurant chains Noble Roman's, Scotty's Brewhouse, and Steak 'n Shake.
Indianapolis includes some  of trails and  of on-street bike lanes.
Of the 160 teams comprising Minor League Baseball, the Indians had the highest attendance during the 2016 season.
Satellite campuses located in the city include Ball State University College of Architecture and Planning, Grace College, Indiana Institute of Technology, Indiana Wesleyan University, and Vincennes University.
Indianapolis hosts numerous sporting events annually, including the Circle City Classic (1983–present), NFL Scouting Combine (1987–present), and Big Ten Football Championship Game (2011–present).
Indianapolis Union Station opened in the Wholesale District on September 20, 1853 as the world's first union station.
Within a week, more than 12,000 recruits signed up to fight for the Union.
High temperatures reach or exceed  an average of 18 days each year, and occasionally exceed .
Media conglomerate Emmis Communications is based in the city.
The U.S. Census Bureau considers Indianapolis as two entities: the consolidated city and the city's remainder, or balance.
Indianapolis became a seat of county government on December 31, 1821, when Marion County, was established.
In 1999, Indianapolis designated six cultural districts to capitalize on the city's cultural institutions within historically significant neighborhoods unique to the city's heritage.
Between 1860 and 1870, the city's population more than doubled.
Notable sites include:
The city's Hispanic or Latino community comprised 9.4% of the city's population in the 2010 U.S. Census: 6.9% Mexican, .4% Puerto Rican, .1% Cuban, and 2% as other.
Citizens Energy Group, a public charitable trust, provides residents with natural gas, water, wastewater, and thermal services.
Founded in 1967, the Indiana Pacers began in the American Basketball Association (ABA), joining the NBA when the leagues merged in 1976.
From 1950 to 1970, 97,000 housing units were built in Marion County.
Some of the city's most notable businesses were founded during this period of growth and innovation, including L. S. Ayres (1872), Eli Lilly and Company (1876), Madame C.J.
The plan removed redundancies, captured increasingly suburbanizing tax revenue, and created a Republican political machine that dominated Indianapolis politics until the 2000s.
On February 11, 1861, president-elect Lincoln arrived in the city, en route to Washington, D.C. for his presidential inauguration, marking the first visit from a president-elect in the city's history.
Indianapolis lies about  north of two state forests (Morgan–Monroe and Yellowwood) and Hoosier National Forest.
The regional health care providers of Community Health Network, Franciscan St. Francis Health, Indiana University Health, and St. Vincent Health have a combined workforce of 43,700.
Indianapolis is a major center for motorsports.
Amid the changes in government and growth, the city invested in an aggressive strategy to brand Indianapolis as a sport tourism destination.
Governor Oliver P. Morton, a major supporter of President Abraham Lincoln, quickly made Indianapolis a rallying place for Union army troops.
Other notable venues include the Indianapolis Artsgarden, a performing arts center suspended over the intersection of Washington and Illinois streets, Clowes Memorial Hall on the Butler University campus, and The Emerson Theater in Little Flower.
Indiana University Health's Academic Health Center encompasses Marion County, with the medical centers of University Hospital, Methodist Hospital, and Riley Hospital for Children.
Indianapolis is the fourth fastest high-tech job growth area in the U.S., with 28,500 information technology-related jobs at such companies as Angie's List, BrightPoint, Interactive Intelligence, and Salesforce Marketing Cloud.
My adenoids are Indianapolis.
News and World Report'', including top 25 honors in orthopedics (23), nephrology (22), gastroenterology and GI surgery (16), pulmonology (13), and urology (4).
'''Top publicly traded companiesbased in Indianapolis'''
The consolidated city covers an area known as Unigov, coterminous with Marion County, except the independent municipalities of Beech Grove, Lawrence, Speedway, and Southport.
Indianapolis is also home to three national sport governing bodies, as recognized by the United States Olympic Committee: USA Gymnastics; USA Diving; and USA Track & Field.
Black or African American
An estimated 4,000 men from Indianapolis served in 39 regiments, and an estimated 700 died during the war.
In addition to its collections, the museum consists of 100 Acres: The Virginia B. Fairbanks Art and Nature Park; Oldfields, a restored house museum and estate once owned by Josiah K. Lilly, Jr.; and restored gardens and grounds originally designed by Percival Gallagher of the Olmsted Brothers firm.
The first segment to be constructed is Phase I of the Red Line, traveling  from Broad Ripple Village to the University of Indianapolis.
Another 8.57% are affiliated with other Christian faiths.
Butler University and Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) are NCAA Division I schools based in the city.
Indianapolis is considered a "high sufficiency" global city.
The city's major exports include pharmaceuticals, motor vehicle parts, medical equipment and supplies, engine and power equipment, and aircraft products and parts.
St. Vincent Indianapolis includes Peyton Manning Children's Hospital, St. Vincent Heart Center of Indiana, St. Vincent Seton Specialty Hospital, and St. Vincent Women's Hospital.
The mini-marathon is held the first weekend of May as part of the 500 Festival, leading up to the Indianapolis 500. , it had sold out for 12 consecutive years, with 35,000 participants.
Notable weeklies include ''NUVO'', an alternative weekly newspaper, the ''Indianapolis Recorder'', a weekly newspaper serving the local African American community, the ''Indianapolis Business Journal'', reporting on local real estate, and the ''Southside Times''.
Contributing to an annual gross metropolitan product (GMP) of $125.9 billion, the Indianapolis metropolitan area is the 26th largest economic region in the U.S. and 42nd largest in the world.
In 2009, IMPD operated six precincts, including 1,617 sworn police personnel.
Temperatures dip to  or below an average of 4.7 nights per year.
Throughout the 1980s, $122 million in public and private funding built the Indianapolis Tennis Center, Major Taylor Velodrome, Indiana University Natatorium, Carroll Track and Soccer Stadium, and RCA Dome.
Indy Parks and Recreation maintains nearly 200 parks covering .
Martin University was founded in 1977 and is the state's only predominately black university.
, 32% of the non-family households included individuals living alone, 8.3% of these households included individuals age 65 years of age or older.
Construction began in 2011 on DigIndy, a $1.9 billion project to correct the city's combined sewer overflows (CSOs) by 2025.
In 2012, it was recognized by the James Beard Foundation as one of "America's Classics."
Indianapolis has been called the "Amateur Sports Capital of the World."
There were also 447 nonfatal shootings in 2015, representing a 24% increase over the 361 shootings recorded during the same time period in 2014.
The Indiana-Kentucky Synod of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and the Indiana Conference of the United Methodist Church are also based in the city.
After the steamboat ''Robert Hanna'' ran aground along the river in 1831, no steamboat successfully returned to Indianapolis.
Founded in 1873, the public library system includes the Central Library and 23 branches throughout the county.
The Butler Bulldogs men's basketball team were runners-up in the 2010 and 2011 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship Games.
In 2016, the Julia M. Carson Transit Center opened, the downtown hub for 27 bus routes.
Under the mayoral administration of Richard Lugar, the city and county governments restructured, consolidating most public services into a new entity called Unigov.
After completion of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument, an ordinance was passed in 1905 restricting building heights on the traffic circle to  to protect views of the  monument.
These are Clermont, Crows Nest, Cumberland, Homecroft, Meridian Hills, North Crows Nest, Rocky Ripple, Spring Hill, Warren Park, Williams Creek, and Wynnedale.
Indianapolis is the seat of the Episcopal Diocese of Indianapolis, based from Christ Church Cathedral.
Of the 42.42% of the city's residents who identify as religious, Roman Catholics make up the largest group, at 11.31%.
Indianapolis became an incorporated city effective March 30, 1847.
The city contains the largest collection of monuments dedicated to veterans and war dead in the country, outside of Washington, D.C.
*Crown Hill National Cemetery
Indianapolis was ranked as the 33rd most dangerous city in the U.S. in the 2008–2009 edition of CQ Press's ''City Crime Rankings'' and the 22nd most dangerous city according to Yahoo!
The nonprofit Phoenix Theatre focuses on contemporary theatrical productions.
The Indiana Theatre opened as a movie palace on Washington Street in 1927, currently housing the Indiana Repertory Theatre, a regional repertory theatre.
Between 1950 and 1990, over 155,000 residents left Center Township, resulting in urban blight and disinvestment.
Quarterback Peyton Manning led the team to win Super Bowl XLI in the 2006 NFL season.
Between 1990 and 2012, approximately 26,900 manufacturing jobs were lost in the city, including the automotive plant closures of Chrysler, Ford, and General Motors.
Winters are generally cold with moderate snowfall.
The mayor appoints deputy mayors, department heads, and members of various boards and commissions.
Held in autumn, the Monumental Marathon is also among the largest in the U.S., with nearly 14,000 entrants in 2015.
Annual music events include the International Violin Competition of Indianapolis, Midwest Music Summit, and Indy Jazz Fest.
As of 2016, the Indianapolis metropolitan area was the 27th largest television market and 39th largest radio market in the United States.
The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Museum (in Speedway) exhibits an extensive collection of auto racing memorabilia showcasing various motorsports and automotive history.
Eli Lilly and Company
As of 2010, the median age for Indianapolis was 33.7 years.
Between 2012 and 2014, the murder rate increased by 44%.
IUPUI's current enrollment is 30,105, the third largest in the state.
Though Indianapolis abolished segregated schools before ''Brown v. Board of Education'', the later action of court-ordered desegregation busing by Judge Samuel Hugh Dillin proved controversial.
Since 1996, the team has played at Victory Field, which replaced Bush Stadium.
It is the third largest manufacturing employer and thirteenth largest employer overall in the city, with a workforce of 4,300 in aircraft engine development and manufacturing.
*Indiana World War Memorial Plaza
Lucas Oil Stadium replaced the team's first home, the RCA Dome, in 2008.
Perhaps the most notable game was the 1954 state championship, which inspired the critically acclaimed 1986 film, ''Hoosiers''.
Its combined statistical area ranks 26th, with 2.4 million inhabitants.
The city's vast land area and low public funding contributed to the ranking.
Walker Manufacturing Company (1910), and Allison Transmission (1915).
In 1816, the year Indiana gained statehood, the U.S. Congress donated four sections of federal land to establish a permanent seat of state government.
Daily grounds and track tours are also based at the museum.
The city hosts numerous events annually, most notably the Indianapolis 500, the world's largest single-day sporting event.
In 1853, voters approved a new city charter that provided for an elected mayor and a fourteen-member city council.
IFD responded to nearly 100,000 incidents in 2014.
Indianapolis is a proposed connection on the Chicago Hub Network, a high-speed rail line that would run between Chicago and Cincinnati.
The latter project secured the 1984 relocation of the NFL Baltimore Colts and the 1987 Pan American Games.
IUPUI has two colleges and 18 schools, including the Herron School of Art and Design, Robert H. McKinney School of Law, and School of Dentistry.
The city is an important hub for CSX Transportation, home to its division headquarters, an intermodal terminal, and classification yard (in the suburb of Avon).
Indianapolis' public medical center, the Sidney and Lois Eskenazi Hospital, reopened in 2013 after a $754 million project to replace Wishard Memorial Hospital on the IUPUI campus.
*Project 9/11 Indianapolis
Allison Transmission Holdings
On April 30, 1865, Lincoln's funeral train made a stop at Indianapolis, where an estimated crowd of more than 100,000 people passed the assassinated president's bier at the Indiana Statehouse.
The city's philanthropic community has been instrumental in the development of its cultural institutions, including The Children's Museum of Indianapolis (the world's largest) and Indiana Landmarks (the country's largest statewide historic preservation organization).
Winters are cold, with an average January temperature of .
Popular nationally syndicated radio program ''The Bob & Tom Show'' has been based at Indianapolis radio station WFBQ since 1983.
*Medal of Honor Memorial
A small segment of the ultimately failed Indiana Central Canal was opened in 1839.
