Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of India by the 1820s.
In 2008, a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between India and the United States.
By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north.
The India–Pakistan nuclear rivalry came to a head in 1998.
In the 60 years since, India has had a mixed record of successes and failures.
The 2011 census reported that Hinduism (79.8% of the population) is the largest religion in India, followed by Islam (14.23%).
India's consumer market, the world's eleventh-largest, is expected to become fifth-largest by 2030.
, India is the world's largest arms importer; between 2007 and 2011, it accounted for 10% of funds spent on international arms purchases.
The BCCI is also responsible for conducting an annual Twenty20 competition known as the Indian Premier League.
The Prime Minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power.
During the Vedic period (c. 1700 – 500 BCE), the foundations of Hindu philosophy, mythology, theology and literature were laid, and many beliefs and practices which still exist today, such as ''dhárma'', ''kárma'', ''yóga'', and ''mokṣa'', were established.
Indian cuisine encompasses a wide variety of regional and traditional cuisines, often depending on a particular state (such as Maharashtrian cuisine).
It was introduced into India by the Mughals and widely used since then.
At the end of 2011, the Indian IT industry employed 2.8 million professionals, generated revenues close to US$100 billion equalling 7.5% of Indian GDP and contributed 26% of India's merchandise exports.
The caste system arose during this period, creating a hierarchy of priests, warriors, free peasants and traders, and lastly the indigenous peoples who were regarded as impure; and small tribal units gradually coalesced into monarchical, state-level polities.
In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988.
The payment of dowry, although illegal, remains widespread across class lines.
Hindi, with the largest number of speakers, is the official language of the government.
The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes.
In the early 16th century, northern India, being then under mainly Muslim rulers, fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors.
Epochal volcanism and climatic changes 20 million years ago forced a mass extinction.
Among the better-known folk dances are the ''bhangra'' of Punjab, the ''bihu'' of Assam, the ''chhau'' of Odisha,  West Bengal and Jharkhand, ''garba'' and ''dandiya'' of Gujarat, ''ghoomar'' of Rajasthan, and the ''lavani'' of Maharashtra.
The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War II, the Congress's final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism.
On Nehru's death in 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly became prime minister; he was succeeded, after his own unexpected death in 1966, by Indira Gandhi, who went on to lead the Congress to election victories in 1967 and 1971.
Female infanticide and female foeticide in the country have caused a discrepancy in the sex ratio,  it was estimated that there were 50 million more males than females in the nation.
Among them are the Nilgiri leaf monkey and Beddome's toad of the Western Ghats.
Buddhism, based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha attracted followers from all social classes excepting the middle class; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India.
An example of this dominance is the basketball competition where Team India won three out of four tournaments to date.
The median age was 24.9 in the 2001 census.
For most of the period between 1950—when India first became a republic—and the late 1980s, the Congress held a majority in the parliament.
India lies within the Indomalaya ecozone and contains three biodiversity hotspots.
The Constitution of India, which came into effect on 26 January 1950, states in its preamble that India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic.
India is home to two major language families: Indo-Aryan (spoken by about 74% of the population) and Dravidian (24%).
The state monopoly on television broadcast ended in the 1990s and, since then, satellite channels have increasingly shaped popular culture of Indian society.
Widespread state intervention and regulation largely walled the economy off from the outside world.
Although the rebellion was suppressed by 1858, it led to the dissolution of the East India Company and to the direct administration of India by the British government.
Vernacular architecture is also highly regional in it flavours.
The improvement in literacy rate in rural area is two times that in urban areas.
According to the 2011 census, there are 53 million-plus cities in India; among them Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Chennai, Ahmedabad, and Kolkata, in decreasing order by population.
In the 20th century, Indian literature was influenced by the works of Bengali poet and novelist Rabindranath Tagore.
In 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act, states were reorganised on a linguistic basis.
It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislations, by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation, of which Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol.
Following public discontent with the state of emergency she declared in 1975, the Congress was voted out of power in 1977; the then-new Janata Party, which had opposed the emergency, was voted in.
Between these extremes lie the moist deciduous sal forest of eastern India; the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India; and the babul-dominated thorn forest of the central Deccan and western Gangetic plain.
Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament.
It is the seventh-largest country by area, the second-most populous country (with over 1.2 billion people), and the most populous democracy in the world.
The Mughal state's economic policies, deriving most revenues from agriculture and mandating that taxes be paid in the well-regulated silver currency, caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets.
Other sports in which Indians have succeeded internationally include badminton (Saina Nehwal is the top ranked female badminton player in the world), boxing, and wrestling.
In the 2014 general election, the BJP became the first political party since 1984 to win a majority and govern without the support of other parties.
From the 14th to the 18th centuries, India's literary traditions went through a period of drastic change because of the emergence of devotional poets such as Kabīr, Tulsīdās, and Guru Nānak.
In North India, Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family, leading to increased subordination of women.
In the late Vedic period, around the 6th century BCE, the small states and chiefdoms of the Ganges Plain and the north-western regions had consolidated into 16 major oligarchies and monarchies that were known as the ''mahajanapadas''.
Four major climatic groupings predominate in India: tropical wet, tropical dry, subtropical humid, and montane.
For the fiscal year spanning 2012–2013, US$40.44 billion was budgeted.
India's defining geological processes began 75 million years ago when the Indian plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east.
Yet, in 2001, over 70% lived in rural areas.
The geographical term ''Bharat'' (, ), which is recognised by the Constitution of India as an official name for the country, is used by many Indian languages in its variations.
By the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred, a number of European trading companies, including the English East India Company, had established coastal outposts.
India's R & D spending constitutes 60% of the biopharmaceutical industry.
India is the world's most populous democracy.
In 1998, the BJP was able to form a successful coalition, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA).
The earliest literary writings in India, composed between 1700 BCE and 1200 CE, were in the Sanskrit language.
'''India''', officially the '''Republic of India''' (IAST: ''''), is a country in South Asia.
Peninsular India's subsequent movement towards and collision with the Laurasian landmass set off a mass exchange of species.
The government abides by constitutional checks and balances.
India subsequently signed co-operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with Russia, France, the United Kingdom, and Canada.
Since its independence in 1947, India has maintained cordial relations with most nations.
Nearly contemporaneous Mesolithic rock art sites have been found in many parts of the Indian subcontinent, including at the Bhimbetka rock shelters in Madhya Pradesh.
The improved results garnered by the Indian Davis Cup team and other Indian tennis players in the early 2010s have made tennis increasingly popular in the country.
Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British-style parliamentary system, the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest.
These include the Asiatic lion, the Bengal tiger, the snow leopard and the Indian white-rumped vulture, which, by ingesting the carrion of diclofenac-laced cattle, nearly became extinct.
The medicinal neem, widely used in rural Indian herbal remedies, is a key Indian tree.
Under the Guptas, a renewed Hinduism based on devotion rather than the management of ritual began to assert itself.
The Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna and the Arjuna Award are the highest forms of government recognition for athletic achievement; the Dronacharya Award is awarded for excellence in coaching.
The name ''India'' is derived from ''Indus'', which originates from the Old Persian word ''Hindu''.
The human sex ratio, according to the 2011 census, is 940 females per 1,000 males.
Home to the ancient Indus Valley Civilisation and a region of historic trade routes and vast empires, the Indian subcontinent was identified with its commercial and cultural wealth for much of its long history.
Since then, their structure has remained largely unchanged.
These are: ''bharatanatyam'' of the state of Tamil Nadu, ''kathak'' of Uttar Pradesh, ''kathakali'' and ''mohiniyattam'' of Kerala,'' kuchipudi'' of Andhra Pradesh, ''manipuri'' of Manipur, ''odissi'' of Odisha, and the ''sattriya'' of Assam.
It has remained a democracy with civil liberties, an active Supreme Court, and a largely independent press.
India has the world's largest Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Zoroastrian, and Bahá'í populations, and has the third-largest Muslim population and the largest Muslim population for a non-Muslim majority country.
As a consequence, India became the sixth ''de facto'' nuclear weapons state.
The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion, resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture.
The Taj Mahal, built in Agra between 1631 and 1648 by orders of Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife, has been described in the UNESCO World Heritage List as "the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage".
These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation, the first urban culture in South Asia; it flourished during 2500–1900&nbsp;BCE in Pakistan and western India.
''Gaṇarājya'' (literally, people's State) is the Sanskrit/Hindi term for "republic" dating back to the ancient times.
When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south, who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south.
The predominant religion, Hinduism, has been shaped by various historical schools of thought, including those of the ''Upanishads'', the ''Yoga Sutras'', the ''Bhakti'' movement, and by Buddhist philosophy.
* Judicial: India has a unitary three-tier independent judiciary that comprises the Supreme Court, headed by the Chief Justice of India, 24 High Courts, and a large number of trial courts.
India is scheduled to host the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup.
Major imports include crude oil, machinery, gems, fertiliser, and chemicals.
It is also home to a diversity of wildlife in a variety of protected habitats.
Deaths resulting from dowry, mostly from bride burning, are on the rise.
According to a Food and Agriculture Organization report in 2015, 15% of Indian population is undernourished.
It has unresolved territorial disputes with China and with Pakistan.
Other sets of holidays, varying between nine and twelve, are officially observed in individual states.
Constituted in such fashion, India lies to the north of the equator between 6° 44' and 35° 30' north latitude and 68° 7' and 97° 25' east longitude.
Split lentils, or ''dal'', are used extensively.
The Congress is considered centre-left in Indian political culture, and the BJP right-wing.
In 2008, India's share of world trade was 1.68%; In 2011, India was the world's tenth-largest importer and the nineteenth-largest exporter.
English is used extensively in business and administration and has the status of a "subsidiary official language"; it is important in education, especially as a medium of higher education.
Field hockey in India is administered by Hockey India.
India has close economic ties with South America, Asia, and Africa; it pursues a "Look East" policy that seeks to strengthen partnerships with the ASEAN nations, Japan, and South Korea that revolve around many issues, but especially those involving economic investment and regional security.
In response the system of national parks and protected areas, first established in 1935, was substantially expanded.
Other languages spoken in India come from the Austroasiatic and Sino-Tibetan language families.
The spice trade between India and Europe is often cited by historians as the primary catalyst for Europe's Age of Discovery.
India has tense relations with neighbouring Pakistan; the two nations have gone to war four times: in 1947, 1965, 1971, and 1999.
Appointed by the president, the prime minister is by convention supported by the party or political alliance holding the majority of seats in the lower house of parliament.
In the Indian Ocean, India is in the vicinity of Sri Lanka and the Maldives; in addition, India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Thailand and Indonesia.
''Hindustan'' () is a Persian name for India dating back to the 3rd century B.C.E.
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Indian economy in 2015 was nominally worth  US$2.183 trillion; it is the 7th-largest economy by market exchange rates, and is, at US$8.027 trillion, the third-largest by purchasing power parity, or PPP.
Many Indian festivals are religious in origin.
Jainism came into prominence during the life of its exemplar, Mahavira.
The President of India is the supreme commander of the nation's armed forces; with 1.325 million active troops, they compose the world's third-largest military.
According to a 2011 PricewaterhouseCoopers report, India's GDP at purchasing power parity could overtake that of the United States by 2045.
, just 1.6 percent of Indian women were divorced but this figure was rising due to their education and economic independence.
Habitat ranges from the tropical rainforest of the Andaman Islands, Western Ghats, and North-East India to the coniferous forest of the Himalaya.
In the 19th century, Indian writers took a new interest in social questions and psychological descriptions.
By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in South-East Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Java.
Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo-Aryan migration into the subcontinent.
Corruption in India is perceived to have increased significantly, with one report estimating the illegal capital flows since independence to be US$462 billion.
The Indian national cricket team won the 1983 and 2011 Cricket World Cup events, the 2007 ICC World Twenty20, shared the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy with Sri Lanka, and won 2013 ICC Champions Trophy.
Each state and union territory has one or more official languages, and the constitution recognises in particular 22 "scheduled languages".
Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control much of peninsular India, and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards.
The slowing down of the overall growth rate of population was due to the sharp decline in the growth rate in rural areas since 1991.
Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Dholavira, and Kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilisation engaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade.
An overwhelming majority of Indians, with their consent, have their marriages arranged by their parents or other elders in the family.
As applied in Hindu temple architecture, it is influenced by the ''Shilpa Shastras'', a series of foundational texts whose basic mythological form is the ''Vastu-Purusha mandala'', a square that embodied the "absolute".
Elections were held again in 1991; no party won an absolute majority.
The first post-colonial census, conducted in 1951, counted 361.1 million people.
It is a republic and representative democracy, in which "majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law".
Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India.
By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created in the greater Ganges Plain a complex system of administration and taxation that became a model for later Indian kingdoms.
Simultaneously, the vast Tethyn oceanic crust, to its northeast, began to subduct under the Eurasian plate.
That year, Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1957 and 1962 to be re-elected to a consecutive five-year term.
Historians consider India's modern age to have begun sometime between 1848 and 1885.
Its population grew by 17.64% during 2001–2011, compared to 21.54% growth in the previous decade (1991–2001).
In recent years, it has played key roles in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the World Trade Organisation.
The literacy rate in 2011 was 74.04%: 65.46% among females and 82.14% among males.
Several short-lived alliances shared power at the centre.
However a report from 2011 has shown improvement in the gender ratio.
India is a federation with a parliamentary system governed under the Constitution of India, which serves as the country's supreme legal document.
India has a comparatively strong presence in shooting sports, and has won several medals at the Olympics, the World Shooting Championships, and the Commonwealth Games.
India is a federal republic governed under a parliamentary system and consists of 29 states and 7 union territories.
India has two archipelagos: the Lakshadweep, coral atolls off India's south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea.
India's foreign exchange remittances were US$70 billion in year 2014, the largest in the world, contributed to its economy by 25 million Indians working in foreign countries.
The federal government comprises three branches:
These included the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty, the surveillance of the population, and the education of citizens (English Education Act 1835).
''Pachisi'', from which parcheesi derives, was played on a giant marble court by Akbar.
The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers, and it no longer required external support from India's communist parties.
During the period 2000–500 BCE, in terms of culture, many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic to the Iron Age.
However, it is higher than Pakistan, Nepal, Afghanistan, Bangladesh and others.
In an age of increasing urban wealth, both religions held up renunciation as an ideal, and both established long-lasting monastic traditions.
India is a federation composed of 29 states and 7 union territories.
With 1,210,193,422 residents reported in the 2011 provisional census report, India is the world's second-most populous country.
Family values are important in the Indian tradition, and multi-generational patriarchal joint families have been the norm in India, though nuclear families are becoming common in urban areas.
Marriage is thought to be for life, and the divorce rate is extremely low.
India has been a member of WTO since 1 January 1995.
It comprises the Indian Army, the Indian Navy, and the Indian Air Force; auxiliary organisations include the Strategic Forces Command and three paramilitary groups: the Assam Rifles, the Special Frontier Force, and the Indian Coast Guard.
Mammals then entered India from Asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the rising Himalaya.
Despite impressive economic growth during recent decades, India continues to face socio-economic challenges.
The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks—many small farmers became dependent on the whims of far-away markets.
The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the centre through appointed administrators.
Kerala is the most literate state with 93.91% literacy; while Bihar the least with 63.82%.
All but two of the Lok Sabha's 545 members are directly elected by popular vote; they represent individual constituencies via five-year terms.
In the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language.
Major industries include textiles, telecommunications, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, food processing, steel, transport equipment, cement, mining, petroleum, machinery, and software.
Four religions—Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism—originated here, whereas Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam arrived in the 1st millennium CE and also shaped the region's diverse culture.
Indian cultural history spans more than 4,500 years.
In 2016, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) released Top 10 cheapest cities in the world which 4 of it were from India: Bangalore (2nd), Mumbai (3rd), Chennai (6th) and New Delhi (8th) based on the cost of 160 products and services.
Economic liberalisation, which was begun in the 1990s, has created a large urban middle class, transformed India into one of the world's fastest-growing economies, and increased its geopolitical clout.
Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised, drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well.
Today, television is the most penetrative media in India; industry estimates indicate that  there are over 554 million TV consumers, 462 million with satellite and/or cable connections, compared to other forms of mass media such as press (350 million), radio (156 million) or internet (37 million).
The original Indian plate survives as peninsular India, the oldest and geologically most stable part of India.
Classical Sanskrit literature flowered as well, and Indian science, astronomy, medicine, and mathematics made significant advances.
Lentils may be used whole, dehusked—for example, ''dhuli moong'' or ''dhuli urad''—or split.
The Indian early medieval age, 600 CE to 1200 CE, is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity.
During this time, pastoral peoples whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes.
The pharmaceutical industry in India is among the significant emerging markets for global pharma industry.
The rural urban literacy gap which was 21.2 percentage points in 2001, dropped to 16.1 percentage points in 2011.
Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the south-west, and the Bay of Bengal on the south-east, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the north-east; and Myanmar (Burma) and Bangladesh to the east.
Cut off from the plain by the ancient Aravalli Range lies the Thar Desert.
It operates under a Westminster-style parliamentary system and comprises the upper house called the Rajya Sabha ("Council of States") and the lower called the Lok Sabha ("House of the People").
* Legislative: The legislature of India is the bicameral parliament.
The report highlights key growth factors: a young and rapidly growing working-age population; growth in the manufacturing sector because of rising education and engineering skill levels; and sustained growth of the consumer market driven by a rapidly growing middle class.
In the 2004 Indian general elections, again no party won an absolute majority, but the Congress emerged as the largest single party, forming another successful coalition: the United Progressive Alliance (UPA).
Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions, including invasive British-style social reforms, harsh land taxes, and summary treatment of some rich landowners and princes, the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule.
''Vastu shastra'', literally "science of construction" or "architecture" and ascribed to Mamuni Mayan, explores how the laws of nature affect human dwellings; it employs precise geometry and directional alignments to reflect perceived cosmic constructs.
Cotton was domesticated in India by 4000 BCE.
Politically, by the 3rd century BCE, the kingdom of Magadha had annexed or reduced other states to emerge as the Mauryan Empire.
Its government lasted just over three years.
Led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the NDA became the first non-Congress, coalition government to complete a five-year term.
Since then, however, it has increasingly shared the political stage with the BJP, as well as with powerful regional parties which have often forced the creation of multi-party coalitions at the centre.
With 7 of the world's top 15 information technology outsourcing companies based in India, the country is viewed as the second-most favourable outsourcing destination after the United States, .
Established regional cinematic traditions exist in the Assamese, Bengali, Bhojpuri, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Punjabi, Gujarati, Marathi, Odia, Tamil, and Telugu languages.
In 2011, the annual defence budget increased by 11.6%, although this does not include funds that reach the military through other branches of government.
However, it continues to face the challenges of poverty, corruption, malnutrition and inadequate public healthcare.
Prominent works of this Sanskrit literature include epics such as the ''Mahābhārata'' and the ''Ramayana'', the dramas of Kālidāsa such as the ''Abhijñānaśākuntalam'' (''The Recognition of Śakuntalā''), and poetry such as the ''Mahākāvya''.
Scholars believe it to be named after the Vedic tribe of ''Bharatas'' in the second millennium B.C.E.
Although India possessed nuclear weapons at the time and was not party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, it received waivers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, ending earlier restrictions on India's nuclear technology and commerce.
