India emerged victorious in the resulting conflict to become the regional hegemon of South Asia.
In 1966, after Shastri's death, the Congress legislative party elected Indira Gandhi over  Morarji Desai as their leader.
Gandhi declared the people of Indian origin settled in Africa as "Ambassors of India."
In 1977, after extending the state of emergency twice, Indira Gandhi called elections to give the electorate a chance to vindicate her rule.
After her mother died, she briefly attended the Badminton School before enrolling at Somerville College in 1937 to study history.
Accordingly, Ahmed declared a State of Emergency caused by internal disorder, based on the provisions of Article 352(1) of the Constitution, on 25 June 1975.
In these campaigns Bhutto asked the nation to get united and great slogans were raised such as ''hum ghaas kha lay gay magar nuclear power ban k rhe gay (we would eat grass but would surely achieve nuclear power)''.
In the elections held in January, Congress returned to power with a landslide majority.
In doing so, she had hoped to ward off the growing political conflict between Hindu and Sikh groups in the region.
Foreign and domestic policy successes in the 1970s enabled Gandhi to rebuild India's image in the eyes of African states.
Gandhi indicated that she would make no major concessions on Kashmir.
The most prominent of the Kashmiri separatists, Sheikh Abdullah, had to recognize India's control over Kashmir in light of the new order in South Asia.
Furthermore, the conclusion of the Indo-Soviet treaty in 1971 and threatening gestures by the major western power, the United States, to send its nuclear armed Task Force 74 into the Bay of Bengal at the height of the East Pakistan crisis had enabled India to regain its anti-imperialist image.
She enjoyed cordial relations with Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike.
Dr. Dogra stated that as many as 30 bullet wounds were sustained by Indira Gandhi, from two sources, a Sten gun and a pistol.
The prevailing rumour was that Sanjay had intentions of dislodging Gandhi and the trio stood between that.
Gandhi inherited a weak economy when she again became Prime Minister in 1980.
Great ire was raised in Pakistan and its Prime Minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, described this test as "''Indian hegemony''" to intimidate Pakistan.
However, Mujibur Rahman's pro-India policies antagonised many in Bangladeshi politics and the military, who feared that Bangladesh had become a client state of India.
Relations with the U.S. became distant as Gandhi developed closer ties with the Soviet Union after the war.
This was followed by the annexation of Sikkim in 1975.
Rosser wrote that "some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress dissent against Gandhi's policy shift to the right."
She began a new course by launching the ''Fourth Five-Year Plan'' in 1969.
In Bihar, Jayaprakash Narayan, the veteran leader came out of retirement to lead the protest movement there.
During Charan Singh's last year in office (1980), inflation averaged 18.2%, compared to 6.5% during Gandhi's last year in office (1984).
On the other hand, the combined opposition alliance had a two word manifesto of "Indira Hatao" (Remove Indira).
Egypt's stance was met with dismay by the Indians, who had come to expect close co-operation with the Baathist regimes.
She was being treated there in 1940, when the Nazi armies rapidly conquered Europe.
Sanjay died soon after in an air crash, early into this term.
The opposition to Gandhi in 1973-75 period, after the Indira wave had receded, was strongest in Bihar and Gujarat.
The government targeted growth at 5.7% while stating as its goals, "growth with stability and progressive achievement of self-reliance."
The prime minister retained the support of her party, which issued a statement backing her.
In 1974, India successfully conducted an underground nuclear test, unofficially code named as "''Smiling Buddha''", near the desert village of Pokhran in Rajasthan.
In response to her arrest, Indira Gandhi's supporters hijacked an Indian Airlines jet and demanded her immediate release.
The party included right wing Hindu Nationalists, Socialists and former Congress party members.
In the 1977 elections, a coalition led by the Sikh-majority Akali Dal came to power in the northern Indian state of Punjab.
At Oxford, she did well in history, political science and economics, but her grades in Latin—a compulsory subject—remained poor.
In 1971, Gandhi intervened in the Pakistani Civil War in support of East Pakistan.
Military hostilities recommenced in 1984 following Gandhi's authorization of Operation Meghdoot.
Gandhi not only abandoned the short lived liberalization programme but also aggressively expanded the public sector with new licensing requirements and other restrictions for industry.
While the agreement was considered a victory for the Indian government and ended large-scale conflicts, there has since been spurts of violence by rebel holdouts and ethnic conflict amongst the tribes.
Rajiv Gandhi on a live TV show said of the carnage, "When a big tree falls, the earth shakes."
Elections soon after to State assemblies across the country also brought back Congress ministries in the state with Indira's son Sanjay Gandhi choosing loyalists to lead the states.
The university later awarded her an honorary degree.
Nevertheless, others have disputed the success of the program and criticized Gandhi for not doing enough to reform land ownership.
The rise of these newly empowered social classes challenged the political establishment of the Hindi Belt in the years to come.
This had been her first economic policy formulation, six months after coming to office.
In this context, Gandhi was accused of formulating populist policies to suit her political needs; being seemingly against the rich and big business while preserving the status quo in order to manipulate the support of the left at times of political insecurity, such as the late 1960s.
The cross examination was conducted by Shri P. N. Lekhi, the defence counsel.
With so little in common, the Morarji Desai government was bogged down by infighting.
One of the major developments in Southeast Asia during Gandhi's premiership was the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1967.
Although Gandhi came to be viewed in time as the scourge of the right-wing and reactionary political elements of India, leftist opposition to her policies emerged.
That government had the distinction of being India's first ever elected Communist Government.
Indian National Congress established the annual Indira Gandhi Award for National Integration in 1985, given in her memory on her death anniversary.
Victory over Pakistan and India's possession of nuclear weapons showed the degree of India's progress.
Gandhi remained a staunch supporter of Palestinians in the Arab-Israeli conflict and was critical of the Middle East diplomacy sponsored by the United States.
Populist programs and policies were replaced by pragmatism.
India's relationship with Pakistan remained strained following the Shimla Accord in 1972.
Victory over Pakistan in 1971 consolidated Indian power in Kashmir.
In an effort to split the Akali Dal and gain popular support among the Sikhs, Indira Gandhi's Congress helped bring the orthodox religious leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale to prominence in Punjab politics.
In 1972, after the less extremist Mizo leaders came to the negotiating table, Gandhi upgraded Mizoram to the status of a union territory.
On their part, the ASEAN nations were unhappy with Gandhi's sympathy for the Viet Cong and India's strong links with the USSR.
On 31 October 1984, two of Gandhi's bodyguards, Satwant Singh and Beant Singh, shot her with their service weapons in the garden of the Prime Minister's residence at 1 Safdarjung Road, New Delhi.
Efforts to rope in the Asian community to join Indian diplomacy, however, came to naught, partly because of the unwilligness of Indians to remain in politically insecure surroundings and partly due to the exodus of African Indians to Britain with the passing of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act in 1968.
In the resulting Operation Blue Star, the shrine was damaged and many civilians were brutally massacred.
Gandhi considered the north-eastern regions important, because of its strategic situation.
Gandhi directed a letter to Bhutto and, later to the world, describing the test for peaceful purposes and India's commitment to develop its programme for industrial and scientific use.
She and her mother Kamala Nehru moved to Belur Math headquarters of Ramakrishna Mission where Swami Ranganathananda was her guardian  later she went on to study at the Viswa Bharati University in Shantiniketan.
Gandhi began negotiations with the Kenyan government to establish the Africa-India Development Cooperation.
Atal Bihari Vajpayee though categorically denied ever having said that when he made an appearance in Rajat Sharma's show Aap ki Adalat.
Her funeral was televised live on domestic and international stations, including the BBC.
The shooting occurred as she was walking past a wicket gate guarded by Satwant and Beant.
The government was even able to exceed the targeted growth figure with an annual growth rate of 5.0–5.2% over the five-year period of the plan (1974–79).
Thus, this decision effectively removed her from office.
Sanjay wielded tremendous power during the emergency without holding any Government office.
Charan Singh was appointed Prime Minister, by President Reddy, after Indira and Sanjay Gandhi promised Singh that Congress (I) would support his government from outside on certain conditions., The conditions included dropping all charges against Indira and Sanjay.
Regardless of the debate over her ideology or lack of thereof, Gandhi remains a left-wing icon.
Gandhi ordered the Indian army to launch massive retaliatory strikes in response.
''The Indian Libertarian'' wrote that: "it would be difficult to find a more machiavellian leftist than Mrs Indira Gandhi...for here is Machiavelli at its best in the person of a suave, charming and astute politician."
Gandhi moved to restore order by ordering the arrest of most of the opposition participating in the unrest.
Pankaj Vohra noted that "even the late prime minister’s critics would concede that the maximum number of legislations of social significance was brought about during her tenure...and that she lives in the hearts of millions of Indians who shared her concern for the poor and weaker sections and who supported her politics."
The Indira Gandhi National Open University, the largest university in the world, is also named after her.
The 1974 India-Iranian agreement led to Iran supplying nearly 75 percent of India's crude oil demands.
The Prime Minister must be a member of either the Lok Sabha (the lower house in the Parliament of India) or a member of the Rajya Sabha (the upper house).
Critics also accused Gandhi of choosing to "talk left and act right", referring to her concurrent pro-business decisions and endeavours.
Her lieutenant, Narasimha Rao, later became Prime Minister and approved full diplomatic ties with Israel in 1992.
She won a bye-election from the Chikamagalur constituency to the Lok sabha in 1978.
But, it then accelerated sharply in the 1970s, from 5.5% in 1970–71 to over 20% by 1973–74, due to the international oil crisis.
The preceding year in 1979–80 under the Janata Party government had led to the strongest recession (−5.2%) in the history of modern India with inflation rampant at 18.2%.
Gandhi claimed that only "clear vision, iron will and the strictest discipline" can remove poverty.
Gandhi was unhappy with the lack of support from India's Arab allies during the war with Pakistan, while the Shah was apprehensive at the growing friendship between Pakistan and the Gulf states, specially Saudi Arabia, and the growing influence of Islam in Pakistani society.
Upon her father's death in 1964,  Gandhi refused to enter the Congress party leadership contest and instead chose to become a cabinet minister in the government led by Lal Bahadur Shastri.
India's entry into the nuclear weapons club in 1974 contributed to tensions in Southeast Asia.
In 1979, when she visited Madurai, some hooligans attacked her.
Responding to the insurgency in Nagaland, Gandhi "unleashed a powerful military offensive" in the 1970s.
In Uganda, the African Indian community even suffered persecution and eventually expulsion under the government of Idi Amin.
A small-scale insurgency by some militants continued into the late 1970s but was successfully dealt with by the government.
The period of 1967–75 was characterized by socialist ascendency in India which culminated in 1976 with the official declaration of state socialism.
Gandhi promised to reduce poverty by targeting the consumption levels of the poor and enact wide ranging social and economic reforms.
Following the rise to power of General Zia-ul-Haq in Pakistan in 1978, India's relations with its neighbour reached a nadir.
The ambitious Union Finance minister, Charan Singh, who as the Union Home Minister during the previous year had ordered arrest of Gandhi, took advantage of this and started courting the Congress (I).
However, this strategy backfired disastrously.
Her arrest and long-running trial gained her great sympathy from many people.
In that capacity, she was instrumental in getting  the Communist led Kerala State Government dismissed in 1959.
Towards the end of the 1950s, Indira Gandhi served as the President of the Congress.
Indira Gandhi was the only child of India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru.
On average, inflation in India had remained below 7% through the 1950s and 1960s.
Gandhi had asked one of her colleagues in government, Mr Ashoke Kumar Sen to defend her in court.
Soon afterwards, the Congress party split again with Gandhi floating her own Congress (I) faction.
In 1969, Gandhi moved to nationalise fourteen major commercial banks.
The Congress Party split during the election campaign of 1977: veteran Gandhi supporters like Jagjivan Ram, Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna and Nandini Satpathy were compelled to part ways and form a new political entity, CFD (Congress for Democracy), primarily due to intra-party politicking and also due to circumstances created by Sanjay Gandhi.
Grain diplomacy and currency devaluation became matters of intense national pride in India.
Gandhi authorised the development of nuclear weapons in 1967, in response to the ''Test No.
To this day the events remain controversial with a disputed number of victims; Many Sikhs seeing the attack as unjustified and Bhindrawale being declared the greatest Sikh martyr of the 20th century by Akal Takht (Sikh Political Authority) in 2003.
In 1966, the Mizo uprising took place against the government of India and overran almost the whole of the Mizoram region.
At the same time, Chinese influence in Africa had declined owing to its incessant quarrels with the Soviet Union.
Gandhi proceeded to abrogate the Janata Party government's Five Year Plan in 1980 and launched the Sixth Five Year Plan (1980–85).
In 1969, after falling out with senior party leaders on a number of issues, the party president S. Nijalingappa expelled her from the party.
Indira had to take the entrance examination twice, having failed at her first attempt with a poor performance in Latin.
The Mizo conflict was definitively resolved during the administration of Gandhi's son Rajiv.
Which started a swim of riot in Punjab and as a result many religious Sikh leaders as well as many devotees of Harminder Sahib were arrested, tortured and killed.
Gandhi's yoga guru, Dhirendra Brahmachari, helped her in making certain decisions and also executed certain top level political tasks on her behalf, especially from 1975 to 1977 when Gandhi declared a state of emergency and suspended civil liberties."
Indian High Commissioner BK Nehru said Gandhi's conviction would not harm her political career.
The economic period of 1967–75 became significant for its major wave of nationalisations amidst the increased regulation of the private sector.
However, the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971  put the Arab and Muslim states of the Middle East in a dilemma as the war was fought by two states both friendly to the Arabs.
The only passenger in the plane, Captain Subhash Saxena, also died in the crash.
She was elected Congress President in 1959.
Nevertheless, Gandhi rejected demands to invade Sri Lanka in the aftermath of Black July 1983, an anti-Tamil pogrom carried out by Sinhalese mobs.
"I believe the prime minister of India will continue in office until the electorate of India decides otherwise".
Having been re-elected in 1971 on a nationalisation platform, Gandhi proceeded to nationalise the coal, steel, copper, refining, cotton textiles, and insurance industries.
Gandhi contributed and further carried out the vision of Jawarharalal Nehru, former Premier of India to develop the program.
Since Gandhi had lost her seat in the election, the defeated Congress party appointed Yashwantrao Chavan as their parliamentary  party leader.
In 1971, Gandhi again motioned to abolish the privy purse.
Gandhi inherited a tattered economy in her second term; harvest failures and a second oil shock in the late 1970s had again caused inflation to rise.
Gandhi insisted that the conviction did not undermine her position, despite having been unseated from the lower house of parliament, Lok Sabha, by order of the High Court.
In 2011, the Government of Bangladesh conferred its highest state award posthumously on Gandhi for her "outstanding contribution" to the country's independence.
After reaching a high diplomatic point in the aftermath of Nehru's role in the Suez Crisis, India's isolation from Africa was complete when only four nations; Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria and Libya supported her during the Sino-Indian War in 1962.
Yet, she later forged close relations with Indian communists even while using the army to break the Naxalites.
The nobility responded by rallying around the Jana Sangh and other right-wing parties that stood in opposition to Gandhi's attempts to abolish royal privileges.
After becoming Prime Minister, Gandhi expressed the intention of nationalising the banks in a paper titled, ''"Stray thoughts on Bank Nationalisation"'' in order to alleviate poverty.
However, a contentious issue that was considered unresolved by the Akali's was the status of Chandigarh, a prosperous city on the Punjab-Haryana border, which Gandhi declared a union territory to be shared as a capital by both the states.
In 1975, Gandhi declared the state of Jammu and Kashmir as a constituent unit of India.
Her father, Jawaharlal Nehru, was a leading figure in India's political struggle for independence from British rule, and became the first Prime Minister of the Union (and later Republic) of India.
Rosser wrote that "some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress leftist dissent against Gandhi's policy shift to the right."
The assailants had fired 31 bullets at her, of which 30 had hit; 23 had passed through her body while 7 were trapped inside her.
She was the only child (a younger brother was born, but died young), and grew up with her mother, Kamala Nehru, at the Anand Bhavan; a large family estate in Allahabad.
The progressive Arab regimes in Egypt, Syria, and Algeria chose to remain neutral, while the conservative pro-American Arab monarchies in Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and United Arab Emirates openly supported Pakistan.
India was victorious in the resulting Siachen conflict against Pakistan.
Still there is a long list of missing persons from Sikh religious community of Punjab being abducted by state agencies, police and army.
Although Iran had earlier characterized the Indo-Pakistani war in 1965 as Indian aggression, the Shah had launched an effort at rapprochement with India in 1969 as part of his effort to secure support for a larger Iranian role in the Persian Gulf.
The Indian government also started considering the possibility of bringing Indians settled in Africa within the framework of its policy goals to help recover its declining geo-strategic influence.
U.S. President Richard Nixon disliked Gandhi personally, referring to her as a "witch" and "clever fox" in his private communication with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.
India's new hegemonic position as articulated under the "Indira Doctrine" led to attempts to bring the Himalayan states under the Indian sphere of influence.
The policies of the Congress under Indira Gandhi,  prior to the 1971 elections, also included proposals for the  abolition of Privy Purse to former rulers of the Princely states and the 1969 nationalization of the fourteen largest banks in India.
She was declared dead at 2:20 PM.
She argued the case for abolition based on equal rights for all citizens and the need to reduce the government's revenue deficit.
She justified the imposition of the state of emergency in 1975 in the name of the socialist mission of the Congress.
The Janata coalition was only united by its hatred of Gandhi (or "that woman" as some called her).
Relations between ASEAN and India was mutually antagonistic.
Dr. Dogra extracted bullets to establish the identity of the weapons and to match each weapon with the bullets recovered by ballistic examination.
Gandhi appreciated the Shah's disregard of Pan-Islamism in diplomacy.
"Mrs Gandhi has still today overwhelming support in the country," he said.
There was an increase in Indian economic and military co-operation with Iran during the 1970s.
Since Charan Singh refused to drop the charges, Congress (I) withdrew its support and President Reddy dissolved Parliament in August 1979.
India maintained close ties with neighbouring Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) following the Liberation War.
Gandhi, who gave evidence in her defence during the trial, was found guilty of dishonest election practices, excessive election expenditure, and of using government machinery and officials for party purposes.
The bullets were matched with respective weapons at CFSL Delhi.
According to Mark Tully, "His inexperience did not stop him from using the Draconian powers his mother, Indira Gandhi, had taken to terrorise the administration, setting up what was in effect a police state."
The latter grew to become India's largest trading partner and its biggest arms supplier for much of Gandhi's premiership.
Nationalisation also resulted in a significant growth in the geographical coverage of banks; the number of bank branches rose from 8,200 to over 62,000, most of which were opened in the unbanked, rural areas.
After leading India to victory against Pakistan in the Bangladesh liberation war in 1971, President V. V. Giri awarded Mrs. Gandhi India's highest civilian honour, the Bharat Ratna., In 2011, the Bangladesh Freedom Honour (Bangladesh Swadhinata Sammanona ), Bangladesh's highest civilian award, was posthumously conferred on Indira Gandhi for her outstanding contributions to Bangladesh's Liberation War.
Gandhi gave verbal authorisation of this test, and preparations were made in a long-constructed army base, the Indian Army Pokhran Test Range.
She served as Prime Minister from 1966 to 1977 and then again from 1980 until her assassination in 1984, making her the second-longest-serving Prime Minister after her father.
Gandhi thus put herself forward as a leader with a pan-Indian vision.
Gandhi's overtures to Muammar Gaddafi were rebuffed.
But, much of that growth was offset by the fact that the external aid promised by the United States government and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), meant to ease the short-run costs of adjustment to a liberalized economy, never materialized.
The economy managed to recover in 1966 and ended up growing at 4.1% over 1966–1969.
Indian diplomats also hoped to win Arab support in countering Pakistan in Kashmir.
As the world was quiet by this test, a vehement protest came forward from Pakistan.
Beant Singh and Satwant Singh dropped their weapons and surrendered.
She had a lonely and unhappy childhood.
She did, however, have an active part within the student life of the university, such as the Oxford Majlis Asian Society.
The motion to abolish privy purses, and the official recognition of the titles, was originally brought before the Parliament in 1970.
The Congress (I) under Gandhi swept back to power in January 1980.
In the Congress Party's parliamentary leadership election, held in early 1966 upon the death of Shastri, she defeated her rival, Morarji Desai, to become leader; and, thus, succeeded Shastri as Prime Minister of India.
Related to this point were a set of policies which were meant to regulate the private sector.
Kehar Singh was later arrested for conspiracy in the attack.
The government additionally targeted an annual growth of 4.4% over the period of the plan.
The public realized the statement and motto of the Janata Party alliance.
Gandhi's Congress party was crushed soundly in the elections.
Gandhi saw this test as Chinese nuclear intimidation, therefore, Gandhi promoted the views of Nehru to establish India's stability and security interests as independent from those of the nuclear superpowers.
The Sixth Plan went on to become the most successful of the Five Year plans yet; showing an average growth of 5.7% over 1980–85.
Gandhi's relationship with the military regimes was strained, due to her alleged support of anti-Islamist leftist guerrilla forces in Bangladesh.
The insurgents soon agreed to surrender and signed the Shillong Accord in 1975.
Most of these nationalisations were made to protect employment and the interest of the organised labour.
And, for their part, the previously voiceless poor would at last gain both political worth and political weight.
The Hindi-speaking southern half of Punjab became a separate state, Haryana, while the Pahari speaking hilly areas in the north east were joined to Himachal Pradesh.
S. K. Datta-Ray described her as "a master of rhetoric...often more posture than policy", while ''The Times'' journalist, Peter Hazelhurst, famously quipped that Gandhi's socialism was "slightly left of self-interest."
But, the death of Nasser in 1970 and Sadat's growing friendship with Riyadh, and his mounting differences with Moscow, constrained Egypt to a policy of neutrality.
The site where she was cremated is today known as Shakti Sthala.
