Under the ''Reformasi'' movement, independent filmmaking was a rebirth of the filming industry in Indonesia, where film's started addressing topics which were previously banned such as; religion, race, love and other topics.
Indonesia has been a member of the United Nations since 1950, and was a founder of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC).
Indonesia has at least 150 active volcanoes, including Krakatoa and Tambora, both famous for their devastating eruptions in the 19th century.
The president may serve a maximum of two consecutive five-year terms.
Garuda Indonesia, flag carrier of Indonesia since 1949, was selected by Skytrax as "The World's Best Economy Class" in 2013.
Rendang can be made from beef that is slowly simmered with coconut milk and a mixture of lemongrass, galangal, garlic, turmeric, ginger and chilies, then left to stew for a few hours to make it tender, flavorful bovine goodness.
The country has abundant natural resources like oil and natural gas, tin, copper and gold.
'''Indonesia''' (  or  ; Indonesian: ), officially the '''Republic of Indonesia''' ( ), is a sovereign transcontinental country located mainly in Southeast Asia with some territories in Oceania.
In 2014, Indonesia ran a trade deficit with export revenues of US$176 billion and import expenditure of US$178.2 billion.
The Acehnese government, for example, has the right to create certain elements of an independent legal system.
There are also international ferry services between across the Strait of Malacca between Sumatra and Malaysia, and between Singapore and nearby Indonesian islands, such as Batam.
Pramoedya earned several accolades, and was frequently discussed as Indonesia's and Southeast Asia's best candidate for a Nobel Prize in Literature.
Indonesia's main export markets (2009) are Japan (17.28%), Singapore (11.29%), the United States (10.81%), and China (7.62%).
The major suppliers of imports to Indonesia are Singapore (24.96%), China (12.52%), and Japan (8.92%).
In 2010, Christians made up almost 10% of the population (7% of the total population was Protestant, 2.9% Roman Catholic), 1.7% were Hindu, and 0.9% were Buddhist or other.
The army has about 400,000 active-duty personnel.
* North Kalimantan (''Kalimantan Utara'')&nbsp;– Tanjung Selor
The first Indonesian scholar to use the name was Suwardi Suryaningrat (Ki Hajar Dewantara), when he established a press bureau in the Netherlands with the name ''Indonesisch Pers-bureau'' in 1913.
''Mahkamah Agung'' is the country's highest court, and hears final cessation appeals and conducts case reviews.
* Yogyakarta Special Region* (''Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta'')&nbsp;– Yogyakarta (city)
Between the eighth and 10th centuries CE, the agricultural Buddhist Sailendra and Hindu Mataram dynasties thrived and declined in inland Java, leaving grand religious monuments such as Borobudur, Sewu and Prambanan.
Another major grouping are the Melanesians, who inhabit eastern Indonesia.
Indonesia's first appearance in Asian Cup was back in 1996.
Following a sporadic thirty-year guerrilla war between the Gerakan Aceh Merdeka (GAM) and the Indonesian military, a ceasefire agreement was reached in 2005.
At 1,919,440&nbsp;square kilometres (741,050&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi), Indonesia is the world's 15th-largest country in terms of land area and world's 7th-largest country in terms of combined sea and land area.
Some of his popular poems include ''Krawang-Bekasi'', ''Diponegoro'' and ''Aku''.
Traditional wooden vessel pinisi still widely used as the inter-island freight service within Indonesian archipelago.
While religious freedom is stipulated in the Indonesian constitution, the government officially recognises only six religions: Islam, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism.
Next to distinctive native form of musics, several genres can trace their origins to foreign influences, such as gambus and qasidah from Middle Eastern Islamic music, keroncong from Portuguese influences, and dangdut—one of the most popular music genres in Indonesia—with notable Hindi music influence as well as Malay orchestras.
Actors during this era included Deddy Mizwar, Eva Arnaz, Meriam Bellina, and Rano Karno.
Indonesia's largest rivers are in Kalimantan, and include the Mahakam and Barito; such rivers are communication and transport links between the island's river settlements.
At , Puncak Jaya in Papua is Indonesia's highest peak, and Lake Toba in Sumatra its largest lake, with an area of 1,145&nbsp;square kilometres (442&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi).
In addition, BRT systems exist in Yogyakarta, Palembang, Bandung, Denpasar, Pekanbaru, Semarang, Makassar, and Padang without segregated lane.
Chinese Indonesians are an influential ethnic minority comprising 3–4% of the population.
In Java the ''desa'' (village) is divided further into smaller units called ''dusun'' or ''dukuh'' (hamlets), these units are the same as rukun warga.
Each province has its own legislature and governor.
Palm oil expansion can generate wealth for local communities, but it can also degrade ecosystems and cause social problems.
Liga Super Indonesia is the country's premier football club league.
One of the reforms following the 1998 resignation of Suharto was the removal of formal TNI representation in parliament; nevertheless, its political influence remains extensive.
On the continent level, Indonesia won the bronze medal once in football in the 1958 Asian Games.
* Maluku&nbsp;– Ambon
In addition, mass rapid transit and light rail transit systems are under construction in Jakarta and Palembang.
Suharto resigned on 21 May 1998.
It is well developed, with each of the major islands having at least one significant port city.
Indonesia's major imports include machinery and equipment, chemicals, fuels, and foodstuffs, and the country's major export commodities include oil and gas, electrical appliances, plywood, rubber, and textiles.
The national shipping line, Pelni, provides passenger service to ports throughout the country on a two to four week schedule.
Riri Riza and Mira Lesmana were the new generation of Indonesian film figures who co-directed of ''Kuldesak'' (1999), ''Petualangan Sherina'' (2000), ''Ada Apa dengan Cinta?''
Traditional sports include ''sepak takraw'', and bull racing in Madura.
The ancient Prambanan and Borobudur temples, Toraja and Bali, with its Hindu festivities, are some of the popular destinations for cultural tourism.
Both nature and culture are major components of Indonesian tourism.
The Indonesia traditional houses are at the centre of a web of customs, social relations, traditional laws, taboos, myths and religions that bind the villagers together.
The eruption of the Toba supervolcano, approximately 70,000 years ago, was one of the largest eruptions ever, and a global catastrophe.
Local rulers gradually absorbed foreign cultural, religious and political models from the early centuries CE, and Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms flourished.
* South Kalimantan (''Kalimantan Selatan'')&nbsp;– Banjarmasin
* Riau Islands (''Kepulauan Riau'')&nbsp;– Tanjung Pinang
Rice is the main staple food and is served with side dishes of meat and vegetables.
Islam was first adopted by Indonesians in northern Sumatra in the 13th century, through the influence of traders, and became the country's dominant religion by the 16th century.
* Lampung&nbsp;– Bandar Lampung
The Sundanese, ethnic Malays, and Madurese are the largest non-Javanese groups.
In 1850, George Windsor Earl, an English ethnologist, proposed the terms ''Indunesians''—and, his preference, ''Malayunesians''—for the inhabitants of the "Indian Archipelago or Malayan Archipelago".
Indonesia consists of hundreds of distinct native ethnic and linguistic groups.
Mountainous areas – particularly in the west coast of Sumatra, West Java, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, and Papua – receive the highest rainfall.
Most belong to the Austronesian language family, with a few Papuan languages also spoken.
58% of the population lives in Java, the world's most populous island.
The Sukarno government used cinema for nationalistic, anti-Western purposes.
Indonesia currently possess a relatively young population, with a median age of 28.2 years (2011 estimate).
In Papua, there has been a significant, albeit imperfect, implementation of regional autonomy laws, and a reported decline in the levels of violence and human rights abuses, since the presidency of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
The industry sector is the economy's largest and accounts for 46.4% of GDP (2012), this is followed by services (38.6%) and agriculture (14.4%).
Indonesia has received humanitarian and development aid since 1966, in particular from the United States, western Europe, Australia, and Japan.
Although relations among different religious and ethnic groups are largely harmonious, sectarian discontent and violence have persisted.
Known as the Wallace Line, it runs roughly north–south along the edge of the Sunda Shelf, between Kalimantan and Sulawesi, and along the deep Lombok Strait, between Lombok and Bali.
Textiles such as batik, ikat, ulos and songket are created across Indonesia in styles that vary by region.
The village is the lowest level of government administration in Indonesia.
The enrolment rate is 94% for primary education (2011), 75% for secondary education, and 27% for tertiary education.
Indonesia has 8 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, such as the Komodo National Park, Cultural Landscape of Bali, Ujung Kulon National Park, Lorentz National Park, Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra, comprises three national parks on the island of Sumatra: Gunung Leuser National Park, Kerinci Seblat National Park and the Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park; and 18 World Heritage Sites in tentative list, such as the historic urban centres of Jakarta Old Town, Sawahlunto Old Coal Mining Town, Semarang Old Town, as well as Muara Takus Compound Site.
Private radio stations carry their own news bulletins and foreign broadcasters supply programs.
After 1900, the name ''Indonesia'' became more common in academic circles outside the Netherlands, and Indonesian nationalist groups adopted it for political expression.
Indonesia has extensive natural resources, including crude oil, natural gas, tin, copper, and gold.
The Indonesian film industry's popularity peaked in the 1980s and dominated cinemas in Indonesia, although it declined significantly in the early 1990s.
In 1999, East Timor voted to secede from Indonesia, after a twenty-five-year military occupation that was marked by international condemnation of repression of the East Timorese.
T1 and T2 also will be revitalised, so all the three terminals finally will accommodate 67 million passengers a year.
* West Nusa Tenggara (''Nusa Tenggara Barat'')&nbsp;– Mataram
As part of the Coral Triangle, Bali, including Nusa Penida, offers a wide range of dive sites with varying types of reefs.
Sumatran courtly culture such as the remnant of Aceh Sultanate and Palembang Sultanate, are more influenced by Islamic culture, while Java and Bali are more deeply rooted in their Hindu-Buddhist heritage.
Cycle rickshaws, called ''becak'' in Indonesia, are a regular sight on city roads and provide inexpensive transportation.
Subsequently, series of Javanese Hindu-Buddhist polities rise and fall, from Kahuripan kingdom ruled by Airlangga to Kadiri and Singhasari.
Indonesia's national motto, ''"Bhinneka Tunggal Ika"'' ("Unity in Diversity" ''literally,'' "many, yet one"), articulates the diversity that shapes the country.
Average annual rainfall in the lowlands varies from , and up to  in mountainous regions.
Ideal agricultural conditions and the mastering of wet-field rice cultivation as early as the 8th century BCE, allowed villages, towns, and small kingdoms to flourish by the 1st century CE.
Indonesia is signatory to the ASEAN Free Trade Area agreement, the Cairns Group, and the World Trade Organization (WTO), and a member of OPEC.
Indonesia is one of Coral Triangle countries with the world's greatest diversity of coral reef fish with more than 1,650 species in eastern Indonesia only.
Indonesia has a sizeable automotive industry, which produced almost 1.3 million motor vehicles in 2014, ranking as the 15th largest producer in the world.
A political settlement to an armed separatist conflict in Aceh was achieved in 2005.
An additional 8 million Indonesian live overseas, comprising one of the world's largest diasporas.
For most of the colonial period, Dutch control over the archipelago was tenuous outside of coastal strongholds; only in the early 20th century did Dutch dominance extend to what was to become Indonesia's current boundaries.
In 2011, rendang was chosen as the "Worlds Most Delicious Food" that has been announced by CNN.
Of the world's 500 largest companies measured by revenue in 2014, the Fortune Global 500, two are headquartered in Indonesia i.e.
Indonesian is based on the prestige dialect of Malay, that of the Johor-Riau Sultanate, which for centuries had been the ''lingua franca'' of the archipelago.
* Bali&nbsp;– Denpasar
Soekarno–Hatta International Airport is the 18th busiest airport in the world, serving 54,053,905 passengers, according to Airports Council International.
* Jambi&nbsp;– Jambi City
To boost the port capacity, two-phase "New Tanjung Priok" extension project is currently ongoing.
Invaders, colonisers, missionaries, merchants and traders brought cultural changes that had a profound effect on building styles and techniques.
Bali island received the Best Island award from Travel and Leisure in 2010.
Indonesia regained its investment grade rating in late 2011 after losing it in 1997.
It is the largest archipelagic country in the world, extending  from east to west and  from north to south.
After T3 Soekarno-Hatta Airport expansion will be finished in August 2016, the total capacity of three terminals become 43 million passengers a year.
Social, religious and ethnic tensions have triggered communal violence.
Indonesia maintains close relationships with its neighbours in Asia, and is a founding member of ASEAN and the East Asia Summit.
Warkop's comedy films, directed by Arizal also proved to be successful.
Traditional Indonesian instruments include angklung, kacapi suling, siteran, gong, gamelan, degung, gong kebyar, bumbung, talempong, kulintang and sasando.
In Sumatra and Kalimantan, these are predominantly of Asian species.
Following three and a half centuries of Dutch colonialism starting from Amboina and Batavia, and eventually all of the archipelago including Timor and West Papua, at times interrupted by Portuguese, French and British rule, Indonesia secured its independence after World War II.
Dirgantara Indonesia''), which, with EADS CASA of Spain developed the CN-235 aircraft, which has been exported to many countries.
In aerospace technology, Indonesia has a long history in developing military and small commuter aircraft as the only country in Southeast Asia to produce and develop its own aircraft, also producing aircraft components for Boeing and Airbus, with its state-owned aircraft company (founded in 1976), the Indonesian Aerospace (Indonesian: ''PT.
* West Kalimantan (''Kalimantan Barat'')&nbsp;– Pontianak
Lying along the equator, Indonesia has a tropical climate, with two distinct monsoonal wet and dry seasons.
On the busy crossings between Sumatra, Java, and Bali, multiple car ferries run frequently twenty-four hours per day.
Forests cover approximately 60% of the country.
The village administration level is the most influential on a citizen's daily life and handles matters of a village or neighbourhood through an elected ''lurah'' or ''kepala desa'' (village chief).
However, the overwhelming popularity of Indonesian music in Malaysia had alarmed the Malaysian music industry.
A large proportion of Indonesians—such as the Javanese ''abangan'', Balinese Hindus, and Dayak Christians—practice a less orthodox, syncretic form of their religion, which draws on local customs and beliefs.
Fossils and the remains of tools show that the Indonesian archipelago was inhabited by ''Homo erectus'', popularly known as "Java Man", between 1.5 million years ago and 35,000 years ago.
The British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace described a dividing line between the distribution of Indonesia's Asian and Australasian species.
* East Kalimantan (''Kalimantan Timur'')&nbsp;– Samarinda
It borrows heavily from local languages such as Javanese, Sundanese, Minangkabau, etc.
In 1961, the first post-colonial census gave a total population of 97 million.
With 20% of the world's coral reefs, over 3,000 different species of fish and 600 coral species, deep water trenches, volcanic sea mounts, World War II wrecks, and an endless variety of macro life, scuba diving in Indonesia is both excellent and inexpensive.
The first regular contact between Europeans and the peoples of Indonesia began in 1512, when Portuguese traders led by Francisco Serrão, sought to monopolise the sources of nutmeg, cloves, and cubeb pepper in Maluku.
In Southeast Asia, Indonesia is one of the major sport powerhouses by winning the Southeast Asian Games 10 times since 1977.
As well as in June 2015, it also was awarded with "The World's Best Cabin Crew".
Political and economic instability, social unrest, corruption, and terrorism slowed progress; however, in the last five years the economy has performed strongly.
From the 7th century CE, the powerful Srivijaya naval kingdom flourished as a result of trade and the influences of Hinduism and Buddhism that were imported with it.
The provinces are subdivided into regencies (''kabupaten'') and cities (''kota''), which are further subdivided into districts (''kecamatan'' or ''distrik'' in Papua and West Papua), and again into administrative villages (either ''desa'', ''kelurahan'', ''kampung'', ''nagari'' in West Sumatra, or ''gampong'' in Aceh).
* East Java (''Jawa Timur'')&nbsp;– Surabaya
* West Java (''Jawa Barat'')&nbsp;– Bandung
The tourism sector contributes to around US$10.1 billion of foreign exchange in 2013, and ranked as the 4th largest among goods and services export sectors.
Although Muslim traders first travelled through Southeast Asia early in the Islamic era, the earliest evidence of Islamised populations in Indonesia dates to the 13th century in northern Sumatra.
Indonesia has a well established railway industry, with its state-owned train manufacturer company, the Indonesian Railway Industry (Indonesian: ''PT.
Defense spending in the national budget was 4% of GDP in 2006, and is controversially supplemented by revenue from military commercial interests and foundations.
Indonesian is primarily used in commerce, administration, education and the media, but most Indonesians speak other languages, such as Javanese, as their first language.
The diverse world of Indonesian music genres was the result of the musical creativity of its people, and subsequent cultural encounters with foreign musical influences into the archipelago.
* Central Java (''Jawa Tengah'')&nbsp;– Semarang
The Indonesian economy performed strongly during the financial crisis of 2007–08 and in 2012, its GDP grew by over 6%.
The Shias and Ahmadis respectively constitute 0.5% and 0.2% of the Muslim population.
Chinese businesses in Indonesia are part of the larger bamboo network, a network of overseas Chinese businesses operating in the markets of Southeast Asia that share common family and cultural ties.
Wood carving traditions exist in many parts of the country, with exceptional examples are in Jepara in Central Java, Bali, and Asmat.
Since 2007, however, with the improvement in banking sector and domestic consumption, national economic growth has accelerated to over 6% annually and this helped Indonesia weather the 2008–2009 Great Recession.
Education in Indonesia is compulsory for twelve years.
Reforms since 1998 have markedly increased the DPR's role in national governance.
In written poetry and prose, a number of traditional forms dominate, mainly syair, pantun, gurindam, hikayat and babad.
Moreover, there are over 3,500 species living in Indonesian waters, including sharks, dolphins, manta rays, turtles, morays, cuttlefish, octopus and scorpaenidae, compared to 1,500 on the Great Barrier Reef.
Indonesia is the world's most populous Muslim majority country, at 87.2% in 2010, with the majority being Sunni Muslims (99%).
Though now minority religions, Hinduism and Buddhism remain defining influences in Indonesian culture.
In Bali, dances has become the integral part of Hindu Balinese rituals.
The capital, Jakarta, is on Java and is the nation's largest city, followed by Surabaya, Bandung, Medan, and Semarang.
With a total of 550 hectares, Jakarta has the world's largest shopping mall floor area within a single city.
Sukarno moved Indonesia from democracy towards authoritarianism, and maintained his power base by balancing the opposing forces of the military and the Communist Party of Indonesia (''Partai Komunis Indonesia'', PKI).
Indonesia shares maritime borders across narrow straits with Singapore, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Palau to the north, and with Australia to the south.
This period marked a renaissance of Hindu-Buddhist art in ancient Java.
B. J. Habibie, a former Indonesian president played an important role in this achievement.
The provinces of Aceh, Jakarta, Yogyakarta, Papua, and West Papua have greater legislative privileges and a higher degree of autonomy from the central government than the other provinces.
Architecture reflects the diversity of cultural that have shaped Indonesia as a whole.
Large species such as the tiger, rhinoceros, orangutan, elephant, and leopard, were once abundant as far east as Bali, but numbers and distribution have dwindled drastically.
However, the forests of the smaller, and more densely populated Java, have largely been removed for human habitation and agriculture.
His New Order administration was supported by the US government, and encouraged foreign direct investment in Indonesia, which was a major factor in the subsequent three decades of substantial economic growth.
According to a geospatial survey conducted between 2007 and 2010 by National Coordinating Agency for Survey and Mapping (Bakosurtanal), Indonesia has 13,466 islands, about 6,000 of which are inhabited.
Four amendments to the 1945 Constitution of Indonesia have revamped the executive, judicial, and legislative branches.
Some of these works are ''Syair Raja Siak'', ''Syair Abdul Muluk'', ''Hikayat Abdullah'', ''Hikayat Bayan Budiman'', ''Hikayat Hang Tuah'', ''Sulalatus Salatin'', and ''Babad Tanah Jawi''.
Traditional carpentry, masonry, stone and woodwork techniques and decorations are also thrived in Indonesian vernacular architecture, with numbers of traditional houses' styles has been developed.
* West Sumatra (''Sumatera Barat'')&nbsp;– Padang
The largest – and politically dominant – ethnic group are the Javanese.
In an attempt to boost the domestic mineral processing industry and encourage exports of higher value-added mineral products, the Indonesian government implemented a ban on exports of unprocessed mineral ores in 2014.
In 2003, it instituted a form of ''sharia'' (Islamic law).
Agriculture, however, had been the country's largest employer for centuries.
They arrived in Indonesia around 2000&nbsp;BCE, and as they spread through the archipelago, confined the indigenous Melanesian peoples to the far eastern regions.
Foreign film imports were banned.
It is diverse, in part because Indonesia is composed of approximately 6,000 populated islands of the total 18,000 in the world's largest archipelago, with more than 300 ethnic groups calling Indonesia their home.
All of educational institutions located in Java.
It is the sixteenth largest economy in the world by nominal GDP and is the eighth largest in terms of GDP (PPP).
Most of indigenous native Indonesian beliefs could be categorised as animism, shamanism as well ancestral worship.
Early modern Indonesian literature originates in Sumatran tradition.
A shared identity has developed, defined by a national language, ethnic diversity, religious pluralism within a Muslim-majority population, and a history of colonialism and rebellion against it.
Many cities and towns have some form of transportation for hire available as well such as taxis.
Example of Indonesian vernacular architecture including Toraja's Tongkonan, Minangkabau's Rumah Gadang and Rangkiang, Javanese style Pendopo pavilion with Joglo style roof, Dayak's longhouses, various Malay houses, Balinese houses and temples, and also various styles of ''lumbung'' (rice barns).
The commoners folk dance is more concerned with social function and entertainment value than rituals.
'''Lesser Sunda Islands'''
This increased popular discontent with the New Order and led to popular protest across the country.
The Hindu Majapahit kingdom was founded in eastern Java in the late 13th century, and under Gajah Mada, its influence stretched over much of Indonesia.
The capital city, Jakarta, is a shopping hub in Southeast Asia.
On the international stage, Indonesia experienced limited success despite being the first Asian team to qualify for the FIFA World Cup in 1938 as Dutch East Indies.
Important figures in modern Indonesian literature include: Dutch author Multatuli, who criticised treatment of the Indonesians under Dutch colonial rule; Sumatrans Mohammad Yamin and Hamka, who were influential pre-independence nationalist writers and politicians; and proletarian writer Pramoedya Ananta Toer, Indonesia's most famous novelist.
After the overthrow of Sukarno by Suharto's New Order regime, films were regulated through a censorship code that aimed to maintain the social order.
Austronesian peoples, who form the majority of the modern population, migrated to Southeast Asia from Taiwan.
Sacred ritual dances performed only in Balinese temples such as sacred Sanghyang dedari and Barong dance.
* East Nusa Tenggara (''Nusa Tenggara Timur'')&nbsp;– Kupang
There are usually also bus services of various kinds such as the Kopaja buses and the more sophisticated TransJakarta bus rapid transit system in Jakarta.
Most Indonesians are descended from Austronesian-speaking peoples whose languages can be traced to Proto-Austronesian, which possibly originated in Taiwan.
Juanda Airport in Surabaya and Ngurah Rai in Bali are the country's 2nd and 3rd busiest airport.
These ships generally provide the least expensive way to cover long distances between islands.
