Its introduction allowed night life to flourish in cities and towns as interiors and streets could be lighted on a larger scale than before.
Often the technology was purchased from Britain or British engineers and entrepreneurs moved abroad in search of new opportunities.
Other inventors increased the efficiency of the individual steps of spinning (carding, twisting and spinning, and rolling) so that the supply of yarn increased greatly.
In other countries, notably Britain and America, this practice was carried out by individual manufacturers eager to improve their own methods.
He explains that the model for standardised mass production was the printing press and that "the archetypal model for the industrial era was the clock".
During 1813–1913, there was a significant increase in worker wages.
The first successful piston steam engine was introduced by Thomas Newcomen before 1712.
In particular, average income and population began to exhibit unprecedented sustained growth.
Its ''Charter'' of reforms received over three million signatures but was rejected by Parliament without consideration.
The industrial revolution changed a mainly rural society into an urban one, but with a strong contrast between northern and southern Belgium.
But it is also pointed out by many researchers, with its ''Sillon industriel'', 'Especially in the Haine, Sambre and Meuse valleys, between the Borinage and Liège, (...) there was a huge industrial development based on coal-mining and iron-making...'.
Benjamin Huntsman developed his crucible steel technique in the 1740s.
Friedrich Engels in ''The Condition of the Working Class in England'' in 1844 spoke of "an industrial revolution, a revolution which at the same time changed the whole of civil society".
Consumers benefited from falling prices for clothing and household articles such as cast iron cooking utensils, and in the following decades, stoves for cooking and space heating.
The Leblanc process was a reaction of sulphuric acid with sodium chloride to give sodium sulphate and hydrochloric acid.
Use of coal in smelting started somewhat before the Industrial Revolution, based on innovations by Sir Clement Clerke and others from 1678, using coal reverberatory furnaces known as cupolas.
Population density was extremely high.
New canals were hastily built in the aim of replicating the commercial success of the Bridgewater Canal, the most notable being the Leeds and Liverpool Canal and the Thames and Severn Canal which opened in 1774 and 1789 respectively.
The logistical effort in procuring and distributing raw materials and picking up finished goods were also limitations of the putting out system.
Firedamp explosions continued, often setting off coal dust explosions, so casualties grew during the entire 19th century.
In many industries, this involved the application of technology developed in Britain in new places.
Conditions improved over the course of the 19th century due to new public health acts regulating things such as sewage, hygiene and home construction.
Using the spinning wheel, it took anywhere from four to eight spinners to supply one hand loom weaver.
A machine for making a continuous sheet of paper on a loop of wire fabric was patented in 1798 by Nicholas Louis Robert who worked for Saint-Léger Didot family in France.
However, it has been pointed out that slave trade and West Indian plantations provided only 5% of the British national income during the years of the Industrial Revolution.
The John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Heritage Corridor retraces the history of "America's Hardest-Working River', the Blackstone.
Construction of major railways connecting the larger cities and towns began in the 1830s but only gained momentum at the very end of the first Industrial Revolution.
Child labour existed before the Industrial Revolution but with the increase in population and education it became more visible.
Instead of making a small amount each time, he was able to make around  in each of the chambers, at least a tenfold increase.
This came principally from Sweden from the mid-17th century and later also from Russia from the end of the 1720s.
Known for its huge commercial success, the Bridgewater Canal in North West England, which opened in 1761 and was mostly funded by The 3rd Duke of Bridgewater.
However it never achieved the commercial success its sponsors had hoped for and signalled canals as a dying mode of transport in an age dominated by railways, which were quicker and often cheaper.
The emergence of great factories and the concomitant immense growth in coal consumption gave rise to an unprecedented level of air pollution in industrial centers; after 1900 the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste.
The supply of cheaper iron and steel aided a number of industries, such as those making nails, hinges, wire and other hardware items.
Some industrialists themselves tried to improve factory and living conditions for their workers.
Middle-class and women were confined to an idle domestic existence, supervising servants; lower-class women were forced to take poorly paid jobs.
Rolling replaced hammering for consolidating wrought iron and expelling some of the dross.
The process consisted of the large-scale gasification of coal in furnaces, the purification of the gas (removal of sulphur, ammonia, and heavy hydrocarbons), and its storage and distribution.
Although there were earlier pieces of legislation, the Public Health Act 1875 required all furnaces and fireplaces to consume their own smoke.
Joseph Foljambe's ''Rotherham plough'' of 1730, was the first commercially successful iron plough.
Horse-drawn public railways did not begin until the early years of the 19th century when improvements to pig and wrought iron production were lowering costs.
Governments' grant of limited monopolies to inventors under a developing patent system (the Statute of Monopolies in 1623) is considered an influential factor.
A fundamental change in working principles was brought about by Scotsman James Watt.
Occasionally the work was done in the workshop of a master weaver.
For example, the London-based Royal Society of Arts published an illustrated volume of new inventions, as well as papers about them in its annual ''Transactions''.
Early uses for sulphuric acid included pickling (removing rust) iron and steel, and for bleaching cloth.
The rapid introduction of railways followed the 1829 Rainhill Trials, which demonstrated Robert Stephenson's successful locomotive design and the 1828 development of Hot blast, which dramatically reduced the fuel consumption of making iron and increased the capacity the blast furnace.
The stable political situation in Britain from around 1688, and British society's greater receptiveness to change (compared with other European countries) can also be said to be factors favouring the Industrial Revolution.
Around the start of the 19th century, the Cornish engineer Richard Trevithick, and the American, Oliver Evans began to construct higher pressure non-condensing steam engines, exhausting against the atmosphere.
Those who ran away would be whipped and returned to their masters, with some masters shackling them to prevent escape.
While members of these sects were excluded from certain circles of the government, they were considered fellow Protestants, to a limited extent, by many in the middle class, such as traditional financiers or other businessmen.
However, by the 1840s, trunk lines linked the major cities; each German state was responsible for the lines within its own borders.
A workhorse needs  for fodder while even early steam engines produced four times more mechanical energy.
Hand methods of production were very laborious and costly and precision was difficult to achieve.
Their useful economic roles gave them a sort of equality with their husbands.
Study tours were common then, as now, as was the keeping of travel diaries.
The famines that troubled rural areas did not happen in industrial areas.
Belgium was the second country, after Britain, in which the Industrial Revolution took place and the first in continental Europe: Wallonia (French speaking southern Belgium) was the first region to follow the British model successfully.
The United States population of the time was adequately fed, much taller on average and had life expectancy of 45–50 years.
Knowledge of innovation was spread by several means.
Many strikes were painful events for both sides, the unions and the management.
Eventually, effective political organisation for working people was achieved through the trades unions who, after the extensions of the franchise in 1867 and 1885, began to support socialist political parties that later merged to become the British Labour Party.
Taking a pessimistic side, Alice Clark argued that when capitalism arrived in 17th century England, it lowered the status of women as they lost much of their economic importance.
New industries developed with their focus on the domestic market: mechanical engineering, power utilities, papermaking and textile.
Since then industrialisation has spread throughout much of the world.
Textiles were the dominant industry of the Industrial Revolution in terms of employment, value of output and capital invested; the textile industry was also the first to use modern production methods.
Internal tariffs were abolished by Henry VIII of England, they survived in Russia till 1753, 1789 in France and 1839 in Spain.
Countries around the world started to recognise the changes and advancements in Britain and use them as an example to begin their own Industrial Revolutions.
In 1833 and 1844, the first general laws against child labour, the Factory Acts, were passed in Britain: Children younger than nine were not allowed to work, children were not permitted to work at night, and the work day of youth under the age of 18 was limited to twelve hours.
These advancements also greatly benefitted the British society as a whole.
Other factors include the considerable distance of China's coal deposits, though large, from its cities as well as the then unnavigable Yellow River that connects these deposits to the sea.
Lowell and his partners built America's second cotton-to-cloth textile mill at Waltham, Massachusetts, second to the Beverly Cotton Manufactory.
The jenny produced a lightly twisted yarn only suitable for weft, not warp.
Lewis Paul patented the roller spinning frame and the flyer-and-bobbin system for drawing wool to a more even thickness.
Watt's monopoly may have prevented other inventors, such as Richard Trevithick, William Murdoch or Jonathan Hornblower, from introducing improved steam engines, thereby retarding the industrial revolution by about 16 years.
Nonetheless, this synthetic soda ash proved economical compared to that from burning specific plants (barilla) or from kelp, which were the previously dominant sources of soda ash, and also to potash (potassium carbonate) derived from hardwood ashes.
The large scale production of chemicals was an important development during the Industrial Revolution.
The term ''Industrial Revolution'' applied to technological change was becoming more common by the late 1830s, as in Jérôme-Adolphe Blanqui's description in 1837 of ''la révolution industrielle''.
Despite their disadvantages, Newcomen engines were reliable and easy to maintain and continued to be used in the coalfields until the early decades of the 19th century.
The Industrial Revolution concentrated labour into mills, factories and mines, thus facilitating the organisation of ''combinations'' or trade unions to help advance the interests of working people.
Lowell, Massachusetts, using  of canals and 10,000 horsepower delivered by the Merrimack River, is considered by some as a major contributor to the success of the American Industrial Revolution.
Seventy percent of European urbanisation happened in Britain 1750–1800.
Even if Belgium is the second industrial country after Britain, the effect of the industrial revolution there was very different.
In Britain by 1800 an estimated 10,000 horsepower was being supplied by steam.
Some historians, such as John Clapham and Nicholas Crafts, have argued that the economic and social changes occurred gradually and the term ''revolution'' is a misnomer.
Communication routes between these small centres only became populated later and created a much less dense urban morphology than, for instance, the area around Liège where the old town was there to direct migratory flows.
Women's historians have debated the effect of the Industrial Revolution and capitalism generally on the status of women.
Roller mills were first used for making sheets, but also were developed for rolling structural shapes such as angles and rails.
Cartwright's loom design had several flaws, the most serious being thread breakage.
The flying shuttle patented in 1733 by John Kay, with a number of subsequent improvements including an important one in 1747, doubled the output of a weaver, worsening the imbalance between spinning and weaving.
Encyclopaedias such as Harris's ''Lexicon Technicum'' (1704) and Abraham Rees's ''Cyclopaedia'' (1802–1819) contain much of value.
In 1764 in the village of Stanhill, Lancashire, James Hargreaves invented the spinning jenny, which he patented in 1770.
They became known as the Tolpuddle Martyrs.
In his 1976 book ''Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society'', Raymond Williams states in the entry for "Industry": "The idea of a new social order based on major industrial change was clear in Southey and Owen, between 1811 and 1818, and was implicit as early as Blake in the early 1790s and Wordsworth at the turn of the 19th century."
Good quality seed drills were not produced until the mid 18th century.
In many cities, the new railway shops were the centres of technological awareness and training, so that by 1850, Germany was self-sufficient in meeting the demands of railroad construction, and the railways were a major impetus for the growth of the new steel industry.
This period witnessed increasing regional specialisation with mining in Bergslagen, textile mills in Sjuhäradsbygden and forestry in Norrland.
His factories at Seraing integrated all stages of production, from engineering to the supply of raw materials, as early as 1825.
During the Industrial Revolution an intellectual and artistic hostility towards the new industrialisation developed, associated with the Romantic movement.
Many children developed lung cancer and other diseases and died before the age of 25.
Sweden abolished most tariffs and other barriers to free trade in the 1850s and joined the gold standard in 1873.
These machines were all-metal and were the first machines for mass production and making components with a degree of interchangeability.
The Industrial Revolution on Continental Europe came a little later than in Great Britain.
Local supplies of coal, iron, lead, copper, tin, limestone and water power, resulted in excellent conditions for the development and expansion of industry.
For much of the 19th century, production was done in small mills, which were typically water-powered and built to serve local needs.
In other nations, such as France, markets were split up by local regions, which often imposed tolls and tariffs on goods traded among them.
Despite the losses, the Manufactory served as a playground of innovation, both in turning a large amount of cotton, but also developing the water-powered milling structure used in Slater's Mill.
British scientists by contrast, lacked research universities and did not train advanced students; instead the practice was to hire German-trained chemists.
Some degree of safety was provided by the safety lamp which was invented in 1816 by Sir Humphry Davy and independently by George Stephenson.
The design was partly based on a spinning machine built for Thomas High by clockmaker John Kay, who was hired by Arkwright.
These attackers became known as Luddites, supposedly followers of Ned Ludd, a folklore figure.
The major turnpikes radiated from London and were the means by which the Royal Mail was able to reach the rest of the country.
The industrial revolution began about 1870 as Meiji period leaders decided to catch up with the West.
Hot blast, patented by James Beaumont Neilson in 1828, was the most important development of the 19th century for saving energy in making pig iron.
In Britain and the Netherlands, food supply had been increasing and prices falling before the Industrial Revolution due to better agricultural practices; however, population grew too, as noted by Thomas Malthus.>  Before the Industrial Revolution, advances in agriculture or technology soon led to an increase in population, which again strained food and other resources, limiting increases in per capita income.
Also, people were at risk of developing pathologies due to persistent dampness.
This operated until about 1764.
Mechanised textile production spread from Great Britain to continental Europe in the early 19th century, with important centres of textiles, iron and coal emerging in  Belgium, and later in France.
In 1800, only 3% of the world's population lived in cities, compared to nearly 50% today (the beginning of the 21st century).
This was further aided by Britain's geographical position—an island separated from the rest of mainland Europe.
Puddling was done in a reverberatory furnace, allowing coal or coke to be used as fuel.
The Bank of Japan, founded in 1882, used taxes to fund model steel and textile factories.
Steam locomotives began being built after the introduction of high pressure steam engines after the expiration of the Boulton and Watt patent in 1800.
Starting in the middle of the 1820s, and especially after Belgium became an independent nation in 1830, numerous works comprising coke blast furnaces as well as puddling and rolling mills were built in the coal mining areas around Liège and Charleroi.
It took several decades to diffuse and was the final straw for many farm labourers, who faced near starvation, leading to the 1830 agricultural rebellion of the Swing Riots.
Puddling was backbreaking and extremely hot work.
During 1815–1850 the protoindustries developed into more specialised and larger industries.
French Romanticisim likewise was highly critical of industry.
By the 1820s a national network was in existence.
The first horse railways were introduced toward the end of the 18th century, with steam locomotives being introduced in the early decades of the 19th century.
Henry Maudslay, who trained a school of machine tool makers early in the 19th century, was a mechanic with superior ability who had been employed at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich.
They usually lost  and modified the worst practices.
Another theory is that Britain was able to succeed in the Industrial Revolution due to the availability of key resources it possessed.
However, German unification in 1870 stimulated consolidation, nationalisation into state-owned companies, and further rapid growth.
Roberts was a maker of high-quality machine tools and a pioneer of the use of jigs and gauges for precision workshop measurement.
The second stage was the "family wage economy" of early industrialisation; the entire family depended on the collective wages of its members, including husband, wife and older children.
Thomas Somers and the Cabot Brothers founded the Beverly Cotton Manufactory in 1787, the first cotton mill in America, the largest cotton mill of its era, and a significant milestone in the research and development of cotton mills in the future.
By comparison, this proportion reached only 17 per cent in Wallonia, barely 10 per cent in most West European countries, 16 per cent in France and 25 per cent in Britain.
The jenny worked in a similar manner to the spinning wheel, by first clamping down on the fibres, then by drawing them out, followed by twisting.
Threshing machines were a particular target, and hayrick burning was a popular activity.
The public outcry, especially among the upper and middle classes, helped stir change in the young workers' welfare.
Improved transportation also allowed new ideas to spread quickly.
Horock's loom was improved by Richard Roberts in 1822 and these were produced in large numbers by Roberts, Hill & Co.
Samuel Horrocks patented a fairly successful loom in 1813.
The slide rest lathe was called one of history's most important inventions, although not entirely Maudslay's idea.
“ A good horse on an ordinary turnpike road can draw two thousand pounds, or one ton.
These laws decreased the number of child labourers, however child labour remained in Europe and the United States up to the 20th century.
These were developments that had begun before the Industrial Revolution, but the adoption of John Smeaton's improvements to the Newcomen engine followed by James Watt's more efficient steam engines from the 1770s reduced the fuel costs of engines, making mines more profitable.
After his death in 1817, his associates built America's first planned factory town, which they named after him.
Coal mining was very dangerous owing to the presence of firedamp in many coal seams.
The Industrial Revolution also created a middle class of professionals, such as lawyers and doctors, who lived in much better conditions.
Daniel Day established a wool carding mill in the Blackstone Valley at Uxbridge, Massachusetts in 1809, the third woollen mill established in the US (The first was in Hartford, Connecticut, and the second at Watertown, Massachusetts.)
Several important institutional changes took place in this period, such as free and mandatory schooling introduced 1842 (as first country in the world), the abolition of the national monopoly on trade in handicrafts in 1846, and a stock company law in 1848.
Some economists, such as Robert E. Lucas, Jr., say that the real impact of the Industrial Revolution was that "for the first time in history, the living standards of the masses of ordinary people have begun to undergo sustained growth&nbsp;...
The Lunar Society flourished from 1765 to 1809, and it has been said of them, "They were, if you like, the revolutionary committee of that most far reaching of all the eighteenth century revolutions, the Industrial Revolution".
There were no sanitary facilities.
The process produced a large amount of pollution (the hydrochloric acid was initially vented to the air, and calcium sulphide was a useless waste product).
There were two main values that really drove the Industrial Revolution in Britain.
The impact of machine tools during the Industrial Revolution was not that great because other than firearms, threaded fasteners and a few other industries there were few mass-produced metal parts.
The first large-scale, modern environmental laws came in the form of Britain's Alkali Acts, passed in 1863, to regulate the deleterious air pollution (gaseous hydrochloric acid) given off by the Leblanc process, used to produce soda ash.
However, harsh working conditions were prevalent long before the Industrial Revolution took place.
Savery pumps continued to be produced until the late 18th century.
The origins of the environmental movement lay in the response to increasing levels of smoke pollution in the atmosphere during the Industrial Revolution.
However, from 1785, imports decreased because of the new iron making technology, and Britain became an exporter of bar iron as well as manufactured wrought iron consumer goods.
They were also much lighter weight and smaller in size for a given horsepower than the stationary condensing engines.
However, the lamps proved a false dawn because they became unsafe very quickly and provided a weak light.
The colonial expansion of the 17th century with the accompanying development of international trade, creation of financial markets and accumulation of capital are also cited as factors, as is the scientific revolution of the 17th century.
This meant that lower quality coal or anthracite could be used in areas where coking coal was unavailable or too expensive; however, by the end of the 19th century transportation costs fell considerably.
In 'Breaking stereotypes', Muriel Neven and Isabelle Devious say:
Crompton's mule was able to produce finer thread than hand spinning and at a lower cost.
Bradford grew by 50% every ten years between 1811 and 1851 and by 1851 only 50% of the population of Bradford was actually born there.
On 15 September 1830, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway was opened, the first inter-city railway in the world and was attended by Prime Minister, the Duke of Wellington.
Bessemer steel was being displaced by the open hearth furnace near the end of the 19th century.
By 1729, when Newcomen died, his engines had spread (first) to Hungary in 1722, Germany, Austria, and Sweden.
Those rioters who were caught were tried and hanged, or transported for life.
The Unitarians, in particular, were very involved in education, by running Dissenting Academies, where, in contrast to the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and schools such as Eton and Harrow, much attention was given to mathematics and the sciences—areas of scholarship vital to the development of manufacturing technologies.
Thanks to coal (the French word "houille" was coined in Wallonia), the region geared up to become the 2nd industrial power in the world after Britain.
The introduction of hydroelectric power generation in the Alps enabled the rapid industrialisation of coal-deprived northern Italy, beginning in the 1890s.
This made child labour the labour of choice for manufacturing in the early phases of the Industrial Revolution between the 18th and 19th centuries.
Twelve wagons were loaded with stones, till each wagon weighed three tons, and the wagons were fastened together.
The power of a union could demand better terms by withdrawing all labour and causing a consequent cessation of production.
Some lost hands or limbs, others were crushed under the machines, and some were decapitated.
The effects of patents, both good and ill, on the development of industrialisation are clearly illustrated in the history of the steam engine, the key enabling technology.
About ten years later, the employment of children and women in mining was forbidden.
Britain emerged from the Napoleonic Wars as the only European nation not ravaged by financial plunder and economic collapse, and having the only merchant fleet of any useful size (European merchant fleets were destroyed during the war by the Royal Navy).
Germany's political disunity—with three dozen states—and a pervasive conservatism made it difficult to build railways in the 1830s.
He was hired away by Joseph Bramah for the production of high security metal locks that required precision craftsmanship.
The '''Industrial Revolution''' was the transition to new manufacturing processes in the period from about 1760 to sometime between 1820 and 1840.
Britain's population grew 280% 1550–1820, while the rest of Western Europe grew 50–80%.
Dissenters found themselves barred or discouraged from almost all public offices, as well as education at England's only two universities at the time (although dissenters were still free to study at Scotland's four universities).
Using less coal or coke meant introducing fewer impurities into the pig iron.
The factory system contributed to the growth of urban areas, as large numbers of workers migrated into the cities in search of work in the factories.
Employers had to decide between giving in to the union demands at a cost to themselves or suffering the cost of the lost production.
Reports were written detailing some of the abuses, particularly in the coal mines and textile factories, and these helped to popularise the children's plight.
''Cyclopaedia'' contains an enormous amount of information about the science and technology of the first half of the Industrial Revolution, very well illustrated by fine engravings.
Instead, the greater liberalisation of trade from a large merchant base may have allowed Britain to produce and use emerging scientific and technological developments more effectively than countries with stronger monarchies, particularly China and Russia.
Conversely, Chinese society was founded on men like Confucius, Mencius, Han Feizi (Legalism), Lao Tzu (Taoism), and Buddha (Buddhism), resulting in very different worldviews.
The causes of the Industrial Revolution were complicated and remain a topic for debate, with some historians believing the Revolution was an outgrowth of social and institutional changes brought by the end of feudalism in Britain after the English Civil War in the 17th century.
The railway was engineered by Joseph Locke and George Stephenson, linked the rapidly expanding industrial town of Manchester with the port town of Liverpool.
By 1800, only the Netherlands was more urbanised than Britain.
