An infectious disease team may be alerted when:
Some viruses once acquired never leave the body.
One of the hallmarks of a bacterial infection is local pain, pain that is in a specific part of the body.
Thus, avoiding using antibiotics longer than necessary helps preventing such infectious diseases.
Another effective way to decrease the transmission rate of infectious diseases is to recognize the effects of small-world networks.
Not all infectious agents cause disease in all hosts.
The Gram stain identifies the bacterial groups Firmicutes and Actinobacteria, both of which contain many significant human pathogens.
A sample taken from potentially diseased tissue or fluid is then tested for the presence of an infectious agent able to grow within that medium.
+Comparison of viral and bacterial infection
Because it is normal to have bacterial colonization, it is difficult to know which chronic wounds can be classified as infected and how much risk of progression exists.
The diagnosis is aided by the presenting symptoms in any individual with an infectious disease, yet it usually needs additional diagnostic techniques to confirm the suspicion.
Some signs of infection affect the whole body generally, such as fatigue, loss of appetite, weight loss, fevers, night sweats, chills, aches and pains.
Signal of unknowns can be compared to that of standards allowing quantitation of the target antigen.
* The infectious agent is of an uncommon nature (e.g.
Persistent infections occur because the body is unable to clear the organism after the initial infection.
Technologies based upon the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method will become nearly ubiquitous gold standards of diagnostics of the near future, for several reasons.
The variables involved in the outcome of a host becoming inoculated by a pathogen and the ultimate outcome include:
An interesting fact that gas chromatography–mass spectrometry, 16S ribosomal RNA analysis, omics, and other advanced technologies have made more apparent to humans in recent decades is that microbial colonization is very common even in environments that humans think of as being nearly sterile.
In a microbial culture, a growth medium is provided for a specific agent.
Infection begins when an organism successfully enters the body, grows and multiplies.
A typical example is the herpes virus, which tends to hide in nerves and become reactivated when specific circumstances arise.
: Opportunistic pathogens can cause an infectious disease in a host with depressed resistance (immunodeficiency) or if they have unusual access to the inside of the body (for example, via trauma).
A number of studies have reported associations between pathogen load in an area and human behavior.
Most pathogenic bacteria are easily grown on nutrient agar, a form of solid medium that supplies carbohydrates and proteins necessary for growth of a bacterium, along with copious amounts of water.
This process requires immune mechanisms to kill or inactivate the inoculum of the pathogen.
The infections from both tyrannosaurs were received by being bitten during a fight, like the ''Herrerasaurus'' specimen.
In contrast, a secondary infection is a sequela or complication of a root cause.
Others are specific to individual body parts, such as skin rashes, coughing, or a runny nose.
The most common classes of antibiotics used in medicine include penicillin, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, macrolides, quinolones and tetracyclines.
Complex serological techniques have been developed into what are known as Immunoassays.
The introduction of new crops attracts new crop pests and the microbes they carry to farming communities, exposing people to unfamiliar diseases.
In epidemics, there are often extensive interactions within hubs or groups of infected individuals and other interactions within discrete hubs of susceptible individuals.
A single bacterium will grow into a visible mound on the surface of the plate called a colony, which may be separated from other colonies or melded together into a "lawn".
In contrast, the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) kills its victims very slowly by attacking their immune system.
Bacteriological plates such as these are commonly used in the clinical identification of infectious bacterium.
Some viruses may be grown in embryonated eggs.
The prion causing mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease invariably kills all animals and people that are infected.
Also, the relatively low virulence allows its victims to travel long distances, increasing the likelihood of an epidemic.
An opportunistic disease requires impairment of host defenses, which may occur as a result of genetic defects (such as Chronic granulomatous disease), exposure to antimicrobial drugs or immunosuppressive chemicals (as might occur following poisoning or cancer chemotherapy), exposure to ionizing radiation, or as a result of an infectious disease with immunosuppressive activity (such as with measles, malaria or HIV disease).
Other important indicators include parental concern, clinical instinct, and temperature greater than 40&nbsp;°C.
As countries make use of their rain forests, by building roads through forests and clearing areas for settlement or commercial ventures, people encounter insects and other animals harboring previously unknown microorganisms.
Some individuals develop natural serum antibodies to the surface polysaccharides of some agents although they have had little or no contact with the agent, these natural antibodies confer specific protection to adults and are passively transmitted to newborns.
The diagnosis of a few diseases will not benefit from the development of PCR methods, such as some of the clostridial diseases (tetanus and botulism).
Ships and other cargo carriers often harbor unintended "passengers", that can spread diseases to faraway destinations.
Serological tests, if available, are usually the preferred route of identification, however the tests are costly to develop and the reagents used in the test often require refrigeration.
It is less clear that a pure culture comes from an animal source serving as host than it is when derived from microbes derived from plate culture.
Severe infections of the brain are usually treated with intravenous antibiotics.
Several human activities have led to the emergence of zoonotic human pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, protozoa, and rickettsia, and spread of vector-borne diseases, see also Globalization and Disease and Wildlife disease:
Sometimes, multiple antibiotics are used in case there is resistance to one antibiotic.
Only a few viral infections are painful, like herpes.
Resistance to infection (immunity) may be acquired following a disease, by asymptomatic carriage of the pathogen, by harboring an organism with a similar structure (crossreacting), or by vaccination.
*antibiotics, called prophylactic when given as prevention rather as treatment of infection.
: Primary pathogens cause disease as a result of their presence or activity within the normal, healthy host, and their intrinsic virulence (the severity of the disease they cause) is, in part, a necessary consequence of their need to reproduce and spread.
Plates may contain substances that permit the growth of some bacteria and not others, or that change color in response to certain bacteria and not others.
The specific serological diagnostic identification, and later genotypic or molecular identification, of HIV also enabled the development of hypotheses as to the temporal and geographical origins of the virus, as well as a myriad of other hypothesis.
Persistent infections cause millions of deaths globally each year.
Symptomatic infections are ''apparent'' and ''clinical'', whereas an infection that is active but does not produce noticeable symptoms may be called ''inapparent,'' ''silent,'' ''subclinical'', or occult.
Not all infections require treatment, and for many self-limiting infections the treatment may cause more side-effects than benefits.
As an example, the staphylococcus species remains harmless on the skin, but, when present in a normally sterile space, such as in the capsule of a joint or the peritoneum, multiplies without resistance and causes harm.
To aid in the diagnosis of infectious diseases, immunoassays can detect or measure antigens from either infectious agents or proteins generated by an infected organism in response to a foreign agent.
For example, in the early 1980s, prior to the appearance of AZT for the treatment of AIDS, the course of the disease was closely followed by monitoring the composition of patient blood samples, even though the outcome would not offer the patient any further treatment options.
The antigen, usually a protein or carbohydrate made by an infectious agent, is bound by the antibody.
Many of the most common primary pathogens of humans only infect humans, however many serious diseases are caused by organisms acquired from the environment or that infect non-human hosts.
Non-pathogenic organisms can become pathogenic given specific conditions, and even the most virulent organism requires certain circumstances to cause a compromising infection.
Microbial culture may also be used in the identification of viruses: the medium in this case being cells grown in culture that the virus can infect, and then alter or kill.
The benefits of identification, however, are often greatly outweighed by the cost, as often there is no specific treatment, the cause is obvious, or the outcome of an infection is benign.
Infections can be further classified by causative agent (bacterial, viral, fungal, parasitic), and by the presence or absence of systemic symptoms (sepsis).
There are some viruses that can maintain a persistent infection by infecting different cells of the body.
The pain of viral infections is often described as itchy or burning.
The isolation of enzymes from infected tissue can also provide the basis of a biochemical diagnosis of an infectious disease.
The work of the infectious diseases specialist therefore entails working with both patients and general practitioners, as well as laboratory scientists, immunologists, bacteriologists and other specialists.
Antibiotics work by slowing down the multiplication of bacteria or killing the bacteria.
Also, this virus must spread through skin lesions or permeable membranes such as the eye.
a runny nose, sinus congestion, cough, body aches etc.
Depending on the severity and the type of infection, the antibiotic may be given by mouth or by injection, or may be applied topically.
The development of molecular diagnostic tools have enabled physicians and researchers to monitor the efficacy of treatment with anti-retroviral drugs.
Diagnosis of infectious disease is nearly always initiated by medical history and physical examination.
Chronic infections by parasites account for a high morbidity and mortality in many underdeveloped countries.
Bacterial throat pain is often characterized by more pain on one side of the throat.
In part, these studies on the appearance of HIV in specific communities permitted the advancement of hypotheses as to the route of transmission of the virus.
Microscopy is often also used in conjunction with biochemical staining techniques, and can be made exquisitely specific when used in combination with antibody based techniques.
One way of proving that a given disease is "infectious", is to satisfy Koch's postulates (first proposed by Robert Koch), which demands that the infectious agent be identified only in patients and not in healthy controls, and that patients who contract the agent also develop the disease.
* Uncontrolled urbanization.
This may be due high pathogen load favoring avoidance of other groups, which may reduce pathogen transmission, or a high pathogen load preventing the creation of large settlements and armies that enforce a common culture.
However, long term use of antibiotics leads to resistance and chances of developing opportunistic infections such as ''clostridium difficile'' colitis.
Microorganisms can cause tissue damage by releasing a variety of toxins or destructive enzymes.
For example, less than 5% of individuals infected with polio develop disease.
* the intrinsic virulence of the particular organism
Antimicrobial substances used to prevent transmission of infections include:
Often, even clearly infectious diseases do not meet the infectious criteria.
#Human activity is involved with many emerging infectious diseases, such as environmental change enabling a parasite to occupy new niches.
Frequent hand washing remains the most important defense against the spread of unwanted organisms.
Thus, infection rates in small-world networks can be reduced somewhat if interactions between individuals within infected hubs are eliminated (Figure 1).
Diagnosis of infectious disease sometimes involves identifying an infectious agent either directly or indirectly.
Most humans are not easily infected.
The chain of events involves several steps—which include the infectious agent, reservoir, entering a susceptible host, exit and transmission to new hosts.
It's important to distinguish, because viral infections cannot be cured by antibiotics.
Cooking foods well and avoiding foods that have been left outside for a long time is also important.
The response of bacteria to different staining procedures is used in the taxonomic classification of microbes as well.
In the case of viral identification, a region of dead cells results from viral growth, and is called a "plaque".
Scientists who studied the skull speculated that the bite marks were received in a fight with another ''Herrerasaurus''.
To get around the usage annoyance, it is common for health professionals to speak of ''colonization'' (rather than ''infection'') when they mean that some of the pathogens are present but that no clinically apparent infection (no disease) is present.
* neutralization of viruses so that these organisms cannot enter cells,
: A primary infection is infection that is, or can practically be viewed as, the root cause of the current health problem.
A significant proliferation of the infectious agent does not occur, this limits the ability of PCR to detect the presence of any bacteria.
Another principal tool in the diagnosis of infectious disease is microscopy.
Among the many varieties of microorganisms, relatively few cause disease in otherwise healthy individuals.
Higher fertility rates and shorter or less parental care per child is another association that may be a compensation for the higher mortality rate.
* Changes in agriculture.
For example, an "uncomplicated" pneumonia will generally be treated by the internist or the pulmonologist (lung physician).
It can be difficult to distinguish which is the cause of a specific infection.
The only remaining blockades to the use of PCR as a standard tool of diagnosis are in its cost and application, neither of which is insurmountable.
For example, immunoassay A may detect the presence of a surface protein from a virus particle.
On the other hand, some infectious agents are highly virulent.
This is referred to as colonization.
This finding, originally reported in Nature, showed that genotype 1 hepatitis C patients carrying certain genetic variant alleles near the IL28B gene are more possibly to achieve sustained virological response after the treatment than others.
The branch of medicine that focuses on infections is referred to as infectious disease.
The appearance and severity of disease resulting from any pathogen, depends upon the ability of that pathogen to damage the host as well as the ability of the host to resist the pathogen.
Opportunistic infection may be caused by microbes ordinarily in contact with the host, such as pathogenic bacteria or fungi in the gastrointestinal or the upper respiratory tract, and they may also result from (otherwise innocuous) microbes acquired from other hosts (as in ''Clostridium difficile'' colitis) or from the environment as a result of traumatic introduction (as in surgical wound infections or compound fractures).
Some colonizing bacteria, such as ''Corynebacteria sp.''
* The destruction of rain forests.
There are alternative explanations for at least some of the associations although some of these explanations may in turn ultimately be due to pathogen load.
The clearance of the pathogens, either treatment-induced or spontaneous, it can be influenced by the genetic variants carried by the individual patients.
Thus, a contagious disease is a subset of infectious disease that is especially infective or easily transmitted.
When infection attacks the body, ''anti-infective'' drugs can suppress the infection.
The bug is later inspected for growth of ''T.
In this case, xenodiagnosis involves the use of the vector of the Chagas agent ''T.
There is a general chain of events that applies to infections.
Infectious diseases are sometimes called contagious disease when they are easily transmitted by contact with an ill person or their secretions (e.g., influenza).
; Primary infection versus secondary infection
Pathogenic bacteria
Bacteria such as ''Mycobacterium leprae'' and ''Treponema pallidum'' can be grown in animals, although serological and microscopic techniques make the use of live animals unnecessary.
*antiseptics, which are applied to living tissue/skin
* Encroachment on wildlife habitats.
* Modern transport.
In general, viral infections are systemic.
Persistent infections are characterized by the continual presence of the infectious organism, often as latent infection with occasional recurrent relapses of active infection.
As a result of the above features, the spread of Ebola is very rapid and usually stays within a relatively confined geographical area.
This fact occasionally creates some ambiguity or prompts some usage discussion.
There is also an association with polygyny which may be due to higher pathogen load, making selecting males with a high genetic resistance increasingly important.
* or by T lymphocytes, which will kill a cell parasitized by a microorganism.
Another example is that poor socioeconomic factors may ultimately in part be due to high pathogen load preventing economic development.
Koch's postulates can not be applied ethically for many human diseases because they require experimental infection of a healthy individual with a pathogen produced as a pure culture.
Bacterial and viral infections can both cause the same kinds of symptoms.
Chagas disease is the most significant example, because it is difficult to directly demonstrate the presence of the causative agent, ''Trypanosoma cruzi'' in a patient, which therefore makes it difficult to definitively make a diagnosis.
A long-term infection is a chronic infection.
For example, ''Treponema pallidum'', the causative spirochete of syphilis, cannot be cultured ''in vitro'' - however the organism can be cultured in rabbit testes.
A cell is normally transparent under a microscope, and using a stain increases the contrast of a cell with its background.
In practice most minor infectious diseases such as warts, cutaneous abscesses, respiratory system infections and diarrheal diseases are diagnosed by their clinical presentation and treated without knowledge of the specific causative agent.
The size, color, shape and form of a colony is characteristic of the bacterial species, its specific genetic makeup (its strain), and the environment that supports its growth.
Thus, polygny may also be due to a lower male:female ratio in these areas but this may ultimately be due to male infants having increased mortality from infectious diseases.
There are other forms of prevention such as avoiding the use of illicit drugs, using a condom, and having a healthy lifestyle with a balanced diet and regular exercise.
Clinicians therefore classify infectious microorganisms or microbes according to the status of host defenses - either as ''primary pathogens'' or as ''opportunistic pathogens'':
Gerhard Domagk developed sulphonamides, the first broad spectrum synthetic antibacterial drugs.
A short-term infection is an ''acute'' infection.
Given sufficient effort, all known infectious agents can be specifically identified.
Despite the low interaction between discrete hubs, the disease can jump to and spread in a susceptible hub via a single or few interactions with an infected hub.
An infection that is inactive or dormant is called a ''latent infection''.
The symptoms of an infection depend on the type of disease.
An example of the former is the anaerobic bacteria species, which colonizes the mammalian colon, and an example of the latter is various species of staphylococcus that exist on human skin.
There is usually an indication for a specific identification of an infectious agent only when such identification can aid in the treatment or prevention of the disease, or to advance knowledge of the course of an illness prior to the development of effective therapeutic or preventative measures.
Another useful identification method is Xenodiagnosis, or the use of a vector to support the growth of an infectious agent.
Specific acquired immunity against infectious diseases may be mediated by antibodies and/or T lymphocytes.
Disease can arise if the host's protective immune mechanisms are compromised and the organism inflicts damage on the host.
Thus, while there still is no cure for AIDS, there is great therapeutic and predictive benefit to identifying the virus and monitoring the virus levels within the blood of infected individuals, both for the patient and for the community at large.
Each of the links must be present in a chronological order for an infection to develop.
The use of needle exchange programs in areas with a high density of drug users with HIV is an example of the successful implementation of this treatment method.
The classic symptoms of a bacterial infection are localized redness, heat, swelling and pain.
Usually opportunistic infections are viewed as secondary infections (because immunodeficiency or injury was the predisposing factor).
It also associated with higher preferences for health and attractiveness in mates.
Neither of these colonizations are considered infections.
Techniques like hand washing, wearing gowns, and wearing face masks can help prevent infections from being passed from one person to another.Aseptic technique was introduced in medicine and surgery in the late 19th century and greatly reduced the incidence of infections caused by surgery.
The difference between an infection and a colonization is often only a matter of circumstance.
* The patient is immunocompromised (for example, in AIDS or after chemotherapy);
While a few organisms can grow at the initial site of entry, many migrate and cause systemic infection in different organs.
pyogenes'', that is retrieved from a patients throat with a cotton swab.
* The disease might be dangerous to other patients, and the patient might have to be isolated
Some pathogens grow within the host cells (intracellular) whereas others grow freely in bodily fluids.
cruzi'' within its gut.
An example of a latent bacterial infection is latent tuberculosis.
* a direct effect upon a pathogen, such as antibody-initiated complement-dependent bacteriolysis, opsonoization, phagocytosis and killing, as occurs for some bacteria,
The images are useful in detection of, for example, a bone abscess or a spongiform encephalopathy produced by a prion.
First, the catalog of infectious agents has grown to the point that virtually all of the significant infectious agents of the human population have been identified.
Primary pathogens may also cause more severe disease in a host with depressed resistance than would normally occur in an immunosufficient host.
Immunity mediated by these two factors may be manifested by:
By understanding how the disease was transmitted, resources could be targeted to the communities at greatest risk in campaigns aimed at reducing the number of new infections.
Later report from Nature demonstrated that the same genetic variants are also associated with the natural clearance of the genotype 1 hepatitis C virus.
These postulates were first used in the discovery that Mycobacteria species cause tuberculosis.
A cut that produces pus and milky-colored liquid is most likely infected.
Viruses are also usually identified using alternatives to growth in culture or animals.
For example, the use of antibodies made artificially fluorescent (fluorescently labeled antibodies) can be directed to bind to and identify a specific antigens present on a pathogen.
Microbiological culture is a principal tool used to diagnose infectious disease.
Higher pathogen load is also associated with more restricted sexual behavior, which may reduce pathogen transmission.
Generally, infections are initially diagnosed by primary care physicians or internal medicine specialists.
Since bacteria ferment carbohydrates in patterns characteristic of their genus and species, the detection of fermentation products is commonly used in bacterial identification.
A general method to prevent transmission of vector-borne pathogens is pest control.
The medical treatment of infectious diseases falls into the medical field of Infectious Disease and in some cases the study of propagation pertains to the field of Epidemiology.
Bacterial infection
More detailed identification techniques involve the culture of infectious agents isolated from a patient.
The immune system response to a microorganism often causes symptoms such as a high fever and inflammation, and has the potential to be more devastating than direct damage caused by a microbe.
