The exact changes that are required for this to happen are not well understood.
This is important in the emergence of pandemics, as discussed below in the section on Epidemiology.
The sequencing of the influenza genome and recombinant DNA technology may accelerate the generation of new vaccine strains by allowing scientists to substitute new antigens into a previously developed vaccine strain.
It can be difficult to distinguish between the common cold and influenza in the early stages of these infections, but a flu can be identified by a high fever with a sudden onset and extreme fatigue.
Most references in the media to "bird flu" and most references to H5N1 are about this specific strain.
A number of biologics, therapeutic vaccines and immunobiologics are also being investigated for treatment of infection caused by viruses.
In children, there may be nausea and vomiting, but these are not common in adults.
Three types of influenza viruses affect people, called Type A, Type B, and Type C. Usually, the virus is spread through the air from coughs or sneezes.
In addition, if a child (or presumably an adult) seems to be getting better and then relapses with a high fever, that is a danger sign since this relapse can be bacterial pneumonia.
The relative importance of these three modes of transmission is unclear, and they may all contribute to the spread of the virus.
Influenza B almost exclusively infects humans and is less common than influenza A.
Symptoms of influenza can start quite suddenly one to two days after infection.
Antiviral drugs such as the neuraminidase inhibitor oseltamivir, among others, have been used to treat influenza.
The length of time the virus will persist on a surface varies, with the virus surviving for one to two days on hard, non-porous surfaces such as plastic or metal, for about fifteen minutes from dry paper tissues, and only five minutes on skin.
actually a swine flu) or of transmission from pigs to people, instead the virus is spreading from person to person.
This genus has one species, influenza A virus.
The first significant step towards preventing influenza was the development in 1944 of a killed-virus vaccine for influenza by Thomas Francis, Jr..
Wild aquatic birds are the natural hosts for a large variety of influenza A.
In comparison to vaccines, the development of anti-influenza drugs has been slower, with amantadine being licensed in 1966 and, almost thirty years later, the next class of drugs (the neuraminidase inhibitors) being developed.
In the 20th century three influenza pandemics occurred: Spanish influenza in 1918, Asian influenza in 1958, and Hong Kong influenza in 1968, each resulting in more than a million deaths.
Many people are so ill that they are confined to bed for several days, with aches and pains throughout their bodies, which are worse in their backs and legs.
Research into new vaccines is particularly important, as current vaccines are very slow and expensive to produce and must be reformulated every year.
The symptoms most reliably seen in influenza are shown in the table to the right.
The vRNA and viral core proteins leave the nucleus and enter this membrane protrusion (step 6).
HA is a lectin that mediates binding of the virus to target cells and entry of the viral genome into the target cell, while NA is involved in the release of progeny virus from infected cells, by cleaving sugars that bind the mature viral particles.
When an infected person sneezes or coughs more than half a million virus particles can be spread to those close by.
Internationally, on 18 January 2006, donor nations pledged US$2 billion to combat bird flu at the two-day International Pledging Conference on Avian and Human Influenza held in China.
At present, HPAI A(H5N1) is an avian disease, and there is no evidence suggesting efficient human-to-human transmission of HPAI A(H5N1).
These studies help in developing influenza countermeasures; for example, a better understanding of the body's immune system response helps vaccine development, and a detailed picture of how influenza invades cells aids the development of antiviral drugs.
Influenzaviruses A, B and C are very similar in overall structure.
Influenza spreads around the world in a yearly outbreak, resulting in about three to five million cases of severe illness and about 250,000 to 500,000 deaths.
No benefit has been found in those with other health problems.
In pigs, horses and dogs, influenza symptoms are similar to humans, with cough, fever and loss of appetite.
Influenza infects many animal species, and transfer of viral strains between species can occur.
In an assessment of the 2009 H1N1 pandemic on selected countries in the Southern Hemisphere, data suggest that all countries experienced some time-limited and/or geographically isolated socio/economic effects and a temporary decrease in tourism most likely due to fear of 2009 H1N1 disease.
Their benefits in those who are otherwise healthy do not appear to be greater than their risks.
In those who develop symptoms from experimental infection (only 67% of healthy experimentally infected individuals), symptoms and viral shedding show a similar pattern, but with viral shedding preceding illness by one day.
* H7N7, which has unusual zoonotic potential
As before, the viruses adhere to the cell through hemagglutinin; the mature viruses detach once their neuraminidase has cleaved sialic acid residues from the host cell.
A type of polymerase chain reaction that detects the virus's RNA is more accurate.
How long influenza survives in airborne droplets seems to be influenced by the levels of humidity and UV radiation, with low humidity and a lack of sunlight in winter aiding its survival.
For example, the influenza A genome contains 11 genes on eight pieces of RNA, encoding for 11 proteins: hemagglutinin (HA), neuraminidase (NA), nucleoprotein (NP), M1, M2, NS1, NS2 (NEP: nuclear export protein), PA, PB1 (polymerase basic 1), PB1-F2 and PB2.
Preventative costs are also high.
Negative-sense vRNAs that form the genomes of future viruses, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, and other viral proteins are assembled into a virion.
* Irritated, watering eyes
The virus particle is 80–120 nanometers in diameter and usually roughly spherical, although filamentous forms can occur.
Flu symptoms in birds are variable and can be unspecific.
Although the strain of the virus is not thought to spread efficiently between humans,  by mid-April, at least 82 persons had become ill from H7N9, of which 17 had died.
The influenza A virus can be subdivided into different serotypes based on the antibody response to these viruses.
Since antiviral drugs are effective in treating influenza if given early (see treatment section, below), it can be important to identify cases early.
Vaccines have also been developed to protect poultry from avian influenza.
Birds are thought to be the main animal reservoirs of influenza viruses.
Hence, the majority of newly manufactured influenza viruses are mutants; this causes antigenic drift, which is a slow change in the antigens on the viral surface over time.
The central core contains the viral RNA genome and other viral proteins that package and protect this RNA.
In the Northern and Southern parts of the world outbreaks occur mainly in winter while in areas around the equator outbreaks may occur at any time of the year.
On 1 November 2005, United States President George W. Bush unveiled the National Strategy to Safeguard Against the Danger of Pandemic Influenza backed by a request to Congress for $7.1 billion to begin implementing the plan.
This genus has one species, influenza C virus, which infects humans, dogs and pigs, sometimes causing both severe illness and local epidemics.
Two of whom had died and the third was critically ill.
Typically, biologics do not target metabolic pathways like anti-viral drugs, but stimulate immune cells such as lymphocytes, macrophages, and/or antigen presenting cells, in an effort to drive an immune response towards a cytotoxic effect against the virus.
For example, Lymphocyte T-Cell Immune Modulator inhibits viral growth in the murine model of influenza.
The only other animals known to be susceptible to influenza B infection are the seal and the ferret.
The symptoms following infection with low-pathogenicity avian influenza may be as mild as ruffled feathers, a small reduction in egg production, or weight loss combined with minor respiratory disease.
In March 2013, the Chinese government reported three cases of H7N9 influenza infections in humans.
One important basic research program is the Influenza Genome Sequencing Project, which is creating a library of influenza sequences; this library should help clarify which factors make one strain more lethal than another, which genes most affect immunogenicity, and how the virus evolves over time.
Nausea and vomiting occur more commonly in the unrelated infection gastroenteritis, which is sometimes inaccurately referred to as "stomach flu" or "24-hour flu".
Governments worldwide have spent billions of U.S. dollars preparing and planning for a potential H5N1 avian influenza pandemic, with costs associated with purchasing drugs and vaccines as well as developing disaster drills and strategies for improved border controls.
Unusually for a virus, its genome is not a single piece of nucleic acid; instead, it contains seven or eight pieces of segmented negative-sense RNA, each piece of RNA containing either one or two genes, which code for a gene product (protein).
However, influenza C is less common than the other types and usually only causes mild disease in children.
Hemagglutinin and neuraminidase molecules cluster into a bulge in the cell membrane.
Some strains such as Asian H9N2 are highly virulent to poultry and may cause more extreme symptoms and significant mortality.
However, it was not until Wendell Stanley first crystallized tobacco mosaic virus in 1935 that the non-cellular nature of viruses was appreciated.
* H1N2, endemic in humans, pigs and birds
However, the economic impacts of past pandemics have not been intensively studied, and some authors have suggested that the Spanish influenza actually had a positive long-term effect on per-capita income growth, despite a large reduction in the working population and severe short-term depressive effects.
The etiological cause of influenza, the Orthomyxoviridae family of viruses, was first discovered in pigs by Richard Shope in 1931.
Research on influenza includes studies on molecular virology, how the virus produces disease (pathogenesis), host immune responses, viral genomics, and how the virus spreads (epidemiology).
These filamentous forms are more common in influenza C, which can form cordlike structures up to 500&nbsp;micrometers long on the surfaces of infected cells.
Although a single sneeze releases up to 40,000 droplets, most of these droplets are quite large and will quickly settle out of the air.
These core proteins and vRNA form a complex that is transported into the cell nucleus, where the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase begins transcribing complementary positive-sense vRNA (Steps 3a and b).
Avian influenza viruses can survive indefinitely when frozen.
As the influenza virus can persist outside of the body, it can also be transmitted by contaminated surfaces such as banknotes, doorknobs, light switches and other household items.
This genus has one species, influenza B virus.
Two decision analysis studies suggest that ''during local outbreaks'' of influenza, the prevalence will be over 70%, and thus patients with any of these combinations of symptoms may be treated with neuraminidase inhibitors without testing.
Death occurs mostly in the young, the old and those with other health problems.
Sixteen forms of hemagglutinin and nine forms of neuraminidase have been identified.
The cough, however, may last for more than two weeks.
Newly synthesized viral proteins are either secreted through the Golgi apparatus onto the cell surface (in the case of neuraminidase and hemagglutinin, step 5b) or transported back into the nucleus to bind vRNA and form new viral genome particles (step 5a).
Since these mild symptoms can make diagnosis in the field difficult, tracking the spread of avian influenza requires laboratory testing of samples from infected birds.
The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) maintains an up-to-date summary of available laboratory tests.
Of the symptoms listed above, the combinations of fever with cough, sore throat and/or nasal congestion can improve diagnostic accuracy.
In pigs swine influenza produces fever, lethargy, sneezing, coughing, difficulty breathing and decreased appetite.
These cases include three small family clusters in Shanghai and one cluster between a neighboring girl and boy in Beijing, raising at least the possibility of human-to-human transmission.
1918 flu pandemic(Spanish flu)
New technologies are also being developed to grow viruses in cell culture, which promises higher yields, less cost, better quality and surge capacity.
As the virus spreads rapidly in the crowded conditions seen in the intensive farming of chickens and turkeys, these outbreaks can cause large economic losses to poultry farmers.
* H2N2, which caused Asian Flu in 1957
Other studies have attempted to predict the costs of a pandemic as serious as the 1918 Spanish flu on the U.S. economy, where 30% of all workers became ill, and 2.5% were killed.
Symptoms of influenza may include:
Infected pigs can lose up to 12 pounds of body weight over a 3- to 4-week period.
WHO points out that one cluster did not have two of the cases lab confirmed and further points out, as a matter of baseline information, that some viruses are able to cause limited human-to-human transmission under conditions of close contact but are not transmissible enough to cause large community outbreaks.
Application of this observation by Francis allowed his group of researchers at the University of Michigan to develop the first influenza vaccine, with support from the U.S. Army.
A person may be infectious to others both before and during the time they are showing symptoms.
As a result of this lack of antigenic diversity, a degree of immunity to influenza B is usually acquired at an early age.
It is usually well tolerated.
These different types of HA and NA form the basis of the ''H'' and ''N'' distinctions in, for example, ''H5N1''.
In 2009, a swine-origin H1N1 virus strain commonly referred to as "swine flu" caused the 2009 flu pandemic, but there is no evidence that it is endemic to pigs (i.e.
These are made of a viral envelope containing two main types of glycoproteins, wrapped around a central core.
The frequency of animal diseases are not as well-studied as human infection, but an outbreak of influenza in harbor seals caused approximately 500 seal deaths off the New England coast in 1979–1980.
However, influenza B mutates enough that lasting immunity is not possible.
This reduced rate of antigenic change, combined with its limited host range (inhibiting cross species antigenic shift), ensures that pandemics of influenza B do not occur.
These tests may be especially useful during the influenza season (prevalence=25%) but in the absence of a local outbreak, or peri-influenza season (prevalence=10%).
In almost all cases, those infected have had extensive physical contact with infected birds.
In the future, H5N1 may mutate or reassort into a strain capable of efficient human-to-human transmission.
The Army was deeply involved in this research due to its experience of influenza in World War I, when thousands of troops were killed by the virus in a matter of months.
This type of influenza mutates at a rate 2–3 times slower than type A and consequently is less genetically diverse, with only one influenza B serotype.
However, despite these varied shapes, the viral particles of all influenza viruses are similar in composition.
Thus, these proteins are targets for antiviral drugs.
They are inactivated by heating to 56&nbsp;°C (133&nbsp;°F) for a minimum of 60 minutes, as well as by acids (at pH (Asiatic or Russian Flu)
A vaccine made for one year may not be useful in the following year, since the virus evolves rapidly.
This built on work by Australian Frank Macfarlane Burnet, who showed that the virus lost virulence when it was cultured in fertilized hen's eggs.
Research on a universal influenza A vaccine, targeted against the external domain of the transmembrane viral M2 protein (M2e), is being done at the University of Ghent by Walter Fiers, Xavier Saelens and their team and has now successfully concluded Phase I clinical trials.
This Asian lineage strain of HPAI A(H5N1) is spreading globally.
possibly H3N8  or H2N2
This discovery was shortly followed by the isolation of the virus from humans by a group headed by Patrick Laidlaw at the Medical Research Council of the United Kingdom in 1933.
Influenza models, such as murine influenza, are convenient models to test the effects of prophylactic and therapeutic biologics.
The resulting rapid change in viral genetics produces antigenic shifts, which are sudden changes from one antigen to another.
The vRNA either is exported into the cytoplasm and translated (step 4) or remains in the nucleus.
Larger outbreaks known as pandemics are less frequent.
The available laboratory tests for influenza continue to improve.
Direct transmission of an influenza virus from pigs to humans is occasionally possible (this is called zoonotic swine flu).
Furthermore, they are antigens to which antibodies can be raised.
It is epizootic (an epidemic in non-humans) and panzootic (a disease affecting animals of many species, especially over a wide area), killing tens of millions of birds and spurring the culling of hundreds of millions of other birds in an attempt to control its spread.
Once inside the cell, the acidic conditions in the endosome cause two events to happen: First, part of the hemagglutinin protein fuses the viral envelope with the vacuole's membrane, then the M2 ion channel allows protons to move through the viral envelope and acidify the core of the virus, which causes the core to disassemble and release the viral RNA and core proteins.
Other viral proteins have multiple actions in the host cell, including degrading cellular mRNA and using the released nucleotides for vRNA synthesis and also inhibiting translation of host-cell mRNAs.
The M2 ion channel is blocked by amantadine drugs, preventing infection.
* H3N2, which caused Hong Kong Flu in 1968
* H1N1, which caused Spanish Flu in 1918, and Swine Flu in 2009
In some cases the infection can cause abortion.
The obvious symptom is trouble breathing.
* H5N1, which caused Bird Flu in 2004
Influenza is a mixture of symptoms of common cold and pneumonia, body ache, headache, and fatigue.
The serotypes that have been confirmed in humans, ordered by the number of known human pandemic deaths, are:
The infection may be confirmed by testing the throat, sputum, or nose for the virus.
The most common symptoms include: a high fever, runny nose, sore throat, muscle pains, headache, coughing, and feeling tired.
'''Influenza''', commonly known as "the '''flu'''", is an infectious disease caused by an influenza virus.
The first influenza virus to be isolated was from poultry, when in 1901 the agent causing a disease called "fowl plague" was passed through Chamberland filters, which have pores that are too small for bacteria to pass through.
Influenza can be spread in three main ways: by direct transmission (when an infected person sneezes mucus directly into the eyes, nose or mouth of another person); the airborne route (when someone inhales the aerosols produced by an infected person coughing, sneezing or spitting) and through hand-to-eye, hand-to-nose, or hand-to-mouth transmission, either from contaminated surfaces or from direct personal contact such as a hand-shake.
There has been some research success towards a "universal flu vaccine" that produces antibodies against proteins on the viral coat which mutate less rapidly, and thus a single shot could potentially provide longer-lasting protection.
In immunocompromised people, viral shedding can continue for longer than two weeks.
A number of rapid tests are available; however, people may still have the infection if the results are negative.
According to the CDC, rapid diagnostic tests have a sensitivity of 50–75% and specificity of 90–95% when compared with viral culture.
Occasionally, viruses are transmitted to other species and may then cause devastating outbreaks in domestic poultry or give rise to human influenza pandemics.
* Reddened eyes, skin (especially face), mouth, throat and nose
It can also be spread by touching surfaces contaminated by the virus and then touching the mouth or eyes.
After the release of new influenza viruses, the host cell dies.
The separation of the genome into eight separate segments of vRNA allows mixing or reassortment of vRNAs if more than one type of influenza virus infects a single cell.
These vaccines can be effective against multiple strains and are used either as part of a preventative strategy, or combined with culling in attempts to eradicate outbreaks.
An avian-adapted, highly pathogenic strain of H5N1 (called HPAI A(H5N1), for "highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of type A of subtype H5N1") causes H5N1 flu, commonly known as "avian influenza" or simply "bird flu", and is endemic in many bird populations, especially in Southeast Asia.
Usually the first symptoms are chills or a chilly sensation, but fever is also common early in the infection, with body temperatures ranging from 38 to 39&nbsp;°C (approximately 100 to 103&nbsp;°F).
Additional costs would come from medical treatment of 18 million to 45 million people, and total economic costs would be approximately $700 billion.
In the airborne route, the droplets that are small enough for people to inhale are 0.5 to 5&nbsp;µm in diameter and inhaling just one droplet might be enough to cause an infection.
In its most highly pathogenic form, influenza in chickens and turkeys produces a sudden appearance of severe symptoms and almost 100% mortality within two days.
The main variants named using this convention are: bird flu, human flu, swine flu, horse flu and dog flu.
However, outbreaks in pigs are common and do not cause severe mortality.
* In children, gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea and abdominal pain, (may be severe in children with influenza B)
Therapeutic biologics are designed to activate the immune response to virus or antigens.
RNA tends to be single stranded but in special cases it is double.
Wearing a surgical mask is also useful.
* Body aches, especially joints and throat
Influenza A viruses are classified into subtypes based on antibody responses to HA and NA.
However, if the virus is present in mucus, this can protect it for longer periods (up to 17&nbsp;days on banknotes).
It is still too early to determine whether the H1N1 pandemic has caused any long-term economic impacts.
Occasionally, influenza can cause severe illness including primary viral pneumonia or secondary bacterial pneumonia.
In otherwise healthy adults, influenza virus shedding (the time during which a person might be infectious to another person) increases sharply one-half to one day after infection, peaks on day 2 and persists for an average total duration of 5 days—but can persist as long as 9 days.
Influenza produces direct costs due to lost productivity and associated medical treatment, as well as indirect costs of preventative measures.
Children are much more infectious than adults and shed virus from just before they develop symptoms until two weeks after infection.
Hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) are the two large glycoproteins on the outside of the viral particles.
These sudden large changes allow the virus to infect new host species and quickly overcome protective immunity.
Complications of influenza may include viral pneumonia, secondary bacterial pneumonia, sinus infections, and worsening of previous health problems such as asthma or heart failure.
A 30% sickness rate and a three-week length of illness would decrease the gross domestic product by 5%.
This is believed to occur mostly over relatively short distances.
The mature virus buds off from the cell in a sphere of host phospholipid membrane, acquiring hemagglutinin and neuraminidase with this membrane coat (step 7).
This strain is a reassortment of several strains of H1N1 that are usually found separately, in humans, birds, and pigs.
The type A viruses are the most virulent human pathogens among the three influenza types and cause the severest disease.
The viral RNA (vRNA) molecules, accessory proteins and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase are then released into the cytoplasm (Stage 2).
* Fever and extreme coldness (chills shivering, shaking (rigor))
Diarrhea is not normally a symptom of influenza in adults, although it has been seen in some human cases of the H5N1 "bird flu" and can be a symptom in children.
These symptoms typically begin two days after exposure to the virus and most last less than a week.
A fourth family of influenza viruses has been proposed - influenza D. The type species for this family is Bovine Influenza D virus which was first isolated in 2012.
Symptoms can be mild to severe.
Variants of flu virus are sometimes named according to the species the strain is endemic in or adapted to.
The vaccine is usually effective against three or four types of influenza.
All known subtypes (HxNy) are found in birds, but many subtypes are endemic in humans, dogs, horses, and pigs; populations of camels, ferrets, cats, seals, mink, and whales also show evidence of prior infection or exposure to influenza.
Because of the absence of RNA proofreading enzymes, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase that copies the viral genome makes an error roughly every 10 thousand nucleotides, which is the approximate length of the influenza vRNA.
Frequent hand washing reduces the risk of infection because the virus is inactivated by soap.
There are 16 H and 9 N subtypes known, but only H 1, 2 and 3, and N 1 and 2 are commonly found in humans.
(Cat flu generally refers to feline viral rhinotracheitis or feline calicivirus and not infection from an influenza virus.)
However, due to the high lethality and virulence of H5N1, its endemic presence, and its large and increasing biological host reservoir, the H5N1 virus was the world's pandemic threat in the 2006–07 flu season, and billions of dollars are being raised and spent researching H5N1 and preparing for a potential influenza pandemic.
Even in the absence of a local outbreak, treatment may be justified in the elderly during the influenza season as long as the prevalence is over 15%.
Influenza may also affect other animals, including pigs, horses and birds.
The World Health Organization declared an outbreak of a new type of influenza A/H1N1 to be a pandemic in June 2009.
