Not only did she have cancer, but it was spreading, and if anyone had known how bad it was, no one would have gone on with the project."
''Joan of Lorraine''
Academy Award for Best Supporting ActressBAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role
She acted in each of these languages at various times.
Even worse, it received disastrous reviews, and although nominated for several Academy Awards, did not receive a Best Picture nomination.
Bergman's first acting role in the United States came when Hollywood producer David O. Selznick brought her to America to star in ''Intermezzo: A Love Story'' (1939), an English language remake of her earlier Swedish film ''Intermezzo'' (1936).
girl "with light brown hair and blue eyes who was painfully shy but friendly, with a warm, straight, quick smile."
Ed Sullivan chose not to have her on his show, despite a poll indicating that the public wanted her to appear.
She went through a publicized divorce and custody battle for their daughter.
Bergman strongly admired two films by Italian director Roberto Rossellini that she had seen in the United States.
Fellow actor John Gielgud, who had acted with her in ''Murder on the Orient Express'' and who had directed her in the play ''The Constant Wife'', playfully commented: "She speaks five languages and can't act in any of them."
Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy
She was sweetly stubborn.
Selznick appreciated her uniqueness, and with his wife Irene, they remained important friends throughout her career.
After his death, she was sent to live with an aunt, who died of heart disease only six months later.
In 1937, at the age of 21, Bergman married dentist Petter Aron Lindström (later to become a neurosurgeon); the couple had a daughter, Friedel Pia Lindström (born 20 September 1938).
Insurance for Bergman was impossible.
Bergman could speak Swedish (her native language), German (her second language, learned from her German mother and in school), English (learned when brought over to the United States), Italian (learned while living in Italy) and French (her third language, learned in school).
The film was shot in Norway.
In the years before he died, he wanted her to become an opera star, and had her take voice lessons for three years.
This was her final performance on the big screen.
Nastro d'Argento Award for Best Foreign Actress
Bergman received another Best Actress nomination for ''Joan of Arc'' (1948), an independent film based on the Maxwell Anderson play ''Joan of Lorraine'', produced by Walter Wanger, and initially released through RKO.
''Murder on the Orient Express''
This was the "sentiment of the entire set," writes ''Life,'' adding that workmen would go out of their way to do things for her, and the cast and crew "admired the quick, alert concentration she gave to direction and to her lines."
For her contributions to the motion picture industry, Bergman has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6759 Hollywood Blvd.
After separating from Rossellini, Bergman starred in Jean Renoir's ''Elena and Her Men'' (''Elena et les Hommes,'' 1956), a romantic comedy in which she played a Polish princess caught up in political intrigue.
During production, Bergman fell in love with Rossellini, and they began an affair.
The film was not a big hit with the public, partly because of the scandal of Bergman's affair with Italian film director Roberto Rossellini, which broke while the film was still in theatres.
Selznick understood her fear of Hollywood make-up artists, who might turn her into someone she wouldn't recognize, and "instructed them to lay off".
Senator Charles H. Percy entered an apology into the ''Congressional Record'' for the attack made on Bergman 22 years earlier by Edwin C. Johnson.
She was also persuaded that Golda was a "grand-scale person," one that people would assume was much taller than she actually was.
Bergman felt that "The good people there would not permit it."
She was given a standing ovation after being introduced by Cary Grant as she walked out onto the stage to present the award.
Bergman, named after Princess Ingrid of Sweden, was born on 29 August 1915 in Stockholm, to a Swedish father, Justus Bergman, and his German wife, Frieda (née Adler) Bergman.
It was to be her final acting role and she was honored posthumously with a second Emmy Award for Best Actress.
Chandler adds, "Ingrid felt guilty all the rest of her life because when she was in Germany at the end of the war, she had been afraid to go with the others to witness the atrocities of the Nazi extermination camps."
Bergman became pregnant with their son, Renato Roberto Ranaldo Giusto Giuseppe ("Robin") Rossellini (born 2 February 1950).
The film was taken from Ernest Hemingway's novel of the same title.
Her first film role after leaving the Royal Dramatic Theatre was a small part in 1935's ''Munkbrogreven'' (although she had previously been an extra in the 1932 film ''Landskamp'').
In 1979, Bergman hosted the AFI's Life Achievement Award Ceremony for Alfred Hitchcock.
''The Inn of the Sixth Happiness''
Writing about her first years in Hollywood, ''Life'' magazine stated that "All Bergman vehicles are blessed," and "they all go speedily and happily, with no temperament from the leading lady."
The book was written after her children warned her that she would only be known through rumors and interviews if she did not tell her own story.
A few weeks later, they did meet, and after studying her he said, "You ''are'' Maria!"
Since her part was so small, I decided to film her one big scene, where she talks for almost five minutes, straight, all in one long take.
In 1957 she divorced Rossellini.
According to Selznick's son, Danny, who was a child at the time, his father had a few concerns about Ingrid: "She didn't speak English, she was too tall, her name sounded too German, and her eyebrows were too thick."
According to the ''St.
This led to her being cast in his film ''Stromboli'' (1950).
Many of her personal and film documents can be seen in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives.
Apart from ''Casablanca'', her performances from this period include Victor Fleming's remake of ''Dr.
After being forced to do an in-depth genealogical investigation, Bergman's maternal cousin found there to be no Jewish ancestry on Bergman's mother's side.
"Her spirit triumphed with remarkable grace and courage," adds Spoto.
We were involved for weeks in close and intense work.”
Lumet discussed Bergman's role:
Her father, who was an artist and photographer, died when she was 13.
'''Ingrid Bergman''' (; 29 August 191529 August 1982) was a Swedish actress who starred in a variety of European and American films.
It was never recorded by Guthrie but, when later found in the Woody Guthrie archives, it was set to music, and recorded, by Billy Bragg on the album ''Mermaid Avenue''.
A star must have individuality.
The next year she married Lars Schmidt, a theatrical entrepreneur from a wealthy Swedish shipping family.
In Bergman's first film with Rossellini, her character was "defying audience expectations" in that the director preferred to work without a script, forcing Bergman to act "inspired by reality while she worked, a style which Bondanella calls 'a new cinema of psychological introspection'".
Nominated — Academy Award for Best ActressNominated — Bambi Award for Best Actress — International
A documentary titled ''Ingrid Bergman: In Her Own Words'' was also screened at the festival.
Lindström later moved to San Francisco, California, where he completed his internship at a private hospital, and they continued to spend time together when she could travel between filming.
Bergman was frequently ill during the filming although she rarely complained or showed it.
It seems to have filled a need, a need that was there before the film, a need that the film filled."
She is best remembered for her roles as Ilsa Lund in ''Casablanca'' (1942) and as Alicia Huberman in ''Notorious'' (1946), an Alfred Hitchcock thriller starring Cary Grant and Claude Rains.
Before becoming a star in American films, Bergman had been a leading actress in Swedish films.
The affair and then marriage with Rossellini created a scandal in the US that forced her to remain in Europe for several years, when she made a successful Hollywood return in ''Anastasia'' (1956), for which she won her second Academy Award.
Chekhov acted with Bergman in ''Spellbound'' and received his only Academy Award nomination for his performance.
Bergman was the President of the Jury at the 1973 Cannes Film Festival.
''Twenty Hours in a Woman's Life''
His opinion came from seeing her in her first American role, ''Intermezzo,'' although he hadn't yet met her.
During a press conference in Washington, D.C. for the promotion of ''Joan of Lorraine'', she protested against racial segregation after seeing it first hand at the theater she was acting in.
"I made so many films which were more important, but the only one people ever want to talk about is that one with Bogart."
After viewing the series on TV, Isabella commented,
Unable to speak English and uncertain about her acceptance by the American audience, she expected to complete this one film and return home to Sweden.
She went on to act in a dozen films in Sweden, including ''En kvinnas ansikte,'' which was later remade as ''A Woman's Face'' with Joan Crawford, and one film in Germany, ''Die vier Gesellen'' (''The Four Companions'') (1938).
In the same month the film was released, she gave birth to a boy, Roberto Ingmar Rossellini (born 2 February 1950).
In ''Intermezzo'', she played the role of a young piano accompanist opposite Leslie Howard as a famous violin virtuoso.
Bergman became one of the few actresses ever to receive three Oscars when she won her third (and first in the category of Best Supporting Actress) for her performance in ''Murder on the Orient Express'' (1974).
According to one of her biographers, Charlotte Chandler (2007), she had at first considered the Nazis only a "temporary aberration, 'too foolish to be taken seriously.'
She continued her acting career while suffering from cancer for eight years, and won international honors for her final roles.
The following year, her husband arrived from Sweden with daughter Pia.
Chandler notes that the role "also had a special significance for her, as during World War II, Ingrid felt guilty because she had so misjudged the situation in Germany."
In 2007, the American Film Institute ranked Bergman as the fourth-greatest female screen legend of classic American cinema.
Academy Award for Best ActressGolden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Leading RoleNominated — New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress
He was also aware that her natural good looks would compete successfully with Hollywood's "synthetic razzle-dazzle".
Lindström stayed in Rochester, New York, where he studied medicine and surgery at the University of Rochester.
Katharine Hepburn still holds the record with four (all for Best Actress).
When the book was sold to Paramount Pictures, Hemingway stated that "Miss Bergman, and no one else should play the part."
Nominated — Academy Award for Best Actress
According to film historian David Thomson, she "always strove to be a 'true' woman", and many filmgoers identified with her:
Schmidt died on 18 October 2009.
"He let her have her way," notes a story in ''Life'' magazine.
''A Woman Called Golda''
According to Chandler, "Ingrid's rapidly deteriorating health was a more serious problem.
But her aunt also cautioned her about telling others about her possible ancestry as "there might be some difficult times coming".
Bergman and Rossellini were married on 24 May 1950.
Another aunt she visited, Elsa Adler, first told Ingrid, when she was 11, that her mother may have had "some Jewish blood," and that her father was aware of that fact long before they married.
Academy Award for Best ActressDavid di Donatello Award for Best Foreign ActressGolden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture DramaNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress
During her marriage with Lindström, Bergman had a brief affair with ''Spellbound'' costar Gregory Peck.
Later, she received a scholarship to the state-sponsored Royal Dramatic Theatre School, where Greta Garbo had some years earlier earned a similar scholarship.
After a decade in American films, she starred in Roberto Rossellini's ''Stromboli'' (1950), following the revelation that she was having an extramarital affair with the director.
Biographer Aleksandra Ziolkowska-Boehm, however, notes that the claim of Jewish blood was likely an embellishment.
Bergman was aware of Rossellini's directing style before filming, as the director had earlier written to her explaining that he worked from "a few basic ideas, developing them little by little" as a film progressed.
The rest were placed next to her parents' ashes in Norra Begravningsplatsen (Northern Cemetery), Stockholm, Sweden.
''The Bells of St. Mary's''
Her husband, Dr. Petter Lindström, remained in Sweden with their daughter Pia (born 1938).
She was offered the starring role in a television mini-series, ''A Woman Called Golda'' (1982), about the late Israeli prime minister Golda Meir.
Her daughter, Isabella, described Bergman's surprise at being offered the part and the producer trying to explain to her, "People believe you and trust you, and this is what I want, because Golda Meir had the trust of the people."
She continued to alternate between performances in American and European films for the rest of her career and also made occasional appearances in television dramas such as ''The Turn of the Screw'' (1959) for the ''Ford Startime'' TV series—for which she won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Single Performance by an Actress.
In the United States, she is considered to have brought a "Nordic freshness and vitality" to the screen, along with exceptional beauty and intelligence; David O. Selznick once called her "the most completely conscientious actress" he had ever worked with.
After her American film debut in the film ''Intermezzo: A Love Story'' (1939), co-starring Leslie Howard, Hollywood saw her as a unique actress who was completely natural in style and without need of makeup.
The film's director, Gregory Ratoff, said "She is sensational," as an actress.
It was subsequently cut by 45 minutes, but restored to full length in 1998 and released in 2004 on DVD.
Soon after the war ended, she also went to Europe for the same purpose, where she was able to see the devastation caused by the war.
I can sum it up as your naturalness.
Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play (tied with Helen Hayes for ''Happy Birthday'')
It makes you a great star.
However, Steve Allen, whose show was equally popular, did have her as a guest, later explaining "the danger of trying to judge artistic activity through the prism of one's personal life."
In March 2015, a picture of Bergman photographed by David Seymour was chosen for the main poster for the 2015 Cannes Film Festival.
Spoto notes that Bergman had, by virtue of her roles and screen persona, placed herself "above all that."
Her final film for Hitchcock was ''Under Capricorn'' (1949).
In 1978, Bergman played in Ingmar Bergman's ''Autumn Sonata'' (''Höstsonaten'') for which she received her 7th Academy Award nomination.
I'm just a woman, another human being."
For the role she received her first Academy Award nomination for Best Actress.
Bergman did not consider ''Casablanca'' to be one of her favorite performances.
According to an article in ''Life'' magazine, the "doctor regards himself as the undisputed head of the family, an idea that Ingrid accepts cheerfully."
She was "completely pleased" with her early career's management by David O. Selznick, who always found excellent dramatic roles for her to play, and equally satisfied with her salary, once saying, "I am an actress and I am interested in acting, not in making money."
In later years, she stated, "I feel about ''Casablanca'' that it has a life of its own.
As a result of the scandal, Bergman returned to Italy, leaving her husband and daughter (Pia).
Bergman later said, "People saw me in ''Joan of Arc'' and declared me a saint.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde'' (1941), ''For Whom the Bell Tolls'' (1943), ''Gaslight'' (1944), and ''The Bells of St. Mary's'' (1945).
Although known chiefly as a film star, Bergman strongly admired the great English stage actors and their craft.
Her last films for Selznick were Alfred Hitchcock's ''Spellbound'' (1945) and ''Notorious'' (1946).
Rossellini's use of a Hollywood star in his typically "neorealist" films, in which he normally used non-professional actors, did provoke some negative reactions in certain circles.
After the onset of World War II, Bergman "felt guilty because she had so misjudged the situation in Germany" while she was there filming ''Die vier Gesellen'' (The Four Companions).
Chandler notes that this was "totally against procedure" at the school, where girls were expected to complete three years of study before getting such acting roles.
David di Donatello Award for Best Foreign ActressNational Board of Review Award for Best ActressNational Society of Film Critics Award for Best ActressNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActressNominated — Academy Award for Best ActressNominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture DramaNominated — Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress
She then moved in with her Aunt Hulda and Uncle Otto, who had five children.
In this film, she played the role of Ilsa, the beautiful Norwegian wife of Victor Laszlo, played by Paul Henreid, an "anti-Nazi underground hero" who is in Casablanca, a haven from the Nazis.
Her father documented all her birthdays with a borrowed camera.
Selznick's financial problems meant that Bergman was often loaned to other studios.
(This is from a Dorothy Parker quote which became a  snowclone, "That woman speaks eighteen languages, and can't say 'No' in any of them.")
The film, according to Thomson, "was the peak of her Hollywood glory."
She had the opportunity to appear in London's West End, working with such stage stars as Michael Redgrave in ''A Month in the Country'' (1965), Sir John Gielgud in ''The Constant Wife'' (1973) and Wendy Hiller in ''Waters of the Moon'' (1977–78).
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Leading RoleNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress (also for ''Spellbound'')Nominated — Academy Award for Best Actress
On 18 June 1952 she gave birth to the twin daughters Isotta Ingrid Rossellini and Isabella Rossellini.
During the following weeks, while ''Intermezzo'' was being filmed, Selznick was also filming ''Gone with the Wind.''
Film critic James Agee wrote that she "not only bears a startling resemblance to an imaginable human being; she really knows how to act, in a blend of poetic grace with quiet realism."
Most of them were scattered in the sea around the islet of Dannholmen off the fishing village of Fjällbacka in Bohuslän, on the west coast of Sweden, where she spent most of the summers from 1958 until her death in 1982.
It was through this autobiography that her affair with Robert Capa became known.
Unlike the affair with Rossellini, that with Peck was kept private until he confessed it to Brad Darrach of ''People'' in an interview five years after Bergman's death.
She won three Academy Awards, two Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, a BAFTA Award, and the Tony Award for Best Actress.
According to ''Life,'' the impression that she left on Hollywood, after she returned to Sweden, was of a tall (5&nbsp;ft. 9 in.)
Her body was cremated at Kensal Green Cemetery, London, and her ashes taken to Sweden.
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television FilmPrimetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie
But she always "knew from the beginning that she wanted to be an actress," sometimes wearing her mother's clothes and staging plays in her father's empty studio.
She had played a nun in ''The Bells of St. Mary's'' (1945) and a virgin saint in ''Joan of Arc'' (1948).
Bergman made her first post-scandal public appearance in Hollywood in the 1958 Academy Awards, when she was the presenter of the Academy Award for Best Picture.
''Intermezzo'' became an enormous success and as a result Bergman became a star.
It was written with the help of Alan Burgess, and in it she discusses her childhood, her early career, her life during her time in Hollywood, the Rossellini scandal, and subsequent events.
National Board of Review Award for Best ActressNominated — BAFTA Award for Best Foreign ActressNominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture Drama
Nominated — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Single Performance by an Actress
She believed Germany would not start a war."
That marriage lasted nearly two decades, until 1975 when they divorced.
After returning to the United States in 1940, she acted on Broadway before continuing to do films in Hollywood.
In 1949, Bergman wrote to Rossellini, expressing this admiration and suggesting that she make a film with him.
She was a student of the acting coach Michael Chekhov during the 1940s.
Bergman was soon accepted without having to modify her looks or name, despite some early suggestions by Selznick.
Director George Cukor once summed up her contributions to the film media when he said to her, "Do you know what I especially love about you, Ingrid, my dear?
At her insistence, producer David O. Selznick agreed not to sign her to a contract – for four films rather than the then-standard seven-year period, also at her insistence – until after ''Intermezzo'' had been released.
She loved the idea and made the most of it.
She married producer Lars Schmidt, a fellow Swede, on 21 December 1958.
In 1980, Bergman's autobiography was published under the title ''Ingrid Bergman: My Story.''
''For Whom the Bell Tolls''
I've never seen anything like it."
Bergman starred in the Alfred Hitchcock films ''Spellbound'' (1945), ''Notorious'' (1946), and ''Under Capricorn'' (1949).
Bergman next played a nun in ''The Bells of St. Mary's'' (1945) opposite Bing Crosby, for which she received her third consecutive nomination for Best Actress.
He insisted she draw the line between her film and personal life, as he has a "professional dislike for being associated with the tinseled glamor of Hollywood."
In addition to Renato, they had twin daughters (born 18 June 1952): Isabella Rossellini, who became an actress and model, and Isotta Ingrid Rossellini, who became a professor of Italian literature.
After completing one last film in Sweden and appearing in three moderately successful films (''Adam Had Four Sons'', ''Rage in Heaven'' and ''Dr.
The camera loves your beauty, your acting, and your individuality.
Film historian David Thomson notes that this would become "the start of an astonishing impact on Hollywood and America" where her lack of makeup contributed to an "air of nobility."
Bergman died in 1982 on her 67th birthday in London, of breast cancer.
After a long hiatus, Bergman made the film ''Cactus Flower'' (1969), with Walter Matthau and Goldie Hawn.
This affair caused a huge scandal in the United States, where it led to Bergman being denounced on the floor of the United States Senate.
The following year, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress for ''Gaslight'' (1944), a film in which George Cukor directed her as a "wife driven close to madness" by co-star Charles Boyer.
She arrived in Los Angeles on 6 May 1939, and stayed at the Selznick home until she could find another residence.
In the film, Bergman plays a celebrity pianist who travels to Norway to visit her neglected daughter, played by Liv Ullmann.
Bergman went to Alaska during World War II to entertain US Army troops.
:"She had chosen a very small part, and I couldn't persuade her to change her mind.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde'', all 1941) in the United States, Bergman co-starred with Humphrey Bogart in the classic film ''Casablanca'' (1942), which remains her best-known role.
When she was two years old, her mother died.
This led to a lot of publicity and some hate mail.
But stubborn she was...
After her death, her daughter Pia accepted her Emmy.
There is something mystical about it.
