'', the character of McCroskey (Lloyd Bridges) refers to his inhalant use when he states, "I picked the wrong week to quit sniffing glue."
This isolation can make it harder to keep in touch with the sniffer and encourage him or her to stop sniffing."
In 2012, the issue once again made the news media in Canada.
No, I am speaking about imbibing alcohol."
One of the early musical references to inhalant use occurs in the 1974 Elton John song "The Bitch Is Back", in the line "I get high in the evening sniffing pots of glue."
Despite being moved to the new community of Natuashish in 2002, serious inhalant abuse problems have continued.
In Mexico, the inhaling of a mixture of gasoline and industrial solvents, known locally as "Activo" or "Chemo", has risen in popularity among the homeless and among the street children of Mexico City in recent years.
These groups almost always use inhalants at very high levels (Leal et al.
Regardless of which inhalant is used, administration can lead to injury or death.
Violators can be fined up to $100."
Ether was either sniffed or drunk and, in some towns, replaced alcohol entirely.
'''Inhalants''' are a broad range of intoxicative drugs whose gases or volatile vapors are breathed in via the nose or mouth.
Neither of them suffered any side effects other than their voices becoming much deeper while in the room.
Inhalant use, especially glue sniffing, is widely associated with the late-1970s punk youth subculture in the UK and North America.
Even though many inhalants are legal, there have been legal actions taken in some jurisdictions to limit access by minors.
Glue and gasoline sniffing is also a problem in parts of Africa, especially with street children.
nitrous oxide (found in whipped cream canisters)
As with any recreational drug, users can be injured due to dangerous behavior while they are intoxicated, such as driving under the influence.
Some inhalant users are injured due to the harmful effects of the solvents or gases or due to other chemicals used in the products that they are inhaling.
Fallon's character asks if it is possible to die from nitrous oxide, to which Queen Latifah's character responds with "It's laughing gas, stupid!"
Australia has long faced a petrol (gasoline) sniffing problem in isolated and impoverished aboriginal communities.
Actual overdose from the drug does occur, however, and inhaled solvent abuse is statistically more likely to result in life-threatening respiratory depression than intravenous use of opiates such as heroin.
Some harm reduction experts encourage glue sniffers to use paper bags rather than thin plastic bags, because plastic bags greatly increase the risk of suffocation, as plastic bags are more likely to stick to the users' nose and mouth while she or he is intoxicated.
In the UK, marginalized youth use a number of inhalants, such as solvents and propellants.
It is also possible to classify inhalants by the effect they have on the body.
The song is about chloroethane and its widespread recreational sale and use during the rise of Brazil's carnivals.
In the series ''It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia'', Charlie Kelly has an addiction to huffing glue.
In the tragicomedy ''Love Liza'', the main character, played by Philip Seymour Hoffman, plays a man who takes up building remote-controlled airplanes as a hobby to give him an excuse to sniff the fuel in the wake of his wife's suicide.
Khaliq v HM Advocate was a Scottish criminal case decided by the High Court of Justiciary on appeal, in which it was decided that it was an offence at common law to supply glue sniffing materials that were otherwise legal in the knowledge that they would be used recreationally by children.
The 1990s grunge band Nirvana, which was influenced by punk music, penned a song, "Dumb", in which Kurt Cobain sings "my heart is broke/But I have some glue/help me inhale /And mend it with you".
Visits to retail outlets selling these products reveal that some manufacturers have since reformulated their products to abide by the regulations, through the use of the legal cyclohexyl nitrite as the primary ingredient in their products, which are sold as video head cleaners, polish removers, or room odorants.
The 1999 independent film ''Boys Don't Cry'' depicts two young low-income women inhaling aerosol computer cleaner (compressed gas) for a buzz.
A number of 1970s punk rock and 1980s hardcore punk songs refer to inhalant use.
Sales that are not authorized can now be punished with fines and prison.
A small number of recreational inhalant drugs are pharmaceutical products that are used illicitly.
Similar incidents of glue sniffing among destitute youth in the Philippines have also been reported, most commonly from groups of street children and teenagers collectively known as "Rugby" boys, which were named after a brand of toluene-laden contact cement.
A person who has inhaled a small amount of rubber cement or paint thinner vapor may be impaired in a manner resembling alcohol inebriation.
Research conducted by Cottrell-Boyce for the African Journal of Drug and Alcohol Studies found that glue sniffing amongst Kenyan street children was primarily functional – dulling the senses against the hardship of life on the street – but it also provided a link to the support structure of the "street family" as a potent symbol of shared experience.
On appeal, the High Court took the view that, even though glue and plastic bags might be perfectly legal, everyday items, the two shopkeepers knew perfectly well that the children were going to use the articles as inhalants and the charge on the indictment should stand.
For example, amyl nitrite and toluene – the solvent used in contact cement and model airplane glue – are considered inhalants, but tobacco, cannabis, and crack are not, even though the latter are also inhaled (as smoke).
A number of gases intended for household or industrial use are inhaled as recreational drugs.
However, most users tend to be "...adolescents (between the ages of 12 and 17)."
Most deaths from solvent abuse could be prevented if individuals were resuscitated quickly when they stopped breathing and their airway cleared if they vomited.
Certain solvents are more hazardous than others, such as gasoline.
The 1980s punk band The Dead Milkmen wrote a song, "Life is Shit" from their album ''Beelzebubba'', about two friends hallucinating after sniffing glue.
When a gas that was stored under high pressure is released, it cools abruptly and can cause frostbite if it is inhaled directly from the container (when nitrous oxide is used as an automotive power adder, its cooling effect is used to make the fuel-air charge denser.
It defines restricted substances as... specific volatile substances if they are sold, compounded, possessed or controlled, or delivered or administered to another person for breathing, inhaling, sniffing, or drinking to induce a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect.
It has become very common for school and college students to use it, because it is easily available in stationery shops in India.
Toxicity may also result from the pharmacological properties of the drug; excess NMDA antagonism can completely block calcium influx into neurons and provoke cell death through apoptosis, although this is more likely to be a long-term result of chronic solvent abuse than a consequence of short-term use.
There are three main product categories: solvents; gases; and medical drugs which are used illicitly.
According to NIH, even a single session of inhalant abuse "can disrupt heart rhythms and lower oxygen levels", which can lead to death.
The South African film ''The Wooden Camera'' also depicts the use of inhalants by one of the main characters, a homeless teen, and their use in terms of socio-economic stratification.
As well, using inhalants was a way of expressing their anti-corporatist DIY (do it yourself) credo; by using inexpensive household products as inhalants, punks did not have to purchase industrially manufactured liquor or beer.
When the case came to trial at Glasgow High Court the two were sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
Although some sources argue that sniffing was introduced by United States servicemen stationed in the nation's Top End during World War II or through experimentation by 1940s-era Cobourg Peninsula sawmill workers, other sources claim that inhalant abuse (such as glue inhalation) emerged in Australia in the late 1960s.
In the short term, death from solvent abuse occurs most commonly from aspiration of vomit while unconscious or from a combination of respiratory depression and hypoxia, the second cause being especially a risk with heavier-than-air vapors such as butane or gasoline vapor.
In the David Lynch film ''Blue Velvet'', the bizarre and manipulative character played by Dennis Hopper uses a mask to inhale amyl nitrite.
"...Nothing left to do but get out the 'ol glue; Parents, parents; Sniff it good now..."
Nitrous oxide is thought to be particularly non-toxic, though long-term use can lead to a variety of serious health problems linked to destruction of vitamin B12 and folic acid.
", to which another character replies: "Hardly.
In France, the sale of products containing butyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite, or isomers thereof, has been prohibited since 1990 on grounds of danger to consumers.
"New Jersey... prohibits selling or offering to sell minors products containing chlorofluorocarbon that is used in refrigerant."
In July 1997, it was estimated that there were around 200 young people sniffing petrol across 10 communities in Central Australia.
There have been reports of young Aboriginal people sniffing petrol in the urban areas around Darwin and Alice Springs.
In the US, thirty-eight of 50 states have enacted laws making various inhalants unavailable to those under the age of 18, or making inhalant use illegal.
"Thirty-eight of 50 US states have enacted laws making various inhalants unavailable to those under the age of 18.
It may be severely under-reported, because death is often attributed to a discrete event such as a stroke or a heart attack, even if the event happened because of inhalant abuse.
When inhaling non-stick cooking spray or other aerosol products, some users may filter the aerosolized particles out with a rag.
In the third episode of season 5 of ''American Dad!
Solvents such as toluene and gasoline act as depressants, causing users to feel relaxed and sleepy.
In 1985, there were 14 communities in Central Australia reporting young people sniffing.
Once full symptoms of hypoxia appear, it may be too late to breathe without assistance, especially if the gas is heavy enough to lodge in the lungs for extended periods.
The mechanisms of action of many non-medical inhalants have not been well elucidated.
The Canadian and provincial Newfoundland and Labrador governments intervened on a number of occasions, sending many children away for treatment.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has reported that glue sniffing is at the core of "street culture" in Nairobi, Kenya, and that the majority of street children in the city are habitual solvent users.
The song "Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue" describes adolescent boredom, and the song "Carbona not Glue" states, "My brain is stuck from shooting glue."
Brain damage is typically seen with chronic long-term use as opposed to short-term exposure.
Other states prohibit the sale of these items to anyone without recognition of purpose for purchase.
This makes inhaled anesthetic gases different from other NMDA antagonists, such as ketamine, which bind to a regulatory site on the NMDA-sensitive calcium transporter complex and provide slightly lower levels of NMDA blockade, but for a longer and much more predictable duration.
Such laws usually ban distribution to minors or limit the amount of nitrous oxide that may be sold without special license.
The science fiction story "Waterspider" by Philip K. Dick (first published in January 1964 in ''If'' magazine) contains a scene in which characters from the future are discussing the culture of the early 1950s.
Two shopkeepers in Glasgow were arrested and charged with supplying to children "glue-sniffing kits" consisting of a quantity of petroleum-based glue in a plastic bag.
Opal is a non-sniffable fuel (which is much less likely to cause a high) and has made a difference in some indigenous communities.
Some gases, such as propane and butane gases, are inhaled directly from the canister.
Approximately 40 were classified as chronic sniffers.
"Boss", or chronic, sniffers may move in and out of communities; they are often responsible for encouraging young people to take it up.
Some inhalants can also indirectly cause sudden death by cardiac arrest, in a syndrome known as "sudden sniffing death".
An odor of paint or solvents on clothes, skin, and breath is sometimes a sign of inhalant abuse, and paint or solvent residues can sometimes emerge in sweat.
Pop punk band Sum 41 wrote a song, "Fat Lip", which refers to a character who does not "... make sense from all the gas you be huffing..." The song ''Lança-perfume'', written and performed by Brazilian popstar Rita Lee, became a national hit in 1980.
In the 1996 film ''Citizen Ruth'', the character Ruth (Laura Dern), a homeless drifter, is depicted inhaling patio sealant from a paper bag in an alleyway.
In the show ''Squidbilles'', the main character Early Cuyler is often seen inhaling gas or other substances.
Another way to categorize inhalants is by their product category.
This 1983 study did not find any common usage patterns or social class factors.
Since 2007, reformulated poppers containing isopropyl nitrite are sold in Europe because only isobutyl nitrite is prohibited.
Other alkyl nitrites were outlawed in the U.S. by Congress through the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988.
Several remixes of scenes from Allison's episode can be found online.
In the United Kingdom, poppers are widely available and frequently (legally) sold in gay clubs/bars, sex shops, drug paraphernalia head shops, over the Internet and on markets.
The film ''Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas'' describes how the two main characters inhale diethyl ether and amyl nitrite.
It is illegal under Medicines Act 1968 to sell them advertised for human consumption, and in order to bypass this, they are usually sold as odorizers.
During a flashback scene in the 2001 film ''Hannibal'', Hannibal Lecter gets Mason Verger high on amyl nitrite poppers, then convinces Verger to cut off his own face and feed it to his dogs.
This includes petroleum products (gasoline and kerosene), toluene (used in paint thinner, contact cement and model glue), and acetone (used in nail polish remover).
L7, an all-female grunge band, penned a song titled "Scrap" about a skinhead who inhales spray-paint fumes until his mind "starts to gel".
The article also states that "...high inhalant use rates among barrio Hispanics almost undoubtedly are related to the poverty, lack of opportunity, and social dysfunction that occur in barrios" and states that the "...same general tendency appears for Native-American youth" because "...Indian reservations are among the most disadvantaged environments in the United States; there are high rates of unemployment, little opportunity, and high rates of alcoholism and other health problems."
Hip hop performer Eminem wrote a song, "Bad Meets Evil", which refers to breathing "...ether in three lethal amounts."
In the action movie ''Shooter'', an ex-serviceman on the run from the law (Mark Wahlberg) inhales nitrous oxide gas from a number of Whip-It!
Butane is the most commonly misused volatile solvent in the UK and caused 52% of solvent-related deaths in 2000.
Solvents have many potential risks in common, including pneumonia, cardiac failure or arrest, and aspiration of vomit.
Several other manufacturers have also followed suit.
Because India's Food & Drug Authority (FDA-India) rules state that transferring a drug from one container to another (refilling) is equivalent to manufacturing, anyone found doing so must possess a drug manufacturing license.
Serious but potentially reversible effects include liver and kidney damage and blood-oxygen depletion.
The effects of solvent intoxication can vary widely depending on the dose and what type of solvent or gas is inhaled.
There are a wide range of social problems associated with inhalant use, such as feelings of distress, anxiety and grief for the community; violence and damage to property; violent crime; stresses on the juvenile justice system; and stresses on youth agencies and support services.
The sale of alkyl nitrite-based poppers was banned in Canada in 2013.
In Canada, Native children in the isolated Northern Labrador community of Davis Inlet were the focus of national concern in 1993, when many were found to be sniffing gasoline.
The Ramones, an influential early US punk band, referred to inhalant use in several of their songs.
Female inhalant users who are pregnant may have adverse effects on the fetus, and the baby may be smaller when it is born and may need additional health care (similar to those seen with alcohol – fetal alcohol syndrome).
Even though solvent glue is normally a legal product, there is a case where a court has ruled that supplying glue to children is illegal.
In the short term, many users experience headache, nausea and vomiting, slurred speech, loss of motor coordination, and wheezing.
Although not considered a narcotic and not illegal to possess or use, they are considered a drug.
Most inhalant solvents and gases are not regulated under drug laws such as the United States' Controlled Substances Act.
Some states mandate laws against using these products for purposes of getting high, while some states have laws about possessing certain inhalants.
Once these solvents or gases are inhaled, the extensive capillary surface of the lungs rapidly absorb the solvent or gas, and blood levels peak rapidly.
As with many other drugs, users may also injure themselves due to loss of coordination or impaired judgment, especially if they attempt to drive.
The effects of inhalant use are also modified by the combined use of inhalants and alcohol or other drugs.
In Australia, petrol sniffing now occurs widely throughout remote Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory, Western Australia, northern parts of South Australia and Queensland.
Chronic, heavy petrol sniffing appears to occur among remote, impoverished indigenous communities, where the ready accessibility of petrol has helped to make it a common substance for abuse.
Nitrous oxide gases from whipped cream aerosol cans, aerosol hairspray or non-stick frying spray are sprayed into plastic bags.
whipped cream canisters until he becomes unconscious.
Death from inhalants is generally caused by a very high concentration of fumes.
Similar problems were reported in Sheshatshiu in 2000 and also in Pikangikum First Nation.
Harmony Korine's 1997 ''Gummo'' depicts adolescent boys inhaling contact cement for a high.
Inhalants can be classified by the intended function.
Young people who become chronic, heavy inhalant abusers are also more likely to be those who are isolated from their families and community.
During the Interbellum the inhalation of ether (etheromania) was widespread in some regions of Poland, especially in Upper Silesia—tens of thousands of people were affected by this problem.
Nitrous oxide inhalation can cause analgesia, depersonalisation, derealisation, dizziness, euphoria, and some sound distortion.
The intoxication effects occur so quickly that the effects of inhalation can resemble the intensity of effects produced by intravenous injection of other psychoactive drugs.
Another very common inhalant is Erase-X, a correction fluid that contains toluene.
In some cases, users have died from hypoxia (lack of oxygen), pneumonia, cardiac failure or arrest, or aspiration of vomit.
Some nitrous oxide users spray the gas into balloons.
The article "Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: An International Perspective" notes that "the most serious form of obsession with inhalant use probably occurs in countries other than the United States where young children live on the streets completely without family ties.
While solvent glue is normally a legal product, a Scottish court has ruled that supplying glue to children is illegal if the store knows the children intend to abuse the glue.
One history of the punk subculture argues that "substance abuse was often referred to in the music and did become synonymous with the genre, glue sniffing especially" because the youths' "...faith in the future had died and that the youth just didn't care anymore" due to the "awareness of the threat of nuclear war and a pervasive sense of doom."
However, most inhalant abuse takes place when people inhale solvents by themselves or in groups of people who are intoxicated.
That was a mania among adolescents and did not become widespread in fact until a decade later.
One episode of the ''Jeremy Kyle Show'' featured a woman with a 20-year butane gas addiction.
"Louisiana prohibits the sale, transfer, or possession of model glue and inhalable toluene substances to minors.
Statistics on deaths caused by inhalant abuse are difficult to determine.
The practices are known colloquially as "sniffing", "huffing" or "bagging".
According to a 1995 report by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the most serious inhalant abuse occurs among homeless children and teens who "...live on the streets completely without family ties."
Also in the 1990s, the Britpop band Suede had a UK hit with their song "Animal Nitrate" whose title is a thinly veiled reference to amyl nitrite.
Frank Zappa's song "Teenage Wind" from 1981 has a reference to glue sniffing:
Deliberately inhaling solvents from an attached paper or plastic bag or in a closed area greatly increases the chances of suffocation.
Nitrous oxide is a dental anesthetic which is used as a recreational drug, either by users who have access to medical grade gas canisters (e.g., dental hygienists or dentists) or by using the gas contained in whipped cream aerosol containers.
'', titled "Home Adrone", Roger asks an airline stewardess to bring him industrial adhesive and a plastic bag.
Use of glue, paint and gasoline became more common after the 1950s.
In the 1999 horror-thriller novel "Hannibal" by Thomas Harris, psychiatrist Hannibal Lecter gets his patient Mason Verger high on amyl nitrite poppers, then convinces the intoxicated Verger to cut off his own face and feed it to his dogs.
There is some evidence of birth defects and disabilities in babies born to women who sniffed solvents such as gasoline.
He was a 'glue-sniffer'?
The Brian Jonestown Massacre, a retro-rock band from the 1990s, has a song "Hyperventilation", which is about sniffing model-airplane cement.
Deaths typically occur from complications related to excessive sedation and vomiting.
Since reflexive breathing is prompted by elevated carbon dioxide levels (rather than diminished blood oxygen levels), breathing a concentrated, relatively inert gas (such as computer-duster tetrafluoroethane or nitrous oxide) that removes carbon dioxide from the blood without replacing it with oxygen will produce no outward signs of suffocation even when the brain is experiencing hypoxia.
Abuse of aerosol sprays became more common in the 1980s, as older propellants such as CFCs were phased out and replaced by more environmentally friendly compounds such as propane and butane.
In some countries, chronic, heavy inhalant use is concentrated in marginalized, impoverished communities.
Additionally, season nine episode 8 shows Dennis, Mac and Dee getting a can of gasoline to use as a solvent, but instead end up taking turns huffing from the canister.
In the 2004 film ''Taxi'', Queen Latifah and Jimmy Fallon are trapped in a room with a burst tank containing nitrous oxide.
The causes of death for inhalant users in Australia included pneumonia, cardiac failure/arrest, aspiration of vomit, and burns.
In 2005, the Government of Australia and BP Australia began the usage of opal fuel in remote areas prone to petrol sniffing.
Bostik Philippines, which currently owns the Rugby and Vulca Seal brands, has since responded to the issue by adding bitterants such as mustard oil to their Rugby line, as well as reformulating it by replacing toluene with xylene.
However, the risk of death from excessive sedation or overdose is greater than that with alcohol, and ether drinking is associated with damage to the stomach and gastrointestinal tract.
"Connecticut law bans the unauthorized manufacture or compounding, possession, control, sale, delivery, or administration of any "restricted substance".
A 1983 survey of 4,165 secondary students in New South Wales showed that solvents and aerosols ranked just after analgesics (e.g., codeine pills) and alcohol for drugs that were abused.
Some states draw their prohibitions more narrowly...In Massachusetts, retailers must ask minors for identification before selling them glue or cement that contains a solvent that can release toxic vapors."
They argued there was nothing illegal about the items that they had supplied.
Even completely inert gases, such as argon, can have this effect if oxygen is largely excluded.
An influential punk fanzine about the subculture and music took its name (''Sniffin' Glue'') from the Ramones song.
Other agents may have more direct effects at receptors.
Many inhalants are volatile organic chemicals and can catch fire or explode, especially when combined with smoking.
Many inhalants act primarily as asphyxiant gases, with their primary effect due to oxygen deprivation.
Allison has since achieved a small but significant cult following among bloggers and YouTube users.
Inhalant users inhale vapors or aerosol propellant gases using plastic bags held over the mouth or by breathing from an open container of solvents, such as gasoline or paint thinner.
In New Zealand, the Ministry of Health has warned that nitrous oxide is a prescription medicine, and its sale or possession without a prescription is an offence under the Medicines Act.
Inhalant use or abuse was mentioned on 144 death certificates in Texas during the period 1988–1998 and was reported in 39 deaths in Virginia between 1987 and 1996 from acute voluntary exposure to abused inhalants.
However, many US states and Canadian cities have placed restrictions on the sale of some solvent-containing products to minors, particularly for products widely associated with sniffing, such as model cement.
The number of people sniffing petrol goes up and down over time as young people experiment or sniff occasionally.
Diethyl ether has a long history of use as a recreational drug.
In the seventh episode of the fourteenth season of South Park, Towelie, an anthropomorphic towel, develops an addiction to inhaling computer duster.
Inhaling butane gas can cause drowsiness, narcosis, asphyxia, and cardiac arrhythmia.
Nearly every state imposes fines and jail terms for violation of their specific laws."
In contrast, a few inhalants like amyl nitrate and diethyl ether have medical applications and are less harmful, though they are still dangerous when used recreationally.
Primus's 1998 song "Lacquer Head" is about adolescents who use inhalants to get high.
In the  U.S., originally marketed as a prescription drug in 1937, amyl nitrite remained so until 1960, when the Food and Drug Administration removed the prescription requirement due to its safety record.
A gas used as a propellant in whipped cream aerosol containers, nitrous oxide, is used as a recreational drug.
This includes chlorofluorocarbons used in aerosols and propellants (e.g., hair spray).
A characteristic "glue sniffer's rash" around the nose and mouth is sometimes seen after prolonged use.
In the French horror film ''Them'', (2006) a French couple living in Romania are pursued by a gang of street children who break into their home at night.
The documentary ''Children Underground'' depicts the huffing of a solvent called Aurolac (a product used in chroming) by Romanian homeless children.
This requirement was reinstated in 1969, after observation of an increase in recreational use.
The effects of inhalants range from an alcohol-like intoxication and intense euphoria to vivid hallucinations, depending on the substance and the dose.
Also, due to NMDA antagonism, the user may experience all the psychedelic effects present in classical dissociatives such as ketamine in forms of thought loops and feeling of mind being disconnected from one's body.
Brain damage is typically seen with chronic long-term use as opposed to short-term exposure.
