Obtect pupae are compact, with the legs and other appendages enclosed.
At least a few insects have nociceptors, cells that detect and transmit signals responsible for the sensation of pain.
The word "insect" comes from the Latin word '''', meaning "with a notched or divided body", or literally "cut into", from the neuter singular perfect passive participle of , "to cut into, to cut up", from ''in''- "into" and ''secare'' "to cut"; because insects appear "cut into" three sections.
The middle segment is the mesothorax, with the major features being the second pair of legs and the anterior wings.
Insects that undergo 3-stage metamorphosis lack a pupal stage and adults develop through a series of nymphal stages.
Holometabolism, or complete metamorphosis, is where the insect changes in four stages, an egg or embryo, a larva, a pupa and the adult or imago.
Silkworms and bees have been used extensively by humans for the production of silk and honey, respectively.
There are many different patterns of gas exchange demonstrated by different groups of insects.
In peramorphosis, an opposite sort of phenomenon, insects take on previously unseen traits after they have matured into adults.
Most sound-making insects also have tympanal organs that can perceive airborne sounds.
Insects may be ''univoltine'', ''bivoltine'' or ''multivoltine'', i.e.
The number of eggs that the insect is able to make vary by the number of ovarioles with the rate that eggs can be develop being also influenced by ovariole design.
The silkworm has greatly affected human history, as silk-driven trade established relationships between China and the rest of the world.
The Apterygota consist of the primitively wingless order of the silverfish (Thysanura).
This gigantism may have been due to higher atmospheric oxygen levels that allowed increased respiratory efficiency relative to today.
Here, the vertex, or the apex (dorsal region), is situated between the compound eyes for insects with a hypognathous and opisthognathous head.
Male moths can sense the pheromones of female moths over great distances.
The remarkably successful Hymenoptera appeared as long as 146 million years ago in the Cretaceous period, but achieved their wide diversity more recently in the Cenozoic era, which began 66 million years ago.
The flies and moths along with the fleas evolved from the Mecoptera.
The follicles connect to the vas deferens by the vas efferens, and the two tubular vasa deferentia connect to a median ejaculatory duct that leads to the outside.
Such a mimicry complex is referred to as ''Batesian'' and is most commonly known by the mimicry by the limenitidine Viceroy butterfly of the inedible danaine Monarch.
Insects are the only invertebrates to have developed active flight capability, and this has played an important role in their success.
The seminal vesicles have glandular linings that secrete nutrients for nourishment and maintenance of the sperm.
While birds are perhaps more visible predators of insects, insects themselves account for the vast majority of insect consumption.
Insects have a high protein content for their mass, and some authors suggest their potential as a major source of protein in human nutrition.
Many modern insect genera developed during the Cenozoic.
For example, when moving slowly, turning, or avoiding obstacles, four or more feet may be touching the ground.
"Insect" first appears documented in English in 1601 in Holland's translation of Pliny.
Kairomones benefit their receiver instead of their producer.
More sedate locomotion is seen in the stick insects or walking sticks (Phasmatodea).
Different insect species can have varying hearing, though most insects can hear only a narrow range of frequencies related to the frequency of the sounds they can produce.
The higher-level phylogeny of the arthropods continues to be a matter of debate and research.
The anterior segment, closest to the head, is the prothorax, with the major features being the first pair of legs and the pronotum.
Dragonfly naiads use jet propulsion, forcibly expelling water out of their rectal chamber.
Many insects possess very sensitive and, or specialized organs of perception.
Many insects are considered pests by humans.
Microscopic projections from the midgut wall, called microvilli, increase the surface area of the wall and allow more nutrients to be absorbed; they tend to be close to the origin of the midgut.
Neoptera can further be divided into incomplete metamorphosis-based (Polyneoptera and Paraneoptera) and complete metamorphosis-based groups.
Insect pollinators are essential to the life-cycle of many flowering plant species on which most organisms, including humans, are at least partly dependent; without them, the terrestrial portion of the biosphere (including humans) would be devastated.
These wagging movements can signal the arrival of new material into the nest and aggression between workers can be used to stimulate others to increase foraging expeditions.
Many of the traditional appearance-based taxa have been shown to be paraphyletic, so rather than using ranks like subclass, superorder, and infraorder, it has proved better to use monophyletic groupings (in which the last common ancestor is a member of the group).
The most familiar group are the fireflies, beetles of the family Lampyridae.
These insects, and others, are responsible for much of the process by which topsoil is created.
The ultrasonic clicks were subsequently found to be produced mostly by unpalatable moths to warn bats, just as warning colorations are used against predators that hunt by sight.
The segments of the body are organized into three distinctive but interconnected units, or tagmata: a head, a thorax and an abdomen.
In Müllerian mimicry, inedible species, usually within a taxonomic order, find it advantageous to resemble each other so as to reduce the sampling rate by predators who need to learn about the insects' inedibility.
Amongst the Aborigines of Australia of the Arrernte language groups, honey ants and witchety grubs served as personal clan totems.
In some insects, the role of the microvilli and where they are located may vary.
Thus, the first insects probably appeared earlier, in the Silurian period.
The Thysanura themselves possibly are not monophyletic, with the family Lepidotrichidae being a sister group to the Dicondylia (Pterygota and the remaining Thysanura).
While some chemicals are targeted at individuals of the same species, others are used for communication across species.
Terga are separated from each other and from the adjacent sterna or pleura by membranes.
The procuticle is chitinous and much thicker than the epicuticle and has two layers: an outer layer known as the exocuticle and an inner layer known as the endocuticle.
The respiratory system is an important factor that limits the size of insects.
These chemicals, termed semiochemicals, are often derived from plant metabolites include those meant to attract, repel and provide other kinds of information.
In this communication system, called dance language, the angle at which a bee dances represents a direction relative to the sun, and the length of the dance represents the distance to be flown.
Certain predatory and parasitic insects can detect the characteristic sounds made by their prey or hosts, respectively.
This system is typical in bees and wasps.
Some insects, like flies, have extra-oral digestion.
The immature stages are small, move slowly or are immobile, and so all stages are exposed to predation and parasitism.
The largest flying insects today are much smaller and include several moth species such as the Atlas moth and the White Witch (''Thysania agrippina'').
Air is taken in through openings on the sides of the abdomen called spiracles.
The ovaries are made up of a number of egg tubes, called ovarioles, which vary in size and number by species.
Complete metamorphosis is unique to a group of certain insect orders including Diptera, Lepidoptera and Hymenoptera.
This worm-like form can be one of several varieties: eruciform (caterpillar-like), scarabaeiform (grub-like), campodeiform (elongated, flattened and active), elateriform (wireworm-like) or vermiform (maggot-like).
As it allows for rapid yet stable movement, many insects adopt a tripedal gait in which they walk with their legs touching the ground in alternating triangles.
Insect life-histories show adaptations to withstand cold and dry conditions.
Honey bees have been cultured by humans for thousands of years for honey, although contracting for crop pollination is becoming more significant for beekeepers.
Some species have the ability to change color as their surroundings shift (''B.
Insect flight has been a topic of great interest in aerodynamics due partly to the inability of steady-state theories to explain the lift generated by the tiny wings of insects.
macklotti'' and ''Palophus centaurus'') are covered in mossy or lichenous outgrowths that supplement their disguise.
Ants also help control animal populations by consuming small vertebrates.
Traditional morphology-based or appearance-based systematics have usually given the Hexapoda the rank of superclass, and identified four groups within it: insects (Ectognatha), springtails (Collembola), Protura, and Diplura, the latter three being grouped together as the Entognatha on the basis of internalized mouth parts.
Some other species, such as those in the genus of cockroaches known as ''Diploptera'', are viviparous, and thus gestate inside the mother and are born alive.
Most of this food is ingested in the form of macromolecules and other complex substances like proteins, polysaccharides, fats and nucleic acids.
Mosquitoes have been found to hear up to 2&nbsp;kHz, and some grasshoppers can hear up to 50&nbsp;kHz.
Many of those that live in sandy environments blend in with the coloration of the substrate.
These four groups account for the majority of described species.
Many species are able to detect light in the infrared, ultraviolet and the visible light wavelengths.
However, overall, most individuals are female, which are produced by fertilization.
The exocuticle is greatly reduced in many soft-bodied insects (e.g., caterpillars), especially during their larval stages.
Insect respiration is accomplished without lungs.
melanogaster'' has been an essential part of studies into principles like genetic linkage, interactions between genes, chromosomal genetics, development, behavior and evolution.
Only insects which live in nests or colonies demonstrate any true capacity for fine-scale spatial orientation or homing.
Insects undergo considerable change in form during the pupal stage, and emerge as adults.
In some species, this region is modified and assumes a different name.
Still other insects have evolved mechanisms of diapause that allow eggs or pupae to survive these conditions.
The alimentary canal directs food unidirectionally from the mouth to the anus.
The ejaculatory duct is derived from an invagination of the epidermal cells during development and, as a result, has a cuticular lining.
Pliny the Elder introduced the Latin designation as a  loan-translation of the Greek word  (''éntomos'') or "insect" (as in entomology), which was Aristotle's term for this class of life, also in reference to their "notched" bodies.
A portion of the vas deferens is often enlarged to form the seminal vesicle, which stores the sperm before they are discharged into the female.
Predators that eat poisonous butterflies and moths may become sick and vomit violently, learning not to eat those types of species; this is actually the basis of Müllerian mimicry.
Since oxygen is delivered directly, the circulatory system is not used to carry oxygen, and is therefore greatly reduced.
Insects are capable of learning.
The foregut is lined with a cuticular lining made of chitin and proteins as protection from tough food.
Some entomologists suggest that the wings are from paranotal lobes, or extensions from the insect's exoskeleton called the nota, called the ''paranotal theory''.
In modern insects there is a tendency toward reduction in the number of the abdominal segments, but the primitive number of 11 is maintained during embryogenesis.
The adult does not contact the growing offspring, but it nonetheless does provide food.
A recent theory is that the Hexapoda are polyphyletic (where the last common ancestor was not a member of the group), with the entognath classes having separate evolutionary histories from the Insecta.
Taxa from the toxic genus ''Heliconius'' form one of the most well known Müllerian complexes.
The insect circulatory system has no veins or arteries, and instead consists of little more than a single, perforated dorsal tube which pulses peristaltically.
It has three sections, each of which performs a different process of digestion.
It was found that 70% of the fly genome is similar to the human genome, supporting the evolution theory.
Insects are the only group of invertebrates to have developed flight.
Some insects may retain phenotypes that are normally only seen in juveniles; this is called paedomorphosis.
A serious environmental problem is the decline of populations of pollinator insects, and a number of species of insects are now cultured primarily for pollination management in order to have sufficient pollinators in the field, orchard or greenhouse at bloom time.
Many of these species have adaptations to help in under-water locomotion.
Some insects, like wasps, bees, butterflies and ants, pollinate flowering plants.
The respiratory system of insects constrains their size, however the high oxygen in the atmosphere allowed larger sizes.
This form of development is exclusive and not seen in any other arthropods.
Some insects have evolved this system to hypermetamorphosis.
Insects are mostly solitary, but some, such as certain bees, ants and termites, are social and live in large, well-organized colonies.
Due to the abundance of insects and a worldwide concern of food shortages, the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations considers that the world may have to, in the future, regard the prospects of eating insects as a food staple.
Some Lepidoptera manufacture their own toxins.
The evolution of insect wings has been a subject of debate.
If used carelessly, the poison can kill all kinds of organisms in the area, including insects' natural predators, such as birds, mice and other insectivores.
Insects make sounds mostly by mechanical action of appendages.
Coarctate pupae develop inside the larval skin.
A recent study estimated the number of beetles at 0.9–2.1 million with a mean of 1.5 million.
The first three pairs of ganglia are fused into the brain, while the three following pairs are fused into a structure of three pairs of ganglia under the insect's esophagus, called the subesophageal ganglion.
Many of the early groups became extinct during the Permian-Triassic extinction event, the largest mass extinction in the history of the Earth, around 252 million years ago.
Paleoptera and Neoptera are the winged orders of insects differentiated by the presence of hardened body parts called sclerites, and in the Neoptera, muscles that allow their wings to fold flatly over the abdomen.
Accessory glands or glandular parts of the oviducts produce a variety of substances for sperm maintenance, transport and fertilization, as well as for protection of eggs.
With each molt, nymphs grow larger and become more similar in appearance to adult insects.
In Schizophora however the serosa does not develop, but these flies lay their eggs in damp places, such as rotting matter.
The earliest vertebrates on land existed 400 million years ago and were large amphibious piscivores.
The number of extant species is estimated at between six and ten million, and potentially represent over 90% of the differing animal life forms on Earth.
Many adult insects use six legs for walking and have adopted a tripedal gait.
For the first step, the middle right leg and the front and rear left legs are in contact with the ground and move the insect forward, while the front and rear right leg and the middle left leg are lifted and moved forward to a new position.
The body plan, or morphology, of such specimens is thus easily compared with modern species.
Most extinct orders of insects developed during the Permian period that began around 270 million years ago.
When this stage is complete, the insect makes its body swell by taking in a large quantity of water or air, which makes the old cuticle split along predefined weaknesses where the old exocuticle was thinnest.
Some otherwise palatable moths have evolved to mimic these calls.
Many entomologists are involved in various forms of pest control, as in research for companies to produce insecticides, but increasingly rely on methods of biological pest control, or biocontrol.
In Mesopotamian literature, the epic poem of Gilgamesh has allusions to Odonata which signify the impossibility of immortality.
Most insects are also able to sense vibrations transmitted through surfaces.
Female insects are able make eggs, receive and store sperm, manipulate sperm from different males, and lay eggs.
For instance, some nocturnal moths can perceive the ultrasonic emissions of bats, which helps them avoid predation.
As the salivary glands produce fluid and carbohydrate-digesting enzymes (mostly amylases), strong muscles in the pharynx pump fluid into the buccal cavity, lubricating the food like the salivarium does, and helping blood feeders, and xylem and phloem feeders.
Some insects perform complex ecological roles; blow-flies, for example, help consume carrion but also spread diseases.
Many insects have a parasitic relationship with humans such as the mosquito.
Insects then have a variety of defense strategies to avoid being attacked by predators or parasitoids.
The effects of DDT's use exemplifies how some insecticides can threaten wildlife beyond intended populations of pest insects.
The immature stages can differ from the adults in structure, habit and habitat, and can include a passive pupal stage in those groups that undergo 4-stage metamorphosis (see holometabolism).
Pheromones, a type of semiochemical, are used for attracting mates of the opposite sex, for aggregating conspecific individuals of both sexes, for deterring other individuals from approaching, to mark a trail, and to trigger aggression in nearby individuals.
This sort of care is typical for most species of bees and various types of wasps.
Some insects use parthenogenesis, a process in which the female can reproduce and give birth without having the eggs fertilized by a male.
In the Carboniferous age, some of the ''Meganeura'' dragonflies had as much as a  wide wingspan.
Many insects spend at least part of their lives under water, with larval adaptations that include gills, and some adult insects are aquatic and have adaptations for swimming.
Over time, this has led to complex groups of coevolved species.
Matters that have incurred controversy include Strepsiptera and Diptera grouped together as Halteria based on a reduction of one of the wing pairs – a position not well-supported in the entomological community.
The male solitary wasp in the genus ''Eumenes'' is smaller than the female, so the mother of one species supplies him with only five caterpillars; the larger female receives ten caterpillars in her cell.
Spiracles are located in the pleural area.
They obtain their toxicity by sequestering the chemicals from the plants they eat into their own tissues.
Cockroaches are among the fastest insect runners and, at full speed, adopt a bipedal run to reach a high velocity in proportion to their body size.
In grasshoppers and crickets, this is achieved by stridulation.
As larvae, many insects have gills that can extract oxygen dissolved in water, while others need to rise to the water surface to replenish air supplies which may be held or trapped in special structures.
The foregut includes the buccal cavity (mouth), pharynx, esophagus and crop and proventriculus (any part may be highly modified) which both store food and signify when to continue passing onward to the midgut.
Fleas are now thought to be closely related to boreid mecopterans.
Most insects, except some species of cave crickets, are able to perceive light and dark.
They live together in large well-organized colonies that may be so tightly integrated and genetically similar that the colonies of some species are sometimes considered superorganisms.
The opposite end of the dorsal tube is like the aorta of the insect circulating the hemolymph, arthropods' fluid analog of blood, inside the body cavity.
melanogaster'' was sequenced in 2000, reflecting the organism's important role in biological research.
There is a pronounced tendency for there to be a trade-off between visual acuity and chemical or tactile acuity, such that most insects with well-developed eyes have reduced or simple antennae, and vice versa.
lice, bed bugs), transmit diseases (mosquitoes, flies), damage structures (termites), or destroy agricultural goods (locusts, weevils).
The purest form of the tripedal gait is seen in insects moving at high speeds.
Synomones benefit the producer and the receiver.
These insects are known to spread diseases such as malaria and yellow fever and because of such, mosquitoes indirectly cause more deaths of humans than any other animal.
Insect walking is of particular interest as an alternative form of locomotion in robots.
The head capsule is made up of six fused segments, each with either a pair of ganglia, or a cluster of nerve cells outside of the brain.
It is then emptied directly into the alimentary canal, at the junction between the midgut and hindgut.
Coevolution has led to the development of very specific mutualisms in such systems.
When they touch the ground to form a new stable triangle the other legs can be lifted and brought forward in turn and so on.
In addition to the alimentary canal, insects also have paired salivary glands and salivary reservoirs.
The larva grows and eventually becomes a pupa, a stage marked by reduced movement and often sealed within a cocoon.
Insects cannot effectively produce low-frequency sounds, and high-frequency sounds tend to disperse more in a dense environment (such as foliage), so insects living in such environments communicate primarily using substrate-borne vibrations.
The eyes may include simple eyes or ocelli as well as compound eyes of varying sizes.
Chemoreception is the physiological response of a sense organ (i.e.
The nocturnal feeding habits of adults also aids Phasmatodea in remaining concealed from predators.
The colors of emitted light vary from dull blue (''Orfelia fultoni'', Mycetophilidae) to the familiar greens and the rare reds (''Phrixothrix tiemanni'', Phengodidae).
Insects are the only invertebrates to have evolved flight.
Having their muscles attached to their exoskeletons is more efficient and allows more muscle connections; crustaceans also use the same method, though all spiders use hydraulic pressure to extend their legs, a system inherited from their pre-arthropod ancestors.
It has proved difficult to clarify the relationships between the orders in Polyneoptera because of constant new findings calling for revision of the taxa.
The mechanisms of production of vibrational signals are just as diverse as those for producing sound in insects.
From there, the pharynx passes food to the esophagus, which could be just a simple tube passing it on to the crop and proventriculus, and then onward to the midgut, as in most insects.
The dorsal surface is called the tergum (or ''notum'') to distinguish it from the abdominal terga.
During this era, some giant dragonfly-like forms reached wingspans of , making them far larger than any living insect.
The thoracic segments have one ganglion on each side, which are connected into a pair, one pair per segment.
The head is enclosed in a hard, heavily sclerotized, unsegmented, exoskeletal head capsule, or epicranium, which contains most of the sensing organs, including the antennae, ocellus or eyes, and the mouthparts.
But insect wings are in motion, with flapping and vibrations, resulting in churning and eddies, and the misconception that physics says "bumblebees can't fly" persisted throughout most of the twentieth century.
Translations of Aristotle's term also form the usual word for "insect" in Welsh (, from '''' "to cut" and '' mil'',  "animal"), Serbo-Croatian (''zareznik'', from ''rezati'', "to cut"), Russian ( ''nasekomoje'', from ''seč'/-sekat''', "to cut"), etc.
Some of the oldest and most successful insect groups, such Endopterygota, use a system of complete metamorphosis.
Scarab beetles held religious and cultural symbolism in Old Egypt, Greece and some shamanistic Old World cultures.
This ultimately affects humans since ensuring healthy crops is critical to agriculture.
This serosa secretes a cuticle rich in chitin that protects the embryo against desiccation.
In discontinuous gas exchange, however, the insect takes in oxygen while it is active and small amounts of carbon dioxide are released when the insect is at rest.
Chemical defense is another important defense found amongst species of Coleoptera and Lepidoptera, usually being advertised by bright colors, such as the Monarch butterfly.
The ancient Chinese regarded cicadas as symbols of rebirth or immortality.
Another defense that often uses color or shape to deceive potential enemies is mimicry.
Immature insects that go through incomplete metamorphosis are called nymphs or in the case of dragonflies and damselflies, also naiads.
