The first-phase release is rapidly triggered in response to increased blood glucose levels, and lasts about 10 minutes.
It has important effects on the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats and protein by promoting the absorption of, especially, glucose ''from'' the blood into fat, liver and skeletal muscle cells.
In 1901 Eugene Lindsay Opie took another major step forward when he clearly established the link between the islets of Langerhans and diabetes: "Diabetes mellitus ... is caused by destruction of the islets of Langerhans and occurs only when these bodies are in part or wholly destroyed".
In November, Lilly made a major breakthrough and was able to produce large quantities of highly refined insulin.
Insulin and its related proteins have been shown to be produced inside the brain, and reduced levels of these proteins are linked to Alzheimer's disease.
The hexamer-monomer conversion is one of the central aspects of insulin formulations for injection.
* Increased potassium uptake – forces cells synthesizing glycogen (a very spongy, "wet" substance, that increases the content of intracellular water, and its accompanying K+ ions) to absorb potassium from the extracellular fluids; lack of insulin inhibits absorption.
After that, this polypeptide was synthesized independently by several groups.
Keep dogs alive till acini degenerate leaving islets.
Although other cells can use other fuels (most prominently fatty acids), neurons depend on glucose as a source of energy, unless the person is in ketosis.
The 3-dimensional structure of insulin was determined by X-ray crystallography in Dorothy Hodgkin's laboratory in 1969 (PDB file 1ins).
The primary structure of bovine insulin was first determined by Frederick Sanger in 1951.
This results in type 1 diabetes mellitus, which is characterized by very high blood sugar levels, and generalized body wasting, which is fatal if not treated.
Removal of the pancreas in test animals in essence mimics diabetes, leading to elevated blood glucose levels.
In the presence of insulin in the extracellular fluid, two of these monomers come together, bind the insulin molecule (also a protein) to their unified extracellular domains, resulting in the conversion of the intracellular domain of the resulting protein complex into an active enzyme, tyrosine kinase.
Since Banting required only one lab assistant, Best and Noble flipped a coin to see which would assist Banting for the first half of the summer.
The structure of the insulin–insulin receptor complex has been determined using the techniques of X-ray crystallography.
* An increased intracellular ATP:ADP ratio closes the ATP-sensitive SUR1/Kir6.2 potassium channel (see sulfonylurea receptor).
It also results in the activation of the enzyme, glycogen synthase, causing liver and muscle cells to  convert glucose into glycogen.
After cleavage of the C-peptide, these 2 pairs of basic residues are removed by the carboxypeptidase.
Fast acting insulins do not require the injection-to-meal interval previously recommended for human insulin and animal insulins.
* At the mRNA translation
The exact details of how much insulin needs to be injected, and when during the day, has to be adjusted according to the patient’s daily routine of meals and exercise, in order to mimic the physiological secretion of insulin as closely as is practically possible.
When the glucose level comes down to the usual physiologic value, insulin release from the β-cells slows or stops.
The hexamer is far more stable than the monomer, which is desirable for practical reasons; however, the monomer is a much faster-reacting drug because diffusion rate is inversely related to particle size.
There are a variety of treatment regimens, very few of which are entirely satisfactory.
The hexamer is an inactive form with long-term stability, which serves as a way to keep the highly reactive insulin protected, yet readily available.
As mentioned below in the section on degradation, endocytosis and degradation of the receptor bound to insulin is a main mechanism to end signaling.
Best won the coin toss, and took the first shift as Banting's assistant.
The two primary sites for insulin clearance are the liver and the kidney.
It is hoped that future insulin pumps will address this characteristic.
The first biosynthetic insulin analog was developed for clinical use at mealtime (prandial insulin), Humalog (insulin lispro), it is more rapidly absorbed after subcutaneous injection than regular insulin, with an effect 15&nbsp;minutes after injection.
The endogenous production of insulin is regulated in several steps along the synthesis pathway:
Likewise, another protracted insulin analogue (Levemir) is based on a fatty acid acylation approach.
Insulin binds to the extracellular portion of cell membrane-bound insulin receptors.
A few cases of murder, attempted murder, or suicide using insulin overdoses have been reported, but most insulin shocks appear to be due to errors in dosage of insulin (e.g., 20 units instead of 2) or other unanticipated factors (did not eat as much as anticipated, or exercised more than expected, or unpredicted kinetics of the subcutaneously injected insulin itself).
* The significantly increased amount of calcium ions in the cells' cytoplasm causes the release into the blood of previously synthesized insulin, which has been stored in intracellular secretory vesicles.
Rosalyn Sussman Yalow received the 1977 Nobel Prize in Medicine for the development of the radioimmunoassay for insulin.
In 2015 it was reported that the cone snails ''Conus geographus'' and ''Conus tulipa'', venomous sea snails that hunt small fish, use modified forms of insulin in their venom cocktails.
A chemically synthesized c-terminal tail is then grafted onto insulin by reverse proteolysis using the inexpensive protease trypsin; typically the lysine on the c-terminal tail is protected with a chemical protecting group to prevent proteolysis.
* Glucose-6-phosphate enters glycolytic pathway and then, via the pyruvate carboxylase reaction, into the Krebs cycle, where multiple, high-energy ATP molecules are produced by the oxidation of acetyl CoA (the Krebs cycle substrate), leading to a rise in the ATP:ADP ratio within the cell.
Insulin is produced and stored in the body as a hexamer (a unit of six insulin molecules), while the active form is the monomer.
Insulin also has stimulatory effects on gonadotropin-releasing hormone from the hypothalamus, thus favoring fertility.
This allows the release of Ca2+ ions from the ER via IP3-gated channels, which raises the cytosolic concentration of calcium ions independently of the effects of a high blood glucose concentration.
About 5–10 min after its assembly in the endoplasmic reticulum, proinsulin is transported to the trans-Golgi network (TGN) where immature granules are formed.
The primary structure of insulin was determined by British molecular biologist Frederick Sanger.
Banting and Best were then able to keep a pancreatectomized dog named Marjorie alive for the rest of the summer by injecting her with the crude extract they had prepared.
In 1969, after decades of work, Dorothy Hodgkin determined the spatial conformation of the molecule, the so-called tertiary structure, by means of X-ray diffraction studies.
It is a dimer of an A-chain and a B-chain, which are linked together by disulfide bonds.
This may be achieved by delivering insulin rhythmically to the portal vein or by islet cell transplantation to the liver.
Grieving family members were often in attendance, awaiting the (until then, inevitable) death.
* The cytosolic calcium ion concentration can also be increased by calcium release from intracellular stores via activation of ryanodine receptors.
'''Insulin''' ''(from the Latin, '''insula''' meaning island)'' is a peptide hormone produced by beta cells of the pancreatic islets, and by the Brockmann body in some teleost fish.
Their neighboring alpha cells, probably by taking their cues from the beta cells, secrete glucagon into the blood in the opposite manner: high secretion rates when the blood glucose concentrations are low, and low secretion rates when the glucose levels are high.
All are rapidly absorbed due to sequence that will reduce formation of dimers and hexamers (monomeric insulins are more rapidly absorbed).
Sufficient lack of glucose and scarcity of these sources of glucose can dramatically make itself manifest in the impaired functioning of the central nervous system: dizziness, speech problems, and even loss of consciousness.
In 1869, while studying the structure of the pancreas under a microscope, Paul Langerhans, a medical student in Berlin, identified some previously unnoticed tissue clumps scattered throughout the bulk of the pancreas.
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) then binds to receptor proteins in the plasma membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
One million to three million islets of Langerhans (pancreatic islets) form the endocrine part of the pancreas, which is primarily an exocrine gland.
The blood content of insulin can be measured in international units, such as µIU/mL or in molar concentration, such as pmol/L, where 1 µIU/mL equals 6.945 pmol/L.
* In the posttranslational modifications
It is on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines, the most important medications needed in a basic health system.
They then isolated an extract from these islets, producing what they called "isletin" (what we now know as insulin), and tested this extract on the dogs starting July 27.
Within vertebrates, the amino acid sequence of insulin is strongly conserved.
First-phase release and insulin sensitivity are independent predictors of diabetes.
Banting and Best presented their results to Macleod on his return to Toronto in the fall of 1921, but Macleod pointed out flaws with the experimental design, and suggested the experiments be repeated with more dogs and better equipment.
* Glucose enters the β-cells through the glucose transporters, GLUT2.
* Oral hypoglycemic agents (e.g., any of the sulfonylureas, or similar drugs, which increase insulin release from β-cells in response to a particular blood glucose level)
Insulin may have originated more than a billion years ago.
lispro, aspart, glulisine).
In type 2 diabetes mellitus the destruction of beta cells is less pronounced than in type 1 diabetes, and probably not due to an autoimmune process.
Banting suggested they try to use fetal calf pancreas, which had not yet developed digestive glands; he was relieved to find this method worked well.
Preproinsulin contains a 24-residue signal peptide which directs the nascent polypeptide chain to the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER).
* The glucose that enters the β-cell is phosphorylated to glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-P) by glucokinase (hexokinase IV) which is not inhibited by G-6-P in the way that the hexokinases in other tissues (hexokinase I - III) are affected by this product.
Insulin also influences other body functions, such as vascular compliance and cognition.
The human insulin protein is composed of 51 amino acids, and has a molecular mass of 5808 Da.
This was completely successful, not only in having no obvious side-effects but also in completely eliminating the glycosuria sign of diabetes.
* Upon depolarization, voltage-gated calcium ion (Ca2+) channels open, allowing calcium ions to move into the cell by facilitated diffusion.
When the blood glucose levels are high they secrete insulin into the blood; when the levels are low they cease their secretion of this hormone into the general circulation.
* Decreased gluconeogenesis – decreases production of glucose from noncarbohydrate substrates, primarily in the liver (the vast majority of endogenous insulin arriving at the liver never leaves the liver); increase of insulin causes glucose production by the liver from assorted substrates.
It appears that release of catecholamines by the sympathetic nervous system has conflicting influences on insulin release by beta cells, because insulin release is inhibited by α2-adrenergic receptors and stimulated by β2-adrenergic receptors.
She had been awarded a Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964 for the development of crystallography.
coli'' in 1978 by Arthur Riggs and Keiichi Itakura at the Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope in collaboration with Herbert Boyer at Genentech.
A read-through gene, INS-IGF2, overlaps with this gene at the 5' region and with the IGF2 gene at the 3' region.
The C-peptide of proinsulin (discussed later), however, differs much more among species; it is also a hormone, but a secondary one.
Glucose production (and excretion ''into'' the blood) by the liver is strongly inhibited by high concentrations of insulin in the blood.
In 1916, Nicolae Paulescu, a Romanian professor of physiology at the University of Medicine and Pharmacy in Bucharest, developed an aqueous pancreatic extract which, when injected into a diabetic dog, had a normalizing effect on blood-sugar levels.
Loss of the coin toss may have proved unfortunate for Noble, given that Banting decided to keep Best for the entire summer, and eventually shared half his Nobel Prize money and a large part of the credit for the discovery of insulin with the winner of the toss.
Murray was a professor of physiology at the Anderson College of Medicine in Glasgow, Scotland, the head of the department of Metabolic Diseases at a leading Glasgow hospital, vice-president of the British Association of Diabetes, and a founding member of the International Diabetes Federation.
At low blood sugar levels very little glucose enters the β-cells; at high blood glucose concentrations large quantities of glucose enter these cells.
The signal peptide is cleaved as the polypeptide is translocated into lumen of the RER, forming proinsulin.
A similar activation of the glycolytic enzymes, and of acetyl CoA carboxylase, stimulates liver, adipose and lactating mammary gland tissue to synthesize triglycerides (fats).
He was awarded the 1958 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this work.
Enhancing brain insulin signaling by means of intranasal insulin administration also enhances the acute thermoregulatory and glucoregulatory response to food intake, suggesting that central nervous insulin contributes to the co-ordination of a wide variety of homeostatic or regulatory processes in the human body.
Bovine insulin differs from human in only three amino acid residues, and porcine insulin in one.
Once an insulin molecule has docked onto the receptor and effected its action, it may be released back into the extracellular environment, or it may be degraded by the cell.
Insulin was offered for sale shortly thereafter.
Serine/Threonine kinases are also known to reduce the activity of insulin.
After the intracellular signal that resulted from the binding of insulin to its receptor has been produced, termination of signaling is then needed.
Parasympathetic stimulation of the pancreatic islets operates via this pathway to increase insulin secretion into the blood.
Although Paulescu discovered the principles of the treatment, his saline extract could not be used on humans; he was not mentioned in the 1923 Nobel Prize.
Inhaled insulin is also available in U.S. market now.
Insulin can aggregate and form fibrillar interdigitated beta-sheets.
The other type is long acting insulin; the first of these was Lantus (insulin glargine).
This means that its substrate, glycogen synthase (GS), cannot be phosphorylated, and remains dephosphorylated, and therefore active.
It can occur during the honeymoon period, a period up to several years after a type 1 diabetes diagnosis during which endogenous insulin production still occurs.)
He also supplied Banting with ten dogs on which to experiment, and two medical students, Charles Best and Clark Noble, to use as lab assistants, before leaving for Scotland.
Between 1911 and 1912, E.L. Scott at the University of Chicago used aqueous pancreatic extracts, and noted "a slight diminution of glycosuria", but was unable to convince his director of his work's value; it was shut down.
Several days after the removal of the dog's pancreas, Minkowski's animal-keeper noticed a swarm of flies feeding on the dog's urine.
In these tissues the absorbed glucose is converted into either glycogen or fats (triglycerides), or, in the case of the liver, into both.
Genentech, founded by Swanson, Boyer and Eli Lilly and Company, went on in 1982 to sell the first commercially available biosynthetic human insulin under the brand name Humulin.
* Increased amino acid uptake – forces cells to absorb circulating amino acids; increase of insulin inhibits absorption.
The ease of modular synthesis and the relative safety of modifications in that region accounts for common insulin analogs with c-terminal modifications (e.g.
(This can never be a cause of hypoglycemia in patients with mature type 1 diabetes, since there is no endogenous insulin production to stimulate.
Animal studies show these can trigger insulin release, albeit in much smaller quantities than sugar, according to a report in ''Discover'' magazine, August 2004, p 18.
Transport to the TGN may take about 30 min.
The pancreatic beta cells (β cells) are known to be sensitive to the glucose concentration in the blood.
Other substances known to stimulate insulin release include the amino acids arginine and leucine, parasympathetic release of acetylcholine (acting via the phospholipase C pathway), sulfonylurea, cholecystokinin (CCK, also via phospholipase C), and the gastrointestinally derived incretins, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP).
* Increased lipid synthesis – insulin forces fat cells to take in blood glucose, which is converted into triglycerides; increase of insulin causes the reverse.
The strong homology seen in the insulin sequence of diverse species suggests that it has been conserved across much of animal evolutionary history.
The function of the "little heaps of cells", later known as the ''islets of Langerhans'', initially remained unknown, but Edouard Laguesse later suggested they might produce secretions that play a regulatory role in digestion.
Children dying from diabetic ketoacidosis were kept in large wards, often with 50 or more patients in a ward, mostly comatose.
Instead there is an accumulation of amyloid in the pancreatic islets, which disrupts the anatomy and physiology of the pancreatic islets.
Low insulin levels in the blood have the opposite effect by promoting widespread catabolism.
The manner in which the presence of insulin in the extracellular fluids affects metabolic changes inside its target cells is strangely complex and counterintuitive.
The resulting complex sets a variety of intracellular phosphorylation cascades in motion which ultimately result in the insertion of glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4) molecules into the cell membranes of fat and muscle tissues, increasing the rate of glucose transport into these cells (making their glucose uptake “insulin dependent”).
While experimental, several companies now have various formulations in human clinical trials, and one, the India-based Biocon, has formed an agreement with BMS to produce an oral-insulin alternative.
These have a steady effect for an extended period from 18 to 24&nbsp;hours.
This is the primary mechanism for release of insulin.
The first genetically engineered, synthetic "human" insulin was produced using ''E.
Banting's method was to tie a ligature around the pancreatic duct; when examined several weeks later, the pancreatic digestive cells had died and been absorbed by the immune system, leaving thousands of islets.
Banting, insulted that Best was not mentioned, shared his prize with him, and Macleod immediately shared his with James Collip.
The work published by Banting, Best, Collip and Macleod represented the preparation of purified insulin extract suitable for use on human patients.
In 1906 George Ludwig Zuelzer achieved partial success in treating dogs with pancreatic extract, but he was unable to continue his work.
George Minot, co-recipient of the 1934 Nobel Prize for the development of the first effective treatment for pernicious anemia, had diabetes mellitus.
Over the spring of 1922, Best managed to improve his techniques to the point where large quantities of insulin could be extracted on demand, but the preparation remained impure.
This technique is anticipated to reduce production costs.
It was the first protein to have its sequence be determined.
These stimuli include ingested protein and glucose in the blood produced from digested food.
This possibly occurs via insulin-induced translocation of the Na+/K+-ATPase to the surface of skeletal muscle cells.
If the carbohydrates include glucose, then that glucose will be absorbed into the bloodstream and blood glucose level will begin to rise.
Marjorie was able to remain alive because the extracts, containing isletin, were able to lower her blood glucose levels.
The description of first phase release is as follows:
In yeast, insulin may be engineered as a single-chain protein with a KexII endoprotease (a yeast homolog of PCI/PCII) site that separates the insulin A chain from a c-terminally truncated insulin B chain.
However, the extract was so impure, Thompson suffered a severe allergic reaction, and further injections were canceled.
The secretion of insulin and glucagon into the blood in response to the blood glucose concentration is the primary mechanism responsible for keeping the glucose levels in the extracellular fluids within very narrow limits at rest, after meals, and during exercise and starvation.
Within the islets of Langerhans, beta cells constitute 65–80% of all the cells.
This enzyme converts a phospholipid in the cell membrane by the name of  phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), into phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3), which, in turn, activates protein kinase B (PKB).
The liver clears most insulin during first-pass transit, whereas the kidney clears most of the insulin in systemic circulation.
Other rapid-acting analogues are NovoRapid and Apidra, with similar profiles.
Insulin from animal sources differs somewhat in effectiveness (in carbohydrate metabolism effects) from human insulin because of these variations.
The net effect of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerves and epinephrine from adrenal glands on insulin release is inhibition due to dominance of the α-adrenergic receptors.
Degradation normally involves endocytosis of the insulin-receptor complex, followed by the action of insulin-degrading enzyme.
The Genentech synthesis and completely chemical synthesis such as that by Bruce Merrifield are not preferred because the efficiency of recombining the two insulin chains is low, primarily due to competition with the precipitation of insulin B chain.
A fast-reacting drug means insulin injections do not have to precede mealtimes by hours, which in turn gives people with diabetes more flexibility in their daily schedules.
Macleod was initially skeptical, but eventually agreed to let Banting use his lab space while he was on holiday for the summer.
Had Noble won the toss, his career might have taken a different path.
*Decreased autophagy - decreased level of degradation of damaged organelles.
As a result, the insulin levels, even when the blood sugar level is normal, are much higher than they are in healthy persons.
Professor Ian Murray was particularly active in working to correct "the historical wrong" against Nicolae Paulescu.
The cleavage sites are each located after a pair of basic residues (lysine-64 and arginine-65, and arginine-31 and -32).
The first patient treated in the U.S. was future woodcut artist James D. Havens; Dr. John Ralston Williams imported insulin from Toronto to Rochester, New York, to treat Havens.
* In mRNA stability
He had to interrupt his experiments because of World War I, and in 1921 he wrote four papers about his work carried out in Bucharest and his tests on a diabetic dog.
Later that year, he published "Research on the Role of the Pancreas in Food Assimilation".
This prevents potassium ions (K+) from leaving the cell by facilitated diffusion, leading to a buildup of intracellular potassium ions.
Israel Kleiner demonstrated similar effects at Rockefeller University in 1915, but World War I interrupted his work and he did not return to it.
A combination of a rapid acting and a protracted insulin is also available, making it more likely for patients to achieve an insulin profile that mimics that of the body´s own insulin release.
Circulating insulin also affects the synthesis of proteins in a wide variety of tissues.
Reduced first-phase insulin release may be the earliest detectable beta cell defect predicting onset of type&nbsp;2 diabetes.
However, they needed six weeks to extract the isletin, which forced considerable delays.
In October 1920, Canadian Frederick Banting concluded that it was the very digestive secretions that Minkowski had originally studied that were breaking down the islet secretion(s), thereby making it impossible to extract successfully.
If the blood glucose level drops lower than this, especially to dangerously low levels, release of hyperglycemic hormones (most prominently glucagon from islet of Langerhans alpha cells) forces release of glucose into the blood from the liver glycogen stores, supplemented by gluconeogenesis if the glycogen stores become depleted.
Possible causes of hypoglycemia include:
Before insulin binds to its receptor, however, the receptor consists of two identical protein monomers, which remain separate until insulin binding occurs.
* The calcium ion concentration in the cytosol of the beta cells can also, or additionally, be increased through the activation of phospholipase C resulting from the binding of an extracellular ligand (hormone or neurotransmitter) to a G protein-coupled membrane receptor .
A typical blood level between meals is 8–11 μIU/mL (57–79 pmol/L).
This can only be corrected by injecting the hormone, either directly into the blood if the patient is very ill and confused or comatosed, or subcutaneously for routine maintenance therapy, which must be continued for the rest of the person’s life.
In December 1921, Macleod invited the biochemist James Collip to help with this task, and, within a month, the team felt ready for a clinical test.
As a result, the inside of the cell becomes less negative with respect to the outside, leading to the depolarization of the cell surface membrane.
* Arterial muscle tone – forces arterial wall muscle to relax, increasing blood flow, especially in microarteries; increase of insulin reduces flow by allowing these muscles to contract.
He theorized a relatively pure extract could be made from the islets once most of the rest of the pancreas was gone.
The second phase is a sustained, slow release of newly formed vesicles triggered independently of sugar, peaking in 2 to 3 hours.
Paul Langerhans' son, Archibald, also helped to understand this regulatory role.
The vast majority of insulin currently used worldwide is now biosynthetic recombinant "human" insulin or its analogues.
Insulin in some invertebrates is quite similar in sequence to human insulin, and has similar physiological effects.
This enzyme then phosphorylates itself, as well as a cytosolic protein named insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), which becomes bound to activated insulin receptor.
A myristyric acid molecule is attached to this analogue, which in turn associates the insulin molecule to the abundant serum albumin, which in turn extends the effect and reduces the risk of hypoglycemia.
Banting and Best never worked well with Collip, regarding him as something of an interloper, and Collip left the project soon after.
Carbohydrates can be polymers of simple sugars or the simple sugars themselves.
Even during the digestion, in general, one or two hours following a meal, insulin release from the pancreas is not continuous, but oscillates with a period of 3&ndash;6&nbsp;minutes, changing from generating a blood insulin concentration more than about 800 pmol/l to less than 100 pmol/l.
High glucagon concentrations in the blood plasma powerfully stimulate the liver to release glucose into the blood by glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, thus having the opposite effect on the blood glucose level to that produced by high insulin concentrations.
Another phosphorylation cascade that is activated by insulin binding to its receptor is the multistep Erk and MAP kinase pathways, which ultimately phosphorylate a number of substrates important for cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, cell division and differentiation (RSK kinases, Elk-1 transcription factor, etc.)
Recombinant insulin is produced either in yeast (usually ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'') or ''E.
The endocrine portion accounts for only 2% of the total mass of the pancreas.
Both protracted analogues need to be taken only once daily, and are used for type 1 diabetics as the basal insulin.
In high concentrations in the blood it is therefore an anabolic hormone, promoting the conversion of small molecules in the blood into large molecules inside the cells.
The preproinsulin precursor of insulin is encoded by the ''INS'' gene.
Over the next 12&nbsp;days, Collip worked day and night to improve the ox-pancreas extract, and a second dose was injected on January 23.
Finally, insulin is degraded, terminating the response.
