These characters, however, are not in common use today; instead, units are written in katakana, the Japanese syllabary used for foreign borrowings, such as  for kilometre, but are also written in standard prefixes such as "km" for kilometre.
* At least three separate experiments be carried out yielding values having a relative standard uncertainty in the determination of the kilogram of no more than  and at least one of these values should be better than .
* '''Non-SI units associated with the CGS and the CGS-Gaussian system of units''' (Table 9)
Although the writing of unit names is language-specific, the writing of unit symbols and the values of quantities is consistent across all languages and therefore the SI Brochure has specific rules in respect of writing them.
Metrication was voluntary and to be coordinated by the United States Metric Board (USMB).
::minute, hour, day, degree of arc, minute of arc, second of arc, hectare, litre, tonne, astronomical unit and Decibel|decibel
The system also establishes a set of twenty prefixes to the unit names and unit symbols that may be used when specifying multiples and fractions of the units.
amount of substance
Its official version is in French, in line with the Metre Convention.
The rest of the Commonwealth, South Africa and Ireland followed within a few years; in some countries such as South Africa and Australia metrication was mandatory rather than voluntary.
All multiples are integer powers of ten, and above a hundred or below a hundredth all are integer powers of a thousand.
The underlying reasons for this response include a relative uniformity of weights and measures (though, notably, US liquid measure differed by about 20% from British Imperial measure, which was adopted throughout the British Empire in 1824) inherited from the United Kingdom in 1776, a homogeneous economy and the influence of business groups and populists in Congress caused the country to look at the short-term costs associated with the change-over, particularly those that would be borne by the consumer rather than long-term benefits of efficiency and international trade.
:* '''ICAW''' = International Committee on Atomic Weights
The directive also catalogued units of measure whose status would be reviewed by the end of 1977 (mainly coherent CGS units of measure) and also catalogued units of measure that were to be phased out by the end of 1977, including the use of obsolete names for the sale of timber such as the stere, the use of units of force and pressure that made use of the acceleration due to gravity, the use of non-coherent units of power such as the Pferdestärke (PS), the use of the calorie as a measure of energy and the stilb as a measure of luminance.
In addition, certain other units are so deeply embedded in the history and culture of the human race that they will continue to be used for the foreseeable future.
Some of these systems were metric system variations, whereas others were based on customary systems of measure.
High-profile exceptions include the sale of draught beer, the sale of milk in returnable containers, and United Kingdom road signs.
Other quantities such as area, pressure, and electrical resistance are derived from these base quantities by clear non-contradictory equations.
Initially its prime metrological purpose was a periodic recalibration of national prototype metres and kilograms against the international prototype.
In 1965, after this and similar false starts the then Federation of British Industry informed the British Government that its members favoured the adoption of the metric system.
As with the units of measure in Tables 6 and 7, these have been catalogued by the CIPM in the SI Brochure to ensure consistent usage, but with the recommendation that authors who use them should define them wherever they are used.
In the interests of standardising health-related units of measure used in the nuclear industry, the 12th CGPM (1964) accepted the continued use of the curie (symbol Ci) as a non-SI unit of activity for radionuclides; the becquerel, sievert and gray were adopted in later years.
Once the metrication of most consumer goods was completed in 2000, aspects of British life, especially in government, commerce and industry used SI.
In English, when unit names are combined to denote multiplication of the units concerned, they are separated with a hyphen or a space (e.g.
*'''Current''' (1979): The luminous intensity, in a given direction, of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency  hertz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of  watt per steradian.
:* '''IEC''' = International Electrotechnical Commission
Giorgi later identified the need for an electrical base unit.
Multiples of the kilogram are named as if the gram were the base unit, so a millionth of a kilogram is a ''milligram'', not a microkilogram.
However, the US military uses the metric system widely, partly because of the need to work with armed services from other nations.
* International Bureau of Weights and Measures (''Bureau international des poids et mesures'' or BIPM) – an international metrology centre at Sèvres in France that has custody of the International prototype kilogram, provides metrology services for the CGPM and CIPM, houses the secretariat for these organisations and hosts their formal meetings.
For example, ''kilo-'' denotes a multiple of a thousand and ''milli-'' denotes a multiple of a thousandth, so there are one thousand millimetres to the metre and one thousand metres to the kilometre.
The second has been catalogued as an SI unit, its multiples as units of measure that may be used alongside the SI.
* '''Non-SI units whose values in SI units must be obtained experimentally''' (Table 7).
In the United Kingdom the breakdown of voluntary metrication in the mid-1970s coincided with the United Kingdom's obligations as part of the EEC to adopt the metric system, resulting in legislation to force metrication in certain areas and the Eurosceptic movement adopting an anti-metrication stance and the United Kingdom seeking a number of derogations from the relevant EEC directives.
Both the Watt balance and the Avogadro project should be included in the experiments and any differences between these be reconciled.
These are generally not used today, but are occasionally found in older or technical writing.
The International System of Units consists of a set of base units, a set of  derived units with special names, and a set of decimal-based multipliers that are used as prefixes.
The ISQ is defined in the international standard ISO/IEC 80000, and was finalised in 2009 with the publication of ISO 80000-1.
The study recommended that the United States adopt the International System of units, and in 1975 Congress passed the Metric Conversion Act of 1975 which established a national policy of coordinating and planning for the increased use of the metric measurement system in the United States.
Meter (公尺), centimeter (公分), liter (公升), kilogram (公斤), gram (公克) and hectare (公頃) have the prefix "公", which means "universal".
It defines twenty-two named units, and includes many more unnamed coherent derived units.
This was backed up by requests from other nations including Japan and New Zealand to permit metric-only labelling as an aid to trade with those countries.
The CODATA task group on fundamental constants has announced special submission deadlines for data to compute the values that will be announced at this event.
Six base units were recommended: the metre, kilogram, second, ampere, degree Kelvin (later renamed kelvin), and candela.
"henries" is the plural of "henry".
Canada has adopted it for most purposes, but imperial units are still legally permitted and remain in common use throughout a few sectors of Canadian society, particularly in the buildings, trades and railways sectors.
Its metrication programme started in 1956 with the passing of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act.
In 1921, the Treaty was extended to include all physical quantities including electrical units originally defined in 1893.
Irish road signs (road distances and speeds) were converted to metric units during the first decade of the 21st century; otherwise, the situation in Ireland is similar to that in the United Kingdom.
Likewise, the plural forms of units follow the grammar of the language concerned: in English, the normal rules of English grammar are used, e.g.
Prefixes are added to unit names to produce multiple and sub-multiples of the original unit.
The Board of Trade, on behalf of the Government, agreed to support a ten-year metrication programme.
During a routine decennial review of the directive in 2008, the EU postponed the sunset clause for dual units indefinitely.
Although, in theory, SI can be used for any physical measurement, the CIPM has recognised that some non-SI units still appear in the scientific, technical, and commercial literature, and will continue to be used for many years to come.
The fourth unit could be chosen to be electric current, voltage, or electrical resistance.
*'''Current''' (1967):  of the thermodynamic temperature of the triple point of water
*'''Original''' (1900): The molecular weight of a substance in mass grams.ICAW
Definition (incomplete)
The automotive industry is largely metric, but aircraft such as the Boeing 787 Dreamliner were designed using customary units.
The bill, however, failed to make the statute book because of lack of parliamentary time.
Beginning in about 1900, physicists who had been using the symbol "μ" for "micrometre" (or "micron"), "λ" for "microlitre", and "γ" for "microgram" started to use the symbols "μm", "μL" and "μg", but it was only in 1935, a decade after the revision of the Metre Convention that the CIPM formally adopted this proposal and recommended that the symbol "μ" be used universally as a prefix for .
In 1960, the 11th CGPM named the system the ''International System of Units'', abbreviated SI from the French name, .
The legislation stated that the federal government has a responsibility to assist industry, especially small business, as it voluntarily converts to the metric system of measurement.
*'''Original''' (1743): The '''centigrade scale''' is obtained by assigning 0&nbsp;°C to the freezing point of water and 100&nbsp;°C to the boiling point of water.
These were combined with a set of six prefix characters – ''kilo-'' (), ''hecto-'' (), ''deca-'' (), ''deci-'' (), ''centi-'' () and ''milli-'' () – to form an additional 18 single-character units.
The directive also formalised the use of ''supplementary units'', which in 1979 were permitted for a period of ten years.
The measurement of angles has likewise had a long history of consistent use – the radian, being  of a revolution, has mathematical niceties, but it is cumbersome for navigation, hence the retention of the degree, minute and second of arc.
The engineering industry is equally split.
These rules were subsequently extended by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and now cover unit symbols and names, prefix symbols and names, how quantity symbols should be written and used and how the values of quantities should be expressed.
Part of the act fixed the value of the seer (a legacy unit of mass) to 0.9331&nbsp;kg exactly; elsewhere the Act declared that from 1960 all non-metric units of measure were to be illegal.
Each member state was entitled to one of each of the remaining prototypes to serve as the national prototype for that country.
Most of mankind has used the day and its non-decimal subdivisions as a basis of time and, unlike the foot or the pound, these were the same regardless of where they were being measured.
The directive replicated the CGPM SI recommendations and in addition pre-empted some of the additions whose use had been recommended by the CIPM in 1969, but had not been ratified by the CGPM.
The system was published in 1960 as the result of an initiative that began in 1948.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a number of non-coherent units of measure based on the gram/kilogram, the centimetre/metre, and the second, such as the ''Pferdestärke'' (metric horsepower) for power, the darcy for permeability and the use of "millimetres of mercury"  for the measurement of both barometric and blood pressure were developed or propagated, some of which incorporated standard gravity in their definitions.
The metric system was first implemented during the French Revolution (1790s) with just the metre and kilogram as standards of length and mass respectively.
On 11 July 1792, the committee proposed the names ''metre'', ''are'', ''litre''  and ''grave'' for the units of length, area, capacity, and mass, respectively.
In the 1830s Carl Friedrich Gauss laid the foundations for a coherent system based on length, mass, and time.
Dual-unit labelling on consumer goods is mandatory.
The committee also proposed that multiples and submultiples of these units were to be denoted by decimal-based prefixes such as ''centi'' for a hundredth and ''kilo'' for a thousand.
Metric Study the emphasis of which was to examine the feasibility of adopting SI.
These characters are examples of the rare phenomenon of single-character loan words – a foreign word represented by a single Japanese character – and form the plurality of such words.
On the basis of the findings of this study, the 10th CGPM in 1954 decided that an international system should be derived from six base units to provide for the measurement of temperature and optical radiation in addition to mechanical and electromagnetic quantities.
On 10 February 1964, the National Bureau of Standards (now the National Institute of Standards and Technology) issued a statement that it was to use SI except where this would have an obvious detrimental effect.
In 1921, the Metre Convention was extended to include all physical units, including the ampere and others defined by the Fourth International Conference of Electricians in Chicago in 1893, thereby enabling the CGPM to address inconsistencies in the way that the metric system had been used.
The basic Chinese units are metre ( ''mǐ''), litre ( ''shēng''), gram ( ''kè''), and second ( ''miǎo''), while others include watt ( ''wǎ'').
The cut-off date for the use of supplementary units was extended a number of times and in 2009 was extended indefinitely.
This committee thus provides a forum for the bodies concerned to provide input to the CIPM in respect of ongoing enhancements to SI.
*'''Current''' (1983):  The distance travelled by light in vacuum in  second.
In 1968 Congress authorised the U.S.
The radian, being  of a revolution, has mathematical advantages but it is cumbersome for navigation, and, as with time, the units used in navigation have a large degree of consistency around the world.
Changing technology has led to an evolution of the definitions and standards that has followed two principal strands – changes to SI itself and clarification of how to use units of measure that are not part of SI, but are still nevertheless used on a worldwide basis.
Another three base units (for temperature, substance and luminous intensity) were added later.
One of each was selected at random to become the International prototype metre and International prototype kilogram that replaced the ''mètre des Archives'' and ''kilogramme des Archives'' respectively.
The seventh base unit, the mole, was added in 1971 by the 14th CGPM.
*'''Original''' (Medieval):  of a day.
Meanwhile, in 1875, the Treaty of the Metre passed responsibility for verification of the kilogram and metre against agreed prototypes from French to international control.
In 1948, an overhaul of the metric system was set in motion which resulted in the development of the "Practical system of units" which, on its publication in 1960, was given the name "The International System of Units".
Most of mankind has used the day and its subdivisions as a basis of time with the result that the second, minute, hour and day, unlike the foot or the pound, were the same regardless of where it was being measured.
The catalogued units are
When it became independent in 1947, both imperial and native units of measure were in use.
In 1971, a seventh base quantity, amount of substance represented by the mole, was added to the definition of SI.
Acceptance of the UPLR varies from state to state – fourteen states accept it by merely citing it in their legislation.
The prefixes "兆", "分" and "厘" are not commonly used, and the use of "千" is limited to kilowatt (千瓦).
*'''Original''' (1793):  of the meridian through Paris between the North Pole and the Equator.FG
It was reissued as directive 80/181/EEC.
On 10 December 1799 (a month after Napoleon's coup d'état), the law by which the metric system was to be definitively adopted in France ()
Some industries are engaged in efforts to amend this law to allow manufacturers to use only metric labelling.
the use of metric (and therefore SI) units in the United States does not follow any pattern.
In 1832, the German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, assisted by Wilhelm Weber, implicitly defined the second as a base unit when he quoted the earth's magnetic field in terms of millimetres, grams, and seconds.
*'''Current''' (1889): The mass of the international prototype kilogram.
However, the units lux, hertz, and siemens have irregular plurals in that they remain the same in both their singular and plural form.
Both ISO and the IEC have published rules for the presentation of SI units that are generally compatible with those published in the SI Brochure.
*'''Original''' (1946): The value of the new candle is such that the brightness of the full radiator at the temperature of solidification of platinum is 60 new candles per square centimetre.
These differences are brought out in the examples below:
The units associated with these quantities were the metre, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin and candela.
The guideline produced by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) clarifies language-specific areas in respect of American English that were left open by the SI Brochure, but is otherwise identical to the SI Brochure.
The writing and maintenance of the CGPM brochure is carried out by one of the committees of the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM),  the Consultative Committee for Units (CCU).
In German, however, the names of units, as with all German nouns, start with capital letters.
These units have been grouped as follows:
This directive catalogued units of measure that could be used for "economic, public health, public safety and administrative purposes" and also provided instructions for a transition from the existing units of measure that were in use.
On 30 March 1791, the Assembly adopted the committee's proposed principles for the new decimal system of measure and authorised a survey between Dunkirk and Barcelona to establish the length of the meridian.
The ISQ defines the quantities that are measured with the SI units.
The BIPM has also described SI as "the modern metric system".
Similarly, the millimetre of mercury (symbol mmHg) was retained for measuring blood pressure.
Prefixes include ''deci-'' ( ''fēn''), ''centi-'' ( ''lí''), ''milli-'' ( ''háo''), ''micro-'' ( ''wēi''), ''kilo-'' ( ''qiān''), and ''mega-'' ( ''zhào'').
A set of 30 prototypes of the metre and 40 prototypes of the kilogram, in each case made of a 90% platinum-10% iridium alloy, were manufactured by the British firm Johnson, Matthey & Co and accepted by the CGPM in 1889.
In the current (2016
In the event, the unit of electric current was chosen for SI.
Names of units follow the grammatical rules associated with common nouns: in English and in French they start with a lowercase letter (e.g., newton, hertz, pascal), even when the symbol for the unit begins with a capital letter.
The definitions of the terms "quantity", "unit", "dimension" etc.
While metrication in the United States is consistent in science, medicine, government, and various fields of technology and engineering, common measurements are mostly performed in United States customary units, although these have officially been defined in terms of SI units.
The original definitions of the various base units in the above table were made by the following authorities:
When the SI standard was published in 1960, the only major Commonwealth country to have adopted the metric system was India.
The result was that the initial metrication programme was a conversion to the CGS system of units and the subsequent adoption of SI has been haphazard.
*'''Current''' (1967): The duration of  periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium-133 atom.
It comprises a coherent system of units of measurement built on seven base units.
*'''Current''' (1946): The constant current which, if maintained in two straight parallel conductors of infinite length, of negligible circular cross-section, and placed 1&nbsp;m apart in vacuum, would produce between these conductors a force equal to  newtons per metre of length.
In 1976 a new Weights and Measures Act replaced the 1956 Act which, amongst other things,  required that all weighing devices be approved before being released onto the market place.
The seven length units (kilometre to millimetre), for example, are  and .
The CGPM has a role of recommending changes, but no formal role in the enforcement of such changes—another inter-governmental organisation, the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML) provides a forum for harmonisation of national standards and legislation in respect of metrology.
It is based on the metre-kilogram-second system of units (MKS) rather than any variant of the centimetre-gram-second system (CGS).
SI has become the world's most widely used system of measurement, used in both everyday commerce and science.
During the first half of the nineteenth century there was little consistency in the choice of preferred multiples of the base units – typically the myriametre (&nbsp;metres) was in widespread use in both France and parts of Germany, while the kilogram ( grams) rather than the myriagram was used for mass.
The official language of the Metre Convention is French and the definitive version of all official documents published by or on behalf of the CGPM is the French-language version.
All other definitions result from resolutions by either CGPM or the CIPM and are catalogued in the ''SI Brochure''.
In the 19th century, various compound characters were also used, similar to Japanese, either imported or formed on the same principles, such as  for  ''qiānwǎ'' (kilowatt) or  for .
Public response included resistance, apathy, and sometimes ridicule.
The International System of Quantities (ISQ) is a system based on seven base quantities: length, mass, time, electric current, thermodynamic temperature, amount of substance, and luminous intensity.
Similar characters were also coined for other units, such as British units, though these also have fallen out of use; see Single character gairaigo: Metric units and Single character gairaigo: Other units for a full list.
The CIPM nominates the chairman of this committee, but the committee includes representatives of various other international bodies rather than CIPM or CGPM nominees.
Although overall responsibility for labelling requirements of consumer goods lies with Congress and is therefore covered by federal law, details of labelling requirements for certain commodities are controlled by state law or by other authorities such as the Food and Drug Administration, Environmental Protection Agency and Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
India was one of the last countries to start a metrication programme before the advent of SI.
*'''Non-SI units accepted for use with the SI''' (Table 6):
:A number of non-SI units that had never been formally sanctioned by the CGPM have continued to be used across the globe in many spheres including health care and navigation.
A French-inspired initiative for international cooperation in metrology led to the signing in 1875 of the Metre Convention.
*'''Interim''' (1960):  wavelengths in a vacuum of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the 2p and 5d quantum levels of the krypton-86 atom.
However, in 2012, it was reported that traditional units were still encountered in small manufacturing establishments and in the marketplace alongside CGS, SI and imperial measures, particularly in the poorer areas.
Prior to this, the strength of the earth’s magnetic field had only been described in relative terms.
:The SI manual also catalogues a number of legacy units of measure that are used in specific fields such as geodesy and geophysics or are found in the literature, particularly in classical and relativistic electrodynamics where they have certain advantages: The units that are catalogued are:
The CGPM, which was established by the Metre Convention of 1875, brought together many international organisations to not only agree on the definitions and standards of the new system but also agree on the rules for writing and presenting measurements in a standardised manner around the world.
When Maxwell first introduced the concept of a coherent system, he identified three quantities that could be used as base units: mass, length and time.
Four years after the Indian Government announced its metrication programme, SI was published.
Initially the convention only covered standards for the metre and the kilogram.
Some consumer goods such as soft drinks are sold in metric quantities, but milk is sold in customary units.
The government agreed to a voluntary policy requiring minimal legislation and costs to be borne where they fell.
::electronvolt (symbol eV), and dalton/unified atomic mass unit (Da or u)
The treaty established three international organisations to oversee the keeping of international standards of measurement:
Although, in theory, SI can be used for any physical measurement, it is recognised that some non-SI units still appear in the scientific, technical and commercial literature, and will continue to be used for many years to come.
The 1988 Omnibus Foreign Trade and Competitiveness Act removed international trade barriers and amended the Metric Conversion Act of 1975, designating the metric system as "the Preferred system of weights and measures for United States trade and commerce".
The directive was silent in respect of units that were specific to one or two countries including the ''pond'', ''pfund'', ''livre'' (Dutch, German and French synonyms for 500&nbsp;g), thereby effectively prohibiting their use as well.
Although Ireland left the Commonwealth in 1948 and South Africa in 1961, both continued their close economic ties with the Commonwealth.
The motivation for the development of the SI was the diversity of units that had sprung up within the CGS systems and the lack of coordination between the various disciplines that used them.
*'''Interim''' (1956):  of the tropical year for 1900 January 0 at 12 hours ephemeris time.
Metrologists carefully distinguish between the definition of a unit and its realisation.
In the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell, William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) and others working under the auspices of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, built on Gauss' work and formalised the concept of a coherent system of units with base units and derived units.
The most common ones have been catalogued in the SI Brochure together with consistent symbols and accepted values, but with the caveat that their values in SI units need to be measured.
The CIPM has catalogued such units and included them in the SI Brochure so that they can be used consistently.
* '''Other non-SI units''' (Table 8):
A set of characters representing various metric units was created in Japan in the late 19th century.
In 1954, the 10th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) identified electric current as the fourth base quantity in the practical system of units and added two more base quantities—temperature and luminous intensity—making six base quantities in all.
Some units have different names in Taiwan.
In 1948, the ninth CGPM approved the first formal recommendation for the writing of symbols in the metric system when the basis of the rules as they are now known was laid down.
SI would be used from the outset.
The plural is formed by converting the last unit name to the plural form (e.g.
Both the degree and rate of adoption of SI varied from country to country—countries that had not adopted the metric system by 1960 and subsequently adopted SI did so directly as part of their metrication programs while others migrated from the CGS system of units to SI.
Although imperial units are widely encountered in unregulated areas such as the press and everyday speech, SI or units approved for use alongside SI are used in most areas where units of measure are regulated.
In 1960, the world's largest economy was that of the United States, followed by the United Kingdom, West Germany, France, Japan, China and India.
The directive was however overhauled to accommodate British and Irish interests in retaining the imperial system in certain circumstances.
Exceptions were made for the highway and construction industries; the Department of Transportation planned to require metric units by 2000, but this plan was cancelled by the 1998 highway bill TEA21.
The United States and the United Kingdom were non-metric, France and Germany had been using the metric system for about a century, and China had been using the metric system for 35 years, while India and Japan had adopted the metric system within the preceding five years.
The preamble to the Metre Convention read "''Desiring the international uniformity and precision in standards of weight and measure, have resolved to conclude a convention ..."''.
The federal Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (FPLA), originally passed in 1964, was amended in 1992 to require consumer goods directly under its jurisdiction to be labelled in both customary and metric units.
When the directive was revisited during 1977, some of the older units that were being reviewed (such as millimetre of mercury for blood pressure) were retained but others were phased out, thereby broadly aligning the allowable units with SI.
Other non-metric countries were those where the United Kingdom or the United States had considerable influence.
, India – the trader is using hexagonal weights – a shape that is consistent with metric weights, both in India and internationally
The published ''mise en pratique'' is not the only way in which a base unit can be determined: the SI Brochure states that "any method consistent with the laws of physics could be used to realise any SI unit."
In 1948, after representations by the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) and by the French Government, the 9th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) asked the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) to conduct an international study of the measurement needs of the scientific, technical, and educational communities and "to make recommendations for a single practical system of units of measurement, suitable for adoption by all countries adhering to the Metre Convention".
The redefinitions are expected to be adopted at the 26th CGPM in the fall of 2018.
The International System of Units has been adopted by most developed countries; however, the adoption has not been universal in all English-speaking countries.
