The Joint Signal Intelligence Bureau(JSIB) provide support with communications to groups in Kashmir.
He was captured on 28 March 2002, by ISI, CIA and FBI agents after they had raided several safe houses in Faisalabad, Pakistan.
The ISI was structured to be manned by officers from the three main military services, and to specialize in the collection, analysis and assessment of external intelligence, either military or non-military.
After independence in 1947, two new intelligence agencies were created in Pakistan: the Intelligence Bureau (IB) and the Military Intelligence (MI).
The selected candidates are then invited for an interview which is conducted by a joint committee comprising both ISI and FPSC officials.
A classified report accessed by the newspaper ''Asian Age'' said "the ISI in particular wants Naxals to cause largescale damage to infrastructure projects and industrial units operating in the interior parts of the country where ISI’s own terror network is non-existent".
Others, however, maintain Pakistan continues to support the Afghan Taliban, which Pakistan rejects.
The ISI supported Al-Qaeda during the war along with CIA against the soviet regime, through the Taliban, and it is believed by some that there are still contact between Al-Qaeda and the ISI.
Former Pakistani General Ziauddin Butt (a.k.a.
Hizbul Mujahideen were created as the Kashmiri branch of Jamaat-i-Islami.
Based on the results, the FPSC shortlists the candidates and sends the list to the ISI who conduct the initial background checks.
: A Chinese woman believed to be an ISI agent, who headed the Chinese unit of a US manufacturer was charged with illegally exporting high-performance coatings for Pakistan's nuclear power plants.
: Ramzi bin al-Shibh, an Al-Qaeda terrorist responsible for planning the 9/11 terrorist attacks as well as the attack on 2000 USS Cole bombing, and the 2002 Ghriba synagogue bombing in Tunisia.
He claimed that the Afghan government had given British and American intelligence agents evidence that proved ISI involvement in bombings.
A special Afghan Section, the SS Directorate, was created under the command of Brigadier Mohammed Yousaf to oversee the coordination of the war.
ISI contacted Mr. Ejaz who then confessed that a few months ago the Soviet diplomat approached him and threatened his family unless he divulged sensitive information in regard to the highway such as alignment of the road, location of bridges, the number of Chinese personnel working on the Highway, etc.
Some analysts say that this is because of the fact that intelligence work agencies around the world remain secretive.
Without any exception, officers from this divisions are reported to be engineer officers and military scientists who deal with the military promotion of science and technology.
Wang and her co-conspirators agreed upon a scheme to export and re-export the high-performance epoxy coatings from the United States to Pakistan's Chashma II plant, via a third-party distributor in People's Republic of China.
Indian intelligence agencies have claimed they have proof of ISI involvement with the Naxalites.
* Khalid Sheikh Mohammed
Taliban spokesman Mr. Ehsanullah Ehsan told that nearby located ISI office was the target.
They had received terrorist training in Libya and were ready to embark on a terrorist campaign in Pakistan to force the Army to step down from power.
* At least 13 people among 10 military personnel were killed when suicide bomber blew up his van into agency’s Peshawar office on 13 November 2009.
Xun Wang, a former managing director of PPG Paints Trading in Shanghai, a Chinese subsidiary of United States-based PPG Industries, Inc, was indicted on a charge of conspiring to violate the International Emergency Economic Powers Act and related offences.
: The 1965 war in Kashmir provoked a major crisis in intelligence.
: ISI successfully intercepted two American private weapons dealers during the Soviet-Afghan war of the 1980s.
In addition, there are also separate explosives and a chemical and biological warfare sections.
He described the central building, which houses the director general's office on the top floor, as "a modern structure with a round, echoing lobby."
: After the failure of Operation Eagle Claw, the U.S. media outlets such as ''Newsweek'' and ''Time'' reported that CIA agents stationed in Tehran had obtained information in regard to the location of the hostages, in-house information from a Pakistani cook who used to work for the U.S. Embassy.
India accuses ISI of supporting separatist militants in Jammu and Kashmir while Pakistan claims to give them moral support only.
ISI decided against arresting these men outright because they did not know how deep this conspiracy went and kept these men under strict surveillance.
All of them were put out of business.
Around 400&nbsp;kg of explosives were used which destroyed significant portion of building.
However, on 5 November 2014, Lt. Gen. Joseph Anderson, a senior commander for US and Nato forces in Afghanistan, said in a Pentagon-hosted video briefing from Afghanistan that the Haqqani network is now "fractured" like the Taliban.
Two army personnel were dead and seven while seven officials were injured.
: The ISI was involved in supplying arms to the warring parties in Bosnia-Herzegovina to protect themselves from Serbian attacks.
: Senior aid to Baitullah Mehsud captured by ISI in August 2009.
* Political Internal Division
: The PAF Field Intelligence Unit at their base in Karachi in July 1980 captured an Indian agent.
: In 1981, a Libyan Security company called Al Murtaza Associates sent recruiters to Pakistan to entice former soldiers and servicemen for high paying security jobs in Libya.
As of 2011, more than 300 ISI officials have been killed.
Ayub Khan set up a committee headed by General Yahya Khan to examine the working of the agencies.
: ISI decided to spy on the residence of Colonel Hussain Imam Mabruk who was a Military Attaché to the Embassy of Libya in Islamabad as he had made some inflammatory statements towards the military regime of Zia-ul-Haq.
Intercepted documents later on showed that the two were recruited by the CIA.
All external operations are carried out under the supervision of the S Wing of the ISI.
:Monitored the financial funding of the right-wing political science sphere against the left-wing political science circles.
The ISI is the largest of the five intelligence services of Pakistan, the others being the Intelligence Bureau (IB), Military Intelligence (MI), Naval Intelligence (NI) and Air Intelligence (AI).
: In Feb 2014, as the British paper "Daily Mail" disclosed in Mar 2015, the then Indian chief of army staff General Bikram Singh issued orders to deploy troops along the borders with Pakistan in Rajasthan and Jammu-Kashmir region, but ISI got the information in few hours and as a reaction Pakistan Army deployed its troops near the Indian borders which rung the bells among Indian authorities.
The Soviet war in Afghanistan of the 1980s saw the enhancement of the covert action capabilities of the ISI by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
The ISI was reorganised in 1966 after intelligence failures in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, and expanded in 1969.
: Five Pakistanis who worked as informant for CIA to pass information leading to the Death of Osama bin Laden had been arrested by the ISI.
The ISI was established as an independent intelligence service in 1948 in order to strengthen the sharing of military intelligence between the three branches of Pakistan Armed Forces in the aftermath of the Indo-Pak War of 1947, which had exposed weaknesses in intelligence gathering, sharing and coordination between the Army, Air Force and Navy.
ISI former DG Ashfaq Parvez Kayani is also reported to have said, "real aim of U.S. war strategy is to denuclearize Pakistan."
As many as 985 people have been sentenced so far while the cases of 875 accused in various crimes were in the courts.
As the date of the annual parade approached, ISI was satisfied that it had identified the major players in this conspiracy and then arrested these men along with quite a few high-ranking military officers.
Joint Intelligence/North(JIN) is responsible for conducting operations in Jammu and Kashmir and Afghanistan.
: The ISI has been deeply involved in domestic politics of Pakistan since the late 1950s.
All members of the conspiracy were apprehended before any damage could be done.
: Ramzi Yousef, one of the planners of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing as well as the Bojinka plot.
I think it is important to note that as they have made these adjustments in their own assessment of their national interests, they're paying a big price for it".
The province's governor, Abdul Sator Borez went on to mention that said officer had led the offensive.
The ISI instead of confronting the Soviet diplomat chose to feed him with false information.
On 1 March 2003, the ISI successfully captured KSM in a joint raid with the CIA's Special Activities Division paramilitary operatives and the Diplomatic Security Service Special Agents in Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
: ISI became aware of a plot to assassinate the President of Pakistan, Zia-ul-Haq and then launch a bloody coup to depose the current government and install an Islamic government in its place.
"Nawab Akbar Bugti was killed in a Capture Operation Launched by the Pakistan against his private militia, ISI provided key intelligence during the operation."
After the 1971 Indo Pak war, the agency has been headed by a Gen officer three-star general officer of Pakistan Army, being the biggest segment of Pakistan armed forces.
He also said the leader of the spy ring was being headed by the food and beverages manager at the Intercontinental Hotel in Karachi and a number of serving Air Force officers and ratings were on his payroll.
The department is now "inactive" since March 2012 with the new director taking the operational charge of the ISI.
National Intelligence Directorate (NID) is formed in 2014 in order to pool and share intelligence gathered by over 30 Pakistan's intelligence agencies to combat terrorism in Pakistan effectively.
Pakistani intelligence, and the Department of State&nbsp;– U.S.
The recruitment and expansion of the ''ISI'' was managed and undertaken by then-Navy's Commander Syed Mohammad Ahsan who was tenuring as Deputy Director of the Naval Intelligence.
In the late 1950s, when Ayub Khan became the President of Pakistan, he expanded the role of ISI and MI in monitoring opposition politicians, and sustaining military rule in Pakistan.
The SS Directorate is comparable to that of Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) National Clandestine Service (NCS), and responsible for the covert political action and paramilitary special operations.
The guards at ISI building fought back.
Recently the Militants have been accused of targeting people of non-Balochi ethnic groups and Balouchi who do not agree with separatism .
: Abu Zubaydah, an Al-Qaeda terrorist responsible for hatching multiple terrorist plots including sending Ahmed Ressam to blow up the Los Angeles airport in 2000.
* A suicide bomber struck his vehicle into bus carrying officials killing at least 28 people on 28 November 2007 outside ISI office in Rawalpindi.
One American International School employee and under cover agent Mr. Naeem was arrested while waiting to clear shippment from Islamabad custom.
:ISI are believed to have access to Osama bin Laden in the past.
In September 2001, Parvaiz Musharraf appointed a new Director General for ISI, Lieutenant General Ehsanul Haq who was later on replaced by the Lieut.
"They are fractured.
According to Afghanistan's National Directorate of Security, individuals arrested by the Afghan government stated that the ISI was behind this attack and had given them Rs 120,000 for the operation.
He selected Colonel Shahid Hamid to set up this new formation and command it.
On 1 August 2007, Abdul Wahab, a Pakistani national and ISI agent was detained in Kathmandu with $252,000 worth of counterfeit Indian currency.
: The Indian Consulate General in Jalalabad was attacked by terrorists in 2007.
The Navy's Commander Syed Mohammad Ahsan played a pivotal role in formulating the procedures of the ''ISI''.
One American diplomat (his name has not been de-classified) who lived in the F-7/4 sector of Islamabad was spotted by an ISI agent in a seedy part of Rawalpindi by his automobile's diplomatic plates.
Cawthorn left Pakistan in 1951.
: ISI failed to prevent the KHAD/KGB terror campaign in Pakistan which in 1987 led to the deaths of about 324 Pakistanis in separate terror incidents.
These two acts greatly enhanced Pakistan's Nuclear weapons program and their missile delivery systems.
According to Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, both former members of the National Security Council, the ISI acted as a "kind of terrorist conveyor belt" radicalizing young men in the Madrassas in Pakistan and delivering them to training camps affiliated with or run by Al-Qaeda and from there moving them into Jammu and Kashmir to launch attacks.
They are fractured like the Taliban is.
According to the United States diplomatic cables leak the ISI had previously shared intelligence information with Israel regarding possible terrorist attacks against Jewish and Israeli sites in India in late 2008.
The ISI lost its importance during the regime of Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, who was very critical of its rôle during the 1970 general elections, which triggered off the events leading to the division of Pakistan and emergence of Bangladesh.
Harkat-ul-Mujahideen were founded in the 1980s by the ISI to fight against Indian interests.
The complex consists of various adobe buildings separated by lawns and fountains.
* Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh
The ISI has headquarters in Islamabad, Islamabad Capital Venue, and is currently headed by Lieutenant-General Rizwan Akhter, who succeeded Zaheerul Islam in October 2014.
: ISI had placed a mole in the Soviet Union's embassy in Islamabad.
: A new report by the London School of Economics (LSE) claimed to provide the most concrete evidence yet that the ISI is providing funding, training and sanctuary to the Taliban insurgency on a scale much larger than previously thought.
When Pakistan attempted to secure the top of the Siachen Glacier in 1984, it placed a large order for Arctic-weather gear with the same company that also supplied the Indian Army with its gear.
The third Al-Badr (India)
* Abdul Ghani Baradar
: In the aftermath of a shooting involving American CIA agent Raymond Davis, the ISI had become more alert and suspicious about CIA spy network in Pakistan, which had disrupted the ISI-CIA cooperation.
When the war started, there was a complete collapse of the operations of all the intelligence agencies, after the commencement of the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war, was apparently unable to locate an Indian armored division due to its preoccupation with political affairs.
The spying paid off as he was seen talking with two Pakistani gentlemen who entered and left the compound suspiciously.
: Ilam Din also known as Ilmo was an infamous Indian spy working from Pakistan.
According to Peter Tomsen, the ISI in conjunction with Jamaat-e-Islami formed the first Al-Badr who resisted the Indian trained influx of Mukti Bahini in Bangladesh in the 1970s.
This process continued and many more Indian spies in Pakistan were flushed out, such as Roop Lal.
: Major General Sultan Habib who was an operative of the ISI's Joint Intelligence Miscellaneous department successfully procured nuclear material while being posted as the Defence Attaché in the Pakistani Embassy in Moscow from 1991 to 1993 and concurrently obtaining other materials from Central Asian Republics, Poland and the former Czechoslovakia.
The masterminds behind the coup were high-ranking Military and Intelligence officers and were led by Major General Tajammal Hussain Malik, his son, Captain Naveed and his nephew Major Riaz, a former Military Intelligence officer.
ISI is also accused of supporting pro independence militias in Jammu and Kashmir while Pakistan denies all such claims.
: ISI has been active in obtaining information and operating through third countries like Afghanistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Iran, Turkey and China.
Obama added that whether Pakistan's ties with the Haqqani network are active or passive, Pakistan has to deal with it."
Critics of the ISI say that it has become a state within a state and not accountable enough.
:deals with development of science and technology to advance the Pakistan intelligence gathering.
He was interrogated and revealed that a large network of Indian spies were functioning in Karachi.
: ISI's Internal Political Division has been accused by various members of the Pakistan People's Party in assassinating Shahnawaz Bhutto, one of the two brothers of Benazir Bhutto, through poisoning in the French Riviera in the middle of 1985 in an attempt to intimidate her into not returning to Pakistan for directing the movement against Zia's Military government, but no proof has been found implicating the ISI.
: Taliban's deputy commander, Abdul Ghani Baradar was captured by U.S. and Pakistani forces in Pakistan on 8 February 2010, in a morning raid.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Pakistan is paying a "big price for supporting the U.S. war against terror groups.
After Moscow, Major General Habib then coordinated shipping of missiles from North Korea and the training of Pakistani experts in the missile production.
* 30 people including four officials of Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and 14 policemen were killed and over 300 were injured when three people attacked ISI office on 27 May 2009 in Lahore.
Pearl had been kidnapped, had his throat slit, and then been beheaded and Sheikh Omar Saeed was named the chief suspect.
During the incident of firing explosive laden vehicle detonated
The attackers fired at ISI office and policemen present there.
India quickly mounted a military operation (Operation Meghdoot) and captured entire glacier.
Since Pakistan's launch of war on Al-Qaeda, Taliban and other jihadist groups, the country's armed forces, intelligence services (particularly ISI), military industrial complexes, paramilitary forces and police forces have come under intense attacks.
The factions that were backed by the ISI were Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's Hezb-i Islami, and the forces fighting for Jalaluddin Haqqani.
The Associated Press reported that "the president said Mullen's statement 'expressed frustration' over the insurgent safe havens in Pakistan.
He had eluded being captured many times but on 23 March at 3 a.m., Ilmo and two other Indian spies were apprehended by Pakistani Rangers as they were illegally crossing into Pakistan from India.
As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Mike Mullen stated:
India has accused ISI of plotting the Mumbai terror attack in March 1993 and November 2008.
A number of officers from the ISI's Covert Action Division (Special Activities Division) received training in the United States and many covert action experts of the CIA were attached to the ISI to guide it in its operations against the Soviet troops by using the Afghan Mujahideen.
: ISI has been actively involved in suppressing a bloody separatist insurgency in Balochistan.
Below are some major incidents when attempts were made to target ISI.
For civilians, recruitment is advertised and is jointly handled by the Federal Public Services Commission (FPSC) and civilian ISI agents are considered employees of the Ministry of Defence.
Some analysts believe that the ISI provides support to militant groups, though according to other analyst, these allegations remain unsubstantiated with evidence.
International officials have accused the ISI of continuing to support and even lead the Taliban today in the War in Afghanistan (2001-present).
: ISI implemented Operation Tupac a three part action plan for covertly supporting the Kashmiri freedom fighters in their fight against the Indian authorities in Kashmir, initiated by President Zia Ul Haq in 1988  After success of Operation Tupac, support to Kashmiri freedom fighters became Pakistan's state policy.
In reality, Libya was recruiting mercenaries to fight with Chad and Egypt as it had border disputes with both nations.
* A car bomb exploded at CNG station in Faisalabad on 8 March 2011 killing 25 people and injuring more than 100.
The ISI headquarter is in Islamabad.
According to Grant Holt and David H. Gray "The agency specializes in utilizing terrorist organizations as proxies for Pakistani foreign policy, covert action abroad, and controlling domestic politics."
The agent claimed that these spies, in addition to espionage, had also assassinated a few armed personnel.
The '''Directorate General for Inter-Services Intelligence''' (Urdu: ) or '''Inter-Services Intelligence''' (abbreviated '''ISI''', Urdu: ) is the premier intelligence service of Pakistan, operationally responsible for providing critical national security and intelligence assessment to the Government of Pakistan.
While the total number has never been made public, experts estimate about 10,000 officers and staff members, which does not include informants and assets.
The entrance to the complex is next to a private hospital.
: Home Minister Balochistan, Pakistan, Sarfraz Bugti informed on 26 Mar 2016 that a serving Indian Naval officer, Kulbhushan Yadav, working for Indian spy agency RAW was arrested in Balochistan, by ISI.
* Ramzi bin al-Shibh
), had kept Osama bin Laden in an Intelligence Bureau safe house in Abbottabad."
Their mission was to spy and report back on the new military equipment that Pakistan will be showing in their annual 23 March Pakistan day parade.
According to Stephen P. Cohen and Wilson John, the ISI's aid to and creation of designated terrorist groups and religious extremist groups is well documented.
The leak in 2012 of e-mails from Stratfor claimed that papers captured during the raid in Abbotabad on Osama Bin Laden's compound showed up to 12 ISI officials knew where he was and that Bin Laden had been in regular contact with the ISI.
ISI successfully gathered evidence, and intercepted communication documents and showed it to the Iranian Chief of J-2 which cleared the cook.
ISI is widely believed to train and support freedom movement in Kashmir region.
# September 2014&nbsp;– Present: Lt Gen Rizwan Akhtar
Critics argue the institution should be more accountable to the President or the Prime Minister.
* ''SS'' Directorate
He and his family were secretly escorted out of their residence and were given safe passage on a London bound British Airways flight in exchange for classified information in regard to Afghan agents in Pakistan.
Both were arrested and their cameras and other sensitive equipment were confiscated.
The ISI have also given aid to Hizbul Mujahideen.
The general staff of the ISI mainly come from armed forces.
In the late 20th century, the ISI's work and activities in relation to Afghan mujahideen against the Soviet Union during the Soviet–Afghan War in then-communist Afghanistan became quite famous.
The agency is divided into Eight divisions.
Following the 9/11 attack on the United States by Al-Qaeda, Pakistan says it felt it necessary to cooperate with the US.
The attempted assassination and coup was to occur on 23 March 1980 during the annual 23 March Pakistan Day Parade.
Other senior international officials, however, maintain that senior Al Qaeda leaders such as Osama Bin Laden have been hidden by the ISI in major settled areas of Pakistan with the full knowledge of the Pakistani military leadership.
U.S. military officials have increasingly said, they do not notify Pakistani officials before conducting operations against the Afghan Taliban or Al Qaeda, because they fear Pakistani officials may tip them off.
At least 30 suspected covert American operatives have suspended their activities in Pakistan and 12 have already left the country.
Indians were easily alerted to the large Pakistani purchase and deduced that this large purchase could be used to equip troops to capture the glacier.
: ISI discovered a surveillance mission to Kahuta Research Laboratories nuclear complex on 26 June 1979 by the French Ambassador to Pakistan, Le Gourrierec and his First Secretary, Jean Forlot.
: ISI uncovered a secret deal in which naval base facilities were granted by Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to the USSR in Vizag and the Andaman & Nicobar Island and the alleged attachment of KGB advisers to the then Lieutenant General Sunderji who was the commander of Operation Blue Star in the Golden Temple in Amritsar in June 1984.
The FPSC conducts various examinations testing the candidate's knowledge of current affairs, English and various analytical abilities.
The 1990 elections for example were widely believed to have been rigged by the ISI in favor of the Islami Jamhoori Ittehad (IJI) party, a conglomerate of nine mainly rightist parties by the ISI under Lt. General Hameed Gul, to ensure the defeat of Bhutto's Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) in the polls.
General Ziauddin Khawaja) revealed at a conference on Pakistani–U.S.
Sheikh told the Pakistani court, however, that he had surrendered to the ISI a week earlier.
From the 1990s, the ISI began to court the Jihadists who had emerged from the conflict against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan and by 2000 the majority of militant groups operating in Kashmir were either based in Pakistan or were pro Pakistan.
And in 2015 March our ex headquarter chief Muhammad razzaq and there family killed by Al Qaeda but there 1 son Ali razzaq still alive.
Another was Eugene Clegg, a teacher in the American International School who also indulged in weapons trade.
The report's author Matt Waldman spoke to nine Taliban field commanders in Afghanistan and concluded that Pakistan's relationship with the insurgents ran far deeper than previously realised.
The mole reported that the Third Secretary in the Soviet Embassy was after information in regard to the Karakurum Highway and was obtaining it from a middle level employee, Mr. Ejaz, of the Northern Motor Transport Company.
:Worrying that among the large influx of Afghan refugees that had come into Pakistan due to the Soviet-Afghan war were members of KHAD (Afghan Intelligence), the ISI successfully convinced Mansoor Ahmed who was the Charge-de-Affairs of the Afghan Embassy in Islamabad to turn his back on the Soviet backed Afghan government.
: In November 2001, Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi, a Libyan paramilitary trainer for Al-Qaeda attempted to flee Afghanistan following the collapse of the Taliban precipitating the 2001 U.S. invasion of Afghanistan but was captured by Pakistani Forces.
: ISI has a dedicated section which spies against enemy's intelligence collection.
After Chief of Army Staff General Zia-ul-Haq seized power on 5 July 1977 and became the Chief Martial Law Administrator of the country, the ISI was expanded by making it responsible for the collection of intelligence about the Pakistan Communist Party and various political parties such as the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP).
It has been reported that JI founded Hizbul Mujahideen at the request of the ISI to counter the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front(JKLF) who are advocates for the independence of Kashmir.
* Four people including ISI officials were killed and 35 were injured when local office of ISI was attacked by 5 suicide bombers in Sukkur on 24 July 2013.
Declan Walsh of ''The Guardian'' said that the entrance is "suitably discreet: no sign, just a plainclothes officer packing a pistol who direct visitors through a chicane of barriers, soldiers and sniffer dogs".
Walsh said that the complex "resembles a well-funded private university" and that the buildings are "neatly tended," the lawns are "smooth," and the fountains are "tinkling."
Based on these suspicion, it is speculated that ISI is pursuing a counter-intelligence against CIA operations in Pakistan and Afghanistan.
But Obama said 'the intelligence is not as clear as we might like in terms of what exactly that relationship is.'
* Two attackers ambushed Multan office in which 8 people were killed and 45 were injured on 8 December 2009.
The ISI monitored the two men and were later identified as Pakistani exiles that hated the current military regime and were Bhutto loyalists.
The Soviet and Afghan diplomats tried their best to find the family but were unsuccessful.
ISI became aware of the plot and the whole scheme was stopped.
"That has very much disrupted their efforts in Afghanistan and has caused them to be less effective in terms of their ability to pull off an attack in Kabul," Anderson added.
A December 2011 analysis report by the Jamestown Foundation came to the conclusion that "in spite of denials by the Pakistani military, evidence is emerging that elements within the Pakistani military harbored Osama bin Laden with the knowledge of former army chief General Pervez Musharraf and possibly current Chief of Army Staff (COAS) General Ashfaq Pervez Kayani.
In particular the US was trying to seek the release of Dr Shakil Afridi, a Pakistani who worked for the CIA, passing intelligence leading to the death of Bin Laden.
It was later proven that the manager was completely innocent.
