que tuo nomine fi sanctificato;
come noi li rimettiamo ai nostri debitori,
Interestingly, the Interlingua presented by the IALA is very close to Peano’s Interlingua (Latino sine flexione), both in its grammar and especially in its vocabulary.
For the most part, consonants are pronounced as in English, while the vowels are like Spanish.
Their argument was that systematic derivation of words was a Procrustean bed, forcing the learner to unlearn and re-memorize a new derivation scheme when a usable vocabulary was already available.
sed libera nos a malo.
como nos pardona los ci peca a nos.
The star is symbolic of the four cardinal directions, and the two halves symbolize Romance and non-Romance speakers of Interlingua who understand each other.
With a "concession rule" that required participants to make a certain number of concessions, early debates at IALA sometimes grew from heated to explosive.
At other times, it is much more recent or even contemporary.
The new institute supported the work of other linguistic organizations, made considerable scholarly contributions and produced Interlingua summaries for scholarly and medical publications.
e non ci indurre in tentazione,
In the year between, the Scandinavian Interlingua societies co-organize a conference in Sweden.
A good example is the plural ''-s'', which is always preceded by a vowel to prevent the occurrence of a hard-to-pronounce consonant cluster at the end.
When compared to natural languages, Interlingua most resembles Spanish.
'''Interlingua''' (; ISO 639 language codes ''ia'', ''ina'') is an international auxiliary language (IAL), developed between 1937 and 1951 by the International Auxiliary Language Association (IALA).
así en la tierra como en el cielo.
tale anke sur la tero.
An example is Italian ''fiammifero'' (lit.
Unassimilated foreign loanwords, or borrowed words, are pronounced and spelled as in their language of origin.
If the diacritics do not affect pronunciation, they are removed.
Hugh E. Blair, Gode's close friend and colleague, became his assistant.
On the one hand, it should be neutral, free from characteristics peculiar to one language.
Within a few years, it found similar use at nine further medical congresses.
Originally, the association had not set out to create its own language.
Interlingua has five falling diphthongs, , and , although  and  are rare.
Nian panon ĉiutagan donu al ni hodiaŭ
These are the most widely spoken Romance, Germanic, and Slavic languages, respectively.
At the Second International Interlanguage Congress, held in Geneva in 1931, IALA began to break new ground; 27 recognized linguists signed a testimonial of support for IALA's research program.
but deliver us from evil.
Interlingua was developed to combine a simple, mostly regular grammar with a vocabulary common to the widest possible range of languages, making it unusually easy to learn, at least for those whose native languages were sources of Interlingua's vocabulary and grammar.
This only occurred with a few grammatical particles.
One of its largest achievements was two immense volumes on phytopathology produced by the American Phytopathological Society in 1976 and 1977.
On the other hand, it should maximally capture the characteristics common to all contributing languages.
Simple and compound tenses can be combined in various ways to express more complex tenses (e.g., ''Nos haberea morite'', 'We would have died').
e pardona a nos nostre debitas
And lead us not into temptation,
que tuo regno adveni;
Other Interlingua-language works were published by university presses in Sweden and Italy, and in the 1990s, Brazil and Switzerland.
That same year, Professor Herbert N. Shenton and Dr. Edward L. Thorndike became influential in IALA's work by authoring key studies in the interlinguistic field.
Verbs take the same form for all persons (''io vive, tu vive, illa vive'', 'I live', 'you live', 'she lives').
If the word has any derivatives that occur in the source languages with appropriate parallel meanings, then their morphological connection must remain intact; for example, the Interlingua word for 'time' is spelled ''tempore'' and not ''*tempus'' or ''*tempo'' in order to match it with its derived adjectives, such as ''temporal''.
kiel ankaŭ ni pardonas al niaj ŝuldantoj.
mas líbranos del mal.
en tera como en sielo.
sed liberigu nin de la malbono.
The language-specific characteristics are closely related to the sound laws of the individual languages; the resulting words are often close or even identical to the most recent form common to the contributing words.
Thus, Interlingua has no noun–adjective agreement by gender, case, or number (cf.
The first steps towards the finalization of Interlingua were taken in 1937, when a committee of 24 eminent linguists from 19 universities published ''Some Criteria for an International Language and Commentary''.
Others contend that Interlingua has spelling irregularities that, while internationally recognizable in written form, increase the time needed to fully learn the language, especially for those unfamiliar with Indo-European languages.
Research with Swedish students has shown that, after learning Interlingua, they can translate elementary texts from Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish.
Three common verbs usually take short forms in the present tense: ''es'' for 'is', 'am', 'are;' ''ha'' for 'has', 'have;' and ''va'' for 'go', 'goes'.
A word, that is a form with meaning, is eligible for the Interlingua vocabulary if it is verified by at least three of the four primary control languages.
venga a nosotros tu Reino;
If they still have one or more meanings in common, however, the word can enter Interlingua with this smaller set of meanings.
Tests had shown that if a larger number of source languages were used, the results would be about the same.
Perdónanos nuestras deudas,
que tu nomine sia sanctificate;
kaj pardonu al ni niajn ŝuldojn,
e ne duktez ni aden la tento,
Si o non on crede que un lingua pro tote le humanitate es possibile, si o non on crede que interlingua va devenir un tal lingua es totalmente indifferente ab le puncto de vista de interlingua mesme.
Each of these forms contributes to the eligibility of the Interlingua word.
tua volo facesez quale en la cielo
Y el pan nuestro de cada día dánosle hoy;
There are four simple tenses (present, past, future, and conditional), three compound tenses (past, future, and conditional), and the passive voice.
As a result, it can be transformed into any of the contributing variants using only these language-specific characteristics.
For example, ''kilom'''e'''tro'' is acceptable, although ''kil'''o'''metro'' is more common.
In 1943 Stillman left for war work and Gode became Acting Director of Research.
Science Service, the publisher of ''Science Newsletter'' at the time, published a monthly column in Interlingua from the early 1950s until Gode's death in 1970.
The grammar of Interlingua has been described as similar to that of the Romance languages, but greatly simplified, primarily under the influence of English.
tua nomo santigesez;
Every two years, the UMI organizes an international conference in a different country.
The two more schematic models were rejected – K overwhelmingly.
The IALA closed its doors in 1953 but was not formally dissolved until 1956 or later.
This counts as long as one or more control languages actually have this basic root word, which the Romance languages all do.
The American heiress Alice Vanderbilt Morris (1874–1950) became interested in linguistics and the international auxiliary language movement in the early 1920s, and in 1924, Morris and her husband, Dave Hennen Morris, established the non-profit International Auxiliary Language Association (IALA) in New York City.
Similarly, the modern form ''troppo'', 'too' or 'too much', has replaced ''nimis'', and ''ma'' 'but' has largely replaced ''sed''.
Because of their close relationship, Spanish and Portuguese are treated as one unit.
Individuals, governments, and private companies use Interlingua for learning and instruction, travel, online publishing, and communication across language barriers.
sed libera nos ab malo.
Interlingua literature maintains that (written) Interlingua is comprehensible to the hundreds of millions of people who speak Romance languages, though it is actively spoken by only a few hundred.
Adjectives may precede or follow the nouns they modify, but they most often follow it.
These morphemes are identical in Interlingua.
Proponents argue that Interlingua's source languages include not only Romance languages but English, German, and Russian as well.
English ''proximity'', for example, gives support to Interlingua ''proxime'', meaning 'near, close'.
With respect to the secondary control languages, Interlingua has articles, unlike Russian.
et remitte ad nos nostro debitos,
Instead, the remaining base words and especially the derivatives determine the form ''oculo'' found in Interlingua.
However, the prototyping procedure for determining Interlingua words, which strives for internationality, should in general lead naturally to words that are easy for most learners to pronounce.
To that point, much of the debate had been equivocal on the decision to use naturalistic (e.g., Peano’s Interlingua, Novial and Occidental) or systematic (e.g., Esperanto and Ido) words.
This word is thus said to be potentially present in the other languages although they may represent the meaning with a single morpheme.
sia santificato il tuo Nome,
Between the mid-1950s and the late 1970s, some thirty scientific and especially medical journals provided article summaries in Interlingua.
Dacci oggi il nostro pane quotidiano,
The position of adverbs is flexible, though constrained by common sense.
There are several active mailing lists, and Interlingua is also in use in certain Usenet newsgroups, particularly in the europa.
and forgive us our debts
on earth, as it is in heaven.
In Africa, Interlingua has official representation in the Republic of the Congo.
English (traditional)
Novial  Wikipedia marks Interlingua with the Flag of Europe itself.
IALA began to develop models of the proposed language, the first of which were presented in Morris's ''General Report'' in 1945.
This sometimes corresponds with that of Vulgar Latin.
moderately&nbsp;naturalistic, similar to Occidental
moderately&nbsp;schematic, similar to Ido (less schematic than Esperanto)
Interlingua had attracted many former adherents of other international-language projects, notably Occidental and Ido.
Spanish and Portuguese ''gatas negras'' or Italian ''gatte nere'', 'black female cats'), because this is absent from English, and it has no progressive verb tenses (English ''I am reading''), because they are absent from French.
# ''t'' is generally , but ''ti'' followed by a vowel, unless stressed or preceded by "s",  is pronounced  (or optionally )
For this reason, Interlingua is frequently termed a ''naturalistic'' IAL.
:Interlingua has detached itself from the movement for the development and introduction of a universal language for all humanity.
Patre nostro, qui es in celos,
Czech and Polish ''oko'', Ukrainian ''око'' ''(óko)'') are related to this form in that all three descend from Proto-Indo-European ''*okʷ''.
santificado sea tu Nombre;
Alice Morris edited several of these studies and provided much of IALA's financial support.
Words from any language are eligible for inclusion, so long as their internationality is shown by their presence in these control languages.
Speakers of other languages can also learn to speak and write Interlingua in a short time, thanks to its simple grammar and regular word formation using a small number of roots and affixes.
An early practical application of Interlingua was the scientific newsletter ''Spectroscopia Molecular'', published from 1952 to 1980.
Adveniat regnum tuum.
venga il tuo Regno,
An additional eight added their signatures at the third congress, convened in Rome in 1933.
quale anke ni pardonas a nia ofensanti,
y no nos dejes caer en la tentación,
'), and there is no subjunctive.
highly&nbsp;naturalistic, with word forms unchanged from the prototypes
In 1946, IALA sent an extensive survey to more than 3,000 language teachers and related professionals on three continents.
A few irregular verb forms are available, but rarely used.
Patre nostre, qui es in le celos,
It also arranged conferences with proponents of these IALs, who debated features and goals of their respective languages.
In the process of forming new words, an ending cannot always be added without a modification of some kind in between.
In pursuit of the last goal, it conducted parallel studies of these languages, with comparative studies of national languages, under the direction of scholars at American and European universities.
as we have forgiven our debtors.
Some opponents see the Germanic, Slavic, and Celtic languages, in particular, as having little influence.
Nos Padre, ce es en sielo,
If the singular does not end in a vowel, the final ''-s'' becomes ''-es.''
IALA also received support from such prestigious groups as the Carnegie Corporation, the Ford Foundation, the Research Corporation, and the Rockefeller Foundation.
Their spelling may contain diacritics, or accent marks.
Plurals are formed by adding ''-s'', or ''-es'' after a final consonant.
e pardonez a ni nia ofensi,
come in cielo così in terra.
Interlingua is presented on CDs, radio, and television.
como etiam nos los pardona a nostre debitores.
People with a good knowledge of a Romance language, or a smattering of a Romance language plus a good knowledge of the ''international scientific vocabulary'' can frequently understand it immediately on reading or hearing it.
At the outbreak of World War II, IALA's research activities were moved from Liverpool to New York, where E. Clark Stillman established a new research staff.
Either secondary control language can substitute for a primary language.
Give us this day our daily bread;
Most adverbs are derived regularly from adjectives by adding ''-mente'', or ''-amente'' after a ''-c''.
Hence, Interlingua includes such diverse word forms as Japanese ''geisha'' and ''samurai'', Arabic ''califa'', Guugu Yimithirr ''gangurru'' (Interlingua: kanguru), and Finnish ''sauna''.
The IALA became a major supporter of mainstream American linguistics, funding, for example, numerous studies by Sapir, Collinson, and Morris Swadesh in the 1930s and 1940s.
Today, interest in Interlingua has expanded from the scientific community to the general public.
Thus, "Interlingua" would mean "language for intercommunication".
However, the outbreak of World War II in 1939 cut short the intended biannual meetings of the committee.
Martinet took up a position at Columbia University in 1948, and Gode took on the last phase of Interlingua's development.
It ranks among the top most widely used IALs (along with Esperanto and Ido), and is the most widely used naturalistic IAL: in other words, its vocabulary, grammar and other characteristics are derived from natural languages rather than a centrally planned grammar and vocabulary.
Donez a ni cadie la omnadiala pano,
It consists of a white four-pointed star extending to the edges of the flag and dividing it into an upper blue and lower red half.
Conversely, it is used as a rapid introduction to many natural languages.
sanktigata estu Via nomo.
The expansive movements of science, technology, trade, diplomacy, and the arts, combined with the historical dominance of the Greek and Latin languages have resulted in a large common vocabulary among European languages.
In recent years, samples of Interlingua have also been seen in music and anime.
In 1967, the powerful International Organization for Standardization, which normalizes terminology, voted almost unanimously to adopt Interlingua as the basis for its dictionaries.
Personal pronouns take one form for the subject and one for the direct object and reflexive.
ma liberaci dal male.
In 2000, the Interlingua Institute was dissolved amid funding disputes with the UMI; the American Interlingua Society, established the following year, succeeded the institute and responded to new interest emerging in Mexico.
Moreover, the source languages are widely spoken internationally, and large numbers of their words also appear in other languages – still more when derivative forms and loan translations are included.
If their meanings have become different over time, they are considered different words for the purpose of Interlingua eligibility.
+ The Lord's Prayer
Periodicals and books are produced by many national organizations, such as the Societate American pro Interlingua, the Svenska Sällskapet för Interlingua, and the Union Brazilian pro Interlingua.
In its early years, IALA concerned itself with three tasks: finding other organizations around the world with similar goals; building a library of books about languages and interlinguistics; and comparing extant IALs, including Esperanto, Esperanto II, Ido, Peano’s Interlingua (Latino sine flexione), Novial, and Interlingue (Occidental).
Our Father, who art in heaven,
slightly&nbsp;schematic, along the lines of Novial
Some opponents argue that, being based on a few European languages, Interlingua is best suited for speakers of European languages.
Four models were canvassed:
Accordingly, the very name "Interlingua" was kept, yet a distinct abbreviation was adopted: IA instead of IL.
Stillman, with the assistance of Dr. Alexander Gode, developed a ''prototyping'' technique – an objective methodology for selecting and standardizing vocabulary based on a comparison of ''control languages''.
Gopsill has suggested that Interlingua's freedom from irregularities allowed the students to grasp the mechanisms of language quickly.
sia fatta la tua Volontà
Et non induce nos in tentatione,
Word order is subject–verb–object, except that a direct object pronoun or reflexive pronoun comes before the verb (''Io les vide'', 'I see them').
There are copious Interlingua web pages,  including editions of Wikipedia and Wiktionary, and a number of periodicals, including ''Panorama in Interlingua'' from the Union Mundial pro Interlingua (UMI) and magazines of the national societies allied with it.
The University of Granada in Spain, for example, offers an Interlingua course in collaboration with the Centro de Formación Continua.
The results of the survey were striking.
In some cases, the archaic or ''potential'' presence of a word can contribute to its eligibility.
The remainder of the vocabulary originates in Slavic and non-Indo-European languages.
Interlingua has active speakers on all continents, especially in South America and in Eastern and Northern Europe, most notably Scandinavia; also in Russia and Ukraine.
This finally convinced supporters of the systematic languages, and IALA from that point assumed the position that a naturalistic language would be best.
The definite article ''le'' is invariable, as in English.
So, IALA selected a much simpler extraction procedure for Interlingua with little adverse effect on its internationality.
así como nosotros hemos perdonado a nuestros deudores;
In the third person, the reflexive is always ''se''.
As with Esperanto, there have been proposals for a flag of Interlingua; the proposal by Czech translator Karel Podrazil is recognized by multilingual sites.
Words do not enter the Interlingua vocabulary solely because cognates exist in a sufficient number of languages.
Each word retains its original spelling, pronunciation, and meanings.
With Interlingua, an objective procedure is used to extract and standardize the most widespread word or words for a concept found in a set of ''control languages'': English, French, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese, with German and Russian as secondary references.
sed libera nos del mal.
More recently, modern alternatives have become generally accepted.
Da hodie ad nos nostro pane quotidiano,
sicut in caelo, et in terra.
Whether or not one believes that a language for all humanity is possible, whether or not one believes that Interlingua will become such a language is totally irrelevant from the point of view of Interlingua itself.
Originally, a word was taken from Latin if the usual procedure did not produce a sufficiently international word.
Words in Interlingua may be taken from any language, as long as their internationality is verified by their presence in seven ''control'' languages: Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, and English, with German and Russian acting as secondary controls.
