An important consequence, sometimes called the ''second fundamental theorem of calculus'', allows one to compute integrals by using an antiderivative of the function to be integrated.
The most important special cases arise when  is , , or a finite extension of the field  of p-adic numbers, and  is a finite-dimensional vector space over , and when  and  is a complex Hilbert space.
Consequently, computerized algebra systems have no hope of being able to find an antiderivative for a randomly constructed elementary function.
This weighting distinguishes the line integral from simpler integrals defined on intervals.
The most basic technique for computing definite integrals of one real variable is based on the fundamental theorem of calculus.
A differential one-form can be integrated over an oriented path, and the resulting integral is just another way of writing a line integral.
Here  denotes the region of integration.
The accuracy is not impressive, but calculus formally uses pieces of infinitesimal width, so initially this may seem little cause for concern.
The function  to be integrated is called the integrand.
This area is just .
Thus surface integrals have applications in physics, particularly with the classical theory of electromagnetism.
Under suitable conditions (e.g., if ''f'' is continuous), then Fubini's theorem guarantees that this integral can be expressed as an equivalent iterated integral
Simpson's rule approximates the integrand by a piecewise quadratic function.
A calculus text is no substitute for numerical analysis, but the reverse is also true.
This produces an approximation whose values never deviate far from those of the original function.
With the first convention, the resulting relation
Techniques include:
This provides an algorithm to express the antiderivative of a ''D''-finite function as the solution of a differential equation.
The computation of higher-dimensional integrals (for example, volume calculations) makes important use of such alternatives as Monte Carlo integration.
Beginning in the nineteenth century, more sophisticated notions of integrals began to appear, where the type of the function as well as the domain over which the integration is performed has been generalised.
The major advance in integration came in the 17th century with the independent discovery of the fundamental theorem of calculus by Newton and Leibniz.
The development of general-purpose computers made numerical integration more practical and drove a desire for improvements.
In more complicated cases, the sets being measured can be highly fragmented, with no continuity and no resemblance to intervals.
There are many ways of formally defining an integral, not all of which are equivalent.
* Differentiation under the integral sign
* ''Reversing limits of integration.''
Summations and integrals can be put on the same foundations using the theory of Lebesgue integrals or time scale calculus.
The Lagrange polynomial interpolating  {(4.00,6.128), (2.00,4.352), (1.00,3.908)} is 3.76 + 0.148, producing the extrapolated value 3.76 at .
Although all bounded piecewise continuous functions are Riemann-integrable on a bounded interval, subsequently more general functions were considered—particularly in the context of Fourier analysis—to which Riemann's definition does not apply, and Lebesgue formulated a different definition of integral, founded in measure theory (a subfield of real analysis).
The volume of irregular objects can be measured with precision by the fluid displaced as the object is submerged.
The function in this example is a degree 3 polynomial, plus a term that cancels because the chosen endpoints are symmetric around zero.
Extensive tables of integrals have been compiled and published over the years for this purpose.
The fluid flux in this example may be from a physical fluid such as water or air, or from electrical or magnetic flux.
Here the basic two-forms  measure oriented areas parallel to the coordinate two-planes.
Integration was first rigorously formalized, using limits, by Riemann.
Let  be the function of  to be integrated over a given interval .
Some special integrands occur often enough to warrant special study.
For example, the integral  is difficult to evaluate numerically because it is infinite at .
This connection, combined with the comparative ease of differentiation, can be exploited to calculate integrals.
370 BC), which sought to find areas and volumes by breaking them up into an infinite number of divisions for which the area or volume was known.
A major mathematical difficulty in symbolic integration is that in many cases, a closed formula for the antiderivative of a rather simple-looking function does not exist.
See  for an axiomatic characterisation of the integral.
We are taking a sum of finitely many function values of , multiplied with the differences of two subsequent approximation points.
Unlike Newton–Cotes rules, which interpolate the integrand at evenly spaced points, Gaussian quadrature evaluates the function at the roots of a set of orthogonal polynomials.
:What is the area under the function , in the interval from 0 to 1?
At this time the work of Cavalieri with his method of Indivisibles, and work by Fermat, began to lay the foundations of modern calculus, with Cavalieri computing the integrals of  up to degree  in Cavalieri's quadrature formula.
Wallis generalized Cavalieri's method, computing integrals of  to a general power, including negative powers and fractional powers.
The multiplication sign is usually omitted.
The values  and , the end-points of the interval, are called the limits of integration of .
There are many extensions of this notation to generalizations of the integral.
As a first approximation, look at the unit square given by the sides  to  and  and .
* Changing the order of integration
A differential two-form is a sum of the form
In this situation the linearity holds for the subspace of functions whose integral is an element of  (i.e.
Integration is one of the two main operations of calculus, with its inverse, differentiation, being the other.
In more complicated cases, limits are required at both endpoints, or at interior points.
This subject, called ''numerical integration'' or ''numerical quadrature'', arose early in the study of integration for the purpose of making hand calculations.
This polynomial is chosen to interpolate the values of the function on the interval.
:For all  there exists  such that, for any tagged partition  with mesh less than , we have
In that case, the integral is, as in the Riemannian case, the difference between the area above the -axis and the area below the -axis:
which has the exact answer .
A "proper" Riemann integral assumes the integrand is defined and finite on a closed and bounded interval, bracketed by the limits of integration.
It is the fundamental theorem of calculus that connects differentiation with the definite integral: if  is a continuous real-valued function defined on a closed interval , then, once an antiderivative  of  is known, the definite integral of  over that interval is given by
Given the name infinitesimal calculus, it allowed for precise analysis of functions within continuous domains.
The Risch algorithm provides a general criterion to determine whether the antiderivative of an elementary function is elementary, and, if it is, to compute it.
the integral is called an indefinite integral (also known as antiderivative).
Equal in importance is the comprehensive mathematical framework that both Newton and Leibniz developed.
If  is a real number then
where the differential  indicates that integration is taken with respect to area.
Barrow provided the first proof of the fundamental theorem of calculus.
Differential forms are organized by degree.
As  puts it, "To compute the Riemann integral of , one partitions the domain  into subintervals", while in the Lebesgue integral, "one is in effect partitioning the range of ".
That is, the improper integral is the limit of proper integrals as one endpoint of the interval of integration approaches either a specified real number, or , or .
The theorem demonstrates a connection between integration and differentiation.
Its area is exactly 1.
The ''Riemann integral'' of a function  over the interval  is equal to  if:
The Lebesgue integral of  is then defined by
Because of this, another notation for the integral over ''R'' uses a double integral sign:
This, with , implies:
Let  be the width of sub-interval ; then the ''mesh'' of such a tagged partition is the width of the largest sub-interval formed by the partition, .
In practice, each method must use extra evaluations to ensure an error bound on an unknown function; this tends to offset some of the advantage of the pure Gaussian method, and motivates the popular Gauss–Kronrod quadrature formulae.
Riemann sums, the trapezoid rule, and Simpson's rule are examples of a family of quadrature rules called Newton–Cotes formulas.
Linearity, together with some natural continuity properties and normalisation for a certain class of "simple" functions, may be used to give an alternative definition of the integral.
This theory also allows one to compute the definite integral of a ''D''-function as the sum of a series given by the first coefficients, and provides an algorithm to compute any coefficient.
The symbol  is not always placed after , as for instance in
Fit a box for each step using the right end height of each curve piece, thus , , and so on to .
To find the flux, we need to take the dot product of  with the unit surface normal to  at each point, which will give us a scalar field, which we integrate over the surface:
Specific results which have been worked out by various techniques are collected in the list of integrals.
* Integration using Euler's formula
that is compatible with linear combinations.
If a function has an integral, it is said to be integrable.
This framework eventually became modern calculus, whose notation for integrals is drawn directly from the work of Leibniz.
A differential form is a mathematical concept in the fields of multivariable calculus, differential topology, and tensors.
In the case of a closed curve it is also called a ''contour integral''.
The explanation for this dramatic success lies in the choice of points.
Using the left end of each piece, the rectangle method sums 16 function values and multiplies by the step width, , here 0.25, to get an approximate value of 3.94325 for the integral.
If  is any element of , then
* Euler substitution
For instance, a sequence of functions can frequently be constructed that approximate, in a suitable sense, the solution to a problem.
* Integration by reduction formulae
The symbol , called the differential of the variable , indicates that the variable of integration is .
In particular, it may be useful to have, in the set of antiderivatives, the special functions of physics (like the Legendre functions, the hypergeometric function, the Gamma function, the Incomplete Gamma function and so on&nbsp;— see Symbolic integration for more details).
This is the approach of Daniell for the case of real-valued functions on a set , generalized by Nicolas Bourbaki to functions with values in a locally compact topological vector space.
This means that the upper and lower sums of the function  are evaluated on a partition  whose values  are increasing.
* Integration using parametric derivatives
He adapted the integral symbol, '''∫''', from the letter ''ſ'' (long s), standing for ''summa'' (written as ''ſumma''; Latin for "sum" or "total").
However, 218 pieces are required, a great computational expense for such little accuracy; and a reach for greater accuracy can force steps so small that arithmetic precision becomes an obstacle.
Practical approximations may suffice for such trivial examples, but precision engineering (of any discipline) requires exact and rigorous values for these elements.
The discrete equivalent of integration is summation.
Most of the elementary and special functions are ''D''-finite, and the integral of a ''D''-finite function is also a ''D''-finite function.
The Risch algorithm, implemented in Mathematica and other computer algebra systems, does just that for functions and antiderivatives built from  rational functions, radicals, logarithm, and exponential functions.
Some authors use an upright "d" to indicate the variable of integration (i.e.,  instead of ).
However, the substitution  transforms the integral into , which has no singularities at all.
To start off, consider the curve  between  and  with  (see figure).
(Cancellation also benefits the Romberg method.)
Alternative methods exist to compute more complex integrals.
This immediately improves the approximation to 3.76925, which is noticeably more accurate.
The value of the line integral is the sum of values of the field at all points on the curve, weighted by some scalar function on the curve (commonly arc length or, for a vector field, the scalar product of the vector field with a differential vector in the curve).
There are also many less common ways of calculating definite integrals; for instance, Parseval's identity can be used to transform an integral over a rectangular region into an infinite sum.
Integration over more general domains is possible.
First, the step lengths are halved incrementally, giving trapezoid approximations denoted by , and so on, where  is half of .
This method was later used in the 5th century by Chinese father-and-son mathematicians Zu Chongzhi and Zu Geng to find the volume of a sphere (; ).
The notation for this integral will be
* Inverse function integration
For example, a one-form is a weighted sum of the differentials of the coordinates, such as:
One reason for the first convention is that the integrability of  on an interval  implies that  is integrable on any subinterval , but in particular integrals have the property that:
Most of these techniques rewrite one integral as a different one which is hopefully more tractable.
* Integration by partial fractions
The symbol  is separated from the integrand by a space (as shown).
An improper integral occurs when one or more of these conditions is not satisfied.
over an interval  is defined if .
The modern notation for the indefinite integral was introduced by Gottfried Leibniz in 1675 (; ).
The most difficult step is usually to find the antiderivative of .
Geometrically, this signifies that integration takes place "left to right", evaluating  within intervals  where an interval with a higher index lies to the right of one with a lower index.
For a suitable class of functions (the measurable functions) this defines the Lebesgue integral.
Computations of volumes of solids of revolution can usually be done with disk integration or shell integration.
where the integral on the right is an ordinary improper Riemann integral ( is a strictly decreasing positive function, and therefore has a well-defined improper Riemann integral).
More broadly, adaptive quadrature partitions a range into pieces based on function properties, so that data points are concentrated where they are needed most.
But the really powerful idea is to interpolate a polynomial through the approximations, and extrapolate to .
These have important applications in physics, as when dealing with vector fields.
is then well-defined for any cyclic permutation of , , and .
* ''Additivity of integration on intervals.''
The integral is said to be over the interval .
and call this (yet unknown) area the (definite) '''integral''' of .
The modern notation for the definite integral, with limits above and below the integral sign, was first used by Joseph Fourier in ''Mémoires'' of the French Academy around 1819–20, reprinted in his book of 1822 (; ).
This can be achieved by splitting the surface into surface elements, which provide the partitioning for Riemann sums.
The definition of the Lebesgue integral thus begins with a measure, μ.
The function to be integrated may be a scalar field or a vector field.
The fundamental theorem of calculus relates indefinite integrals and definite integrals.
A ''line integral'' (sometimes called a ''path integral'') is an integral where the function to be integrated is evaluated along a curve.
Therefore, it is of great importance to have a definition of the integral that allows a wider class of functions to be integrated .
As it is, the true value of the integral must be somewhat less than 1.
The most commonly used definitions of integral are Riemann integrals and Lebesgue integrals.
A general measurable function  is Lebesgue-integrable if the area between the graph of  and the -axis is finite:
Higher degree Newton-Cotes approximations can be more accurate, but they require more function evaluations (already Simpson's rule requires twice the function evaluations of the trapezoid rule), and they can suffer from numerical inaccuracy due to Runge's phenomenon.
* Integration by parts
Area can be found via geometrical compass-and-straightedge constructions of an equivalent square, e.g., squaring the circle.
With the spread of computers, many professionals, educators, and students have turned to computer algebra systems that are specifically designed to perform difficult or tedious tasks, including integration.
The first documented systematic technique capable of determining integrals is the method of exhaustion of the ancient Greek astronomer Eudoxus (''ca.''
Gaussian quadrature often requires noticeably less work for superior accuracy.
A similar method was independently developed in China around the 3rd century AD by Liu Hui, who used it to find the area of the circle.
conceives the integral as a weighted sum, denoted by the elongated , of function values, , multiplied by infinitesimal step widths, the so-called ''differentials'', denoted by .
It is often of interest, both in theory and applications, to be able to pass to the limit under the integral.
A better approach replaces the rectangles used in a Riemann sum with trapezoids.
These approaches based on the real number system are the ones most common today, but alternative approaches exist, such as a definition of integral as the standard part of an infinite Riemann sum, based on the hyperreal number system.
The method of convolution using Meijer G-functions can also be used, assuming that the integrand can be written as a product of Meijer G-functions.
Using more steps produces a closer approximation, but will never be exact: replacing the 5 subintervals by twelve in the same way, but with the left end height of each piece, we will get an approximate value for the area of 0.6203, which is too small.
The integrals discussed in this article are those termed ''definite integrals''.
With this method a numerically ''exact'' answer here requires only four pieces (five function values).
Such integrals are known as line integrals and surface integrals respectively.
refers to a weighted sum in which the function values are partitioned, with  measuring the weight to be assigned to each value.
This gives the line integral
In this example, it can compute the function values at just two  positions, , then double each value and sum to get the numerically exact answer.
A rigorous mathematical definition of the integral was given by Bernhard Riemann.
The area above the -axis adds to the total and that below the -axis subtracts from the total.
* Integration by trigonometric substitution
The trapezoid rule is almost as easy to calculate; it sums all 17 function values, but weights the first and last by one half, and again multiplies by the step width.
Integrals appear in many practical situations.
Using the "partitioning the range of " philosophy, the integral of a non-negative function  should be the sum over  of the areas between a thin horizontal strip between  and .
Indeed, repeatedly doubling the number of steps eventually produces an approximation of 3.76001.
Integrals can also be defined if :
Many simple formulas in physics have natural continuous analogs in terms of line integrals; for example, the fact that work is equal to force, , multiplied by displacement, , may be expressed (in terms of vector quantities) as:
The ''fundamental theorem of calculus'' is the statement that differentiation and integration are inverse operations: if a continuous function is first integrated and then differentiated, the original function is retrieved.
is defined informally as the signed area of the region in the -plane that is bounded by the graph of , the -axis and the vertical lines  and .
* ''Integrals over intervals of length zero.''
Thus Henri Lebesgue introduced the integral bearing his name, explaining this integral thus in a letter to Paul Montel:
Then the integral of the solution function should be the limit of the integrals of the approximations.
This method was further developed and employed by Archimedes in the 3rd century BC and used to calculate areas for parabolas and an approximation to the area of a circle.
The goals of numerical integration are accuracy, reliability, efficiency, and generality, and sophisticated modern methods can vastly outperform a naive method by all four measures (; ; ).
* Contour integration
If the interval is unbounded, for instance at its upper end, then the improper integral is the limit as that endpoint goes to infinity.
More recently a new approach has emerged, using ''D''-finite functions, which are the solutions of linear differential equations with polynomial coefficients.
Some integrals found in real applications can be computed by closed-form antiderivatives.
A line integral is defined for functions of two or three variables, and the interval of integration  is replaced by a certain curve connecting two points on the plane or in the space.
Imagine that we have a fluid flowing through , such that  determines the velocity of the fluid at .
Some antiderivatives do not have closed forms, some closed forms require special functions which themselves are a challenge to compute, and others are so complex that finding the exact answer is too slow.
This double integral can be defined using Riemann sums, and represents the (signed) volume under the graph of  over the domain ''R''.
In particular, the fundamental theorem of calculus allows one to solve a much broader class of problems.
The first convention is necessary in consideration of taking integrals over subintervals of ; the second says that an integral taken over a degenerate interval, or a point, should be zero.
See volume integral.
