Inuit art such as soapstone carvings is one of Nunavut's most important industries.
In 1996, Dene and Inuit representatives participated in a healing ceremony to reconcile the centuries-old grievances.
The typical Inuit diet is high in protein and very high in fat – in their traditional diets, Inuit consumed an average of 75% of their daily energy intake from fat.
These various activist movements began to change the direction of Inuit society in 1975 with the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement.
Other recent research has noted that "While there is little disagreement that there were examples of infanticide in Inuit communities, it is presently not known the depth and breadth of these incidents.
At that event they signed the Nuuk Declaration.
The historic accounts of violence against outsiders does make clear that there was a history of hostile contact within the Inuit cultures and with other cultures.
Among some Inuit groups, if there were children, divorce required the approval of the community and particularly the agreement of the elders.
In particular, he found that adequate vitamin C could be obtained from items in their traditional diet of raw meat such as ringed seal liver and whale skin (muktuk).
The Inuit began to emerge as a political force in the late 1960s and early 1970s, shortly after the first graduates returned home.
During raids against other peoples, the Inuit, like their non-Inuit neighbors, tended to be merciless.
Unfortunately the storm claimed the body, which was not recovered.
The Moravian missionaries could easily provide the Inuit with the iron and basic materials they had been stealing from whaling outposts, materials whose real cost to Europeans was almost nothing, but whose value to the Inuit was enormous and from then on contacts in Labrador were far more peaceful.
Long winter months of waiting for caribou herds or sitting near breathing holes hunting seals gave birth to stories of mysterious and sudden appearance of ghosts and fantastic creatures.
They were dropped off in early September when winter had already arrived.
The changing climate forced Inuit to work their way south, forcing them into marginal niches along the edges of the tree line.
The Inuit practiced a form of shamanism based on animist principles.
Inuit had trade relations with more southern cultures; boundary disputes were common and gave rise to aggressive actions.
A series of authors has focused upon the increasing myopia in the youngest generations of Inuit.
Justice within Inuit culture was moderated by the form of governance that gave significant power to the elders.
A team of dogs in either a tandem/side-by-side or fan formation would pull a sled made of wood, animal bones, or the baleen from a whale's mouth and even frozen fish, over the snow and ice.
More recently, mitochondrial DNA research has supported the theory of continuity between the Tuniit and the Sadlermiut.
In the Northwest Territories, Inuvialuktun, Inuinnaqtun and Inuktitut are all official langues.
Canada's 1982 Constitution Act recognized the Inuit as Aboriginal peoples in Canada, but not First Nations.
The Inuit used stars to navigate at sea and landmarks to navigate on land; they possessed a comprehensive native system of toponymy.
She was the best preserved body ever recovered in Alaska, and radiocarbon dating of grave goods and of a strand of her hair all place her back to about 1200 CE.
* ''maligait'' refers to what has to be followed
The Inuit live throughout most of the Canadian Arctic and subarctic in the territory of Nunavut; "Nunavik" in the northern third of Quebec; "Nunatsiavut" and "NunatuKavut" in Labrador; and in various parts of the Northwest Territories, particularly around the Arctic Ocean.
bowhead whale), walrus, caribou, seal, polar bears, muskoxen, birds, and fish and at times other less commonly eaten animals such as the Arctic fox.
Between 1982 and 1994, a storm with high winds caused ocean waves to erode part of the bluffs near Barrow, Alaska, and a body was discovered to have been washed out of the mud.
With the establishment of Nunatsiavut in 2005, almost all the traditional Inuit lands in Canada, with the exception NunatuKavut in central and South Labrador, are now covered by some sort of land claims agreement providing for regional autonomy.
It was the largest land claims agreement in Canadian history.
Principal theories are the change to a western style diet with more refined foods, and extended education.
Southern Labrador Inuit of NunatuKavut are currently in the process of establishing landclaims and title rights that would allow them to negotiate with the Newfoundland Government.
The semi-nomadic eco-centred Inuit were fishers and hunters harvesting lakes, seas, ice platforms and tundra.
After the disappearance of the Norse colonies in Greenland, the Inuit had no contact with Europeans for at least a century.
Well-known Inuit politicians include Premier of Nunavut, Peter Taptuna, Nancy Karetak-Lindell, former MP for the riding of Nunavut, and Kuupik Kleist, Prime Minister of Greenland.
Martin Frobisher's 1576 search for the Northwest Passage was the first well-documented post-Columbian contact between Europeans and Inuit.
European Colonization of Alaska started in the 18th century by Russia.
Canada, with its more hospitable lands largely settled, began to take a greater interest in its more peripheral territories, especially the fur and mineral-rich hinterlands.
The waters, a central food source, were believed to contain great gods.
The British Naval Expedition of 1821–3 led by Admiral William Edward Parry, which twice over-wintered in Foxe Basin, provided the first informed, sympathetic and well-documented account of the economic, social and religious life of the Inuit.
Jack Anawak and Nancy Karetak-Lindell were both parliamentary secretaries respectively from 1993 to 1996 and in 2003.
Stefansson (1946) also observed that the Inuit were able to get the necessary vitamins they needed from their traditional winter diet, which did not contain any plant matter.
By believing that all things, including animals, have souls like those of humans, any hunt that failed to show appropriate respect and customary supplication would only give the liberated spirits cause to avenge themselves.
The ''angakkuq'' of a community of Inuit was not the leader, but rather a sort of healer and psychotherapist, who tended wounds and offered advice, as well as invoking the spirits to assist people in their lives.
With current dependence on modern society for necessities, (including governmental jobs, food, aid, medicine, etc.
'real people') who live in the Northwest Arctic Borough, the North Slope Borough and the Bering Straits region.
Labrador Inuit have had the longest continuous contact with Europeans.
Once the suicide had been agreed to, the victim would dress him or herself as the dead are clothed, with clothing turned inside-out.
Frobisher brought an unwilling Inuk to England, possibly the first Inuk ever to visit Europe.
In the 1950s, the Canadian government began to actively settle Inuit into permanent villages and cities, occasionally against their will (such as in Nuntak and Hebron).
The Inuit oral tradition, in contrast, recounts the natives helping Frobisher's crewmen, whom they believed had been abandoned.
In a culture with an oral history, elders are the keepers of communal knowledge, effectively the community library.
Their first European contact was with the Vikings who settled in Greenland and explored the eastern Canadian coast.
'''Inuit''' (pronounced  or ; Inuktitut: , "the people") are a group of culturally similar indigenous peoples inhabiting the Arctic regions of Greenland, Canada and Alaska.
An important biennial event, the Arctic Winter Games, is held in communities across the northern regions of the world, featuring traditional Inuit and northern sports as part of the events.
This tale is still told to children today.
In the extreme case of famine, the Inuit fully understood that, if there was to be any hope of obtaining more food, a hunter was necessarily the one to feed on whatever food was left.
One of the more notable relocations was undertaken in 1953, when 17 families were moved from Port Harrison (now Inukjuak, Quebec) to Resolute and Grise Fiord.
In July 2013 she was sworn in as the Minister of the Environment.
Since the mid-1980s the Southern Labrador Inuit of NunatuKavut began organizing politically after being geographically cut out of the LIA, however, for political expediency the organization was erroneously called the Labrador Métis Nation.
Myopia was almost unknown prior to the Inuit adoption of western culture.
Regular visits from doctors, and access to modern medical care raised the birth rate and decreased the death rate, causing an enormous natural increase.
The Sadlermiut population survived up until winter 1902–03, when exposure to new infectious diseases brought by contact with Europeans led to their extinction as a people.
People seeking assistance in their suicide made three consecutive requests to relatives for help.
Because they are of extreme value as the repository of knowledge, there are cultural taboos against sacrificing elders.
While there was considerable skepticism when he reported these findings, they have been borne out in recent studies and analyses.
The Nunatukavummuit were usually spread out among islands and bays and therefore did not establish stationary communities.
Anthropologists believed that Inuit cultures routinely killed children born with physical defects because of the demands of the extreme climate.
As the final step in this long process, the ''Nunavut Land Claims Agreement'' was signed on May 25, 1993, in Iqaluit by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and by Paul Quassa, the president of Nunavut Tunngavik Incorporated, which replaced the TFN with the ratification of the Nunavut Final Agreement.
In the United States and Canada the term "Eskimo" was commonly used to describe the Inuit and Alaska's Yupik and Inupiat.
As World War II ended and the Cold War began, the Arctic became a place where countries that did not get along were close to each other.
These forced resettlements were acknowledged by the Canadian government in 2005.
, which results in the population being mostly concentrated in the big 4 educational cities of Copenhagen, Aarhus, Odense, and Aalborg, which all have vibrant Greenlandic communities and cultural centers (Kalaallit Illuutaat).
Captain George Comer's Inuit wife Shoofly, known for her sewing skills and elegant attire, was influential in convincing him to acquire more sewing accessories and beads for trade with Inuit.
The harshness and unpredictability of life in the Arctic ensured that Inuit lived with concern for the uncontrollable, where a streak of bad luck could destroy an entire community.
Less frequently, the legends refer to the Dorset as "dwarfs".
In many areas Inuit were required to live in towns by the 1960s.
They were thought to have become completely extinct as a people by about 1400 or 1500.
Several frozen bodies (now known as the "frozen family") were recovered, autopsies were performed, and they were re-interred as the first burials in the then-new Imaiqsaun Cemetery south of Barrow.
In 2009 the film, Le Voyage D'Inuk, a Greenlandic language feature film directed by Mike Magidson and co-written by Magidson and French film producer Jean-Michel Huctin.
For others they were invisible giants, the souls of animals, a guide to hunting and as a spirit for the ''angakkuq'' to help with healing.
Frobisher encountered Inuit on Resolution Island where five sailors left the ship, under orders from Frobisher, and became part of Inuit mythology.
''Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit'', or traditional knowledge, such as storytelling, mythology, music and dancing remain important parts of the culture.
In the final years of the 18th century, the Moravian Church began missionary activities in Labrador, supported by the British who were tired of the raids on their whaling stations.
In Greenland, Inuit also speak Danish and learn English in school.
There is a vast array of different hunting technologies that the Inuit used to gather their food.
Nonetheless, Inuit society in the higher latitudes had largely remained in isolation during the 19th century.
When food is not sufficient, the elderly are the least likely to survive.
After about 1350, the climate grew colder during the period known as the Little Ice Age.
The families were told by the RCMP they would be able to return within two years if conditions were not right.
By the mid-1960s, encouraged first by missionaries, then by the prospect of paid jobs and government services, and finally forced by hunger and required by police, most Canadian Inuit lived year-round in permanent settlements.
In the winter, Inuit would also hunt sea mammals by patiently watching an ''aglu'' (breathing hole) in the ice and waiting for the air-breathing seals to use them.
The games were first held in 1970, and while rotated usually among Alaska, Yukon and the Northwest Territories, they have also been held in Schefferville, Quebec in 1976, in Slave Lake, Alberta, and a joint Iqaluit, Nunavut-Nuuk, Greenland staging in 2002.
''Inuit'' is the Eastern Canadian Inuit (Inuktitut) and West Greenlandic (Kalaallisut) word for "the people."
The environment in which the Inuit lived inspired a mythology filled with adventure tales of whale and walrus hunts.
While it is not possible to cultivate plants for food in the Arctic, the Inuit have traditionally gathered those that are naturally available.
Indeed, prior to about 1970, it is impossible to find even one reference to a Western observer who was aware that any form of governance existed among any Inuit, however, there was a set way of doing things that had to be followed:
Finally, Deaf Inuit speak Inuit Sign Language, often called Inuiuuk, which is a language isolate and almost extinct as only around 50 people still speak it.
They formed new politically active associations in the early 1970s, starting with the Inuit Tapirisat of Canada (Inuit Brotherhood and today known as Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami), an outgrowth of the Indian and Eskimo Association of the '60s, in 1971, and more region specific organizations shortly afterwards, including the Committee for the Original People's Entitlement (representing the Inuvialuit), the Northern Quebec Inuit Association (Makivik Corporation) and the Labrador Inuit Association (LIA) representing Northern Labrador Inuit.
Boots (''mukluk'' or ''kamik''), could be made of caribou or seal skin, and designed for men and women.
During this period, Alaskan natives were able to continue their whaling activities, but Inuit were forced to abandon their hunting and whaling sites in the high Arctic as bowhead whales disappeared from Canada and Greenland.
The Norse sagas recorded meeting ''skrælingar'', probably an undifferentiated label for all the Native Americans whom the Norse encountered, whether Tuniit, Inuit, or Beothuk.
The Hudson's Bay Company opened trading posts such as Great Whale River (1820), today the site of the twin villages of Whapmagoostui and Kuujjuarapik, where whale products of the commercial whale hunt were processed and furs traded.
Goods were shared within a household, and also, to a significant extent, within a whole community.
It also has provided evidence that a population displacement did not occur within the Aleutian Islands between the Dorset and Thule transition.
It also makes it clear that Inuit nations existed through history, as well as confederations of such nations.
The more sparsely settled Inuit in the Central Arctic, however, did so less often.
Family members would attempt to dissuade the individual at each suggestion, but with the third request by a person, assistance became obligatory.
People such as Legislative Assembly of Nunavut member, Levinia Brown and former Commissioner of Nunavut and the NWT, Helen Maksagak were born and lived the early part of their life "on the land".
In Canada and Greenland, "Inuit" is preferred.
During the early 20th century a few traders and missionaries circulated among the more accessible bands, and after 1904 they were accompanied by a handful of Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP).
There was also a larger notion of community as, generally, several families shared a place where they wintered.
It was a female child, approximately 9 years old, who had clearly been born with a congenital birth defect.
At the same time men, who could be away from camp for several days at a time, would be expected to know how to sew and cook.
One of the most famous Inuit artists is Pitseolak Ashoona.
* ''piqujait'' refers to what has to be done
The Inuit have traditionally been fishers and hunters.
However, the term is probably a Montagnais exonym as well as being widely used in folk etymology as meaning "eater of raw meat" in the Cree language.
Furthermore, fish oil supplement studies have failed to support claims of preventing heart attacks or strokes.
They moved between summer and winter camps to always be living where there were animals to hunt.
Inuit religion was closely tied to a system of rituals integrated into the daily life of the people.
In the United States, Inupiat live on the North Slope in Alaska and on Little Diomede Island.
Although still a part of the Kingdom of Denmark (along with Denmark proper and the Faroe Islands), Greenland, known as Kalaallit Nunaat in the Greenlandic language, maintains much autonomy today.
The death occurred at a specific place, where the material possessions of deceased people were brought to be destroyed.
The research is neither complete nor conclusive to allow for a determination of whether infanticide was a rare or a widely practiced event."
There are a surprising number of Inuit, even those who now live in urban centres such as Ottawa, Montreal and Winnipeg, who have experienced living on the land in the traditional life style.
Native customs were worn down by the actions of the RCMP, who enforced Canadian criminal law on Inuit, such as Kikkik, who often could not understand what they had done wrong, and by missionaries who preached a moral code very different from the one they were used to.
In the 1950s the High Arctic relocation was undertaken by the Government of Canada for several reasons.
The Inuit Circumpolar Council is a United Nations-recognized non-governmental organization (NGO), which defines its constituency as Canada's Inuit and Inuvialuit, Greenland's Kalaallit Inuit, Alaska's Inupiat and Yup'ik, and Russia's Siberian Yupik, despite the last two neither speaking an Inuit dialect or considering themselves "Inuit".
Kalaallisut is the official language of Greenland.
The Thule people arrived in Greenland in the 13th century.
The stressors regarding the identity crisis among teenagers have led to disturbingly high numbers of suicide.
The Inuit would perform rituals over the newborn pup to give it favorable qualities; the legs were pulled to make them grow strong and the nose was poked with a pin to enhance the sense of smell.
Inuit art, carving, print making, textiles and Inuit throat singing, are very popular, not only in Canada but globally, and Inuit artists are widely known.
The Inuvialuit are western Canadian Inuit who remained in the Northwest Territories when Nunavut split off.
Small sculptures of animals and human figures, usually depicting everyday activities such as hunting and whaling, were carved from ivory and bone.
The belief that the Inuit regularly resorted to infanticide may be due in part to studies done by Asen Balikci, Milton Freeman and David Riches among the Netsilik, along with the trial of Kikkik.
As of the 2006 Canada Census there were 10,950 Inuit living in Quebec.
Walrus ivory was a particularly essential material, used to make knives.
The Inuit generally favored, and tried to breed, the most striking and handsome of dogs, especially ones with bright eyes and a healthy coat.
Susan Aglukark is a popular singer.
The site, known as the "Ukkuqsi archaeological site", was excavated.
To offend a spirit was to risk its interference with an already marginal existence.
Marriages were often arranged, sometimes in infancy, and occasionally forced on the couple by the community.
In 1939, the Supreme Court of Canada found, in a decision known as ''Re Eskimos'', that the Inuit should be considered Indians and were thus under the jurisdiction of the federal government.
Canadian Inuit may also speak Québécois French.
These areas are known in Inuktitut as the "Inuit Nunangat".
However, Aboriginal peoples in Canada and Greenland view "Eskimo" as pejorative, and "Inuit" has become more common.
Every household had its head, an elder or a particularly respected man.
Leona Aglukkaq, current MP, was the first Inuk to be sworn into the Canadian Federal Cabinet as Health Minister in 2008.
However, evidence shows that Inuit cultures had quite accurate methods of teaching historical accounts to each new generation.
These Inuit then had to subsist on a much poorer diet in addition to losing access to essential raw materials for their tools and architecture previously derived from whaling.
In other areas south of the tree line, Native American cultures were well established.
With better health care, the Inuit population grew too large to sustain itself solely by hunting.
In November 1992, the ''Nunavut Final Agreement'' was approved by nearly 85% of the Inuit of what would become Nunavut.
However, two years later more families were relocated to the High Arctic and it was to be thirty years before they were able to visit Inukjuak.
These were to include protecting Canada's sovereignty in the Arctic, alleviating hunger (as the area currently occupied had been over-hunted), and attempting to solve the "Eskimo problem", meaning the assimilation and end of the Inuit culture.
As Inuktitut was the language of the Eastern Canadian Inuit and Kalaallisut is the language of the Western Greenlandic Inuit, they are related more closely than most other dialects.
South of Nunatsiavut, the descendants of the southern Labrador Inuit in NunatuKavut continued their traditional transhumant semi-nomadic way of life until the mid-1900s.
The Inuktitut language is still spoken in many areas of the Arctic and is common on radio and in television programming.
These schools, in Aklavik, Iqaluit, Yellowknife, Inuvik and Kuujjuaq, brought together young Inuit from across the Arctic in one place for the first time, and exposed them to the rhetoric of civil and human rights that prevailed in Canada in the 1960s.
In some cases, a suicide was a publicly acknowledged and attended event.
In winter, both on land and on sea ice, the Inuit used dog sleds (''qamutik'') for transportation.
This comprehensive land claims settlement for Quebec Inuit, along with a large cash settlement and substantial administrative autonomy in the new region of Nunavik, set the precedent for the settlements to follow.
The marital customs among the Inuit were not strictly monogamous: many Inuit relationships were implicitly or explicitly sexual.
The nearest thing to a central deity was the Old Woman (''Sedna''), who lived beneath the sea.
The study focused on the fact that the Inuit's low-carbohydrate diet had no adverse effects on their health, nor indeed, Stefansson's own health.
They were  long and had a flat bottom so that the boats could come close to shore.
Writing of the Labrador Inuit, Hawkes (1916) was considerably more explicit on the subject of suicide and the burden of the elderly:
The nomadic migrations that were the central feature of Arctic life had become a much smaller part of life in the North.
They still hunt whales (esp.
They displaced the related Dorset culture, the last major Paleo-Eskimo culture (in Inuktitut, called the ''Tuniit'').
Marriage was common for women at puberty and for men when they became productive hunters.
The Arctic had always been seen as inaccessible, but the invention of aircraft made it easier for non-Arctic dwellers to get there.
During the summer they became pack animals, sometimes dragging up to  of baggage and in the winter they pulled the sled.
During the winter, certain Inuit lived in a temporary shelter made from snow called an ''igloo'', and during the few months of the year when temperatures were above freezing, they lived in tents, known as ''tupiq'', made of animal skins supported by a frame of bones or wood.
The Inuit of Alaska are the Inupiat (from Inuit- people – and piaq/piat real, i.e.
So the Inuit had the place to themselves.
The majority, about 14,718, live in the state of Alaska.
''Angakkuit'' were not trained; they were held to be born with the ability and recognized by the community as they approached adulthood.
The ''husky'' dog breed comes from Inuit breeding of dogs and wolves for transportation.
* ''tirigusuusiit'' refers to what has to be avoided
Although anthropologists like Diamond Jenness (1964) were quick to predict that Inuit culture was facing extinction, Inuit political activism was already emerging.
This technique is also used by the polar bear, who hunts by seeking holes in the ice and waiting nearby.
The Inuit were hunter–gatherers, and have been referred to as nomadic.
The known confederations were usually formed to defend against a more prosperous, and thus stronger, nation.
Like Nunavut the population lives throughout the region.
Inuit made clothes and footwear from animal skins, sewn together using needles made from animal bones and threads made from other animal products, such as sinew.
The majority, about 9,565, live in Nunavik.
Most travel to Denmark for educational purposes, and many remain after finishing their education
The Inuit understood that they had to work in harmony with supernatural powers to provide the necessities of day-to-day life.
On October 30, 2008, Leona Aglukkaq was appointed as Minister of Health, "becoming the first Inuk to hold a senior cabinet position, although she is not the first Inuk to be in cabinet altogether."
In the same year, the Tunngavik Federation of Nunavut (TFN) was incorporated, in order to take over negotiations for land claims on behalf of the Inuit living in the eastern Northwest Territories, that would later become Nunavut, from the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, which became a joint association of the Inuit of Quebec, Labrador, and the Northwest Territories.
The Greenlandic Inuit are the descendants of migrations from Canada and are citizens of Denmark, although not of the European Union.
Frobisher's expedition landed in Frobisher Bay, Baffin Island, not far from the settlement now called The City of Iqaluit which was long known as ''Frobisher Bay''.
In 2002 the first feature film in Inuktitut, ''Atanarjuat'', was released worldwide to great critical and popular acclaim.
These were areas which Native Americans had not occupied or where they were weak enough for coexistence with Inuit.
While there are some allegations that Inuit were hostile to early French and English explorers, fishers and whalers, more recent research suggests that the early relations with whaling stations along the Labrador coast and later James Bay were based on a mutual interest in trade.
