Interhalogen compounds are well known; examples include iodine monochloride and trichloride; iodine pentafluoride and heptafluoride.
Normal vaginal tissue stains brown from high glycogen content (a color-reaction similar to that with starch), while abnormal tissue (possibly cancerous) does not stain and appears paler than the surrounding tissue.
In an estimated two-thirds of households on Earth, table salt is iodized.
The next-longest-lived radioisotope, iodine-125, has a half-life of 59 days.
Most other iodine producers use naturally occurring brine.
Applications of tincture of iodine or Betadine can cause rashes, sometimes severe.
The production of ethylenediamine dihydroiodide, provided as a nutritional supplement for livestock, consumes a large portion of available iodine.
Alkyl iodides such as iodomethane are good alkylating agents.
:2 I− + 4 H+ + MnO2 → I2 + 2 H2O + Mn2+
Of the several iodine sources in nature, only two are useful commercially: the caliche, found in Chile, and the iodine-containing brines of gas and oil fields, especially in Japan and the United States.
Kelp was a common source of iodine in the 18th and 19th centuries, but it is no longer economically viable.
This reaction produces 314 kJ per mole of aluminium, comparable to thermite's 425 kJ.
for iodine deficiency per 100,000&nbsp;inhabitants in 2002.
Iodine is a common general stain used in thin-layer chromatography.
From the perspective of commercial applications, an important compound is hydroiodic acid, used as a co-catalyst in the Cativa process for the production of acetic acid.
In the universe and on Earth, iodine's high atomic number makes it a relatively rare element.
Davy sent a letter dated 10 December to the Royal Society of London stating that he had identified a new element.
Sodium iodide is especially useful in the Finkelstein reaction because it is soluble in acetone, whereas potassium iodide is less so.
Practically, only the −1 oxidation state is of significance, being the form found in iodide salts and organoiodine compounds.
Iodized salt is fortified with iodine.
A metal ion may replace the solvent, in which case the two species exchange electrons, the ion undergoing π backbonding.
* Iodine may be used to test a sample substance for the presence of starch.
: I2 + 2 H2O + SO2 → 2 HI + H2SO4
The antimicrobial action of iodine is quick and works at low concentrations.
Excess iodine can be more cytotoxic in the presence of selenium deficiency.
Like other radioiodines, I-131 accumulates in the thyroid gland, but unlike the others, in small amounts it is highly carcinogenic there, it seems, owing to the high local cell mutation from beta decay damage.
It is also used to block uptake of iodine-131 in the thyroid gland (see isotopes section above), when this isotope is used as part of radiopharmaceuticals (such as iobenguane) that are not targeted to the thyroid or thyroid-type tissues.
Air is blown into the solution to evaporate the iodine, which is passed into an absorbing tower where sulfur dioxide reduces the iodine.
Both salts are used mainly in the production of iodized salt.
Iodine is sometimes used to stabilize the wavelength of helium-neon lasers.
Unlike tincture of iodine, Lugol's has a minimized amount of the free iodine (I2) component.
In areas where there is little iodine in the diet, typically remote inland areas and semi-arid equatorial climates where no marine foods are eaten, iodine deficiency gives rise to hypothyroidism, symptoms of which are extreme fatigue, goitre, mental slowing, depression, weight gain, and low basal body temperatures.
In amphibian metamorphosis iodine and thyroid hormones exert a well-studied experimental model of apoptosis on the cells of gills, tail, and fins of tadpoles.
Ampère had given some of his sample to English chemist Humphry Davy (1778–1829).
: 2 HI + Cl2 → I2↓ + 2 HCl
: 2 CuI2 → 2 CuI + I2
Investigation continues into other possible health problems caused by iodine deficiency, including:
Patients with various food allergies (shellfish, egg, milk, etc.)
However, this still leaves an estimated two billion people iodine-deficient.
The toxicity derives from its oxidizing properties, through which it denaturates proteins (including enzymes).
Charge-transfer complexes form when iodine is dissolved in polar solvents, modifying the energy distribution of iodine's molecular orbitals, hence changing the colour.
Hypersensitivity reactions to products and foods containing iodine are apparently related to their other molecular components; thus, a person who has demonstrated an allergy to one food or product containing iodine may not be have an allergic reaction to another.
The colour is due to absorption of visible light by electronic transitions between the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals.
: Cu2+ + 2 I− → CuI2
It is used as a convenient gamma-emitting tag for proteins in biological assays, and a few nuclear medicine imaging tests where a longer half-life is required.
Present in sea water, it is the heaviest essential element used widely by life in biological functions (only tungsten, employed in enzymes by a few species of bacteria, is heavier).
* Iodine compounds are more expensive than the corresponding bromides and chlorides, in that order.
Iodine deficiency is the leading cause of preventable intellectual disability, a result that occurs primarily when babies or small children are rendered hypothyroidic by a lack of the element.
Saltpeter produced from French nitre beds required sodium carbonate, which could be isolated from seaweed collected on the coasts of Normandy and Brittany.
:R-Cl  + NaI  → R-I  + NaCl
Excess iodine can then react with  to form  (green) and  (black).
Minerals containing iodine include caliche, found in Chile.
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medications needed in a basic health system.
The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for adults is 1,100&nbsp;μg/day (1.1&nbsp;mg/day).
Because of this function, radioisotopes of iodine are concentrated in the thyroid gland along with nonradioactive iodine.
In the United States, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) regards iodine and compounds containing iodine (ionic iodides, iodoform, ethyl iodide, and so on) as reagents useful for the clandestine manufacture of methamphetamine.
The reaction initiates spontaneously, and if unconfined, boils the liquid iodine into a gaseous cloud.
This relies on the insolubility of sodium chloride in acetone to drive the reaction:
Solutions with high elemental iodine concentration, such as tincture of iodine and Lugol's solution, are capable of causing tissue damage if used in prolonged cleaning or antisepsis; similarly, liquid Povidone-iodine (Betadine) trapped against the skin resulted in chemical burns in some reported cases.
kelp) and shellfish, dairy products and eggs so long as the animals received enough iodine, and plants grown on iodine-rich soil.
I2 is easily reduced and I− is easily oxidized.
A solution of starch and iodide can perform the same function.
Nonradioactive ordinary potassium iodide (iodine-127), in a number of convenient forms (tablets or solution) may be used to saturate the thyroid gland with iodine, and thereby protect it against accidental contamination from iodine-131 generated by nuclear fission accidents, such as the Chernobyl disaster, the Fukushima I nuclear accidents, and nuclear fallout from nuclear weapons.
Melting at , it forms compounds with many elements but is less reactive than other halogens, and has some metallic light reflectance.
In the alternative, iodine may be produced from iodophors, which contain iodine complexed with a solubilizing agent (iodide ion may be thought of loosely as the iodophor in triiodide water solutions).
Iodine adopts a variety of oxidation states, commonly ranging from (formally) I(VII) to I(-I), and including the intermediate states of I(V), I(III) and I(I).
Elemental iodine is used as a disinfectant either as the element, or as the water-soluble triiodide anion I3− generated ''in situ'' by adding iodide to poorly water-soluble elemental iodine (the reverse chemical reaction makes some free elemental iodine available for antisepsis).
The crystal motif in the Hermann–Mauguin notation is Cmca (No 64), Pearson symbol oS8.
Iodine is useful in analytical chemistry because it reacts with alkenes, starch, and oxidizing and reducing agents, producing highly colored species that are ready analytical indicators.
The remaining waste was destroyed by adding sulfuric acid.
Iodine was used by the police to reveal latent fingerprints on paper and similar surfaces ("iodine fuming").
This is often in conjunction with advanced X-ray techniques such as angiography and CT scanning.
:2 I− + Cl2 → I2 + 2 Cl−
:I2 + 2  → 2  + Cl2
Courtois suspected that this was a new element but lacked funding to pursue it further.
At present, all water-soluble radiocontrast agents rely on iodine.
A family of selenium-dependent enzymes called deiodinases converts T4 to T3 (the active hormone) by removing an iodine atom from the outer tyrosine ring.
T4 acts largely as a precursor to T3, which is (with minor exceptions) the biologically active hormone.
Some researchers have found an epidemiologic correlation between iodine deficiency, iodine-deficient goitre, and gastric cancer.
These are addition condensation products of the amino acid tyrosine, and are stored prior to release in aprotein called thyroglobulin.
Iodine is reduced to hydrogen iodide by hydrogen sulfide and hydrazine:
The resulting  or  can be isolated as deep blue crystals.
Elemental iodine is slightly soluble in water, with one gram dissolving in 3450&nbsp;ml at 20&nbsp;°C and 1280&nbsp;ml at 50&nbsp;°C; potassium iodide may be added to increase solubility via formation of triiodide ions.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.1 ppm (1&nbsp;mg/m3) during an 8-hour workday.
He also gave some of the substance to chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778–1850), and to physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836).
This is long enough to be a permanent fixture of the environment on human time scales, but far too short for it to survive as a primordial isotope.
In the cells of those tissues, iodide enters directly by sodium-iodide symporter (NIS).
Total deficiency of thyroid hormones can reduce basal metabolic rate by as much as 50%.
Iodine and the iodide ion form a redox couple.
As an element with high electron density and atomic number, iodine absorbs X-rays weaker than 33.3 keV due to the photoelectric effect of the innermost electrons.
On 6 December, Gay-Lussac announced that the new substance was either an element or a compound of oxygen.
Organoiodine compounds can be produced in many ways.
The oxidation of iodide to iodine in air is also responsible for the slow loss of iodide content in iodized salt if exposed to air.
* During colposcopy, Lugol's iodine is applied to the vagina and cervix.
* '''Stomach cancer'''.
Electrolysis is not used to produce of iodine from seawater the iodine-rich brine are sufficient.
* Iodides are much stronger alkylating agents, and thus more toxic (e.g., methyl iodide is very toxic (T+)).
Information processing, fine motor skills, and visual problem solving are improved by iodine repletion in moderately iodine-deficient children.
With electron donors such as triphenylphosphine and pyridine it forms a charge-transfer complex.
With the iodide anion it forms the triiodide ion.
Under slightly more alkaline conditions,  disproportionates into  and an iodine(III) compound.
The thyroid gland needs no more than 70&nbsp;μg/day to synthesize the requisite daily amounts of T4 and T3.
Courtois once added excessive sulfuric acid and a cloud of purple vapour rose.
The I2 molecules tend to interact via the weak van der Waals forces called the London dispersion forces, and this interaction is responsible for a melting point that is higher than more compact halogens, which are also diatomic.
The thyroid gland actively absorbs iodide from the blood to make and release these hormones into the blood, actions that are regulated by a second hormone TSH from the pituitary.
Another significant use is a catalyst for the production of acetic acid by the Monsanto and Cativa processes.
For example, methyl iodide can be prepared from methanol, red phosphorus, and iodine.
* Lugol's iodine: iodine and iodide in water alone, forming mostly triiodide.
The volatile iodomethane is broken up in the atmosphere as part of a global iodine cycle.
The action of iodine in mammary tissue is related to fetal and neonatal development, but in the other tissues, it is (at least) partially unknown.
The iodoform test uses an alkaline solution of iodine to react with methyl ketones to give the labile triiodomethide leaving group, forming iodoform, which precipitates.
Iodine-131 (half-life 8 days), a beta-emitting isotope, is a common nuclear fission product.
Thyroid hormones play a basic role in biology, acting on gene transcription to regulate the basal metabolic rate.
Iodine is used as propellant for ambipolar Ion thrusters, with performance similar to that of Xenon.
To isolate the sodium carbonate, seaweed was burned and the ash washed with water.
People can be exposed to iodine in the workplace by inhalation, ingestion, skin contact, and eye contact.
Perfluoroalkyl iodides are precursors to important surfactants, such as perfluorooctanesulfonic acid.
Hafnium, zirconium, titanium are purified by the van Arkel Process, which involves the reversible formation of the tetraiodides of these elements.
The hydrogen iodide (HI) is reacted with chlorine to precipitate the iodine.
The simplest organoiodine compound is iodomethane, approved as a soil fumigant.
T4 and T3 contain four and three atoms of iodine per molecule, respectively.
Davy did some experiments on the substance and noted its similarity to chlorine.
In Japan, consumption was considered much higher, ranging between 5,280&nbsp;μg/day to 13,800&nbsp;μg/day from dietary seaweed or kombu kelp, often in the form of Kombu Umami extracts for soup stock and potato chips.
Thyroid hormones are phylogenetically very old molecules that are synthesized by most multicellular organisms, and that even have some effect on unicellular organisms.
It is preferably administered to humans only in very high doses that destroy all tissues where it accumulates (usually the thyroid), which in turn prevents these tissues from developing cancer from a lower dose (paradoxically, a high dose of this isotope appears safer for the thyroid than a low dose).
Excessive production of thyroid hormones can increase the basal metabolic rate by 100%.
Suspicious tissue can then be biopsied.
(Modern treatment for syphilis involves the use of antibiotics to kill syphilis bacteria - see Syphilis.)
Other studies have reported that iodine supplements were coincident with a decrease in the death rate from stomach cancer.
The brine is first purified and acidified using sulfuric acid, then the iodide present is oxidized to iodine with chlorine.
Elemental iodine is also a skin irritant, and direct contact with skin can cause damage and solid iodine crystals should be handled with care.
For this reason, people who at risk of exposure to environmental radioactive iodine (iodine-131) in fallout may be instructed to take non-radioactive potassium iodide tablets.
They described the substance to a meeting of the Imperial Institute of France.
In medicine, a saturated solution of potassium iodide called '''SSKI''' is used to treat acute thyrotoxicosis.
:8 I2 + 8 H2S → 16 HI + S8
Iodine is sometimes used to activate magnesium when preparing Grignard reagents.
It was Gay-Lussac who suggested the name ''"iode"'', from the Greek word  (''ioeidēs'') for violet (because of the colour of iodine vapor).
After filtering and purification the iodine is packed.
He noted that the vapour crystallized on cold surfaces, making dark crystals.
Iodine deficiency affects about two billion people and is the leading preventable cause of intellectual disabilities.
The daily Dietary Reference Intake recommended by the United States Institute of Medicine is between 110 and 130 µg for infants up to 12 months, 90&nbsp;µg for children up to eight years, 130&nbsp;µg for children up to 13 years, 150&nbsp;µg for adults, 220&nbsp;µg for pregnant women and 290&nbsp;µg for lactating mothers.
Alkali metal salts are common colourless solids that are highly soluble in water.
Iodine's relatively high atomic number, low toxicity, and ease of attachment to organic compounds have made iodine radioisotopes, such as 131I, a part of many X-ray contrast materials in modern medicine.
The tolerable upper intake limit of iodine in Japan is 3,000&nbsp;µg/day for an adult.
Titanium and aluminium iodides are used in the production of butadiene, a precursor to rubber tires.
Parenteral use of iodine-based contrast agents (see above) can cause reactions ranging from a mild rash to fatal anaphylaxis.
Potassium iodide is a convenient source of the iodide anion; it is easier to handle than sodium iodide because it is not hygroscopic.
Iodine-123 (half-life 13 hours) is the isotope of choice for nuclear medicine imaging of the thyroid gland, which naturally accumulates all iodine isotopes.
Some salts use iodate () to prevent the loss of iodine.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (Permissible exposure limit) for iodine exposure in the workplace at 0.1 ppm (1&nbsp;mg/m3) during an 8-hour workday.
Despite having the lowest electronegativity of the common halogens, iodine reacts violently with some metals, such as aluminium:
For treatment of syphilis, it states "in its tertiary stages and also earlier this disease yields in the most rapid and unmistakable fashion to iodides; so much so that the administration of these salts is at present the best means of determining whether, for instance, a cranial tumour be syphilitic or not".
Its specific mode of action is unknown.
The concentration of an oxidant can be determined by adding it to an excess of iodide; the test sample oxidizes the elemental iodine/triiodide.
The calcium iodates are reduced to the corresponding iodides.
Inorganic iodides find specialized uses.
The longest-lived radioisotope, iodine-129, has a half-life of 15.7 million years.
An iodine solution is produced, but is dilute and must be concentrated.
Iodine value or iodine number indicates the number of carbon-carbon double bonds in vegetable oils and fatty acids.
The iodine clock reaction is an extension of the techniques in iodometry.
Most common is the interconversion of I− and I2.
Evidence for this conversion is the yellow tint of certain aged samples of iodide salts and some organoiodine compounds.
or asthma are more likely to suffer reactions to contrast media containing iodine.
This is called a Schiller's Test.
One consequence of this weak bonding is that I2 molecules have a relatively high tendency to dissociate into atomic iodine.
:2 I2 + N2H4 → 4 HI + N2
Hydrolysis of the resulting acetyl iodide regenerates hydroiodic acid and gives acetic acid.
Since the atomic size of iodine is larger, its melting point is higher.
The general US population has adequate iodine nutrition, with women of childbearing age and pregnant women having a possible mild risk of deficiency.
Iodine supplementation in selenium-deficient populations is, in theory, problematic, partly for this reason.
* '''Breast cancer.'''
About 214 kilotonnes/year of iodomethane is produced by the marine environment, by microbial activity in rice paddies and by the burning of biological material.
The  cation is also formed in the oxidation of iodine by  or .
Several analytical methods rely on this property:
Examples of such preparations include:
However, new studies suggest that Japan's consumption is closer to 1,000–3,000&nbsp;μg/day.
In animal biology, iodine is primarily a constituent of the thyroid hormones ''thyroxine'' (T4) and ''triiodothyronine'' (T3).
See the article on potassium iodide for more on this topic.
For the treatment of chronic lead poisoning, it states "the essential part of the medicinal treatment of this condition is the administration of iodides, which are able to decompose the insoluble albuminates of lead which have become locked up in the tissues, rapidly causing their degeneration, and to cause the excretion of the poisonous metal by means of the intestine and the kidneys" (modern treatment for lead poisoning involves the use of a variety of substances - see Lead poisoning).
Iodine has only one stable isotope.
It is also commonly used in brachytherapy implanted capsules that kill tumors by local short-range gamma radiation (but where the isotope is never released into the body).
Iodine normally exists as a diatomic molecule with an I-I bond length of 270&nbsp;pm, one of the longest single bonds known.
A family of non-selenium-dependent enzymes then further deiodinates the products of these reactions.
The caliche contains sodium nitrate, which is the main product of the mining activities, contaminated with small amounts of various calcium iodate minerals.
Iodine forms an intense blue complex with the glucose polymers starch and glycogen.
* Low-molecular-weight iodides tend to weigh more than other alkylating agents (e.g., methyl iodide versus dimethyl carbonate) from the atomic mass of iodine.
:3 I2 + 2 Al → 2 AlI3
Because of this tendency of 131I to cause high damage to cells that collect it and others near them (0.6 to 2&nbsp;mm away, the range of the beta rays), it is the only iodine radioisotope used as direct therapy to kill tissues such as cancers that take up artificially iodinated molecules (example, the compound iobenguane, also known as MIBG).
The element may also be prepared in an ultra-pure form through the reaction of potassium iodide with copper(II) sulfate, which gives copper(II) iodide initially, which then decomposes spontaneously to copper(I) iodide and iodine:
Iodine forms compounds with all the elements except for the noble gases.
Fifteen to 20&nbsp;mg of iodine is concentrated in thyroid tissue and hormones, but 70% of all iodine in the body is found in other tissues, including mammary glands, eyes, gastric mucosa, fetal thymus, cerebro-spinal fluid and choroid plexus, arterial walls, the cervix, and salivary glands.
The solid crystallizes as orthorhombic crystals.
It penetrates into microorganisms and attacks particular amino acids (such as cysteine and methionine), nucleotides, and fatty acids, ultimately resulting in cell death.
The brine is hotter than 60&nbsp;°C from the depth of the source.
: 2 HI + Cl2 → I2↑ + 2 HCl
When dissolved in fuming sulfuric acid (65% oleum), iodine forms an intense blue solution.
For the same reason, only the iodine isotope I-131 is used to treat Grave's disease and those thyroid cancers (sometimes in metastatic form) where the tissue that requires destruction still functions to accumulate the iodide.
Iodine and its compounds are primarily used in nutrition, and industrially in the production of acetic acid and certain polymers.
and does not take into account a tolerable upper limit for absorption into other tissues of the body, such as breast tissue in women or prostate tissue in men.
Like the other halogens, free iodine occurs mainly as a diatomic molecule I2, and then only momentarily after being oxidized from iodide by an oxidant like free oxygen.
