Iowa had several brigadier generals and four major generals—Grenville Mellen Dodge, Samuel R. Curtis, Francis J. Herron, and Frederick Steele—and saw many of its generals go on to state and national prominence following the war.
Iowa Hawkeyes football
In 1884, the Iowa Civil Rights Act apparently outlawed discrimination by businesses, reading: "All persons within this state shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of inns, restaurants, chophouses, eating houses, lunch counters, and all other places where refreshments are served, public conveyances, barber shops, bathhouses, theaters, and all other places of amusement."
Five of these have had candidates on the ballot in Iowa since 2004 for various positions: the Constitution Party, the Green Party, the Libertarian Party, the Pirate Party, and the Socialist Workers Party.
During the 1990s, Iowa had the second highest exodus rate for single, educated young adults, second only to North Dakota.
The Iowa Barnstormers play in the Indoor Football League at Wells Fargo Arena in Des Moines.
13% responded with non-religious, and 5% did not answer.
I-80 travels from the Nebraska state line to the Illinois state line through the center of the state, including Council Bluffs, Des Moines, Iowa City, and the Quad Cities.
In college football, Jay Berwanger was the first winner of the Downtown Athletic Club Trophy in 1935, later renamed the Heisman Trophy and won by Nile Kinnick in 1939.
The state has the top graduation rate in the nation.
Once admitted to the Union, the state's boundary issues resolved, and most of its land purchased from the Indians, Iowa set its direction to development and organized campaigns for settlers and investors, boasting the young frontier state's rich farmlands, fine citizens, free and open society, and good government.
The Iowa Speedway oval track has hosted auto racing championships such as the IndyCar Series, NASCAR Nationwide Series and NASCAR Truck Series since 2006.
Much of Iowa's support for the Union can be attributed to Samuel J. Kirkwood, its first wartime governor.
*Faith Baptist Bible College and Theological Seminary, Ankeny
Musicians, actors, and entertainers from Iowa include Tom Arnold, Bix Beiderbecke, Johnny Carson, Buffalo Bill Cody, Simon Estes, Nathan Jonas Jordison, Corey Taylor, Shawn Crahan, William Frawley, Charlie Haden, Ashton Kutcher, Cloris Leachman, Glenn Miller, Kate Mulgrew, Donna Reed, George Reeves, Brandon Routh, Jean Seberg, John Wayne, Brooks Wheelan, Andy Williams, Meredith Willson, and Elijah Wood.
Iowa contributed proportionately more men to Civil War military service than did any other state, north or south, sending more than 75,000 volunteers to the armed forces, over one-sixth of whom were killed before the Confederates surrendered at Appomattox.
Sioux City boasts a revitalized downtown, attractions include the Sergeant Floyd Monument, Sergeant Floyd River Museum, and the Orpheum Theater.
Private colleges and universities include:
If measured by gross state product, for 2005 it was US $113.5&nbsp;billion.
During the Archaic period (10,500–2,800 years ago), American Indians adapted to local environments and ecosystems, slowly becoming more sedentary as populations increased.
In 1869, Iowa became the first state in the union to admit women to the practice of law, with the Court ruling that women may not be denied the right to practice law in Iowa and admitting Arabella A. Mansfield to the practice of law.
To the east lies Clear Lake.
Presbyterian Church (USA) had almost 290 congregations and 51,380 members followed by the Reformed Church in America with 80 churches and 40,000 members, the United Church of Christ had 180 churches and 39,000 members.
The largest non Protestant religion was Catholicism with 503,080 adherents.
The Sioux City Hornets play in the American Basketball Association.
*Upper Iowa University, Fayette
Along the Missouri River at least five French and English trading houses were built before 1808.
Many Iowa communities hold farmers' markets during warmer months; these are typically weekly events, but larger cities can host multiple markets.
Van Allen, ecologist Aldo Leopold, computer pioneer John Vincent Atanasoff, inventor and plant scientist George Washington Carver, geochemist Clair Cameron Patterson, and Intel founder Robert Noyce.
As punishment for the uprising, and as part of a larger settlement strategy, treaties were subsequently designed to remove all Indians from Iowa.
:''See List of Governors of Iowa, Iowa General Assembly, and Iowa State Capitol''
The special K-12 schools include the Iowa School for the Deaf in Council Bluffs and the Iowa Braille and Sight Saving School in Vinton.
Iowa was part of a territory known as ''La Louisiane'' or Louisiana, and European traders were interested in lead and furs obtained by Indians.
Iowa can be divided into eight landforms based on glaciation, soils, topography, and river drainage.
After Amendment, it reads:  "All men and women are, by nature, free and equal, and have certain inalienable rights — among which are those of enjoying and defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness."
The state has great number of  Reformed denomination.
Man-made lakes include Lake Odessa, Saylorville Lake, Lake Red Rock, Coralville Lake, Lake MacBride, and Rathbun Lake.
The explosion in the number of high-density livestock facilities in Iowa has led to increased rural water contamination and a decline in air quality.
In 2007, the latest demographic information available shows that the state had a natural increase of 53,706 people in population from the last census (that is 197,163 births minus 143,457 deaths) and a decrease of 11,754 due to net migration of people out of the state.
*Northwestern College, Orange City
The third-most-common language is German, spoken by 17,000 people in Iowa; two notable German dialects used in Iowa include Amana German spoken around the Amana Colonies, and Pennsylvania German, spoken among the Amish in Iowa.
Nearby attractions include Adventureland and Prairie Meadows Racetrack Casino in Altoona, Living History Farms in Urbandale, Trainland USA in Colfax, and the Iowa Speedway and Valle Drive-In in Newton.
The state has four major college teams playing in Division I for all sports.
Several attempts to grant full voting rights to Iowa women were defeated between 1870 and 1919.
Beginning with the first farm-related industries developed in the 1870s, Iowa has experienced a gradual increase in the number of business and manufacturing operations.
Trade continued in furs and lead, but disease and forced population movement decimated Indian cultures and economies.
*AIB College of Business, Des Moines
Iowa athletes winning Olympic gold medals are Tom Brands, Jay Clark, Chuck Darling, Dan Gable, Shawn Johnson, Edward Lindberg, Allie Morrison, George Saling, Cael Sanderson, Kenneth Sitzberger, and Frank Wykoff.
Natives of central and southern Iowa – including such cities as Council Bluffs, Davenport, Des Moines, and Iowa City – tend to speak the North Midland dialect also found in eastern Nebraska, central Illinois, and central Indiana.
CNBC's list of "Top States for Business in 2010" has recognized Iowa as the sixth best state in the nation.
More than 3,000 years ago, during the Late Archaic period, American Indians in Iowa began utilizing domesticated plants.
Fort Madison was built to control trade and establish U.S. dominance over the Upper Mississippi, but it was poorly designed and disliked by the Sauk and Ho-Chunk, many of whom allied with the British, who had not abandoned claims to the territory.
Some of the most dramatic scenery in Iowa is found in the unique Loess Hills.
Iowa is also headquarters to other companies including Hy-Vee, Pella Corporation, Vermeer Company, Kum & Go gas stations, Von Maur, Pioneer Hi-Bred, McLeodUSA, and Fareway grocery stores.
Iowa is generally not flat; most of the state consists of rolling hills.
Iowa supported the Union during the Civil War, voting heavily for Abraham Lincoln, though there was a strong antiwar "Copperhead" movement among settlers of southern origins and among Catholics.
Iowa was also ranked 10th in "Economy", 12th in "Business Friendliness", 16th in "Education", 17th in both "Cost of Living" and "Quality of Life", 20th in "Workforce", 29th in "Technology and Innovation", 32nd in "Transportation" and the lowest ranking was 36th in "Access to Capital".
*Mount Mercy University, Cedar Rapids
In the 19th century Iowa was among the earliest states to enact prohibitions against race discrimination, especially in education, but was slow to achieve full integration in the 20th century.
Iowa is home to more than 70 wineries, and hosts five regional wine tasting trails.
Post-Civil Rights era court decisions in Iowa clarified and expanded citizens' rights.
Iowa ranked 49th of U.S. states in public land holdings.
After the 1803 Louisiana Purchase, Iowa was placed under United States control.
There are currently nine income tax brackets, ranging from 0.36% to 8.98%.
Starting in the 2015-16 season of the Major Arena Soccer League, the Cedar Rapids Rampage will have its own indoor soccer team playing in the U.S. Cellular Center.
The Iowa Board of Educational Examiners is an autonomous board in control of teacher licensure standards and professional discipline; it has a majority of licensed teachers as members and is the oldest state educational board.
The period since World War II has witnessed a particular increase in manufacturing operations.
Iowa has four Class A minor league teams in the Midwest League.
The study ''Religious Congregations & Membership: 2000'' found that in the southernmost two tiers of Iowa counties and in other counties in the center of the state, the largest religious group was the United Methodist Church; in the northeast part of the state, including Dubuque and Linn counties (where Cedar Rapids is located), the Catholic Church was the largest; and in ten counties, including three in the northern tier, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America was the largest.
The center of population of Iowa is located in Marshall County, in the city of Marshalltown.
On July 2, 2009, Standard and Poor's rated the state of Iowa's credit as AAA (the highest of its credit ratings, held by only 11 U.S. state governments).
Smaller airports in the state include the Davenport Municipal Airport (Iowa), Dubuque Regional Airport, Fort Dodge Regional Airport, Mason City Municipal Airport, Sioux Gateway Airport, Southeast Iowa Regional Airport, and Waterloo Regional Airport.
Along with the New Hampshire primary the following week, Iowa's caucuses have become the starting points for choosing the two major-party candidates for president.
Tribes which arrived in Iowa in the late prehistoric or protohistoric periods include the Illiniwek, Meskwaki, Omaha, and Sauk.
They marched on General Nathaniel Banks' ill-starred expedition to the Red River.
On December 28, 1846, Iowa became the 29th state in the Union when President James K. Polk signed Iowa's admission bill into law.
The state did away with racial barriers to marriage in 1851, more than 100 years before the U.S. Supreme Court would ban miscegenation statutes nationwide.
*Grand View University, Des Moines
In 1917, the United States entered World War I and farmers as well as all Iowans experienced a wartime economy.
Other communities with vibrant historic downtown areas include Decorah, McGregor, Mason City, Elkader, Guttenberg, Algona, Spillville, Charles City, and Independence.
*Simpson College, Indianola
Iowa has been listed as one of the safest states in which to live.
Much of Iowa was mapped by Zebulon Pike in 1805, but it was not until the construction of Fort Madison in 1808 that the U.S. established tenuous military control over the region.
Iowa State Cyclones men's basketball
It has crossed the state on various routes each year since 1973.
6.5% of Iowa's population were reported as under the age of five, 22.6% under 18, and 14.7% were 65 or older.
Scored in 10 individual categories, Iowa was ranked 1st when it came to the "Cost of Doing Business"; this includes all taxes, utility costs, and other costs associated with doing business.
When American Indians first arrived in what is now Iowa more than 13,000 years ago, they were hunters and gatherers living in a Pleistocene glacial landscape.
Property tax is levied on the taxable value of real property.
*Ashford University, Clinton
Many athletes from Iowa have become famous enough to be noted in the ''List of people from Iowa''.
The Farm Crisis of the 1980s caused a major recession in Iowa, causing poverty not seen since the Depression.
If the economy is measured by gross domestic product, in 2005 Iowa's GDP was about US $124&nbsp;billion.
Other western communities with vibrant historic downtown areas include Storm Lake, Spencer, Le Mars, Glenwood, Carroll, Atlantic, Red Oak, Denison, Creston, Mount Ayr, Sac City, and Walnut.
The Great Depression and World War II accelerated the shift away from smallholder farming to larger farms, and began a trend of urbanization that continues.
In the very first decision of the Iowa Supreme Court – ''In Re the Matter of Ralph'', decided July 1839 – the Court rejected slavery in a decision that found that a slave named Ralph became free when he stepped on Iowa soil, 26 years before the end of the Civil War.
It was not until the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified in 1920 that women had full suffrage in Iowa.
Iowa is the 30th most populated state in the country.
Threatened or endangered animals in Iowa include the interior least tern, piping plover, Indiana bat, pallid sturgeon, the Iowa Pleistocene land snail, Higgins' eye pearly mussel, and the Topeka shiner.
On December 14th, 2015, Branstad became the longest serving governor in US history, serving (at that time) 20 years, 11 months, and 3 days; eclipsing George Clinton (vice president), who served 21 years until 1804.
The following table shows the Iowa sports teams with average attendance over 8,000.
All of the following teams are NCAA Division I football teams or basketball teams:
For farmers, the change was significant.
In 1856 the Iowa Legislature passed an unprecedented act allowing the Meskawki to purchase the land; Indians were not usually permitted to do so.
As of 2015, Iowa had an estimated population of 3,123,899, which is an increase of 16,773 people or 0.56%, from the prior year and an increase of 77,544 or 2.55%, since the year 2010.
A 2001 survey from the City University of New York found that 52% of Iowans are Protestant, while 23% are Catholic, and other religions made up 6%.
By the time European explorers visited Iowa, American Indians were largely settled farmers with complex economic, social, and political systems.
Iowans are mostly of Western European descent.
Fort Madison is served by Amtrak's ''Southwest Chief'', running daily between Chicago and Los Angeles.
Since the defeat of incumbent Democrat Chet Culver in 2010, Iowa's governor has been Republican Terry Branstad, who served as governor from 1983 to 1999.
*William Penn University, Oskaloosa
The State Board consists of ten members: nine voting members who are appointed by the governor for six-year terms and subject to Senate confirmation; and one nonvoting student member who serves a one-year term, also appointed by the governor.
The Ho-Chunk were removed from Iowa in 1850, and the Dakota were removed by the late 1850s.
*Central College, Pella
Other factors negatively affecting Iowa's environment include the extensive use of older coal-fired power plants, fertilizer and pesticide runoff from crop production, and diminishment of the Jordan Aquifer.
I-74 begins at I-80 just northeast of Davenport.
Historically, religious sects and orders who desired to live apart from the rest of society established themselves in Iowa, such as the Amish and Mennonite near Kalona and in other parts of eastern Iowa such as Davis County and Buchanan County.
The Babel Proclamation of 1918 banned the speaking of German in public.
Other religious sects and orders living apart include Quakers around West Branch and Le Grand, German Pietists who founded the Amana Colonies, followers of Transcendental Meditation who founded Maharishi Vedic City, and Order of Cistercians of the Strict Observance monks and nuns at the New Melleray and Our Lady of the Mississippi Abbies near Dubuque.
Thereafter, the fair moved to locations closer to the center of the state and in 1886 found a permanent home in Des Moines.
Iowa's population is more urban than rural, with 61 percent living in urban areas in 2000, a trend that began in the early 20th century.
With three casino resorts, the city also includes such cultural attractions as the Western Hills Trails Center, Union Pacific Railroad Museum, the Grenville M. Dodge House, and the Lewis and Clark Monument.
Among the early traders on the Mississippi were Julien Dubuque, Robert La Salle, and Paul Marin.
Directly and indirectly, agriculture has been a major component of Iowa's economy.
The State Fair has been held every year since except for the year 1898 due to the Spanish–American War and the World's Fair being held in nearby Omaha, Nebraska.
While Iowa is often viewed as a farming state, in reality agriculture is a small portion of a diversified economy, with manufacturing, biotechnology, finance and insurance services, and government services contributing substantially to Iowa's economy.
Steve King represented the old Fifth District.
The Cedar Rapids Titans play in the Indoor Football League at the U.S. Cellular Center.
Many Meskwaki later returned to Iowa and settled near Tama, Iowa; the Meskwaki Settlement remains to this day.
The Iowa Energy, an NBA Development League team that plays in Des Moines, is affiliated with the Memphis Grizzlies of the NBA.
In 1894 women were given "partial suffrage", which allowed them to vote on issues, but not for candidates.
The John Deere Classic is a PGA Tour golf event held at Iowa since 1971.
The first American settlers officially moved to Iowa in June 1833.
The national and international media give Iowa and New Hampshire extensive attention, which gives Iowa voters leverage.
Social and housing discrimination continued against Blacks at state universities until the 1950s.
Iowa has four primary interstate highways.
They served with the Army of the Potomoc in Virginia and fought under Union General Philip Sheridan in the Shenandoah Valley.
Tribes which were probably descendants of the prehistoric Oneota include the Dakota, Ho-Chunk, Ioway, and Otoe.
Council Bluffs, the major city of southwest Iowa, sits at the base of the Loess Hills National Scenic Byway.
William Labov and colleagues, in the monumental ''Atlas of North American English'' found that the English spoken in Iowa divides into multiple linguistic regions.
*Iowa Wesleyan College, Mount Pleasant
Some smaller communities, such as Denison and Storm Lake, have mitigated this population loss through gains in immigrant laborers.
Major manufacturing sectors include food processing, heavy machinery, and agricultural chemicals.
Western Iowa around modern Council Bluffs was used as a way station for other tribes being moved west, including the Potawatomi.
Most fought in the great campaigns in the Mississippi Valley and in the South.
This made Iowa the third state in the U.S. and first in the Midwest to permit same-sex marriage.
The Court heard ''Coger v. The North Western Union Packet Co.'' in 1873, ruling against racial discrimination in public accommodations 91 years before the U.S. Supreme Court reached the same decision.
Wellmark HealthPlan of Iowa and Wellmark Inc had the highest risk-based capital percentages of all 10 providers at 1158% and 1132%, respectively.
*Des Moines University, Des Moines
The fair was also a World War II wartime casualty from 1942–1945.
The Sioux City Explorers are part of the American Association of Independent Professional Baseball.
Emmyon is a startup hosted in the BioVentures Center, which is developing medicines to treat muscle disorders.
Iowa has two professional basketball teams.
In 2002 the total impact of the indirect role of agriculture in Iowa's economy, including agriculture-affiliated business, was calculated at 16.4% in terms of value added and 24.3% in terms of total output.
The Sanford Museum and Planetarium in Cherokee, Grotto of the Redemption in West Bend, Arnolds Park Amusement Park (one of the oldest amusement parks in the country) in Arnolds Park, The Danish Immigrant Museum in Elk Horn, and the Fort Museum and Frontier Village in Fort Dodge are regional destinations.
Its nickname is the Hawkeye State.
Iowa troops fought at Wilson's Creek in Missouri, Pea Ridge in Arkansas, Forts Henry and Donelson, Shiloh, Chattanooga, Chickamauga, Missionary Ridge, and Rossville Gap as well as Vicksburg, Iuka, and Corinth.
Full racial civil rights were codified under the Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965.
*Cornell College, Mount Vernon
There were numerous Indian tribes living in Iowa at the time of early European exploration.
In 2009 Iowa was the headquarters for five of the top 1,000 companies for revenue.
They are the Burlington Bees, Cedar Rapids Kernels, Clinton LumberKings, and the Quad Cities River Bandits.
Males made up approximately 49.6% of the population.
The population density of the state is 52.7 people per square mile.
The tax rate differs in each locality and is a composite of county, city or rural township, school district and special levies.
Since the beginning of the war in 1914, Iowa farmers had experienced economic prosperity.
Loess hills lie along the western border of the state, some of which are several hundred feet thick.
Iowa did add the word "women" to the Iowa Constitution in 1998.
Frank Gotch was a World Heavyweight Wrestling Champion, Zach Johnson won the 2007 Masters Golf Tournament and the 2015 British Open, and Jeremy Hellickson won the 2011 American League Rookie of the Year award pitching for the Tampa Bay Rays.
Although Iowa supported the Federal Equal Rights Amendment, in 1980 and 1992 Iowa voters rejected an Equal Rights Amendment to the state constitution.
*Clarke University, Dubuque
Iowa's population included about 97,000 foreign-born (3.3%).
Iowa's main agricultural products are hogs, corn, soybeans, oats, cattle, eggs, and dairy products.
The Des Moines Golf and Country Club hosted the 1999 U.S. Senior Open and has scheduled the 2017 Solheim Cup.
The Quad City Jr Flames are a Tier III Jr. A hockey team located in Davenport, Iowa and are part of the Central States Hockey League.
This transformation happened gradually.
Those who enter the caucus race often expend enormous effort to reach voters in each of Iowa's 99 counties.
The arrival of European trade goods and diseases in the Protohistoric period led to dramatic population shifts and economic and social upheaval, with the arrival of new tribes and early European explorers and traders.
Around Pella, residents of Dutch descent once spoke the Pella Dutch dialect.
Black Hawk took part in the siege of Fort Madison.
Boone hosts the biennial Farm Progress Show and is home to the Mamie Doud Eisenhower museum, the Boone & Scenic Valley Railroad, and Ledges State Park.
*Palmer College of Chiropractic, Davenport
Iowa derives its name from the Ioway people, one of the many Native American tribes that occupied the state at the time of European exploration.
After bottoming out in the 1980s, Iowa's economy began to become increasingly less dependent on agriculture, and by the early 21st century was characterized by a mix of manufacturing, biotechnology, finance and insurance services, and government services.
Major non-food manufacturing firms with production facilities in Iowa include 3M, ALCOA, Amana Corporation, Dexter Apache Holdings, Inc., Electrolux/Frigidaire, Emerson Process Management, Fisher Controls International, Hagie Manufacturing Company, HON Industries, The HON Company, SSAB, John Deere, Lennox Manufacturing, Maytag Corporation, Pella Corporation, Procter & Gamble, Rockwell Collins, Terex, Vermeer Company, and Winnebago Industries.
*Emmaus Bible College, Dubuque
Endangered or threatened plants include western prairie fringed orchid, eastern prairie fringed orchid, Mead's milkweed, prairie bush clover, and northern wild monkshood.
Incumbent congressmen Leonard Boswell (D) and Tom Latham (R) ran against each other in the new Third District; Latham won.
There were no battles in the state, although the battle of Athens, Missouri, 1861, was fought just across the Des Moines River from Croton, Iowa, and shots from the battle landed in Iowa.
Other notable scientists who worked or were born in Iowa include astronomer and space pioneer James A.
Amtrak's ''California Zephyr'' serves the south of Iowa with stops at Burlington, Mount Pleasant, Ottumwa, Osceola, and Creston on its daily route between Chicago and Emeryville, California (across the bay from San Francisco).
*Kaplan University, Cedar Falls, Cedar Rapids, Council Bluffs, Davenport, Mason City, and Urbandale
This economic diversity has helped Iowa weather the late 2000s recession better than most states, with unemployment substantially lower than the rest of the nation.
Dubuque is home to a Catholic archdiocese, which spans the northeastern section of Iowa.
Companies with direct or indirect processing facilities in Iowa include ConAgra Foods, Wells Blue Bunny, Barilla, Heinz, Tone's Spices, General Mills, and Quaker Oats.
On July 4, 1838, the U.S. Congress established the Territory of Iowa.
The Iowa Supreme Court decided ''Clark v. The Board of Directors'' in 1868, ruling that racially segregated "separate but equal" schools had no place in Iowa, 85 years before ''Brown v. Board of Education''.
Iowa has a long tradition of state and county fairs.
*Maharishi University of Management, Fairfield
The Sauk and Meskwaki effectively controlled trade on the Mississippi in the late 18th century and early 19th century.
