"Greater Iran" (''Irānzamīn'' or ''Irān e Bozorg'') correspond to territories of the Iranian cultural and linguistic zones.
According to estimates, about five million Iranian citizens have emigrated to other countries, mostly since the 1979 Revolution.
In 334&nbsp;BC, Alexander the Great invaded the Achaemenid Empire, defeating the last Achaemenid emperor, Darius III, at the Battle of Issus.
Cyrus entered Babylon and presented himself as a traditional Mesopotamian monarch.
Iran is a founding member of the UN, ECO, NAM, OIC, and OPEC.
However, despite the self-ruling, they all remained subjects and vassals to the Zand king.
However, many scholarly and organisational estimations regarding the number of these two groups differ significantly from the mentioned census.
According to Steven R. Ward, "Mongol violence and depredations killed up to three-fourths of the population of the Iranian Plateau, possibly 10 to 15 million people.
Presidential candidates must be approved by the Guardian Council before running, in order to ensure their allegiance to the ideals of the Islamic Revolution.
In 2006, about 45% of the government's budget came from oil and natural gas revenues, and 31% came from taxes and fees.
Owing to its dominant geopolitical position and culture in the world, Iran has directly influenced cultures as far away as Greece, Macedonia, and Italy to the West, Russia to the North, the Arabian Peninsula to the South, and indirectly South and East Asia to the East.
Many countries have expressed concern that Iran's nuclear program could divert civilian nuclear technology into a weapons program.
"of the Iranians"), argued to descend from Proto-Indo-European '''', meaning "skillful assembler".
The Iranian visual arts reached a pinnacle by the Sassanid Era.
Iran is the world's largest producer and exporter of handmade carpets, producing three quarters of the world's total output and having a share of 30% of world's export markets.
Among them are treatises such as the Shikand-gumanic Vichar, Denkard, Zātspram, as well as older passages of Avesta, and the Gathas.
Percentages of spoken language continue to be a point of debate, as many opt that they are politically motivated; most notably regarding the largest and second-largest ethnicities in Iran, the Persians and Azerbaijanis.
Sorena 2 Robot, which was designed by engineers at the University of Tehran, was unveiled in 2010.
The eastern part consists mostly of desert basins such as the Dasht-e Kavir, Iran's largest desert, in the north-central portion of the country, and the Dasht-e Lut, in the east, as well as some salt lakes.
The government has not released statistics regarding irreligiosity.
Sanctions have led to a steep fall in the value of the rial, and as of April 2013 one US dollar is worth 36,000 rial, compared with 16,000 in early 2012.
This marked the end of the Kingdom of Urartu as well, which was subsequently conquered and dissolved.
The eastern and central basins are arid, with less than  of rain, and have occasional deserts.
Saint Stephen Church - 8614907041.jpg|Saint Stepanos Monastery
Iranian physics is especially strong in string theory, with many papers being published in Iran.
The settlement was then shifted to the southern end of the Zagros Mountains, and is today defined as Fars Province.
There are dozens of prehistoric sites across the Iranian plateau, pointing to the existence of ancient cultures and urban settlements in the 4th millennium BC.
The wildlife of Iran is composed of several animal species, including bears, gazelles, wild pigs, wolves, jackals, panthers, Eurasian lynx, and foxes.
Apart from the rule of Aqa Mohammad Khan, the Qajar rule is characterized as a century of misrule.
Hassan Rouhani was elected as President of Iran on June 15, 2013, defeating Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf and four other candidates.
The area was first unified by the Iranian Medes in 625&nbsp;BC, who became the dominant cultural and political power in the region.
Summer temperatures rarely exceed .
The Court's rulings are final and cannot be appealed.
Iran has the largest Jewish population in the Middle East outside of Israel.
Asghar Farhadi, a well-known Iranian director, has received a Golden Globe Award and an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and was named as one of the 100 Most Influential People in the world by Time Magazine in 2012.
The government’s goal of 53,000 megawatts of installed capacity by 2010 is to be reached by bringing on line new gas-fired plants and by adding hydroelectric, and nuclear power generating capacity.
Over five million tourists visited Iran in the fiscal year of 2014–2015, ending March 21, four percent more year-on-year.
Kurdish is widely spoken in Kurdistan Province and nearby areas.
Tabriz, the capital of East Azerbaijan Province, is considered the second industrial city of Iran (after Tehran).
The role of the old Arab aristocracy was gradually replaced by an Iranian bureaucracy.
One of the most famous members of the Iranian wildlife is the critically endangered Asiatic cheetah, also known as the ''Iranian cheetah'', whose numbers were greatly reduced after the 1979 Revolution.
Since 2006, Iranian officials have been working with the UNHCR and Afghan officials for their repatriation.
It is even possible to see a progenitor of the cinema close-up in one of these works of art, which shows a wounded wild pig escaping from the hunting ground.
The majority of production focused on melodrama and thrillers.
It is a major industrial city in Iran, with large factories producing sugar, textiles, wire, and alcohol.
Kaluts, Iran (5072510138).jpg|Lut Desert
The empire had a centralized, bureaucratic administration under the emperor, a large professional army, and civil services, inspiring similar developments in later empires.
The assassination of Nader Shah sparked a brief period of civil war and turmoil, after which Karim Khan of the Zand Dynasty came to power in 1750, bringing a period of relative peace and prosperity.
Iran is ranked as an upper-middle income economy by the World Bank.
The presence of so many foreign troops in the nation also culminated in the Soviet-backed establishment of two puppet regimes in the nation; the Azerbaijan People's Government, and the Republic of Mahabad.
It has not challenged any of the Supreme Leader's decisions.
The 10th century saw a mass migration of Turkic tribes from Central Asia into the Iranian plateau.
Iran has the second largest proved gas reserves in the world after Russia, with 33.6 trillion cubic metres, and third largest natural gas production in the world after Indonesia, and Russia.
Since the 1979 Revolution, to overcome foreign embargoes, Iran has developed its own military industry, produced its own tanks, armored personnel carriers, guided missiles, submarines, military vessels, guided missile destroyer, radar systems, helicopters and fighter planes.
Takht-e-soleiman-3.jpg|Adur Gushnasp Temple
In the early 2000s, the industry faced serious limitations in infrastructure, communications, industry standards and personnel training.
The Sassanid Empire of the Late Antiquity is considered as one of the most influential periods of Iran, as Iran influenced the culture of ancient Rome (and through that as far as Western Europe), Africa, China, and India, and played a prominent role in the formation of both European and Asian medieval art.
Many students do a 1–2 year course of pre-university (''piš-dānešgāh''), which is the equivalent of GCE A-levels and International Baccalaureate.
The electoral victory of new Iranian President Hassan Rouhani has improved the relations of Iran with other countries.
It is enjoyed by people with different religions, but is a holiday for Zoroastrians.
Popular unrest culminated in the Persian Constitutional Revolution of 1906, which established a constitutional monarchy and the country's first legislative body, the Majles.
Today, the main orchestra of Iran include the National Orchestra, the Nations Orchestra, and the Symphony Orchestra of Tehran.
Eventual conflict on the western borders began with the Ionian Revolt which erupted into the Greco-Persian Wars, and continued through the first half of the 5th century BC, and ended with the Persian withdrawal from all of their European territories in the Balkans and Eastern Europe proper.
The Iranian Parliament has been showing disregard for wildlife by passing laws and regulations such as the act that lets the Ministry of Industries and Mines exploit mines without the involvement of the Department of Environment, and by approving large national development projects without demanding comprehensive study of their impact on wildlife habitats.
Under the new Arab elite of the Rashidun and later the Umayyad caliphates, both converted (mawali) and non-converted (dhimmi) Iranians were discriminated against, being excluded from the government and military, and having to pay a special tax called ''Jizya''.
It also ranks fourth in oil reserves with an estimated 153,600,000,000 barrels.
After the Revolution of 1979, as the new government imposed new laws and standards, a new age in Iranian cinema emerged, starting with ''Viva...'' by Khosrow Sinai and followed by many other directors, such as Abbas Kiarostami and Jafar Panahi.
Local city councils are elected by public vote to four-year terms in all cities and villages of Iran.
It is estimated that in 480 BC, 50 million people lived in the Achaemenid Empire.
The Persian language has been dubbed as a worthy language to serve as a conduit for poetry, and is considered as one of the four main bodies of world literature.
A second referendum in December 1979 approved a theocratic constitution.
In 2005, Iran spent US$4 billion on fuel imports, because of contraband and inefficient domestic use.
This is because the mountain ranges are too high for rain clouds to reach these regions.
Unemployment has remained above 10% since 1997, and the unemployment rate for women is almost double that of the men.
Historically, Iranian literature has inspired writers including Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Henry David Thoreau, and Ralph Waldo Emerson.
They both have affinities to the neighboring Caucasian languages.
Iran received access to the Internet in 1993.
The others are elected by the Iranian Parliament from among the jurists nominated by the Head of the Judiciary.
are the most used search engines in Iran.
Gunde Shapur, home of the ''Academy of Gunde Shapur'' which was the most important medical center of the world at the time, survived after the invasion, but became known as an Islamic institute thereafter.
But the Bahá'í Faith, which is said to be the largest non-Muslim religious minority in Iran, is not officially recognized, and has been persecuted during its existence in Iran since the 19th century.
It was registered on the list of Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity, and was described as the ''Persian New Year'' by UNESCO in 2009.
By the Samanid era in the 9th and 10th centuries, the efforts of Iranians to regain their independence had been well solidified.
The CIA's World Factbook has estimated that around 79% of the population of Iran are a diverse Indo-European ethno-linguistic group that comprise the speakers of the Iranian languages, with Persians (incl.
In 2004, a large share of natural gas reserves in Iran were untapped.
Iran is the third country in the world to have developed GTL technology.
After him, several others like Russi Khan, Ardeshir Khan, and Ali Vakili tried to establish new movie theaters in Tehran.
By 1975 and 1976, an economic recession led to increased unemployment, especially among millions of youth who had migrated to the cities of Iran looking for construction jobs during the boom years of the early 1970s.
To achieve a balanced taste, characteristic flavourings such as saffron, dried limes, cinnamon, and parsley are mixed delicately and used in some special dishes.
Peoples of the other ethno-linguistic groups make up the remaining 21%, with Azerbaijanis constituting 16%, Arabs 2%, Turkmens and Turkic tribes 2%, and others 1% (such as Armenians, Talysh, Georgians, Circassians, Assyrians).
Iran is also home to one of the largest jewel collections in the world.
By the 1500s, Ismail I from Ardabil, established the Safavid Dynasty, with Tabriz as the capital.
The emergence of genres such as modern rock in the 1970s and hip hop in the 1980s, which replaced the outdated musical styles among the youth, followed major movements and influences in the music of Iran.
Following the Iran–Iraq War, in 1989, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani and his administration concentrated on a pragmatic pro-business policy of rebuilding and strengthening the economy without making any dramatic break with the ideology of the revolution.
Athenaeus of Naucratis states that, by the time of the last Achaemenid king, Artashata (336–330 BC), Achaemenid singing girls were captured by the Macedonian general, Parmenion.
Persians were present in the region since the 9th century BC, and became rulers of a large empire under the reign of the Achaemenid Dynasty in the 6th century BC.
Subsequently, Khomeini accepted a truce mediated by the UN.
Circassian was also once widely used by the large Circassian minority, but, due to assimilation over the many years, no sizable number of Circassians speak the language anymore.
He obtained a camera and filmed the Shah's visit to Europe.
The prolonged and gradual process of the Islamization of Iran began following the conquest.
In the early years of the 2000s (decade), industry infrastructure was increasingly inefficient because of technological lags.
, Iran had earned $70 billion in foreign exchange reserves mostly (80%) from crude oil exports.
539 BC was the year in which Persian forces defeated the Babylonian army at Opis, and marked the end of around four centuries of Mesopotamian domination of the region with the transition from the Neo-Babylonian Period to the Achaemenid Period.
The continuous presence of Iranian films in prestigious international festivals, such as the Cannes Film Festival, the Venice Film Festival, and the Berlin International Film Festival, attracted world attention to Iranian masterpieces.
Many of the Iranian territories in the Caucasus gained ''de facto'' independence and were locally ruled through various Caucasian khanates.
Most of the newspapers published in Iran are in Persian.
With the screening of the films ''Kaiser'' and ''The Cow'', directed by Masoud Kimiai and Dariush Mehrjui respectively in 1969, alternative films set out to establish their status in the film industry and Bahram Beyzai's ''Downpour'' and Nasser Taghvai's ''Tranquility in the Presence of Others'' followed soon.
The listed populations are from the 2006/07 (1385&nbsp;AP) census.
Direct access to Facebook has been blocked in Iran since the 2009 Iranian presidential election protests, due to organization of the opposition movements on the website; but however, Facebook has around 12 to 17 million users in Iran who are using virtual private networks and proxy servers to access the website.
Opposition to the name change led to the reversal of the decision, and Professor Ehsan Yarshater, editor of Encyclopædia Iranica, propagated a move to use ''Persia'' and ''Iran'' interchangeably.
In 1904, Mirza Ebrahim Khan (Sahhaf Bashi) opened the first movie theater in Tehran.
In 1941, Reza Shah was forced to abdicate in favor of his son, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, and established the Persian Corridor, a massive supply route that would last until the end of the ongoing war.
As a result of the 19th century Russo-Persian wars, the Russians took over the Caucasus, and Iran irrevocably lost control over its integral territories in the region (comprising modern-day Dagestan, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan), which got confirmed per the treaties of Gulistan and Turkmenchay.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini became an active critic of the Shah's White Revolution, and publicly denounced the government.
Following the premature death of Alexander, Iran came under the control of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire.
Historical and cultural usage of the word ''Iran'' is not restricted to the modern state proper.
The administration continues to follow the market reform plans of the previous one and indicated that it will diversify Iran's oil-reliant economy.
The Expediency Council has the authority to mediate disputes between Parliament and the Guardian Council, and serves as an advisory body to the Supreme Leader, making it one of the most powerful governing bodies in the country.
In August 2014, Maryam Mirzakhani became the first-ever woman, as well as the first-ever Iranian, to receive the Fields Medal, the highest prize in mathematics.
Over 30 percent of Iranians watch satellite channels, but observers state that the figures are likely to be higher.
Iran’s first nuclear power plant at Bushehr went online in 2011.
The earliest archaeological artifacts in Iran, like those excavated at the Kashafrud and Ganj Par sites, attest to a human presence in Iran since the Lower Paleolithic era, c. 800,000–200,000 BC.
The Central Bank of the Islamic Republic of Iran is responsible for developing and maintaining the Iranian rial, which serves as the country's currency.
Iran has also developed a biotechnology, nanotechnology, and pharmaceuticals industry.
* Sepand Ārmazgān: Dedicated to Ameša Spenta (the ''Holy Devotion''); celebrated by giving presents to partners, on Esfand 15 (February 24).
The Seljuks subsequently gave rise to the Sultanate of Rum in Anatolia, while taking their thoroughly Persianized identity with them.
The rise of the Safavid Dynasty in 1501 led to the establishment of Twelver Shia Islam as the official religion of Iran, marking one of the most important turning points in Iranian and Muslim history.
Iran's military doctrine is based on deterrence.
Although both nationalists and Marxists had initially joined with Islamists to overthrow the Shah, tens of thousands were executed by the Islamic government afterward.
The Constitution included the official recognition of Iran's three religious minorities, namely Christians, Zoroastrians, and Jews, which has remained a basis in the legislation of Iran since then.
It is one of the former capitals of Iran, the first capital of the Safavid Empire, and has also been proven extremely influential in the country’s recent history.
These wars exhausted both Romans and Sassanids, and led to the defeat of both at the hands of the invading Muslim Arabs.
Multiple depictions of horizontal harps were also sculpted in Assyrian palaces, dating back between 865 and 650 BC.
Weak advertising, unstable regional conditions, a poor public image in some parts of the world, and absence of efficient planning schemes in the tourism sector have all hindered the growth of tourism.
Few exploratory wells were drilled in 2005.
The Supreme Leader is Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, controls the military intelligence and security operations, and has sole power to declare war or peace.
By the time of Khosrow II, the Sassanid royal court was the host of prominent musicians, namely Ramtin, Bamshad, Nakisa, Azad, Sarkash, and Barbad.
As the most extensive interactions the Ancient Greeks had with any outsider was with the Persians, the term persisted, even long after the Persian rule in Greece.
History of the Sassanid music is better documented than the earlier periods, and is specially more evident in the Zoroastrian contexts.
After the Supreme Leader, the Constitution defines the President of Iran as the highest state authority.
The new government went about purging itself of the non-Islamist political opposition, as well as of those Islamists who were not considered radical enough.
The art of animation, as practiced in modern Iran, started in the 1950s.
In 1921, the Qajar Dynasty was overthrown by Reza Khan of the Pahlavi Dynasty, who was the Prime Minister of Iran and the former general of the Persian Cossack Brigade, and he became the new Shah.
Iranian cuisine is diverse due to its variety of ethnic groups and the influence of other cultures.
The Persian leopard, which is the world's largest leopard subspecies living primarily in northern Iran, is also listed as an endangered species.
The geopolitical reach of the Zand Dynasty was limited, compared to its preceding dynasties.
The minimum wage in June 2013 was 487 million rials a month ($134).
The only large plains are found along the coast of the Caspian Sea and at the northern end of the Persian Gulf, where Iran borders the mouth of the Arvand river.
Beginning with Azerbaijan, he subsequently extended his authority over all of the Iranian territories, and established an intermittent Iranian hegemony over the vast relative regions, reasserting the Iranian identity within large parts of the Greater Iran.
This has led the UN Security Council to impose sanctions against Iran which had further isolated Iran politically and economically from the rest of the global community.
Around 250,000–370,000 Christians reside in Iran, and it is the largest recognized minority religion in the nation.
, Iran maintains diplomatic relations with 99 members of the United Nations, but not with the United States or Israel, a state which Iran has not recognized since the 1979 Revolution.
Iranian works of art show a great variety in style, in different regions and periods.
Damavand in winter.jpg|Mount Damavand
Onions and garlic are normally used in the preparation of the accompanying course, but are also served separately during meals, either in raw or pickled form.
The President is elected by universal suffrage for a term of four years and can only be re-elected for one term.
The most widely circulated periodicals of the country are based in Tehran.
Iran is the apparent birthplace of the earliest complex instruments, as evidenced by the archaeological records found in Western Iran,  dating back to the 3rd millennium BC.
''Tehran Times'', ''Iran Daily'', and ''Financial Tribune'' are among the English language newspapers based in Iran.
By the early 20th century, the five-year-old modern industry of cinema came to Iran.
Together with their neighboring arch-rival, the Roman-Byzantines, they made up the world's two most dominant powers at the time, for over four centuries.
It is the capital of Alborz Province, and is situated 20&nbsp;km west of Tehran, at the foot of the Alborz mountains.
From the late 10th to late 7th centuries BC, the Iranian peoples, together with the pre-Iranian kingdoms, fell under the domination of the Assyrian Empire, based in northern Mesopotamia.
During the Bronze Age, Iran was home to several civilizations including Elam, Jiroft, and Zayande River.
Iran has one of the highest urban growth rates in the world.
United Nations Resident Coordinator for Iran Gary Lewis has said that "Water scarcity poses the most severe human security challenge in Iran today".
If a law is deemed incompatible with the constitution or Sharia (Islamic law), it is referred back to Parliament for revision.
The misty mountains.jpg|Mountains in Arasbaran.
Iranian cardiologist, Tofy Mussivand invented and developed the first artificial cardiac pump, the precursor of the artificial heart.
Iran was predominantly Sunni, but Ismail instigated a forced conversion to the Shia branch of Islam, by which the Shia Islam spread throughout the Safavid territories in the Caucasus, Iran, Anatolia, and Mesopotamia.
The 1949 ''Apadana Gallery'' of Tehran, which was operated by Mahmoud Javadi Pour and other colleagues, and the emergence of artists such as Marcos Grigorian in the 1950s, signaled a commitment to the creation of a form of modern art grounded in Iran.
The first Iranian filmmaker was Mirza Ebrahim Khan (Akkas Bashi), the official photographer of Mozaffar od Din Shah of Qajar.
The President appoints and supervises the Council of Ministers, coordinates government decisions, and selects government policies to be placed before the legislature.
According to UNESCO and the deputy head of research for Iran Travel and Tourism Organization (ITTO), Iran is rated 4th among the top 10 destinations in the Middle East.
By the late 1970s, many of these people opposed the Shah's regime and began to organize and join the protests against it.
The current Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei has fired as well as reinstated Council of Ministers members.
The requirement to enter into higher education is to have a high school diploma and pass the national university entrance examination, Iranian University Entrance Exam (known as ''concour''), which is the equivalent of the US SAT exams.
The endeavors also resulted in the formation of the Tehran World Festival in 1973.
Persepolis was the ritual center of the ancient kingdom of Achaemenids, and the figures at Persepolis remain bound by the rules of grammar and syntax of visual language.
Isfahan, with a population of around 1.7 million (2011 census), is Iran's third largest city and the capital of Isfahan Province.
In 2014, GDP was $404.1 billion ($1.334 trillion at PPP), or $17,100 at PPP per capita.
Iran's climate ranges from arid or semiarid, to subtropical along the Caspian coast and the northern forests.
Some historians have estimated that Iran's population did not again reach its pre-Mongol levels until the mid-20th century."
The heads of the judiciary, state radio and television networks, the commanders of the police and military forces and six of the twelve members of the Guardian Council are appointed by the Supreme Leader.
The Russo-Persian wars of 1804–1813 and 1826–1828 resulted in large irrevocable territorial losses for Iran in the Caucasus, comprising all of Transcaucasia and Dagestan, which made part of the very concept of Iran for centuries, and thus substantial gains for the neighboring Russian Empire.
The Lurish and Lari languages are spoken in southwestern and southern Iran.
The area was greatly influenced by the Babylonian civilization, and after the emergence of the ancient Persians, soon came to be known as Persis.
Poetry is used in many Iranian classical works, whether in literature, science, or metaphysics.
Today, the Twelver Shia Islam is the official state religion, to which about 90% to 95% of the population officially belong.
The remaining 2% are non-Muslim religious minorities, including Christians, Jews, Bahais, Mandeans, Yezidis, Yarsanis, and Zoroastrians.
The Safavid Era saw the start of mass integration from Caucasian populations into new layers of the society of Iran, as well as mass resettlement of them within the heartlands of Iran, playing a pivotal role in the history of Iran for centuries onwards.
Over the next several years, these uprisings were subdued in a violent manner by the new Islamic government.
Other remained national annuals of Iran include:
The blossoming literature, philosophy, medicine, and art of Iran became major elements in the formation of a new age for the Iranian civilization, during the period known as the ''Islamic Golden Age''.
However, Iran's birth rate has dropped significantly in recent years, leading to a population growth rate—recorded from July 2012—of about 1.29%.
As a result, thereof, the modern-day Iran is the only official Shia nation of the world, with it holding an absolute majority in Iran and the Republic of Azerbaijan, having there the 1st and 2nd highest number of Shia inhabitants by population percentage in the world.
The emergence of writing in Elam was paralleled to Sumer, and the Elamite cuneiform was developed since the 3rd millennium BC.
According to the statistics provided by the web information company of Alexa, Google Search and Yahoo!
The centuries-long geopolitical and ideological rivalry between Safavid Iran and the neighboring Ottoman Empire, led to numerous Ottoman–Persian Wars.
Another civil war ensued after the death of Karim Khan in 1779, out of which Aqa Mohammad Khan emerged, founding the Qajar Dynasty in 1794.
