In the face of growing Kurdish dissent, as well as Barzani's personal power, Qasim began to incite the Barzanis historical enemies, the ''Baradost'' and ''Zebari'' tribes, which led to intertribal warfare throughout 1960 and early 1961.
The campaign also included Arabization of Kirkuk, a program to drive Kurds and other ethnic groups out of the oil-rich city and replace them with Arab settlers from central and southern Iraq.
According to the World Food Programme, in the span of one week in August 2013, 37,000 Syrians fled to Iraq, 15,000 of them arriving at the Kawrgosk camp in Kurdish Northern Iraq.
This campaign failed in May 1966, when Barzani forces thoroughly defeated the Iraqi Army at the Battle of Mount Handrin, near Rawandiz.
More recently the Zoroastrian faith has gained strength among the Kurds in the region, claiming up to 100,000 adherents as of 2015.
Dr. Kamal Miraudeli came second with approximately 30% of votes.
The 2003 invasion of Iraq and the subsequent political changes led to the ratification of a new Constitution of Iraq in 2005.
Then, with the collapse of the Kurdish forces the British exiled Mahmud Barzanji to India.
Not a single coalition soldier or foreigner has been killed, wounded or kidnapped in Kurdistan since the invasion of Iraq in 2003.
Nechirvan Idris Barzani, Masoud’s nephew, was prime minister of the KRG from 1999 to 2009, including presiding over the first KDP-PUK unified cabinet from 2006 to 2009.
As a result, the KDP began to agitate for regional autonomy.
''Heyran''s are love ballads usually expressing the melancholy of separation and unfulfilled love.
The world's largest deposit of rock sulfur is located just southwest of Erbil.
Masoud BarzaniPresident since 2005
His presidency concluded on 19 August 2015 after the political parties failed to reach an agreement over extending his presidency term.
During the 2014 Northern Iraq offensive, Iraqi Kurdistan seized the city of Kirkuk and the surrounding area, as well as most of the disputed territories in Northern Iraq.
The KRG defend their actions as necessary compensation for the hundreds of thousands of Kurds that have been forced out of the same areas by previous Iraqi governments and during the Al-Anfal campaign.
The Assyrian semi-independent kingdom of Adiabene was centred in Erbil in the first Christian centuries.
The Pershmerga forces received training and arms from the US-led coalition for the fight agianst Islamic State.
By 1974, the Iraqi government retaliated with a new offensive against the Kurds and pushed them close to the border with Iran.
After the 1991 safe haven was established, the Kurdistan Regional Government began projects to reconstruct the Kurdistan Region.
The mountains are part of the larger Zagros mountain range which is present in Iran as well.
By 1927, the Barzani clan had become vocal supporters of Kurdish rights in Iraq.
Between the 16th and 17th century the area nowadays known as Iraqi Kurdistan, (formerly ruled by three principalities of Baban, Badinan, and Soran) was continuously passed back and forth between archrivals the Safavids and the Ottomans, until the Ottomans managed to decisively seize power in the region starting from the mid 17th century through the Ottoman–Safavid War (1623–39) and the resulting Treaty of Zuhab.
Meanwhile, during 1959–1960, Barzani became the head of the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), which was granted legal status in 1960.
Hewler Old Minaret.jpg|Mudhafaria Minaret in the Minare Park, Erbil
The US and British government established a No Fly Zone over a large part of northern Iraq (see Operation Provide Comfort), however, it left out Sulaymaniyah, Kirkuk and other important Kurdish populated regions.
Furthermore, since the removal of the previous regime in 2003, the KRG has been able to scale up its service delivery and infrastructure, which has changed the economic landscape of the region and facilitated a number of investment projects.
As of 2014, the resident population of Iraqi Kurdistan had reached 9.85 million people, including Iraqi nationals and foreign residents permanently staying in the region (most notably Syrian refugees).
Gas and associated gas reserves are in excess of .
Under pressure from the Iraqi government and the British, the most influential leader of the clan, Mustafa Barzani was forced into exile in Iran in 1945.
A Kurdish newspaper based in the Kurdish capital estimates that around 50,000 Kurds come from Turkey are now living in Kurdistan Reports about immigrants Kurds from Syria, Iran and Turkey have been published as well.
The plan also gave Kurds representation in government bodies, to be implemented in four years.
The mountainous nature of Kurdistan, the difference of temperatures in its various parts, and its wealth of waters make Kurdistan a land of agriculture and tourism.
Kurdish parties joined forces against the Iraqi government during the war in Spring 2003.
Iraqi Kurdistan's food security allowed for substantially more of the funds to be spent on development projects than in the rest of Iraq.
The Kurdistan Region is allowed to have its own army under the Iraqi constitution and the central Iraqi army is not allowed to enter the Kurdistan Region by law.
In August 2013 the parliament extended his presidency for another two years.
In prehistoric times, the region was home to a Neanderthal culture such as has been found at the Shanidar Cave.
In the presidential election, Masoud Barzani was appointed President and won another term in 2009 by gaining 70% of votes.
As reported to the Centre for Islamic Pluralism by the non-governmental organization, called as Stop FGM in Kurdistan, the Kurdistan Regional Government in northern Iraq, on 25 November, officially admitted the wide prevalence in the territory of female genital mutilation (FGM).
There was no specific music related to the Kurdish princely courts, and instead, music performed in night gatherings (''şevbihêrk'') is considered classical.
With mediation by Algerian President Houari Boumediene, Iran and Iraq reached a comprehensive settlement in March 1975 known as the ''Algiers Pact''.
It was ruled by the Akkadian Empire from 2334&nbsp;BC until 2154&nbsp;BC.
Iraqi Kurdistan also has strong economic relations with neighbouring Iran, with $100m worth of good traded between the countries in 2000, growing to $4bn by 2014.
The dominant religion is Islam, which is professed by the majority of Iraqi Kurdistan's inhabitants.
This led to internecine and intra-Kurdish conflict and warfare between 1994 and 1996.
Since 2003, the stronger economy of Iraqi Kurdistan has attracted around 20,000 workers from other parts of Iraq.
In 2006, the first new oil well since the invasion of Iraq was drilled in the Kurdistan region by the Norwegian energy company DNO.
Instead, it is rolling hills and sometimes plains that make up the areas.
Each district is divided into sub-districts.
Despite significant casualties and the crisis of refugees in bordering regions of Iran and Turkey, the Peshmerga success and establishment of the northern no-fly zone following the First Gulf War in 1991 created the basis for Kurdish self-rule and facilitated the return of Kurdish refugees.
Notable companies active in Kurdistan include Exxon, Total, Chevron, Talisman Energy, MOL Group, Genel Energy, Hunt Oil, Gulf Keystone Petroleum, and Marathon Oil.
The Kurdistan Premier League is a Kurdish professional league for men's association football clubs.
There were about 335,000 in the area prior to 2014 with the rest arriving in 2014 as a result of unrest in Syria and attacks by the Islamic State.
In November 1963, after considerable infighting amongst the civilian and military wings of the Ba'athists, they were ousted by Abdul Salam Arif in a coup.
A tiny ethno-religious community of Mandeans also exists within the semi-autonomous region.
Also member of World Kickboxing and Karate Union (WKU).
The Assyrians have reported Kurdish officials' reluctance in rebuilding Assyrian villages in their region while constructing more settlements for the Kurds affected during the Anfal campaign.
The largest lake in the region is Lake Dukan.
The name ''Kurdistan'' literally means "Land of the Kurds".
At the top of the Kurdish football league system, it is the country's primary football competition.
A Legislative Assembly was established and Erbil became the capital of the new entity which lay in Northern Iraq, encompassing the Kurdish authorities of Erbil, Dahuk and Sulaymaniyah.
In 1978 and 1979, 600 Kurdish villages were burned down and around 200,000 Kurds were deported to the other parts of the country.
After his visit to the region, the Dutch politician Joël Voordewind noted that the positions reserved for minorities in the Kurdish parliament were appointed by Kurds as the Assyrians for example had no possibility to nominate their own candidates.
Direct United States mediation led the two parties to a formal ceasefire in what was termed the ''Washington Agreement'' in September 1998.
Currently, in addition to the three governorates of Iraqi Kurdistan, Kurds control parts of Ninawa, Kirkuk and Diyala governorates, which are also claimed by the Iraqi government; on the other hand, Iraqi government control parts of those three provinces which are also claimed by the Kurds.
As of July 2007, the Kurdish government solicited foreign companies to invest in 40 new oil sites, with the hope of increasing regional oil production over the following 5 years by a factor of five, to about .
The first and the most common way is to view the Kurds as victims, both of the central government in Iraq and of neighbouring powers - particularly Turkey.
Each council consists of 41 members.
On the other hand, Kurds remained dependent on the Iranian military support and could do little to strengthen their forces.
By the program's end in 2003 $4 billion of the KRG's oil-for-food funds remained unspent.
After previously opposing the independence for Iraqi Kurdistan, Turkey later gave signs that it could recognize an independent Kurdish state.
Despite this, the Iraqi government embarked on an Arabization program in the oil rich regions of Kirkuk and Khanaqin in the same period.
The Kurdistan Region’s official languages are Kurdish and Arabic; Kurdish is the most widely spoken language.
Saddam had established an oil smuggling route through territory controlled by the KDP, with the active involvement of senior Barzani family members.
Moreover, the Soviet Union  pressured the Iraqis to come to terms with Barzani.
The establishment of the Kurdistan Region dates back to the March 1970 autonomy agreement between the Kurdish opposition and the Iraqi government after years of heavy fighting.
The region is officially governed by the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), with the capital being Erbil.
Due to Qasim's profound distrust of the Iraqi Army, which he purposely failed to adequately arm (in fact, Qasim implemented a policy of ammunition rationing), Qasim's government was not able to subdue the insurrection.
The Peshmerga fought alongside the US Army and the coalition in the northern front during Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Love songs, dance music, wedding and other celebratory songs (''dîlok/narînk''), erotic poetry and work songs are also popular.
Following Nader's death in 1747, Ottoman suzerainty was reimposed, and in 1831, direct Ottoman rule was established which lasted until World War I, when the Ottomans were defeated by the British.
Between 612 and 605&nbsp;BC, the Assyrian empire fell and it passed to the neo-Babylonians and later became part of the Athura Satrap within the Achaemenian Empire from 539 to 332&nbsp;BC, where it was known as Athura, the Achaemenid name for Assyria.
It recognized both the Kurdistan Region and all laws passed by the KRG since 1992.
Meanwhile, in June 1961, the KDP issued a detailed ultimatum to Qasim outlining Kurdish grievances and demanded rectification.
The large Kurdish town of Qala Dizeh (population 70,000) was completely destroyed by the Iraqi army.
Barzani went to Iran with many of his supporters.
Barzani agreed to the ceasefire and fired the radicals from the party.
The second and more extensive and widespread wave began from March 29, 1987 until April 23, 1989, when the Iraqi army under the command of Ali Hassan al-Majid carried out a genocidal campaign against the Kurds, characterized by the following human rights violations: The widespread use of chemical weapons, the wholesale destruction of some 2,000 villages, and slaughter of around 50,000 rural Kurds, by the most conservative estimates.
According to the KRG website, no coalition soldier has died nor any foreigner been kidnapped since the 2003 invasion of Iraq in areas administered by the KRG.
Among their neighbours, the Kurdish culture is closest to Persian culture.
Kurdish culture is a group of distinctive cultural traits practiced by Kurdish people.
He has also been at the forefront of the rapprochement with Turkey and the active development of oil and gas fields in the Region.
Kurds also refer to the region as ''Başûrê Kurdistanê'' or ''Başûrî Kurdistan'' ("Southern Kurdistan"), referring to its geographical location within the whole of the Greater Kurdistan Region.
Both of their international organizations are similar and both have a similar structure of authority.
On March 23, Barzani officially declared that Iraqi Kurdistan will hold the referendum some time "before October" of that year.
Governorates have a capital city, while districts and sub-districts have ''district centers''.
The stability of the Kurdistan region has allowed it to achieve a higher level of development than other regions in Iraq.
Arabic, Assyrian Neo-Aramaic, Armenian are also spoken by their respective communities.
Christianity is professed by Assyrians and Armenians.
The second opposing position is to see them as an agent provocateur, acting as proxy forces for states opposed to the incumbent Iraqi regime.
The objection of the British to Kurdish self-rule sprang from the fear that success of an independent Kurdish area would tempt the two Arab areas of Baghdad and Basra to follow suit, hence endangering the direct British control over all Mesopotamia.
Elections held in June 1992 produced an inconclusive outcome, with the assembly divided almost equally between the two main parties and their allies.
Prior to the removal of Saddam Hussein, the Kurdistan Regional Government received approximately 13% of the revenues from Iraq's Oil-for-Food Programme.
The region has populations of Assyrian Christians, Yazidi, Yarsan, Mandean and Shabak faiths.
The issues and challenges of the socio-political system have been described as "Kurdistan’s Politicized Society Confronts a Sultanistic System" in an August 2015 paper by the Carnegie Middle East Center:
As of December 2014 there were approximately 2 million refugees in Iraqi Kurdistan from surrounding areas.
At this battle, it was said that the Kurds slaughtered an entire brigade.
In 1973, the US made a secret agreement with the Shah of Iran to begin covertly funding Kurdish rebels against Bagdad through the Central Intelligence Agency and in collaboration with Mossad, both of which would be active in the country through the launch of the Iraqi invasion and into the present.
This polarised notion of their status may be too simplistic, when one considers that there are opposing agendas within Iraqi Kurdistan with regard to issues such as the relationship with Turkey, nationalist aspirations and relations globally.
The Peshmerga have also been deployed in Baghdad and al-Anbar governorate for anti-terror operations.
The League of Nations granted France mandates over Syria and Lebanon and granted the United Kingdom mandates over Palestine (which then consisted of two autonomous regions: Mandatory Palestine and Transjordan) and what was to become Iraq.
KFA submit an application for membership in FIFA.
Iraqi Kurdistan currently has the lowest poverty rates in Iraq.
The first revolt began on May 22, 1919 with the arrest of British officials in Sulaymaniyah and it quickly spread to Mosul and Erbil.
Other peoples such as Arabs, Assyrians, Armenians, Shabaks and Mandeans have their own distinctive cultures.
Iraqi Kurdistan can be reached by land and air.
The suffix -stan is Iranian for "place of" or "country".
There is also a small number of Shia Feyli Kurds, as well as adherents of Sufi Islam.
According to Iraqi president Jalal Talabani, since 2003 the number of millionaires in the Kurdish city of Silêmani has increased from 12 to 2000, reflecting the financial and economic growth of the region.
Bloody clashes between Iraqi forces and Kurdish troops continued and, after an uneasy and shaky balance of power was reached, the Iraqi government fully withdrew its military and other personnel from the region in October 1991 allowing Iraqi Kurdistan to function de facto independently.
Exxon responded by announcing its intention to leave the West-Qurna project.
As of 2014, Iraqi Kurdistan is in dispute with the Federal Iraqi government on the issues of territorial control, export of oil and budget distribution and is functioning largely outside Baghdad's control.
The newer and  less popular competing movement, the Gorran List ("Gorran" means "change" in Kurdish) headed by Nawshirwan Mustafa won 24 seats, a quarter of all parliamentary seats.
On January 30, 2005 three elections were held in the region: 1) for Transitional National Assembly of Iraq 2) for Iraqi Kurdistan National Assembly and 3) for provincial councils.
The taxation of this trade at the crossing point between Saddam’s territory and Kurdish controlled territory and then into Turkey, along with associated service revenue, meant that whoever controlled Dohuk and Zakho had the potential to earn several million dollars a week.
The KRG also has plans to build a media city in Erbil and free trade zones near the borders of Turkey and Iran.
These include Kurds, Iraqi Turkmen, and Arabs, belonging mostly to the Shafi'i school of Sunni Islam.
According to Bruinessen, the traditional structure of Kurdish social and political organization was inherently tribal, with a tribe being a socio-political unit with distinct territorial limits and membership based on kinship.
Kurdish military forces, known as Peshmerga, played an important role in the overthrow of the Iraqi government; however, Kurds have been reluctant to send troops into Baghdad since then, preferring not to be dragged into the sectarian struggle that so dominates much of Iraq.
The regional government calls it the "Kurdistan Region".
The studies have shown that there is a trend of general decline of FGM.
Crude deliveries are expected to occur on a regular basis.
Since then, of all the 4,500 villages that were destroyed by Saddam Husseins' regime, 65% have been reconstructed by the KRG.
Zoroastrians were seeking official recognition of their religion as of early 2016.
Then, after another failed offensive, Arif declared a ceasefire in February 1964 which provoked a split among Kurdish urban radicals on one hand and Peshmerga (Freedom fighters) forces led by Barzani on the other.
The earliest neolithic site in Kurdistan is at Tell Hassuna, the centre of the ''Hassuna culture'', circa 6000&nbsp;BC.
Several musical forms are found in this genre.
Later, the region was incorporated by the Romans as the Roman Assyria province but shortly retaken by the Sassanids who established the Satrap of Assuristan (Sassanid Assyria) in it until the Arab Islamic conquest.
A 2011 Kurdish law criminalized FGM practice in Iraqi Kurdistan and law was accepted four years later.
The Kurdistan Regional Government has constitutionally recognised authority over the provinces of Erbil, Dahuk, and Sulaymaniyah.
After 1996, 13% of the Iraqi oil sales were allocated for Iraqi Kurdistan and this led to a relative prosperity in the region.
In February 2016, the Kurdish president Barzani stated once again that "Now the time is ripe for the people of Kurdistan to decide their future through a referendum", supporting an independence referendum and citing similar referenda in Scotland, Catalonia and Quebec.
A new constitution of Iraq was established in 2005, defining Iraq as a federalist state consisting of Regions and Governorates.
There is provision for Governorates to create, join or leave Regions.
There are also several smaller lakes, such as Darbandikhan Lake and Duhok Lake.
The relative security and stability of the region has allowed the KRG to sign a number of investment contracts with foreign companies.
Things began to change after the 1991 uprising against Saddam Hussein at the end of the Persian Gulf War.
This act caused Baghdad to threaten to revoke Exxon's contract in its southern fields, most notably the West-Qurna Phase 1 project.
The subject of presidency in Iraqi Kurdistan and the legitimacy of extension beyond two terms is a volatile subject and the cause of the current public anger.
From within Iraq, the Kurdistan Region can be reached by land from multiple roads.
The western and southern parts of the Kurdistan Region are not as mountainous as the east.
Traditionally, there are three types of Kurdish classical performers - storytellers (''çîrokbêj''), minstrels (''stranbêj'') and bards (''dengbêj'').
Nechirvan, as Prime Minister, spearheaded unprecedented social and economic reforms, including attention to violence against women, improvements in infrastructure, and a focus on the private sector and foreign investment.
Elections for the governorate councils are held every four years, however the last ones being held in 2005.
Qasim ignored the Kurdish demands and continued his planning for war.
Extraction of these reserves began in 2007.
The KRG spent millions of dollars on the airports to attract international carriers, and currently Turkish Airlines, Austrian Airlines, Lufthansa, Etihad, Royal Jordanian, Emirates, Gulf Air, Middle East Airlines, Atlas Jet, and Fly Dubai all service the Region.
The incursion, which lasted eight days, could have drawn the armed forces of Kurdistan into a broader regional war.
Later he moved to the Soviet Union after the collapse of the Republic of Mahabad in 1946.
Tribal power is widespread in Erbil and Dahuk.
Iraqi Kurdistan has also a border gate with Syria known as the Faysh Khabur border gate.
In 1992, Kurdish major political movements of KDP and PUK established the semi-autonomous Kurdistan Regional Government.
The Assyrians ruled the region from the 21st century BC.
The Shabaki and Yarsan (Ahl-e Haqq or Kakai) religions number around and 250,000 and 200,000 adherents respectively; these, like Yezidism, are sometimes said to be related to the pre-Islamic indigenous religion of Kurdistan.
Relations became further strained by the formation of a new command center (Tigris Operation Command) for Iraqi forces to operate in a disputed area over which both Baghdad and the Kurdistan Regional Government claim jurisdiction.
Further, the 1980–88 Iran–Iraq War  and especially the Anfal genocide campaign of the Iraqi army devastated the population and nature of Iraqi Kurdistan.
The KRG has a parliament, elected by popular vote, called the Kurdistan Parliament, and a cabinet composed of the KDP, the PUK and their allies (Iraqi Communist Party, the Kurdistan Socialist Democratic Party etc.).
The reason for the blocked protest was that Kurds in the Nahla Valley, mainly populated by Assyrians, encroached on land owned by Assyrians, without any action by courts or officials to remove the structures the Kurds built there.
Masrour, Masoud’s son, is now in the Political Bureau.
In English translations of the Constitution of Iraq, it is called "Kurdistan", four times in the phrase "region of Kurdistan" and once in the phrase "Kurdistan region".
21 June 2011 The Family Violence Bill was approved by the Kurdistan Parliament, it includes several provisions criminalizing the practice.
Structurally and officially, the two parties exhibit few differences from each other.
The Ba'ath government started a campaign to end the Kurdish insurrection, which stalled in 1969.
In September 2012, the Iraqi government ordered the KRG to transfer its powers over the Peshmerga to the central government.
Elections for the Kurdistan Parliament, called the Kurdistan National Assembly until 2009, are held every four years.
Masoud Barzani, who was initially elected as president in 2005, was re-elected in 2009.
The Ba'athist government of Iraq forcibly displaced and culturally Arabized minorities (Kurds, Yezidis, Assyrians, Shabaks, Armenians, Turkmen, Mandeans), in line with settler colonialist policies, from the 1960s to the early 2000s, in order to shift the demographics of North Iraq towards Arab domination.
One of the major Assyrian cities in the area, Erbil (Arba-Ilu), was noted for its distinctive cult of Ishtar, and the city was called "the Lady of Ishtar" by its Assyrian inhabitants.
Although the Kurdish regional parliament has officially recognized ethnic minorities such as Assyrians, Turkmen, Arabs, Armenians, Mandeans, Shabaks and Yezidis, there have been accusations of Kurdish discrimination against those groups.
The one-party rule which had dominated Iraq however meant that the new assembly was an overall component of Baghdad's central government; the Kurdish authority was installed by Baghdad and no multi-party system had been inaugurated in Iraqi Kurdistan, and as such the local population enjoyed no particular democratic freedom denied to the rest of the country.
Assyrian kings are attested from the 23rd century BC according to the Assyrian King List, and Assyrian city-states such as Ashur and Ekallatum started appearing in the region from the mid-21st century BC.
Many songs are epic in nature, such as the popular ''lawik''s which are heroic ballads recounting the tales of Kurdish heroes of the past like Saladin.
The linked list is an incomplete list of the largest cities within the three governorates which are currently de jure and de facto under control of the Kurdistan Regional Government.
The Kurdistan parliament in 2008 passed a draft law outlawing the practice, but the ministerial decree necessary to implement it, expected in February 2009, was cancelled.
In 2012 Kurdistan won the Viva World Cup as the host of the tournament.
The Kurdish culture is a legacy from the various ancient peoples who shaped modern Kurds and their society, but primarily Iranian.
This stalemate irritated powerful factions within the military and is said to be one of the main reasons behind the Ba'athist coup against Qasim in February 1963.
PUK leader Jalal Talabani was elected President of the new Iraqi administration, while KDP leader Masoud Barzani became President of the Kurdistan Regional Government.
For example, they celebrate Newroz as the new year day, which is celebrated on March 21.
It is the first day of the month of ''Xakelêwe'' in Kurdish calendar and the first day of spring.
With the escalation of the Iraqi crisis and fears of Iraq's collapse, Kurds have increasingly debated the issue of independence.
This was not received well in Baghdad, and as a result, Qasim began to prepare for a military offensive against the north to return government control of the region.
In November, Ed Royce, Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the United States House of Representatives, introduced legislation to arm the Kurds directly, rather than continue working through the local governments.
The Al-Anfal Campaign constituted  a systematic genocide of the Kurdish people in Iraq.
In response to the attack, Qasim lashed out and ordered the Iraqi Air Force to indiscriminately bomb Kurdish villages, which ultimately served to rally the entire Kurdish population to Barzani's standard.
Iraqi Kurdistan has opened its doors to the international world by opening two international airports.
The region was inhabited by the northern branch of the Gutian/Hurrians around 2400 BC.
The new Iraqi constitution defines the Kurdistan Region as a federal entity of Iraq, and establishes Kurdish and Arabic as Iraq's joint official languages.
