Ancient Iraq, or ''Mesopotamia'', was home to many sophisticated and highly advanced civilisations, in all fields of knowledge – including the culinary arts.
Iraq was the centre of the Akkadian, Sumerian, Assyrian, and Babylonian empires.
This is an attempt to boost usage and comes as a result of significant improvements in Internet infrastructure in the country.
When they arrived at the Islamic capital, Hulagu Khan demanded its surrender, but the last Abbasid Caliph Al-Musta'sim refused.
The capital, Ninus or Nineveh, was taken by the Medes under Cyaxares, and some 200 years after Xenophon passed over its site, then mere mounds of earth.
The Sumerians under king Shulgi conquered almost all of Iraq except the northern reaches of Assyria, and asserted themselves over the Elamites, Gutians and Amorites.
According to the Iraqi constitution: "The Arabic language and the Kurdish language are the two official languages of Iraq.
The capital, and largest city, is Baghdad.
The declaration enraged many local Shia clerics, and by 2005 the United States had relented, allowing a role for sharia in the constitution to help end a stalemate on the draft constitution.
Arabs form 75%–80% of the population.
This was followed by a Sumerian renaissance in the form of the Neo-Sumerian Empire.
Assyria expanded territorially into the north eastern Levant, central Iraq, and eastern Anatolia, forming the Old Assyrian Empire (circa 2035-1750 BC) under kings such as Puzur-Ashur I, Sargon I, Ilushuma and Erishum I, the latter of whom produced the most detailed set of Written Laws yet written.
Currently upwards to 78% of Iraqis own a mobile phone.
Until that point, al-Maliki had clung to power even asking the federal court to veto the president's nomination describing it as a violation of the constitution.
Arabic is the majority language; Kurdish is spoken by approximately 10–15% of the population; and Turkmen, the Neo-Aramaic language of the Assyrians and others, by 5%.
By the end of 1918, the British had deployed 410,000 men in the area, of which 112,000 were combat troops.
To escape the civil war, over 160,000 Syrian refugees of varying ethnicities have fled to Iraq since 2012.
People who dress in emo style are mistakenly associated with homosexuality and may suffer the same fate.
As many as 30 cinemas were reported to have been converted to live stages, producing a wide range of comedies and dramatic productions.
According to a US Study from May 2007, between  and  of Iraq's declared oil production over the past four years could have been siphoned off through corruption or smuggling.
Two major rivers, the Tigris and Euphrates, run south through Iraq and into the Shatt al-Arab near the Persian Gulf.
The live theatre scene received a boost during the 1990s when UN sanctions limited the import of foreign films.
It has a mixed Shia and Sunni population.
The Sunni militia Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad became Al-Qaeda in Iraq in October 2004 and targeted Coalition forces as well as civilians, mainly Shia Muslims, further exacerbating ethnic tensions.
Ghazi was followed by his underage son, Faisal II.
The south broke up into a number of Akkadian speaking states, Isin, Larsa and Eshnunna being the major ones.
After his death in 1966, he was succeeded by his brother, Abdul Rahman Arif, who was overthrown by the Ba'ath Party in 1968.
2004 saw Sunni and Shia militants fighting against each other and against the new Iraqi Interim Government installed in June 2004, and against Coalition forces, as well as the First Battle of Fallujah in April and Second Battle of Fallujah in November.
Likewise, British authorities selected Sunni Arab elites from the region for appointments to government and ministry offices.
After the capture of Baghdad, 20,000 of its citizens were massacred.
Relationships with Turkey are tense, largely because of the Kurdistan Regional Government, as clashes between Turkey and the PKK continue.
Bulgur wheat is used in many dishes – having been a staple in the country since the days of the Ancient Assyrians.
By the mid 21st century BC, the Akkadian speaking kingdom of Assyria had risen to dominance in northern Iraq.
In fall 2003, self-entitled 'jihadist' groups began targeting coalition forces.
In 1916, the British and French made a plan for the post-war division of Western Asia under the Sykes-Picot Agreement.
Some characteristic ingredients of Iraqi cuisine include – vegetables such as aubergine, tomato, okra, onion, potato, courgette, garlic, peppers and chilli, cereals such as rice, bulgur wheat and barley, pulses and legumes such as lentils, chickpeas and cannellini, fruits such as dates, raisins, apricots, figs, grapes, melon, pomegranate and citrus fruits, especially lemon and lime.
In November 2002, the UN Security Council passed UNSCR 1441 and in March 2003 the US and its allies invaded Iraq.
In the late 7th century BC, the Assyrian Empire tore itself apart with a series of brutal civil wars, weakening itself to such a degree that a coalition of its former subjects; the Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Scythians and Cimmerians, were able to attack Assyria, finally bringing its empire down by 605 BC.
At the nightclubs of Baghdad, ensembles consisted of oud, qanun and two percussionists, while the same format with a ney and cello were used on the radio.
A monarchy was established in 1921 and the Kingdom of Iraq gained independence from Britain in 1932.
The main ethnic groups are Arabs and Kurds; others include Assyrians, Turkmen, Shabakis, Yazidis, Armenians, Mandeans, Circassians, and Kawliya.
The region between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, historically known as Mesopotamia, is often referred to as the cradle of civilisation.
A BBC article published in 2009, which includes interviews of homosexual and transgender Iraqis, suggests that LGBT people were less subject to violence under Hussein's regime.
In May 2007, Iraq's Parliament called on the United States to set a timetable for withdrawal and US coalition partners such as the UK and Denmark began withdrawing their forces from the country.
An Arabic folk etymology for the name is "deeply rooted, well-watered; fertile".
'''Iraq''' (, , or ;  ''''), officially the '''Republic of Iraq''' (Arabic:  ) is a country in Western Asia, bordered by Turkey to the north, Iran to the east, Kuwait to the southeast, Saudi Arabia to the south, Jordan to the southwest, and Syria to the west.
The Arab Islamic conquest in the mid-7th century AD established Islam in Iraq and saw a large influx of Arabs.
On 14 August, Maliki stepped down as PM to support Mr al-Abadi and to "safeguard the high interests of the country".
During the late 14th and early 15th centuries, the Black Sheep Turkmen ruled the area now known as Iraq.
Typically, precipitation is low; most places receive less than  annually, with maximum rainfall occurring during the winter months.
Oil fields contracted include the "super-giant" Majnoon Field, Halfaya Field, West Qurna Field and Rumaila Field.
Government payroll have increased from 1 million employees under Saddam Hussein to around 7 million employees in 2016.
The life expectancy at birth was 68.49 years in 2010, or 65.13 years for males and 72.01 years for females.
However, on 14 July 2014, as sectarian strife had taken hold, Kurdistan Regional Government forces seized control of the Bai Hassan and Kirkuk oilfields in the north of the country, taking them from Iraq's control.
Around 20,000 Marsh Arabs live in southern Iraq.
In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 6.84% of the country's GDP.
In 2004, the CFA chief executive L. Paul Bremer said he would veto any constitutional draft stating that sharia is the principal basis of law.
Various Sunni militias were created in 2003, for example Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi.
Today the cuisine of Iraq reflects this rich inheritance as well as strong influences from the culinary traditions of neighbouring Turkey, Iran and the Greater Syria area.
Christians have lived in the area for about 2,000 years, and many descend from the ''pre-Arab'' ancient Mesopotamians-Assyrians.
They numbered over 1.4 million in 1987 or 8% of the estimated population of 16.3 million and 550,000 in 1947 or 12% of the population.
Spanning , it is the 58th-largest country in the world.
After the end of the full state control in 2003, there were a period of significant growth in the broadcast media in Iraq.
The Mahdi Army—a Shia militia created in the summer of 2003 by Muqtada al-Sadr—began to fight Coalition forces in April 2004.
Daoud and his brother Saleh formed the official ensemble for the Iraqi radio station and were responsible for introducing the cello and ney into the traditional ensemble.
On 1 April 1941, Rashid Ali al-Gaylani and members of the Golden Square staged a coup d'état and overthrew the government of 'Abd al-Ilah.
In 2003, an estimated 80% of Iraq's 15,000 school buildings needed rehabilitation and lacked basic sanitary facilities, and most schools lacked libraries and laboratories.
In 1958, the monarchy was overthrown and the Iraqi Republic created.
From this period, the civilisation in Iraq came to be known as Sumero-Akkadian.
The Iraqi Government's failure to disarm and agree to a ceasefire resulted in sanctions which remained in place until 2003.
The following Neolithic period (PPNB) is represented by rectangular houses.
Prior to US occupation, Iraq's centrally planned economy prohibited foreign ownership of Iraqi businesses, ran most large industries as state-owned enterprises, and imposed large tariffs to keep out foreign goods.
Immediately, and the ban on satellite dishes is no longer in place, and by mid-2003, according to a BBC report, there were 20 radio stations from 0.15 to 17 television stations owned by Iraqis, and 200 Iraqi newspapers owned and operated.
The dispersion of native Iraqis to other countries is known as the Iraqi diaspora.
After the collapse of the Akkadian Empire in the late 22nd century BC, the Gutians occupied the south for a few decades, while Assyria reasserted its independence in the north.
Some reports that the government has reduced corruption in public procurement of oil; however, reliable reports of bribery and kickbacks to government officials continue to persist.
In late 2006, the US government's Iraq Study Group recommended that the US begin focusing on training Iraqi military personnel and in January 2007 US President George W. Bush announced a "Surge" in the number of US troops deployed to the country.
In English, it is either  (the only pronunciation listed in the Oxford English Dictionary and the first one in  Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary) or  (listed first by MQD), the //web.archive.org/web/20080314173050/http://www.bartleby.com/61/81/I0228100.html American Heritage Dictionary, and the  Random House Dictionary.
Most of Iraq has a hot arid climate with subtropical influence.
It is planned to increase to 18,000 personnel, with 550 aircraft by 2018.
In 2008, there were 6.96 physicians and 13.92 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants.
Around 95% of the country's 36 million citizens are Shia or Sunni Muslims, with Christianity, Yarsan, Yezidism, and Mandeanism also present.
Aside from the federal government, there are regions (made of one or more governorates), governorates, and districts within Iraq with jurisdiction over various matters as defined by law.
Currently only a modest percentage of women (the highest estimate for 2011 was 22%) participate in the labour force.
According to official United States Citizenship and Immigration Services statistics, 58,811 Iraqis have been granted refugee-status citizenship as of May 25, 2011.
The American presence in Iraq ended in 2011, but the Iraqi insurgency continued and intensified as fighters from the Syrian Civil War spilled into the country.
One of these small kingdoms founded in 1894 BC contained the then small administrative town of Babylon within its borders.
Since the establishment of the no–fly zones following the Gulf War of 1990–1991, the Kurds established their own autonomous region..
However, these East Semitic Akkadian kings, were unable to prevent new waves of West Semitic migrants entering southern Iraq, and during the 11th century BC Arameans and Suteans entered Babylonia from The Levant, and these were followed in the late 10th to early 9th century BC by the migrant Chaldeans who were closely related to the earlier Arameans.
The coalition forces proceeded with a bombing campaign targeting military targets and then launched a 100-hour-long ground assault against Iraqi forces in Southern Iraq and those occupying Kuwait.
Although a vocational track is available to those who do not pass the exam, few students elect that option because of its poor quality.
Under the terms of the constitution, the country conducted fresh nationwide parliamentary elections on 15 December 2005.
Only about 2,000 oil wells have been drilled in Iraq, compared with about 1 million wells in Texas alone.
Early in the 20th century, many of the most prominent musicians in Iraq were Jewish.
A 2011 Pew Research Center estimates that 51% of Muslims in Iraq are Shia, 42% are Sunni, while 5% identify themselves as "Just a Muslim".
Iraq had no Sharia courts but civil courts used Sharia for issues of personal status including marriage and divorce.
Despite historically poor relations, some progress has been made, and Iraq elected its first Kurdish president, Jalal Talabani, in 2005.
The respect and adoration for Pasha were unusual at the time since public performance by women was considered shameful, and most female singers were recruited from brothels.
The northern mountainous regions have cold winters with occasional heavy snows, sometimes causing extensive flooding.
The navy is also responsible for the security of offshore oil platforms.
In 1831, the Ottomans managed to overthrow the Mamluk regime and imposed their direct control over Iraq.
Winter temperatures infrequently exceed  with maxima roughly  and night-time lows .
The occupation ended on 26 October 1947, although Britain was to retain military bases in Iraq until 1954, after which the Assyrian militias were disbanded.
The area has been home to successive civilisations since the 6th millennium BC.
The British lost 92,000 soldiers in the Mesopotamian campaign.
Increasing violence during the Syrian civil war led to an increasing numbers of Iraqis returning to their native country.
According to the Overseas Development Institute, international NGOs face challenges in carrying out their mission, leaving their assistance "piecemeal and largely conducted undercover, hindered by insecurity, a lack of coordinated funding, limited operational capacity and patchy information".
An Elamite invasion in 2004 BC brought the Sumerian revival to an end.
After this, another foreign people, the Language Isolate speaking Kassites, originating in the Zagros Mountains of Ancient Iran, seized control of Babylonia, where they were to rule for almost 600 years, by far the longest dynasty ever to rule in Babylon.
In southern Iraq, there is a community of Iraqis of African descent, a legacy of the slavery practised in the Islamic Caliphate beginning before the Zanj Rebellion of the 9th century, and Basra's role as a key port.
LGBT rights in Iraq remain limited.
Tablets found in ancient ruins in Iraq show recipes prepared in the temples during religious festivals – the first cookbooks in the world.
An April 2009 estimate of the total Iraqi population is 31,234,000.
Jim Cramer's October 20, 2009 endorsement of the Iraqi Dinar on CNBC has further piqued interest in the investment.
It failed to attain the size, power or longevity of its predecessor; however, it came to dominate The Levant, Canaan, Arabia, Israel and Judah, and to defeat Egypt.
This name had for many centuries been the Indo-European word for ''Assyria'' and specifically and only meant Assyria; however, the Seleucids also applied it to The Levant (Aramea, causing both the Assyria and the Assyrians of Iraq and the Arameans and The Levant to be called Syria and Syrians/Syriacs in the Greco-Roman world.
Al-maqam al-Iraqi is the collection of sung poems written either in one of the sixteen meters of classical Arabic or in Iraqi dialect (Zuhayri).
It currently has 3,000 personnel.
Finds of obsidian tools from Anatolia are evidences of early trade relations.
The Mongols destroyed the Abbasid Caliphate and Baghdad's House of Wisdom, which contained countless precious and historical documents.
Public holidays in Iraq include Republic Day on 14 July and the National Day on 3 October.
The institution of slavery was abolished in the 1920s.
The Chaldeans are also first mentioned at this time.
Iraq has a small coastline measuring  along the Persian Gulf.
It was founded in 1948, and has been a member of FIFA since 1950 and the Asian Football Confederation since 1971.
In June 2008, the Iraqi Oil Ministry announced plans to go ahead with small one- or two-year no-bid contracts to Exxon Mobil, Shell, Total and BP — once partners in the Iraq Petroleum Company — along with Chevron and smaller firms to service Iraq's largest fields.
Under the Rashidun Caliphate, the prophet Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law, Ali, moved his capital to Kufa when he became the fourth caliph.
15% of Iraq's population are Kurds.
Timur ordered that every soldier should return with at least two severed human heads to show him (many warriors were so scared they killed prisoners captured earlier in the campaign just to ensure they had heads to present to Timur).
After a period of comparative decline in Assyria, it once more began to expand with the Neo Assyrian Empire (935–605 BC).
In 1257, Hulagu Khan amassed an unusually large army, a significant portion of the Mongol Empire's forces, for the purpose of conquering Baghdad.
The country hadn't pumped that much oil since 1979, when Saddam Hussein rose to power.
In 1936, Iraq Radio was established with an ensemble made up entirely of Jews, with the exception of the percussion player.
It remained insignificant for over a century, overshadowed by older and more powerful states, such as Assyria, Elam, Isin, Ehnunna and Larsa.
The most famous singer of the 1930s–1940s was perhaps the Jew Salima Pasha (later Salima Murad).
British forces regrouped and captured Baghdad in 1917, and defeated the Ottomans.
The Kurdistan List is dominated by two parties, the Kurdistan Democratic Party led by Masood Barzani and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan headed by Jalal Talabani.
Iraqi cuisine has a long history going back some 10,000 years – to the Sumerians, Akkadians, Babylonians, Assyrians and Ancient Persians.
The UNICEF/WHO report noted that prior to 1990, 97% of the urban dwellers and 71% of the rural population had access to free primary health care; just 2% of hospital beds were privately managed.
Iraqi media expert and author of a number of reports on this subject, Ibrahim Al Marashi, identifies four stages of the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 where they had been taking the steps that have significant effects on the way for the later of the Iraqi media since then.
The population of Iraq, estimated at 30 million in 800 AD, was only 5 million at the start of the 20th century.
In 1792 BC, an Amorite ruler named Hammurabi came to power in this state, and immediately set about building Babylon from a minor town into a major city, declaring himself its king.
For example, in Najaf, which has a population of 300,000, is being published more than 30 newspapers and distributed.
Most dishes are served with rice – usually Basmati, grown in the marshes of southern Iraq.
The US government welcomed this as "another major step forward" in uniting Iraq.
In August 1990, Iraq invaded and annexed Kuwait.
The new constitution was backed by the Shia and Kurdish communities, but was rejected by Arab Sunnis.
Iraqi security forces are composed of forces serving under the Ministry of Interior (which controls the Police and Popular Mobilization Forces) and the Ministry of Defense, as well as the Iraqi Counter Terrorism Bureau, reporting directly to the Prime Minister of Iraq, which oversees the Iraqi Special Operations Forces.
The British established the Hashemite king, Faisal I of Iraq, who had been forced out of Syria by the French, as their client ruler.
In 2014, Sunni insurgents belonging to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist group seized control of large swathes of land including several major Iraqi cities, like Tikrit, Fallujah and Mosul creating hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons amid reports of atrocities by ISIL fighters.
However, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki denied it.
The best estimate for the Middle East is a death rate of roughly one-third.
On 30 June and 11 December 2009, the Iraqi ministry of oil awarded service contracts to international oil companies for some of Iraq's many oil fields.
Iraq was controlled by the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party from 1968 until 2003.
The debt relief will be implemented in three stages: two of 30% each and one of 20%.
Public sector employment accounted for nearly 60% of full-time employment in 2011.
Iran–Iraq relations have flourished since 2005 by the exchange of high level visits: Iraqi PM Nouri al-Maliki made frequent visits to Iran, along with Jalal Talabani visiting numerous times, to help boost bilateral co-operation in all fields.
Iraq was one of the founding members of OPEC.
The war, which ended in stalemate in 1988, had cost the lives of between half a million and 1.5 million people.
Rainfall during the summer is extremely rare, except in the far north of the country.
At its height, the Middle Assyrian Empire stretched from The Caucasus to Dilmun (modern Bahrain), and from the Mediterranean coasts of Phoenicia to the Zagros Mountains of Iran.
During World War I, the Ottomans sided with Germany and the Central Powers.
A project which expected to cost $600 million is ongoing in co-operation with market leaders such as Astrium and Arianespace.
Both Sunnis and Shias crossed the border to fight in Syria.
Hammurabi conquered the whole of southern and central Iraq, as well as Elam to the east and Mari to the west, then engaged in a protracted war with the Assyrian king Ishme-Dagan for domination of the region, creating the short lived Babylonian Empire.
Iraqi Kurdistan (Erbil, Dohuk, Sulaymaniyah and Halabja) is the only legally defined region within Iraq, with its own government and quasi-official army Peshmerga.
Faced with spiraling costs and influenced by the public protestations of the war hero T. E. Lawrence in ''The Times'', Britain replaced Arnold Wilson in October 1920 with a new Civil Commissioner, Sir Percy Cox.
188 of the year 1959 (Personal Status Law) made polygamy extremely difficult, granted child custody to the mother in case of divorce, prohibited repudiation and marriage under the age of 16.
The Sealand Dynasty was finally conquered by Kassite Babylonia circa 1380 BC.
In the late 4th century BC, Alexander the Great conquered the region, putting it under Hellenistic Seleucid rule for over two centuries.
After uprisings during the early 90s, many Kurds fled their homeland and no-fly zones were established in northern Iraq to prevent more conflicts.
During the years 1747–1831, Iraq was ruled by a Mamluk dynasty of Georgian origin who succeeded in obtaining autonomy from the Ottoman Porte, suppressed tribal revolts, curbed the power of the Janissaries, restored order and introduced a programme of modernisation of economy and military.
Other historians point to soil salination as the culprit in the decline in agriculture.
The insurgency included intense inter-ethnic violence between Sunnis and Shias.
Similarly with other countries of Western Asia, chicken and especially lamb are the favourite meats.
On 12 February 2009, Iraq officially became the 186th State Party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In January 2005, the first elections since the invasion took place and in October a new Constitution was approved, which was followed by parliamentary elections in December.
By the 17th century, the frequent conflicts with the Safavids had sapped the strength of the Ottoman Empire and had weakened its control over its provinces.
The biggest club in Iraq is Al Shorta, who won back-to-back league titles in 2013 and 2014 and were the first ever winners of the Arab Champions League.
The regional government and the central government disagree as to whether they are under Baghdad's authority and to what extent.
The National Alliance is the main Shia parliamentary bloc, and was established as a result of a merger of Prime Minister Nouri Maliki's State of Law Coalition and the Iraqi National Alliance.
Arabic, Kurdish, Persian, and South Azeri are written with versions of the Arabic script, the Neo-Aramaic languages in the Syriac script and Armenian is written in the Armenian script.
BP and China National Petroleum Corporation won a deal to develop Rumaila, the largest Iraqi oil field.
Five years after the invasion, an estimated 2.4 million people were internally displaced (with a further two million refugees outside Iraq), four million Iraqis were considered food-insecure (a quarter of children were chronically malnourished) and only a third of Iraqi children had access to safe drinking water.
Crime and violence initially spiked in the months following the US withdrawal from cities in mid-2009 but despite the initial increase in violence, in November 2009, Iraqi Interior Ministry officials reported that the civilian death toll in Iraq fell to its lowest level since the 2003 invasion.
Article 1 of Civil Code also identifies Islamic law as a formal source of law.
Following the withdrawal of US troops in 2011, the insurgency continued and Iraq suffered from political instability.
The Sassanids of Persia under Ardashir I destroyed the Parthian Empire and conquered the region in 224 AD.
'Abd al-Ilah served as Regent during Faisal's minority.
An armistice was signed in 1918.
Iraq's population has reached 35 million amid a post-war population boom.
, nearly 3 million Iraqis have been displaced, with 1.3 million within Iraq and 1.6 million in neighbouring countries, mainly Jordan and Syria.
at the south and east of the Jazira Plateau, which forms the northern and western edge of the "al-Iraq arabi" area.
During the medieval period, there was a region called ''ʿIrāq ʿArabī'' ("Arabian Iraq") for Lower Mesopotamia and ''ʿIrāq ʿajamī'' ("Foreign Iraq"), for the region now situated in Central and Western Iran.
The navy will have coastal patrol squadrons, assault boat squadrons and a marine battalion.
The Iraqi Jewish community, numbering around 150,000 in 1941, has almost entirely left the country.
In October 2011, the Turkish parliament renewed a law that gives Turkish forces the ability to pursue rebels over the border in Iraq."
It was during this period that the Epic of Gilgamesh originates, which includes the tale of The Great Flood.
Relations between Iraq and its Kurdish population have been sour in recent history, especially with Saddam Hussein's genocidal campaign against them in the 1980s.
In combination with decreased oil prices, the government budget deficit is near 25% of GDP as of 2016.
