* 114 Chloropyta (green algae)
The population of Ireland collapsed dramatically during the second half of the 19th century.
Some previously extinct birds, such as the golden eagle, been reintroduced in about the year 2000 after decades of extirpation.
Grazing in this manner is one of the main factors preventing the natural regeneration of forests across many regions of the country.
The island is noted for the breeding and training of race horses and is also a large exporter of racing dogs.
The North/South Inter-Parliamentary Association is a joint parliamentary forum for the island of Ireland.
Natural areas require fencing to prevent over-grazing by deer and sheep that roam over uncultivated areas.
However, due to the ecological importance of peatlands in storing carbon and their rarity, the EU is attempting to protect this habitat by fining Ireland if they are dug up.
Stately homes, built during the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries in Palladian, Neoclassical and neo-Gothic styles, such as, Castle Ward, Castletown House, Bantry House, Glenveagh Castle are also of interest to tourists.
The concept only became a political reality in the Viking Age and even then was not a consistent one.
Urban Area Population
Since then there have been a number of stylistic fusions including folk metal and others, while some contemporary music groups stick closer to a "traditional" sound.
* 31 Cyanophyta (Blue-green algae)
However, they are still treated as counties for cultural and some official purposes, for example postal addresses and by the Ordnance Survey Ireland.
The Common Agricultural Policy had in the past subsidised potentially destructive agricultural practices, for example by emphasising production without placing limits on indiscriminate use of fertilisers and pesticides; but reforms have gradually decoupled subsidies from production levels and introduced environmental and other requirements.
Across southeast Ulster and extending southwest to Longford and south to Navan is a province of Ordovician and Silurian rocks, with similarities to the Southern Uplands province of Scotland.
He was elected as Member of Parliament for Ennis in a surprise result and despite being unable to take his seat as a Roman Catholic.
Groups and musicians including Horslips, Van Morrison and Thin Lizzy incorporated elements of Irish traditional music into contemporary rock music and, during the 1970s and 1980s, the distinction between traditional and rock musicians became blurred, with many individuals regularly crossing over between these styles of playing.
The construction of wind farms has in some cases been delayed by opposition from local communities, some of whom overall consider the wind turbines to be unsightly.
Research and development in Ireland in renewable energy such as wind power has increased since 2004.
The earliest evidence of human presence in Ireland is dated at 10,500 BC.
However, by far the greater cause of population decline was the dire economic state of the country which led to an entrenched culture of emigration lasting until the 21st century.
The River Shannon, the island's longest river at  long, rises in County Cavan in the north west and flows  to Limerick city in the mid west.
The Republic's real GDP grew by an average of 9.6% per annum between 1995 and 1999, in which year the Republic joined the euro.
Despite being initially blacklisted by the Home Nations' associations, the FAI was recognised by FIFA in 1923 and organised its first international fixture in 1926 (against Italy).
''tomentosum''), now well established.
Stout, a kind of porter beer, particularly Guinness, is typically associated with Ireland, although historically it was more closely associated with London.
The Republic of Ireland is a parliamentary democracy based on the British model, with a written constitution and a popularly elected president who has mostly ceremonial powers.
Local gentry and charitable organisations provided relief but could do little to prevent the ensuing mortality.
Coarse fishing continues to increase its profile.
Some have been converted into hotels, such as Ashford Castle, Castle Leslie and Dromoland Castle.
Irish, now a minority but official language of the Republic of Ireland, was the vernacular of the Irish people for over two thousand years and was probably introduced by some sort of proto-Gaelic migration during the Iron Age, possibly earlier.
* ''Itonoa marginifera'' (J.Agardh) Masuda & Guiry
Cities and towns by populations
The highest of these is Carrauntoohil () in County Kerry, which rises to  above sea level.
In 1973 the Republic of Ireland joined the European Economic Community while the United Kingdom, and Northern Ireland, as part of it, did the same.
The game has been played in an organised fashion in Ireland since the 1870s, with Cliftonville F.C.
The bull encouraged Henry to take control in Ireland in order to oversee the financial and administrative reorganisation of the Irish Church and its integration into the Roman Church system.
However, summers are cooler than those in Continental Europe.
During the redevelopment of the Lansdowne Road stadium in 2007–10, international rugby and soccer were played there.
for the harp, pipes, and various string instruments) was transmitted orally, but the Irish harp, in particular, was of such significance that it became Ireland's national symbol.
During the last glacial period, and up until about 9000 years ago, most of Ireland was covered with ice, most of the time.
Irish athletics has seen a heightened success rate since the year 2000, with Sonia O'Sullivan winning two medals at 5,000 metres on the track; gold at the 1995 World Championships and silver at the 2000 Sydney Olympics.
Counties Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Galway, Waterford and Tipperary have been broken up into smaller administrative areas.
The island has a small Jewish community.
With no large apex predators in Ireland other than humans and dogs, such populations of animals as semi-wild deer that cannot be controlled by smaller predators, such as the fox, are controlled by annual culling.
The winters destroyed stored crops of potatoes and other staples and the poor summers severely damaged harvests.
The British response, executing fifteen leaders of the Rising over a period of ten days and imprisoning or interning more than a thousand people, turned the mood of the country in favour of the rebels.
File:Newgrange_ireland_750px.jpg|''Brú na Bóinne'', County Meath
300,0000 Cork Metro
This control was further consolidated during the wars and conflicts of the 17th century, which witnessed English and Scottish colonisation in the Plantations of Ireland, the Wars of the Three Kingdoms and the Williamite War.
English Crown control remained relatively unshaken in an amorphous foothold around Dublin known as The Pale, and under the provisions of Poynings' Law of 1494, the Irish Parliamentary legislation was subject to the approval of the English Parliament.
Shelta, the language of the nomadic Irish Travellers is native to Ireland.
He is largely regarded one of the founders of modern chemistry and is best known for the formulation of Boyle's law.
The largest is the Anglican Church of Ireland.
The Republic today ranks amongst the wealthiest countries in the world in terms of GDP per capita and in 2012 was ranked the seventh most developed nation in the world by the United Nations' Human Development Index.
Additional regressive punitive legislation followed 1703, 1709 and 1728.
Religious allegiance now determined the perception in law of loyalty to the Irish King and Parliament.
An area in which the island operates as a single market is electricity.
Northern Ireland saw much civil unrest from the late 1960s until the 1990s.
The same chronicle records that Saint Patrick, Ireland's best known patron saint, arrived the following year.
These missions brought written language to an illiterate population of Europe during the Dark Ages that followed the fall of Rome, earning Ireland the sobriquet, "the island of saints and scholars".
The theory was advanced in part because of lack of archeological evidence for large-scale Celtic immigration, though it is accepted that such movements are notoriously difficult to identify.
Western areas can be mountainous and rocky with green panoramic vistas.
Ireland's culture comprises elements of the culture of ancient peoples, later immigrant and broadcast cultural influences (chiefly Gaelic culture, Anglicisation, Americanisation and aspects of broader European culture).
* 264 Rhodophyta (red algae)
* ''Gelidiella calcicola'' Maggs & Guiry
Their formation was followed in 1914 by the establishment of the Irish Volunteers, whose aim was to ensure that the Home Rule Bill was passed.
The Norman rulers and the Gaelic Irish elites intermarried and the areas under Norman rule became Gaelicised.
Sea angling is developed with many beaches mapped and signposted, and the range of sea angling species is around 80.
Forests today cover about 12.6% of Ireland, of which 4,450&nbsp;km² or one million acres is owned by Coillte, the Republic's forestry service.
As of 2013, the amount of land that is wooded in Ireland is about 11% of the total, compared with a European average of 35%.
Ireland and Great Britain, together with many nearby smaller islands, are known collectively as the British Isles.
Irish culture has had a significant influence on other cultures, especially in the fields of literature.
Irish traditional music and dance has seen a surge in popularity and global coverage since the 1960s.
In his later work, ''Geography'', Ptolemy refers to Ireland as ''Iouernia'' and to Great Britain as ''Albion''.
In common with the rest of Europe, Ireland experienced unusually cold weather during the winter of 2009/10.
Norman settlements were characterised by the establishment of baronies, manors, towns and the seeds of the modern county system.
With the Acts of Union in 1801, Ireland became a part of the United Kingdom.
The Priteni were said to be the first, followed by the Belgae from northern Gaul and Britain.
In 1921, following an incident in which, despite an earlier promise, the IFA moved an Irish Cup semi-final replay from Dublin to Belfast, Dublin-based clubs broke away to form the Football Association of the Irish Free State.
This completed a process of gradual separation from the British Empire that governments had pursued since independence.
However, as a consequence of bootleggers during the prohibition in the United States (who sold poor-quality whiskey bearing Irish-sounding names thus eroding the pre-prohibition popularity for Irish brands) and tariffs on Irish whiskey across the British Empire during the Anglo-Irish Trade War of the 1930s, sales of Irish whiskey worldwide fell to a mere 2% by the mid-20th century.
Since the last quarter of the 20th century, with a re-emergence of wealth in Ireland, a "New Irish Cuisine" based on traditional ingredients incorporating international influences has emerged.
Politically, Ireland is divided between the Republic of Ireland (officially named Ireland), which covers five-sixths of the island, and Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom, in the northeast of the island.
In 2003 it represented 34% of total sports attendances at events in Ireland and abroad, followed by hurling at 23%, soccer at 16% and rugby at 8% and the All-Ireland Football Final is the most watched event in the sporting calendar.
* ''Gelidium maggsiae'' Rico & Guiry
The religious struggles of the 17th century left a deep sectarian division in Ireland.
In the 20th century, Ireland produced four winners of the Nobel Prize for Literature: George Bernard Shaw, William Butler Yeats, Samuel Beckett and Seamus Heaney.
During the course of the 19th and 20th centuries, a strong tradition of painting emerged, including such figures as John Butler Yeats, William Orpen, Jack Yeats and Louis le Brocquy.
In Northern Ireland, English is the de facto official language, but official recognition is afforded to Irish, including specific protective measures under Part III of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
However, a united kingdom of Gaelic Ireland was never achieved.
In the late 1960s, nationalist grievances were aired publicly in mass civil rights protests, which were often confronted by loyalist counter-protests.
Notable mathematicians include Sir William Rowan Hamilton, famous for work in classical mechanics and the invention of quaternions.
Ireland's pre-Christian heritage fused with the Celtic Church following the missions of Saint Patrick in the 5th century.
There are frequent horse race meetings and greyhound stadiums are well-attended.
Irish rugby has become increasingly competitive at both the international and provincial levels since the sport went professional in 1994.
Both the Republic of Ireland and the United Kingdom are members of the European Union, and as a consequence there is free movement of people, goods, services and capital across the border.
When Henry's successor died unexpectedly in 1199, John inherited the crown of England and retained the Lordship of Ireland.
Members of the government are chosen from both the Dáil and the upper house of parliament, the Seanad.
From about 4500 BC , Neolithic settlers arrived introducing cereal cultivars, a housing culture (similar to those of the same period in Scotland) and stone monuments.
Most of Ireland's gas comes through interconnectors between Twynholm in Scotland and Ballylumford, County Antrim and Loughshinny, County Dublin.
At least six of these policy areas must have an associated all-island "implementation bodies" and at least six others must be implemented separately in each jurisdiction.
One notable exception to this is association football, although both associations continued to field international teams under the name "Ireland" until the 1950s.
The majority, approximately 175,000 in number, under John Redmond, took the name National Volunteers and supported Irish involvement in the war.
The High King was said to preside over the provincial kingdoms that together formed Ireland.
File:Ireland - Plains of South Kildare.jpg|South Kildare countryside
It began to be written down after Christianisation in the 5th century and spread to Scotland and the Isle of Man where it evolved into the Scottish Gaelic and Manx languages respectively.
It was most popular, especially in its first decades, around Belfast and in Ulster.
This contrasts with the traditional view that their origin lies in mainland Europe with the Hallstatt culture.
In the southwest, around Bantry Bay and the mountains of Macgillicuddy's Reeks, is an area of substantially deformed, but only lightly metamorphosed, Devonian-aged rocks.
1,801,040 Greater Dublin
The population soared in the latter part of this century and the architectural legacy of Georgian Ireland was built.
In addition to this, the Irish International side has had increased success in the Six Nations Championship against the other European elite sides.
Horse racing and greyhound racing are both popular in Ireland.
It was claimed that a second wave named the Euerni, belonging to the Belgae people of northern Gaul, began arriving about the sixth century BC.
In 1782, Poynings' Law was repealed, giving Ireland legislative independence from Great Britain for the first time since 1495.
Dublin, with over 1 million residents in the Greater Dublin Area, is the largest city on the island.
Henry was authorised to impose a tithe of one penny per hearth as an annual contribution.
The theory holds that there were four separate Celtic invasions of Ireland.
Later in the century, Charles Stewart Parnell and others campaigned for autonomy within the Union, or "Home Rule".
The Abwehr was also active in Ireland.
Thus herders would avoid slaughtering a milk-producing cow.
This defined the Irish state as the Lordship of Ireland.
City status does not directly equate with population size.
''Codium fragile'' ssp.
Ireland has won more medals in boxing than in any other Olympic sport.
Contemporary Irish visual artists of note include Sean Scully, Kevin Abosch, and Alice Maher.
Later, around 5600 BC, Great Britain itself became separated from continental Europe.
Nationalists, mainly Roman Catholic, wanted to unite Ireland as an independent republic, whereas unionists, mainly Protestant, wanted Northern Ireland to remain in the United Kingdom.
Rarer species include:
There are also many shipwrecks along the coast of Ireland, with some of the best wreck dives being in Malin Head and off the County Cork coast.
An extraordinary climatic shock known as the "Great Frost" struck Ireland and the rest of Europe between December 1739 and September 1741, after a decade of relatively mild winters.
Since just before the year 2010, Bundoran has hosted European championship surfing.
Across Ireland, there is significant interest in the English and, to a lesser extent, Scottish soccer leagues.
Hedgerows, however, traditionally used for maintaining and demarcating land boundaries, act as a refuge for native wild flora.
The North/South Ministerial Council is an institution through which ministers from the Government of Ireland and the Northern Ireland Executive agree all-island policies.
In a system that developed between the 13th and 17th centuries, Ireland has 32 traditional counties.
EirGrid is building a HVDC transmission line between Ireland and Great Britain with a capacity of 500 MW, about 10% of Ireland's peak demand.
It is a popular tourist destination for surfing and contains 5 Blue Flag beaches and Croaghaun one of the worlds highest sea cliffs.
* ''Halymenia latifolia'' P.L.Crouan & H.M.Crouan ex Kützing.
Ireland consists of Old Irish ''Eriu'' + English ''land''.
The arts of manuscript illumination, metalworking and sculpture flourished and produced treasures such as the ''Book of Kells'', ornate jewellery and the many carved stone crosses that still dot the island today.
Some historians estimate that as much as half of the pre-war population of Ireland may have died as a result of the conflict.
The Executive is jointly headed by a First Minister and deputy First Minister drawn from the unionist and nationalist parties.
The total number of species is 574 and is distributed as follows:
Katie Taylor has won gold in every European and World championship since 2005.
Unlike soccer, Ireland continues to field a single national rugby team and a single association, the Irish Rugby Football Union (IRFU), governs the sport across the island.
This ecosystem stretches across the countryside and acts as a network of connections to preserve remnants of the ecosystem that once covered the island.
Until medieval times Ireland was heavily forested with oak, pine and birch.
In response, the Irish parliament passed the Statutes of Kilkenny in 1367.
John B. Cosgrave was a specialist in number theory and discovered a 2000-digit prime number in 1999 and a record composite Fermat number in 2003.
The relationship between the Roman Empire and the kingdoms of ancient Ireland is unclear.
There has also been significant immigration from Lithuania, the Czech Republic and Latvia.
Although in the early Middle Ages the church was "quite unlike its counterpart in continental Europe", there was considerable interchange between monastic settlements in Ireland and the rest of Europe that contributed to what is known as Gregorian chant.
This theory draws on the ''Lebor Gabála Érenn'', a medieval Christian pseudo-history of Ireland along with the presence of Celtic culture, language and artefacts found in Ireland such as Celtic bronze spears, shields, torcs and other finely crafted Celtic associated possessions.
The Helvick oil field, estimated to contain over  of oil, is another recent discovery.
The invasion, which coincided with a period of renewed Norman expansion, was at the invitation of Dermot Mac Murrough, the king of Leinster.
Conscription was not extended to Northern Ireland and roughly an equal number volunteered from Northern Ireland as volunteered from the south.
The period of civil unrest that followed until the end of the 19th century is referred to as the Land War.
Sir Ernest Henry Shackleton, an Irish explorer, was one of the principal figures of Antarctic exploration.
Social changes also occurred in this time, most markedly with the decline in authority of the Catholic Church.
In the Republic of Ireland, the ESB has failed to modernise its power stations and the availability of power plants has recently averaged only 66%, one of the worst such rates in Western Europe.
City status in Ireland is decided by legislative or royal charter.
* ''Schmitzia hiscockiana'' Maggs & Guiry
The style is still popular today in jewellery and graphic art, as is the distinctive style of traditional Irish music and dance, and has become indicative of modern "Celtic" culture in general.
The Northern Ireland government requested the British Army to aid the police, who were exhausted after several nights of serious rioting.
In 1999, economically significant finds of natural gas were made in the Corrib Gas Field off the County Mayo coast.
Cider, particularly ''Magners'' (marketed in the Republic of Ireland as ''Bulmers''), is also a popular drink.
George Johnstone Stoney introduced the term ''electron'' in 1891.
The Republic of Ireland has shown a strong commitment to renewable energy, ranking as one of the top 10 markets for cleantech investment in the 2014 Global Green Economy Index.
Swimming, golf, aerobics, soccer, cycling, Gaelic football and billiards/snooker are the sporting activities with the highest levels of playing participation.
Food and cuisine in Ireland takes its influence from the crops grown and animals farmed in the island's temperate climate and from the social and political circumstances of Irish history.
For much of their existence electricity networks in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland were entirely separate.
Many major GAA games are played there, including the semi-finals and finals of the All-Ireland Senior Football Championship and All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship.
The population of Ireland rose rapidly from the 16th century until the mid-19th century, but a devastating famine in the 1840s caused one million deaths and forced over one million more to emigrate in its immediate wake.
A minority, approximately 13,000, retained the Irish Volunteers' name, and opposed Ireland's involvement in the war.
An all-Ireland club competition for soccer, the Setanta Cup, was created in 2005.
Aquatic wildlife, such as species of sea turtle, shark, seal, whale, and dolphin, are common off the coast.
In English, Jonathan Swift, still often called the foremost satirist in the English language, was very popular in his day for works such as ''Gulliver's Travels'' and ''A Modest Proposal'', and Oscar Wilde is known most for his often quoted witticisms.
The Republic qualified for the World Cup finals in 1990 (reaching the quarter-finals), 1994, 2002 and the European Championships in 1988 and 2012.
Modern Irish literature is often connected with its rural heritage through writers such as John McGahern and poets such as Seamus Heaney.
* ''Asparagopsis armara'' Harvey, which originated in Australia and was first recorded by M. De Valera in 1939
Achill Island lies off the coast of County Mayo and is Ireland's largest island.
It was spoken by a few peasants and merchants brought over from England, and was largely replaced by Irish before the Tudor Conquest of Ireland.
Ireland also hosted games during the 1991 and the 1999 Rugby World Cups (including a quarter-final).
When de Valera achieved power, he took advantage of the Statute of Westminster and political circumstances to build upon inroads to greater sovereignty made by the previous government.
Sir Joseph Larmor, a physicist and mathematician, made innovations in the understanding of electricity, dynamics, thermodynamics and the electron theory of matter.
Ireland has nine universities, seven in the Republic of Ireland and two in Northern Ireland, including Trinity College, Dublin and the University College Dublin, as well as numerous third-level colleges and institutes and a branch of the Open University, the Open University in Ireland.
When taking both into account a recent study drew the conclusion that modern Celtic speakers in Ireland could be thought of as European "Atlantic Celts" showing a shared ancestry throughout the Atlantic zone from northern Iberia to western Scandinavia rather than substantially central European.
In part, the fall in population was due to death from the Great Famine of 1845 to 1852, which took about 1 million lives.
However, a number of finds of Roman coins have been made, for example at the Iron Age settlement of Freestone Hill near Gowran and Newgrange.
The invasion was legitimised by the provisions of the Papal Bull ''Laudabiliter'', issued by Adrian IV in 1155.
Northern Ireland elects 18 of the UK House of Commons' 650 MPs.
The earlier names, in contrast, were likely to have been coined before direct contact with local peoples was made.
How and when the island of Ireland became Celtic has been debated for close to a century, with the migrations of the Celts being one of the more enduring themes of archaeological and linguistic studies.
File:Causeway-code poet-4.jpg|Giant's Causeway, County Antrim
In 1998, following a ceasefire by the Provisional IRA and multi-party talks, the Good Friday Agreement was concluded as a treaty between the British and Irish governments, annexing the text agreed in the multi-party talks.
A quarter of births (24 percent) in 2009 were to mothers born outside Ireland.
Porter remains very popular, although it has lost sales since the mid-20th century to lager.
