The Late Middle Ages also saw the settlement of Scottish gallowglass families of mixed Gaelic-Norse -Pict descent, mainly in the north; due to similarities of language and culture they too were assimilated.
Some famous Argentines of Irish descent include Che Guevara, former president Edelmiro Julián Farrell, and admiral William Brown.
A small number of Irish families of Gaelic origin came to use a Norman form of their original  surname—so that Mac Giolla Phádraig became Fitzpatrick – while some assimilated so well that the Gaelic name was dropped in favor of a new, Hiberno-Norman form.
Venezuelans called them the Albion Legion.
The Mac Lochlainn, Ó Maol Seachlainn, Ó Maol Seachnaill, Ó Conchobhair, Mac Loughlin, Mac Diarmada, and Mac Loughlin families, all distinct, are now all subsumed together as MacLoughlin.
"Mac" or "Mc" means "son".
There have been many notable Irish people throughout history.
They fought until their surrender at the decisive Battle of Churubusco, and were executed outside Mexico City by the American government on 13 September 1847.
The most significant Irish intellectual of the early monastic period was the 9th century Johannes Scotus Eriugena, an outstanding philosopher in terms of originality.
The Irish bardic system, along with the Gaelic culture and learned classes, were upset by the plantations, and went into decline.
The Joyce and Griffin/Griffith (Gruffydd) families are also of Welsh origin.
), used by the Normans, meaning ''son''.
Ireland itself was known by a number of different names, including Banba, Fódla, Ériu by the islanders, ''Iouerne'' and ''Hiverne'' to the Greeks, and Hibernia to the Romans.
Another English commentator records that the assemblies were attended by "all the scum of the country"—the labouring population as well as the landowners.
The Normans themselves were descendants of Vikings, who had settled in Normandy and thoroughly adopted the French language and culture.
The poetic families included the Uí Dhálaigh (Daly) and the MacGrath.
Ireland has been inhabited for about 9,000 years according to archaeological studies (see Prehistoric Ireland).
There are also large Irish communities in some mainland European countries, notably in Spain, France and Germany.
However, dark hair in people of Irish descent is common, although darker skin complexions appear less frequently.
It was this latter family which produced Dubhaltach Mac Fhirbhisigh, the 17th century genealogist and compiler of the ''Leabhar na nGenealach''.
Since John F. Kennedy took office in 1961, every American President (with the exception of Gerald Ford) has had some Irish blood.
The 6th-century Irish monk and missionary Columbanus is regarded as one of the "fathers of Europe", followed by saints Cillian and Fergal.
The only military raid abroad recorded after that century is a presumed invasion of Wales, which according to a Welsh manuscript may have taken place around the 7th century.
While the distinction between "free" and "unfree" elements of the Irish people was unreal in legal terms, it was a social and economic reality.
As of 2006, Irish Canadians number around 4,354,155.
The name Reynolds is an Anglicization of the Gaelic Mac Raghnaill, itself originating from the Norse names Randal or Reginald.
These were the ''San Patricios'', or Saint Patrick's Battalion—a group of Irish led by Galway-born John O'Riley, with some German, Scottish and American Catholics.
In the 2006 Census, 1,803,741 residents identified themselves as having Irish ancestry either alone or in combination with another ancestry.
Famous Irish writers include Oscar Wilde, W. B. Yeats, George Bernard Shaw, Bram Stoker and James Joyce.
One legend states that the Irish were descended from one Míl Espáine, whose sons supposedly conquered Ireland around 1000 BC or later.
The Vikings left little impact on Ireland other than towns and certain words added to the Irish language, but many Irish taken as slaves inter-married with the Scandinavians, hence forming a close link with the Icelandic people.
Social mobility was usually downwards, due to social and economic pressures.
People of Irish descent also feature strongly in Latin America, especially in Argentina and important minorities in Brazil, Chile, and Mexico.
Among the most famous people of ancient Irish history are the High Kings of Ireland, such as Cormac mac Airt and Niall of the Nine Hostages, and the semi-legendary Fianna.
However this figure does not include Australians with an Irish background who chose to nominate themselves as 'Australian' or other ancestries.
Today, Australians of Irish descent are one of the largest self-reported ethnic groups in Australia, after English and Australian.
Irish missionaries such as Saint Columba brought Christianity to Pictish Scotland.
The English term for these lordships was "nation" or "country".
The massive crowds were repeated at Pope John Paul II's Mass in Phoenix Park in 1979.
The last name ''O'Brien'', for example, became ''Obregón''.
In the Icelandic ''Laxdœla saga'', for example, "even slaves are highborn, descended from the kings of Ireland."
In 1921, with the formation of the Irish Free State, six counties in the northeast remained in the United Kingdom as Northern Ireland.
According to ''Eirik the Red's Saga'', the first European couple to have a child born in North America was descended from the Viking Queen of Dublin, Aud the Deep-minded, and a Gaelic slave brought to Iceland.
When anglicised, the name can remain O' or Mac, regardless of gender.
Indeed, the Tudor lawyer John Davies described the Irish people with respect to their laws:
The Irish have their own customs, language, music, dance, sports, cuisine, and mythology.
1579–1590) and Flann Mac Aodhagáin (alive 1640).
There are a number of Irish surnames derived from Norse personal names, including Mac Suibhne (Sweeney) from Swein and McAuliffe from "Olaf".
Traditional histories assert that the Romans never attempted to conquer Ireland, although it may have been considered.
Nine of the signatories of the American Declaration of Independence were of Irish origin.
This last word, derived from the Welsh ''gwyddel'' "raiders", was eventually adopted by the Irish for themselves.
The term has also come to be used to refer to the African-Irish descendants of those who live on Montserrat, a number of whom have Irish surnames, still retain part of their Irish accents and sing bilingual songs.
"Fitz" is an old Norman French variant of the Old French word ''fils'' (variant spellings filz, fiuz, fiz, etc.
The Irish term "''oireacht''" referred to both the territory and the people ruled by the lord.
Though these names were of Viking derivation some of the families who bear them appear to have had Gaelic origins.
51% of Protestants and 33% of all respondents felt "Not at all Irish", while 62% of Catholics and 28% of all respondents felt "Not at all British".
There have been notable Irish scientists.
R1b is the most frequent haplogroup in Germany and in the Low Countries, and is common in southern Scandinavia and in northern and central Italy.
Boyle was an atomist, and is best known for Boyle's Law.
The Anglo-Irish scientist Robert Boyle (1627–1691) is considered the father of chemistry for his book ''The Sceptical Chymist'', written in 1661.
At least twenty-five presidents of the United States have some Irish ancestral origins, including George Washington.
Ulster Protestants tend to have either English or Scottish surnames while Catholics tend to have Irish surnames, although this is not always the case.
This flow of emigrants dropped sharply when assisted passage to Australia was introduced at which point the Argentine government responded with their own scheme and wrote to Irish bishops, seeking their support.
The first Irish historian who questioned the reliability of such accounts was Dubhaltach Mac Fhirbhisigh (murdered 1671).
Some were exiled by the English Oliver Cromwell due to the large Irish population and their attempted rebellion on 17 March 1768.
This brought a further question for the future of Irish identity; whether Ireland was "closer to Boston than to Berlin:"
It is believed that as many as 30,000 Irish people emigrated to Argentina between the 1830s and the 1890s.
The existence of an especially strong genetic association between the Irish and the Basques, one even closer than the relationship between other west Europeans, was first challenged in 2005, and in 2007 scientists began looking at the possibility of a more recent Mesolithic- or even Neolithic-era entrance of R1b into Europe.
Later, Irish brigades in France and Spain fought in the Wars of the Spanish and Austrian Succession and the Napoleonic Wars.
The most famous cause of emigration was the Great Famine of the late 1840s.
Irish missionaries founded monasteries outside Ireland, such as Iona Abbey, the Abbey of St Gall in Switzerland, and Bobbio Abbey in Italy.
Most of these were assimilated into Irish culture and polity by the 15th century, with the exception of some of the walled towns and the Pale areas.
This practice is paralleled by the Anglo-Saxon dynasties' claims of descent from Woden, via his sons Wecta, Baeldaeg, Casere and Wihtlaeg.
Today, Ireland is made up of the Republic of Ireland (an independent state), and the smaller Northern Ireland (a part of the United Kingdom).
The 31st International Eucharistic Congress was held in Dublin in 1932, that year being the supposed 1,500th anniversary of Saint Patrick's arrival.
Although some Irish retained their surnames intact, others were assimilated into the Spanish vernacular.
This has been a matter of concern over the last century for followers of nationalist ideologists such as DP Moran.
There is evidence also that Hebrew and Greek were studied, the latter probably being taught at Iona.
He was the uncle of another notable physicist, George FitzGerald.
(see also Irish medical families).
However, there was little or no planning for the arrival of a large number of immigrants, no housing, no food.
Today the diaspora is believed to contain an estimated 80 million people.
The '''British Legion''' were units that fought under Simón Bolívar against Spain for the independence of Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Peru.
Mac is commonly anglicised Mc.
Between 1585 and 1818, over half a million Irish departed Ireland to serve in the wars on the continent, in a constant emigration romantically styled the "''Flight of the Wild Geese''".
Surnames in the nine-county Province of Ulster tend to differ based on which community families originate from.
Ireland joined the European Community in 1973, and Irish citizens became additionally Citizens of the European Union with the Maastricht Treaty signed in 1992.
The character is almost certainly a mere personification of a supposed migration by a group or groups from Iberia to Ireland.
The Irish poets of the late 17th and 18th centuries moved toward more modern dialects.
In the cases of the Conmaicne, Delbhna, and perhaps Érainn, it can be demonstrated that the tribe took their name from their chief deity, or in the case of the Ciannachta, Eóganachta, and possibly the Soghain, a deified ancestor.
Among the last of the true bardic poets were Brian Mac Giolla Phádraig (c. 1580–1652) and Dáibhí Ó Bruadair (1625–1698).
In the words of Seumas MacManus:
The '''Irish people''' ( or ''Na hÉireannaigh'') are a nation and ethnic group native to the island of Ireland, who share a common Irish ancestry, identity and culture.
The vast majority of the 4,811 Irish-born soldiers served in the U.S. Army, but some defected to the Mexican Army, primarily to escape mistreatment by Anglo-Protestant officers and the strong anti-Catholic discrimination in America.
Notable Irish writers include Jonathan Swift (1667–1745), Laurence Sterne, Oliver Goldsmith, and Bram Stoker.
The United States has the most people of Irish descent, while in Australia those of Irish descent are a higher percentage of the population than in any other country.
Historically, emigration from Ireland has been the result of conflict, famine and economic issues.
It was noted in ''Time Magazine'' that the Congress' special theme would be "the Faith of the Irish."
Irish physicians, such as the O'Briens in Munster or the MacCailim Mor in the Western Isles, were renowned in the courts of England, Spain, Portugal and the Low Countries.
The Isle of Man and the Manx people also came under massive Gaelic influence in their history.
The hydrographer Rear Admiral Francis Beaufort (1774–1857), an Irish naval officer of Huguenot descent, was the creator of the Beaufort scale for indicating wind force.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, 300,000 free emigrants and 45,000 convicts left Ireland to settle in Australia.
on mtDNA, related western European populations appear to be largely from the neolithic and not paleolithic era, as previously thought.
The Australian embassy in Dublin states that up to 30 percent of the population claim some degree of Irish ancestry.
Among them was the sole Catholic signatory, Charles Carroll of Carrollton, whose family were the descendants of Ely O'Carroll, an Irish prince who had suffered under Cromwell.
To this day, the Island celebrates St. Patrick's Day as a public holiday to commemorate the event.
In the words of Arthur Wellesley, the Irish-born "Iron Duke" of Wellington, a notable representative of the Irish military diaspora, "Ireland was an inexhaustible nursery for the finest soldiers".
One popular speculation suggests the Black Irish are descendants of survivors of the Spanish Armada, despite research discrediting such claims.
The ruling clan's "expansion from the top downwards" was constantly displacing commoners and forcing them into the margins of society.
There are also significant numbers in Argentina and Mexico.
Nineteenth century anthropology studied the physical characteristics of Irish people in minute detail.
He had considerable familiarity with the Greek language, and translated many works into Latin, affording access to the Cappadocian Fathers and the Greek theological tradition, previously almost unknown in the Latin West.
By some accounts, the first European child born in North America had Irish descent on both sides; and an Irishman was the first European to set foot on American soil in Columbus' expedition of 1492.
Learning was not exclusive to the hereditary learned families, however; one such example is Cathal Mac Manus, the 15th century diocesan priest who wrote the ''Annals of Ulster''.
A recent whole genome analysis of 4 neolithic and Bronze Age skeletal remains in Ireland suggested that the original farming population was a mixture descended from Middle Eastern/southwest Mediterranean and eastern European immigrants.
People of Irish descent are also one of the largest self-reported ethnic groups in Canada, after English, French and Scottish Canadians.
This led to writers, such as Stephen Oppenheimer and Bryan Sykes, to conclude that the majority of Irish people primarily descend from an "Iberian refugium" population bottleneck dating back to the last ice age.
Similar surnames are often found in Scotland for many reasons, such as the use of a common language and mass Irish migration to Scotland in the late 19th and early to mid-20th centuries.
For a comparatively small population of about 6 million people, Ireland made an enormous contribution to literature during the enlightenment.
Scotland takes its name from Scota, who in Irish mythology, Scottish mythology, and pseudohistory, is the name given to two different mythological daughters of two different Egyptian Pharaohs to whom the Gaels traced their ancestry, allegedly explaining the name Scoti, applied by the Romans to Irish raiders, and later to the Irish invaders of Argyll and Caledonia which became known as Scotland.. Other Latin names for people from Ireland in Classic and Mediaeval sources include Attacotti and Gael.
However, this haplogroup is now believed by some to have originated over 12,000 years more recently than previously thought.
There are people of Irish descent all over South America, such as the Chilean liberator Bernardo O'Higgins and the Peruvian photographer Mario Testino.
The influx of Viking raiders and traders in the 9th and 10th centuries resulted in the founding of many of Ireland's most important towns, including Cork, Dublin, Limerick, and Waterford (earlier Gaelic settlements on these sites did not approach the urban nature of the subsequent Norse trading ports).
Although Irish (Gaelic) was their main language in the past, today most Irish people speak English.
The full surname usually indicated which family was in question, something that has been diminished with the loss of prefixes such as Ó and Mac.
the National Museum Wales note "It is possible that future genetic studies of ancient and modern human DNA may help to inform our understanding of the subject.
A new study published in 2010 by Balaresque et al.
A survey in 1999 showed that 72% of Northern Irish Protestants considered themselves "British" and 2% "Irish", with 68% of Northern Irish Catholics considering themselves "Irish" and 9% "British".
This view is in agreement with Irish historians such T. F. O'Rahilly and Francis John Byrne; the early chapters of their respective books, ''Early Irish history and mythology'' (reprinted 2004) and ''Irish Kings and High-Kings'' (3rd revised edition, 2001), deal in depth with the origins and status of many Irish ancestral deities.
Historically, the Irish nation was made up of kin groups or clans, and the Irish also had their own religion, law code and style of dress.
The frequency of Y-DNA haplogroup R1b (the most common haplogroup in Europe) is highest in the populations of Atlantic Europe and, due to European emigration, in North America, South America, and Australia.
Among the most prominent of this period were Séamas Dall Mac Cuarta, Peadar Ó Doirnín, Art Mac Cumhaigh, Cathal Buí Mac Giolla Ghunna, and Seán Clárach Mac Domhnaill.
Thomas Croke Archbishop of Cashel, said:  "I most solemnly conjure my poorer countrymen, as they value their happiness hereafter, never to set foot on the Argentine Republic however tempted to do so they may be by offers of a passage or an assurance of comfortable homes."
Since the time of Charlemagne, Irish scholars had a considerable presence in the Frankish court, where they were renowned for their learning.
George Boole (1815–1864), the mathematician who invented Boolean algebra, spent the latter part of his life in Cork.
The previous estimates, based on inaccurate dating methods (30,000+ years BP), made R1b and its subclades seem to be more useful indicators of the paleolithic era populations of western Europe than they actually are.
With Latin, the early Irish scholars "show almost a like familiarity that they do with their own Gaelic".
It is predominately religion, historical, and political differences that divide the two communities of (nationalism and unionism).
This was encouraged by the clergy, as they considered a Catholic country, Argentina, preferable to a Protestant United States.
Examples include de Búrca (Burke), de Brún, de Barra (Barry), de Stac (Stack), de Tiúit, de Faoite (White), de Londras (Landers), de Paor (Power).
A knowledge of Latin was common among the poor Irish mountaineers in the 17th century, who spoke it on special occasions, while cattle were bought and sold in Greek in the mountain market-places of Kerry.
Four polls taken between 1989 and 1994 revealed that when asked to state their national identity, over 79% of Northern Irish Protestants replied "British" or "Ulster" with 3% or less replying "Irish", while over 60% of Northern Irish Catholics  replied "Irish" with 13% or less replying "British" or "Ulster".
For most of Ireland's recorded history, the Irish have been primarily a Gaelic people (see Gaelic Ireland).
A female's surname replaces Ó with Ní (reduced from Iníon Uí – "daughter of the grandson of") and Mac with Nic (reduced from Iníon Mhic – "daughter of the son of"); in both cases the following name undergoes lenition.
The introduction of Christianity to the Irish people during the 5th century brought a radical change to the Irish people's foreign relations.
As a clan-based society, genealogy was all important.
Names that begin with Mac or Mc include Mac Cárthaigh (MacCarthy), Mac Diarmada (MacDermott), Mac Domhnaill (MacDonnell), and Mac Mathghamhna (MacMahon).
People of Irish descent are the second largest self-reported ethnic group in the United States, after German Americans.
The 'traditional' view is that, in the 4th or 5th century, Gaelic language and culture was brought to Scotland by settlers from Ireland, who founded the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata on Scotland's west coast.
implies either a Mesolithic- or Neolithic- (not Paleolithic) era entrance of R1b into Europe.
The proper surname for a woman in Irish uses the feminine prefix nic (meaning daughter) in place of mac.
In the 12th century, Icelandic bard and historian Snorri Sturluson proposed that the Norse gods were originally historical war leaders and kings, who later became cult figures, eventually set into society as gods.
The Irish people of the Late Middle Ages were active as traders on the European continent.
Only in the major part of Ulster did the plantations of mostly Scottish prove long-lived; the other three provinces (Connacht, Leinster, and Munster) remained heavily Gaelic Irish.
R1b's incidence declines gradually with distance from these areas but it is still common across the central areas of Europe.
and Malmström et al.
Many Icelanders have Irish and Scottish Gaelic forebears.
Unlike African chattel slaves, the overwhelming majority of Irish laborers who were sent to Montserrat did so by personal choice, and agreed to indentured labor contracts with full and informed knowledge of what that entailed.
''Black Irish'' is an ambiguous term sometimes used (mainly outside Ireland) as a reference to a dark-haired phenotype appearing in people of Irish origin.
With the exception of the Gaelic-Irish Fitzpatrick (Mac Giolla Phádraig) surname, all names that begin with Fitz – including FitzGerald (Mac Gearailt), Fitzsimons (Mac Síomóin/Mac an Ridire) and FitzHenry (Mac Anraí) – are descended from the initial Norman settlers.
Anglo-Normans conquered parts of Ireland in the 12th century, while England's 16th/17th century (re)conquest and colonization of Ireland brought a large number of English and Lowland Scots to parts of the island, especially the north.
Many of their compositions were incorporated into the compendium Lebor Gabála Érenn.
Irish literature encompasses the Irish and English languages.
Following the conversion of the Irish to Christianity, Irish secular laws and social institutions remained in place.
Thus the daughter of a man named Ó Maolagáin has the surname ''Ní Mhaolagáin'' and the daughter of a man named Mac Gearailt has the surname ''Nic Gearailt''.
According to the writer Seumas MacManus, the explorer Christopher Columbus visited Ireland to gather information about the lands to the west, a number of Irish names are recorded on Columbus' crew roster preserved in the archives of Madrid and it was an Irishman named Patrick Maguire who was the first to set foot in the Americas in 1492; however, according to Morison and Miss Gould, who made a detailed study of the crew list of 1492, no Irish or English sailors were involved in the voyage.
Many Gaelic Irish were displaced during the 17th century plantations.
Hence the chief of the clan Ó Cearnaigh (Kearney) was referred to as An Sionnach (Fox), which his descendants use to this day.
It thus follows that Irish and many other R1b subclades will be considerably younger than the maximum age of 18,000 years.
In the mid-19th century, large numbers of Irish immigrants were conscripted into Irish regiments of the United States Army at the time of the Mexican-American War.
Other learned families included the Mic Aodhagáin and Clann Fhir Bhisigh.
While preferring the term "The Atlantean Irish", Quinn's reference to certain phenotypical characteristics (within elements of the Irish populace and diaspora) as possible evidence of a previous Hibernian-Iberian (and possibly Berber) admixture mirrors common descriptions of the Black Irish.
The Greek mythographer Euhemerus originated the concept of Euhemerism, which treats mythological accounts as a reflection of actual historical events shaped by retelling and traditional mores.
In its summary of their article 'Who were the Celts?'
Neither their languages nor terms they used to describe themselves have survived.
In his documentary series ''Atlantean'', Bob Quinn explores an alternative 'Iberian' hypothesis, proposing the existence of an ancient sea-trading route skirting the Atlantic coast from North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula to regions such as Connemara.
The country came to be called ''Scotland'', after the Roman name for the Gaels: ''Scoti''.
The archaeologist Ewan Campbell argues against this view, saying that there is no archeological or placename evidence for a migration or a takeover by a small group of elites.
A million are thought to have emigrated to Liverpool as a result of the famine.
The survey also revealed that 78% of Protestants and 48% of all respondents felt "Strongly British", while 77% of Catholics and 35% of all respondents felt "Strongly Irish".
Thus a boy may be called Mac Domhnaill whereas his sister would be called Nic Dhomhnaill or Ní Dhomhnaill – the insertion of 'h' follows the female prefix in the case of most consonants (bar H, L, N, R, & T).
The people of Northern Ireland hold various national identities; including Irish, Northern Irish, British, or some combination thereof.
The name Cotter, local to County Cork, derives from the Norse personal name Ottir.
Another common Irish surname of Norman Irish origin is the 'de' habitational prefix, meaning 'of' and originally signifying prestige and land ownership.
Dál Riata and the territory of the neighbouring Picts merged to form the Kingdom of Alba, and Gaelic language and culture became dominant there.
Volunteers in the British Legion were motivated by a combination of both genuine political and mercenary motives.
Irish Catholics continued to receive an education in secret "hedgeschools", in spite of the Penal laws.
However, if the second part of the surname begins with the letter C or G, it is not lenited after Nic.
The Irish surname "Walsh" (in Gaelic ''Breathnach'') was routinely given to settlers of Welsh origin, who had come during and after the Norman invasion.
The 19th century physicist George Stoney introduced the idea and the name of the electron.
Different branches of a family with the same surname sometimes used distinguishing epithets, which sometimes became surnames in their own right.
The terms ''Irish'' and ''Ireland'' are probably derived from the goddess Ériu.
After Ireland's conversion to Christianity, Irish missionaries and scholars exerted great influence on Western Europe, and the Irish came to be seen as a nation of "saints and scholars".
Ireland was then home to 3,171,697 Catholics, about a third of whom attended the Congress.
Many presidents of the United States have had some Irish ancestry.
This tradition was enhanced and embedded in the tradition by successive historians such as Dubsúilech Ó Maolconaire (died 1270); Seán Mór Ó Dubhagáin (d.1372); Giolla Íosa Mór Mac Fir Bhisigh (fl.
He was the earliest of the founders of scholasticism, the dominant school of medieval philosophy.
A son has the same surname as his father.
Many died, others made their way to the United States and other destinations, some returned to Ireland, a few remained and prospered.
It is from this that the Irish were, as late as the 1800s, popularly known as "Milesian".
