Fission and alpha-particle emission would then make heavy nuclei decay into iron, converting all stellar-mass objects to cold spheres of pure iron.
In the Industrial Revolution, new methods of producing bar iron without charcoal were devised and these were later applied to produce steel.
In the far future of the universe, assuming that proton decay does not occur, cold fusion occurring via quantum tunnelling would cause the light nuclei in ordinary matter to fuse into 56Fe nuclei.
At pressures above approximately 10 GPa and temperatures of a few hundred kelvin or less, α-iron changes into a hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure, which is also known as ε-iron; the higher-temperature γ-phase also changes into ε-iron, but does so at higher pressure.
When hemoglobin is not attached to oxygen (and is then called deoxyhemoglobin), the Fe2+ ion at the center of the heme group (in the hydrophobic protein interior) is in a high-spin configuration.
For greater pressures, studies put the γ-ε-liquid triple point at pressures that differ by tens of gigapascals and 1000&nbsp;K in the melting point.
A typical six-coordinate anion is hexachloroferrate(III), FeCl63&minus;, found in the mixed salt tetrakis(methylammonium) hexachloroferrate(III) chloride.
Ruthenium exhibits an aqueous cationic chemistry in its low oxidation states similar to that of iron, but osmium does not, favoring high oxidation states in which it forms anionic complexes.
It was first synthesised in 1951 during an attempt to prepare the fulvalene (C10H8) by oxidative dimerization of cyclopentadiene; the resultant product was found to have molecular formula C10H10Fe and reported to exhibit "remarkable stability".
Iron oxide mixed with aluminium powder can be ignited to create a thermite reaction, used in welding and purifying ores.
Wrought iron is characterized by the presence of fine fibers of slag entrapped within the metal.
Many enzymes vital to life contain iron, such as catalase, lipoxygenases, and IRE-BP.
Much of the past work on isotopic composition of iron has focused on the nucleosynthesis of 60Fe through studies of meteorites and ore formation.
Railways have been central to the formation of modernity and ideas of progress and various languages (e.g.
As the iron passes through the Curie temperature there is no change in crystalline structure, but there is a change in "domain structure", where each domain contains iron atoms with a particular electronic spin.
However, the mechanical properties of iron are significantly affected by the sample's purity: pure, single crystals of iron are actually softer than aluminium, and the purest industrially produced iron (99.99%) has a hardness of 20–30&nbsp;Brinell.
Iron is the most widely used of all the metals, accounting for over 90% of worldwide metal production.
Applying valence bond theory to ferrocene by considering an Fe2+ centre and two cyclopentadienide anions (C5H5−), which are known to be aromatic according to Hückel's rule and hence highly stable, allowed correct prediction of the geometry of the molecule.
This bridge still stands today as a monument to the role iron played in the Industrial Revolution.
Thermolysis of iron pentacarbonyl gives the trinuclear cluster, triiron dodecacarbonyl.
Glycine, the cheapest and most common amino acid is most often used to produce iron glycinate supplements.
The iron age was closely related with Rome, and in Ovid's ''Metamorphoses''
Many coordination compounds of iron are known.
Another method is electrolysis of ferrous chloride onto an iron cathode.
Naturally occurring iron consists of four stable isotopes: 5.845% of 54Fe, 91.754% of 56Fe, 2.119% of 57Fe and 0.282% of 58Fe.
Further refinement with oxygen reduces the carbon content to the correct proportion to make steel.
In unmagnetized iron, all the electronic spins of the atoms within one domain have the same axis orientation; however, the electrons of neighboring domains have other orientations with the result of mutual cancellation and no magnetic field.
Nevertheless, milligram amounts of ferric iodide, a black solid, may still be prepared through the reaction of iron pentacarbonyl with iodine and carbon monoxide in the presence of hexane and light at the temperature of −20&nbsp;°C, making sure that the system is well sealed off from air and water.
Damage to the cells of the gastrointestinal tract can also prevent them from regulating iron absorption, leading to further increases in blood levels.
The mentioned iron compounds have been used as pigments (compare ochre) since historical time and contribute as well to the color of varíous geological formations, e.g.
At 912&nbsp;°C and below, the crystal structure again becomes the bcc α-iron allotrope, or ferrite.
The Greek poet Hesiod's ''Works and Days'' (lines 109–201) lists different ages of man named after metals like gold, silver, bronze and iron to account for successive ages of humanity.
These compounds participate in transporting gases, building enzymes, and transferring electrons.
Cytochrome a is slightly distinct, as it occurs at the mitochondrial membrane, binds directly to oxygen, and transports protons as well as electrons, as follows:
This happens because the two unpaired electrons on each iron atom are in the d''z''2 and d''x''2 − ''y''2 orbitals, which do not point directly at the nearest neighbors in the body-centered cubic lattice and therefore do not participate in metallic bonding; thus, they can interact magnetically with each other so that their spins align.
The latter is used as the traditional "blue" in blueprints.
Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency in the world.
The steel can then be tempered by reheating to a temperature in between, changing the proportions of pearlite and martensite.
Humans experience iron toxicity when the iron exceeds 20&nbsp;milligrams for every kilogram of body mass; 60&nbsp;milligrams per kilogram is considered a lethal dose.
It is the fourth most common element in the Earth's crust.
The nuclide 54Fe theoretically can undergo double electron capture to 54Cr, but the process has never been observed and only a lower limit on the half-life of 3.1×1022 years has been established.
Modern blast furnaces have grown much bigger, with hearths fourteen meters in diameter that allow them to produce thousands of tons of iron each day, but essentially operate in much the same way as they did during medieval times.
from Donzdorf) in Germany and Bath stone in the UK, iron pigments contribute to the yellowish color of large amounts of historical buildings and sculptures.
Both of these are oxidized in aqueous solution and precipitate in even mildly elevated pH as iron(III) oxide.32
by treatment with carbon.
The symbolic role was important e.g.
Carbon dioxide is not evolved when carbonate anions are added, which instead results in white iron(II) carbonate being precipitated out.
Pig iron has 3.5–4.5% carbon and contains varying amounts of contaminants such as sulfur, silicon and phosphorus.
In these people, excessive iron intake can result in iron overload disorders, known medically as hemochromatosis.
On the other hand, other metals may be added to make alloy steels.
The banded iron formations were laid down in the time between  and .
Much of this is in more-developed countries (7000–14000&nbsp;kg per capita) rather than less-developed countries (2000&nbsp;kg per capita).
Cooling a mixture of iron with 0.8% carbon slowly below 723&nbsp;°C to room temperature results in separate, alternating layers of cementite and ferrite, which is soft and malleable and is called pearlite for its appearance.
In the case of the Eisensandstein (a jurassic 'iron sandstone', e.g.
For example, the color of blood is due to hemoglobin, an iron-containing protein.
Iron provided by dietary supplements is often found as iron(II) fumarate, although  is cheaper and is absorbed equally well.
If honed to an edge, it loses it quickly.
However, iron objects of great age are much rarer than objects made of gold or silver due to the ease with which iron corrodes.
It is thus too large to fit inside the porphyrin ring, which bends instead into a dome with the Fe2+ ion about 55&nbsp;picometers above it.
The most abundant iron isotope 56Fe is of particular interest to nuclear scientists because it represents the most common endpoint of nucleosynthesis.
Iron in low amounts is found in molasses, teff, and farina.
Thus, when deoxyhemoglobin takes up oxygen, its affinity for more oxygen increases, and vice versa.
Items that were likely made of iron by Egyptians date from 3000 to 2500&nbsp;BCE.
It is also very common in the universe, relative to other stable metals of approximately the same atomic weight.
Alloy steels contain varying amounts of carbon as well as other metals, such as chromium, vanadium, molybdenum, nickel, tungsten, etc.
Iron(II) compounds tend to be oxidized to iron(III) compounds in the air.
This made steel much more economical, thereby leading to wrought iron no longer being produced in large quantities.
Following this, iron was used in rails, boats, ships, aqueducts, and buildings, as well as in iron cylinders in steam engines.
Ferrocene can itself be oxidized to the ferrocenium cation (Fc+); the ferrocene/ferrocenium couple is often used as a reference in electrochemistry.
This hard, brittle compound dominates the mechanical properties of white cast irons, rendering them hard, but unresistant to shock.
These oxides are the principal ores for the production of iron (see bloomery and blast furnace).
It has been almost completely replaced by mild steel for traditional "wrought iron" products and blacksmithing.
The form of iron that is stable under standard conditions can be subjected to pressures up to ca.
Unlike many other metals, iron does not form amalgams with mercury.
In gray iron the carbon exists as separate, fine flakes of graphite, and also renders the material brittle due to the sharp edged flakes of graphite that produce stress concentration sites within the material.
The Hittites began to smelt iron between 1500 and 1200&nbsp;BCE and the practice spread to the rest of the Near East after their empire fell in 1180&nbsp;BCE.
The Knölker complex, for example, is a transfer hydrogenation catalyst for ketones.
On the other hand, the pale green iron(II) hexaquo ion Fe(H2O)62+ does not undergo appreciable hydrolysis.
The sixth coordination site is then occupied by either another imidazole nitrogen or a methionine sulfur, so that these proteins are largely inert to oxygen – with the exception of cytochrome a, which bonds directly to oxygen and thus is very easily poisoned by cyanide.
The discovery sparked substantial interest in the field of organometallic chemistry, in part because the structure proposed by Pauson and Kealy (shown at right) was inconsistent with then-existing bonding models and did not explain its unexpected stability.
The ferrous halides typically arise from treating iron metal with the corresponding hydrohalic acid to give the corresponding hydrated salts.
Maximum hardness of 65 Rc is achieved with a 0.6% carbon content, although the alloy has low tensile strength.
In fact, iron is so common that production generally focuses only on ores with very high quantities of it.
Although a further tiny energy gain could be extracted by synthesizing 62Ni, which has a marginally higher binding energy than 56Fe, conditions in stars are unsuitable for this process.
There is some archaeological evidence of iron being smelted in Zimbabwe and southeast Africa as early as the eighth century BCE.
Iron shows a great variety of electronic spin states, including every possible spin quantum number value for a d-block element from 0 (diamagnetic) to  (5 unpaired electrons).
Iron is consequently the most abundant element on Earth, but only the fourth most abundant element in the Earth's crust, after oxygen, silicon, and aluminium.
While it makes up about 5% of the Earth's crust, both the Earth's inner and outer core are believed to consist largely of an iron-nickel alloy constituting 35% of the mass of the Earth as a whole.
Its low cost and high strength make it indispensable in engineering applications such as the construction of machinery and machine tools, automobiles, the hulls of large ships, and structural components for buildings.
Iron(II) chloride is used as a reducing flocculating agent, in the formation of iron complexes and magnetic iron oxides, and as a reducing agent in organic synthesis.
Iron chemical compounds have many uses.
Iron also occurs in higher oxidation states, an example being the purple potassium ferrate (K2FeO4) which contains iron in its +6 oxidation state, although this is very easily reduced.
These high-pressure phases of iron are important as endmember models for the solid parts of planetary cores.
Chloro complexes are less stable and favor tetrahedral coordination as in FeCl4−; finally, FeBr4− and FeI4− reduce themselves easily to iron(II).
Medieval blast furnaces were about  tall and made of fireproof brick; forced air was usually provided by hand-operated bellows.
Alternatively, it may be directly reduced.
Beads made from meteoric iron in 3500&nbsp;BCE or earlier were found in Gerzah, Egypt by G. A. Wainwright.
As such, iron is the most abundant element in the core of red giants, and is the most abundant metal in iron meteorites and in the dense metal cores of planets such as Earth.
An example of a low-spin iron(III) complex is Fe(CN)63−.
In the last decade, advances in mass spectrometry have allowed the detection and quantification of minute, naturally occurring variations in the ratios of the stable isotopes of iron.
Annealing involves the heating of a piece of steel to 700–800&nbsp;°C for several hours and then gradual cooling.
During weathering, iron tends to leach from sulfide deposits as the sulfate and from silicate deposits as the bicarbonate.
Among the halide and pseudohalide complexes, fluoro complexes of iron(III) are the most stable, with the colorless FeF5(H2O)2− being the most stable in aqueous solution.
Iron is the first of the transition metals that cannot reach its group oxidation state of +8, although its heavier congeners ruthenium and osmium can, with ruthenium having more difficulty than osmium.
Alleged references (compare history of metallurgy in South Asia) to iron in the Indian Vedas have been used for claims of a very early usage of iron in India respectively to date the texts as such.
For example, in the ferric chloride test, used to determine the presence of phenols, iron(III) chloride reacts with a phenol to form a deep violet complex:
Ferrite (α-iron) is a fairly soft metal that can dissolve only a small concentration of carbon (no more than 0.021% by mass at 910&nbsp;°C).
The first iron production started in the Middle Bronze Age but it took several centuries before iron displaced bronze.
Silica is removed by adding a limestone flux as described above.
Other specialized fluxes are used depending on the details of the ore.
These geological formations are a type of rock consisting of repeated thin layers of iron oxides alternating with bands of iron-poor shale and chert.
These ores are reduced to the metal in a carbothermic reaction, i.e.
It can also be dissolved in alcohol to form tincture of iron, which is used as a medicine to stop bleeding in canaries.
Significant amounts also occur in the iron sulfide mineral iron pyrite (FeS2), but it is difficult to extract iron from it and it is therefore not used.
Iron(II) sulfate is used as a precursor to other iron compounds.
Removing the other impurities results in cast iron, which is used to cast articles in foundries such as stoves, pipes, radiators, lamp-posts and rails.
15&nbsp;GPa before transforming into a high-pressure form, as described in the next section.
Iron-proteins are found in all living organisms: archaeans, bacteria and eukaryotes, including humans.
Iron is involved in numerous biological processes.
(Additionally, this hydrogen bonding results in the tilting of the oxygen molecule, resulting in a Fe–O–O bond angle of around 120° that avoids the formation of Fe–O–Fe or Fe–O2–Fe bridges that would lead to electron transfer, the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+, and the destruction of hemoglobin.)
Although Fe3+ has an d5 configuration, its absorption spectrum is not like that of Mn2+ with its weak, spin-forbidden d–d bands, because Fe3+ has higher positive charge and is more polarizing, lowering the energy of its ligand-to-metal charge transfer absorptions.
Painting, galvanization, passivation, plastic coating and bluing are all used to protect iron from rust by excluding water and oxygen or by cathodic protection.
According to the International Resource Panel's Metal Stocks in Society report, the global stock of iron in use in society is 2200&nbsp;kg per capita.
Elemental iron, or reduced iron, despite being absorbed at only one-third to two-thirds the efficiency (relative to iron sulfate), is often added to foods such as breakfast cereals or enriched wheat flour.
The production of iron or steel is a process consisting of two main stages.
This 56Ni, which has a half-life of about 6&nbsp;days, is created in quantity in these stars, but soon decays by two successive positron emissions within supernova decay products in the supernova remnant gas cloud, first to radioactive 56Co, and then to stable 56Fe.
Iron is pervasive, but particularly rich sources of dietary iron include red meat, lentils, beans, poultry, fish, leaf vegetables, watercress, tofu, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, and blackstrap molasses.
The attenuation of radiation as a function of energy is shown in the graph.
The coke and limestone are fed into the top of the furnace, while a massive blast of air heated to 900&nbsp;°C, about 4 tons per ton of iron, is forced into the furnace at the bottom.
The source of its chemical symbol ''Fe'' is the Latin word ''ferrum'', and its descendants are the names of the element in the Romance languages (for example, French ''fer'', Spanish ''hierro'', and Italian and Portuguese ''ferro'').
The average adult human contains about 0.005% body weight of iron, or about four grams, of which three quarters is in hemoglobin – a level that remains constant despite only about one milligram of iron being absorbed each day, because the human body recycles its hemoglobin for the iron content.
As such, iron, cobalt, and nickel are sometimes grouped together as the iron triad.
Carbon monoxide and phosphorus trifluoride are poisonous to humans because they bind to hemoglobin similarly to oxygen, but with much more strength, so that oxygen can no longer be transported throughout the body.
:Fe + 2 HX → FeX2 + H2 (X = F, Cl, Br, I)
Steel (with smaller carbon content than pig iron but more than wrought iron) was first produced in antiquity by using a bloomery.
The electrolyte is usually iron(II) sulfate in urban areas (formed when atmospheric sulfur dioxide attacks iron), and salt particles in the atmosphere in seaside areas.
:Anode: 4 Fe → 4 Fe2+ + 8 e−; 4 Fe2+ → 4 Fe3+ + 4 e−
Many people have an undiagnosed genetic susceptibility to iron overload, and are not aware of a family history of the problem.
Cast iron was used in ancient China for warfare, agriculture, and architecture.
The iron, once cooled, is called pig iron, while the slag can be used as a material in road construction or to improve mineral-poor soils for agriculture.
Samples of smelted iron from Asmar, Mesopotamia and Tall Chagar Bazaar in northern Syria were made sometime between 3000 and 2700&nbsp;BCE.
A certain proportion of carbon (between 0.002% and 2.1%) produces steel, which may be up to 1000&nbsp;times harder than pure iron.
It has been worked, or wrought, for millennia.
Examples of proteins found in higher organisms include hemoglobin, cytochrome (see high-valent iron), and catalase.
The ensuing availability of inexpensive iron was one of the factors leading to the Industrial Revolution.
In magnetized iron, the electronic spins of the domains are aligned and the magnetic effects are reinforced.
For all these processes, charcoal was required as fuel.
French, Spanish, Italien and German) refer to railways as ''iron road''.
The most commonly known and studied bioinorganic iron compounds (biological iron molecules) are the heme proteins: examples are hemoglobin, myoglobin, and cytochrome P450.
Iron is sometimes considered as a prototype for the entire block of transition metals, due to its abundance and the immense role it has played in the technological progress of humanity.
:Fe2O3 + 3 CO → 2 Fe + 3 CO2
Meteoritic iron is comparably soft and ductile and easily forged by cold working but may get brittle when heated because of the nickle content.
Berlin iron jewellery reached its peak production between 1813 and 1815, when the Prussian royal family urged citizens to donate gold and silver jewellery for military funding.
It was so important that Wilkinson and Fischer shared the 1973 Nobel Prize for Chemistry "for their pioneering work, performed independently, on the chemistry of the organometallic, so called sandwich compounds".
In fact, in this second half of the 3d transition series, vertical similarities down the groups compete with the horizontal similarities of iron with its neighbors cobalt and nickel in the periodic table, which are also ferromagnetic at room temperature and share similar chemistry.
Iron is the sixth most abundant element in the Universe, and the most common refractory element.
Metalloproteins are a group of proteins with metal ion cofactors.
Although each domain contains billions of atoms, they are very small, about 10&nbsp;micrometres across.
It makes the steel softer and more workable.
The iron compounds produced on the largest scale in industry are iron(II) sulfate (FeSO4·7H2O) and iron(III) chloride (FeCl3).
Like the other group 8 elements, ruthenium and osmium, iron exists in a wide range of oxidation states, −2 to +6, although +2 and +3 are the most common.
Iron metal has been used since ancient times, although copper alloys, which have lower melting temperatures, were used even earlier in human history.
The oxidation states and other bonding properties are often assessed using the technique of Mössbauer spectroscopy.
In the bottom of the furnace, the molten slag floats on top of the denser molten iron, and apertures in the side of the furnace are opened to run off the iron and the slag separately.
Pig iron has a melting point in the range of 1420–1470&nbsp;K, which is lower than either of its two main components, and makes it the first product to be melted when carbon and iron are heated together.
Alternatively pig iron may be made into steel (with up to about 2% carbon) or wrought iron (commercially pure iron).
Wrought iron is more corrosion resistant than steel.
In all cases, the objective is to oxidize some or all of the carbon, together with other impurities.
Iron smelting may have been introduced into China through Central Asia.
Significant amounts of iron occur in the iron sulfide mineral iron pyrite (FeS2), but it is difficult to extract iron from it and it is therefore not used.
It is a metal in the first transition series.
Iron plays a certain role in mythology and has found various usage as a metaphor and in in folklore.
Iron belongs to the elements undoubtedly known to the ancient world.
Generally speaking, molecular dynamics computer simulations of iron melting and shock wave experiments suggest higher melting points and a much steeper slope of the melting curve than static experiments carried out in diamond anvil cells.
Although rare, iron meteorites are the main form of natural metallic iron on the Earth's surface.
Among its organometallic compounds is ferrocene, the first sandwich compound discovered.
Like manganese(II), most iron(III) complexes are high-spin, the exceptions being those with ligands that are high in the spectrochemical series such as cyanide.
Children, pre-menopausal women (women of child-bearing age), and people with poor diet are most susceptible to the disease.
It is by mass the most common element on Earth, forming much of Earth's outer and inner core.
In excess carbon dioxide this forms the slightly soluble bicarbonate, which occurs commonly in groundwater, but it oxidises quickly in air to form iron(III) oxide that accounts for the brown deposits present in a sizeable number of streams.
The proverbial red color of the surface of Mars is derived from an iron oxide-rich regolith.
The data on iron is so consistent that it is often used to calibrate measurements or to compare tests.
Powdered iron in an acidic solvent was used in the Bechamp reduction the reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline.
Their alloy content raises their cost, and so they are usually only employed for specialist uses.
For example, Friedel-Crafts acylation of ferrocene with acetic anhydride yields acetylferrocene just as acylation of benzene yields acetophenone under similar conditions.
Owing to environmental concerns, alternative methods of processing iron have been developed.
Usage of the blast and cupola furnace remained widespread during the Song and Tang Dynasties.
Although the heme proteins are the most important class of iron-containing proteins, the iron-sulfur proteins are also very important, being involved in electron transfer, which is possible since iron can exist stably in either the +2 or +3 oxidation states.
The carbon monoxide reduces the iron ore (in the chemical equation below, hematite) to molten iron, becoming carbon dioxide in the process:
Finally, at 770&nbsp;°C (the Curie point, Tc) iron's magnetic ordering changes from paramagnetic to ferromagnetic.
Hemochromatosis is estimated to be the a cause of 0.3 to 0.8% of all metabolic diseases of Caucasians.
''ira'', 'wrath'4) The Balto-Slavic names for iron (for example, Russian ''железо'' ''zhelezo'') are the only ones to come directly from the Proto-Indo-European ''*ghelgh-'' "iron".
Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer contains iron in the rare +1 oxidation state.
The melting and boiling points of iron, along with its enthalpy of atomization, are lower than those of the earlier 3d elements from scandium to chromium, showing the lessened contribution of the 3d electrons to metallic bonding as they are attracted more and more into the inert core by the nucleus; however, they are higher than the values for the previous element manganese because that element has a half-filled 3d subshell and consequently its d-electrons are not easily delocalized.
Despite their names, they are actually all non-stoichiometric compounds whose compositions may vary.
:Cathode: 3 O2 + 6 H2O + 12 e− → 12 OH−
"Direct iron reduction" reduces iron ore to a powder called "sponge" iron or "direct" iron that is suitable for steelmaking.
Its 26 electrons are arranged in the configuration Ar3d64s2, of which the 3d and 4s electrons are relatively close in energy, and thus it can lose a variable number of electrons and there is no clear point where further ionization becomes unprofitable.
The latter tend to be rather more unstable than iron(II) complexes and often dissociate in water.
This value is always half the number of unpaired electrons.
