; Gilgamos/Gil: A two-thousand-year-old, winged warrior married to Bette Noir.
Bette stole a piece of the candle wax, but did not tell the other Paradigm members about it, fearing that her affair would be exposed.
Waid's premise stems from the rejection of the idea that, in "superhero comics, pretty much everyone who’s called upon to put on a cape is, at heart, emotionally equipped for the job."
Samsara is empowered by a mystical crystal embedded in his forehead that enables him to create simple temporary constructs of mystical energy, and which protects him from "mortal harm," making him virtually immortal.
Plutonian flees and hides in Samsara's grave.
The second printing's cover is a sketch version of Kitson variant and a 1-in-20 incentive reprinting of the Spokes cover, not signed by Waid.
''Issue #32'' details how the Plutonian came to be, created by members of an alien race sent to study Earth: the Eleos.
Bette reveals that she had an affair with Plutonian before his fall, using a magical candle that renders Plutonian mortal to allow them to have sex.
Bette is later possessed by Modeus.
Plutonian asks them to explain how he came to be.
Cary reveals that he is aware that Plutonian (while still a hero) used alien technology recovered from an invasion to buy the silence of a scientist who was a vociferous Plutonian critic due to the latter's tight control of said alien technology.
; Citadel: Paradigm member.
Gil returns in ''Issue #29'' when Kaidan and Scylla's ghost bring him out of retirement.
On Earth, Cary uses the telepathic villain Burrows to interrogate the villains seeking amnesty to determine if their motives are pure.
Kaidan and fellow member Scylla are in love, to the chagrin of his brother Cary.
Waid further notes that, "by the classic superhero rules," a hero can't concern themselves with what people think of them, but that if "you are so far removed as to not care what people think of you, it takes one less step to not care what people think."
:The Plutonian's powers are not physical but psionic, enabling him to subconsciously manipulate matter on an atomic level: allowing him to heat or freeze the air, see through objects, fly, render himself virtually indestructible, possess super strength and heightened senses, and make opponents more susceptible to damage.
The series follows the fall of the world's greatest superhero, the Plutonian, as he begins slaughtering the population of Earth.
Bette shoots at Plutonian with the wax bullet, but Qubit uses his portals to redirect the bullet and kill Orian, having correctly surmised that Orian intended to invade Earth after Plutonian's death.
Kaidan realizes that Scylla is alive when she fails to summon his spirit.
Cary possesses energy manipulation and projection powers, and he is the source of the power that Scylla employs.
Cary takes credit for Plutonian's defeat and offers amnesty to super-villains that join the Paradigm to help rebuild the Earth.
During the same event, he added that he did not have any intention of rehabilitating the Plutonian character or redeeming him for his actions, saying "There's no hope for Plutonian...but that said, I never actually said the title ''Irredeemable'' refers to Plutonian."
Plutonian rejects Modeus' advances and Modeus uses his power to brutally beat Plutonian, but Plutonian finds himself unable to harm Bette's body.
Meanwhile, in response to Cary's new power, the US military summons the demon Orian to destroy the heroes entirely.
; Mallus: An alien that Plutonian meets on Genhom.
At an unknown point he takes possession of Plutonian's alien lover Cutter, and then Bette Noir.
Qubit has Burrows secretly scan Cary, and learns enough to deem Cary as big a threat as Plutonian.
Hornet activated the signal to the Vespan before he was killed.
They negotiate an alliance with Mordanse to escape, and are later joined by another alien, Kurne.
On Gehnom, Plutonian wakes from his fantasy to find the Auroran, a heroic figure from his dream, is present in the waking world.
Following Scylla's apparent death, his share of their power is returned to Cary, who adopts the codename ''Survivor''.
; Volt: An African-American hero empowered by alien energy during the Vespan invasion.
Former enemies of Plutonian attempt to work with him but he offers them a way to earn his trust they turn on him, resulting in a self-destruct of the facility in which they are meeting.
Modeus transfers himself into Qubit, but is left trapped by Qubit's mental safeguards.
''Irredeemable'' #1 premiered in April 2009, and the series ended in May 2012, after thirty-seven issues and one special.
Cary and Orian return to Earth, agreeing to work together to kill Plutonian.
Samsara's restorative powers revive him in his grave to Plutonian's gratitude, but it is revealed that Modeus is secretly possessing Samsara's body.
The Eleos accept that Plutonian now feels remorse, but still abandon him at the end of time, refusing to absolve his crimes.
Given the name Dan Anderson, he is repeatedly moved through foster homes by parents fearful of him after discovering his abilities.
; Hornet: A former policeman who relies on skill and gadgets to fight crime.
A group of superheroes and the Plutonian's former teammates.
On Gehnom, Plutonian and Auroran work together to escape the asylum, fighting their way through the inmates until they face Mordanse, a bestial alien.
Plutonian laments that only Modeus could figure out how to use the gem to restore Sky City, and reminisces about the time he realized that Modeus was in love with him.
Her rejection of Cary's own advances, combined with his increasing responsibilities leading the Paradigm, and power lead to him becoming unstable, causing Kaidan and Qubit to plot against him, fearing he is more dangerous than Plutonian.
On February 23, 2009, Boom!
He is left trapped on Genhom with Qubit when Plutonian leaves for Earth.
In ''Issue #35'', Modeus unlocks Bette's true potential, physics altering gravity singularities.
Plutonian reveals that he hates his enemy Max Damage more than anyone because Max saw Plutonian as a child when he lived in the wilderness as the "Wolf boy" and inspired his first act of unrestrained anger.
; Inferno: Paradigm member.
Mark Waid is Irredeemable!
In response the probe is transformed into an infant human.
His origin is initially unknown even to the Plutonian who provides alternating stories such as being an alien or an orphaned mutant.
Following Bill's death, Dan becomes the Plutonian, donning a costume bearing a symbol on his chest similar to the design embedded on the front door of one of his foster homes.
The rogue Modeus robot and Encanta find the injured Modeus-Samsara and transfer Modeus into the robot's body.
Modeus plots to return Plutonian to Earth.
; Orian: An extra-dimensional, demonic hunter who has fought the Paradigm in the past and was only defeated because of the Plutonian.
The United Nations offer Plutonian their subservience, hoping to avoid his wrath.
", which culminated with the release of a limited edition "Mark Waid is Evil" tee-shirt at the 2009 New York Comic Con.
Cary meets with Elliott, who has become a priest and abandoned his powers.
Killed by the Plutonian's heat vision alongside Metalman.
After learning of his wife's inoperable cancer, Bill and his wife are killed in an accident that Plutonian believes was suicide.
His brain-dead but living body is later shown to be in the possession of Qubit's rogue Modeus robot and later Modeus himself.
Cary shared his power equally among his brothers but cannot take it back until their death.
Qubit and Max Damage teleport to Plutonian and return him to Earth.
He is left trapped in the spirit world after being dragged there by Scylla's ghost.
Established four years before the beginning of the series by the Plutonian, Bette Noir, Qubit, Charybdis, Scylla, Metalman, Hornet, and Kaidan.
Plutonian maim Modeus-Samsara's face.
Initial critical reception for the series was positive, the first issue receiving 3.5 out of 5 stars from Comic Book Resources, complimenting the way the art worked with the story, and 4 out of 5 stars from Major Spoilers.
Intrigued by the diversity and intensity of human emotions, the aliens crafted a probe using a piece of themselves, to study humans more closely.
In December 2009, a spin-off titled ''Incorruptible'' was released, chronicling the reformation of former supervillain—and one of Plutonian's greatest enemies—Max Damage, into a hero after he witnesses the atrocities committed by Plutonian.
The beauty of Superman is that he can deal with that level of adulation without it going to his head, without it warping him, but he's a very special individual.
In ''Irredeemable #18'', it is revealed that Hornet had become suspicious of Tony after he mentions Hornet's wife by name; information Hornet had never shared with him.
The Plutonian, a powerful being once thought to be the world's greatest superhero, has now become its greatest supervillain.
Punched through the head and killed during the Plutonian's initial rampage.
While the first was lost in combat against Orian, he tore the second off himself after being incarcerated by the US government, using the bones within to pick the lock of his cell.
Plutonian is alerted to the heroes' hidden location and attacks them.
:Unable to cope with criticism levied against him by various people including Dr. Seabrook—who criticizes him for withholding seized alien technology—Plutonian provides Seabrook with a sample of the technology.
While Orian restrains Plutonian for the shot, Qubit creates tiny portals to redirect the bullet and kill Orian instead, knowing that Orian plans to invade Earth.
Modeus-Bette sends Kurne after Gil and Kaidan, and captures Mordanse.
The incentive variants by Spokes for the first 12 issues of the series will spell out Irredeemable, with one letter being featured on each cover.
Bill and his wife die in a car crash after Dan informs him of his wife's terminal cancer; Dan suspects that the accident was actually a suicide.
Plutonian harbors particular hatred for him after the two met as teenagers while Max was still unpowered and Plutonian lived in the wild.
Modeus later explains that he possessed Bette to combine the body Plutonian desired with his own spirit he deems worthy of Plutonian.
His former allies, the superhero group The Paradigm, attempt to find a way to stop his rampage while dealing with their own problems of betrayal and hopelessness.
In ''Issue #17'', it is revealed that Modeus is in love with Plutonian, but his extreme psychopathy and lack of empathy results in him expressing his feelings by trying to destroy everything else that could divert Plutonian's attention from himself: Sky City, his friends and his loved ones.
Possesses super-strength, flight, and invulnerability, and can emit sonic blasts from his mouth.
Despite his initial resentment of Plutonian for revealing himself to the world as Hornet was about to make his debut, the two come to be partners, with Hornet considering "Tony" his best friend.
; Max Damage: One of Plutonian's main enemies during his heroic career, Max is a supervillain who gains superhuman abilities the longer he remains awake.
; Scylla: Twin and partner of Cary.
With Cary's death the power is completely lost.
The series starts with the Plutonian killing his former ally, the Hornet, and his entire family.
Meanwhile, Cutter confronts Bette and is revealed to be possessed by Modeus.
Possesses super strength, invulnerability and several mouths on his back which speak incessantly and utter conflicting messages that only Kurne can hear.
Waid realized that the concept was one he could never properly explore at either DC or Marvel Comics, a "Twilight of the Superheroes"-style story revolving around the premise of "how does a man go from being the world’s greatest superhero to its greatest supervillain?"
Waid did not rule out revisiting the ''Irredeemable'' series in the future to explore some of the characters but intimated that this would not be possible for some of them, following the series' end.
Chinese and Japanese representatives meet with the new American president to reveal their plan to kill Plutonian, which will result in the death of 2 billion people.
With his restored strength, Cary is capable of equaling the Plutonian's power.
Modeus hypothesizes that if the Plutonian is made aware of his true abilities he would be able to alter probability, see through time and reverse entropy, concluding "and that's just if he moves from Kindergarten to grade school."
Although the second issue was less action-packed Joyce still thought it was a "great story" and despite only being two installments in he says "I’m willing to bet that this story becomes a classic once it is completed".
Starting with ''Irredeemable #29'' in September 2011, Krause officially left the series, being replaced by Diego and his father Eduardo Barreto.
Plutonian attempts to kill Cary, but Cary reveals that his brother's death has made him significantly more powerful.
Modeus later captures Mordanse in an energy sphere, turning him into a powerful sonic explosive that is expended trying to kill Qubit.
; Samsara: The Plutonian's former sidekick.
I cannot stress how much I truly enjoyed it."
During a conversation about how Modeus helped create the radiation as a child, Plutonian realizes that Modeus had possessed Cutter and flies after Bette, believing Modeus will hurt her.
Following the death of his mind, his share of Scylla's power is split evenly between Scylla and their brother Elliott.
At Volt's funeral, Kaidan discovers she can summon the spirits of her fallen comrades.
Well, what if you gave that level of power to someone who, at heart, didn't have that emotional capability?
When Kaidan cannot summon his ghost, she realizes that Scylla is still alive.
Qubit remotely destroys all of his teleportation technology to prevent Plutonian's escape.
The remaining superheroes, the Paradigm – Bette Noir, Scylla, Cary, Volt, Qubit, Gil, and Kaidan – search for the reason behind Plutonian's change by speaking to his former sidekick Samsara, whom Plutonian lobotomized.
Cutter is a telekinetic self-mutilator whose self-harm is inflicted on others rather than herself.
Mark Waid (Shared for ''Irredeemable,'' ''Incorruptible,'' and ''Daredevil'')
He contemplates being transferred into Scylla's body but decides against it in favor of his emotionless robot body.
Peter Krause was the artist for the first twenty-four issues, after which Diego Barretto took over as artist.
It is revealed that his body has been possessed by Plutonian's nemesis, Modeus, as a means to get close to, and manipulate the former hero.
Plutonian and his allies assault the new Paradigm, but stands aside as the Paradigm's villain recruits attack Cary for bringing them to Plutonian's attention.
Returning to Earth to find it devastated by radiation, and believing humanity will become extinct within three generations, Qubit recruited Max as muscle and sought out Plutonian.
; Mordanse: A white, beast-like creature capable of altering its form.
John Hardick of ''The Express-Times'' describes the series as "on its way to becoming one of the best books of the year".
Qubit reveals his true plan to redeem Plutonian; using his portals to transport Plutonian's original essence, as created by the Eleos, into parallel universes to give it a chance to be remade into something good.
The present Plutonian fades away and Modeus' robot body falls apart, leaving Qubit and Mallus trapped on Gehnom.
; Modeus: The Plutonian's nemesis.
Possesses superhuman strength and capable of unsupported flight.
Stephen Joyce at Comics Bulletin praised the writing, characters and art (in particular the coloring) in the first issue, concluding "This is an amazing book!
A spin-off titled ''Incorruptible'' was released in December 2009, which follows one of the Plutonian's greatest enemies, Max Damage, on his journey to become a superhero in the wake of Plutonian's fall.
Plutonian reveals that he is aware of Modeus' possession of Samsara and burns off Samsara's face.
Plutonian is fitted with an exoskeleton to put his unconscious body to work mining on an alien world; the Vespan find they cannot awaken him from his fantasy.
Qubit confronts Cary, accusing him of not searching for Scylla out of fear of losing his new power.
They explore, record, and safeguard the knowledge of all time across multiple universes.
Encanta transfers his essence from Samsara into Qubit's rogue Modeus robot.
After peering into Plutonian's mind, Burrows hangs himself.
; Charybdis/Cary: Twin and partner of Scylla.
At Qubit's request, Bette's body is eventually destroyed by Plutonian.
He joins with the Plutonian on Genhom and accompanies him to Earth.
; Metalman: Possesses superhuman durability.
Modeus is able to use her power to open wormholes of limitless range, enabling him to consume entire star systems, granting Bette's body enough power to physically injure and overwhelm the Plutonian.
Plutonian admits that he has known about the possession since the start, and disfigures Samsara's face to prevent it eliciting sympathy from him.
; Agent Nine: Paradigm member.
Plutonian thought the technology was safe, and believed the scientist to be sincere in his criticism, but subsequent tampering released a virus that resulted in the deaths of many children.
He later reveals that he and Cary are not twins but triplets.
Hornet and his family are murdered by Plutonian at the beginning of the series.
It is revealed that Qubit retrieved the wax bullet after it killed Orian.
Samsara cannot regrow lost tissue or limbs but the crystal keeps him alive long enough for any wound to close naturally.
Modeus-Samsara and Plutonian travel to Sky City with a magical gem.
He is romantically involved with Kaidan.
''Irredeemable'' is author Mark Waid's third and "most complex" story concerning the "cost of superheroics" or the "path of villainy".
Qubit and the other heroes discover Modeus' location within Plutonian's citadel.
The creatures reveal themselves as the Eleos, a race of interdimensional beings that explore and record universes.
Modeus kidnaps Kaidan to force Qubit into an alliance to recover Plutonian.
Plutonian tried to conceal his involvement in the event, but when his sidekick Samsara learned the truth, Plutonian snapped.
During an alien invasion years prior to the Plutonian's fall, Hornet makes a secret deal with the aliens, trading them teleportation technology and the locations of various Earth-like worlds in exchange for them not only sparing Earth, but returning to subdue the Plutonian if his fears are realized.
Bette repeatedly attempts suicide but is saved by the Plutonian.
It is later shown that it was reading Modeus' mind in Cutter's body that caused his suicide.
Before they escape, Plutonian confronts Auroran about why he resembles the first person Plutonian ever saved.
Auroran is unveiled as a shape-shifting symbiote feeding on Plutonian's dreams.
In April 2011, Krause announced that he would be leaving the series to focus on opportunities outside of comics.
Real name Martin Reber.
After the Plutonian confesses to his girlfriend Alana Patel that he and Dan Hartigan are the same person, Alana reveals his secret out of anger that she has been fooled.
Plutonian confronts Qubit about his promise of redemption after using his time-observing power to discover that Mallus was killed sending Qubit to Earth.
The Vespan arrive and subdue Plutonian with advanced technology.
He is torn in half by the Plutonian while defending a school of children from his initial rampage.
A "Wall Street billionaire" turned vigilante; he possesses a reputation as an excellent tactician.
Years prior to the Plutonian's rampage, Encanta uses her abilities to transform Modeus, at his request, into pure information, allowing him to possess the body of Samsara.
Cary threatens to tell the world that Qubit spared Plutonian's life.
Bill creates the superhero identity of Plutonian (named for Piety, Loyalty, Utility, Truthfulness, and Order) and the civilian identity of Dan Hartigan for him.
Encanta is teleported from Qubit's lab by Qubit's rogue Modeus robot who is revealed to be in possession of Scylla, who is still alive.
The resulting explosion kills Scylla and injures Cary, superhero brothers who are observing the villains.
Cary waits to confront Plutonian while the others teleport into Plutonian's lair.
The probe is inadvertently transformed into an infant human in response to the strong emotions of a mother who had killed her child.
Married to Gilgamos, but has an affair with the Plutonian prior to his fall.
China, Japan, and America launch their plan, releasing two towering creatures from a hidden facility, causing widespread destruction and billions of deaths.
While Cary, Orian, and Gil fight Plutonian, Modeus-Samsara pushes Volt over a cliff to his death.
Cary, Orian, Gil, and Bette confront Plutonian.
Qubit uses Modeus' memories to discover how to stop the radiation, and Plutonian retrieves the knowledge of Bette's powers-necessary to stop the radiation-from Bette's body.
; The Eleos: A race of towering aliens possessing vast abilities including those of the Plutonian.
He eventually returns, claiming his gem healed his mind, and joins Plutonian.
Modeus transfers himself to Bette Noir before hurling Cutter's body from the top of a building.
Although he resides in Samsara's body he is only able to take control after Plutonian lobotomizes Samsara.
; Bette Noir: A female crime fighter who augments her uncanny aim with customized ammunition for dealing with specific threats.
As a teenager he starts a heroic career with his brothers but grows disillusioned with how their actions result in death and tormented victims, becoming a priest instead and ignoring his abilities.
The surviving members work together to discover a means to stop the Plutonian's rampage.
Plutonian notices a blur and realizes that it is himself from the immediate-future, sent back in time by Mallus' power.
He has destroyed Sky City – the metropolis he once protected – and has murdered millions of people across the globe.
Plutonian returns, but Modeus has accessed Bette's true potential, gravity manipulation strong enough to overpower Plutonian.
Initial pre-publication publicity utilized the tagline "Mark Waid is Evil!
She is kidnapped by the Plutonian (who uses her as a sex-slave), and recovered by Qubit to learn the location of Modeus.
He is later fostered by Bill Hartigan, the only foster parent who is not afraid of Plutonian's powers and trains him to be a selfless superhero.
When Qubit offers to make Plutonian even stronger in order to remove the radiation, Max abandons the plan and leaves.
He makes an alliance with Survivor to kill Plutonian with Bette's wax candle-coated bullet.
She attempts to kill the Plutonian with a bullet crafted from the magic wax but fails due to Qubit's interference.
After meeting with his Eleos creators, Plutonian's powers are expanded.
Qubit amplifies Mallus' powers to allow greater control over time, but Mallus is unable to endure the process and dies.
Waid stated that he was "stretched thin right now both personally and professionally", and that the cast of ''Irredeemable'' were moving naturally towards the series ending he had planned, and so Waid desired to "go out big and grand".
When Samsara discovers the Plutonian is responsible for an accidental viral outbreak that killed thousands of children, Plutonian, enraged that his closest friend has turned on him, lobotomizes Samsara.
After the source of their power, Cary, is killed, Elliott's power is seemingly lost.
Cary is killed by Gil in ''Issue #31'' and all of his and Elliott's power is lost as a result.
Plutonian leaves, taking some of the new Paradigm members with him, whom he later kills.
Krause claimed that he made the decision in February 2011 after finding himself facing stress and deadlines from multiple commitments.
