There were four more hit versions in 1944–45.
Berlin wrote nearly three dozen songs for the show which contained a cast of 300 men.
Berlin's songs signified modernism, and they signified the cultural struggle between Victorian gentility and the "purveyors of liberation, indulgence, and leisure," says Furia.
In 1934, ''Life'' put him on its cover and inside hailed "this itinerant son of a Russian cantor" as "an American institution."
''As Thousands Cheer'' (1933) was a revue, also with book by Moss Hart, with a theme: each number was presented as an item in a newspaper, some of them touching on issues of the day.
Music critic Stephen Holden credits this partly to the fact that "the song also evokes a primal nostalgia—a pure childlike longing for roots, home and childhood—that goes way beyond the greeting imagery."
In 1909, the year of the premiere of Israel Zangwill's ''The Melting Pot'', he got another big break as a staff lyricist with the Ted Snyder Company.
Kate Smith also sang "God Bless America" in the film with a backdrop showing families anxious over the coming war.
According to Saul Bornstein (aka Sol Bourne, Saul Bourne), Berlin's publishing company manager, "It was a ritual for Berlin to write a complete song, words and music, every day."
Just minutes before the President's statement was released, he joined a crowd of thousands to sing Berlin's "God Bless America" at a luncheon in Boston.
His father, a cantor in a synagogue, uprooted the family to America, as did many other Jewish families in the late 19th century.
The show became a hit movie and a morale-boosting road show that toured the battlefronts of Europe.
It is said that the showstopper song, "There's No Business Like Show Business", was almost left out of the show altogether because Berlin mistakenly thought that Rodgers and Hammerstein didn't like it.
However, before Berlin was fourteen his meager income was still adding less than his sisters' to the family's budget, which made him feel worthless.
The show yielded a succession of hit songs, including "Easter Parade" sung by Marilyn Miller and Clifton Webb, "Heat Wave" (presented as the weather forecast), "Harlem on My Mind", and "Supper Time", a song about racial bigotry that was sung by Ethel Waters.
Music historian Susannah McCorkle writes that "in scope, quantity, and quality his work was amazing."
He described it as worse than the slums of Bombay, but was nonetheless "impressed and moved by the Jews," says Whitcomb, noting how the songs by the little immigrant boys "saluted the Stars and Stripes."
The song became a hit twice (for Vincent Lopez and George Olsen) in its first incarnation.
Similar films included ''On the Avenue'' (1937), ''Gold Diggers in Paris'' (1938), ''Holiday Inn'' (1942), ''Blue Skies'' (1946) and ''Easter Parade'' (1948), with Judy Garland and Fred Astaire.
2 on the R&B chart.
"Alexander's Ragtime Band" sparked an international dance craze in places as far away as Berlin's native Russia, which also "flung itself into the ragtime beat with an abandon bordering on mania."
In 1927, his song "Blue Skies", was featured in the first feature-length talkie, ''The Jazz Singer'', with Al Jolson.
Of the five top songwriters, only Porter and Berlin wrote both their own words and music.
According to McCorkle, of the top five songwriters in America, only Berlin and Cole Porter wrote both their words and music.
Performed by Dick Powell in the 1937 film ''On the Avenue''.
He then wrote lyrics to the score, played it again in another Broadway Review, and this time ''Variety'' news weekly called it "the musical sensation of the decade."
He played almost entirely in the key of F sharp so that he could stay on the black notes and owned two transposing pianos so as to change keys.
Music was his only source of income and he picked up the language and culture of the ghetto lifestyle.
How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning".
In its early years, the theater was a showcase for revues by Berlin.
I want to say at once that I frankly believe that Irving Berlin is the greatest songwriter that has ever lived.... His songs are exquisite cameos of perfection, and each one of them is as beautiful as its neighbor.
Furia writes that the international success of "Alexander's Ragtime Band"  gave ragtime "new life and sparked a national dance craze."
His mother took a job as a midwife, and three of his sisters worked wrapping cigars, common for immigrant girls.
Twenty-four years later, the song went to no.
His older brother worked in a sweatshop assembling shirts.
Although he did comment to his daughter about her mother's lavish Christmas spending, "I gave up trying to get your mother to economize.
Berlin's daughter, Mary Ellen Berlin-Barrett, states that the song was actually "very personal" for her father, and was intended as an expression of his deep gratitude to the nation for merely "allowing" him, an immigrant raised in poverty, to become a successful songwriter.
He died a few years later when Irving was thirteen years old.
In 1914, Berlin wrote a ragtime revue, "Watch Your Step," which starred the couple and showcased their talents on stage.
'''Irving Berlin''' (born '''Israel Isidore Baline'''; May 11, 1888 – September 22, 1989) was an American composer and lyricist, widely considered one of the greatest songwriters in American history.
In 1922, ''Madame Butterfly'' was his first composing film debut.
After her return, she and Berlin were besieged the press, which followed them everywhere.
On one occasion, Berlin, whose face was still not known, was on a train trip and decided to entertain the fellow passengers with some music.
In 1924, when Berlin was 36, his biography, ''The Story of Irving Berlin'', was being written by Alexander Woollcott.
Morton Gould, the composer and conductor who was president of the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), of which Irving Berlin was a founder, said, "What to me is fascinating about this unique genius is that he touched so many people in so many age groups over so many years.
In 1959, Sammy Turner took the song to no.
On April 1, 1917, after President Woodrow Wilson declared that America would enter World War I, Berlin felt that Tin Pan Alley should do its duty and support the war with inspirational songs.
He has caught and immortalized in his songs what we say, what we think about, and what we believe.
It was taken to Broadway and then on to Washington, D.C. (where President Franklin D. Roosevelt attended).
Because Berlin was Jewish and she was Catholic, their life was followed in every possible detail by the press, which found the romance of an immigrant from the Lower East Side and a young heiress a good story.
Besides serving drinks, he sang made-up "blue" parodies of hit songs to the delight of customers.
Berlin returned to Tin Pan Alley after the war and in 1921 created a partnership with Sam Harris to build the Music Box Theater.
She adds that he was in his mid-50's at the time, and later declared those years with the show were the "most thrilling time of his life."
Many of the songs were for the new dances then appearing, such as the "grizzly bear", "chicken walk", or fox trot.
He liked the words to the songs but sometimes the rhythms were "kind of boggy," and he might change them.
I love this country."
''Annie Get Your Gun'' is considered to be Berlin's best musical theatre score not only because of the number of hits it contains, but because its songs successfully combine character and plot development.
The shows and movie combined raised more than $10 million for the Army, and in recognition of his contributions to troop morale, Berlin was awarded the Medal of Merit by President Harry S. Truman.
Now, with only a few years of schooling, eight-year-old Irving found it necessary to take to the streets to help support his family.
They asked him how he knew so many hit songs, and Berlin modestly replied, "I wrote them."
To them it voiced the ache of separation and the wistfulness they felt for the girl back home, for the innocence of youth...." Poet Carl Sandburg said, "Way down under this latest hit of his, Irving Berlin catches us where we love peace."
His Broadway musical and 1942 film, ''This is the Army'', with Ronald Reagan, had Kate Smith singing Berlin's "God Bless America" which was first performed in 1938.
He went so far as to send her off to Europe to find other suitors and forget Mr. Berlin.
The wedding news made the front-page of the ''New York Times''.
Berlin was then twenty-six, and the success of the show was riding on his name alone.
Herbert later became a moving force behind the creation of ASCAP, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers.
Furia notes that when Rudy Vallee first introduced the song on his radio show, the "song not only became an overnight hit, it saved Vallee's marriage: The Vallees had planned to get a divorce, but after Vallee sang Berlin's romantic lyrics on the air, "both he and his wife dissolved in tears" and decided to stay together.
As theater owner, producer and composer, he looked after every detail of his shows, from the costumes and sets to the casting and musical arrangements.
However, she notes that Porter, unlike Berlin, was a Yale-educated and wealthy Midwesterner whose songs were not successful until he was in his thirties.
''Variety'' called "Watch Your Step" the "first syncopated musical," where the "sets and the girls were gorgeous."
He would typically begin writing after dinner and continue until 4 or 5 in the morning.
Some of his songs have become holiday anthems, such as "Easter Parade", "White Christmas" and "Happy Holiday".
4 hit for the techno artist Taco in 1983.
1 country hit, 52 years after it was written.
Emotionally, he honestly absorbs the vibrations emanating from the people, manners and life of his time and, in turn, gives these impressions back to the world—simplified, clarified and glorified.
He became an instant celebrity, and the featured performer later that year at Oscar Hammerstein's vaudeville house, where he introduced dozens of other songs.
His only ability was acquired from his father's vocation as a singer, and he joined with a few other youngsters who went to saloons on the Bowery and sing to customers.
Loosely based on the life of sharpshooter Annie Oakley, the music and lyrics were written by Berlin, with a book by Herbert Fields and his sister Dorothy Fields, and directed by Joshua Logan.
Rudy Vallee performed it on his radio show, and the song was a hit for George Olsen, Connee Boswell (she was still known as Connie), and Ozzie Nelson's band.
He did, however, write a new song, "An Old-Fashioned Wedding," for the 1966 Broadway revival of ''Annie Get Your Gun'' starring Ethel Merman.
In subsequent years, it was re-recorded and became a top-10 seller for numerous artists: Frank Sinatra, Jo Stafford, Ernest Tubb, The Ravens and The Drifters.
Among Berlin's contemporaries was Cole Porter, whose music style was often considered more "witty, sophisticated, and dirty," according to musicologist Susannah McCorkle.
And in 2015, pianist and composer Hershey Felder began touring nationwide as a one-man show, portraying Berlin and performing his songs.
The song he wrote to express his grief, "When I Lost You," was his first ballad.
In 1939, Clark Gable sang it in the movie ''Idiot's Delight''.
In 1917, Berlin was drafted into the United States Army, and the news of his induction became headline news, with one paper headline reading, "Army Takes Berlin!"
The song was heard after September 11, 2001, as U.S. senators and congressmen stood on the capitol steps and sang it after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center.
Bergreen describes them as being uncharitable living quarters, "Dickensian in their meanness, filth, and insensitivity to ordinary human beings."
His first attempt at actual songwriting was "Marie From Sunny Italy," written in collaboration with the Pelham's resident pianist, Mike Nicholson.
It was an immediate popular hit and sold more than a million copies.
Biographer Philip Furia writes that newspapers rumored they were engaged before she returned from Europe, and some Broadway shows even performed skits of the "lovelorn songwriter."
His father, unable to find comparable work as a cantor in New York, took a job at a kosher meat market and gave Hebrew lessons on the side, to support his family.
For instance, in 1912 he married Dorothy Goetz, the sister of songwriter E. Ray Goetz.
But the Army only wanted Berlin, now aged 30, to do what he knew best: write songs of patriotism.
That musical revue became Berlin's first complete score with songs that "radiated musical and lyrical sophistication."
Composer Douglas Moore sets Berlin apart from all other contemporary songwriters, and includes him instead with Stephen Foster, Walt Whitman, and Carl Sandburg, as a "great American minstrel"—someone who has "caught and immortalized in his songs what we say, what we think about, and what we believe."
Instead, says music critic Stephen Holden, Berlin's songs were always simple, "exquisitely crafted street songs whose diction feels so natural that one scarcely notices the craft....they seem to flow straight out of the rhythms and inflections of everyday speech."
Some of the songs Berlin created came out of his own sadness.
It became Patsy Cline's postmortem anthem and hit no.
He used to visit ''The Music Box Theater'', which he founded and which still stands at 239 West Forty-Fifth St. From 1947 to 1989, Berlin's home in New York City was 17 Beekman Place.
During his 60-year career he wrote an estimated 1,500 songs, including the scores for 19 Broadway shows and 18 Hollywood films, with his songs nominated eight times for Academy Awards.
1 shortly after 9/11, when Celine Dion recorded it as the title track of a 9/11 benefit album.
When the 1980 U.S. Olympic hockey team pulled off the "greatest upset in sports history," referred to as the "Miracle on Ice", the players spontaneously sang it as Americans were overcome by patriotism.
For years, Mr. Mackay refused to speak to the Berlins.
Tsar Alexander III of Russia and then Tsar Nicholas II, his son, had revived with utmost brutality the anti-Jewish pogroms, which created the spontaneous mass exodus to America.
He then decided to leave home and join the city's ragged army of other young immigrants.
It was Irving Berlin who was the very first to have created a real, inherent American music.... Irving Berlin was the first to free the American song from the nauseating sentimentality which had previously characterized it, and by introducing and perfecting ragtime he had actually given us the first germ of an American musical idiom; he had sown the first seeds of an American music.
First sung in the film by Bing Crosby (along with Marjorie Reynolds), it has sold over 50 million records and stayed no.
The 1942 film ''Holiday Inn'' introduced "White Christmas", one of the most recorded songs in history.
Irving Berlin has no ''place'' in American music—he ''is'' American music.
On the origin of another of the play's leading songs, Logan described how he and Hammerstein privately discussed wanting another duet between Annie and Frank.
Irving Berlin can sing 60 that are immediately identifiable... You couldn't have a holiday without his permission."
During his six-decade career, from 1907 to 1966, he produced sheet music, Broadway shows, recordings, and scores played on radio, in films and on television, and his tunes continue to evoke powerful emotions for millions around the world.
;"Say It Isn't So" (1932)
He supervised the production and traveled with it, always singing "Oh!
It was eventually shown at military bases throughout the world, including London, North Africa, Italy, Middle East, and Pacific countries, sometimes in close proximity to battle zones.
22 for Nat Cole and no.
The show kept him away from his family for three and a half years, during which time he took neither salary nor expenses, and turned over all profits to the Army Emergency Relief Fund.
Over the decades it has earned millions for the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, to whom Berlin assigned all royalties.
ASCAP's records show that 25 of Berlin's songs reached the top of the charts and were re-recorded by dozens of famous singers over the years, such as Eddie Fisher, Al Jolson, Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra, Barbra Streisand, Linda Ronstadt, Rosemary Clooney, Doris Day, Diana Ross, Nat King Cole and Ella Fitzgerald.
When they quarreled and parted in the crepuscular bitter-sweetness of the 1920s, it was Berlin who gave eloquence to their heartbreak by way of "What'll I Do" and "Remember" and "All Alone."
Others, such as Broadway musician Anne Phillips, says simply that "the man is an American institution."
The shows earned $150,000 for a camp service center.
According to his biographer, Laurence Bergreen, as an adult Berlin admitted to no memories of his first five years in Russia except for one: "he was lying on a blanket by the side of a road, watching his house burn to the ground.
Former President Ronald Reagan, who costarred in Berlin's 1943 musical ''This Is the Army,'' said, "Nancy and I are deeply saddened by the death of a wonderfully talented man whose musical genius delighted and stirred millions and will live on forever."
While stationed with the 152nd Depot Brigade at Camp Upton, he then composed an all-soldier musical revue titled "Yip Yip Yaphank", written to be patriotic tribute to the United States Army.
According to his daughter, he usually "sweated blood" to write his songs.
Apparently the "creative spurt" in which Berlin turned out several songs for the score in a single weekend was an anomaly.
When he was fished out after going down for the third time, he was still holding in his clenched fist the five pennies he earned that day.
The ''New York Telegraph'' described how two hundred of his street friends came to see "their boy" on stage: "All the little writer could do was to finger the buttons on his coat while tears ran down his cheeks—in a vaudeville house!"
The song "Play a Simple Melody" became the first of his famous "double" songs in which two different melodies and lyrics are counterpointed against one another.
Initially the song was not recognized as a hit, however; Broadway producer Jesse Lasky was uncertain about using it, although he did include it in his “Follies” show.
They possess a permanence not generally associated with Tin Pan Alley products and it is more than remotely possible that in days to come Berlin will be looked upon as the Stephen Foster of the 20th century.
Berlin overheard their conversation, and although the show was to go into rehearsal with days, he wrote the score to "Anything You Can Do" a few hours later.
In a letter to Woollcott, Jerome Kern offered what one writer said "may be the last word" on the significance of Irving Berlin:
He also co-wrote a song aimed at ending ethnic conflict, "Let's All Be Americans Now."
''Variety'' reported that her father vowed that their marriage "would only happen 'over my dead body.'"
1 upon its release.
She died six months later of typhoid fever, which she contracted during their honeymoon in Havana.
From these seamy surroundings he became street wise, with a real and lasting education.
Prince Felix Yusupov, for instance, a recent Oxford undergraduate of Russian noble lineage and heir to the largest estate in Russia, was described by his dance partner as "wriggling around the ballroom like a demented worm, screaming for 'more ragtime and more champagne'."
Afterwards, Berlin officially announced his retirement and spent his remaining years in New York.
In 1915 he wrote the hit, "I Love a Piano", a comical and erotic ragtime love song.
As a result, they decided to elope and were married in a simple civil ceremony at the Municipal Building away from media attention.
They met in 1925, and her father opposed the match from the start.
As a result, Wilder says that many admirers of the music of Jerome Kern, Richard Rodgers and Cole Porter were unlikely to consider Berlin's work in the same category because they forgot or never realized that Berlin wrote many popular tunes, such as "Soft Lights and Sweet Music," "Supper Time," and "Cheek to Cheek."
Never having lessons, after the bar closed for the night, young Berlin would sit at a piano in the back and begin improvising tunes.
His daughter, Mary Ellin Barrett, who was 15 when she was at the opening-night performance of "This is the Army" on Broadway, remembered that when her father, who normally shunned the spotlight, appeared in the second act in soldier's garb to sing "Oh, How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning," he was greeted with a standing ovation that lasted 10 minutes.
It was easier just to make more money."
;"I've Got My Love to Keep Me Warm" (1937)
Berlin took his advice.
When the United States joined World War II after the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Berlin immediately began composing a number of patriotic songs.
He was interred in the Woodlawn Cemetery in The Bronx, New York City.
Patsy Cline", played a two-year Nashville run that ended in 1995.
Considering the fact that "White Christmas" has only eight sentences in the entire song, lyrically Mr. Berlin achieved all that was necessary to eventually sell over 100 million copies and capture the hearts of the American public at the same time.
Later, in 1908, when he was 20, Berlin took a new job at a saloon in the Union Square neighborhood.
In his final decades he retreated from public life.
He maintained an interest in the theater throughout his life, and even in his last years was known to call the Shubert Organization, his partner, to check on the receipts.
Composer Douglas Moore added:
"Every man should have a Lower East Side in his life," he said.
23 for Frank Sinatra.
On the evening following the announcement of his death, the marquee lights of Broadway playhouses were dimmed before curtain time in his memory.
It would also be the last time a Berlin song went to no.
At his 100th-birthday celebration in May 1988, violinist Isaac Stern said, "The career of Irving Berlin and American music were intertwined forever—American music was born at his piano," while songwriter Sammy Cahn pointed out:  "If a man, in a lifetime of 50 years, can point to six songs that are immediately identifiable, he has achieved something.
In 1938, "God Bless America" became the unofficial national anthem of the United States, and on September 11, 2001, members of the House of Representatives stood on the steps of the Capitol and solemnly sang "God Bless America" together.
The song returned to no.
The ''Economist'' magazine writes that "Berlin was producing a deep-felt paean to the country that had given him what he would have said was everything."
The following list includes scores mostly produced by Berlin.
Although her parents liked to celebrate every single holiday with their children.
Berlin's Civil Rights Movement support also made him a target of FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who continuously investigated him for years.
Music historian Philip Furia writes that when eight-year-old "Izzy" quit school to sell newspapers in the Bowery, he was exposed to the music and sounds coming from saloons and restaurants that lined the crowded streets.
Composer George Gershwin called him "the greatest songwriter that has ever lived", and composer Jerome Kern concluded that "Irving Berlin has no ''place'' in American music—he ''is'' American music.
His music forms a great part of the Great American Songbook.
In 2012 it was used for a flash mob wedding event in Moscow.
There, he was able to collaborate with other young songwriters, such as Edgar Leslie, Ted Snyder, Al Piantadosi, and George A. Whiting.
Berlin joined up wrote the song, "For Your Country and My Country", stating that "we must speak with the sword not the pen to show our appreciation to America for opening up her heart and welcoming every immigrant group."
190, New York City, the Scottish Rite Valley of New York City, and Mecca Shrine Temple.
George Frazier of ''Life'' magazine found Berlin to be "intensely nervous," with a habit of tapping his listener with his index finger to emphasize a point, and continually pressing his hair down in back" and "picking up any stray crumbs left on a table after a meal."
Two dancers who expressed that craze were Irene and Vernon Castle.
They usually had light romantic plots and a seemingly endless string of his new and old songs.
"White Christmas" won Berlin the Academy Award for Best Music in an Original Song, one of seven Oscar nominations he received during his career.
He sounded our deepest feelings—happiness, sadness, celebration, loneliness."
He said he did most of  work under pressure.
He went on to write the scores for 19 Broadway shows and 18 Hollywood films, with his songs nominated for Academy Awards on eight occasions.
He lived in the Bowery, taking up residence in one of the lodging houses that sheltered the thousands of other homeless boys in the Lower East Side.
It's a rare gift which sets Irving Berlin apart from all other contemporary songwriters.
Not always certain about his own writing abilities, he once asked a songwriter friend, Victor Herbert, whether he should study composition.
Each evening, when the family came home from their day's work, Bergreen writes, "they would deposit the coins they had earned that day into Lena's outspread apron."
The Philadelphia Flyers hockey team started playing it before crucial contests.
"White Christmas" alone sold over 50 million records, the top single selling song in recording history, won an ASCAP and an Academy Award, and is one of the most frequently played songs ever written.
McCorkle writes that the score "meant more to me than ever, now that I knew that he wrote it after a grueling world tour and years of separation from his wife and daughters."
Biographer Charles Hamm writes that in Berlin's free time after hours, he taught himself to play the piano.
As an adult, Berlin said he was unaware of being raised in abject poverty since he knew no other life.
In response, Berlin assigned all rights to a number of popular songs, including "Always", a song still played at weddings today.
In 1912, he married Dorothy Goetz, the sister of the songwriter E. Ray Goetz.
With few survival skills and little education, he realized that formal employment was out of the question.
How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning", which he performed himself.
Ginger Rogers, who danced to Berlin tunes with Fred Astaire, told The Associated Press upon hearing of his death that working with Mr. Berlin had been "like heaven."
Its popularity was so great that it later became the theme for all of Ziegfeld's revues, and the theme song in the 1936 film ''The Great Ziegfeld''.
He never forgot those childhood years when he "slept under tenement steps, ate scraps, and wore secondhand clothes," and described those years as hard but good.
