Also, one of Asimov's robot short stories, "The Bicentennial Man", was expanded into a novel ''The Positronic Man'' by Asimov and Robert Silverberg, and this was adapted into the 1999 movie ''Bicentennial Man'', starring Robin Williams.
The Doubleday company went on to publish five more original science fiction novels by Asimov in the 1950s, along with the six juvenile Lucky Starr novels, the latter under the pseudonym of "Paul French".
In his last volume of autobiography, Asimov wrote, "If I were not an atheist, I would believe in a God who would choose to save people on the basis of the totality of their lives and not the pattern of their words.
Meanwhile, totally artificial birth, although not specifically cloning, is the aim of the leaders of the society, sexual want is the major driving force of the main female character (albeit veiled in 1950s sensibilities), and the entire story is used to make the point that too much order is ultimately a stagnant dead end to be avoided.
The hysterically laughing Asimov was then led out of the room.
(John Campbell advised Asimov to begin his stories as late in the plot as possible.
At the end of the examination, one evaluator turned to him, smiling, and said, "What can you tell us, Mr. Asimov, about the thermodynamic properties of the compound known as thiotimoline".
The band and their impostors would likely be played by McCartney's group Wings, then at the height of their career.
He was also a close friend of ''Star Trek'' creator Gene Roddenberry, and earned a screen credit as "special science consultant" on ''Star Trek: The Motion Picture'' for advice he gave during production.
Most of his popular science books explain scientific concepts in a historical way, going as far back as possible to a time when the science in question was at its simplest stage.
Somehow it was better to say one was a humanist or an agnostic.
Thus, the dedication in Clarke's book ''Report on Planet Three'' (1972) reads: "In accordance with the terms of the Clarke-Asimov treaty, the second-best science writer dedicates this book to the second-best science-fiction writer."
This phobia influenced several of his fiction works, such as the Wendell Urth mystery stories and the ''Robot'' novels featuring Elijah Baley.
For a listing of Asimov's books in chronological order within his future history, see the ''Foundation'' series list of books.
Phonetically, both words are almost identical because in Russian 'О' in the first unstressed syllable is always pronounced as 'А'.
See ''In Memory Yet Green'' for details of that time period.)
Asimov rejected the idea that a human belief or action could merit infinite punishment.
In it they offer advice on how to maintain a positive attitude and stay productive when dealing with discouragement, distractions, rejection, and thick-headed editors.
In 1942, he published the first of his ''Foundation'' stories—later collected in the ''Foundation'' trilogy: ''Foundation'' (1951), ''Foundation and Empire'' (1952), and ''Second Foundation'' (1953)—which recount the collapse and rebirth of a vast interstellar empire in a universe of the future.
Asimov was prolific and wrote or edited more than 500 books and an estimated 90,000 letters and postcards.
Graduating at 15, he went on to Seth Low Junior College, a branch of Columbia University in Downtown Brooklyn designed to absorb some of the Jewish and Italian-American students who applied to Columbia College, then the institution's primary undergraduate school for men with quotas on the number of admissions from those ethnic groups.
**  (second Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
His first wide-ranging reference work, ''The Intelligent Man's Guide to Science'' (1960), was nominated for a National Book Award.
However, he did not make use of McCartney's brief scrap of dialogue, and probably as a consequence, McCartney rejected the story.
For many years, Asimov called himself an atheist; however, he considered the term somewhat inadequate, as it described what he did not believe rather than what he did.
After a five-minute or so wait, he was summoned back into the Examination Room and congratulated as "Dr. Asimov".
Fearing a prejudicial reaction from his graduate school evaluation board at Columbia University, Asimov asked his editor that it be released under a pseudonym, yet it appeared under his own name.
The screenplay has never been filmed and was eventually published in book form in 1994.
He patiently answered tens of thousands of questions and other mail with postcards and was pleased to give autographs.
Asimov corrected himself with a follow-up essay to ''TV Guide'' claiming that despite its inaccuracies, ''Star Trek'' was a fresh and intellectually challenging science fiction television show.
Later in life, Asimov synthesized the ''Robot'' series into a single coherent "history" that appeared in the extension of the ''Foundation'' series.
Meanwhile, the monthly ''Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction'' invited him to continue his regular nonfiction column, begun in the now-folded bimonthly companion magazine ''Venture Science Fiction Magazine'', ostensibly dedicated to popular science, but with Asimov having complete editorial freedom.
He began publishing nonfiction in 1952, co-authoring a college-level textbook called ''Biochemistry and Human Metabolism''.
Two more of his stories appeared that year, "The Weapon Too Dreadful to Use" in the May ''Amazing'' and "Trends" in the July ''Astounding''.
He published two full-length mystery novels, and wrote 66 stories about the Black Widowers, a group of men who met monthly for dinner, conversation, and a puzzle.
Many of his short stories mention or quote Gilbert and Sullivan.
The series features his fictional science of psychohistory, in which the future course of the history of large populations can be predicted.
Asimov notes in his introduction to the short story collection ''The Complete Robot'' (1982) that he was largely inspired by the almost relentless tendency of robots up to that time to fall consistently into a Frankenstein plot in which they destroyed their creators.
Roddenberry retorted respectfully with a personal letter explaining the limitations of accuracy when writing a weekly series.
Asimov was sometimes criticized for the general absence of sexuality and of extraterrestrial life in his science fiction.
Asimov wrote hard science fiction and, along with Robert A. Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke, he was considered one of the "Big Three" science fiction writers during his lifetime.
It was his personal favorite and considered by many to be equal to "Nightfall".
In his first autobiography, he indicates his support for the safety of Israel, though remaining careful to insist he is by no means a Zionist.
In 1984, the American Humanist Association (AHA) named him the Humanist of the Year.
The candy stores sold newspapers and magazines, a fact that Asimov credited as a major influence in his lifelong love of the written word, as it allowed him an unending supply of new reading material as a child that he could not have otherwise afforded.
''The Naked Sun'' (1957) deals with social issues as a core part of its central setting and motivation, depicts genetic engineering in the guise of eugenics as a fundamental part of that society, and presents the reader with inverted arcologies where a single person is the focal point of the artificial environment, as well as a hero who hails from a "normal" arcology on Earth.
However, he did submit a paper to DARPA titled "On Creativity" containing ideas on how government-based science projects could encourage team members to think more creatively.
For example, the August 25, 1985 ''Washington Post''s "Book World" section reports of ''Robots and Empire'' as follows:
This advice helped Asimov create "Reason", one of the early ''Robot'' stories.
He was dismayed over the pardon extended to Nixon by his successor: "I was not impressed by the argument that it has spared the nation an ordeal.
Asimov had two younger siblings:  a sister, Marcia (born Manya, June 17, 1922 – April 2, 2011), and a brother, Stanley (July 25, 1929&nbsp;– August 16, 1995), who was vice-president of ''New York Newsday''.
He was of medium height, stocky, with mutton chop whiskers and a distinct New York accent.
There are, however, many inconsistencies in this unification, especially in his earlier stories.
The nature of the rejection led him to believe that Campbell may have based his bias towards humans in stories on a real-world racial bias.
I finally decided that I'm a creature of emotion as well as of reason.
I've been an atheist for years and years, but somehow I felt it was intellectually unrespectable to say one was an atheist, because it assumed knowledge that one didn't have.
"Nightfall" is an archetypal example of social science fiction, a term coined by Asimov to describe a new trend in the 1940s, led by authors including Asimov and Heinlein, away from gadgets and space opera and toward speculation about the human condition.
The asteroid 5020 Asimov, a crater on the planet Mars, a Brooklyn elementary school, and a literary award are named in his honor.
**  (sequel to the Elijah Baley trilogy)
Asimov wrote of it in 1973:
Though Asimov came from a Jewish family, he appeared to hold an equivocal attitude towards Israel.
**  (early Galactic Empire)
", Asimov responded:
He vehemently opposed Richard Nixon, considering him "a crook and a liar".
The Galactic Empire novels were published as independent stories, set earlier in the same future as ''Foundation''.
By 1941, Asimov had begun selling regularly to ''Astounding'', which was then the field's leading magazine.
He freely acknowledged a number of his fellow writers as superior to himself in talent, saying of Harlan Ellison, "He is (in my opinion) one of the best writers in the world, far more skilled at the art than I am."
Campbell rejected "Cosmic Corkscrew", but encouraged Asimov to keep trying, and Asimov did.
Although he prided himself on his unornamented prose style (for which he credited Clifford D. Simak as an early influence), Asimov also enjoyed giving his longer stories complicated narrative structures, often by arranging chapters in nonchronological ways.
He was a prominent member of the Baker Street Irregulars, the leading Sherlock Holmes society, for whom he wrote an essay arguing that Professor Moriarty's work "The Dynamics of An Asteroid" involved the willful destruction of an ancient civilized planet.
He often provides nationalities, birth dates, and death dates for the scientists he mentions, as well as etymologies and pronunciation guides for technical terms.
This scholarship was a seed for his later authorship and publication of ''Asimov's Guide to the Bible'', an analysis of the historic foundations for both the Old and New Testaments.
**  (occurs before ''Foundation'')
Asimov was also a noted mystery author and a frequent contributor to ''Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine''.
An online exhibit in West Virginia University Libraries' virtually complete Asimov Collection displays features, visuals, and descriptions of some of his over 600 books, games, audio recordings, videos, and wall charts.
Janet Asimov edited ''It's Been a Good Life'' (2002), a condensed version of his three autobiographies.
Then too, it is impossible to write science fiction and really ignore religion."
The great variety of information covered in Asimov's writings once prompted Kurt Vonnegut to ask, "How does it feel to know everything?"
When discussing how that novel depicts night falling over futuristic New York City, Gunn says that Asimov's prose "need not be ashamed anywhere in literary society".
As his books ''Treasury of Humor'' and ''Asimov Laughs Again'' record, Asimov was willing to tell jokes involving God, Satan, the Garden of Eden, Jerusalem, and other religious topics, expressing the viewpoint that a good joke can do more to provoke thought than hours of philosophical discussion.
He immediately began seeing Janet O. Jeppson and married her two weeks after his divorce from Gertrude in 1973.
In his later years, Asimov found enjoyment traveling on cruise ships; on several cruises he was part of the entertainment program, giving science-themed talks aboard ships such as the RMS ''Queen Elizabeth II''.
For a brief while, his father worked in the local synagogue to enjoy the familiar surroundings and, as Isaac put it, "shine as a learned scholar" versed in the sacred writings.
He was also a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of his fictional group of mystery solvers, the Black Widowers.
* '''The Robot series:'''
** , Published with the title 'The Man Who Upset the Universe' as a 35c Ace paperback, D-125, in about 1952
Toward the end of his life, Asimov published a series of collections of limericks, mostly written by himself, starting with ''Lecherous Limericks'', which appeared in 1975.
In 1987, the Asimovs co-wrote ''How to Enjoy Writing: A Book of Aid and Comfort''.
'''Isaac Asimov''' (; born '''Isaak Ozimov''';  January 2, 1920 – April 6, 1992) was an  American author and professor of biochemistry at Boston University.
He issued many appeals for population control, reflecting a perspective articulated by people from Thomas Malthus through Paul R. Ehrlich.
From 1958, this was in a nonteaching capacity, as he turned to writing full-time (his writing income had already exceeded his academic salary).
McCartney had a vague idea for the plot and a small scrap of dialogue; he wished to make a film about a rock band whose members discover they are being impersonated by a group of extraterrestrials.
Examples include ''Guide to Science'', the three-volume set ''Understanding Physics'', and ''Asimov's Chronology of Science and Discovery'', as well as works on astronomy, mathematics, history, William Shakespeare's writing, and chemistry.
He especially worries about the safety of Israel given that it has been created among hostile neighbours, and that Jews have merely created for themselves another "Jewish ghetto".
His interest in literature manifested itself in several annotations of literary works, including ''Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare'' (1970), ''Asimov's Annotated Paradise Lost'' (1974), and ''The Annotated Gulliver's Travels'' (1980).
When he failed to secure admission to medical school, he applied to the graduate program in chemistry at Columbia; initially rejected and then only accepted on a probationary basis, Asimov completed his MA in chemistry in 1941 and earned a PhD in biochemistry in 1948.
His family immigrated to the United States when he was three years old.
Being tenured, he retained the title of associate professor, and in 1979, the university honored his writing by promoting him to full professor of biochemistry.
In December 1974, former Beatle Paul McCartney approached Asimov and asked him if he could write the screenplay for a science-fiction movie musical.
Asimov's ''Treasury of Humor'' is both a working joke book and a treatise propounding his views on humor theory.
Asimov began reading science fiction pulp magazines at a young age.
Complete with maps and tables, the guide goes through the books of the Bible in order, explaining the history of each one and the political influences that affected it, as well as biographical information about the important characters.
The robot series has led to film adaptations.
He never learned to swim or ride a bicycle; however, he did learn to drive a car after he moved to Boston.
Asimov also wrote mysteries and fantasy, as well as much nonfiction.
When asked in an interview in 1982 if he was an atheist, Asimov replied, "I am an atheist, out and out.
I don't have the evidence to prove that God doesn't exist, but I so strongly suspect he doesn't that I don't want to waste my time."
In September 1945 he was drafted into the U.S. Army; if he had not had his birth date corrected, he would have been officially 26 years old and ineligible.
Beginning in 1977, Asimov lent his name to ''Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine'' (now ''Asimov's Science Fiction'') and penned an editorial for each issue.
Taken together, they are his most famous work of science fiction, along with the ''Robot ''series.
The two main characters, both Jewish, talk over dinner, or lunch, or breakfast, about anecdotes of "George" and his friend Azazel.
During his oral examination shortly thereafter, Asimov grew concerned at the scrutiny he received.
Asimov's most famous work is the ''Foundation'' Series; his other major series are the ''Galactic Empire'' series and the ''Robot'' series.
Asimov declined, on the grounds that his ability to write freely would be impaired should he receive classified information.
In his short story collection ''Nightfall and Other Stories'', he wrote, "The writing of 'Nightfall' was a watershed in my professional career.....
Since his parents always spoke Yiddish and English with him, he never learned Russian, but he remained fluent in Yiddish as well as English.
Asimov became a staunch supporter of the Democratic Party during the New Deal, and thereafter remained a political liberal.
He adhered to McCartney's overall idea, producing a story he felt to be moving and dramatic.
They promulgated a set of rules of ethics for robots (see Three Laws of Robotics) and intelligent machines that greatly influenced other writers and thinkers in their treatment of the subject.
After the wedding the couple lived in an apartment in West Philadelphia, as Asimov was then employed at the Philadelphia Navy Yard (where two of his co-workers were L. Sprague de Camp and Robert A. Heinlein).
Furthermore, he believed that homosexuality must be considered a "moral right" on population grounds, as must all consenting adult sexual activity that does not lead to reproduction.
Cowart and Wymer's ''Dictionary of Literary Biography'' (1981) gives a possible reason:
His physical dexterity was very poor.
The ''Robot'' series was originally separate from the ''Foundation'' series.
Asimov coined the term 'robotics' without suspecting that it might be an original word; at the time, he believed it was simply the natural analogue of words such as mechanics and hydraulics, but for robots.
While acknowledging the Oxford Dictionary reference, he incorrectly states that the word was first printed about one-third of the way down the first column of page 100, ''Astounding Science Fiction'', March 1942 printing of his short story "Runaround".
Unwilling to write only weak alien races, and concerned that a confrontation would jeopardize his and Campbell's friendship, he decided he would not write about aliens at all.
He did, however, continue to identify himself as a nonobservant Jew, as stated in his introduction to Jack Dann's anthology of Jewish science fiction, ''Wandering Stars'': "I attend no services and follow no ritual and have never undergone that curious puberty rite, the bar mitzvah.
He published ''Asimov's Guide to the Bible'' in two volumes—covering the Old Testament in 1967 and the New Testament in 1969—and then combined them into one 1,300-page volume in 1981.
For example, the first third of ''The Gods Themselves'' begins with Chapter 6, then backtracks to fill in earlier material.
This lasted until about 1958, all but ending after publication of ''The Naked Sun''.
He claimed he wrote ''The Gods Themselves'' to respond to these criticisms, which often came from New Wave science fiction (and mostly British) writers.
**  (Republic of Trantor still expanding)
In 1970, they separated and Asimov moved back to New York, this time to the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where he lived for the rest of his life.
He was a vocal opponent of the Vietnam War in the 1960s and in a television interview during the early 1970s he publicly endorsed George McGovern.
In his humor book ''Asimov Laughs Again'', he describes Boston driving as "anarchy on wheels."
Asimov considered himself a feminist even before Women's Liberation became a widespread movement; he joked that he wished women to be free "because I hate it when they charge".
Isaac Asimov was an atheist, a humanist, and a rationalist.
The first of the ''F&SF'' columns appeared in November 1958, and they followed uninterrupted thereafter, with 399 entries, until Asimov's terminal illness.
Some readers have been put off by this, complaining that the nonlinearity is not worth the trouble and adversely affects the clarity of the story.
After becoming established in the U.S. his parents owned a succession of candy stores, in which everyone in the family was expected to work.
This allows days to be named, e.g., "D-73" instead of December 1 (due to December 1 being the 73rd day of the 4th quarter).
In between, he spent three years during World War II working as a civilian at the Philadelphia Navy Yard's Naval Air Experimental Station, living in the Walnut Hill section of West Philadelphia from 1942 to 1945.
His early career, dominated by science fiction, began with short stories in 1939 and novels in 1950.
In the third volume of his autobiography, he recalls a childhood desire to own a magazine stand in a New York City Subway station, within which he could enclose himself and listen to the rumble of passing trains while reading.
As the years passed, in fact, it became evident that I had written a 'classic'."
Asimov was born between October 4, 1919 and January 2, 1920 in Petrovichi near Klimovichi, then Gomel Governorate in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (now Smolensk Oblast, Russia) to Anna Rachel (née Berman) and Judah Asimov, a family of Jewish millers.
Other than books by Gunn and Patrouch, a relative dearth of "literary" criticism exists on Asimov (particularly when compared to the sheer volume of his output).
I think he would prefer an honest and righteous atheist to a TV preacher whose every word is God, God, God, and whose every deed is foul, foul, foul."
He does not praise all of Asimov's fiction (nor does Patrouch), but he does call some passages in ''The Caves of Steel'' "reminiscent of Proust".
More positronic robot stories were republished in book form as ''The Rest of the Robots''.
(In his letter to Charlotte and Denis Plimmer, who had previously interviewed him for ''Daily Telegraph Magazine'', Tolkien said that he enjoyed the science fiction of Isaac Asimov.)
John W. Campbell, then editor of ''Astounding Science Fiction'', had a strong formative influence on Asimov and eventually became a personal friend.
Gunn's 1982 book goes into considerable depth commenting upon each of Asimov's novels published to that date.
When new science fiction magazines, notably ''Galaxy'' magazine and ''The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction'', appeared in the 1950s, Asimov began publishing short stories in them as well.
It divides the year into four seasons (named A–D) of 13 weeks (91 days) each.
Asimov suffered a heart attack in 1977, and had triple bypass surgery in December 1983.
Over the next quarter century, he wrote only four science fiction novels.
The director criticizes the fictionalized Asimov ("Gregory Laborian") for having an extremely nonvisual style, making it difficult to adapt his work, and the author explains that he relies on ideas and dialogue rather than description to get his points across.
His later novels, written with more female characters but in essentially the same prose style as his early SF stories, brought this matter to a wider audience.
Asimov believed his most enduring contributions would be his "Three Laws of Robotics" and the ''Foundation'' series (see ''Yours, Isaac Asimov,'' p.&nbsp;329).
Asimov married Gertrude Blugerman (1917, Toronto, Canada – 1990, Boston, USA) on July 26, 1942.
In the mid-1930s he came into contact with science fiction fandom, particularly the circle that became the Futurians.
Nevertheless, in response to these criticisms, he wrote ''The Gods Themselves'', which contains aliens and alien sex.
From then until his death, Asimov published several more sequels and prequels to his existing novels, tying them together in a way he had not originally anticipated, making a unified series.
The book won the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1972, and the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1973.
Following the brief orbit of the first man-made satellite Sputnik I by the USSR in 1957, his production of nonfiction, particularly popular science books, greatly increased, with a consequent drop in his science fiction output.
In the Hugo Award-winning novella "Gold", Asimov describes an author clearly based on himself who has one of his books (''The Gods Themselves'') adapted into a "compu-drama", essentially photo-realistic computer animation.
In his autobiographical writings, such as ''Gold'' ("Women and Science Fiction"), he acknowledges this and responds by pointing to inexperience.
The second part (of three) of the novel is set on an alien world with three sexes, and the sexual behavior of these creatures is extensively depicted.
Asimov was a claustrophile: he enjoyed small, enclosed spaces.
The book won a Hugo Award in 1995.
In September 1941, ''Astounding'' published the 32nd story Asimov wrote, "Nightfall", which has been described as one of "the most famous science-fiction stories of all time".
During his childhood, his father and mother observed Orthodox Jewish traditions, though not as stringently as they had in Petrovichi; they did not, however, force their beliefs upon young Isaac.
**  (third Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
Furthermore, the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' credits his science fiction for introducing the words 'positronic' (an entirely fictional technology), 'psychohistory' (which is also used for a different study on historical motivations) and 'robotics' into the English language.
Asimov wrote a critical essay on ''Star Trek's'' scientific accuracy for ''TV Guide'' magazine.
His last nonfiction book, ''Our Angry Earth'' (1991, co-written with his long-time friend, science fiction author Frederik Pohl), deals with elements of the environmental crisis such as overpopulation, oil dependence, war, global warming, and the destruction of the ozone layer.
I was suddenly taken seriously and the world of science fiction became aware that I existed.
The feelings of friendship and respect between Asimov and Arthur C. Clarke were demonstrated by the so-called "Clarke-Asimov Treaty of Park Avenue", put together as they shared a cab ride in New York.
Many years later, due to pressure by fans on Asimov to write another, he continued the series with ''Foundation's Edge'' (1982) and ''Foundation and Earth'' (1986), and then went back to before the original trilogy with ''Prelude to Foundation'' (1988) and ''Forward the Foundation'' (1992).
Thus, he grew up without strong religious influences, coming to believe that the ''Torah'' represented Hebrew mythology in the same way that the ''Iliad'' recorded Greek mythology.
Asimov first began reading the science fiction pulp magazines sold in his family's confectionery store in 1929.
* '''Foundation prequels:'''
Asimov replied that he only knew how it felt to have the 'reputation' of omniscience—"Uneasy".
Asimov was a founding member of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (now the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry) and is listed in its Pantheon of Skeptics.
Asimov's family considered disclosing his condition just after his death, but the controversy that erupted the same year when Arthur Ashe announced his own HIV infection (also contracted from a blood transfusion during heart surgery) convinced them otherwise.
In fairness, Gunn's and Patrouch's respective studies of Asimov both take the stand that a clear, direct prose style is still a style.
Asimov wrote several essays on the social contentions of his time, including "Thinking About Thinking" and "Science: Knock Plastic".
The book appeared under the Doubleday imprint in January 1950 with the title of ''Pebble in the Sky''.
Asimov described Carl Sagan as one of only two people he ever met whose intellect surpassed his own.
The family name derives from a word for winter crops, in which his great-grandfather dealt.
Asimov's tendency to contort his timelines is perhaps most apparent in his later novel ''Nemesis'', in which one group of characters lives in the "present" and another group starts in the "past", beginning 15 years earlier and gradually moving toward the time period of the first group.
Somewhat later, the term "psychohistory" was applied by others to research of the effects of psychology on history.
The early 1950s also saw the Gnome Press company publishing one collection of Asimov's positronic robot stories as ''I, Robot'' and his ''Foundation'' stories and novelettes as the three books of the ''Foundation trilogy''.
From 1985 until his death in 1992, he served as president of the AHA, an honorary appointment.
", though he later remarked that he believed then that he was merely using an existing word, as he stated in ''Gold'' ("The Robot Chronicles").
It refers to any system closed with respect to matter and open with respect to energy capable of sustaining human life indefinitely.
He began by writing science fiction mysteries such as his Wendell Urth stories, but soon moved on to writing "pure" mysteries.
He was survived by his second wife, Janet, and his children from his first marriage.
