Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem, valid for any exponent.
In an article entitled "Newton, prisms, and the 'opticks' of tunable lasers" it is indicated that Newton in his book ''Opticks'' was the first to show a diagram using a prism as a beam expander.
Science also slowly came to realise the difference between perception of colour and mathematisable optics.
In 1936, a descendant offered the papers for sale at Sotheby’s.
He was close to the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier.
Many of these advancements continue to be the underpinnings of non-relativistic technologies in the modern world.
His biographer, scientist Sir David Brewster, who compiled his manuscripts for over 20 years, wrote about the controversy in well-known book ''Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton'', where he explains that Newton questioned the veracity of those passages, but he never denied the doctrine of Trinity as such.
Newton's monument (1731) can be seen in Westminster Abbey, at the north of the entrance to the choir against the choir screen, near his tomb.
Newton argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement, and Charles II, whose permission was needed, accepted this argument.
He started as a subsizar—paying his way by performing valet's duties—until he was awarded a scholarship in 1664, which guaranteed him four more years until he would get his M.A.
In the same book he describes, via diagrams, the use of multiple-prism arrays.
Their interest encouraged him to publish his notes, ''Of Colours'', which he later expanded into the work ''Opticks''.
Newton gave Boyle's ideas their completion through mathematical proofs and, perhaps more importantly, was very successful in popularising them.
From 1670 to 1672, Newton lectured on optics.
In his correspondence, Newton claimed that in writing the ''Principia'' "I had an eye upon such Principles as might work with considering men for the belief of a Deity".
It has been argued that Newton conceived of his work at the Mint as a continuation of his alchemical work.
A large bronze statue, ''Newton, after William Blake'', by Eduardo Paolozzi, dated 1995 and inspired by Blake's etching, dominates the piazza of the British Library in London.
It is known from his notebooks that Newton was grappling in the late 1660s with the idea that terrestrial gravity extends, in an inverse-square proportion, to the Moon; however it took him two decades to develop the full-fledged theory.
Their intense relationship came to an abrupt and unexplained end in 1693, and at the same time Newton suffered a nervous breakdown.
He approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms (a precursor to Euler's summation formula) and was the first to use power series with confidence and to revert power series.
It is a matter of debate as whether he intended to do this or not.
They contributed to many advances during the Industrial Revolution which soon followed and were not improved upon for more than 200 years.
He took charge of England's great recoining, somewhat treading on the toes of Lord Lucas, Governor of the Tower (and securing the job of deputy comptroller of the temporary Chester branch for Edmond Halley).
John Maynard Keynes, who acquired many of Newton's writings on alchemy, stated that "Newton was not the first of the age of reason: He was the last of the magicians."
Few remember that he spent half his life muddling with alchemy, looking for the philosopher's stone.
In the same work, Newton presented a calculus-like method of geometrical analysis using 'first and last ratios', gave the first analytical determination (based on Boyle's law) of the speed of sound in air, inferred the oblateness of Earth's spheroidal figure, accounted for the precession of the equinoxes as a result of the Moon's gravitational attraction on the Earth's oblateness, initiated the gravitational study of the irregularities in the motion of the moon, provided a theory for the determination of the orbits of comets, and much more.
From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen, Newton was educated at The King's School, Grantham which taught Latin and Greek but no mathematics worth mentioning.
Soon after Newton had obtained his B.A.
In Newton's eyes, worshipping Christ as God was idolatry, to him the fundamental sin.
Motivated partly by a desire for revenge against a schoolyard bully, he became the top-ranked student, distinguishing himself mainly by building sundials and models of windmills.
He also divided them into four types, satisfying different equations, and in 1717 Stirling, probably with Newton's help, proved that every cubic was one of these four types.
In late 1668 he was able to produce this first ''reflecting telescope''.
John Maynard Keynes was one of about three dozen bidders who obtained part of the collection at auction.
He considered light to be made up of extremely subtle corpuscles, that ordinary matter was made of grosser corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical transmutation "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another,&nbsp;... and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the Particles of Light which enter their Composition?"
He used the Latin word ''gravitas'' (weight) for the effect that would become known as gravity, and defined the law of universal gravitation.
A descendant of the original tree can be seen growing outside the main gate of Trinity College, Cambridge, below the room Newton lived in when he studied there.
Monboddo and Samuel Clarke resisted elements of Newton's work, but eventually rationalised it to conform with their strong religious views of nature.
The King's School, Grantham, claims that the tree was purchased by the school, uprooted and transported to the headmaster's garden some years later.
Newton also claimed that the four types could be obtained by plane projection from one of them, and this was proved in 1731.
Also, the use of these prismatic beam expanders led to the multiple-prism dispersion theory.
The contact with the theosophist Henry More, revived his interest in alchemy.
Voltaire may have been present at his funeral.
However, later physicists favoured a purely wavelike explanation of light to account for the interference patterns and the general phenomenon of diffraction.
Albert Einstein kept a picture of Newton on his study wall alongside ones of Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell.
Newton "recognized Christ as a divine mediator between God and man, who was subordinate to the Father who created him."
A bachelor, he had divested much of his estate to relatives during his last years, and died intestate.
In September of that year, Newton had a breakdown which included sending wild accusatory letters to his friends Samuel Pepys and John Locke.
This was published in 2013 as a chapter in a book edited by Bechler.
The widespread belief that he died a virgin has been commented on by writers such as mathematician Charles Hutton, economist John Maynard Keynes, and physicist Carl Sagan.
The ordered and dynamically informed Universe could be understood, and must be understood, by an active reason.
John Conduitt, Newton's assistant at the Royal Mint and husband of Newton's niece, also described the event when he wrote about Newton's life:
When Robert Hooke criticised some of Newton's ideas, Newton was so offended that he withdrew from public debate.
A century later, Pierre-Simon Laplace's work "Celestial Mechanics" had a natural explanation for why the planet orbits don't require periodic divine intervention.
His book ''Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica'' ("Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy"), first published in 1687, laid the foundations for classical mechanics.
He also showed that coloured light does not change its properties by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various objects.
It was Newton's conception of the Universe based upon Natural and rationally understandable laws that became one of the seeds for Enlightenment ideology.
Historian Stephen D. Snobelen says of Newton, "Isaac Newton was a heretic.
Most modern historians believe that Newton and Leibniz developed calculus independently, although with very different notations.
In April 1667, he returned to Cambridge and in October was elected as a fellow of Trinity.
By deriving Kepler's laws of planetary motion from his mathematical description of gravity, and then using the same principles to account for the trajectories of comets, the tides, the precession of the equinoxes, and other phenomena, Newton removed the last doubts about the validity of the heliocentric model of the Solar System.
Thus began the bitter controversy which marred the lives of both Newton and Leibniz until the latter's death in 1716.
Although the laws of motion and universal gravitation became Newton's best-known discoveries, he warned against using them to view the Universe as a mere machine, as if akin to a great clock.
He guessed the same force was responsible for other orbital motions, and hence named it "universal gravitation".
Newton noted that regardless of whether it was reflected, scattered, or transmitted, it remained the same colour.
Royal Society scientists deemed Newton to have made the greater overall contribution.
Today's quantum mechanics, photons, and the idea of wave–particle duality bear only a minor resemblance to Newton's understanding of light.
In 1691, Duillier started to write a new version of Newton's ''Principia'', and corresponded with Leibniz.
He said, "Gravity explains the motions of the planets, but it cannot explain who set the planets in motion.
In predicting this he said, "This I mention not to assert when the time of the end shall be, but to put a stop to the rash conjectures of fanciful men who are frequently predicting the time of the end, and by doing so bring the sacred prophesies into discredit as often as their predictions fail."
These appointments were intended as sinecures, but Newton took them seriously, retiring from his Cambridge duties in 1701, and exercising his power to reform the currency and punish clippers and counterfeiters.
Beyond his work on the mathematical sciences, Newton dedicated much of his time to the study of biblical chronology and alchemy, but most of his work in those areas remained unpublished until long after his death.
Snobelen concludes that Newton was at least a Socinian sympathiser (he owned and had thoroughly read at least eight Socinian books), possibly an Arian and almost certainly an anti-trinitarian.
In 1693, the relationship between Duillier and Newton deteriorated and the book was never completed.
Occasionally it has been suggested that Newton published almost nothing about it until 1693, and did not give a full account until 1704, while Leibniz began publishing a full account of his methods in 1684.
In 1704, Newton published ''Opticks'', in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light.
Thus a conflict between Newton's religious views and Anglican orthodoxy was averted.
He set down in his notebook a series of 'Quaestiones' about mechanical philosophy as he found it.
Later works—''The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended'' (1728) and ''Observations Upon the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse of St. John'' (1733)—were published after his death.
Newton's position was vigorously defended by his follower Samuel Clarke in a famous correspondence.
Building the design, the first known functional reflecting telescope, today known as a Newtonian telescope, involved solving the problem of a suitable mirror material and shaping technique.
Although it has been said that the apple story is a myth and that he did not arrive at his theory of gravity in any single moment, acquaintances of Newton (such as William Stukeley, whose manuscript account of 1752 has been made available by the Royal Society) do in fact confirm the incident, though not the cartoon version that the apple actually hit Newton's head.
Some of their correspondence has survived.
With the ''Principia'', Newton became internationally recognised.
This inference was proved by
He verged on soundlike waves to explain the repeated pattern of reflection and transmission by thin films (Opticks Bk.II, Props.
At that time, the college's teachings were based on those of Aristotle, whom Newton supplemented with modern philosophers such as Descartes, and astronomers such as Galileo and Thomas Street, through whom he learned of Kepler's work.
Nevertheless, Newton managed to avoid it by means of a special permission from Charles II (see "Middle years" section below).
He was especially interested in prophecy, but for him, "the great apostasy was trinitarianism."
However, by 1675 the issue could not be avoided and by then his unconventional views stood in the way.
Newton was the second scientist to be knighted, after Sir Francis Bacon.
He believed in a rationally immanent world, but he rejected the hylozoism implicit in Leibniz and Baruch Spinoza.
Starting in 1699, other members of the Royal Society (of which Newton was a member) accused Leibniz of plagiarism.
A relief panel depicts putti using instruments such as a telescope and prism.
For this, Leibniz lampooned him: "God Almighty wants to wind up his watch from time to time: otherwise it would cease to move.
But Newton insisted that divine intervention would eventually be required to reform the system, due to the slow growth of instabilities.
He found 72 of the 78 species of cubics.
This study was cast into doubt when it was later found that Newton himself wrote the study's concluding remarks on Leibniz.
He replaced the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and repulsion between particles.
The German poet and scientist, Goethe, could not shake the Newtonian foundation but "one hole Goethe did find in Newton's armour,&nbsp;... Newton had committed himself to the doctrine that refraction without colour was impossible.
This followed stimulation by a brief exchange of letters in 1679–80 with Hooke, who had been appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence, and who opened a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions.
Disguised as a habitué of bars and taverns, he gathered much of that evidence himself.
Because of this, the ''Principia'' has been called "a book dense with the theory and application of the infinitesimal calculus" in modern times and "lequel est presque tout de ce calcul" ('nearly all of it is of this calculus') in Newton's time.
Newton himself often told the story that he was inspired to formulate his theory of gravitation by watching the fall of an apple from a tree.
Descartes was the most important early influence on Newton the mathematician.
His prediction that Earth should be shaped as an oblate spheroid was later vindicated by the measurements of Maupertuis, La Condamine, and others, which helped convince most Continental European scientists of the superiority of Newtonian mechanics over the earlier system of Descartes.
Some 278 years after Newton's discussion, multiple-prism beam expanders became central to the development of narrow-linewidth tunable lasers.
Up till this point he had not thought much about religion and had twice signed his agreement to the thirty-nine articles, the basis of Church of England doctrine.
During that time, any Fellow of a college at Cambridge or Oxford was required to take holy orders and become an ordained Anglican priest.
In his later life, Newton became president of the Royal Society.
Their most significant trade was slaves, and according to his niece, he lost around £20,000.
The monument features a figure of Newton reclining on top of a sarcophagus, his right elbow resting on several of his great books and his left hand pointing to a scroll with a mathematical design.
Newton's postulate of an invisible force able to act over vast distances led to him being criticised for introducing "occult agencies" into science.
Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles, which were refracted by accelerating into a denser medium.
In 1679, Newton returned to his work on (celestial) mechanics by considering gravitation and its effect on the orbits of planets with reference to Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
The knighthood is likely to have been motivated by political considerations connected with the Parliamentary election in May 1705, rather than any recognition of Newton's scientific work or services as Master of the Mint.
Despite this, convicting even the most flagrant criminals could be extremely difficult.
Newton made seminal contributions to optics, and he shares credit with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz for the development of calculus.
Newton successfully prosecuted 28 coiners.
But&nbsp;... he never made a public declaration of his private faith—which the orthodox would have deemed extremely radical.
Various trees are claimed to be "the" apple tree which Newton describes.
In his position at the Royal Society, Newton made an enemy of John Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, by prematurely publishing Flamsteed's ''Historia Coelestis Britannica'', which Newton had used in his studies.
However, Newton proved equal to the task.
Had he not relied on the occult idea of action at a distance, across a vacuum, he might not have developed his theory of gravity.
Thus, he observed that colour is the result of objects interacting with already-coloured light rather than objects generating the colour themselves.
It was executed by the sculptor Michael Rysbrack (1694–1770) in white and grey marble with design by the architect William Kent.
(See also Isaac Newton's occult studies.)
After his death, Newton's hair was examined and found to contain mercury, probably resulting from his alchemical pursuits.
Young and Fresnel combined Newton's particle theory with Huygens' wave theory to show that colour is the visible manifestation of light's wavelength.
All of Newton's known writings on alchemy are currently being put online in a project undertaken by Indiana University: "The Chymistry of Isaac Newton".
His work on the subject usually referred to as fluxions or calculus, seen in a manuscript of October 1666, is now published among Newton's mathematical papers.
He was born on 25 December 1642, and died on 20 March 1726/7.—Translation from G.L.
He therefore thought that the object-glasses of telescopes must for ever remain imperfect, achromatism and refraction being incompatible.
This inadvertently resulted in a silver shortage as silver coins were used to pay for imports, while exports were paid for in gold, effectively moving Britain from the silver standard to its first gold standard.
Newton's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin's decimals.
When Newton received his MA and became a Fellow of the "College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity" in 1667, he made the commitment that "I will either set Theology as the object of my studies and will take holy orders when the time prescribed by these statutes 7 years arrives, or I will resign from the college."
Newton died in his sleep in London on 20 March 1727 (OS 20 March 1726; NS 31 March 1727) and was buried in Westminster Abbey.
The author of the manuscript ''De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas'', sent by Isaac Barrow to John Collins in June 1669, was identified by Barrow in a letter sent to Collins in August of that year as:
This was at a time when there was no clear distinction between alchemy and science.
He formulated an empirical law of cooling, studied the speed of sound, and introduced the notion of a Newtonian fluid.
His father, also named Isaac Newton, had died three months before.
Newton remains influential to today's scientists, as demonstrated by a 2005 survey of members of Britain's Royal Society (formerly headed by Newton) asking who had the greater effect on the history of science, Newton or Einstein.
His studies had impressed the Lucasian professor, Isaac Barrow, who was more anxious to develop his own religious and administrative potential (he became master of Trinity two years later), and in 1669, Newton succeeded him, only one year after he received his M.A.
Newton had himself made a justice of the peace in all the home counties—there is a draft of a letter regarding this matter stuck into Newton's personal first edition of his ''Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica'' which he must have been amending at the time.
Although it was claimed that he was once engaged, Newton never married.
In a minority view, T.C.
Descartes freed plane curves from the Greek and Macedonian limitation to conic sections, and Newton followed his lead by classifying the cubic curves in the plane.
They demonstrate an extensive knowledge of early church writings and show that in the conflict between Athanasius and Arius which defined the Creed, he took the side of Arius, the loser, who rejected the conventional view of the Trinity.
Newton was one of many people who lost heavily when the South Sea Company collapsed.
This is known as Newton's theory of colour.
Of an estimated ten million words of writing in Newton's papers, about one million deal with alchemy.
Henry Stokes, master at the King's School, persuaded his mother to send him back to school so that he might complete his education.
Dollond to be wrong."
His half-niece, Catherine Barton Conduitt, served as his hostess in social affairs at his house on Jermyn Street in London; he was her "very loving Uncle", according to his letter to her when she was recovering from smallpox.
For all the barriers placed to prosecution, and separating the branches of government, English law still had ancient and formidable customs of authority.
By 1672 he had started to record his theological researches in notebooks which he showed to no one and which have only recently been examined.
The young Isaac disliked his stepfather and maintained some enmity towards his mother for marrying him, as revealed by this entry in a list of sins committed up to the age of 19: "Threatening my father and mother Smith to burn them and the house over them."
The ''Principia'' is not written in the language of calculus either as we know it or as Newton's (later) 'dot' notation would write it.
At the last moment in 1675 he received a dispensation from the government that excused him and all future holders of the Lucasian chair.
Together, these laws describe the relationship between any object, the forces acting upon it and the resulting motion, laying the foundation for classical mechanics.
He also devoted a great deal of time to alchemy (see above).
Some of the content contained in Newton's papers could have been considered heretical by the church.
Newton was also a member of the Parliament of England for Cambridge University in 1689–90 and 1701–2, but according to some accounts his only comments were to complain about a cold draught in the chamber and request that the window be closed.
His work extensively uses calculus in geometric form based on limiting values of the ratios of vanishing small quantities: in the ''Principia'' itself, Newton gave demonstration of this under the name of 'the method of first and last ratios' and explained why he put his expositions in this form, remarking also that 'hereby the same thing is performed as by the method of indivisibles'.
That was the pebble by the seashore he really wanted to find."
For Newton, it was not precisely the centre of the Sun or any other body that could be considered at rest, but rather "the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the Planets is to be esteem'd the Centre of the World", and this centre of gravity "either is at rest or moves uniformly forward in a right line" (Newton adopted the "at rest" alternative in view of common consent that the centre, wherever it was, was at rest).
Newton wrote works on textual criticism, most notably ''An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture''.
Subsequent to Newton, much has been amended.
In 1999, an opinion poll of 100 of today's leading physicists voted Einstein the "greatest physicist ever;" with Newton the runner-up, while a parallel survey of rank-and-file physicists by the site PhysicsWeb gave the top spot to Newton.
Newton also constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator, using a glass globe.
This work also demonstrated that the motion of objects on Earth and of celestial bodies could be described by the same principles.
He was however noted by Cambridge diarist Abraham de la Pryme as having rebuked students who were frightening local residents by claiming that a house was haunted.
Here is a quote from the project web site.
Diligent, sagacious and faithful, in his expositions of nature, antiquity and the holy Scriptures, he vindicated by his philosophy the majesty of God mighty and good, and expressed the simplicity of the Gospel in his manners.
But the two men remained generally on poor terms until Hooke's death.
Newton communicated his results to Edmond Halley and to the Royal Society in ''De motu corporum in gyrum'', a tract written on about nine sheets which was copied into the Royal Society's Register Book in December 1684.
Mortals rejoice that there has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race!
The project is headed by William R. Newman.
His note to the latter included the charge that Locke "endeavoured to embroil me with woemen".
'''Sir Isaac Newton'''  (; 25 December 1642 – 20 March 1726/27) was an English physicist and mathematician (described in his own day as a "natural philosopher") who is widely recognised as one of the most influential scientists of all time and a key figure in the scientific revolution.
In his ''Hypothesis of Light'' of 1675, Newton posited the existence of the ether to transmit forces between particles.
Newton moved to London to take up the post of warden of the Royal Mint in 1696, a position that he had obtained through the patronage of Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, then Chancellor of the Exchequer.
(Here Newton used what became his famous expression ''"hypotheses non-fingo"'').
Newton's work has been said "to distinctly advance every branch of mathematics then studied".
After the exchanges with Hooke, Newton worked out proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector (see Newton's law of universal gravitation – History and ''De motu corporum in gyrum'').
From 1978 until 1988, an image of Newton designed by Harry Ecclestone appeared on Series D £1 banknotes issued by the Bank of England (the last £1 notes to be issued by the Bank of England).
He had not, it seems, sufficient foresight to make it a perpetual motion."
However, this type of view 'has lost support of late with the availability of Newton's theological papers', and now most scholars identify Newton as an Antitrinitarian monotheist.
The question was not whether gravity existed, but whether it extended so far from Earth that it could also be the force holding the Moon to its orbit.
degree in August 1665, the university temporarily closed as a precaution against the Great Plague.
Newton was made President of the Royal Society in 1703 and an associate of the French Académie des Sciences.
God governs all things and knows all that is or can be done."
Modern scholarship has revealed that Newton's analysis and resynthesis of white light owes a debt to corpuscular alchemy.
His use of methods involving "one or more orders of the infinitesimally small" is present in his ''De motu corporum in gyrum'' of 1684 and in his papers on motion "during the two decades preceding 1684".
Alchemical texts mix artisanal knowledge with philosophical speculation, often hidden behind layers of wordplay, allegory, and imagery to protect craft secrets.
(Leibniz's notation and "differential Method", nowadays recognised as much more convenient notations, were adopted by continental European mathematicians, and after 1820 or so, also by British mathematicians.)
He was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 1669 on Barrow's recommendation.
He hid his faith so well that scholars are still unravelling his personal beliefs."
Isaac Newton was born according to the Julian calendar (in use in England at the time) on Christmas Day, 25 December 1642 (NS 4 January 1643), at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire.
A statue of Isaac Newton, looking at an apple at his feet, can be seen at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History.
In addition to his work on calculus, as a mathematician Newton contributed to the study of power series, generalised the binomial theorem to non-integer exponents, developed a method for approximating the roots of a function, and classified most of the cubic plane curves.
