Muslim tradition views Muhammad (c. 570 – June 8, 632) as the seal of the prophets.
Sufi practices such as veneration of saints have faced stiff opposition from followers of Salafism and Wahhabism, who have sometimes physically attacked Sufi places of worship, leading to deterioration in Sufi–Salafi relations.
Many of the Sharia laws that differ are devised through Ijtihad where there is no such ruling in the Quran or the Hadiths of Islamic prophet Muhammad regarding a similar case.
Islam is often seen as having the simplest doctrines of the major religions.
Polyandry, a form of polygamy, where a woman takes on two or more husbands is prohibited in Islam.
The existence of this aversion to creating images of animate beings has been used to explain the prevalence of calligraphy, tessellation and pattern as key aspects of Islamic artistic culture.
In Iran, revolution replaced a secular regime with an Islamic state.
Jihad only becomes an individual duty for those vested with authority.
In 656, Uthman was also killed, and Ali assumed the position of caliph.
Building upon earlier efforts such as those by Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn al-Qayyim, the movement allegedly seeks to uphold monotheism and purify Islam of what they see as later innovations.
Therefore, wealth is taxed through Zakat, but trade is not taxed.
In Islam, God is beyond all comprehension and Muslims are not expected to visualize God.
Religious concepts and practices include the five pillars of Islam, which are obligatory acts of worship, and following Islamic law, which touches on virtually every aspect of life and society, from banking and welfare to the status of women and the environment.
Religious missions converted Volga Bulgaria to Islam.
Still others describe Islam as an action of returning to God—more than just a verbal affirmation of faith.
The Muslims in China who were descended from earlier immigration began to assimilate by adopting Chinese names and culture while Nanjing became an important center of Islamic study.
In Medina, Al-Masjid al-Nabawi, or the Prophet's Mosque, was also a place of refuge for the poor.
A state was established in accordance with Islamic economic jurisprudence.
A revival movement during this period was an 18th-century Salafi movement led by Ibn Abd al-Wahhab in today's Saudi Arabia.
The trials and tribulations preceding and during the ''Qiyāmah'' are described in the Quran and the hadith, and also in the commentaries of scholars.
The ''Shariʻah'' (literally "the path leading to the watering place") is Islamic law and constitutes a system of duties that are incumbent upon a Muslim by virtue of his or her religious belief.
Al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir completed the most commonly cited commentaries on the Quran, the Tafsir al-Tabari in the 9th century and the Tafsir ibn Kathir in the 14th century, respectively.
The Shahadah, which is the basic creed of Islam that must be recited under oath with the specific statement: "''''", or "I testify that there is no god but God, Muhammad is the messenger of God."
The earliest three generations of Muslims are known as the Salaf, with the companions of Muhammad being known as the Sahaba.
The Bayt al-mal ran for hundreds of years under the Rashidun Caliphate in the 7th century and continued through the Umayyad period and well into the Abbasid era.
The generation after the death of Muhammad but contemporaries of his companions are known as the Tabi‘un, followed by the Tabi‘ al-Tabi‘in.
During the time of Muhammad, any money that went to the state, was immediately used to help the poor.
This made it easier for the different communities to integrate into the Islamic State and that assisted in the quick expansion of the Islamic State.
The Salafi movement claim to take the first three generations of Muslims, known as the salaf, as exemplary models.
Then for legal matters not found in the Quran or the Hadith, they follow four madh'habs (schools of thought): Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki and Shafi'i, established around the teachings of Abū Ḥanīfa, Ahmad bin Hanbal, Malik ibn Anas and al-Shafi'i respectively.
This decline was evident culturally; while Taqi al-Din founded an observatory in Istanbul and the Jai Singh Observatory was built in the 18th century, there was not a single Muslim country with a major observatory by the twentieth century.
Islam is a verbal noun originating from the triliteral root s-l-m which forms a large class of words mostly relating to concepts of wholeness, submission, safeness and peace.
The expansion of the Muslim world involved various caliphates and empires, traders and conversion to Islam by missionary activities.
Hadith Qudsi is a sub-category of hadith, regarded as verbatim words of God quoted by Muhammad but is not part of the Quran.
Mu'awiyah appointed his son, Yazid I, as successor and after Mu'awiyah's death in 680, the "Second Fitna" broke out, where Husayn ibn Ali was killed at the Battle of Karbala, a significant event in Shia Islam.
The word ''mosque'' in English refers to all types of buildings dedicated to Islamic worship, although there is a distinction in Arabic between the smaller, privately owned mosque and the larger, "collective" mosque (''masjid jāmi''').
Salat is compulsory but flexibility in the specifics is allowed depending on circumstances.
It is not a sect of Islam and its adherents belong to the various Muslim denominations.
Then in 634, Umar formally established the welfare state Bayt al-mal.
Mystical traditions in Islam place these heavenly delights in the context of an ecstatic awareness of God.
Rulings over actions can be categorized as those that are obligatory (''fardh'') recommendanded (''mustahabb''), permissible (''mubah''), not recommended (''makrooh'') and prohibited (''haraam'').
While the Sunnis believe that a Caliph should be elected by the community, Shia's believe that Muhammad appointed his son-in-law, Ali ibn Abi Talib, as his successor and only certain descendants of Ali could be Imams.
Jihad also refers to one's striving to attain religious and moral perfection.
The chronologically earlier suras, revealed at Mecca, are primarily concerned with ethical and spiritual topics.
After the death of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq who is considered the sixth Imam by the Twelvers and the Ismaili's, the Ismailis recognized his son Isma'il ibn Jafar as his successor whereas the Twelver Shia's (Ithna Asheri) followed his other son Musa al-Kadhim as the seventh Imam.
Al-Shafi'i also codified a method to determine the reliability of hadith.
The Ja'fari jurisprudence was formed from the teachings of Ja'far al-Sadiq while the four Sunni Madh'habs, the Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki and Shafi'i, were established around the teachings of Abū Ḥanīfa, Ahmad bin Hanbal, Malik ibn Anas and al-Shafi'i respectively.
According to the Quran, angels do not possess free will, and therefore worship and obey God in total obedience.
* parameters for exogenous political alliances
Profit sharing and venture capital where the lender is also exposed to risk is acceptable.
Islam is set to grow faster than any other major world religion, reaching a total number of 2.76 billion (an increase of 73%).
The set of rules governing proper pronunciation is called ''tajwid''.
For others, flexibility is allowed depending on circumstances, but missed fasts usually must be made up quickly.
The Qurʼan in Surat al-Zalzalah describes this as, "So whoever does an atom's weight of good will see it (99:7) and whoever does an atom's weight of evil will see it (99:8)."
This era is sometimes called the "Islamic Golden Age".
Other smaller groups include the Bohra as well as the Alawites and Alevi.
Sizable Muslim communities are also found in Europe, China, Russia, and the Americas.
About half a million Muslims were killed in Cambodia by communists who, it is argued, viewed them as their primary enemy and wished to exterminate them since they stood out and worshipped their own god.
Under Abu Bakr the Muslims expanded into Syria after putting down a rebellion by Arab tribes in an episode known as the Ridda wars, or "Wars of Apostasy".
The term is sometimes said to be offensive or insulting because it suggests that a human being is central to Muslims' religion, and/or because it parallels the formation of ''Christianity'', and thus supposedly equates Muhammad and Jesus Christ.
Many of them, such as the largest narrator of hadith Abu Hureyrah, recorded and compiled what would constitute the sunnah.
Under them, the territory under Muslim rule expanded deeply into the parts of the Persian and Byzantine territories.
With religious guidance increasingly available electronically, Muslims are able to access views that are strict enough for them rather than rely on state clerics who are often seen as stooges.
The Quran and the hadith also urge a Muslim to give even more as an act of voluntary alms-giving called ''''.
Malik ibn Anas wrote one of the earliest books on Islamic jurisprudence, the Muwatta, as a consensus of the opinion of those jurists.
Here, Sufis and their different orders are the main religious sources.
This includes greeting others with "''as-salamu `alaykum''" ("peace be unto you"), saying ''bismillah'' ("in the name of God") before meals, and using only the right hand for eating and drinking.
Umar also introduced Child Benefit and Pensions for the children and the elderly.
Perhaps the most important expression of Islamic architecture is that of the mosque.
There, with the Medinan converts (''Ansar'') and the Meccan migrants (''Muhajirun''), Muhammad in Medina established his political and religious authority.
''Sawm'' is not obligatory for several groups for whom it would constitute an undue burden.
The Zaydis consider Zayd ibn Ali, the uncle of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq, as their fifth Imam, and follow a different line of succession after him.
Much of it has evolved with the objective to prevent innovation or alteration in the original religion, known as bid‘ah.
Varying cultures have an effect on mosque architecture.
Nader Shah, who overthrew the Safavids, attempted to improve relations with Sunnis by propagating the integration of Shiism by calling it the Jaafari Madh'hab.
This example is preserved in traditions known as hadith, which recount his words, his actions, and his personal characteristics.
The Qurʼan lists several sins that can condemn a person to hell, such as disbelief in God ( ''''), and dishonesty; however, the Qurʼan makes it clear God will forgive the sins of those who repent if he so wills.
Issues relating to the authenticity and morality of the Quran, the Islamic holy book, are also discussed by critics.
Recent surveys report that large proportions of Muslims in some parts of the world self-identify as "just Muslim", although there is little published analysis available regarding the motivations underlying this response.
The concept of divine will is referred to as ''al-qadā wa'l-qadar'' (), which literally derives from a root that means ''to measure''.
In Turkey, the Islamist AK Party has democratically been in power for about a decade, while Islamist parties did well in elections following the Arab Spring.
Rumi wrote some of the finest Persian poetry and is still one of the best selling poets in America.
Originating in Mecca, it quickly spread in the Arabian peninsula and by the 8th century the Islamic empire was extended from Iberia in the west to the Indus river in the east.
Islam, like Judaism, has no clergy in the sacerdotal sense, such as priests who mediate between God and people.
* a tax system for supporting the community in time of conflict
There are no intermediaries, such as clergy, to contact God who states, "I am nearer to him than (his) jugular vein."
A mosque is a place of worship for Muslims, who often refer to it by its Arabic name, ''masjid''.
The Arab tribes in the rest of Arabia then formed a confederation and during the Battle of the Trench (March–April 627) besieged Medina, intent on finishing off Islam.
The first four caliphs are known in Sunni Islam as ''al-khulafā' ar-rāshidūn'' ("Rightly Guided Caliphs").
It is a lunar calendar with days lasting from sunset to sunset.
Honorific titles given to scholars include shiekh, mullah and maulvi.
Muslims must repeat the ''shahadah'' in prayer, and non-Muslims wishing to convert to Islam are required to recite the creed.
Islamic holy days fall on fixed dates of the lunar calendar, which means that they occur in different seasons in different years in the Gregorian calendar.
''Muslim'', the word for an adherent of Islam, is the active participle of the same verb form, and means "one who submits" or "one who surrenders".
In the Hadith of Gabriel, ''islām'' is presented as one part of a triad that includes ''imān'' (faith), and ''ihsān'' (excellence), where ''islām'' is defined theologically as Tawhid, historically by asserting that Muhammad is messenger of God, and doctrinally by mandating five basic and fundamental pillars of practice.
The standard copies of the Quran were also distributed throughout the Islamic State.
Muslims believe that angels are made of light.
The Constitution of Medina was formulated, instituting a number of rights and responsibilities for the Muslim, Jewish, Christian and pagan communities of Medina, bringing them within the fold of one community—the Ummah.
Legal institutions introduced include the trust and charitable trust (Waqf).
"() Muslims repudiate polytheism and idolatry, called Shirk, and reject the Christian doctrine of the Trinity and divinity of Jesus.
In the Middle East, non-Arab countries such as Turkey and Iran are the largest Muslim-majority countries; in Africa, Egypt and Nigeria have the most populous Muslim communities.
In the 19th century, the Deobandi and Barelwi movements were initiated.
Ahl al-Hadith is a movement that deemphasized sources of jurisprudence outside the quran and sunnah, such as informed opinion (ra'y).
Secular powers such as the Chinese Red Guards closed many mosques and destroyed Qurans, and Communist Albania became the first country to ban the practice of every religion.
A school of jurisprudence is referred to as a ''madhab'' ().
When Umar was assassinated by Persians in 644, the election of Uthman as successor was met with increasing opposition.
The government paid scientists the equivalent salary of professional athletes today.
The number of Muslims worldwide increased from 200 million in 1900 to 551&nbsp;million in 1970, and tripled to 1.6&nbsp;billion by 2010.
The largest denomination in Islam is Sunni Islam, which makes up 75%–90% of all Muslims and is arguably the world's largest religious denomination.
The Umayyad dynasty conquered the Maghreb, the Iberian Peninsula, Narbonnese Gaul and Sindh.
Muslim jurists consult the ''hadith'' ("reports"), or the written record of Prophet Muhammad's life, to both supplement the Quran and assist with its interpretation.
The doctorate is argued to date back to the licenses to teach in Muslim law schools.
In the 9th century, ash-Shafi'i provided a theoretical basis for Islamic law by codifying the principles of jurisprudence in his book ''ar-Risālah''.
Finally, "Islamic civilization" may also refer to the aspects of the synthesized culture of the early Caliphates, including that of non-Muslims, sometimes referred to as "Islamicate".
The majority and oldest group among Shia at that time, the Zaydis, named after the great grandson of Ali, the scholar Zayd ibn Ali, used the Hanafi jurisprudence, as did most Sunnis.
Muslims usually view "the Quran" as the original scripture as revealed in Arabic and that any translations are necessarily deficient, which are regarded only as commentaries on the Quran.
The Arabic word for angel ( '''') means "messenger", like its counterparts in Hebrew (''malʾákh'') and Greek (''angelos'').
An important pioneer in this, Ibn al-Haytham is regarded as the father of the modern scientific method and often referred to as the "world's first true scientist".
Muhammad provided an example, which is recorded in the hadith books, showing how he practically implemented those rules in a society.
Other non-Arab Muslims might use different names as much as Allah, for instance "Tanrı" in Turkish, "Khodā" in Persian or '''' in Urdu.
Muslims believe that prophets are human and not divine, though some are able to perform miracles to prove their claim.
The first Muslims states independent of a unified Muslim state emerged from the Berber Revolt (739/740-743).
In classical Islamic law, the penalty for apostasy (leaving a religion) in Islam is death.
In Turkey, the military carried out coups to oust Islamist governments, and headscarves were banned in official buildings, as also happened in Tunisia.
At the same time, Meccan trade routes were cut off as Muhammad brought surrounding desert tribes under his control.
Most Muslims are of one of two denominations: Sunni (75–90%) or Shia (10–20%).
In wake of the recent multiculturalism trend, Islam's influence on the ability of Muslim immigrants in the West to assimilate has been criticized.
'''Islam''' (; , '''' ; is the religion articulated by the Quran, a text considered by its adherents to be the verbatim word of God (''''), and, for the vast majority of adherents, by the teachings and normative example (called the ''sunnah'', composed of accounts called ''hadith'') of Muhammad ( 570–8 June 632 CE).
Belief in angels is fundamental to the faith of Islam.
About 13% of Muslims live in Indonesia, the largest Muslim-majority country, 32% in South Asia, 20% in the Middle East, and 15% in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The groom is required to pay a bridal gift (''mahr'') to the bride, as stipulated in the contract.
Sunni Muslims also go by the name ''Ahl as-Sunnah'' which means "people of the tradition of Muhammad".
Most families in the Islamic world are monogamous as the rule is a conditional permission not a recommendation.
Muslims also believe that Islam is the original, complete and universal version of a primordial faith that was revealed many times before through prophets including Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus.
At least one in five Muslims in at least 22 countries self-identify in this way.
Muslims therefore do not generally share the perceptions of angelic pictorial depictions, such as those found in Western Art.
Within a few years, two battles took place against the Meccan forces: first, the Battle of Badr in 624 - a Muslim victory, and then a year later, when the Meccans returned to Medina, the Battle of Uhud, which ended inconclusively.
The amount of zakat to be paid on capital assets (e.g.
It is also controversially used to denote the cultural aspects of traditionally Muslim people.
Sixty percent of Muslims are between the ages of 16 and 59, while only 7% are aged 60+ (the smallest percentage of any major religion).
It is considered a religious obligation (as opposed to voluntary charity) that the well-off owe to the needy because their wealth is seen as a "trust from God's bounty".
Belief in the "Day of Resurrection", ''Yawm al-Qiyāmah'' () is also crucial for Muslims.
It is argued that the data used by Copernicus for his heliocentric conclusions was gathered and that Al-Jahiz proposed a theory of natural selection.
Islam is a Abrahamic monotheistic religion that upholds that God is one and incomparable and that the purpose of existence is to worship God.
Classical Sufi scholars have focused on the reparation of the heart and turning it away from all else but God by making use of "intuitive and emotional faculties" that one must be trained to use.
Sunni Muslims practice Nikah Misyar, a similar marriage arrangement.
The fast is to encourage a feeling of nearness to God, and during it Muslims should express their gratitude for and dependence on him, atone for their past sins, and think of the needy.
For most Twelver Shias, offensive jihad can only be declared by a divinely appointed leader of the Muslim community, and as such is suspended since Muhammad al-Mahdi's occultation in 868 AD.
Four fundamental evidence, codified by ash-Shafi'i, used are, in order of precedence: the Quran, the Hadith (the practice of Muhammad), the consensus of the Muslim jurists (''ijma''), and analogical reasoning (''qiyas'').
Liberal Islam is a movement that attempts to reconcile religious tradition with modern norms of secular governance and human rights.
However, data provided by the San Diego State University's International Population Center to ''U.S.
The Barelvi and Deobandi movements of Sunni Islam accept the validity of all four Sunni madh'habs.
For example, North African and Spanish Islamic architecture such as the Great Mosque of Kairouan contain marble and porphyry columns from Roman and Byzantine buildings, while mosques in Indonesia often have multi-tiered roofs from local Javan styles.
Sufism enjoyed a strong revival in central Asia and South Asia.
As a result, they believe that Ali ibn Abi Talib was the first ''Imam'' (leader), rejecting the legitimacy of the previous Muslim caliphs Abu Bakr, Uthman ibn al-Affan and Umar ibn al-Khattab.
According to the Pew Research Center, Islam is set to equal Christianity in number of adherents by the year 2050.
The descendants of Muhammad's uncle Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib rallied discontented non-Arab converts (''mawali''), poor Arabs, and some Shi'a against the Umayyads and overthrew them, inaugurating the Abbasid dynasty in 750.
money) is 2.5% (1/40) per year, for people who are not poor.
Local populations of Jews and indigenous Christians, persecuted as religious minorities and taxed heavily to finance the Byzantine–Sassanid Wars, often aided Muslims to take over their lands from the Byzantines and Persians, resulting in exceptionally speedy conquests.
According to BBC News, the rates of growth of Islam in Europe reveal that the growing number of Muslims is due primarily to immigration and higher birth rates.
Caliphs such as Mamun al Rashid and Al-Mu'tasim made the mutazilite philosophy an official creed and imposed it upon Muslims to follow.
Most estimates indicate that the People's Republic of China has approximately 20 to 30 million Muslims (1.5% to 2% of the population).
If the population felt comfortable with it, it was just and they used Ijtihad to deduce that it did not conflict with the Quran or the Hadith.
Sunni Muslims also practice Nikah 'urfi.
Someone who studies the science of hadith is called a muhaddith.
Jamal-al-Din al-Afghani, along with his acolyte Muhammad Abduh, have been credited as forerunners of the Islamic revival.
Islam spread with Muslim trade networks and Sufi orders activity that extended into Sub-Saharan Africa, Central Asia and the Malay archipelago.
named Himself al-Muḥīṭ, the All-Embracing.
Referred to as Wahhabi, their self designation is Muwahiddun (unitarians).
Within Islamic jurisprudence, jihad is usually taken to mean military exertion against non-believer/non-Muslim/Muslim combatants.
The basic unit of Islamic society is the family, and Islam defines the obligations and legal rights of family members.
Mu'tazila was a Greek influenced school of speculative theology called kalam, which refers to dialectic.
The Meccan élite felt that Muhammad was destabilising their social order by preaching about one God and about racial equality, and that in the process he gave ideas to the poor and to their slaves.
In some verses, there is stress on the quality of Islam as an internal conviction: "Whomsoever God desires to guide, He opens his heart to Islam."
Pictorial depictions of angels are generally avoided in Islamic Art, as the idea of giving form to anything immaterial is not accepted.
''Yawm al-Qiyāmah'' is also identified in the Quran as ''Yawm ad-Dīn'' (), "Day of Religion"; ''as-sāʿah'' (), "the Last Hour"; and ''al-Qāriʿah'' (), "The Clatterer".
Abu Bakr, a companion and close friend of Muhammad, was made the first caliph.
They are (1) the creed (shahadah), (2) daily prayers (salat), (3) almsgiving (zakah), (4) fasting during Ramadan and (5) the pilgrimage to Mecca (hajj) at least once in a lifetime if you are financially and physically able to.
A qadi is a judge in an Islamic court.
Muslims believe that God finally sent Muhammad as the last law bearing prophet (''Seal of the Prophets'') to convey the divine message to the whole world (to sum up and to finalize the word of God).
The practice of an individual interpretating law with independent reasoning is called ijtihad.
Public hospitals established during this time (called Bimaristan hospitals), are considered "the first hospitals" in the modern sense of the word, and issued the first medical diplomas to license doctors.
By the 19th century the British Empire had formally ended the Mughal dynasty in India.
As for the Quran, Muslims consider it to be both the unaltered and the final revelation of God.
Faith (Iman) in the Islamic creed (Aqidah) is often represented as the six articles of faith, notably spelled out in the Hadith of Gabriel.
Objects of criticism include the morality of the life of Muhammad, the last law bearing prophet of Islam, both in his public and personal life.
Imam () is a leadership position, often used in the context of conducting Islamic worship services.
Grabbing other people's land is also prohibited.
The Pillars of Islam (''arkan al-Islam''; also ''arkan ad-din'', "pillars of religion") are five basic acts in Islam, considered obligatory for all believers.
* a judicial system for resolving disputes where non-Muslims could also use their own laws and have their own judges.
Some Shia branches label other Shia branches that do not agree with their doctrine as Ghulat.
According to the Quran, the prophets were instructed by God to bring the "will of God" to the peoples of the nations.
These hadiths, recounting Muhammad's words, actions, and personal characteristics, are preserved in traditions known as Al-Kutub Al-Sittah (six major books).
The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), consisting of Muslim countries, was established in 1969 after the burning of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem.
Traditional Sufis, such as Bayazid Bastami, Jalaluddin Rumi, Haji Bektash Veli, Junaid Baghdadi, and Al-Ghazali, argued for Sufism being based upon the tenets of Islam and the teachings of Muhammad.
* a system for granting protection of individuals
A comprehensive 2009 demographic study of 232 countries and territories reported that 23% of the global population, or 1.57&nbsp;billion people, are Muslims.
Everything, good and bad, is believed to have been decreed.
The majority accepted the legitimacy of the three rulers prior to Ali, and became known as Sunnis.
Muslims identify the prophets of Islam ( '''' ) as those humans chosen by God to be his messengers.
