When completed, the airport will be the largest in Pakistan.
Zone I consists mainly of all the developed residential sectors while Zone II consists of the under-developed residential sectors.
File:Crescent and Star Monument.jpg|Star and Crescent Monument near the start of Shakarparian
A patch of this Highway from Zero point till Faisal Mosque is known as Faisal Avenue (8th Avenue).
Excavations have revealed evidence of a prehistoric culture.
The wettest month is July, with heavy rainfalls and evening thunderstorms with the possibility of cloudburst and flooding.
The city is the political seat of Pakistan and is administered by the Islamabad Metropolitan Corporation, supported by the Capital Development Authority (CDA).
Islamabad had an estimated population of around 1.67 million in 2011 which according to the estimate of Population Census Organization will rise to around 2&nbsp;million in 2020.
File:Said Pur Village.jpg|Saidpur villagekami
The complex includes Liaquat Gymnasium for indoor games, Mushaf Squash Complex and Jinnah Stadium for outdoor games, which is a venue for regular national and international events.
Other examples of intertwined Islamic and modern architecture include Pakistan Monument and Faisal Mosque.
The tech parks are located in Evacuee Trust Complex and Awami Markaz.
PIMS is divided into five administrative branches.
The city is home to Pakistan's National Monument.
Islamabad is linked to Rawalpindi through the Faizabad Interchange, which has a daily traffic volume of about 48,000 vehicles.
File:Glorious Sunset in Islamabad.jpg|Sunset over the Lake View Park
The airport is the third largest in Pakistan and is located outside Islamabad, in Chaklala, Rawalpindi.
Simli Dam is  north of Islamabad.
Islamabad's micro-climate is regulated by three artificial reservoirs: Rawal, Simli, and Khanpur Dam.
The newly selected location of Islamabad was closer to the army headquarters in Rawalpindi and the disputed territory of Kashmir in the north.
Rudimentary stones recovered from the terraces of the Soan River testify to the endeavours of early man in the inter-glacial period.
Some important places include the Jinnah Convention Centre and Serena Hotel in G-5, the Red Mosque in G-6, and the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences, the largest medical complex in the capital, located in G-8.
Islamabad also has various rock climbing spots in the Margalla Hills.
One end of the Indus Valley Civilization flourished here between the 23rd and 18th centuries BC.
Saidpur village is supposedly named after Said Khan, the son of Sultan Sarang Khan.
Islamabad's architecture is a combination of modernity and old Islamic and regional traditions.
This will be the first green field airport in Pakistan with an area of .
The mother tongue of the majority of the population is Punjabi, at 68% and the major dialect is Pothohari dialect.
Each residential sector is identified by a letter of the alphabet and a number, and covers an area of approximately 2&nbsp;km&nbsp;× 2&nbsp;km (&nbsp;mi&nbsp;× &nbsp;mi).
The largest hospital in Islamabad is Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) hospital.
However, Islamabad city is part of the Islamabad Capital Territory, while Rawalpindi is part of Rawalpindi District, which is part of province of Punjab .
Other notable structures are: Secretariat Complex designed by Gio Ponti, Prime Minister’s secretariat based on Mughal architecture and the National Assembly by Edward Durell Stone.
Rawat Fort in the region was built by the Gakhars in 16th century and contains the grave of the Gakhar chief, Sultan Sarang Khan.
Golra Sharif Junction railway station of Islamabad is situated near Sector G-13 on main railway line; a railway line takes off to Multan via Western Punjab from this station.
F series contains sectors F-5 to F-17; some sectors are still under-developed.
The Saudi-Pak Tower is an example of the integration of modern architecture with traditional styles.
Islamabad has attracted people from all over Pakistan, making it one of the most cosmopolitan and urbanised cities of Pakistan.
Islamabad Capital Territory is divided into eight zones: Administrative Zone, Commercial District, Educational Sector, Industrial Sector, Diplomatic Enclave, Residential Areas, Rural Areas and Green Area.
The capital was not moved directly from Karachi to Islamabad; it was first shifted temporarily to Rawalpindi in the early sixties and then to Islamabad when the essential development work was completed in 1966.
Islamabad is ranked very high on the Human Development Index, equivalent to that of Belgium.
In 2004, the Urs was attended by more than 1.2&nbsp;million people.
The city is home to Islamabad United which won the first ever Pakistan Super League in 2016.
Islamabad Gandhara International Airport is under construction at Fateh Jang to cope with the increasing number of passengers.
Pakistan needed a capital that was easily accessible from all parts of the country.
The hospital has 70 qualified consultants in almost all specialties, 150 IPD beds and OPD facilities in 35 different specialisations.
Later the area was an early settlement of the Aryan community.
To the northeast of the city lies the hill station of Murree, and to the north lies the Haripur District of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
The Maternal and Child Health Care Center is a training institute with an attached hospital of 125 beds offering different clinical and operational services.
There are three pools for children.
The Shah Faisal Mosque is a fusion of contemporary architecture with a more traditional large triangular prayer hall and four minarets, designed by Vedat Dalokay, a Turkish architect and built with the help of funding provided by King Faisal of Saudi Arabia.
Islamabad was built during the 1960s to replace Karachi as Pakistan's capital.
There are 16 recognised universities in Islamabad with a total enrolment of 372,974 students and 30,144 teachers.
The Gender Parity Index in Islamabad is 0.93 compared to the 0.95 national average.
Kahuta lies on the southeast, Taxila, Wah Cantt, and Attock District to the northwest, Gujar Khan, Rawat, and Mandrah on the southeast, and the metropolis of Rawalpindi to the south and southwest.
In 1958, a commission was constituted to select a suitable site for the national capital with particular emphasis on location, climate, logistics, and defence requirements along with other attributes.
, Islamabad LTU (Large Tax Unit) was responsible for Rs 371 billion in tax revenue, which amounts to 20% of all the revenue collected by Federal Board of Revenue.
Loi Bher Forest is situated along the Islamabad Highway, covering an area of .
The highest recorded temperature was  on 23 June 2005 while the lowest temperature was  on 17 January 1967.
Traditionally, development in Pakistan was focused on the colonial centre of Karachi, and President Ayub Khan wanted it equally distributed.
The murals on the inside of the large petals of Pakistan Monument are based on Islamic architecture.
After extensive study, research, and a thorough review of potential sites, the commission recommended the area northeast of Rawalpindi in 1959.
The hospital consists of a 100-bed facility and 10 major departments: Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pediatric, General Medicine, General Surgery, Intensive Care Unit/Coronary Care Unit, Orthopedics, Ophthalmology, Pathology, Radiology, and Dental Department.
File:Day time front view of Pakistan Monument.JPG|Pakistan Monument
The seven star hotel was designed by WS Atkins PLC.
Lahore and Peshawar are linked to Islamabad through a network of motorways, which has significantly reduced traveling times between these cities.
The sectors are lettered from A to I, and each sector is divided into four numbered sub-sectors.
Few swimmers, however, demand more hygienic conditions in showers and rest rooms.
Islamabad is located  SSW of Muzaffarabad,  east of Peshawar,  NNW of Lahore, and  WSW of Srinagar, the capital of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
The E Sectors are named from E-7 to E-17.
When the master plan for Islamabad was drawn up in 1960, Islamabad and Rawalpindi, along with the adjoining areas, was to be integrated to form a large metropolitan area called Islamabad/Rawalpindi Metropolitan Area.
The newly built Islamabad Stock Exchange Towers is another example of modern architecture in the city.
The shrine of Bari Imam was built by Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb.
In the city, temperatures stay mild, with  snowfall over the higher elevations points on nearby hill stations, notably Murree and Nathia Gali.
PIMS consists of five academic institutes: Quaid-e-Azam Postgraduate Medical College, College of Nursing, College of Medical Technology, School of Nursing, and Mother and Child Health Center.
Zone IV and V consist of Islamabad Park, and rural areas of the city.
The total migrant population of the city is 1 million, with the majority (691,977) coming from Punjab.
Awami Markaz houses 36 IT companies while Evacuee Trust house 29 companies.
However, to date only two highways have been constructed: Kashmir Highway (the former Murree Highway) and Islamabad Highway.
On 23 July 2001, Islamabad received a record-breaking  of rainfall in just 10 hours.
Another road connect Islamabad to Kolti Sattian via Lehtrar.
Other universities include Air University, Bahria University, Center for Advanced Studies in Engineering, Federal Urdu University of Arts, Science and Technology, Hamdard University, National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, Capital University of Science & Technology, National Defence University, Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University, National University of Modern Languages, Iqra University, International Islamic University, Virtual University of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah University and The Millennium University College.
Islamabad Hospital is the major component with a 592-bed facility and 22 medical and surgical specialties.
Total enrolment of students in all categories is 267,992; 138,272 for boys and 129,720 for girls.
F-5 is an important sector for the software industry in Islamabad, as the two software technology parks are located here.
Islamabad city is divided into five major zones: Zone I, Zone II, Zone III, Zone IV, and Zone V. Out of these, Zone IV is the largest in area.
The F and G series contains the most developed sectors.
PIMS functions as a National Reference Center and provides specialised diagnostic and curative services.
File:Gate of Pharwala Fort toward the Swaan stream.JPG|15th century Pharwala Fort beside the Swaan River
The second largest religion is Christianity, with 4.07% of the population, 0.94% in rural areas and 5.70% in the city.
The average daily turnover of the stock exchange is over 1 million shares.
All major cities and towns are accessible through regular trains and bus services running mostly from the neighbouring city of Rawalpindi.
Per 1998 census in urban areas the percentage of Muslims is 97.83%.
File:Rawat Fort.JPG|Rawat Fort, built by the Gakhars in the 16th century
A national highway N-80 connects Islamabad to Kohat via Fateh Jang while a highway connects Islamabad to Rawalkot via Kahuta and Azad Patan.
The hottest month is June, where average highs routinely exceed .
Most of the top ranked universities; National University of Sciences and Technology, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology and Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences, also have their headquarters in the capital.
Sectors E-8 and E-9 contain the campuses of Bahria University, Air University, and the National Defence University.
Islamabad is itself situated on G.T Road (N-5); in the southern patch from Highway Chowk till Swan camp and in the norther patch from Motorway Chowk till Nicholson square.
Smaller populations emigrated from Federally Administered Tribal Areas, Balochistan, and Gilgit–Baltistan.
In fiscal year 2004–2005, over 2.88&nbsp;million passengers used Benazir Bhutto International Airport and 23,436 aircraft movements were registered.
The Lok Virsa Museum in Islamabad preserves a wide variety of expressions of folk and traditional cultural legacy of Pakistan.
Zone III consists primarily of the Margalla Hills and Margalla Hills National Park.
File:Chaghi Monument.JPG|Chaghi Monument
The I sectors are numbered from I-8 to I-18.
Only 2.73% of the population is above 65 years of age; 37.90% is below the age of 15.
Winters generally feature dense fog in the mornings and sunny afternoons.
Many great armies such as those of Zahiruddin Babur, Genghis Khan, Timur and Ahmad Shah Durrani used the corridor through Islamabad on their way to invade the rest of the Indian Subcontinent.
In rural areas this percentage is 98.80%.
Karachi, a business centre, was also considered unsuitable partly because of intervention of business interests in government affairs.
The city is home to the Faisal Mosque, the largest mosque in South Asia and the fourth largest mosque in the world.
It was the heaviest rainfall in Islamabad in the past 100 years and the highest rainfall in 24 hours as well.
It is located near the Shakarparian hills and boasts a large display of embroidered costumes, jewellery, musical instruments, woodwork, utensils and folkloristic objects from the region and other parts of Pakistan.
Plans of constructing Margalla Avenue are also underway.
Islamabad has experienced a series of terrorist incidents including the July 2007 Siege of Lal Masjid (Red Mosque), the June 2008 Danish embassy bombing, and the September 2008 Marriott bombing.
The majority of the population lies in the age group of 15–64 years, around 59.38%.
In October 2005, the city suffered some damage due to the 2005 Kashmir earthquake which had a magnitude of 7.6.
The D series has seven sectors (D-11 to D-17), of which only sector D-12 is completely developed.
Islamabad Capital Territory, located on the Pothohar Plateau of the Punjab region, is considered one of the earliest sites of human settlement in Asia.
Series A, B, and C are still underdeveloped.
It contains six major facilities: Surgical and Allied Specialties, Medical and Allied Specialties, Diagnostic Facilities, Operation Theatre, Critical Care (NICU, PICU, Isolation & Accident Emergency), and a Blood Bank.
The Soan River flows into the city through Zone V.
It uses dedicated bus lanes for all of its route covering 24 bus stations.
The shrine of Sufi mystic Pir Meher Ali Shah is located at Golra Sharif, which has a rich cultural heritage of the pre-Islamic period.
Construction of the Rawalpindi-Islamabad Metrobus began on 28 February 2014 which was completed in March 2015, with 60 buses plying on the route.
The region is home to many Hindu temples that are preserved, showing the history of Hindu civilisation and architecture in the region..
The temperatures range from  in January to  in June.
The city is home to sixteen recognised universities, including the Quaid-i-Azam University and the National University of Science and Technology.
A Greek firm of architects, Konstantinos Apostolos Doxiadis, designed the master plan of the city based on a grid plan which was triangular in shape with its apex towards the Margalla Hills.
of the city consists of Margalla Hills National Park.
The coolest month is January.
Hinduism accounts for 0.02% of the population, and other minorities 0.03%.
Islamabad Stock Exchange, founded in 1989, is Pakistan's third largest stock exchange after Karachi Stock Exchange and Lahore Stock Exchange.
This series is located at the foot of Margalla Hills.
The event is one of the largest religious gatherings in Islamabad.
File:Pak Secretariat buildings,Islamabad by Usman Ghani.jpg|Pakistan Secretariat
File:Hassle Bassle Islamabad.jpg|view of Blue Area, the commercial hub of the city.
File:Daman-E-Koh.jpg|Daman-e-Koh Park
Many foreigners and diplomatic personnel are housed in these sectors.
Islam is the largest religion in the city, with 95.53% of the population Muslim.
The Centaurus is an example of modern architecture under construction in Islamabad.
The beige-coloured edifice is trimmed with blue tile works in Islamic tradition, and is one of Islamabad's tallest buildings.
The 500-year-old village was converted into the a place of Hindu worship by a Mughal commander, Raja Man Singh.
File:Islamabad Metro Bus.JPG|Rawalpindi-Islamabad Metrobus near The Centaurus.
Children's Hospital is a 230-bed hospital completed in 1985.
'''Islamabad''' (; , , ) is the capital city of Pakistan located within the federal Islamabad Capital Territory.
The city has an elaborate surveillance system with 1,900 CCTV cameras contributing towards one of the lowest crime rates in the country.
The H sectors are numbered H-8 through H-17.
Offered facilities include Tennis courts, a basketball court with fibre-glass boards and a Futsal ground which introduced artificial turf to the people of Islamabad.
The exchange has 118 members with 104 corporate bodies and 18 individual members.
Moreover, Islamabad is also situated on Rawalpindi-Srinagar Kashmir Road which is also called as N-75 from Islamabad till Kohala and Islamabad-Murree Expressway from Satra Meel, Islamabad till Lower Topa, Murree (an alternate old route is also available from Satra Meel till Lower Topa via Murree City).
Items of pottery and utensils dating back to prehistory have been found.
A further  area is known as the Specified Area, with the Margala Hills in the north and northeast.
The modern capital and the ancient Gakhar city of Rawalpindi stand side by side and are commonly referred to as the Twin Cities, where no exact boundary exists between the two cities.
The area would consist of the developing Islamabad, the old colonial cantonment city of Rawalpindi, and Margalla Hills National Park, including surrounding rural areas.
The labour force of Islamabad is 185,213 and the unemployment rate is 15.70%.
10.26% have a bachelor or equivalent degree while 5.2% have a master or equivalent degree.
Urdu, the national language of the country, is predominantly spoken within the city as well as English.
Initially, it was proposed that the three areas would be connected by four major highways: Murree Highway, Islamabad Highway, Soan Highway, and Capital Highway.
Around 210,614 of the migrated population came from Sindh and rest from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Azad Kashmir.
The Rawalpindi Development Authority lookafter the project with a cost of approximately Rs 24 billion, which was shared by both the Federal government and the provincial government of Punjab.
Airports: Islamabad is connected to major destinations around the world through Benazir Bhutto International Airport, previously known as Islamabad International Airport.
When Pakistan gained independence in 1947, the southern port city of Karachi was its first national capital.
These facilities attract a large gathering on weekends.
M-1 Motorway connects Islamabad with Peshawar and is  long.
As the capital city it has hosted a number of important meetings, such as the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit.
Islamabad is located in the Pothohar Plateau in the northeastern part of the country, between Rawalpindi District and the Margalla Hills National Park to the north.
Moreover, Karachi having tropical weather conditions, was located at one end of the country, making it vulnerable to attacks from the Arabian Sea.
The world's second largest general university by enrolment, Allama Iqbal Open University is located in Islamabad for distance education.
There are 178 boys only institutes, 175 girls only, and 551 mixed institutes in Islamabad.
G sectors are numbered G-5 through G-17.
The main administrative authority of the city is the Islamabad Metropolitan Corporation (IMC) with some help from Capital Development Authority (CDA), which oversees the planning, development, construction, and administration of the city.
15% of the population are Pashto speakers, 18% speak other languages.
Islamabad has seen an expansion in information and communications technology with the addition two Software Technology Parks, which house numerous national and foreign technological and information technology companies.
''Islam'' is an Arabic word which refers to the religion of Islam and ''-abad'' is a Persian place name that means ''inhabited place'' or ''city''.
Islamabad is a net contributor to the Pakistani economy, as whilst having only 0.8% of the country's population, it contributes 1% to the country's GDP.
Islamabad has the highest literacy rate in Pakistan, at 88%.
The architecture of Faisal Mosque is unusual as it lacks a dome structure.
In the 1960s, Islamabad was constructed as a forward capital for several reasons.
Islamabad's railway station (also known as Margalla Railway station) is situated in Sector I-9 which is connect to the main railway line at Nori Junction Railway station (located near Sector I-12).
The city of Islamabad expanses an area of .
The latter is located on the Haro River near the town of Khanpur, about  from Islamabad.
Some of the earliest Stone Age artefacts in the world have been found on the plateau, dating from 100,000 to 500,000 years ago.
A 15th-century Gakhar fort, Pharwala Fort, which was built on the remains of a 10th-century Hindu fort, is located near Islamabad.
The British took control of the region from the Sikhs in 1849 and built South Asia's largest cantonment in the region.
The name of the city, ''Islamabad'' is derived from two words, ''Islam'' and ''abad'', meaning "City of Islam".
Islamabad is the hub all the governmental activities while Rawalpindi is the centre of all industrial, commercial, and military activities.
Islamabad Highway is the main artery of the city which runs from Highway Chowk (G.T Road) till Zero point and is being changed into a signal free corridor.
Rawal Lake is in this zone.
Archaeological remains of the Buddhist era can also still be found in the region.
Islamabad has a multi-purpose Sports Complex opposite Aabpara.
With the exception of I-8, which is a well-developed residential area, these sectors are primarily part of the industrial zone.
The southern portion of the city is an undulating plain.
Major sports in the city include Cricket, Football, Squash, Hockey, Table Tennis, Rugby and Boxing.
There is another Multipurpose Sports Complex in the F6 Markaz.
Islamabad has both public and private medical centres.
File:Faisal Masjid From Damn e koh.jpg|Faisal Mosque
The city's master-plan divides the city into eight basic zones, including administrative, diplomatic enclave, residential areas, educational sectors, industrial sectors, commercial areas, and rural and green areas.
Islamabad has the lowest rate of infant mortality in the country at 38 deaths per thousand compared to the national average of 78 deaths per thousand.
There are many privately operated transport terminals in Faizabad, Sitara Market(G-7) Terminal of NATCO Bus service (which has a fleet of bus service for different cities of Golgit Baltistan from Islamabad and Rawalpind) is located on Faqir Aipi road in Sector I-11.
File:First Mega Mall of Islamabad - Centaurus.JPG|Mega Mall of Islamabad The Centaurus
