The Parliamentary forces then set to fortifying the islands.
St Agnes (with Gugh)
From St Martin's White Island, Little Ganilly and Great Arthur are reachable.
Roads and streets across Scilly have very few signs or markings, and route numbers (of the three A roads on St Mary's) are not marked at all.
Air access to the islands is via St Mary's Airport.
* 1647–1648 Anthony Buller (Parliamentarian)
Of the other inhabited islands, Tresco is run as a timeshare resort, and is consequently the most obviously tourist-oriented.
The islands' position produces a place of great contrast—the ameliorating effect of the sea, greatly influenced by the North Atlantic Current, means they rarely have frost or snow, which allows local farmers to grow flowers well ahead of those in mainland Britain.
The Duchy of Cornwall owns most of the freehold land on the islands.
Accordingly, in 1890 the ''Isles of Scilly Rural District Council'' (the RDC) was formed as a ''sui generis'' unitary authority, outside the administrative county of Cornwall.
The islands have their own independent fire brigade – the Isles of Scilly Fire and Rescue Service – which is staffed entirely by retained fire fighters on all the inhabited islands.
Some islanders take up other temporary jobs ‘out of season’ to compensate for this.
* 1785–1799 Francis Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds (1751–1799)
As soon as he had recovered from his wounds, he let himself be baptised.
The lowest temperature ever recorded was  on 13 January 1987 and the highest was .
Since the passing of the Isles of Scilly Order 1930, this authority has had the status of a county council and today is known as the Council of the Isles of Scilly.
St Agnes has no hotel and is the least-developed of the inhabited islands.
These numbers are significant, in that almost ten per cent of the adult population of the islands is directly linked to the Council, as an employee or a councillor.
The other islands are linked to St. Mary's by a network of inter-island launches.
Then they returned to the Orkneys.
They built Cromwell's Castle—a gun platform on the west side of Tresco—using materials scavenged from an earlier gun platform further up the hill.
The Council is headquartered at Town Hall, by The Parade park in Hugh Town, and also performs the administrative functions of the AONB Partnership and the Inshore Fisheries and Conservation Authority.
When he arrived, the Haakon Jarl was facing a revolt.
Population(Census 2001)
He was probably Priscillian and a part of the tiny Christian community that was exiled here from Spain by Emperor Maximus for Priscillianism and their part in the Priscilline heresy.
Smith created the title ''Lord Proprietor of the Isles of Scilly'' for himself, and many of his actions were unpopular.
(1)  Inhabited until 1855.
One continuing legacy of the isles' past is gig racing, wherein fast rowing boats ("gigs") with crews of six (or in one case, seven) race between the main islands.
About twenty years later, the Domesday survey was conducted.
After Reverend David Easton left the islands in 2009, the series continued under the same name but focused elsewhere..
In 995, he used an opportunity to return to Norway.
The lease remained in his family until it expired for most of the Isles in 1920 when ownership reverted to the Duchy of Cornwall.
The Isles of Scilly were featured on the TV programme ''Seven Natural Wonders'' as one of the wonders of South West England.
The word '''' is a contraction of '''' ('''', mutated to ''''), meaning the 'great island'.
They went first to the Suðreyar Hebrides, and all along the west to the Syllingar, where they gained a great victory in Maríuhöfn on Columba's-mass 9 June, and took much booty.
There is a golf club with a 9-hole course (each with two tees) situated on the island of St Mary's, near Porthloo and Telegraph.
In June 1651, Admiral Robert Blake recaptured the isles for the Parliamentarians.
High housing costs pose significant problems for the local population, especially as local incomes (in Cornwall) are only 70% of the national average, whilst house prices are almost £5,000 higher than the national average.
While volunteers of all ages are welcome, most are young people who are studying for qualifications in related fields, such as conservation and land management.
The population of all the islands at the 2011 census was 2,203.
This has been called 'the land that crime forgot'.
The World Pilot Gig Championships are held annually over the May Day bank holiday weekend.
There once was an Iron Age Britain community here that extended into Roman times.
St Martin's (with White Island)
The names provide a wide variety of origins, e.g.
Today, the Dorrien-Smith estate still holds the lease for the island of Tresco.
The islands appear to have lost the old Celtic language before parts of Penwith on the mainland, in contrast to the history of Irish or Scottish Gaelic.
Housing demand outstrips supply; a problem compounded by restrictions on further development designed to protect the islands' unique environment and prevent the infrastructural carrying capacity from being exceeded.
In early times one group of islands was in the possession of a confederacy of hermits.
There is evidence for inundation by the tsunami caused by the 1755 Lisbon earthquake.
St Mary's Harbour is the principal harbour of the Isles of Scilly, and is located in Hugh Town.
Scilly is responsible for many firsts for Britain, and is particularly good at producing vagrant American passerines.
* At certain low tides the sea becomes shallow enough for people to walk between some of the islands.
Due to a lack of local casual labour at peak holiday times, many of the larger employers accommodate guest workers, who come to the islands for the summer to have a ‘working holiday’.
The Irish Sea Glacier terminated just to the north of the Isles of Scilly during the last Ice Age.
In Snorri Sturluson's Royal Sagas of Norway, it is stated that this seer told him:
In December 2006, Sport England published a survey which revealed that residents of the Isles of Scilly were the most active in England in sports and other fitness activities.
* 1918–1920 Arthur Algernon Dorrien-Smith (1876–1955)
(The boats are correctly termed "pilot gigs").
The islands of Annet and Samson have large terneries and the islands are well populated by seals.
Bryher and St Martin's are more unspoilt, although each has a hotel and other accommodation.
Cornwall County Council provided some services to the Isles, for which the RDC made financial contributions.
The islands are home to ornithologist Will Wagstaff.
In 2004, 92.9% of pupils (26 out of 28) achieved five or more GCSEs at grade C and above, compared to the English average of 53.7%.
* 1799–1831 George Osborne, 6th Duke of Leeds (1775–1838)
Evidence for the older large island includes:
Since EU enlargement in 2004, a number of eastern Europeans have moved to the island, joining the Australians, New Zealanders and South Africans who traditionally made up most of the islands' overseas workers.
Education is available on the islands up to age 16.
The Isles of Scilly has a temperate Oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb), and has one of the mildest climates in the United Kingdom.
Four of the ships sank or capsized, with at least 1,450 dead, including the commanding admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovell.
The Cornish Ensign has also been used.
This community was likely formed by immigrants from Brittany, likely the Veneti who were active in the tin trade from mining in Cornwall and Devon.
The scheduled helicopter service, which previously linked Penzance Heliport with St Mary's Airport and Tresco Heliport, ceased at the end of October 2012; Tresco Heliport is now closed to scheduled services.
* The whole of southern England has been steadily sinking in opposition to post-glacial rebound in Scotland: this has caused the rias (drowned river valleys) on the southern Cornish coast, e.g.
Summers are not as warm as on the mainland.
The event originally involved crews from the Islands and a few crews from Cornwall, but in the intervening years the number of gigs attending has increased, with crews coming from all over the South-West and further afield.
Many buildings are used for tourist accommodation which reduces the number available for local residents.
Many of the northern islands can be reached from Tresco, including Bryher, Samson and St Martin's (requires very low tides).
The league's two clubs, Woolpack Wanderers and Garrison Gunners, play each other seventeen times each season and compete for two cups and for the league title.
The archipelago is part of the Duchy of Cornwall – the duchy owns the freehold of most of the land on the islands and the duke exercises certain formal rights and privileges across the territory, as he does in Cornwall proper.
remaining 45 islets
Bryher (with Gweal)
, 130 people are employed full-time by the Council to provide local services (including water supply and air traffic control).
Although this poorly sited earlier platform dated back to the 1550s, it is now referred to as King Charles's Castle.
* Remains of a prehistoric farm have been found on Nornour, which is now a small rocky skerry far too small for farming.
Exposure to Atlantic winds also means that spectacular winter gales lash the islands from time to time.
In absence of compensation or a satisfactory reply, he declared war on England in June.
Recent statistics suggest that agriculture on the islands now represents less than 2 percent of all employment.
Post eighteen, suitably qualified students attend universities and colleges on the mainland.
The legend continues that, as the seer foretold, Olaf was attacked by a group of mutineers upon returning to his ships.
* 1766–1785 Francis Godolphin, 2nd Baron Godolphin (1706–1785)
Scilly has been identified as the place of exile of two heretical 4th century bishops, Instantius and Tiberianus, who were followers of Priscillian.
The majority of visitors stay on St Mary's, which has a concentration of holiday accommodation and other amenities.
The average annual temperature is  in comparison to London, where it is .
By 1651 the Royalist governor, Sir John Grenville, was using the islands as a base for privateering raids on Commonwealth and Dutch shipping.
In ''Jacob's Room'', by Virginia Woolf, the hero and a friend of his sail around the islands.
The two share a ground, Garrison Field, but travel to the mainland for part of the year to play other non-professional clubs.
* 1700–1732 Sidney Goldolphin (1652–1732)
* 1568–1608 Sir Francis Godolphin (1540–1608)
* Ancient field walls are visible below the high tide line off some of the islands (e.g.
By sea, the Isles of Scilly Steamship Company provides a passenger and cargo service from Penzance to St Mary's, which is currently operated by the ''Scillonian III'' passenger ferry, supported by the ''Gry Maritha'' cargo vessel.
A second battery proved more successful.
* 1651–1660 ''Parliamentary control''
Its small income and the small number of staff have led to the Trust adopting a policy of recruiting volunteers to help it carry out its extensive work programme.
An early governor of Scilly was Thomas Godolphin, whose son Francis received a lease on the Isles in 1568.
With the Norman Conquest, the Isles of Scilly came more under centralised control.
However, the tourist season benefits from an extended period of business in October when many birdwatchers ("birders") arrive.
The Scilly Isles are one of the sunniest areas in the southwest with on average 6.9 hours per day in June.
The designation covers the entire archipelago, including the uninhabited islands and rocks, and is the smallest such area in the UK.
Politically, the islands are part of England, one of the four countries of the United Kingdom.
Historically, the Isles of Scilly were administered as one of the hundreds of Cornwall, although the Cornwall quarter sessions had limited jurisdiction there.
32% of the population participate at least 3 times per week for 30 minutes or more.
However, it is the degree of concentration, which is distinctive along with the overall importance of tourism within the economy as a whole and the very limited manufacturing base that stands out.”
However, since 1890, the islands have had a separate local authority.
Because of the seasonality of tourism, many jobs on the islands are seasonal and part-time, so work cannot be guaranteed throughout the year.
* Some of the Cornish language place names also appear to reflect past shorelines, and former land areas.
It has never recorded a temperature below freezing between May and November.
He then stopped raiding Christian cities, and lived in England and Ireland.
The Local Government Act 1888 allowed the Local Government Board to establish in the Isles of Scilly "councils and other local authorities separate from those of the county of Cornwall"... "for the application to the islands of any act touching local government."
The adjective "Scillonian" is sometimes used for people or things related to the archipelago.
Today, tourism is estimated to account for 85 per cent of the islands' income.
It is likely that until relatively recent times the islands were much larger and perhaps joined together into one island named Ennor.
The duchy also holds  as duchy property, part of the duchy's landholding.
They were styled ''Governors of Scilly'' and the Godolphins and their Osborne relatives held this position until 1834.
The Trust currently has four full-time salaried staff and twelve trustees, who are all residents of the Isles.
The league was a launching pad for the Adidas "Dream Big" Campaign in which a number of famous professional footballers (including David Beckham) arrive on the island to coach the local children's side.
* 1636–1643 Sidney Godolphin (1610–1643)
Rising sea levels flooded the central plain around 400–500 AD, forming the current fifty-five islands and islets, if an island is defined as "land surrounded by water at high tide and supporting land vegetation".
The freehold land of the islands is the property of the Duchy of Cornwall (except for Hugh Town on St Mary's, which was sold to the inhabitants in 1949).
It was during this period that the Three Hundred and Thirty Five Years' War started between the isles and the Netherlands.
Over the years the nature of this trade has varied, due to wider economic and political factors that have seen the rise and fall of industries such as kelp harvesting, pilotage, smuggling, fishing, shipbuilding and, latterly, flower farming.
This type of birding, chasing after rare birds, is called "twitching".
The peak time of year for this is generally in October when it is not unusual for several of the rarest birds in Europe to share this archipelago.
All the uninhabited islands, islets and rocks and much of the untenanted land on the inhabited islands is managed by the Isles of Scilly Wildlife Trust, which leases these lands from the Duchy for the rent of one daffodil per year.
In 1834 Augustus John Smith acquired the lease from the Duchy for £20,000 (£
Thou wilt become a renowned king, and do celebrated deeds.
Sixteen- to eighteen-year-olds are entitled to a free sixth form place at a state school or sixth form college on the mainland, and are provided with free flights and a grant towards accommodation.
Since the mid-eighteenth century the Scillonian economy has relied on trade with the mainland and beyond as a means of sustaining its population.
Section 265 of the Local Government Act 1972 allowed for the continued existence of the RDC, but renamed as the ''Council of the Isles of Scilly''.
Since 2007 the islands have featured in the BBC series ''An Island Parish'', following various real-life stories and featuring in particular the newly appointed ''Chaplain to the Isles of Scilly''.
'''Isles of Scilly'''
Secondary students from outside St Mary's live at a school boarding house (Mundesley House) during the week.
The name does not make it clear if it referred to a harbour on a larger island than today's St Mary's, or a whole island.
Subsequently, Grenville and Blake negotiated terms that permitted the Royalists to surrender honourably.
Blake's initial attack on Old Grimsby failed, but the next attacks succeeded in taking Tresco and Bryher.
This is reflected in the landscape, most clearly seen on Tresco where the lush Abbey Gardens on the sheltered southern end of the island contrast with the low heather and bare rock sculpted by the wind on the exposed northern end.
As part of a 2002 marketing campaign, the plant conservation charity Plantlife chose sea thrift (''Armeria maritima'') as the "county flower" of the islands.
The islands appear to have been raided frequently by Barbary pirates to enslave residents to support the Barbary slave trade.
The maximum snowfall was  on 12 January 1987.
During the night of 22 October 1707, the isles were the scene of one of the worst maritime disasters in British history, when out of a fleet of 21 Royal Navy ships headed from Gibraltar to Portsmouth, six were driven onto the cliffs.
The islands' economy is highly dependent on tourism, even by the standards of other island communities.
The islands would have formed part of the "Exeter Domesday" circuit, which included Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Somerset, and Wiltshire.
One reason for the success of these islands in producing rarities is the extensive coverage these islands get from birdwatchers, but archipelagos are often favoured by rare birds which like to make landfall and eat there before continuing their journeys and often arrive on far flung islands first.
The Isles of Scilly feature what is reportedly the smallest football league in the world, the Isles of Scilly Football League.
This unusual status also means that much administrative law (for example relating to the functions of local authorities, the health service and other public bodies) that applies in the rest of England applies in modified form in the islands.
The club was founded in 1904 and is open to visitors.
St Mary's is the only island with a significant road network and the only island with public highways; in 2005 there were 619 registered vehicles on the island.
"" literally means "Mary's Harbour/Haven".
Tourism is a major part of the local economy, along with agriculture — particularly the growing of cut flowers.
In July 2015 a devolution deal was announced by the government under which Cornwall Council and the Council of the Isles of Scilly are to create a plan to bring health and social care services together under local control.
In 995, Olaf Tryggvason became King Olaf I of Norway.
From Saint Agnes, Gugh becomes accessible at each low tide, via a tombolo.
When thou comest to thy ships many of thy people will conspire against thee, and then a battle will follow in which many of thy men will fall, and thou wilt be wounded almost to death, and carried upon a shield to thy ship; yet after seven days thou shalt be well of thy wounds, and immediately thou shalt let thyself be baptised.
Offshore, midway between Land's End and the Isles of Scilly, is the supposed location of the mythical lost land of Lyonesse, referred to in Arthurian literature, of which Tristan is said to have been a prince.
An adapted version of the old Board of Ordnance flag has also been used, after it was left behind when munitions were removed from the isles.
* 1643–1646 Sir Francis Godolphin of Godolphin (1605–1647)
* 1649–1651 Sir John Grenville (Royalist)
* 1608–1613 Sir William Godolphin of Godolphin (1567–1613)
Olaf Tryggvason persuaded the rebels to accept him as their king, and Jarl Haakon was murdered by his own slave, while he was hiding from the rebels in a pig sty.
The latest elections took place on 2 May 2013; all twenty elected were independents (one seat remained vacant).
In 1975 the islands were designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
Robert and Henry Sage (English), Richard de Tregenestre (Cornish), Ace de Veldre (French), Davy Gogch (possibly Welsh, or Cornish), and Adam le Fuiz Yaldicz (Spanish?
The tidal range at the Isles of Scilly is high for an open sea location; the maximum for St Mary's is .
The limited access to housing provokes strong local politics.
* 1872–1918 Thomas Algernon Smith-Dorrien-Smith (1846–1918)
In the mid-12th century, there was reportedly a Viking attack on the Isles of Scilly, called '''''' by the Norse, recorded in the ''''— Sweyn Asleifsson "went south, under Ireland, and seized a barge belonging to some monks in Syllingar and plundered it."
* A description in Roman times describes Scilly as "" in the singular, indicating either a single island or an island much bigger than any of the others.
The Isles of Scilly Order 1930 granted the Council the "powers, duties and liabilities" of a county council.
* 1660–1667 Sir Francis Godolphin of Godolphin (1605–1667) (restored to office)
Natural England has designated the Isles of Scilly as National Character Area 158.
By 2005, their numbers were estimated at nearly 100 out of a total population of just over 2,000.
However the islands are still considered to be part of the ceremonial county of Cornwall.
The Isles of Scilly are the only British haunt of the Lesser White-toothed Shrew (''Crocidura suaveolens''), where it is know locally as a "''teak''" or "''teke''".
The management of these subsequently affects the possibility of residency on the islands.
Many men wilt thou bring to faith and baptism, and both to thy own and others' good; and that thou mayst have no doubt of the truth of this answer, listen to these tokens.
A 12-part series was filmed in 2007 and first broadcast on ''BBC2'' in January 2008.
* 1667–?1700 Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin (1645–1712)
The islands were not subject to Income Tax until 1954, and there was no motor vehicle excise duty levied until 1971.
If an extremely rare bird turns up, the island will see a significant increase in numbers of birders.
Gig racing has been said to derive from the race to collect salvage from shipwrecks on the rocks around Scilly, but the race was actually to deliver a pilot onto incoming vessels, to guide them through the hazardous reefs and shallows.
The Dutch admiral Maarten Tromp sailed to the isles and on arriving on 30 May 1651 demanded compensation.
Additionally, the inter-island waters are mostly shallow, which at "spring tides" allows for dry land walking between several of the islands.
Born  960, Olaf had raided various European cities and fought in several wars.
The Council of the Isles of Scilly is a separate authority to the Cornwall Council unitary authority, and as such the islands are not part of the administrative county of Cornwall.
Few properties are privately owned, with many units being let by the Duchy of Cornwall, the Council, and a few by housing associations.
They are represented in the UK Parliament as part of the St Ives constituency.
It is generally considered that Cornwall, and possibly the Isles of Scilly, came under the dominion of the English Crown late in the reign of Æthelstan ( 924–939).
For judicial purposes, shrievalty purposes, and lieutenancy purposes, the Isles of Scilly are "deemed to form part of the county of Cornwall".
Around St Mary's several minor islands become accessible, including Taylor's Island on the west coast and Tolls Island on the east coast.
The full Trust Board is responsible for policy whilst a Management Team is responsible for day-to-day administration.
