Tynwald is a bicameral or tricameral legislature, comprising the House of Keys (directly elected by universal suffrage with a voting age of 16 years) and the Legislative Council (consisting of indirectly elected and ex-officio members).
It is likely the first Celts to inhabit the island were Britons in the Iron Age The ancient Romans knew of the island and called it '''' although it is uncertain whether they conquered the island.
As in Irish and Scottish Gaelic, the concepts of "evening" and "afternoon" are referred to with one word.
The Manx cat is a breed of cat noted for having a genetic mutation that causes it to have a shortened tail.
The Manx name of the Isle of Man is '''': '''' () is a Manx word meaning 'island'; '''' () appears in the genitive case as '''' (), with initial consonant mutation, hence '''', 'Island of Mann'.
The Broadway Cinema is located in the Government-owned and -run Villa Marina and Gaiety Theatre complex.
Taking place over a two-week period, it has become a festival for motorcycling culture, makes a huge contribution to the island's economy and has become part of Manx identity.
The music of the Isle of Man reflects Celtic, Norse and other influences, including from its neighbours, Scotland, Ireland, England and Wales.
Nonetheless, the Isle of Man Constabulary voluntarily submits to inspection by the British inspectorate of police, and the Isle of Man Coastguard contracts Her Majesty's Coastguard (UK) for air-sea rescue operations.
This cluster of the highest quality "Milky Way" sites  is now well promoted within the island.
Old Welsh records named it as '''', also reflected in '''', the name for an ancient district in north Britain along the lower Firth of Forth.
At lower levels it can be around  a year.
EU citizens are entitled to travel and reside, but not work, in the island without restriction.
The executive branch of government is the Council of Ministers, which is composed of members of Tynwald.
Average rainfall is highest at Snaefell, where it is around  a year.
It has dark brown wool and four, or sometimes six horns.
It used to be a tradition to leave a coin on the bridge to ensure good luck.
A confused period followed when Mann was sometimes under English rule and sometimes Scottish, until 1346, when the Battle of Neville's Cross decided the long struggle between England and Scotland in England's favour.
There is a small Muslim community, with its own mosque in Douglas, and there is also a small Jewish community.
This was part of a general revival of the Manx language and culture after the death of the last native speaker of Manx in 1974.
Vikings arrived at the end of the 8th century.
This government push has effectively given the island a headstart in the number of recognised Dark Sky sites.
All of these services are controlled directly by the Isle of Man Government, and are independent of the United Kingdom.
Manx cheese has also found some success, featuring smoked and herb-flavoured varieties, and is stocked by many of the UK's supermarket chains.
Seafood has traditionally accounted for a large proportion of the local diet.
In 1866, the Isle of Man obtained a nominal measure of Home Rule.
The population rose 5.5% between the 2006 and 2011 censuses.
The island was cut off from the surrounding islands around 8000&nbsp;BC and colonisation took place by sea some time before 6500&nbsp;BC.
There has never actually been a witches' coven on that site; the myth was only created with the opening of the museum.
However, the Isle of Man tourism board tasked someone from their team to nominate 27 places on the island as a civil task.
In 1266, the island became part of Scotland by the Treaty of Perth, after being a part of Norway.
Average rainfall is higher than averaged over the territory of the British Isles, because the Isle of Man is far enough from Ireland for the prevailing south-westerly winds to accumulate moisture.
At the 2011 census, the Isle of Man was home to 84,497 people, of whom 27,938 resided in the island's capital, Douglas and 9,273 in the adjoining village of Onchan.
However, this has created a distorted view when compared to the UK where this isn't promoted on a national scale.
Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism form key sectors of the economy.
However, its traditional folk music has undergone a revival since the 1970s, starting with a music festival called  in Ramsey.
Broadband internet services are available through four local providers which are Wi-Manx, Domicilium, Manx Computer Bureau and Manx Telecom.
The island is in customs union with the UK, and related revenues are pooled and shared under the Common Purse Agreement.
A number of pressure groups also exist on the island.
The island does not have its own ITU country code, but is accessed via the British country code (+44) and the island's telephone numbers are part of the British telephone numbering plan with local dialling codes 01624 for landlines and 07524, 07624 and 07924 for mobiles.
From 1938 to 1955 there was the Manx Regiment of the British Territorial Army, which saw extensive action during the Second World War.
It remained in English hands until 1313, when Robert Bruce took it after besieging Castle Rushen for five weeks.
Examples of their tools are kept at the Manx Museum.
The 2001 census was conducted by the Economic Affairs Division of the Isle of Man Treasury, under the authority of the Census Act 1929.
The Lord of Mann is represented by a Lieutenant Governor.
The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, who holds the title of Lord of Mann.
Many television services are available by satellite, such as Sky, and Freesat from the group of satellites at 28.2° east, as well as services from a range of other satellites around Europe such as the Astra satellites at 19.2° east and Hotbird.
This means that the Isle of Man cannot have the lower excise revenues on alcohol and other goods that are enjoyed in the Channel Islands.
The Loaghtan, the indigenous breed of Manx sheep, has a rich, dark meat that has found favour with chefs, featuring in dishes on the BBC's ''MasterChef'' series.
A third body of Manx Fencibles was raised in 1803 to defend the Island during the Napoleonic Wars and to assist the Revenue.
The island forms a separate diocese called Sodor and Man, which once comprised the medieval kingdom of Man and the Isles ("Suðreyjar" in Old Norse).
Since 2 December 1999 the island has participated in the United Kingdom National Lottery.
The only commercial airport on the island is the Isle of Man Airport at Ronaldsway.
Proximity to the UK, popularity as a UK tourist destination in Victorian times, and immigration to and from Britain have meant that British influence has been dominant since the Revestment period.
The island has one mountain higher than , Snaefell, with a height of .
The second largest denomination is the Methodist Church, whose Isle of Man District is close in numbers to the Anglican diocese.
In areas denoted by derestricted signs, there is no overriding national speed restriction; only local speed limits are set.
In the 9th century, Norsemen established the Kingdom of the Isles.
The predominant religious tradition of the island is Christianity.
Separately, a witchcraft museum was opened at the Witches Mill, Castletown in 1951.
In conjunction with the Isle of Man TT a limited number of sailings operate to and from Larne in Northern Ireland.
Isle of Man is part of the regions served by BBC North West for BBC One and BBC Two television services, and Granada Television for ITV.
There are more recently deposited shingle beaches at the northernmost point, the Point of Ayre.
The highest recorded temperature was  at Ronaldsway on 12 July 1983.
The main telephone provider on the Isle of Man is Manx Telecom.
The remaining 7.5% were born elsewhere in the world, with 2.4% coming from EU countries (other than the UK and Ireland).
Rules for reckless driving and most other driving regulations are enforced in a manner similar to the UK.
The Isle of Man tourism board has recently invested in "Dark Sky Discovery" sites to diversify its tourism industry.
It takes place in late May and early June.
It has a capacity of 154 and also doubles as a conference venue.
The Isle of Man has two cinemas.
Citizenship in the Isle of Man is governed by British law.
The Bronze Age burial mounds created long-lasting markers around the countryside.
The earliest recorded Manx form of the name is '''' or ''''.
The island's parliament, Tynwald, is claimed to have been in continuous existence since 979 or earlier, purportedly making it the oldest continuously governing body in the world, though evidence supports a much later date.
Tourist numbers peaked in the first half of the 20th century, prior to the boom in cheap travel to Southern Europe that also saw the decline of tourism in many similar English seaside resorts.
The Liberal Vannin Party (established 2006) has two seats in the House of Keys; they promote greater Manx independence and more accountability in Government.
This dish, which is similar to poutine, is found in most of the island's fast-food outlets, and consists of thick cut chips, covered in shredded Cheddar cheese and topped with a thick gravy.
Passports issued by the Isle of Man Passport Office say ''"British Islands – Isle of Man"'' on the cover but the nationality status stated on the passport is simply ''"British Citizen"''.
In 1266 King Magnus VI of Norway ceded the islands to Scotland in the Treaty of Perth; but Scotland's rule over Mann did not become firmly established until 1275, when the Manx were defeated in the Battle of Ronaldsway, near Castletown.
English rule was delegated to a series of lords and magnates.
Personal income is assessed and taxed on a total worldwide income basis rather than a remittance basis.
It has been suggested that its origin lies in Sicily, an island which has been associated with the triskelion since ancient times.
Cod, ling and mackerel are often angled for the table, and freshwater trout and salmon can be taken from the local rivers and lakes, supported by the Government fish hatchery at Cornaa on the east coast.
The first residents were hunter gatherers and fishermen.
Prior to the introduction of football at the beginning of the 20th century, Cammag was the island's national sport.
In 1779, the Manx Fencible Corps, a fencible regiment of three companies, was raised; it was disbanded in 1783 at the end of the American War of Independence.
The Irish operator Aer Arann entered a code-sharing agreement with Abu Dhabi airliner Etihad Airways in 2009, which allows the booking of one-ticket flights from the Isle of Man.
After a period of alternating rule by the kings of Scotland and England, the island came under the feudal lordship of the English Crown in 1399.
The oldest known reference to the island calls it '''', in Latin (Julius Caesar, 54&nbsp;BC); in the 1st century CE, Pliny the Elder records it as '''' or '''', and Ptolemy (2nd century) as ''Monœda'' (, ''Monaoida'') or  (''Monarina''), in Koine Greek.
The Isle of Man has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen ''Cfb'').
However, the UK takes care of its external and defence affairs, and retains paramount power to legislate for the island.
It is expected that dark skies will generally be nominated by the public across the UK.
There are scheduled and chartered flights to numerous airports in the United Kingdom and Ireland, as well as further afield.
The short form often used in English, Mann, is derived from the Manx ''Mannin'', though sometimes the name is written as Man.
It is found in the Sagas of Icelanders as ''''.
There are two types of local authorities: a corporation for the Borough of Douglas, and bodies of commissioners for the town districts of Castletown, Peel and Ramsey, the village districts of Kirk Michael, Laxey, Onchan, Port Erin and Port St Mary, and the 15 "parish districts" (those parishes or parts of parishes which do not fall within the districts previously mentioned).
In the earliest Irish mythological texts, Manannán is a king of the otherworld, but the 9th-century ''Sanas Cormaic'' identifies a euhemerised Manannán as "a famous merchant who resided in, and gave name to, the Isle of Man".
The United Kingdom is responsible for the island's defence and ultimately for good governance, and for representing the island in international forums, while the island's own parliament and government have competence over all domestic matters.
Besides the island of Mann itself, the political unit of the Isle of Man includes some nearby small islands: the seasonally inhabited Calf of Man, Chicken Rock on which stands an unmanned lighthouse, St Patrick's Isle and St Michael's Isle.
According to an old saying, from the summit one can see six kingdoms: those of Mann, Scotland, England, Northern Ireland, Wales, and Heaven.
Revival campaigns have attempted to preserve the surviving vestiges of Manx culture after a long period of Anglicisation, and some increased interest in the Manx language, history and musical tradition has been the result.
Under British law, the Isle of Man is not part of the United Kingdom.
It has an area of around .
There are eight Roman Catholic parish churches, included in the Catholic Archdiocese of Liverpool, as well as a presence of Eastern Orthodox Christians.
The Manx Labour Party is the other: they hold one seat.
The Positive Action Group campaign for three key elements to be introduced into the governance of the island: open accountable government, rigorous control of public finances, and a fairer society.
Ranges of hills in the north and south are separated by a central valley.
Another term used in Manx is '''', meaning "time enough"' this represents a stereotypical view of the Manx attitude to life.
The domain is managed on a daily basis by Domicilium, an island-based internet service provider.
The '''Isle of Man''' (;  ), also known simply as '''Mann''', is a self-governing Crown dependency in the Irish Sea between England and Northern Ireland.
Since 2007, the Isle of Man government invested £34 million in the film industry but recouped only £6.3 million, representing a loss of over £27 million.
This plain dish was supported by the subsistence farmers of the island, who crofted the land and fished the sea for centuries.
The Isle of Man is a low-tax economy with no capital gains tax, wealth tax, stamp duty, or inheritance tax and a top rate of income tax of 20%.
Additionally there are five Baptist churches, four Pentecostal churches, the Salvation Army, a ward of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, two congregations of Jehovah's Witnesses, two United Reformed churches, as well as other Christian churches.
Around the 5th century, large-scale migration from Ireland precipitated a process of Gaelicisation evidenced by Ogham inscriptions, giving rise to the Manx language, which is a Goidelic language closely related to Irish and Scottish Gaelic.
It is similar to the Irish hurling and the Scottish game of shinty.
The island is the only jurisdiction outside the United Kingdom where it is possible to play the UK National Lottery.
The Palace Cinema is located next to the derelict Castle Mona hotel and is operated by the Sefton Group.
It was extensively refurbished in August 2011.
There are no independent military forces on the Isle of Man, although HMS ''Ramsey'' is affiliated with the town of the same name.
However, there are still limitations on the movement of capital and services.
The Tynwald passed laws concerning the government of the island in all respects and had control over its finances, but was subject to the approval of the Lord of Mann.
Other Christian churches also operate on the Isle of Man.
There are two political parties in the Isle of Man.
There were also the local Ronaldsway and Bann cultures.
Postal services are the responsibility of Isle of Man Post, which took over from the British General Post Office in 1973.
The Isle of Man holds neither membership nor associate membership of the European Union and, thus, was not a party to the 2016 referendum on the EU membership.
Tynwald receives the 12p lottery duty for tickets sold in the Island.
In December 2007, the Manx Electricity Authority and its telecommunications subsidiary, e-llan Communications commissioned the laying of a new fibre-optic link that connects the island to a worldwide fibre-optic network.
The culture of the Isle of Man is often promoted as being influenced by its Celtic, and to a lesser extent its Norse, origins.
A tax cap is in force; the maximum amount of tax payable by an individual is £120,000 or £240,000 for couples if they choose to have their incomes jointly assessed.
The main international event associated with the island is the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy race, colloquially known as "The TT", which began in 1907.
usually derived from a Celtic word for 'mountain' (reflected in Welsh '''', Breton '''', and Scottish Gaelic ''''),
The Latin motto translates into English as "whichever way you throw, it will stand" or "whithersoever you throw it, it will stand".
In 1996, the Isle of Man Government obtained permission to use the .im national top-level domain (TLD) and has ultimate responsibility for its use.
Vice-regal functions of the Head of State are performed by a Lieutenant Governor.
The Neolithic Period marked the beginning of farming, and megalithic monuments began to appear such as  Cashtal yn Ard near Maughold, King Orry's Grave at Laxey, Meayll Circle near Cregneash, and Ballaharra Stones at St John's.
In the past the basic national dish of the island was ''spuds and herrin'', boiled potatoes and herring.
The rate of corporation tax is 0% for almost all types of income; the only exceptions are that the profits of banks are taxed at 10%, as is rental (or other) income from land and buildings situated on the Isle of Man.
The other two newspapers are ''Isle of Man Examiner'' (circulation 13,276) and the ''Manx Independent'' (circulation 12,255).
The island has been inhabited since before 6500 BC.
The census also reported 1,823 people who claim a knowledge of the Manx language.
Later, a Manannán is recorded as the first king of Mann in a Manx poem (dated 1504).
Public education is under the Department of Education and Children.
The ''Isle of Man Courier'' (distribution 36,318) is free and distributed to homes on the island.
He missed, and the chunk of earth landed in the Irish Sea, thus creating the island.
Local government on the Isle of Man is based partly on the island's 17 ancient parishes.
There is a comprehensive bus network, operated by the government owned bus operator Bus Vannin.
It dates to the late 17th century when it is known to have appeared on the island's coinage.
However this is a 19th-century legend which in turn is a Scottish legend which in turn is a German legend.
There are several flocks on the island and others have been started in England and Jersey.
One proposal currently under consideration by the Isle of Man Government to improve road safety is the introduction of compulsory vehicle tests (similar to MOT tests in the UK).
By country of birth, those born in the Isle of Man were the largest group (48.1%), while those born in the United Kingdom were the next largest group at 42.2% (35.9% in England, 3.2% in Scotland, 2% in Northern Ireland and 1.1% in Wales), 1.9% in the Republic of Ireland and 0.2% in the Channel Islands.
The Isle of Man is not itself a member of the Commonwealth of Nations.
Before the Protestant Reformation, the island had a long history as part of Catholic Christendom, and in the years following the Reformation, the religious authorities on the island, and later the population of the island, accepted the religious authority of the British monarchy and the Church of England.
The Isle of Man Sea Terminal in Douglas has frequent ferries to and from Heysham as well as frequent summer ferries to and from Liverpool, with a more restricted timetable operating in winter.
The policy has been criticized as unsustainable.
The Manx government promotes island locations for making films by contributing to the production costs.
Thirty-four primary schools, five secondary schools, and the University College Isle of Man function under the department.
The name is probably cognate with the Welsh name of the island of Anglesey, '''',
Later Latin references have '''' or '''' (Orosius, 416 CE),
Manx athletes have won three gold medals at the Commonwealth Games, including the one by cyclist Mark Cavendish in 2006 in the Scratch race.
Some versions add a seventh kingdom, that of the Sea, or Neptune.
The symbol appears in the island's official flag and official coat of arms, as well as its currency.
Gaelic cultural influence began in the 5th century and the Manx language, a branch of the Gaelic languages, emerged.
Although commercial fishing has declined in recent years, local delicacies include Manx kippers (smoked herring) which are produced by the smokeries in Peel on the west coast of the island, albeit mainly from North Sea herring these days.
The Isle of Man has three newspapers, all weeklies, and all owned by Isle of Man Newspapers, a division of the Edinburgh media company Johnston Press.
For many, the Isle carries the title "road racing capital of the world".
Since 1995, over eighty films have been made on the island.
There is no insular television service, and local transmitters retransmit British mainland digital broadcasts via the free-to-air digital terrestrial service Freeview.
They can also be issued to Manx-connected British citizens residing in Britain or either of the other Crown Dependencies.
Although Manx passport holders are British citizens, because the Isle of Man is not part of the European Union, people born on the Island without a parent or grandparent either born, naturalised, registered or resident for more than five consecutive years in the United Kingdom do not have the same rights as other British citizens with regard to employment and establishment in the EU.
The regiment was disbanded in 1802.
The name was at least secondarily associated with that of Manannán mac Lir in Irish mythology (corresponding to Welsh '''').
One of the most often repeated myths is that people found guilty of witchcraft were rolled down Slieau Whallian, a hill near St John's, in a barrel.
The Isle of Man has become a centre for emerging private space travel companies.
Later, the Royal Manx Fencibles was raised at the time of the French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars.
Other types of fairies are the  and the .
It has two screens: Screen One holds 293 customers, while Screen Two is smaller with a capacity of just 95.
The Manx triskelion, which dates with certainty to the late 13th century, is of uncertain origin.
A wide range of music is performed on the island, such as rock, blues, jazz and pop.
The length of this tail can range from a few inches, known as a "stumpy", to being completely nonexistent, or "rumpy".
The £120,000 tax cap equates to an assessable income of £589,550.
Mec Vannin advocate the establishment of a sovereign republic.
At present, the island has two mobile operators: Manx Telecom, previously known as Manx Pronto, and Sure.
The Isle of Man is located in the middle of the northern Irish Sea, almost equidistant from England, Northern Ireland, Scotland (closest), and Wales (furthest).
The northern plain, by contrast, is relatively flat, consisting mainly of deposits from glacial advances from western Scotland during colder times.
Beer is brewed on a commercial scale by Okells Brewery, which was established in 1850 and is the island's largest brewer; and also by Bushy's Brewery and the Hooded Ram Brewery.
Peel Castle has been proposed as a possible location of the Arthurian Avalon or as the location of the Grail Castle, site of Lancelot's encounter with the sword bridge of King Melegaunt.
The ragwort or ''cushag'' is the Manx national flower.
The Government of the Isle of Man has made calls for a more integrated relationship with the Commonwealth, including more direct representation and enhanced participation in Commonwealth organisations and meetings, including Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings.
In 627, Edwin of Northumbria conquered the Isle of Man along with most of Mercia.
During the Bronze Age, burial mounds became smaller.
There is a famous Fairy Bridge and it is said to be bad luck if one fails to wish the fairies good morning or afternoon when passing over it.
An old Irish story tells how Lough Neagh was formed when Ireland's legendary giant Fionn mac Cumhaill (commonly anglicised to Finn McCool) ripped up a portion of the land and tossed it at a Scottish rival.
For centuries, the island's symbol has been the so-called "three legs of Mann" (), a triskelion of three legs conjoined at the thigh.
For a short time, Cloud9 operated as a third mobile operator on the island, but has since withdrawn.
Trade takes place mostly with the United Kingdom.
In Manx, the greetings '''' (good morning) and '''' (good afternoon) can be heard.
