Unbeknownst to Admiral Yamamoto, the Americans were able to learn of the Japanese plans thanks to code breaking of Japanese naval code D (known to the U.S. as JN-25).
Others point out similarly complex Allied operations (such as Operation MB8) that were successful, and note the extent to which the American intelligence ''coup'' derailed the operation before it began.
He targeted the aircraft with gunfire until it began to spew smoke from its left engine.
"Combined Fleet", later released in the United States as ''The Imperial Navy''), Yamamoto was portrayed by Keiju Kobayashi.
In Neal Stephenson's 1999 book ''Cryptonomicon'', Yamamoto's final moments are depicted as him realising that Japan's cryptographic codes have been broken, and that he must inform them, right up until he and his chair hit the tree.
Yamamoto traveled extensively in the United States during his tour of duty there, where he studied American customs and business practices.
For two decades, in keeping with the doctrine of Captain Alfred T. Mahan, the Naval General Staff had planned in terms of Japanese light surface forces, submarines and land-based air units whittling down the American Fleet as it advanced across the Pacific until the Japanese Navy engaged it in a climactic "Decisive Battle" in the northern Philippine Sea (between the Ryukyu Islands and the Marianas Islands), with battleships meeting in the traditional exchange between battle lines.
In the end, five American battleships were sunk, three were damaged, and eleven other cruisers, destroyers and auxiliaries were sunk or seriously damaged.
By late March, having achieved their initial aims with surprising speed and little loss (albeit against enemies ill-prepared to resist them), the Japanese paused to consider their next moves.
Yamamoto agitated for an offensive decisive battle in the east to finish off the American fleet, but the more conservative Naval General Staff officers were unwilling to risk it.
Consequently, Yamamoto stayed in his post.
The 11th Air Fleet caught the American 5th Air Force on the ground in the Philippines hours after Pearl Harbor, and then proceeded to sink the British Force "Z" (battleship  and battlecruiser ) underway at sea.
With the American Fleet largely neutralized at Pearl Harbor, Yamamoto's Combined Fleet turned to the task of executing the larger Japanese war plan devised by the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy General Staff.
The Japanese had secured their oil- and rubber-rich "Southern Resources Area".
Instead, the Imperial General Staff supported an army thrust into Burma in hopes of linking up with Indian Nationalists revolting against British rule, and attacks in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands designed to imperil Australia's sea line of communication with the United States.
On April 14, 1943, the US naval intelligence effort, code-named "Magic", intercepted and decrypted a message containing specific details regarding Yamamoto's tour, including arrival and departure times and locations, as well as the number and types of aircraft that would transport and accompany him on the journey.
Sixteen Lightnings intercepted the flight over Bougainville and a dogfight ensued between them and the six escorting Mitsubishi A6M Zeroes.
Nevertheless, Yamamoto accepted the reality of impending war and planned for a quick victory by destroying the US fleet at Pearl Harbor in a preventive strike while simultaneously thrusting into the oil and rubber resource rich areas of Southeast Asia, especially the Dutch East Indies, Borneo and Malaya.
This was expected to short-circuit the threat posed by General Douglas MacArthur and his American and Australian forces in New Guinea.
The U.S. Navy had abandoned any intention of attempting to charge across the Pacific towards the Philippines at the outset of war in 1935 (in keeping with the evolution of War Plan Orange).
*''Rengō Kantai Shirei Chōkan: Yamamoto Isoroku'' (1968, later released in Canada and the United States as ''Admiral Yamamoto''),
Part of his ashes were buried in the public Tama Cemetery, Tokyo (多摩霊園), and the remainder at his ancestral burial grounds at the temple of Chuko-ji in Nagaoka City.
Two of the main reasons for Yamamoto's political survival were his immense popularity within the fleet, where he commanded the respect of his men and officers, and his close relations with the imperial family.
Yamamoto remained in command as Commander-in-Chief, retained at least partly to avoid diminishing the morale of the Combined Fleet.
He was promoted to Captain in 1923.
Had Yamamoto's dispositions not denied Nagumo adequate pre-attack reconnaissance assets, both the American cryptanalytic success and the unexpected appearance of Fletcher's carriers would have been irrelevant.
In Douglas Niles' 2007 book ''MacArthur's War: A Novel of the Invasion of Japan'' (written with Michael Dobson), which focuses on General Douglas MacArthur and an alternate history of the Pacific War (following a considerably different outcome of the Battle of Midway), Yamamoto is portrayed sympathetically, with much of the action in the Japanese government seen through his eyes, though he could not change the major decisions of Japan in World War II.
The Japanese navy doctor examining the body determined that the head wound killed Yamamoto.
However, his move to the east did avoid the possibility of such a battle taking place.
The defeat marked the high tide of Japanese expansion.
The crash site and body of Yamamoto were found the next day in the jungle of the island of Bougainville, by a Japanese search and rescue party, led by army engineer, Lieutenant Hamasuna.
In 1916, Isoroku was adopted into the Yamamoto family (another family of former Nagaoka samurai) and took the Yamamoto name.
First Lieutenant Rex T. Barber engaged the first of the two Japanese transports which turned out to be ''T1-323'' (Yamamoto's aircraft).
Later on, Yamamoto convinces Japan to join forces with the United States and Britain to defeat Nazi Germany.
Yamamoto and a few Japanese military leaders and officials waited, hoping that the United States or Great Britain would negotiate for an armistice or a peace treaty to end the war in their favour.
In Robert Conroy's 2011 book ''Rising Sun'', Yamamoto directs the IJN to launch a series of attacks on the American West Coast, in the hope that the United States can be convinced to sue for peace and securing Japan's place as a world power; but he cannot escape his lingering fear that the war will ultimately doom Japan.
These issues made him a target of assassination threats by pro-war militarists.
(See Isoroku Yamamoto's sleeping giant quote for further discussion.)
He was unable to do so because his initial dispositions had placed his surface combatants too far from Midway, and because Admiral Raymond Spruance prudently withdrew to the east in a position to further defend Midway Island, believing (based on a mistaken submarine report) the Japanese still intended to invade.
He wrote to an ultranationalist:
This precipitated the American invasion of Guadalcanal and beat the Japanese to the punch, with Marines landing on the island in August 1942 and starting a bitter struggle that lasted until February 1943 and commenced a battle of attrition Japan could ill afford.
They planned to resume the thrust with ''Operation FS'' aimed at eventually taking Samoa and Fiji to cut the American life-line to Australia.
The FS operation was abandoned and the Japanese attempted to fight in both New Guinea and Guadalcanal at the same time.
Although remembered for his association with aircraft carriers due to Pearl Harbor and Midway, Yamamoto did more to influence the development of land-based naval aviation, particularly the Mitsubishi G3M and G4M medium bombers.
The First Air Fleet proceeded to make a circuit of the Pacific, striking American, Australian, Dutch and British installations from Wake Island to Australia to Ceylon in the Indian Ocean.
Yamamoto also oversaw the organization of a similar large land-based organization in the 11th Air Fleet, which would later use the G3M and G4M to neutralize American air forces in the Philippines and sink the British Force "Z".
In 1937, the U.S. Navy had further determined even fully manning the fleet to wartime levels could not be accomplished in less than six months, and myriad other logistic assets needed to execute a trans-Pacific movement simply did not exist and would require two years to construct after the onset of war.
He participated in the second London Naval Conference of 1930 as a Rear Admiral and the 1934 London Naval Conference as a Vice Admiral, as the growing military influence on the government at the time deemed that a career military specialist needed to accompany the diplomats to the arms limitations talks.
This was done as one of the last acts of the then-acting Navy Minister Mitsumasa Yonai, under Baron Hiranuma's short-lived administration partly to make it harder for assassins to target Yamamoto; Yonai was certain that if Yamamoto remained ashore, he would be killed before the year (1939) ended.
He and his wife, Reiko, had four children: two sons and two daughters.
With Tōjō now in charge of Japan's highest political office, it became clear the army would lead the navy into a war about which Yamamoto had serious reservations.
Admiral King telephoned Admiral Chester W. Nimitz at Pearl Harbor.
The Port Moresby (MO) Operation proved an unwelcome setback.
Yamamoto practiced calligraphy.
Award-winning Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune (star of ''The Seven Samurai'') portrayed Yamamoto in three films:
In Toei's 2011 war film ''Rengō Kantai Shirei Chōkan: Yamamoto Isoroku'', Yamamoto was portrayed by Kōji Yakusho.
It was believed that Yamamoto would be appointed to command the Yokosuka Naval Base, "a nice safe demotion with a big house and no power at all."
In any case, insufficient daylight remained after recovering the aircraft from the first two waves for the carriers to launch and recover a third before dark, and Nagumo's escorting destroyers lacked the fuel capacity for him to loiter long.
This quote was spread by the militarists, minus the last sentence, where it was interpreted in America as a boast that Japan would conquer the entire continental United States.
As it turned out, however, the note officially breaking diplomatic relations with the United States was delivered late, and he correctly perceived the Americans would be resolved upon revenge and unwilling to negotiate.
On the strategic level, the attack was a disaster for Japan, rousing American passions for revenge due to it being a "sneak attack".
Barber turned away to attack the other transport as Yamamoto's plane crashed into the jungle.
He also opposed war against the United States partly because of his studies at Harvard University (1919–1921) and his two postings as a naval attaché in Washington, D.C.
The First Air Fleet commenced preparations for the Pearl Harbor Raid, solving a number of technical problems along the way, including how to launch torpedoes in the shallow water of Pearl Harbor and how to craft armor-piercing bombs by machining down battleship gun projectiles.
In the 1993 OVA series ''Konpeki no Kantai'' (lit.
The attack was a complete success according to the parameters of the mission which sought to sink at least four American battleships and prevent the U.S. Fleet from interfering in Japan's southward advance for at least six months.
In the subsequent Pacific war, Japan's technologically advanced navy decisively defeats the United States, and grants all of the former European and American colonies in Asia full independence.
As such he promoted a policy of a strong fleet to project force through gunboat diplomacy, rather than a fleet used primarily for transport of invasion land forces, as some of his political opponents in the army wanted.
The second was a picket line of submarines to detect the movement of the American carriers toward Midway in time for First Mobile Force, First Fleet, and Second Fleet to combine against it.
Both qualities were again purchased at the expense of light construction and flammability that later contributed to the A6M's high casualty rates as the war progressed.
On the morning of April 18, despite urgings by local commanders to cancel the trip for fear of ambush, Yamamoto's two Mitsubishi G4M bombers, used as fast transport aircraft without bombs, left Rabaul as scheduled for the  trip.
Nimitz's carriers positioned themselves to ambush the ''Kido Butai'' (Striking Force) when it struck Midway.
"Turning Point of Showa History: The Militarists"), and
These planes were lightly constructed and when fully fueled, they were especially vulnerable to enemy fire.
His first command was the cruiser  in 1928, followed by the aircraft carrier .
Moreover, it is in question whether the U.S. would have gone to war at all had Japan only attacked British and Dutch possessions in the Far East.
Along with the occupation of the Dutch East Indies came the fall of Singapore (February 15, 1942), and the eventual reduction of the remaining American-Filipino defensive positions in the Philippines on the Bataan peninsula (April 9, 1942) and Corregidor island (May 6, 1942).
After his death, his funeral procession passed by Kawai's quarters on the way to the cemetery.
One of the most notable films is the 1970 movie ''Tora!
Correctly pointing out this plan had never worked even in Japanese war games, and painfully aware of American strategic advantages in military productive capacity, Yamamoto proposed instead to seek a decision with the Americans by first reducing their forces with a preventive strike, and following it with a "Decisive Battle" fought offensively, rather than defensively.
Yamamoto's plan for MI has been the subject of much criticism.
He returned to the Naval Staff College in 1914, emerging as a Lieutenant Commander in 1916.
Yamamoto rushed planning for the Midway and Aleutians missions, while dispatching a force under Naval Major-General Takeo Takagi, including the Fifth Carrier Division (the large, new carriers  and ), to support the effort to seize the islands of Tulagi and Guadalcanal for seaplane and aeroplane bases, and the town of Port Moresby on Papua New Guinea's south coast facing Australia.
His memory from the original timeline intact, Yamamoto uses his knowledge of the future to help Japan become a stronger military power, and eventually launching a ''coup d'état'' against Hideki Tōjō's government.
He learned to speak fluent English as a result.
This partly drove the requirements for the A6M Zero which was as noteworthy for its range as for its maneuverability.
Nagumo had absolutely no idea where the American carriers might be, and remaining on station while his forces cast about looking for them ran the risk of his own forces being found first and attacked while his aircraft were absent searching.
The Japanese lost only 29 aircraft, while 74 were damaged from anti-aircraft fire from the ground.
The film, however, portrays Yamamoto's death as occurring in November 1942, the day after the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal, and the P-38 aircraft that killed him as coming from Guadalcanal.
He was succeeded as commander-in-chief of the Combined Fleet by Admiral Mineichi Koga.
These losses sidelined ''Zuikaku'' while she awaited replacement aircraft and aircrews, and saw to tactical integration and training.
Following a nuisance raid by Japanese flying boats in May, Nimitz dispatched a minesweeper to guard the intended refueling point for Operation K near French Frigate Shoals, causing the reconnaissance mission to be aborted and leaving Yamamoto ignorant of whether Pacific Fleet carriers were still at Pearl Harbor.
He died when American codebreakers identified his flight plans and his plane was shot down.
The plan was a compromise and hastily prepared (apparently so it could be launched in time for the anniversary of Tsushima), but appeared well thought out, well organized, and finely timed when viewed from a Japanese viewpoint.
Only in numbers of carrier decks, available aircraft, and submarines was there near parity between the two sides.
Although the Japanese sank the American carrier  and damaged the , the Americans damaged the carrier ''Shōkaku'' so badly that she required dockyard repairs, and the Japanese lost the light carrier .
The planes did achieve long range, but long-range fighter escorts were not available.
Yamamoto's naval forces won a few victories and inflicted considerable losses and damage to the U.S. Fleet in several naval battles around Guadalcanal which included the battles of Savo Island, Cape Esperance, and Tassafaronga, but he could never draw the Americans into a decisive fleet action.
He also had the acceptance by Japan's naval hierarchy:
He was later reassigned from the Navy Ministry to sea as the Commander-in-Chief of the Combined Fleet on (August 30, 1939).
After the new Japanese cabinet was announced, however, Yamamoto found himself left alone in his position despite his open conflicts with Tōjō and other members of the army's oligarchy who favored war with the European powers and the United States.
It was a common practice for samurai families lacking sons to adopt suitable young men in this fashion to carry on the family name, the rank and the income that comes with it.
This stance led him to oppose the invasion of China.
A token cruiser and destroyer force was sent toward the Aleutians, but otherwise Nimitz ignored them.
As a result, the Japanese Navy's strength began to bleed off.
Correctly perceiving he had lost and could not bring surface forces into action, Yamamoto aborted the invasion of Midway and withdrew.
The first was an aerial reconnaissance mission (Operation K) over Pearl Harbor to ascertain if the American carriers were there.
As a strategic blow intended to prevent American interference in the Dutch East Indies for six months, the Pearl Harbor attack was a success, but unbeknownst to Yamamoto, it was a pointless one.
The range of the G3M and G4M contributed to a demand for great range in a fighter aircraft.
"; however, there is no documented evidence the statement was made.
As Yamamoto had planned, the First Air Fleet of six carriers commenced hostilities against the Americans on December 7, 1941, launching 353 aircraft against Pearl Harbor in two waves.
Competing plans were developed at this stage, including thrusts to the west against India, the south against Australia and the east against the United States.
Tōjō had been Yamamoto's old opponent from the time when the latter served as Japan's deputy navy minister and Tōjō was the prime mover behind Japan's takeover of Manchuria.
He also dispatched his carriers toward Midway early, and they passed the intended picket line force of submarines ''en route'' to their station, negating Yamamoto's back-up security measure.
He was the commander-in-chief during the decisive early years of the Pacific War and so was responsible for major battles such as Pearl Harbor and Midway.
With his air power destroyed and his forces not yet concentrated for a fleet battle, Yamamoto attempted to maneuver his remaining forces, still strong on paper, to trap the American forces.
His prediction would be vindicated as Japan easily conquered territories and islands for the first six months of the war until it suffered a shattering defeat at the Battle of Midway on June 4–7, 1942, which ultimately tilted the balance of power in the Pacific towards the U.S.
In the 2001 film ''Pearl Harbor'', Yamamoto was portrayed by Oscar-nominated Japanese-born American actor Mako Iwamatsu.
Yamamoto was involved in this debate, supporting different plans at different times with varying degrees of enthusiasm and for varying purposes, including "horse-trading" for support of his own objectives.
Admiral Nimitz consulted Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr., Commander, South Pacific, then authorized a mission on April 17 to intercept Yamamoto's flight ''en route'' and shoot it down.
To guard against mischance, Yamamoto initiated two security measures.
By Nimitz's calculation, his three available carrier decks, plus Midway, gave him rough parity with Nagumo's First Mobile Force.
The Japanese army, annoyed at Yamamoto's unflinching opposition to a Rome-Berlin-Tokyo treaty, dispatched military police to "guard" Yamamoto; this was an attempt by the Army to keep an eye on him.
In January 1941, Yamamoto went even further and proposed a radical revision of Japanese naval strategy.
Against four carriers, two light carriers, 11 battleships, 16 cruisers and 46 destroyers likely to be in the area of the main battle the Americans could field only three carriers, eight cruisers, and 15 destroyers.
In 1918 Isoroku married Reiko Mihashi, with whom he had two sons and two daughters.
These grandiose ventures were inevitably set aside as the army could not spare enough troops from China for the first two (which would require a minimum of 250,000 men), nor shipping to support the latter two.
To prevent the Japanese from regaining the initiative, King ramrodded the idea of an immediate American counterattack through the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
''Deep Blue Fleet''), instead of dying in the plane crash, Yamamoto blacks out and suddenly wakes up as his younger self, Isoroku Takano, after the Battle of Tsushima in 1905.
He frequently made jokes about moving to Monaco and starting his own casino.
On June 4, 1942, days before Yamamoto expected them to interfere in the Midway operation, American carrier-based aircraft destroyed the four carriers of the ''Kido Butai'', catching the Japanese carriers at an especially vulnerable moment.
Admiral Osami Nagano and the Naval General Staff eventually caved in to this pressure, but only insofar as approving the attack on Pearl Harbor.
The naval and land battles at Guadalcanal caught the Japanese over-extended and attempting to support fighting in New Guinea while guarding the Central Pacific and preparing to conduct Operation FS.
American aircraft carriers were also considered a choice target, but these were not in port at the time of the attack.
In 1940, U.S. Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Harold Stark had penned a Plan Dog memorandum, which emphasized a defensive war in the Pacific while the U.S. concentrated on defeating Nazi Germany first, and consigned Admiral Husband Kimmel's Pacific Fleet to merely keeping the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) out of the eastern Pacific and away from the shipping lanes to Australia.
'', which stars Japanese actor Sô Yamamura as Yamamoto, who states after the attack on Pearl Harbor:
Yamamoto himself received a steady stream of hate mail and death threats from Japanese nationalists but his reaction to the prospect of death by assassination was passive and accepting.
*''Gekido no showashi 'Gunbatsu' '' (1970, lit.
His demand for great range and the ability to carry a torpedo was intended to conform to Japanese conceptions of attriting the American fleet as it advanced across the Pacific in war.
Just as importantly, Japanese operational mishaps and American fighters and anti-aircraft fire devastated the dive bomber and torpedo plane formations of both ''Shōkaku''s and ''Zuikaku''s air groups.
This reduced Yamamoto to pursuing the classic defensive Decisive Battle strategy he had attempted to overturn.
After graduating from the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy in 1904, Yamamoto served on the armored cruiser  during the Russo-Japanese War.
Many commentators state it violated the principle of concentration of force, and was overly complex.
But when the British, as well as the Americans, expressed no interest in negotiating with Japan for any cease fire, the Japanese thoughts turned to securing their newly seized territory and acquiring more with an eye toward attempting to force one or more of their enemies out of the war.
Yamamoto committed Combined Fleet units to a series of small attrition actions across the south and central Pacific that stung the Americans, but suffered losses he could ill afford in return.
Japan could not hope to match the United States in quantities of well-trained replacement pilots, and the quality of both Japanese land-based and naval aviation began declining.
Yamamoto was part of the Japanese Navy establishment, who were rivals of the more aggressive Army establishment, especially the officers of the Kwantung Army.
This mission would be Top Secret and Urgent.
Yamamoto personally opposed the invasion of Manchuria in 1931, the subsequent land war with China (1937), and the 1940 Tripartite Pact with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy.
According to Hamasuna, Yamamoto had been thrown clear of the plane's wreckage, his white-gloved hand grasping the hilt of his katana, still upright in his seat under a tree.
*''Midway'' (1976, where all of the Japanese scenes had English dialogue).
His father was Sadayoshi Takano (高野 貞吉), an intermediate-rank ''samurai'' of the Nagaoka Domain.
However, he had lost face as a result of the Midway defeat and the Naval General Staff were disinclined to indulge in further gambles.
When asked by Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe in mid-1941 concerning the outcome of a possible war with the United States, Yamamoto made a well-known and prophetic statement: If ordered to fight, "I shall run wild considerably for the first six months or a year, but I have utterly no confidence for the second and third years."
To boost morale following the defeat at Guadalcanal, Yamamoto decided to make an inspection tour throughout the South Pacific.
(It remains unclear why Yamamoto permitted the earlier attack, and why his submarines did not sortie sooner, as reconnaissance was essential to the success of MI.)
Particularly harmful, however, were losses of numerous destroyers in the unsuccessful Tokyo Express supply runs.
The timing of each major battle was successively derailed when the army could not hold up its end of the operation.
Select pilots from three units were informed that they were intercepting an "important high officer" with no specific name given.
The Naval General Staff agreed to Yamamoto's Midway (MI) Operation, subsequent to the first phase of the operations against Australia's link with America, and concurrent with their own plan to seize positions in the Aleutian Islands.
The shock of the attack coming in an unexpected place, with such devastating results and without the expected "fair play" of a declaration of war galvanized the American public's determination to avenge the attack.
He was wounded at the Battle of Tsushima, losing two fingers (the index and middle fingers) on his left hand, as the cruiser was hit repeatedly by the Russian battle line.
Yamamoto was a strong proponent of naval aviation, and served as head of the Aeronautics Department before accepting a post as commander of the First Carrier Division.
Hamasuna said Yamamoto was instantly recognizable, head dipped down as if deep in thought.
This earned the G4M the sardonic nickname "the Flying Cigarette Lighter."
The more violent details of Yamamoto's death were hidden from the Japanese public; the medical report was whitewashed, changed "on orders from above", according to biographer Hiroyuki Agawa.
In the event, the first was aborted and the second delayed until after American carriers had sortied.
Much has been made of Yamamoto's hindsight, but (in keeping with Japanese military tradition not to criticize the commander on the spot) he did not punish Nagumo in any way for his withdrawal.
Although Tulagi and Guadalcanal were taken, the Port Moresby invasion fleet was compelled to turn back when Takagi clashed with an American carrier task force in the Battle of the Coral Sea in early May.
U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt ordered Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox to "Get Yamamoto."
There were severe losses of carrier dive-bomber and torpedo-bomber crews in the carrier battles, emasculating the already depleted carrier air groups.
"Isoroku" is an old Japanese term meaning "56"; the name referred to his father's age at Isoroku's birth.
At the end of the attack upon Pearl Harbor, upon hearing of the mis-timing of the communique breaking diplomatic relations with the United States earlier that day, it is reputed Yamamoto said, "I fear all we have done today is to awaken a great, sleeping giant and fill him with a terrible resolve.
The first film to feature Yamamoto was Toho's 1953 film ''Taiheiyô no washi'', (later released in the United States as ''Eagle of the Pacific''), in which Yamamoto was portrayed by Denjirô Ôkôchi.
The damaged aircraft were disproportionately dive and torpedo bombers, seriously impacting available firepower to exploit the first two waves' success, so the commander of the First Air Fleet, Naval Lieutenant-General Chuichi Nagumo, withdrew.
In Shūe Matsubayashi's 1981 film ''Rengō kantai'' (lit.
Not knowing several battleships, including the powerful , were on the Japanese order of battle, he did not comprehend the severe risk of a night surface battle, in which his carriers and cruisers would be at a disadvantage.
The Naval General Staff proved reluctant to go along and Yamamoto was eventually driven to capitalize on his popularity in the fleet by threatening to resign to get his way.
He enjoyed the company of ''geisha'', and his wife Reiko revealed to the Japanese public in 1954 that Yamamoto was closer to his favorite ''geisha'' Kawai Chiyoko than to her, which stirred some controversy.
Yamamoto held several important posts in the Imperial Japanese Navy, and undertook many of its changes and reorganizations, especially its development of naval aviation.
Yamamoto shifted the load of the air battle away from the depleted carrier air wings to land-based naval air forces.
These two ships would be sorely missed a month later at Midway.
Yamamoto was born  in Nagaoka, Niigata.
Yamamoto was an avid gambler, enjoying ''Go'', ''shogi'', billiards, bridge, mah jong, poker, and other games that tested his wits and sharpened his mind.
A post-mortem of the body disclosed that Yamamoto had received two 0.50-caliber bullet wounds, one to the back of his left shoulder and another to his left lower jaw that exited above his right eye.
Yamamoto hoped, but probably did not believe, if the Americans could be dealt such terrific blows early in the war, they might be willing to negotiate an end to the conflict.
Knox instructed Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Ernest J.
The Battle of Midway solidly checked Japanese momentum, but the IJN was still a powerful force and capable of regaining the initiative.
Yamamoto would eventually die in one of these aircraft.
In naval matters, Yamamoto opposed the building of the super-battleships  and  as an unwise investment of resources.
Already stretched thin, they suffered repeated setbacks due to a lack of shipping, a lack of troops, and a disastrous inability to coordinate Army and Navy activities.
With Guadalcanal lost in February 1943, there was no further attempt by the Japanese navy to seek a major battle in the Solomon Islands against the U.S. fleet, although smaller attrition battles continued.
Yamamoto, the itinerary revealed, would be flying from Rabaul to Balalae Airfield, on an island near Bougainville in the Solomon Islands, on the morning of April 18, 1943.
To this end, development of the airfield on Guadalcanal continued and attracted the baleful eye of Yamamoto's opposite number, Admiral Ernest King.
Prompted by talented young officers such as Lieutenant Commander Minoru Genda, Yamamoto approved the reorganization of Japanese carrier forces into the First Air Fleet, a consolidated striking force that gathered Japan's six largest carriers into one unit.
As Japan moved toward war during 1940, Yamamoto gradually moved toward strategic as well as tactical innovation, again with mixed results.
A squadron of USAAF Lockheed P-38 Lightning aircraft were assigned the task as only they possessed the range to intercept and engage.
'', this film also features the sleeping giant quote.
This innovation gave great striking capacity, but also concentrated the vulnerable carriers into a compact target; both boon and bane would be realized in war.
Throughout 1938, many young army and naval officers began to speak publicly against Yamamoto and certain other Japanese admirals such as Mitsumasa Yonai and Shigeyoshi Inoue for their strong opposition towards a Tripartite pact with Nazi Germany for reportedly being against "Japan's natural interests."
