In 1947, the British government announced it would withdraw from Mandatory Palestine, stating it was unable to arrive at a solution acceptable to both Arabs and Jews.
Israel is also at the technological forefront of desalination and water recycling.
The first record of the name Israel (as '''') occurs in the Merneptah stele, erected for Egyptian Pharaoh Merneptah c. 1209 BCE, "Israel is laid waste and his seed is not."
More than a thousand people were killed in the violence.
With countries around the world turning away Jewish refugees fleeing the Holocaust, a clandestine movement known as Aliyah Bet was organized to bring Jews to Palestine.
In 1964 Israel hosted and won the Asian Nations Cup; in 1970 the Israel national football team qualified for the FIFA World Cup, the only time it participated in the World Cup.
Temperatures in Israel vary widely, especially during the winter.
From May to September, rain in Israel is rare.
Days of working time in Israel are Sunday through Thursday (for a five-day workweek), or Friday (for a six-day workweek).
When completed, approximately 13% of the Barrier will be constructed on the Green Line or in Israel with 87% inside the West Bank.
Israel has embraced solar energy; its engineers are on the cutting edge of solar energy technology and its solar companies work on projects around the world.
Israel was established as a homeland for the Jewish people and is often referred to as a Jewish state.
Israel provides expertise to Ethiopia on irrigation projects and thousands of Ethiopian Jews (Beta Israel) live in Israel.
The conflict erupted in 167 BCE with the Maccabean Revolt, which succeeded in establishing an independent Hasmonean Kingdom in Judah, which later expanded over much of modern Israel, as the Seleucids gradually lost control in the region.
That day, David Ben-Gurion, the executive head of the Zionist Organization and president of the Jewish Agency for Palestine, declared "the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz Israel, to be known as the State of Israel", which would start to function from the termination of the mandate.
The International Court of Justice, principal judicial organ of the United Nations, asserted, in its 2004 advisory opinion on the legality of the construction of the Israeli West Bank barrier, that the lands captured by Israel in the Six-Day War, including East Jerusalem, are occupied territory.
The region came to be populated predominantly by Greco-Romans on the coast and Samaritans in the hill-country.
There were others that did it for the promise of a better life in Israel and a small number that were expelled from their homelands, such as British and French Jews in Egypt after the Suez Crisis.
On 15 May 1947, the General Assembly of the newly formed United Nations resolved that a committee, United Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP), be created "to prepare for consideration at the next regular session of the Assembly a report on the question of Palestine".
On 29 November 1947, the General Assembly adopted a resolution recommending the adoption and implementation of the ''Plan of Partition with Economic Union'' as Resolution 181 (II).
Israel also hosts a significant population of non-citizen foreign workers and asylum seekers from Africa and Asia, including illegal migrants from Sudan, Eritrea and other Sub-Saharan Africans.
After treating 200 patients in two weeks, the departing emergency team donated its equipment to the Japanese.
Israel's largest municipality, in population and area, is Jerusalem with 773,800 residents in an area of  (in 2009).
Israel does not consider the Gaza Strip to be occupied territory and declared it a "foreign territory".
Israel has nine public universities that are subsidized by the state and 49 private colleges.
Israel is one of the world's technological leaders in water technology.
The PLO soon resumed its policy of attacks against Israel.
Most Israelis are drafted into the military at the age of 18.
Israel is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
The Israel Defense Forces is the sole military wing of the Israeli security forces, and is headed by its Chief of General Staff, the ''Ramatkal'', subordinate to the Cabinet.
The area of Beersheba and the Northern Negev has a semi-arid climate with hot summers, cool winters and fewer rainy days than the Mediterranean climate.
Over 90% of Israeli homes use solar energy for hot water, the highest per capita in the world.
The Ministry of Education and the World Chess Federation agreed upon a project of teaching chess within Israeli schools, and it has been introduced into the curriculum of some schools.
Founded in 1918, Habima Theatre in Tel Aviv is Israel's oldest repertory theater company and national theater.
An Israeli government inquiry&nbsp;– the Kahan Commission&nbsp;– would later hold Begin, Sharon and several Israeli generals as indirectly responsible for the Sabra and Shatila massacre.
A member of parliament supported by a parliamentary majority becomes the prime minister—usually this is the chair of the largest party.
Jordan, Syria and Iraq responded and attacked Israel.
Israel is the only country in the world where life revolves around the Hebrew calendar.
Israel has two official languages, Hebrew and Arabic.
Since Israel's capture of these territories, Israeli settlements and military installations have been built within each of them.
Around 4% of Israelis (300,000), ethnically defined as "others", are Russian descendants of Jewish origin or family who are not Jewish according to rabbinical law, but were eligible for Israeli citizenship under the Law of Return.
On 5 June 1967, Israel launched a pre-emptive strike against Egypt.
Israel has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest nearly every year since 1973, winning the competition three times and hosting it twice.
An influx of Holocaust survivors and Jews from Arab and Muslim lands immigrated to Israel during the first 3 years and the number of Jews increased from 700,000 to 1,400,000, many of whom faced persecution in their original countries.
Some commentators contend that the uprising was pre-planned by Yasser Arafat due to the collapse of peace talks.
During the 1950s, Israel was frequently attacked by Palestinian fedayeen, nearly always against civilians, mainly from the Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip, leading to several Israeli counter-raids.
Israel has produced six Nobel Prize-winning scientists since 2002 and has been frequently ranked as one of the countries with the highest ratios of scientific papers per capita in the world.
Israel is served by two international airports, Ben Gurion International Airport, the country's main hub for international air travel near Tel Aviv-Yafo, Ovda Airport in the south, as well as several small domestic airports.
The area is also known as the Holy Land, being holy for all Abrahamic religions including Judaism, Christianity, Islam and the Bahá'í Faith.
He wrote "If the gentiles wish to make peace, we shall make peace and leave them on clear terms; but as for the land, we shall not leave it in their hands, nor in the hands of any nation, not in any generation."
Israel maintains diplomatic relations with 158 countries and has 107 diplomatic missions around the world; countries with whom they have no diplomatic relations include most Muslim countries.
Other Arab states mobilized their forces.
Both General and Labor courts are paperless courts: the storage of court files, as well as court decisions, are conducted electronically.
Jews from Europe and the former Soviet Union and their descendants born in Israel, including Ashkenazi Jews, constitute approximately 50% of Jewish Israelis.
It is also the home of the first hominid fossil skull found in Western Asia called Galilee Man.
After the collapse of the talks and a controversial visit by Likud leader Ariel Sharon to the Temple Mount, the Second Intifada began.
Sharon became prime minister in a 2001 special election.
The notion of the "Land of Israel", known in Hebrew as ''Eretz Yisrael'', has been important and sacred to the Jewish people since Biblical times.
Sargon's son, Sennacherib, tried and failed to conquer Judah.
Israel's national Holocaust museum, Yad Vashem, is the world central archive of Holocaust-related information.
Among Israel's world-renowned orchestras is the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, which has been in operation for over seventy years and today performs more than two hundred concerts each year.
The defeat was also recorded by the Babylonians (see the Babylonian Chronicles).
Given the fragile political situation of the Middle East region and the presence there of major holy sites, a quake reaching magnitude 7 on the Richter scale could have dire consequences for world peace.
According to the Hebrew Bible 50,000 Judeans, led by Zerubabel, returned to Judah and rebuilt the temple.
The Basic Laws of Israel function as an uncodified constitution.
Some new immigrants arrived as refugees with no possessions and were housed in temporary camps known as ''ma'abarot''; by 1952, over 200,000 immigrants were living in these tent cities.
The largest makhtesh in the world is Ramon Crater in the Negev, which measures .
The UN Security Council has declared the annexation of the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem to be "null and void" and continues to view the territories as occupied.
Many Israelis communicate reasonably well in English, as many television programs are broadcast in English with subtitles and the language is taught from the early grades in elementary school.
Israel has no official religion, but the definition of the state as "Jewish and democratic" creates a strong connection with Judaism, as well as a conflict between state law and religious law.
The West Bank, outside of the Israeli settlements within the territory, has remained under direct military rule, and Palestinians in this area cannot become Israeli citizens.
In 1950 Egypt closed the Suez Canal to Israeli shipping and tensions mounted as armed clashes took place along Israel's borders.
The Arab League and Arab Higher Committee of Palestine rejected it, and indicated that they would reject any other plan of partition.
Men serve two years and eight months and women two years.
Eichmann remains the only person executed in Israel by conviction by an Israeli civilian court.
The Plan attached to the resolution was essentially that proposed by the majority of the Committee in the Report of 3 September 1947.
Israeli foreign aid ranks very low among OECD nations, spending less than 0.1% of its GNI on foreign aid, as opposed to the recommended 0.7%.
Israeli cuisine has adopted, and continues to adapt, elements of various styles of Jewish cuisine, particularly the Mizrahi, Sephardic, and Ashkenazi styles of cooking, along with Moroccan Jewish, Iraqi Jewish, Ethiopian Jewish, Indian Jewish, Iranian Jewish and Yemeni Jewish influences.
Israel responded by launching an invasion of southern Lebanon to destroy the PLO bases south of the Litani River.
Israel sent over 200 medical doctors and personnel to start treating injured Haitians at the scene.
Approximately 7,800 Israelis lived in settlements in the Gaza Strip, until they were evacuated by the government as part of its 2005 disengagement plan.
Some of Israel's satellites are ranked among the world's most advanced space systems.
On 29 November 1947, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a Partition Plan for Mandatory Palestine.
The country benefits from a highly skilled workforce and is among the most educated countries in the world with the one of the highest percentage of its citizens holding a tertiary education degree.
The Palestinian fatalities, by 30 April 2008, reached 4,745 killed by Israeli security forces, 44 killed by Israeli civilians, and 577 killed by Palestinians.
It extended its laws to the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem, but not the West Bank.
In 2011, its water technology industry was worth around $2 billion a year with annual exports of products and services in the tens of millions of dollars.
Assyrian records say he leveled 46 walled cities and besieged Jerusalem, leaving after receiving extensive tribute.
The administrative center of the Bahá'í Faith and the Shrine of the Báb are located at the Bahá'í World Centre in Haifa; the leader of the faith is buried in Acre.
The Roman Empire invaded the region in 63 BCE, first taking control of Syria, and then intervening in the Hasmonean civil war.
The deficit in slip that has built up since the 1033 event is sufficient to cause an earthquake of Mw~7.4.
Israel is consistently rated low in the Global Peace Index, ranking 148th out of 162 nations for peacefulness in 2015.
Thanks to Joseph Saragossi who had arrived in the closing years of the 15th century, Safed and its environs had developed into the largest concentration of Jews in Palestine.
Although Israel supports the goals of the International Criminal Court, it has not ratified the Rome Statute, citing concerns about the ability of the court to remain free from political impartiality.
Israel's humanitarian efforts officially began in 1958, with the establishment of MASHAV, the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs Agency for International Development Cooperation.
It is the world's only Jewish-majority state, with 6,388,800 citizens, or 74.8%, being designated as Jewish.
There are 2,867 known species of plants found in Israel.
The refugees were often treated differently according to where they had come from.
Consequently, the population of Israel rose from 800,000 to two million between 1948 and 1958.
The Israeli-Arab satirist Sayed Kashua (who writes in Hebrew) is also internationally known.
The apparent purpose of the invasion was to prevent the establishment of the Jewish state at inception, and some Arab leaders talked about driving the Jews into the sea.
On the basis of scripture, the period of the three Patriarchs has been placed somewhere in the early 2nd millennium&nbsp;BCE, and the first Kingdom of Israel was established around the 11th century BCE.
The Jewish Legion, a group primarily of Zionist volunteers, assisted, in 1918, in the British conquest of Palestine.
In July 2006, a Hezbollah artillery assault on Israel's northern border communities and a cross-border abduction of two Israeli soldiers precipitated the month-long Second Lebanon War.Escalation of hostilities in Lebanon and in Israel since Hizbollah's attack on Israel on 12 July 2006 On 6 September 2007, the Israeli Air Force destroyed a nuclear reactor in Syria.
In 1266 the Mamluk Sultan Baybars converted the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron into an exclusive Islamic sanctuary and banned Christians and Jews from entering, which previously would be able to enter it for a fee.
Although Turkey and Israel did not establish full diplomatic relations until 1991, Turkey has cooperated with the State since its recognition of Israel in 1949.
The highest temperature in the continent of Asia () was recorded in 1942 at Tirat Zvi kibbutz in the northern Jordan river valley.
Control of the region transferred between the Rashidun Caliphs, Umayyads, Abbasids, Fatimids, Seljuks, Crusaders, and Ayyubids throughout the next six centuries, before the area was conquered in 1260 by the Mamluk Sultanate.
By 2014, Israel's desalination programs provided roughly 35% of Israel's drinking water and it is expected to supply 40% by 2015 and 70% by 2050.
Israel's substantial Arab minority has also left its imprint on Israeli culture in such spheres as architecture, music, and cuisine.
Famous Israeli companies include the Batsheva Dance Company and the Kibbutz Contemporary Dance Company.
Israeli cuisine includes local dishes as well as dishes brought to the country by Jewish immigrants from the diaspora.
The most popular spectator sports in Israel are association football and basketball.
Exact figures are unknown, as many of them are living in the country illegally, but estimates run in the region of 203,000.
Israel is a representative democracy with a parliamentary system, proportional representation and universal suffrage.
At the other extreme mountainous regions can be windy, cold, and areas at elevation of 750 meters or more (same elevation as Jerusalem) will usually receive at least one snowfall each year.
For this reason the flora and fauna of Israel is extremely diverse.
Over the last decade, large numbers of migrant workers from Romania, Thailand, China, Africa, and South America have settled in Israel.
The 2013 Freedom in the World annual survey and report by U.S.-based Freedom House, which attempts to measure the degree of democracy and political freedom in every nation, ranked Israel as the Middle East and North Africa's only free country.
Maccabi Tel Aviv, Maccabi Haifa and Hapoel Tel Aviv have competed in the UEFA Champions League and Hapoel Tel Aviv reached the UEFA Cup quarter-finals.
Since the Yom Kippur War, Israel has developed a network of reconnaissance satellites.
The struggle between pro-Roman and pro-Parthian factions in Judea eventually led to the installation of Herod the Great and consolidation of the Herodian Kingdom as a vassal Judean state of Rome.
Israeli children from Russian-speaking families have a higher bagrut pass rate  at high-school level.
The only reference in the text of the Declaration to the borders of the new state is the use of the term ''Eretz-Israel'' ("Land of Israel").
Further south is the Arabah, ending with the Gulf of Eilat, part of the Red Sea.
The Maccabiah Games, an Olympic-style event for Jewish athletes and Israeli athletes, was inaugurated in the 1930s, and has been held every four years since then.
Israeli grandmaster Boris Gelfand won the Chess World Cup in 2009 and the 2011 Candidates Tournament for the right to challenge the world champion.
The Gaza Strip was occupied by Egypt from 1948 to 1967 and then by Israel after 1967.
In 634–641 CE, the region, including Jerusalem, was conquered by the Arabs who had just recently adopted Islam.
The United Nations estimated that more than 700,000 Palestinians were expelled by or fled from advancing Israeli forces during the conflict—what would become known in Arabic as the ''Nakba'' ("catastrophe").
Owing partly to Soviet immigration, it is home to the largest number of chess grandmasters of any city in the world.
Israel has since fought several wars with neighboring Arab states, in the course of which it has occupied the West Bank, Sinai Peninsula (1956–57, 1967–82), part of Southern Lebanon (1982–2000), Gaza Strip (1967–2005; still considered occupied after 2005 disengagement) and the Golan Heights.
The first wave of modern Jewish migration to Ottoman-ruled Palestine, known as the First Aliyah, began in 1881, as Jews fled pogroms in Eastern Europe.
Israel started another operation in Gaza following an escalation of rocket attacks by Hamas in July 2014.
Each side blamed the other for the failure of the talks.
The Haganah joined Irgun and Lehi in an armed struggle against British rule.
Despite the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, Israel is still widely considered an enemy country among Egyptians.
The archaeological evidence indicates a society of village-like centres, but with more limited resources and a small population.
In 2013, 91&nbsp;percent of the 7,863 books transferred to the library were in Hebrew.
The Gaza War lasted three weeks and ended after Israel announced a unilateral ceasefire.
The West Bank was occupied by Israel in 1967 during the Six-Day War.
An alternative for those who receive exemptions on various grounds is ''Sherut Leumi'', or national service, which involves a program of service in hospitals, schools and other social welfare frameworks.
The United States has provided $68&nbsp;billion in military assistance and $32&nbsp;billion in grants to Israel since 1967, under the Foreign Assistance Act (period beginning 1962), more than any other country for that period until 2003.
Eilat has hosted its own international music festival, the Red Sea Jazz Festival, every summer since 1987.
The Israel Museum in Jerusalem is one of Israel's most important cultural institutions and houses the Dead Sea scrolls, along with an extensive collection of Judaica and European art.
In addition, nearly twice as many Israelis aged 55–64 held a higher education degree compared to other OECD countries, with 47 percent holding an academic degree compared with the OECD average of 25%.
The Mishnah and part of the Talmud, central Jewish texts, were composed during the 2nd to 4th centuries CE in Tiberias and Jerusalem.
Jewish presence in the region significantly dwindled after the failure of the Bar Kokhba revolt against the Roman Empire in 132 CE.
As a result of the 2008–09 Gaza War, Mauritania, Qatar, Bolivia, and Venezuela suspended political and economic ties with Israel.
No Israeli legislation has defined the territory of Israel and no act specifically included East Jerusalem therein.
The city of Beersheba has become a national chess center, with the game being taught in the city's kindergartens.
In the first six days of fighting, the Israelis destroyed the military forces of the PLO in Lebanon and decisively defeated the Syrians.
The Israeli Space Agency coordinates all Israeli space research programs with scientific and commercial goals.
Around 930 BCE, the kingdom split into a southern Kingdom of Judah and a northern Kingdom of Israel.
Israel has won over 100 gold medals in the Paralympic Games and is ranked about 15th in the all-time medal count.
Apart from maintenance staff, there is no Bahá'í community in Israel, although it is a destination for pilgrimages.
Israeli tennis champion Shahar Pe'er ranked 11th in the world on 31 January 2011.
Several proposals have been raised to adjust the work week with the majority of the world, and make Sunday a non-working day, while extending working time of other days or replacing Friday with Sunday as a work day.
The committee's members of the Knesset are secretly elected by the Knesset, and one of them is traditionally a member of the opposition, the committee's Supreme Court justices are chosen by tradition from all Supreme Court justices by seniority, the Israeli Bar members are elected by the bar, and the second minister is appointed by the Israeli cabinet.
However, peace treaties between Israel and both Egypt and Jordan have successfully been signed.
Israel is widely believed to possess nuclear weapons as well as chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction.
In the two years that followed, Sadat and Begin signed the Camp David Accords (1978) and the Israel–Egypt Peace Treaty (1979).
Mossad LeAliyah Bet continued to take part in immigration efforts until its disbanding in 1953.
The need to solve the crisis led Ben-Gurion to sign a reparations agreement with West Germany that triggered mass protests by Jews angered at the idea that Israel could accept monetary compensation for the Holocaust.
The Hebrew Book Week is held each June and features book fairs, public readings, and appearances by Israeli authors around the country.
The end of the British Mandate for Palestine was set for midnight on 14 May 1948.
It now plays a significant role in modern Israeli folk dancing and is regularly performed at weddings and other celebrations, and in group dances throughout Israel.
During the siege of Jerusalem by the First Crusade in 1099, the Jewish inhabitants of the city fought side by side with the Fatimid garrison and the Muslim population who tried in vain to defend the city against the Crusaders.
Nachmanides, the 13th-century Spanish rabbi and recognised leader of Jewry greatly praised the land of Israel and viewed its settlement as a positive commandment incumbent on all Jews.
Maariv have describe the Christian Arabs sectors as "the most successful in education system", since Christian Arabs fared the best in terms of education in comparison to any other group in Israel.
In 2011, there were 250,000 Jews living in East Jerusalem.
Jewish communities in the Levant were the first to introduce compulsory education for which the organized community, not less than the parents, was responsible for the education of the next generation of Jews.
Villages had populations of up to 300 or 400, which lived by farming and herding, and were largely self-sufficient; economic interchange was prevalent.
At this time, a full thousand years after the fall of the Jewish state, there were Jewish communities all over the country.
Israel has a three-tier court system.
A second group of 5,000, led by Ezra and Nehemiah, returned to Judah in 456 BCE although non-Jews wrote to Cyrus to try to prevent their return.
It incorporates many foods traditionally eaten in the Arab, Middle Eastern and Mediterranean cuisines, such as ''falafel'', ''hummus'', ''shakshouka'', ''couscous'', and ''za'atar'', which have become common ingredients in Israeli cuisine.
The Golan Heights and all of Jordan are part of the Arabian Plate, while the Galilee, West Bank, Coastal Plain, and Negev along with the Sinai Peninsula are on the African Plate.
Destructive earthquakes leading to serious loss of life strike about every 80 years.
Al-Harizi compared Saladin's decree allowing Jews to re-establish themselves in Jerusalem to the one issued by the Persian king Cyrus the Great over 1,600 years earlier.
The public secular is the largest school group, and is attended by the majority of Jewish and non-Arab pupils in Israel.
Efforts to resolve the Israeli–Palestinian conflict have not resulted in peace.
In July 2007, American business magnate and investor Warren Buffett's holding company Berkshire Hathaway bought an Israeli company, Iscar, its first non-U.S. acquisition, for $4&nbsp;billion.
Israel's Iron Dome anti-missile air defense system gained worldwide acclaim after intercepting hundreds of Qassam, 122 mm Grad and Fajr-5 artillery rockets fire by Palestinian militants from the Gaza Strip.
Iran had diplomatic relations with Israel under the Pahlavi dynasty but withdrew its recognition of Israel during the Islamic Revolution.
Relations between the two countries were also made stronger by former prime minister Tony Blair's efforts for a two state resolution.
A number of other religious landmarks are located in the West Bank, among them Joseph's Tomb in Nablus, the birthplace of Jesus and Rachel's Tomb in Bethlehem, and the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron.
The name "Israel" (Standard&nbsp;''Yisraʾel'', ''Isrāʾīl''; Septuagint  ''Israēl''; 'El(God) persists/rules' though, after Hosea 12:4 often interpreted as "struggle with God") in these phrases refers to the patriarch Jacob who, according to the Hebrew Bible, was given the name after he successfully wrestled with the angel of the Lord.
The Arab league stated that the invasion was to restore law and order and to prevent further bloodshed.
Since the Gulf War in 1991, when Israel was attacked by Iraqi Scud missiles, all homes in Israel are required to have a reinforced security room, Merkhav Mugan, impermeable to chemical and biological substances.
Under Tiglath-Pileser III it first split Israel's territory into several smaller units and then destroyed its capital, Samaria (722 BCE).
In the Report of the Committee dated 3 September 1947 to the UN General Assembly, the majority of the Committee in Chapter VI proposed a plan to replace the British Mandate with "an independent Arab State, an independent Jewish State, and the City of Jerusalem ... the last to be under an International Trusteeship System".
Israel has 18,096&nbsp;kilometers (11,244&nbsp;mi) of paved roads, and 2.4&nbsp;million motor vehicles.
From 1920, the whole region was known as Palestine (under British Mandate) until the Israeli Declaration of Independence of 1948.
Together with non-kosher fish, rabbits and ostriches, pork—often called "white meat" in Israel—is produced and consumed, though it is forbidden by both Judaism and Islam.
File:Flowers-of-Israel-ver006.jpg|Flowers of Israel
In 1187 Sultan Saladin, founder of the Ayyubid dynasty, defeated the Crusaders in the Battle of Hattin and subsequently captured Jerusalem and almost all of Palestine.
Coastal areas, such as those of Tel Aviv and Haifa, have a typical Mediterranean climate with cool, rainy winters and long, hot summers.
Some believed in a Zionist ideology, while others moved to escape persecution.
In a Six-Day War, Israel defeated Jordan and captured the West Bank, defeated Egypt and captured the Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula, and defeated Syria and captured the Golan Heights.
