The former Istanbul Stock Exchange  was originally established as the Ottoman Stock Exchange in 1866.
The city subsequently became the center of the Latin Empire, created by Catholic crusaders to replace the Orthodox Byzantine Empire.
The first private university established in Istanbul since 1982 was Koç University (founded in 1992), and another dozen had opened within the following decade.
Since the mid-1990s, Istanbul's economy has been one of the fastest-growing among OECD metro-regions.
Because of the topography, buildings in Beyoğlu were once constructed with the help of terraced retaining walls, and roads were laid out in the form of steps.
The most recent of these is the 13,800-seat Ülker Sports Arena, which opened in 2012 as the home court of Fenerbahçe's basketball teams.
The first human settlement on the Asian side, the Fikirtepe mound, is from the Copper Age period, with artifacts dating from 5500 to 3500 BCE, On the European side, near the point of the peninsula (Sarayburnu), there was a Thracian settlement during the early 1st millennium BCE.
During the 19th and early 20th centuries, Bankalar Caddesi (Banks Street) in Galata was the financial center of the Ottoman Empire, where the Ottoman Stock Exchange was located.
Turkey has more hospitals accredited by the U.S.-based Joint Commission than any other country in the world, with most concentrated in its big cities.
Istanbul also became the heart of Turkey's nascent film industry, although Turkish films were not consistently developed until the 1950s.
Istanbul experienced especially rapid growth during the second half of the 20th century, with its population increasing tenfold between 1950 and 2000.
Istanbul has two international airports.
An example of which is the imperial Nuruosmaniye Mosque.
Emirgan Park is known for its diversity of plants and an annual tulip festival is held there since 2005.
''Pera'' (from the Greek word for "across") was used to describe the area between the Golden Horn and the Bosphorus, but Turks also used the name ''Beyoğlu'' (today the official name for one of the city's constituent districts).
Beşiktaş J.K., established in 1903, is considered the oldest of these sports clubs.
The Sinan Erdem Dome, among the largest indoor arenas in Europe, hosted the final of the 2010 FIBA World Championship, the 2012 IAAF World Indoor Championships, and the 2011–12 Euroleague Final Four.
Into the 19th century, the Christians of Istanbul tended to be either Greek Orthodox or members of the Armenian Apostolic Church.
The Istanbul Metro comprises three lines (the M1 and M2 on the European side, and the M4 on the Asian side) with several other lines (such as the M3, M5, M7, and M6 Mini-Metro) and extensions under construction.
Although Erdoğan won the most votes in İstanbul, his failure to win above 50% was seen as significant.
Today, there are at least 30 private universities in the city, including Istanbul Commerce University and Kadir Has University.
The settlers built an acropolis adjacent to the Golden Horn on the site of the early Thracian settlements, fueling the nascent city's economy.
Istanbul is home to Borsa Istanbul, the sole exchange entity of Turkey, which combined the former Istanbul Stock Exchange, the Istanbul Gold Exchange, and the Derivatives Exchange of Turkey.
The highest point in Istanbul is Çamlıca Hill, with an altitude of .
The importance of Constantinople in the Ottoman world was also reflected by its Ottoman name 'Der Saadet' meaning the 'gate to Prosperity' in Ottoman.
Arts, music, film, and cultural festivals were established at the end of the 20th century and continue to be hosted by the city today.
Following the founding of the Turkish Republic, the plant underwent renovations to accommodate the city's increasing demand; its capacity grew from  in 1923 to a peak of  in 1956.
The people of Istanbul remain concerned that an even more catastrophic seismic event may be in the city's near future, as thousands of structures recently built to accommodate Istanbul's rapidly increasing population may not have been constructed properly.
Opposition candidate Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu came second with 41.08% and the HDP pro-Kurdish and left-wing candidate Selahattin Demirtaş won a substantial 9.09%.
The  park was later owned by Khedive Ismail Pasha of Ottoman Egypt and Sudan in the 19th century.
Seismologists say the risk of a 7.6-magnitude or greater earthquake striking Istanbul by 2030 is more than .
With its high population and significant contribution to the Turkish economy, Istanbul is responsible for two-fifths of the nation's tax revenue.
The most densely populated areas tend to lie to the northwest, west, and southwest of the city center, on the European side; the most densely populated district on the Asian side is Üsküdar.
Long allied with the Romans, Byzantium officially became a part of the Roman Empire in 73 CE.
The Prince Islands,  from the city center, are also popular for their seafood restaurants.
Five years later, Severus began to rebuild Byzantium, and the city regained—and, by some accounts, surpassed—its previous prosperity.
Hüseyin Avni Mutlu has been Governor of Istanbul Province since May 2010.
Atatürk Olympic Stadium, the largest multi-purpose stadium in Turkey, was completed in 2002 as an IAAF first-class venue for track and field.
This system continued beyond the founding of the Turkish Republic, with the province renamed a ''belediye'' (municipality), but the municipality was disbanded in 1957.
With the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality and Istanbul Province having equivalent jurisdictions, few responsibilities remain for the provincial government.
Today, TRT runs four national radio stations; these stations have transmitters across the country so each can reach over  of the country's population, but only  is based in Istanbul.
The Sublime Porte (''Bâb-ı Âli''), which became a metonym for the Ottoman government, was originally used to describe the Imperial Gate (''Bâb-ı Hümâyûn'') at the outermost courtyard of the Topkapı Palace; but after the 18th century, the ''Sublime Porte'' (or simply ''Porte'') began to refer to the gate of the ''Sadrazamlık'' (Prime Ministry) compound in the Cağaloğlu quarter near Topkapı Palace, where the offices of the Sadrazam (Grand Vizier) and other Viziers were located, and where foreign diplomats were received.
Üsküdar on the Asian side exhibits similarly hilly characteristics, with the terrain gradually extending down to the Bosphorus coast, but the landscape in Şemsipaşa and Ayazma is more abrupt, akin to a promontory.
The Ottoman Dynasty claimed the status of caliphate in 1517, with Istanbul remaining the capital of this last caliphate for four centuries.
The AKP government's decision to replace Taksim Gezi Park with a replica of the Ottoman era Taksim Military Barracks (which was transformed into the Taksim Stadium in 1921, before being demolished in 1940 for building Gezi Park) sparked a series of nationwide protests in 2013 covering a wide range of issues.
Hagia Sophia was converted to a catholic church in 1204.
The city's main cruise ship terminal is the Port of Istanbul in Karaköy, with a capacity of 10,000 passengers per hour.
Many of Istanbul's sports facilities have been built or upgraded since 2000 to bolster the city's bids for the Summer Olympic Games.
''Hürriyet'''s English-language edition, ''The Hürriyet Daily News'', has been printed since 1961, but the English-language ''Today's Zaman'', first published by ''Zaman'' in 2007, has overtaken it in circulation.
In the Köppen–Geiger classification system, Istanbul has a borderline Mediterranean climate (''Csa''), humid subtropical climate (''Cfa'') and oceanic climate (''Cfb''), due to its location in a transitional climatic zone.
The Bosphorus, which connects the Sea of Marmara to the Black Sea, divides the city into a European, Thracian side—comprising the historic and economic centers—and an Asian, Anatolian side.
Building a new runway at Atatürk Airport was rejected due to the cost involved; environmental concerns have also been raised with respect to the new airport.
Europeans used ''Constantinople'' to refer to the whole of the city, but used the name ''Stamboul''—as the Turks also did—to describe the walled peninsula between the Golden Horn and the Sea of Marmara.
Most Sunnis follow the Hanafi school of Islamic thought, although approximately  of Sunnis follow the Shafi'i school.
In the 2014 presidential election, 49.83% of the city's electorate voted for AKP candidate Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
İstanbul has 39 districts, more than any other province in Turkey.
Along the İstiklal Avenue is the Çiçek Pasajı, now home to winehouses (known as ''meyhanes''), pubs, and restaurants.
The high population growth mirrors an urbanization trend across the country, as the second and third fastest-growing OECD metropolises are the Turkish cities of İzmir and Ankara.
The summer months also have the highest concentration of thunderstorms.
Although originally an Islamic school, the university established law, medicine, and science departments in the 19th century and was secularized after the founding of the Turkish Republic.
Despite having a focus on high-value-added work, its low-value-added manufacturing sector is substantial, representing just  of Istanbul's GDP, but four-fifths of the city's total exports.
64.7% of the residents live on the European side and 35.3% on the Asian side.
After Constantine the Great made it the new eastern capital of the Roman Empire in 330 CE, the city became widely known as "Constantinopolis" (Constantinople), which, as the Latinized form of "" (''Konstantinoúpolis''), means the "City of Constantine".
The largest palace, Topkapı, includes a diverse array of architectural styles, from Baroque inside the Harem, to its Neoclassical style Enderûn Library.
Darüşşafaka begins instruction with the fourth grade, providing instruction in English and, starting in sixth grade, a second foreign language—German or French.
Private universities were officially outlawed in Turkey before the Constitution of 1982, but there were already fifteen private "higher schools", which were effectively universities, in Istanbul by 1970.
The stadium hosted the 2005 UEFA Champions League Final.
The largest non-Sunni Muslim sect, accounting for  Turks, is the Alevis; a third of all Alevis in the country live in Istanbul.
In 2011, the first and second bridges on the Bosphorus carried  each day.
In the early 20th century, the Young Turk Revolution deposed Sultan Abdul Hamid II and a series of wars plagued the ailing empire's capital.
Hoping to capitalize on its revitalization and rapid expansion, Istanbul has bid for the Summer Olympics five times in twenty years.
The Tünel opened in 1875 as the world's second-oldest subterranean rail line (after London's Metropolitan Railway).
As public hospitals tend to be overcrowded or otherwise slow, private hospitals are preferable for those who can afford them.
As the only sea route between the oil-rich Black Sea and the Mediterranean, the Bosphorus is one of the busiest waterways in the world; more than  tonnes of oil pass through the strait each year, and the traffic on the Bosphorus is three times that on the Suez Canal.
The main decision-making body of the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality is the Municipal Council, with members drawn from district councils.
The former village of Ortaköy is situated within Beşiktaş and gives its name to the Ortaköy Mosque on the Bosphorus, near the Bosphorus Bridge.
The Metrobus, a form of bus rapid transit, crosses the Bosphorus Bridge, with dedicated lanes leading to its termini.
The greatest rainfall recorded in a day is , and the highest recorded snow cover is .
Galatasaray, for example, offers instruction in French; other Anatolian High Schools primarily teach in English or German alongside Turkish.
The highest and lowest temperatures ever recorded in the city center on the Marmara coast are  and .
The Silahtarağa Power Station, a coal-fired power plant along the Golden Horn, was the sole source of Istanbul's electricity between 1914, when its first engine room was completed, and 1952.
The city is further divided by the Golden Horn, a natural harbor bounding the peninsula where the former Byzantium and Constantinople were founded.
Offering a range of content from educational programming to coverage of sporting events,  is the most popular radio station in Turkey.
The incumbent mayor of the city is Kadir Topbaş of the AKP, who was first elected in the 2004 local elections and succeeded Ali Müfit Gürtuna of the closed down Welfare Party.
In 2000, Istanbul had , of which 100 were private.
Moreover, large scale gentrification and urban renewal projects have been taking place, such as the one in Tarlabaşı; some of these projects, like the one in Sulukule, have faced criticism.
Istanbul has some of Turkey's oldest sports clubs.
A Turkish folk etymology traces the name to Islam bol "plenty of Islam" because the city was called ''Islambol'' ("plenty of Islam") or ''Islambul'' ("find Islam") as the capital of the Islamic Ottoman Empire.
Radio broadcasts in Istanbul date back to 1927, when Turkey's first radio transmission came from atop the Central Post Office in Eminönü.
Istanbul's airwaves are the busiest in Turkey, primarily featuring either Turkish-language or English-language content.
A period of rebellion at the start of the 19th century led to the rise of the progressive Sultan Mahmud II and eventually to the ''Tanzimat'' period, which produced political reforms and allowed new technology to be introduced to the city.
Galleria Ataköy ushered in the age of modern shopping malls in Turkey when it opened in 1987.
Türk Telekom Arena opened in 2011 to replace Ali Sami Yen Stadium as Galatasaray's home turf, while Vodafone Arena opened in 2016 to replace BJK İnönü Stadium as the home turf of Beşiktaş, which won the Süper Lig in the same season.
There are other significant ethnic minorities as well, the Bosniaks are the main people of an entire district – Bayrampaşa.
Istanbul is one of the world's most populous cities and ranks as the world's 7th-largest city proper and the largest European city.
At present, some ''gecekondu'' areas are being gradually demolished and replaced by modern mass-housing compounds.
Spring and autumn are mild, but often wet and unpredictable; chilly winds from the northwest and warm gusts from the south—sometimes in the same day—tend to cause fluctuations in temperature.
Darüşşafaka High School provides free education to children across the country missing at least one parent.
Areas around İstiklal Avenue were filled with grand European embassies and rows of buildings in Neoclassical, Renaissance Revival and Art Nouveau styles, which went on to influence the architecture of a variety of structures in Beyoğlu—including churches, stores, and theaters—and official buildings such as Dolmabahçe Palace.
Istanbul is located in north-western Turkey within the Marmara Region on a total area of .
Istanbul is situated near the North Anatolian Fault, close to the boundary between the African and Eurasian Plates.
Popular during the summer among Istanbulites is Belgrad Forest, spreading across  at the northern edge of the city.
Istanbul is also famous for its sophisticated and elaborately-cooked dishes of the Ottoman cuisine.
By 1876, the first international mailing network between Istanbul and the lands beyond the Ottoman Empire had been established.
A person from the city is an ''İstanbullu'' (plural: ''İstanbullular''), although ''Istanbulite'' is used in English.
The high quality of healthcare, especially in private hospitals, has contributed to a recent upsurge in medical tourism to Turkey (with a  increase between 2007 and 2008).
The city is the administrative center of the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality (coterminous with Istanbul Province), both hosting a population of around 14.7 million residents.
Among the most devastating of these seismic events was the 1509 earthquake, which caused a tsunami that broke over the walls of the city and killed more than 10,000 people.
Operated by Istanbul Electricity, Tramway, and Tunnel General Management (İETT), trams slowly returned to the city in the 1990s with the introduction of a nostalgic route and a faster modern tram line, which now carries  each day.
''Islambol'' (meaning either "City of Islam" or "Full of Islam") was sometimes colloquially used to refer to the city, and was even engraved on some Ottoman coins, but the belief that it was the precursor to the present name, ''İstanbul'', is belied by the fact that the latter existed well before the former and even predates the Ottoman conquest of the city.
Christians made up half the population of the city in 1910.
International rail service from Istanbul launched in 1889, with a line between Bucharest and Istanbul's Sirkeci Terminal, which ultimately became famous as the eastern terminus of the Orient Express from Paris.
Since precipitation in summer months, ranges from , depending on location, the city cannot be classified as solely Mediterranean or humid subtropical.
With additional destinations around the Sea of Marmara, İDO runs the largest municipal ferry operation in the world.
Other focal points for Istanbul's nightlife include Nişantaşı, Ortaköy, Bebek, and Kadıköy.
Bankalar Caddesi continued to be Istanbul's main financial district until the 1990s, when most Turkish banks began moving their headquarters to the modern central business districts of Levent and Maslak.
Istanbul's first water supply systems date back to the city's early history, when aqueducts (such as the Valens Aqueduct) deposited the water in the city's numerous cisterns.
Some Ottoman sources of the 17th century, such as Evliya Çelebi, describe it as the common Turkish name of the time; between the late 17th and late 18th centuries, it was also in official use.
Most nationwide newspapers are based in Istanbul, with simultaneous Ankara and İzmir editions.
The O-1 forms the city's inner ring road, traversing the 15 Temmuz Şehitler (First Bosphorus) Bridge, and the O-2 is the city's outer ring road, crossing the Fatih Sultan Mehmet (Second Bosphorus) Bridge.
There is also a small Nigerian, Congolese and Cameroonian and North African community present.
From the late 1940s and early 1950s, Istanbul underwent great structural change, as new public squares, boulevards, and avenues were constructed throughout the city, sometimes at the expense of historical buildings.
Other estimate that at the same time the population within city limits was 14,657,434.
In the Ottoman period, it was first granted by Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent to Nişancı Feridun Bey in the mid-16th century, before being granted by Sultan Murad IV to the Safavid Emir Gûne Han in the 17th century, hence the name ''Emirgan''.
Byzantium then continued as part of the Athenian League and its successor, the Second Athenian Empire, before gaining independence in 355 BCE.
The first film screening in Turkey was at Yıldız Palace in 1896, a year after the technology publicly debuted in Paris.
It handled  passengers in 2015, making it the third-busiest airport in Europe and the eighteenth-busiest in the world.
Turkish President and former AKP Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan was elected Mayor of İstanbul in the 1994 local elections as the Islamist Welfare Party candidate with 25.1% of the vote, winning due to a vote split between the mainstream centrist parties.
The Column of Constantine, erected in 330 CE to mark the new Roman capital, stands not far from the Hippodrome.
Plague continued, however, to be essentially endemic in Istanbul for the rest of the century, as it had been from 1520, with a few years of respite between 1529 and 1533, 1549 and 1552, and from 1567 to 1570; epidemics originating in the West and in the Hejaz and southern Russia.
A nascent telephone system began to emerge in Istanbul in 1881 and after the first manual telephone exchange became operational in Istanbul in 1909, the Ministry of Post and Telegraph became the Ministry of Post, Telegraph, and Telephone.
Neolithic artifacts, uncovered by archeologists at the beginning of the 21st century, indicate that Istanbul's historic peninsula was settled as far back as the 7th millennium BCE.
Istanbul is famous for its nightlife, as well as its historic taverns, a signature characteristic of the city for centuries if not millennia.
Because of this, fog is very common, although more so in northern parts of the city and away from the city center.
During the Ottoman period, Üsküdar and Kadıköy were outside the scope of urban Istanbul, serving as tranquil outposts with seaside ''yalıs'' and gardens.
Istanbul's tourist industry is concentrated in the European side, with  of the city's hotels located there.
After the reconquest of 1261, however some of the City's monuments were restored, like the 2 Deisis mosaics in Aghia Sofia and Kariye were created.
In the following centuries, and especially after the ''Tanzimat'' reforms, Ottoman architecture was supplanted by European styles.
The three Bosphorus Bridges are currently the only road crossings between the Asian and European sides of Turkey.
The Port of Zeytinburnu is advantaged by its proximity to motorways and Atatürk International Airport, and long-term plans for the city call for greater connectivity between all terminals and the road and rail networks.
The Turkish film industry ramped up in the second half of the century, and with ''Uzak'' (2002) and ''My Father and My Son'' (2005), both filmed in Istanbul, the nation's movies began to see substantial international success.
Since 2002, the right-wing Justice and Development Party (AKP) has won pluralities in every general and local election.
Istanbul is an increasingly popular tourist destination; whereas just  foreigners visited the city in 2000, it welcomed  foreign tourists in 2015, making it the world's fifth most-visited city.
Shifts in operations to Ambarlı since then have left Haydarpaşa running under capacity and with plans to decommission the port.
The confluence of the Sea of Marmara, the Bosphorus, and the Golden Horn at the heart of present-day Istanbul has deterred attacking forces for thousands of years and remains a prominent feature of the city's landscape.
District councils are chiefly responsible for waste management and construction projects within their respective districts.
İstinye Park in İstinye and Zorlu Center near Levent are among the newest malls which include the stores of the world's top fashion brands.
He is currently a Member of Parliament for İstanbul.
Between its opening in 2005 and 2011, Istanbul Park also hosted the annual Turkish Grand Prix; its future remains uncertain due to financial troubles.
Regular service to Bucharest and Thessaloniki continued until the early 2010s, when the former was interrupted for Marmaray construction and the latter was halted due to economic problems in Greece.
Constantinople began to decline continuously after the end of the reign of Basil II in 1025.
Most established universities in Istanbul are backed by the government; the city also has several prominent private institutions.
Bridges across the Golden Horn were constructed during this period, and Istanbul was connected to the rest of the European railway network in the 1880s.
Istanbul's primary motorways are the O-1, O-2, O-3 and O-4.
When additional universities and art journals were founded in Istanbul during the 1980s, artists formerly based in Ankara moved in.
Due to its size, diverse topography, maritime location and most importantly having a coastline to two different bodies of water to the north and south, Istanbul exhibits microclimates.
In recent years, Istanbul's educational system has expanded substantially; from 2000 to 2007, the number of classrooms and teachers nearly doubled and the number of students increased by more than .
More recently, in 1999, an earthquake with its epicenter in nearby İzmit left 18,000 people dead, including 1,000 people in Istanbul's suburbs.
A new central business district is also under construction in Ataşehir and will host the headquarters of various Turkish banks and financial institutions upon completion.
With the Marmaray's completion, rail use in the city is expected to increase to  (from ), behind only Tokyo and New York City.
The leader of the CHP and parliamentary opposition, Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, ran against Topbaş in the 2009 local elections.
Urban districts such as Beşiktaş, Bakırköy, Şişli and Kadıköy have returned strong support for the CHP in past elections.
Turkish citizens are entitled to subsidized healthcare in the nation's state-run hospitals.
Dominated by low-cost carriers, Istanbul's second airport has rapidly become popular, especially since the opening of a new international terminal in 2009; the airport handled  passengers in 2012, a year after Airports Council International named it the world's fastest-growing airport.
These museums have yet to attain the popularity of older museums on the historic peninsula, including the Istanbul Archaeology Museums, which ushered in the era of modern museums in Turkey, and the Turkish and Islamic Arts Museum.
These public universities are two of just eight across the city; other prominent state universities in Istanbul include the Mimar Sinan Fine Arts University, which served as Turkey's primary institution of art until the 1970s, and Marmara University, the country's third-largest institution of higher learning.
The forest originally supplied water to the city and remnants of reservoirs used during Byzantine and Ottoman times survive.
The Byzantine Empire was restored, albeit weakened, in 1261.
Several other indoor arenas, including the Beşiktaş Akatlar Arena, have also been inaugurated since 2000, serving as the home courts of Istanbul's sports clubs.
In later years, in response to increasing public demand, water from various springs was channeled to public fountains, like the Fountain of Ahmed III, by means of supply lines.
At the start of the 21st century, Istanbul's Greek population numbered 3,000 (down from 130,000 in 1923 and 260,000 according to the Ottoman Census of 1910 of 850,000 total).
Istanbul's local public transportation system is a complex network of trams, funiculars, metro lines, buses, bus rapid transit, and ferries.
From this flagship festival came the International Istanbul Film Festival and the Istanbul International Jazz Festival in the early 1980s.
The Cağaloğlu street on which the newspaper was printed, Bâb-ı Âli Street, rapidly became the center of Turkish print media, alongside Beyoğlu across the Golden Horn.
In the early years of the republic, Istanbul was overlooked in favor of Ankara, selected as Turkey's capital to distance the new, secular country from its Ottoman history.
Gülhane Park and Yıldız Park were originally included within the grounds of two of Istanbul's palaces—Topkapı Palace and Yıldız Palace—but they were repurposed as public parks in the early decades of the Turkish Republic.
Overall, Istanbul has an annual average of  with significant precipitation, which amounts to  per year.
For general elections, the city is divided into 3 electoral districts and returns 85 MPs to the Turkish parliament.
Because of events during the 20th century—including the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey, a 1942 wealth tax, and the 1955 Istanbul riots—the Greek population, originally centered in Fener and Samatya, has decreased substantially.
The Ottoman Ministry of Post and Telegraph was established in 1840 and the first post office, the Imperial Post Office, opened near the courtyard of Yeni Mosque.
Representing the Justice and Development Party, Kadir Topbaş has been Mayor of Istanbul since March 2004.
The Yavuz Sultan Selim (Third Bosphorus) Bridge entered service on 26 August 2016.
Its early incarnations were aimed at showcasing Turkish visual art, and it has since opened to international artists and risen in prestige to join the elite biennales, alongside the Venice Biennale and the São Paulo Art Biennial.
Coinciding with this cultural reemergence was the establishment of the Istanbul Festival, which began showcasing a variety of art from Turkey and around the world in 1973.
Due to its initial status as Turkey's only club, Beşiktaş occasionally represented the Ottoman Empire and Turkish Republic in international sports competitions, earning the right to place the Turkish flag inside its team logo.
By the 19th century, the city had acquired other names used by either foreigners or Turks.
Service to Ankara and other points across Turkey is normally offered by Turkish State Railways, but the construction of Marmaray and the Ankara-Istanbul high-speed line forced the station to close in 2012.
Their prevalence has increased significantly over the last decade, as the percentage of outpatients using private hospitals increased from  to  between 2005 and 2009.
However, following the influx of immigrants from southeastern and eastern Turkey, which began in the 1960s, the foodscape of the city has drastically changed by the end of the century; with influences of Middle Eastern cuisine such as kebab taking an important place in the food scene.
Since then, Istanbul has been the most popular location to film Turkish dramas and comedies.
TRT-Children is the only TRT television station based in Istanbul.
Its GDP per capita and productivity are greater than their national averages by  and , respectively, owing in part to the focus on high-value-added activities.
It was instrumental in the advancement of Christianity during Roman and Byzantine times, before the Ottomans conquered the city in 1453 and transformed it into an Islamic stronghold and the seat of the Ottoman Caliphate.
Today, Istanbul has a chlorinated and filtered water supply and a sewage treatment system managed by the Istanbul Water and Sewerage Administration (İstanbul Su ve Kanalizasyon İdaresi, İSKİ).
He demanded that five thousand households needed to be transferred to Constantinople by September.
Suleiman the Magnificent's reign from 1520 to 1566 was a period of especially great artistic and architectural achievement; chief architect Mimar Sinan designed several iconic buildings in the city, while Ottoman arts of ceramics, stained glass, calligraphy, and miniature flourished.
In 1995, the Istanbul Stock Exchange (now Borsa Istanbul) moved to its current building in the İstinye quarter of the Sarıyer district.
He was re-elected in 2009 and 2014.
Another park, Fethi Paşa Korusu, is situated on a hillside adjacent to the Bosphorus Bridge in Anatolia, opposite Yıldız Palace in Europe.
Akmerkez was awarded the titles of "Europe's best" and "World's best" shopping mall by the International Council of Shopping Centers in 1995 and 1996; Istanbul Cevahir has been one of the continent's largest since opening in 2005; Kanyon won the Cityscape Architectural Review Award in the Commercial Built category in 2006.
