By the early 16th century keyboard improvisation came to be greatly valued, and numerous composers of virtuoso keyboard music appeared.
As the papacy fell under the control of the wealthy families, such as the Medici and the Borgias the spirit of Renaissance art and philosophy came to dominate the Vatican.
Most devastating, though, was the Black Death that decimated the populations of the densely populated cities of Northern Italy and returned at intervals thereafter.
Petrarch encouraged the study of the Latin classics and carried his copy of Homer about, at a loss to find someone to teach him to read Greek.
One role of Petrarch is as the founder of a new method of scholarship,  Renaissance Humanism.
Many authors attempted to integrate the methods and styles of the ancient Greeks into their own works.
Equally important was the end of stability with a series of foreign invasions of Italy known as the Italian Wars that would continue for several decades.
The humanist Francesco Petrarch, a key figure in the renewed sense of scholarship, was also an accomplished poet, publishing several important works of poetry.
In the course of the 15th century, the most powerful city-states annexed their smaller neighbors.
Historians debate how easy it was to move between these groups during the Italian Renaissance.
Modern scholarship has recognized the capacity of Mannerist art to convey strong (often religious) emotion where the High Renaissance failed to do so.
The '''Italian Renaissance''' ( ) was the earliest manifestation of the general European Renaissance, a period of great cultural change and achievement that began in Italy during the 14th century and lasted until the 16th century, marking the transition between Medieval and Early Modern Europe.
From Fontainebleau, the new styles, transformed by Mannerism, brought the Renaissance to Antwerp and thence throughout Northern Europe.
The literature and poetry of the Renaissance was largely influenced by the developing science and philosophy.
In 1433, the Albizzi managed to have Cosimo exiled.
Warfare between the states was common, invasion from outside Italy confined to intermittent sorties of Holy Roman Emperors.
The situation differed in the  cities.
Those that grew extremely wealthy in a feudal state ran constant risk of running afoul of the monarchy and having their lands confiscated, as famously occurred to Jacques Coeur in France.
The new demand for products and services also helped create a growing class of bankers, merchants, and skilled artisans.
An upper-class figure would control hundreds of times more income than a servant or labourer.
Lorenzo was the first of the family to be educated from an early age in the humanist tradition and is best known as one of the Renaissance's most important patrons of the arts.
Widespread disorder followed, including a revolt of Florentine textile workers, the ''ciompi'', in 1378.
Although the plot failed, Lorenzo's young brother, Giuliano, was killed, and the failed assassination led to a war with the Papacy and was used as justification to further centralize power in Lorenzo's hands.
In 1447 Francesco Sforza came to power in Milan and rapidly transformed that still medieval city into a major centre of art and learning that drew Leone Battista Alberti.
The revival of classical antiquity can best be illustrated by the Palazzo Rucellai.
Another popular explanation for the Italian Renaissance is the thesis, first advanced by historian Hans Baron, that states that the primary impetus of the early Renaissance was the long-running series of wars between Florence and Milan.
High Renaissance painting evolved into Mannerism, especially in Florence.
Roger Osborne argues that "The Renaissance is a difficult concept for historians because the history of Europe quite suddenly turns into a history of Italian painting, sculpture and architecture."
Examples of individuals who rose from humble beginnings can be instanced, but Burke notes two major studies in this area that have found that the data do not clearly demonstrate an increase in social mobility.
Masaccio's figures have a plasticity unknown up to that point in time.
The next year, however, saw a pro-Medici Signoria elected and Cosimo returned.
Until the late 14th century, prior to the Medici, Florence's leading family were the House of Albizzi.
With the Medici returned to power, now as Grand Dukes of Tuscany, the counter movement in the church continued.
The Hundred Years' War between England and France disrupted trade throughout northwest Europe, most notably when, in 1345, King Edward III of England repudiated his debts, contributing to the collapse of the two largest Florentine banks, those of the Bardi and Peruzzi.
The Italian trade routes that covered the Mediterranean and beyond were also major conduits of culture and knowledge.
There has been much debate as to the degree of secularism in the Renaissance, which had been emphasized by early 20th-century writers like Jacob Burckhardt, based on, among other things, the presence of  a relatively small number of mythological paintings.
Thus, while northern Italy was not richer in resources than many other parts of Europe, the level of development, stimulated by trade, allowed it to prosper.
The Tuscan culture soon became the model for all the states of Northern Italy, and the Tuscan variety of Italian came to predominate throughout the region, especially in literature.
The first part of the Renaissance saw almost constant warfare on land and sea as the city-states vied for preeminence.
He wrote poetry in Latin, notably the Punic War epic ''Africa'', but is today remembered for his works in the Italian vernacular, especially the ''Canzoniere'', a collection of love sonnets dedicated to his unrequited love Laura.
A number of Italy's greatest artists chose to emigrate.
Other Italian composers of the late 16th century focused on composing the main secular form of the era, the madrigal:  and for almost a hundred years these secular songs for multiple singers were distributed all over Europe.
If it became obvious that a state was entirely dependent on mercenaries, the temptation was great for the mercenaries to take over the running of it themselves—this occurred on a number of occasions.
Those of Botticelli, notably ''The Birth of Venus'' and ''Primavera'', are now among the best known, although he was deeply religious (becoming a follower of Savonarola) and the great majority of his output was of traditional religious paintings or portraits.
For example, many thought that the human jawbone was made up of two bones, as they had seen this on animals.
It was only in the 13th century that Italian authors began writing in their native language rather than Latin, French, or Provençal.
The main challengers of the Albizzi family were the Medicis, first under Giovanni de' Medici, later under his son Cosimo di Giovanni de' Medici.
While the Italian Renaissance was fading, the Northern Renaissance adopted many of its ideals and transformed its styles.
The 1250s saw a major change in Italian poetry as the ''Dolce Stil Novo'' (''Sweet New Style'', which emphasized Platonic rather than courtly love) came into its own, pioneered by poets like Guittone d'Arezzo and Guido Guinizelli.
The increase in trade during the early Renaissance enhanced these characteristics.
This was despite a turbulent and generally disastrous period in Italian politics, in the course of which most of Italy was carved up by the major European powers.
This allowed them to create accurate skeleton models and correct previously believed theories.
Some scholars see a trend towards refeudalization in the later Renaissance as the urban elites turned themselves into landed aristocrats.
By the Late Middle Ages (circa 1300 onward), Latium, the former heartland of the Roman Empire, and southern Italy were generally poorer than the North.
Cosimo and Lorenzo rarely held official posts, but were the unquestioned leaders.
This spread north was also representative of a larger trend.
He launched a long series of wars, with Milan steadily conquering neighbouring states and defeating the various coalitions led by Florence that sought in vain to halt the advance.
Their works include Florence Cathedral, St. Peter's Basilica in Rome, and the Tempio Malatestiano in Rimini (to name only a few, not to mention many splendid private residences: see Renaissance architecture).
The Renaissance was not a period of great social or economic change, only of cultural and ideological development.
For Baron, the most important figure in crafting this ideology was Leonardo Bruni.
Its architecture reflects the philosophy of Humanism, the enlightenment and clarity of mind as opposed to the darkness and spirituality of the Middle Ages.
A feature of the High Middle Ages in Northern Italy was the rise of the urban communes which had broken from the control by bishops and local counts.
Wool was imported from Northern Europe (and in the 16th century from Spain) and together with dyes from the east were used to make high quality textiles.
The horrors of the Black Death and the seeming inability of the Church to provide relief would contribute to a decline of church influence.
Smaller courts brought Renaissance patronage to lesser cities, which developed their characteristic arts: Ferrara, Mantua under the Gonzaga, Urbino under Federico da Montefeltro.
In the city-states of Italy, these laws were repealed or rewritten.
As incidences of the plague began to decline in the early 15th century, Europe's devastated population once again began to grow.
The Italian Renaissance is best known for its cultural achievements.
Piero della Francesca wrote treatises on scientific perspective.
However, what is ordinarily called "Machiavellianism" is a simplified textbook view of this single work rather than an accurate term for his philosophy.
Mercenaries were also a constant threat to their employers; if not paid, they often turned on their patron.
Italy became the recognized European leader in all these areas by the late 15th century, and to varying degrees retained this lead until about 1600.
The ''Decameron'' in particular and Boccaccio's work in general were a major source of inspiration and plots for many English authors in the Renaissance, including Geoffrey Chaucer and William Shakespeare.
The northern states also kept many medieval laws that severely hampered commerce, such as those against usury, and prohibitions on trading with non-Christians.
Most damaging was the May 6, 1527, Spanish and German troops' sacking Rome that for two decades all but ended the role of the Papacy as the largest patron of Renaissance art and architecture.
Further, it is not at all clear that Machiavelli himself was the apologist for immorality as whom he is often portrayed: the basic problem is the apparent contradiction between the monarchism of ''The Prince'' and the republicanism of the ''Discourses''.
In response to threats from the landward side, from the early 15th century Venice developed an increased interest in controlling the ''terrafirma'' as the Venetian Renaissance opened.
Among the Greeks, Aristotle, Homer, and Plato were now being read in the original for the first time since the 4th century, though Greek compositions were few.
In the early Renaissance artists were seen as craftsmen with little prestige or recognition.
The great transformation began under Pope Nicholas V, who became pontiff in 1447.
The extensive trade that stretched from Egypt to the Baltic generated substantial surpluses that allowed significant investment in mining and agriculture.
While concern for philosophy, art and literature all increased greatly in the Renaissance the period is usually seen as one of scientific backwardness.
This is not to say that no religious works were published in this period:  Dante Alighieri's ''The Divine Comedy'' reflects a distinctly medieval world view.
This peace would hold for the next forty years, and Venice's unquestioned hegemony over the sea also led to unprecedented peace for much of the rest of the 15th century.
These historians tend to think in terms of "Early Modern Europe" instead.
Discovering the past had become fashionable and it was a passionate affair pervading the upper reaches of society.
Among the most emulated Romans are Cicero, Horace, Sallust, and Virgil.
The rediscovery of Vitruvius meant that the architectural principles of Antiquity could be observed once more, and Renaissance artists were encouraged, in the atmosphere of humanist optimism, to excel the achievements of the Ancients, like Apelles, of whom they read.
For many, the rise to power in Florence of the austere monk Girolamo Savonarola in 1494-1498 marks the end of the city's flourishing; for others, the triumphant return of the Medici marks the beginning of the late phase in the arts called Mannerism.
''I go'', said Cyriac of Ancona, ''I go to awake the dead''.
The main trade routes from the east passed through the Byzantine Empire or the Arab lands and onwards to the ports of Genoa, Pisa, and Venice.
However through examining human corpses they were able to understand that humans actually only have one.
Compared to the flatness of Gothic painting, his pictures were revolutionary.
According to this view, in a more prosperous era, businessmen would have quickly reinvested their earnings in order to make more money in a climate favourable to investment.
No longer was the Mediterranean Europe's most important trade route.
In Naples, the Renaissance was ushered in under the patronage of Alfonso I who conquered Naples in 1443 and encouraged artists like Francesco Laurana and Antonello da Messina and writers like the poet Jacopo Sannazaro and the humanist scholar Angelo Poliziano.
The republican institutions continued, but they lost all power.
The decline of feudalism and the rise of cities influenced each other; for example, the demand for luxury goods led to an increase in trade, which led to greater numbers of tradesmen becoming wealthy, who, in turn, demanded more luxury goods.
This culminated in the 1402 siege of Florence, when it looked as though the city was doomed to fall, before Giangaleazzo suddenly died and his empire collapsed.
The new mercantile governing class, who gained their position through financial skill, adapted to their purposes the feudal aristocratic model that had dominated Europe in the Middle Ages.
Additionally, the collapse of the Bardi and Peruzzi banks would open the way for the Medici to rise to prominence in Florence.
Here the pilasters follow the superposition of classical orders, with  Doric capitals on the ground floor, Ionic capitals on the ''piano nobile'' and Corinthian capitals on the uppermost floor.
One of the most important effects of this political control was security.
The progress made by Donatello was influential on all who followed; perhaps the greatest of whom is Michelangelo, whose ''David'' of 1500 is also a male nude study;   more naturalistic than Donatello's and with greater emotional intensity.
The High Renaissance, as we call the style today, was introduced to Rome with Donato Bramante's Tempietto at San Pietro in Montorio (1502) and his original centrally planned St. Peter's Basilica (1506), which was the most notable architectural commission of the era, influenced by almost all notable Renaissance artists, including Michelangelo and Giacomo della Porta.
He launched a dramatic rebuilding effort that would eventually see much of the city renewed.
From France, Germany, and the Low Countries, through the medium of the Champagne fairs, land and river trade routes brought goods such as wool, wheat, and precious metals into the region.
Especially in poetry, major changes in Italian literature had been taking place decades before the Renaissance truly began.
Italian Renaissance painting exercised a dominant influence on subsequent European painting (see Western painting) for centuries afterwards, with artists such as Giotto di Bondone, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, Piero della Francesca, Domenico Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Michelangelo, Raphael, Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, and Titian.
The thirteenth-century Italian literary revolution helped set the stage for the Renaissance.
It was during this period of instability that the Renaissance authors such as Dante and Petrarch lived, and the first stirrings of Renaissance art were to be seen, notably in the realism of Giotto.
Sicily had prospered for 150 years during the Emirate of Sicily and later for two centuries during the Norman Kingdom and the Hohenstaufen Kingdom, but had declined by the late Middle Ages.
Although the origins of a movement that was confined largely to the literate culture of intellectual endeavor and patronage can be traced to the earlier part of the 14th century, many aspects of Italian culture and society remained largely Medieval; the Renaissance did not come into full swing until the end of the century.
The popes also became increasingly secular rulers as the Papal States were forged into a centralized power by a series of "warrior popes".
Around 1459 San Zeno Altarpiece (Mantegna), it was probably the first good example of Renaissance painting in Northern Italy a model for all Verona's painters, for example Girolamo dai Libri.
The period also saw the first secular (non-religious) themes.
The interior of ''Santo Spirito'' expresses a new sense of light, clarity and spaciousness, which is typical of the early Italian Renaissance.
In 1498, Vasco da Gama reached India, and from that date the primary route of goods from the Orient was through the Atlantic ports of Lisbon, Seville, Nantes, Bristol, and London.
Their images are among the most widely known works of art in the world.
The predominant forms of church music during the period were the mass and the motet.
This change in climate saw agricultural output decline significantly, leading to repeated famines, exacerbated by the rapid population growth of the earlier era.
This change also gave the merchants almost complete control of the governments of the Italian city-states, again enhancing trade.
The source for these works expanded beyond works of theology and towards the pre-Christian eras of Imperial Rome and Ancient Greece.
The Crusades had built lasting trade links to the Levant, and the Fourth Crusade had done much to destroy the Byzantine Roman Empire as a commercial rival to the Venetians and Genoese.
At the turn of the 16th century, especially in Northern Italy, artists also began to use new techniques in the manipulation of light and darkness, such as the tone contrast evident in many of Titian's portraits and the development of sfumato and chiaroscuro by Leonardo da Vinci and Giorgione.
Though today perhaps best known for Italian Renaissance art and architecture, the period saw major achievements in literature, music, philosophy, and other arts, as well as science.
It only touched a small fraction of the population, and in modern times this has led many historians, such as any that follow historical materialism, to reduce the importance of the Renaissance in human history.
It provoked fresh insight into the nature of reality, questioning beyond God and spirituality, and provided for knowledge about history beyond Christian history.
Famous vernacular poets of the 15th century include the renaissance epic authors Luigi Pulci (author of ''Morgante''), Matteo Maria Boiardo (''Orlando Innamorato''), and Ludovico Ariosto (''Orlando Furioso'').
Other accounts trace the end of the Italian Renaissance to the French invasions of the early 16th century and the subsequent conflict between France and Spanish rulers for control of Italian territory.
The humanist scholar Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini became Pope Pius II in 1458.
Florence remained a republic until 1537, traditionally marking the end of the High Renaissance in Florence, but the instruments of republican government were firmly under the control of the Medici and their allies, save during the intervals after 1494 and 1527.
Classic feudalism had never been prominent in Northern Italy, and most peasants worked on private farms or as sharecroppers.
Leonardo's ''Last Supper'', Raphael's ''The School of Athens'' and Michelangelo's ''Sistine Chapel Ceiling'' are the masterpieces of the period.
Christianity remained a major influence for artists and authors, with the classics coming into their own as a second primary influence.
The reverence for classical sources further enshrined the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic views of the universe.
These began with the 1494 invasion by France that wreaked widespread devastation on Northern Italy and ended the independence of many of the city-states.
Under Lorenzo, the Medici rule was formalized with the creation of a new Council of Seventy, which Lorenzo headed.
The trade routes of the Italian states linked with those of established Mediterranean ports and eventually the Hanseatic League of the Baltic and northern regions of Europe to create a network economy in Europe for the first time since the 4th century.
One of his most important accomplishments was negotiating the Peace of Lodi with Francesco Sforza ending the decades of war with Milan and bringing stability to much of Northern Italy.
Some of the main artists of this period are Pontormo, Bronzino, Rosso Fiorentino, Parmigianino and Raphael's pupil Giulio Romano.
In the south, Sicily had for some time been under foreign domination, by the Arabs and then the Normans.
The resulting labour shortage increased wages and the reduced population was therefore much wealthier, better fed, and, significantly, had more surplus money to spend on luxury goods.
By the later Renaissance the top figures wielded great influence and could charge great fees.
Moreover, the inland city-states profited from the rich agricultural land of the Po valley.
Renaissance politics developed from this background.
In 1298, one of the leading banking families of Europe, the Bonsignoris, were bankrupted and so the city of Siena lost her status as the banking center of Europe to Florence.
Many of them sang in either the papal choir in Rome or the choirs at the numerous chapels of the aristocracy, in Rome, Venice, Florence, Milan, Ferrara and elsewhere; and they brought their polyphonic style with them, influencing many native Italian composers during their stay.
In the early Italian Renaissance, much of the focus was on translating and studying classic works from Latin and Greek.
These endeavors were greatly aided by the wealth of Italian patricians, merchant-princes and despots, who would spend substantial sums building libraries.
The Papacy was affronted when the Avignon Papacy was created in southern France as a consequence of pressure from King Philip the Fair of France.
The most notable example was Leonardo da Vinci who left for France in 1516, but teams of lesser artists invited to transform the Château de Fontainebleau created the school of Fontainebleau that infused the style of the Italian Renaissance in France.
He was the foremost writer of sonnets in Italian, and translations of his work into English by Thomas Wyatt established the sonnet form in that country, where it was employed by William Shakespeare and countless other poets.
At the same time philosophy lost much of its rigour as the rules of logic and deduction were seen as secondary to intuition and emotion.
The Medieval Warm Period was ending as the transition to the Little Ice Age began.
The Renaissance later had a significant effect on Rome, which was ornamented with some structures in the new ''all'antico'' mode, then was largely rebuilt by humanist sixteenth-century popes.
The term Renaissance is in essence a modern one that came into currency in the 19th century, in the work of historians such as Jules Michelet and Jacob Burckhardt.
Some historians see this unequal distribution of wealth as important to the Renaissance, as art patronage relies on the very wealthy.
The beginning of the late Renaissance in 1550 was marked by the development of a new column order by Andrea Palladio.
The largest section of the urban population was the urban poor of semi-skilled workers and the unemployed.
Aside from Christianity, classical antiquity, and scholarship, a fourth influence on Renaissance literature was politics.
Composers of madrigals included Jacques Arcadelt, at the beginning of the age, Cipriano de Rore, in the middle of the century, and Luca Marenzio, Philippe de Monte, Carlo Gesualdo, and Claudio Monteverdi at the end of the era.
Since the 13th century, as armies became primarily composed of mercenaries, prosperous city-states could field considerable forces, despite their low populations.
Florence took Pisa in 1406, Venice captured Padua and Verona, while the Duchy of Milan annexed a number of nearby areas including Pavia and Parma.
In 1469 the reins of power passed to Cosimo's twenty-one-year-old grandson Lorenzo, who would become known as "Lorenzo the Magnificent."
The  city-states of Italy expanded greatly during this period and grew in power to become de facto fully independent of the Holy Roman Empire; apart from the Kingdom of Naples, outside powers kept their armies out of Italy.
Cosimo was succeeded by his sickly son Piero de' Medici, who died after five years in charge of the city.
Renaissance authors were not content to rest on the laurels of ancient authors, however.
The Renaissance ideal was fully adopted by the ruling classes and the aristocracy.
Renaissance ideals first spread from Florence to the neighbouring states of Tuscany such as Siena and Lucca.
As a cultural movement, the Italian Renaissance affected only a small part of the population.
Humanism stressed that nature came to be viewed as an animate spiritual creation that was not governed by laws or mathematics.
In 1417 the Papacy returned to Rome, but that once imperial city remained poor and largely in ruins through the first years of the Renaissance.
His major work was the ''Decameron'', a collection of 100 stories told by ten storytellers who have fled to the outskirts of Florence to escape the black plague over ten nights.
Florence, for instance, which had a pre-plague population of 45,000 decreased over the next 47 years by 25–50%.
Most historians feel that early in the Renaissance social mobility was quite high, but that it faded over the course of the 15th century.
In 1293 the Ordinances of Justice were enacted which effectively became the constitution of the republic of Florence throughout the Italian Renaissance.
Overall, the musical style of the period is sometimes labelled as the "Italian ars nova."
Inequality in society was very high.
Accounts of Renaissance literature usually begin with Petrarch (best known for the elegantly polished vernacular sonnet sequence of the ''Canzoniere'' and for the craze for book collecting that he initiated) and his friend and contemporary Boccaccio (author of the ''Decameron'').
A flourishing trade in Renaissance art developed.
15th century writers such as the poet Poliziano and the Platonist philosopher Marsilio Ficino made extensive translations from both Latin and Greek.
On land, decades of fighting saw Florence, Milan and Venice emerge as the dominant players, and these three powers finally set aside their differences and agreed to the Peace of Lodi in 1454, which saw relative calm brought to the region for the first time in centuries.
Venice proved to be a more powerful adversary, and with the decline of Genoese power during the 15th century Venice became pre-eminent on the seas.
The period known as the High Renaissance represents the culmination of the goals of the earlier period, namely the accurate representation of figures in space rendered with credible motion and in an appropriately decorous style.
Although musicologists typically group the music of the Trecento (music of the 14th century) with the late medieval period, it included features which align with the early Renaissance in important ways:  an increasing emphasis on secular sources, styles and forms; a spreading of culture away from ecclesiastical institutions to the nobility, and even to the common people; and a quick development of entirely new techniques.
In 1542 the Sacred Congregation of the Inquisition was formed and a few years later the ''Index Librorum Prohibitorum'' banned a wide array of Renaissance works of literature, which marks the end of the illuminated manuscript together with Giulio Clovio, who is considered the greatest illuminator of the Italian High Renaissance, and arguably the last very notable artist in the long tradition of the illuminated manuscript, before some modern revivals.
The political philosopher Niccolò Machiavelli's most famous works are ''Discourses on Livy'', ''Florentine Histories'' and finally ''The Prince'', which has become so well known in Western society that the term "Machiavellian" has come to refer to the ''realpolitik'' advocated by the book.
The same is true for architecture, as practiced by Brunelleschi, Leon Battista Alberti, Andrea Palladio, and Bramante.
Finally, the Aldine Press, founded by the printer Aldo Manuzio, active in Venice, developed Italic type and the small, relatively portable and inexpensive printed book that could be carried in one's pocket, as well as being the first to publish editions of books in Ancient Greek.
The city's numerous luxurious palazzi were becoming surrounded by townhouses, built by the ever prospering merchant class.
This atmosphere of assumed luxury of the time created a need for the creation of visual symbols of wealth, an important way to show a family’s affluence and taste.
High Medieval Northern Italy was further divided by the long-running battle for supremacy between the forces of the Papacy and of the Holy Roman Empire: each city aligned itself with one faction or the other, yet was divided internally between the two warring parties, Guelfs and Ghibellines.
This time of crisis in Florence was the period when the most influential figures of the early Renaissance were coming of age, such as Ghiberti, Donatello, Masolino, and Brunelleschi.
This group became the main patrons of and audience for Renaissance culture.
Humanism was an optimistic philosophy that saw man as a rational and sentient being, with the ability to decide and think for himself, and saw man as inherently good by nature, which was in tension with the Christian view of man as the original sinner needing redemption.
Prior to the Renaissance, the Italian language was not the literary language in Italy.
The nature of the Renaissance also changed in the late 15th century.
Mannerist artists, who consciously rebelled against the principles of High Renaissance, tend to represent elongated figures in illogical spaces.
Many familiar instruments were invented and perfected in late Renaissance Italy, such as the violin, the earliest forms of which came into use in the 1550s.
