The political efforts to revive growth with massive government spending eventually produced a severe rise in public debt, that stood at over 135% of GDP in 2014, ranking second in the EU only after the Greek one (at 174%).
After various unsuccessful attempts, the Italian Wars of Independence, the Expedition of the Thousand and the capture of Rome resulted in the eventual unification of the country, now a great power after centuries of foreign domination and political division.
In mathematics, Joseph Louis Lagrange (born Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia, 1736–1813) was active before leaving Italy.
During the war, more than 650,000 Italian soldiers and as many civilians died and the kingdom went to the brink of bankruptcy.
Italy needs to import about 80% of its energy requirements.
The government of the conservative Prime Minister was replaced by the technocratic cabinet of Mario Monti.
German has the same status in South Tyrol as, in some parts of that province and in parts of the neighbouring Trentino, does Ladin.
According to ''Top Global Fashion Capital Rankings'' 2013 by Global Language Monitor, Rome ranked sixth worldwide when Milan was twelfth.
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Italy was seized by the Ostrogoths,  followed in the 6th century by a brief reconquest under Byzantine Emperor Justinian.
In the north, the Germans set up the Italian Social Republic (RSI), a Nazi puppet state with Mussolini installed as leader.
In 1935, Mussolini invaded Ethiopia, resulting in an international alienation and leading to Italy's withdrawal from the League of Nations; Italy allied with Nazi Germany and the Empire of Japan and strongly supported Francisco Franco in the Spanish civil war.
In August 2006 Italy deployed about 2,450 troops in Lebanon for the United Nations' peacekeeping mission UNIFIL.
Later, Italy was at the forefront of the progressive rock movement of the 1970s, with bands like PFM and Goblin.
Primary education lasts eight years.
The parliament is perfectly bicameral: the two houses, the Chamber of Deputies (that meets in Palazzo Montecitorio) and the Senate of the Republic (that meets in Palazzo Madama), have the same powers.
In Sardinia, the former Byzantine provinces became independent states known as Giudicati, although some parts of the island were under Genoese or Pisan control until the Aragonese conquered it in the 15th century.
In addition, there are more than 200,000 followers of faiths originating in the Indian subcontinent with some 70,000 Sikhs with 22 gurdwaras across the country, 70,000 Hindus, and 50,000 Buddhists.
Through the centuries, Italy has fostered the scientific community that produced many major discoveries in physics and the other sciences.
Other languages spoken in Italy are Ukrainian, Hindi, Polish, and Tamil amongst others.
The Supreme Court of Cassation is the highest court in Italy for both criminal and civil appeal cases.
It was during this chaotic era that Italian towns saw the rise of a peculiar institution, the medieval commune.
Other popular team sports in Italy include volleyball, basketball and rugby.
The Ancient peoples of pre-Roman Italy – such as the Umbrians, the Latins (from which the Romans emerged), Volsci, Oscans, Samnites, Sabines, the Celts, the Ligures, and many others – were Indo-European peoples; the main historic peoples of possible non-Indo-European heritage include the Etruscans, the Elymians and Sicani in Sicily and the prehistoric Sardinians, which includes the Nuragic civilisation.
The Marshall Plan helped to revive the Italian economy which, until the late 1960s, enjoyed a period of sustained economic growth commonly called the "Economic Miracle".
Italy strongly supports multilateral international politics, endorsing the United Nations and its international security activities.
Italy introduced the common European currency, the Euro in 2002.
The most popular sport in Italy is, by far, football.
In 1913, male universal suffrage was adopted.
Between the 17th and the 11th centuries BC Mycenaean Greeks established contacts with Italy and in the 8th and 7th centuries BC Greek colonies were established all along the coast of Sicily and the southern part of the Italian Peninsula became known as Magna Graecia.
Despite being one of the main victors in World War I, Italy entered a period of economic crisis and social turmoil, leading the way to the rise of a Fascist dictatorship in 1922.
The Calabrian 'Ndrangheta, nowadays probably the most powerful crime syndicate of Italy, accounts alone for 3% of the country's GDP.
Italian Scuderia Ferrari is the oldest surviving team in Grand Prix racing, having competed since 1948, and statistically the most successful Formula One team in history with a record of 224 wins.
Italy's male and female national teams are often featured among the world's best.
Significant changes occurred with the discovery of the New World with the introduction of items such as potatoes, tomatoes, bell peppers and maize, now central to the cuisine but not introduced in quantity until the 18th century.
A transport capability is guaranteed by a fleet of 22 C-130Js and Aeritalia G.222s of which 12 are being replaced with the newly developed G.222 variant called the C-27J Spartan.
The 1814 Congress of Vienna restored the situation of the late 18th century, but the ideals of the French Revolution could not be eradicated, and soon re-surfaced during the political upheavals that characterised the first part of the 19th century.
Although the country comprises the Italian peninsula and most of the southern Alpine basin, some of Italy's territory extends beyond the Alpine basin and some islands are located outside the Eurasian continental shelf.
The Kingdom of Sardinia again attacked the Austrian Empire in the Second Italian War of Independence of 1859, with the aid of France, resulting in liberating Lombardy.
Italy deployed over 2,000 troops in Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) from February 2003.
One of the longest-established minority religious faiths in Italy is Judaism, Jews having been present in Ancient Rome since before the birth of Christ.
The country has produced some well-known furniture designers, such as Gio Ponti and Ettore Sottsass, and Italian phrases such as ''"Bel Disegno"'' and ''"Linea Italiana"'' have entered the vocabulary of furniture design.
Italy is the twelfth largest carbon dioxide producer.
Following the Italian Wars (1494 to 1559), ignited by the rivalry between France and Spain, the city-states gradually lost their independence and came under foreign domination, first under Spain (1559 to 1713) and then Austria (1713 to 1796).
In the 17th century, among the greatest painters of Italian Baroque are Caravaggio, Annibale Carracci, Artemisia Gentileschi, Mattia Preti, Carlo Saraceni and Bartolomeo Manfredi.
Italy has been a unitary parliamentary republic since 2 June 1946, when the monarchy was abolished by a constitutional referendum.
Subsequently, in the 18th century, Italian Rococo was mainly inspired by French Rococo, since France was the founding nation of that particular style, with artists such as Giovanni Battista Tiepolo and Canaletto.
The Italian film industry was born between 1903 and 1908 with three companies: the Società Italiana Cines, the Ambrosio Film and the Itala Film.
The country has also operated several nuclear reactors between 1963 and 1990 but, after the Chernobyl disaster and a referendum on the issue the nuclear programme was terminated, a decision that was overturned by the government in 2008, planning to build up to four nuclear power plants with French technology.
Futurism was succeeded by the metaphysical paintings of Giorgio de Chirico, who exerted a strong influence on the Surrealists and generations of artists to follow.
By the mid-19th century, a rising movement in support of Italian nationalism and Italian independence from foreign control lead to a period of revolutionary political upheaval known as the ''Risorgimento'', which sought to bring about a rebirth of Italian cultural and economic prominence by liberating and consolidating the Italian peninsula and insular Italy into an independent and unified nation-state.
The Years of Lead culminated in the assassination of the Christian Democrat leader Aldo Moro in 1978 and the Bologna railway station massacre in 1980, where 85 people died.
Waste from industrial activity is not always disposed of by legal means and has led to permanent health effects on inhabitants of affected areas, as in the case of the Seveso disaster.
Conditions on peninsular coastal areas can be very different from the interior's higher ground and valleys, particularly during the winter months when the higher altitudes tend to be cold, wet, and often snowy.
However, the current government has scheduled major reforms and investments in order to improve the overall internationalisation and quality of the system.
Italy, nominally allied with the German Empire and the Empire of Austria-Hungary in the Triple Alliance, in 1915 joined the Allies into the war with a promise of substantial territorial gains, that included western Inner Carniola, former Austrian Littoral, Dalmatia as well as parts of the Ottoman Empire.
On 15 November 2013, 58 splinter MPs from Forza Italia founded New Centre-Right.
Movies include world cinema treasures such as ''La dolce vita'', ''The Good, the Bad and the Ugly'' and ''Bicycle Thieves''.
The legacy of the Roman Empire is widespread and can be observed in the global distribution of civilian law, republican governments, Christianity and the Latin script.
Italian professional tennis players won the Davis Cup in 1976 and the Fed Cup in 2006, 2009, 2010 and 2013.
Italy was admitted to the United Nations in 1955, and it is a member and strong supporter of a wide number of international organisations, such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade/World Trade Organization (GATT/WTO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of Europe, and the Central European Initiative.
Major Italian fashion labels, such as Gucci, Armani, Prada, Versace, Valentino, Dolce & Gabbana, Missoni, Fendi, Moschino, Max Mara, Trussardi, and Ferragamo, to name a few, are regarded as among the finest fashion houses in the world.
This was also the first time that Italian women were entitled to vote.
A peculiarity of the Italian Parliament is the representation given to Italian citizens permanently living abroad: 12 Deputies and 6 Senators elected in four distinct overseas constituencies.
The only surviving Roman paintings are wall paintings, many from villas in Campania, in Southern Italy.
Other ancient Italian peoples of undetermined language families but of possible non-Indo-European origins include the Rhaetian people and Cammuni, known for their rock carvings.
Italy is the world's sixth largest manufacturing country, characterised by a smaller number of global multinational corporations than other economies of comparable size and a large number of dynamic small and medium-sized enterprises, notoriously clustered in several industrial districts, which are the backbone of the Italian industry.
Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940.
National parks cover about 5% of the country.
The proportion of daily smokers was 22% in 2012, down from 24.4% in 2000 but still slightly above the OECD average.
In the late 2000s, Italy was severely hit by the Great Recession.
According to one of the more common explanations, the term ''Italia'', from , was borrowed through Greek from the Oscan ''Víteliú'', meaning "land of young cattle" (''cf.''
The Lombard kingdom was subsequently absorbed into the Frankish Empire by Charlemagne in the late 8th century.
The prime minister is the President of the Council of Ministers—which holds effective executive power— and he must receive a vote of approval from it to execute most political activities.
The Italian victory marked the end of the war on the Italian Front, secured the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and was chiefly instrumental in ending the First World War less than two weeks later.
Italy is also prominent in the field of design, notably interior design, architectural design, industrial design and urban design.
However, in recent years Italy experienced a significant growth in birth rates.
This has produced a manufacturing sector often focused on the export of niche market and luxury products, that if on one side is less capable to compete on the quantity, on the other side is more capable of facing the competition from China and other emerging Asian economies based on lower labour costs, with higher quality products.
They are considered to be the two great medieval masters of painting in western culture.
Thanks to the great longitudinal extension of the peninsula and the mostly mountainous internal conformation, the climate of Italy is highly diverse.
The university system in Italy is generally regarded as poor for a world cultural powerhouse, with no universities ranked among the 100 world best and only 20 among the top 500.
Today, Milan and Turin are the nation's leaders in architectural design and industrial design.
The Mediterranean diet forms the basis of Italian cuisine, rich in pasta, fish, fruits and vegetables and characterised by its extreme simplicity and variety, with many dishes having only four to eight ingredients.
Smoking in public places including bars, restaurants, night clubs and offices has been restricted to specially ventilated rooms since 2005.
Another difference with similar offices is that the overall political responsibility for intelligence is vested in the President of the Council of Ministers.
Further updates are foreseen in the Tornado IDS/IDT and AMX fleets.
This was in turn struck down by a referendum following the Fukushima nuclear accident.
Located in the heart of the Mediterranean Sea, Italy shares open land borders with France, Switzerland, Austria, Slovenia, San Marino and Vatican City.
The country's total area is , of which  is land and  is water.
Desserts have a long tradition of merging local flavours such as citrus fruits, pistachio and almonds with sweet cheeses like mascarpone and ricotta or exotic tastes as cocoa, vanilla and cinnamon.
Lega Basket Serie A is widely considered one of the most competitive in Europe.
During the 16th century and on into the 18th century, Commedia dell'arte was a form of improvisational theatre, and it is still performed today.
Until the 13th century, Italian politics was dominated by the relations between the Holy Roman Emperors and the Papacy, with most of the Italian city-states siding for the former (Ghibellines) or for the latter (Guelphs) from momentary convenience.
In the south, Sicily had become an Islamic emirate in the 9th century, thriving until the Italo-Normans conquered it in the late 11th century together with most of the Lombard and Byzantine principalities of southern Italy.
The strongest among these city-states gradually absorbed the surrounding territories giving birth to the Signorie, regional states often led by merchant families which founded local dynasties.
Decades of fighting eventually saw Florence, Milan and Venice emerged as the dominant players that agreed to the Peace of Lodi in 1454, which saw relative calm brought to the region for the first time in centuries.
It is a highly developed country, with the world's 8th highest quality of life and the 25th Human Development Index.
Vesuvius is the only active volcano in mainland Europe and is most famous for the destruction of Pompeii and Herculanum.
The country remained a battlefield for the rest of the war, as the Allies were slowly moving up from the south.
In the 20th century, with Futurism, primarily through the works of Umberto Boccioni and Giacomo Balla, Italy rose again as a seminal country for artistic evolution in painting and sculpture.
On 8 September, Italy surrendered.
Italy was also an important country in the development of disco and electronic music, with Italo disco, known for its futuristic sound and prominent usage of synthesisers and drum machines, being one of the earliest electronic dance genres, as well as European forms of disco aside from Euro disco (which later went on to influence several genres such as Eurodance and Nu-disco).
Italy men's national volleyball team winning three World Championships in a row 1990, 1994 and 1998 an three silver medal in Olympics 1996, 2004, 2016.
Italy is one of the largest financiers of the Palestinian National Authority, contributing €60 million in 2013 alone.
Starting from the last two decades of the 19th century, Italy developed into a colonial power by forcing Somalia, Eritrea and later Libya and the Dodecanese under its rule.
The first Italian film was a few seconds, showing Pope Leo XIII giving a blessing to the camera.
Modern Italian cuisine has developed through centuries of social and political changes, with roots as far back as the 4th century BC.
While the different branches of the Carabinieri report to separate ministries for each of their individual functions, the corps reports to the Ministry of Internal Affairs when maintaining public order and security.
Starting from the early 1980s, until then a linguistically and culturally homogeneous society, Italy begun to attract substantial flows of foreign immigrants.
The Communists reorganised as a social-democratic force.
During the Middle Ages, Italy suffered sociopolitical collapse amid calamitous barbarian invasions, but by the 11th century, numerous rival city-states and maritime republics rose to great prosperity through shipping, commerce, and banking, and even laid the groundwork for capitalism.
The incumbent Prime Minister is Matteo Renzi of the Democratic Party.
The new government started important constitutional reforms such as the abolition of the Senate and a new electoral law.
Italy is regarded as one of the world's most industrialised nations and a leading country in world trade and exports.
The official figures also exclude illegal immigrants, that were estimated in 2008 to number at least 670,000.
Former Presidents of the Republic are ''ex officio'' life senators.
The Italian Army is the national ground defence force, numbering 109,703 in 2008.
Meanwhile, about 250,000 Italians and anti-communist Slavs fled to Italy in the Istrian exodus.
The scandals involved all major parties, but especially those in the government coalition: the Christian Democrats, who ruled for almost 50 years, underwent a severe crisis and eventually disbanded, splitting up into several factions.
This, together with the emigration that preceded and followed World War II, has left only a small community of around 28,400 Jews in Italy.
Italy covers an area of  and has a largely temperate seasonal climate or Mediterranean climate; due to its shape, it is often referred to in Italy as ''lo Stivale'' (the Boot).
The Po, Italy's longest river (652&nbsp;km/405&nbsp;mi), flows from the Alps on the western border with France and crosses the Padan plain on its way to the Adriatic Sea.
In the 1980s, for the first time since 1945, two governments were led by non-Christian-Democrat premiers: one liberal (Giovanni Spadolini) and one socialist (Bettino Craxi); the Christian Democrats remained, however, the main government party.
However, air pollution remains a severe problem, especially in the industrialised north, reaching the tenth highest level worldwide of industrial carbon dioxide emissions in the 1990s.
The coastal areas of Liguria, Tuscany and most of the South generally fit the Mediterranean climate stereotype (Köppen climate classification Csa).
Fears in the Italian electorate of a possible Communist takeover proved crucial for the first universal suffrage electoral outcome on 18 April 1948, when the Christian Democrats, under the leadership of Alcide De Gasperi, obtained a landslide victory.
Italy has a long and successful tradition in individual sports as well.
The assumptions on the etymology of the name "Italia" are very numerous and the corpus of the solutions proposed by historians and linguists is very wide.
Italy's most famous composers include the Renaissance composers Palestrina and Monteverdi, the Baroque composers Scarlatti, Corelli and Vivaldi, the Classical composers Paganini and Rossini, and the Romantic composers Verdi and Puccini.
After the war, Italian film was widely recognised and exported until an artistic decline around the 1980s.
Italian cooks rely chiefly on the quality of the ingredients rather than on elaborate preparation.
However, Roman painting does have important unique characteristics.
Italy is located in Southern Europe, between latitudes 35° and 47° N, and longitudes 6° and 19° E. To the north, Italy borders France, Switzerland, Austria, and Slovenia, and is roughly delimited by the Alpine watershed, enclosing the Po Valley and the Venetian Plain.
Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank.
The Italian Air Force in 2008 had a strength of 43,882 and operated 585 aircraft, including 219 combat jets and 114 helicopters.
The city of Milan hosts Fiera Milano, Europe's largest design fair.
For example, Seneca's ''Phaedra'' was based on that of Euripides, and many of the comedies of Plautus were direct translations of works by Menander.
Producers/songwriters such as Giorgio Moroder, who won three Academy Awards for his music, were highly influential in the development of EDM (electronic dance music).
A 2009 report identified 610 comuni which have a strong Mafia presence, where 13 million Italians live and 14.6% of the Italian GDP is produced.
But by his time Oenotria and Italy had become synonymous, and the name also applied to most of Lucania as well.
The socialist agitations that followed the devastation of the Great War, inspired by the Russian Revolution, led to counter-revolution and repression throughout Italy.
The Renaissance began in Italy and spread to the rest of Europe, bringing a renewed interest in humanism, science, exploration, and art with the start of the modern era.
Other astronomers suchs as Giovanni Domenico Cassini (1625–1712) and Giovanni Schiaparelli (1835–1910) made many important discoveries about the Solar System.
The post-armistice period saw the rise of a large anti-fascist resistance movement, the ''Resistenza''.
The Italian Army, Navy, Air Force and Carabinieri collectively form the Italian Armed Forces, under the command of the Supreme Defence Council, presided over by the President of Italy.
Average winter temperatures vary from  on the Alps to
At the end of 2013, Italy had 60,782,668 inhabitants.
Victor Emmanuel III's son, Umberto II, was forced to abdicate and exiled.
This peace would hold for the next forty years.
Panel painting becomes more common during the Romanesque period, under the heavy influence of Byzantine icons.
Fibonacci (c. 1170 – c. 1250), and Gerolamo Cardano (1501–76) made fundamental advances in mathematics.
These territories are the ''comuni'' of: Livigno, Sexten, Innichen, Toblach (in part), Chiusaforte, Tarvisio, Graun im Vinschgau (in part), which are all part of the Danube's drainage basin, while the Val di Lei constitutes part of the Rhine's basin and the islands of Lampedusa and Lampione are on the African continental shelf.
Italian architecture has also widely influenced the architecture of the world.
In a short time these first companies reached a fair producing quality, and films were soon sold outside Italy.
The population of Italy almost doubled during the 20th century, but the pattern of growth was extremely uneven because of large-scale internal migration from the rural South to the industrial cities of the North, a phenomenon which happened as a consequence of the Italian economic miracle of the 1950–1960s.
Tertiary education in Italy is divided between public universities, private universities and the prestigious and selective superior graduate schools, such as the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa.
Today, Italian pop music is represented annually with the Sanremo Music Festival, which served as inspiration for the Eurovision song contest, and the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto.
In 1860–61, general Giuseppe Garibaldi led the drive for unification in Naples and Sicily, allowing the Sardinian government led by the Count of Cavour to declare a united Italian kingdom on 17 March 1861.
The TFR is expected to reach 1.6–1.8 in 2030.
There are 14 volcanoes in Italy, four of which are active: Etna (the traditional site of Vulcan’s smithy), Stromboli, Vulcano and Vesuvius.
The five largest lakes are, in order of diminishing size: Garda (), Maggiore (, shared with Switzerland), Como (), Trasimeno () and Bolsena ().
The country is well known for its creative and innovative business, a large and competitive agricultural sector (Italy is the world's largest wine producer), and for its influential and high-quality automobile, machinery, food, design and fashion industry.
In 2012, the Italian secondary education has been evalued as slightly below the OECD average, with a strong and steady improvement in science and mathematics results since 2003; however, a wide gap exists between northern schools, which performed significantly better than the national average (among the best in the world in some subjects), and schools in the South, that had much poorer results.
Total Italian military spending in 2010 ranked tenth in the world, standing at $35.8&nbsp;billion, equal to 1.7% of national GDP.
The country has had a broad cultural influence worldwide, also because numerous Italians emigrated to other places during the Italian diaspora.
It also has at its disposal a large number of Leopard 1 and M113 armoured vehicles.
Today, the most notable centres of jazz music in Italy include Milan, Rome, and Sicily.
As the country grew wealthier in the 1950s, a form of neorealism known as pink neorealism succeeded, and other film genres, such as sword-and-sandal followed as spaghetti westerns, were popular in the 1960s and 1970s.
Luca Pacioli established accounting to the world.
Since classical times, ancient Phoenicians and Greeks, Etruscans, and Celts have inhabited the south, centre and north of the Italian Peninsula respectively, with various Italic peoples dispersed throughout Italy alongside other ancient Italian tribes and Greek, Carthaginian, and Phoenician colonies.
Also the Phoenicians established colonies on the coasts of Sardinia and Sicily.
Italy has for centuries welcomed Jews expelled from other countries, notably Spain.
In 2014, challenged by the new Secretary of the PD Matteo Renzi, Letta resigned and was replaced by Renzi.
The distribution of immigrants is largely uneven in Italy: 87% of immigrants live in the northern and central parts of the country (the most economically developed areas), while only 13% live in the southern half of the peninsula.
From the late 19th century to the early 20th century, the new Kingdom of Italy rapidly industrialised, especially in the so-called ''Industrial Triangle'' of Milan, Turin and Genoa in the north, and soon acquired a small colonial empire.
From Giotto on, the treatment of composition by the best painters also became much more free and innovative.
During Craxi's government, the economy recovered and Italy became the world's fifth largest industrial nation, gaining entry into the G7 Group.
Diplomatically, it is recognised by other subjects of international law as a sovereign entity, headed by the Pope, who is also the Bishop of Rome, with which diplomatic relations can be maintained.
After initially advancing in British Somaliland and Egypt, the Italians were defeated in East Africa, Greece, Russia and North Africa.
The history of Italian cinema began a few months after the Lumière brothers began motion picture exhibitions.
After the war, due to the Cold war, a long period of censorship, disinterest and denial occurred about the Italian war crimes and the Yugoslav's foibe killings.
Later, works and pieces composed by native Italian composers of the 19th and early 20th centuries, such as Rossini, Bellini, Donizetti, Verdi and Puccini, are among the most famous operas ever written and today are performed in opera houses across the world.
Currently, about one million Romanian citizens (around one tenth of them being Roma) are officially registered as living in Italy, representing thus the most important individual country of origin, followed by Albanians and Moroccans with about 500,000 people each.
The public part is the ''Servizio Sanitario Nazionale'', which is organised under the Ministry of Health and administered on a devolved regional basis.
Physicist Enrico Fermi (1901–54), a Nobel prize laureate, led the team in Chicago that developed the first nuclear reactor and is also noted for his many other contributions to physics, including the co-development of the quantum theory and was one of the key figures in the creation of the nuclear weapon.
The Greeks gradually came to apply the name "Italia" to a larger region, but it was during the reign of Emperor Augustus (end of the 1st century BC) that the term was expanded to cover the entire peninsula until the Alps.
It is now equipping itself with a bigger aircraft carrier (the ''Cavour''), new destroyers, submarines and multipurpose frigates.
The President of Italy (''Presidente della Repubblica''), currently Sergio Mattarella since 2015, is Italy's head of state.
Greek historian Dionysius of Halicarnassus states this account together with the legend that Italy was named after Italus, mentioned also by Aristotle and Thucydides.
Slovene is officially recognised in the provinces of Trieste, Gorizia and Udine.
The diaspora concerned more than 25 million Italians and it is considered the biggest mass migration of contemporary times.
However, as a result of his spending policies, the Italian national debt skyrocketed during the Craxi era, soon passing 100% of the GDP.
Furthermore, in recent years, growing migration fluxes from Asia-Pacific (notably China and the Philippines) and Latin America (mainly from Peru and Ecuador) have been recorded.
Explorers from Italy such as Marco Polo, Christopher Columbus, Amerigo Vespucci, and Giovanni da Verrazzano discovered new routes to the Far East and the New World, helping to usher in the European Age of Discovery.
Italy became a republic after a referendum held on 2 June 1946, a day celebrated since as Republic Day.
Ennio de Giorgi, a Wolf Prize in Mathematics recipient in 1990, solved Bernstein's problem about minimal surfaces and the 19th Hilbert problem on the regularity of solutions of Elliptic partial differential equations.
It can be noted by the huge difference in statistical income between the northern and southern regions and municipalities.
War between the city-states was endemic, and primarily fought by armies of mercenaries known as ''condottieri'', bands of soldiers drawn from around Europe, especially Germany and Switzerland, led largely by Italian captains.
The Republican Constitution was approved on 1 January 1948.
Singers such as pop diva Mina, classical crossover artist Andrea Bocelli, Grammy winner Laura Pausini, and European chart-topper Eros Ramazzotti have attained international acclaim.
French is co-official in the Valle d’Aosta—although in fact Franco-Provencal is more commonly spoken there.
