It borders Liberia and Guinea in the west, Mali and Burkina Faso in the north, Ghana in the east, and the Gulf of Guinea (Atlantic Ocean) in the south.
The Ghana empire, the earliest of the Sudanic empires, flourished in present-day eastern Mauritania from the fourth to the 13th centuries.
What exactly happened that night is disputed.
Runoffs were held 28 November 2010, after being delayed one week from the original date of 21 November.
In the early 1980s, the world recession and a local drought sent shock waves through the Ivoirian economy.
A ''maquis'' normally features braised chicken and fish covered in onions and tomatoes, served with ''attiéké'' or ''kedjenou''.
The goals focus on health, education, poverty, hunger, climate change, water sanitation, and hygiene.
Pacification was not accomplished until 1915.
An early ceasefire with the rebels, which had the backing of much of the northern populace, proved short-lived, and fighting over the prime cocoa-growing areas resumed.
International organizations reported numerous human-rights violations by both sides.
Ivory Coast notable footballers are Didier Drogba, Yaya Touré, and Gervinho.
They were drafted for work in mines, on plantations, as porters, and on public projects as part of their tax responsibility.
Assimilation was practiced in Ivory Coast to the extent that after 1930, a small number of Westernized Ivoirians were granted the right to apply for French citizenship.
A peace accord between the government and the rebels, or New Forces, was signed on 4 March 2007, and subsequently Guillaume Soro, leader of the New Forces, became prime minister.
The French community grew from only 30,000 prior to independence to 60,000 in 1980, most of them teachers, managers, and advisors.
In contrast, the economic outlook improved, at least superficially, with decreasing inflation and an attempt to remove foreign debt.
It was used in Duckett's ''Dictionnaire''  and by Nicolas Villault de Bellefond, for examples, although Antoine François Prévost used ''Côte d'Ivoire''.
His accomplice, Michael Barry Shor, an international trader, was located in Virginia.
The French said they were protecting their own citizens from danger, but their deployment also aided the government forces.
The woman's football team played in the 2015 Women's World Cup in Canada.
About 4% of the population is of non-African ancestry.
After the decline of Ghana, the Mali Empire grew into a powerful Muslim state, which reached its apogee in the early part of the 14th century.
The United Nations Security Council adopted a common resolution recognising Alassane Ouattara as winner of the elections, based on the position of the Economic Community of West African States, which suspended Ivory Coast from all its decision-making bodies while the African Union also suspended the country's membership.
Ivory Coast became a protectorate of France in 1843–44 and was later formed into a French colony in 1893 amid the European scramble for Africa.
Also in 1887, Verdier's agent, Marcel Treich-Laplène, negotiated five additional agreements that extended French influence from the headwaters of the Niger River Basin through Ivory Coast.
At the end of secondary education, students can sit the'' baccalauréat'' examination.
The Baoulé, like the Ashanti, developed a highly centralized political and administrative structure under three successive rulers.
On 2 December, the Electoral Commission declared that Ouattara had won the election by a margin of 54% to 46%.
Crime rose dramatically in Abidjan.
The unrest forced the government to support multiparty democracy.
Gbagbo said the next day that elements of the resolution deemed to be constitutional violations would not be applied.
In late 1999, a group of dissatisfied officers staged a military coup, putting General Robert Guéï in power.
This sparked violent protests in which his supporters, mainly from the country's north, battled riot police in the capital, Yamoussoukro.
The French built naval bases to keep out non-French traders and began a systematic conquest of the interior.
Though UN peacekeepers were deployed to maintain a "Zone of Confidence", relations between Gbagbo and the opposition continued to deteriorate.
In 1944, he formed the country's first agricultural trade union for African cocoa farmers like himself.
They responded by destroying most Ivoirian military aircraft (two Su-25 planes and five helicopters), and violent retaliatory riots against the French broke out in Abidjan.
As a result, French citizens owned one-third of the cocoa, coffee, and banana plantations and adopted a forced-labour system.
In 1905, the French officially abolished slavery in most of French West Africa.
Ivory Coast achieved independence in 1960, they were led by Félix Houphouët-Boigny, who ruled the country until 1993.
In recent years, Ivory Coast has been subject to greater competition and falling prices in the global marketplace for its primary agricultural crops: coffee and cocoa.
The current king of Sanwi is Nana Amon Ndoufou V (since 2002).
Experts working on this field have designed the WASH concept.
In 1843–4, French admiral Bouët-Willaumez signed treaties with the kings of the Grand Bassam and Assinie regions, making their territories a French protectorate.
A later report concluded the killings were planned.
The southern terminals of the trans-Saharan trade routes were located on the edge of the desert, and from there supplemental trade extended as far south as the edge of the rain forest.
It is usually cooked in a pottery jar called a canary, over a slight fire, or cooked in an oven.
It retained the name through French rule, though, and independence in 1960.
Many Ivoirians viewed the tax as a violation of the terms of the protectorate treaties because they thought that France was demanding the equivalent of a ''coutume'' from the local kings, rather than the reverse.
The city of Kong was destroyed in 1895 by Samori Ture.
The policy of association also affirmed the superiority of the French in the colonies, but it entailed different institutions and systems of laws for the colonizer and the colonized.
Until the period following World War II, governmental affairs in French West Africa were administered from Paris.
The territory of the Mali Empire in Ivory Coast was limited to the north-west corner around Odienné.
According to 2012 government survey, the fertility rate was 5.0 children born per woman, with 3.7 in urban areas and 6.3 in rural areas.
The national football team has played in the World Cup three times, in Germany 2006, in South Africa 2010, and Brazil in 2014.
Infant mortality was 118 of 1000 live births.
Seafood includes tuna, sardines, shrimp, and bonito, which is similar to tuna.
In total there are around 78 languages spoken in Ivory Coast.
A new presidential election was expected to be held in October 2005, and an agreement was reached among the rival parties in March 2007 to proceed with this, but it continued to be postponed until November 2010 due to delays in its preparation.
Ivory Coast is a country of western sub-Saharan Africa.
Gbagbo's original mandate as president expired on 30 October 2005, but due to the lack of disarmament,  holding an election was deemed impossible, so his term in office was extended for a maximum of one year, according to a plan worked out by the African Union; this plan was endorsed by the United Nations Security Council.
In 2015, the United Nations engineered the Sustainable Development Goals, replacing the Millennium Development Goals.
The first recorded history is found in the chronicles of North African (Berber) traders, who, from early Roman times, conducted a caravan trade across the Sahara in salt, slaves, gold, and other goods.
There was also a Pepper Coast also known as the "Grain Coast", a "Gold Coast", and a "Slave Coast".
Such groups included the Ehotilé (Aboisso), Kotrowou (Fresco), Zéhiri (Grand Lahou), Ega and Diès (Divo).
In 2009, the cocoa-bean farmers earned $2.53 billion for cocoa exports and were expected to produce 630,000 metric tons in 2013.
They had lost control of the north of the country, and the rebel forces made their stronghold in the northern city of Bouaké.
''Mafé'' is a common dish consisting of meat in a peanut sauce.
Two Anyi kingdoms, ''Indénié'' and ''Sanwi'', attempted to retain their separate identity through the French colonial period and after independence.
The first round of elections was held peacefully, and widely hailed as free and fair.
From their settlement south of Bondoukou, the Abron gradually extended their hegemony over the Dyula people in Bondoukou, who were recent ''émigrés'' from the market city of Begho.
Through the production of coffee and cocoa, the country was an economic powerhouse in West Africa during the 1960s and 1970s.
One of the most common is the Dyula language, which acts as a trade language, as well as a language commonly spoken by the Muslim population.
Similarly, Bedié excluded many potential opponents from the army.
Around 64.8% of the land is agricultural land, Arable land taking up 9.1%, permanent pasture with 41.5%, and permanent crops occupying 14.2%.
Gbagbo was taken into custody after a raid into his residence on 11 April.
At the time of Ivory Coast's independence (1960), the country was easily French West Africa's most prosperous, contributing over 40% of the region's total exports.
The country has universities in Abidjan (Université de Cocody) and Bouaké (Université de Bouaké).
Activity along the coast stimulated European interest in the interior, especially along the two great rivers, the Senegal and the Niger.
According to the Hershey Company, the price of cocoa beans is expected to rise dramatically in upcoming years.
The dense rain forest, covering the southern half of the country, created barriers to the large-scale political organizations that had arisen in the north.
Aside from French nationals, native-born descendants of French settlers who arrived during the country's colonial period are present.
Alassane Ouattara was disqualified by the country's Supreme Court, due to his alleged Burkinabé nationality.
This was further boosted by a significant immigration of workers from surrounding countries.
International human-rights organizations have noted problems with the treatment of captive noncombatants by both sides and the re-emergence of child slavery among workers in cocoa production.
At the peak of its power in the 11th century, its realms extended from the Atlantic Ocean to Timbuctu.
Religion in Ivory Coast remains very heterogeneous, with Islam (almost all Sunni Muslims, with some Ahmadi Muslims) and Christianity (mostly Roman Catholic with smaller numbers of  Protestants, primarily Methodists) being the major religions.
Laurent Gbagbo, who would become the president of Ivory Coast in 2000, had to flee the country in the 1980s, as he incurred the ire of Houphouët-Boigny when Gbagbo founded the Front Populaire Ivoirien.
Ivory Coast went through an economic crisis in the 1980s, contributing to a period of political and social turmoil.
Houphouët-Boigny banked on his broad appeal to the population who continually elected him.
UN and French forces took military action against Gbagbo.
Ivory Coast is a republic with a strong executive power invested in its President.
Although Kong became a prosperous center of agriculture, trade, and crafts, ethnic diversity and religious discord gradually weakened the kingdom.
Ivory Coast stood out as the only West African country with a sizeable population of settlers; elsewhere in West and Central Africa, the French and British were largely bureaucrats.
The official language is French, with local indigenous languages also widely used, including Baoulé, Dioula, Dan, Anyin, and Cebaara Senufo.
Among those offering greatest resistance was Samori Ture, who in the 1880s and 1890s was establishing the Wassoulou Empire, which extended over large parts of present-day Guinea, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Ivory Coast.
Early in November 2004, after the peace agreement had effectively collapsed following the rebels' refusal to disarm, Gbagbo ordered airstrikes against the rebels.
An indigenous elite trained in French administrative practice formed an intermediary group between the French and the Africans.
Islam had been introduced in the western Sudan (today's Mali) by Muslim Berber traders from North Africa; it spread rapidly after the conversion of many important rulers.
According to 2010 estimates, Ivory Coast has the 27th-highest maternal mortality rate in the world.
A common street food is ''alloco'', which is ripe banana fried in palm oil, spiced with steamed onions and chili and eaten alone or with grilled fish.
In the 19th century, it died out in favor of ''Côte d'Ivoire''.
Guerrilla warfare by the Baoulé and other eastern groups continued until 1917).
The French responded to Samori Ture's expansion of regional control with military pressure.
With the late-October deadline approaching in 2006, the election was regarded as very unlikely to be held by that point, and the opposition and the rebels rejected the possibility of another term extension for Gbagbo.
The descendants of the rulers of the Agni kingdoms tried to retain their separate identity long after Ivory Coast's independence; as late as 1969, the Sanwi attempted to break away from Ivory Coast and form an independent kingdom.
The coast that the French named the ''Côte d'Ivoire'' and the Portuguese named the ''Costa do Marfim''—both, literally, being "Ivory Coast"—lay between what was known as the ''Guiné de Cabo Verde'', so-called "Upper Guinea" at Cabo Verde, and Lower Guinea.
Although most of the fighting ended by late 2004, the country remained split in two, with the north controlled by the New Forces.
Muslims dominate the north, while Christians dominate the south.
Many are French, Lebanese, Vietnamese and Spanish citizens, as well as Protestant missionaries from the United States and Canada.
In 1990, hundreds of civil servants went on strike, joined by students protesting institutional corruption.
The trading post at Grand Bassam in Ivory Coast was left in the care of a shipper from Marseille, Arthur Verdier, who in 1878 was named Resident of the Establishment of Ivory Coast.
As subjects of France, they had no political rights.
Historians believe that they were all either displaced or absorbed by the ancestors of the present indigenous inhabitants, who migrated south into the area before the 16th century.
The majority of students in secondary education are male.
After the assimilation doctrine was implemented entirely through the postwar reforms, though, Ivoirian leaders realized that even assimilation implied the superiority of the French over the Ivoirians, and that discrimination and political inequality would end only with independence.
In the city of Duékoué, hundreds of people were killed.
He tightened his hold over political life, jailing several hundred opposition supporters.
The coastline of the modern state is not quite coterminous with what the 15th- and 16th-century merchants knew as the "Teeth" or "Ivory" coast, which was considered to stretch from Cape Palmas to Cape Three Points and which is thus now divided between the modern states of Ghana and Ivory Coast (with a minute portion of Liberia).
The country was severely damaged by the war, and observers consider that it will be a challenge for Ouattara to rebuild the economy and reunite Ivorians.
A goal focused on majorly was the Clean Water and Sanitation.
A turning point in relations with France was reached with the 1956 Overseas Reform Act (''Loi Cadre''), which transferred a number of powers from Paris to elected territorial governments in French West Africa and also removed remaining voting inequalities.
Several other Ivory Coast officers were released on their diplomatic passports.
The first posts in Ivory Coast included one at Assinie and another at Grand Bassam, which became the colony's first capital.
''Bangui'' is a local palm wine.
Ivory Coast's political capital is Yamoussoukro, and its economic capital and largest city is the port city of Abidjan.
French colonial policy incorporated concepts of assimilation and association.
A year later, the French abolished forced labour.
French campaigns against Samori Ture, which were met with fierce resistance, intensified in the mid-1890s until he was captured in 1898.
A French mission was established in 1637 Assinie near the border with the Gold Coast (now Ghana).
In 2009, according to U.S. Department of State estimates, Christians and Muslims each made up 35 to 40% of the population, while an estimated 25% of the population practiced traditional (animist) religions.
Inhabitants lived in villages or clusters of villages; their contacts with the outside world were filtered through long-distance traders.
It also became Africa's leading exporter of pineapples and palm oil.
Therefore, in April 1986, the government declared Côte d'Ivoire (or, more fully, République de Côte d'Ivoire) to be its formal name for the purposes of diplomatic protocol, and officially refuses to recognize or accept any translation from French to another language in its international dealings.
The Brazzaville Conference of 1944, the first Constituent Assembly of the Fourth Republic in 1946, and France's gratitude for African loyalty during World War II, led to far-reaching governmental reforms in 1946.
By the end of the 1880s, France had established what came through for control over the coastal regions of Ivory Coast, and in 1889 Britain recognized French sovereignty in the area.
It was a colony and an overseas territory under the Third Republic.
Gendarmes and vigilantes bulldozed and burned homes by the thousands, attacking the residents.
Chicken is commonly consumed and has a unique flavor due to its lean, low-fat mass in this region.
Ivory Coast's capital, Yamoussoukro, is home to the largest church building in the world, the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro.
After the inauguration of Gbagbo, Ouattara—who was recognized as the winner by most countries and the United Nations—organized an alternative inauguration.
The maintenance of close ties to France since independence in 1960, diversification of agriculture for export, and encouragement of foreign investment have been factors in the economic growth of Ivory Coast.
The main religions are Islam, Christianity (primarily Roman Catholicism), and various indigenous religions.
The country is the world's largest exporter of cocoa beans, and the fourth-largest exporter of goods, in general, in sub-Saharan Africa (following South Africa, Nigeria, and Angola).
The rebels threatened to move on Abidjan again, and France deployed troops from its base in the country to stop any rebel advance.
France appointed him as the first African to become a minister in a European government.
France also wanted to maintain a presence in the region to stem the increasing influence of the British along the Gulf of Guinea coast.
Many of the population, especially in the interior, considered the tax a humiliating symbol of submission.
Agreements with Liberia in 1892 and with Britain in 1893 determined the eastern and western boundaries of the colony, but the northern boundary was not fixed until 1947 because of efforts by the French government to attach parts of Upper Volta (present-day Burkina Faso) and French Sudan (present-day Mali) to Ivory Coast for economic and administrative reasons.
Five important states flourished in Ivory Coast during the pre-European era.
Its slow decline starting at the end of the 14th century followed internal discord and revolts by vassal states, one of which, Songhai, flourished as an empire between the 14th and 16th centuries.
The UN Security Council endorsed another one-year extension of Gbagbo's term on 1 November 2006; however, the resolution provided for the strengthening of Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny's powers.
Until 1958, governors appointed in Paris administered the colony of Ivory Coast, using a system of direct, centralized administration that left little room for Ivoirian participation in policy making.
During one of these airstrikes in Bouaké, on 6 November 2004, French soldiers were hit, and nine were killed; the Ivorian government has said it was a mistake, but the French have claimed it was deliberate.
An Ivorian military spokesman said, "The air, land, and sea border of the country are closed to all movement of people and goods."
The Constitutional Council, which consists of Gbagbo supporters, declared the results of seven northern departments unlawful and that Gbagbo had won the elections with 51% of the vote - instead of Ouattara winning with 54%, as reported by the Electoral Commission.
The kingdom's Quranic scholars attracted students from all parts of West Africa.
By 1979, the country was the world's leading producer of cocoa.
In 1886, to support its claims of effective occupation, France again assumed direct control of its West African coastal trading posts and embarked on an accelerated program of exploration in the interior.
Whether the French actions improved or worsened the situation in the long term is disputed.
About a quarter of the population lives below the international poverty line of US$1.25 a day.
The more important terminals—Djenné, Gao, and Timbuctu—grew into major commercial centres around which the great Sudanic empires developed.
Changing into the 21st-century Ivorian economy is largely market-based and still relies heavily on agriculture, with smallholder cash-crop production being dominant.
French technicians contributed to the "Ivoirian miracle".
The country lies between latitudes 4° and 11°N, and longitudes 2° and 9°W.
Assinie's survival was precarious, however; the French were not firmly established in Ivory Coast until the mid-19th century.
Communities across the country required repairs to their water supply infrastructure.
In 1887, Lieutenant Louis Gustave Binger began a two-year journey that traversed parts of Ivory Coast's interior.
It finally split into smaller chiefdoms.
The report of the results led to severe tension and violent incidents.
These events were seen by some observers as substantially strengthening Gbagbo's position.
French, the official language, is taught in schools and serves as a ''lingua franca'' in the country.
Winston Churchill gave power back to members of General Charles de Gaulle's provisional government.
The unity government was unstable, and the central problems remained, with neither side achieving its goals.
Unlike Houphouët-Boigny, who was very careful in avoiding any ethnic conflict and left access to administrative positions open to immigrants from neighbouring countries, Bedié emphasized the concept of "Ivority" (''Ivoirité'') to exclude his rival Alassane Ouattara, who had two northern Ivorian parents, from running for future presidential election.
Compared to neighboring Ghana, Ivory Coast suffered little from the slave trade, as European slaving and merchant ships preferred other areas along the coast with better harbors.
They were expected to serve in the military and were subject to the ''indigénat'', a separate system of law.
The name had long since been translated literally into other languages, which the postindependence government considered to be increasingly troublesome whenever its international dealings extended beyond the Francophone sphere.
Concerted French exploration of West Africa began in the mid-19th century, but moved slowly, based more on individual initiative than on government policy.
Abidjan is the administrative center.
In response, the Gbagbo-aligned Constitutional Council rejected the declaration, and the government announced that country's borders had been sealed.
WASH focuses on safe drinkable water, hygiene, and proper sanitation.The group has had a major impact on the Sub-Saharan region of Africa, particularly the Ivory Coast.
The battle for the main gendarmerie barracks in Abidjan lasted until mid-morning, but by lunchtime, the government forces had secured the main city, Abidjan.
In 2012, the Ivory Coast Airforce consisted of one Mil Mi-24 attack helicopter and three SA330L Puma transports (marked as potentially unserviceable).
The defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War in 1871 and the subsequent annexation by Germany of the French province of Alsace-Lorraine caused the French government to abandon its colonial ambitions and withdraw its military garrisons from its French West African trading posts, leaving them in the care of resident merchants.
The Ivory Coast also has 100,000 rubber farmers who earned a total of $105 million in 2012.
'''Ivory Coast''' () or '''Côte d'Ivoire''' (;  ; ), officially named the '''Republic of Côte d'Ivoire''' (), is a country located in West Africa.
The earliest recorded European voyage to West Africa was made by the Portuguese in 1482.
In 1958, Ivory Coast became an autonomous member of the French Community (which replaced the French Union).
The lead-up to the election was marked by military and civil unrest.
The first West African French settlement, Saint Louis, was founded in the mid-17th century in Senegal, while at about the same time, the Dutch ceded to the French a settlement at Goree Island, off Dakar.
Houphouët-Boigny's one-party rule was not amenable to political competition.
Houphouët-Boigny soon rose to prominence and within a year was elected to the French Parliament in Paris.
Since 1983, Ivory Coast's capital has been Yamoussoukro.
Curfews were lifted, and French troops patrolled the western border of the country.
One can find the name ''Cote de(s) Dents'' regularly used in older works.
Like those, the name "Ivory Coast" reflected the major trade that occurred on that particular stretch of the coast, the export of ivory.
In World War II, the Vichy regime remained in control until 1942, when British troops invaded without much resistance.
In October 1995, Bédié overwhelmingly won re-election against a fragmented and disorganised opposition.
France sent in troops to maintain the cease-fire boundaries, and militias, including warlords and fighters from Liberia and Sierra Leone, took advantage of the crisis to seize parts of the west.
