The 2006–07 search season had similar results to those of the previous year:
Indeed, confidence in the claim has eroded with failure to verify its existence despite massive searches.
The lack of confirmed proof of the bird's existence, and the extremely small chance of actually seeing the bird even if it does exist (especially since the exact locations of the reported sightings are still guarded), have prevented the explosion in tourism some locals had anticipated.
The CLO authors could not say with absolute certainty that the sounds recorded in Arkansas were made by Ivory-bills.
“Even though we didn’t get additional definitive evidence of the ivory-bill in Arkansas, we’re not discouraged.
The similarities between the Arkansas bird and known Pileated Woodpeckers suggest that it was most likely a Pileated Woodpecker.
The Ivory-billed has a total length of  and, based on very scant information, weighs about .
Two tantalizing photos were given to Louisiana State University museum director George Lowery in 1971 by a source who wished to remain anonymous but who came forward in 2005 as outdoorsman Fielding Lewis.
Others have independently come to the same conclusion, and publication of independent analyses may be forthcoming ... For scientists to label sight reports and questionable photographs as 'proof' of such an extraordinary record is delving into 'faith-based' ornithology and doing a disservice to science."
The ivory-billed woodpecker was listed as an endangered species on 11 March 1967, though the only evidence of its existence at the time was a possible recording of its call made in East Texas.
Our Committee felt that given the controversy of the Arkansas evidence, the species is best considered still extinct.
All ARU double raps suggesting the presence of an Ivory-billed Woodpecker should be reconsidered in light of the phenomenon of duck wingtip collisions, especially those recorded in the winter months, when duck flocks are common across flooded bottomlands of the southeastern United States.
Parents incubate the eggs cooperatively, with the male incubating from approximately 4:30 PM–6:30 AM while the female foraged, and vice versa from 6:30 AM–4:30 PM.
Pairs are also known to travel together.
The ivory-billed woodpecker ranks among the largest woodpeckers in the world and is the largest in the United States.
The species is listed as critically endangered and possibly extinct by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
Claims that the bird in the Luneau video is a normal pileated woodpecker are based on misrepresentations of a pileated's underwing pattern, interpretation of video artifacts as plumage pattern, and inaccurate models of takeoff and flight behavior.
We have seen a few cavities of the appropriate size and shape for ivory-bills, but these can be old, or exceptionally large Pileated Woodpecker cavities, or mammal-enlarged Pileated Woodpecker cavities.… Given the results, it is unlikely a population of any meaningful size of Ivory-billed Woodpeckers exists in south Florida.
Like all woodpeckers, the ivory-bill has a strong and straight bill and a long, mobile, hard-tipped, barbed tongue.
Ivorybills have also been featured in "Skink, No Surrender" by Carl Hiaasen as a clue to where the protagonist's cousin can be found, for Ivorybills could only be found in one place in the world.
Nest openings are typically ovular to rectangular in shape, and measure about 12–14&nbsp;cm tall by 10&nbsp;cm wide (4"-5 3/4" by 4")
When the bird is disturbed, the pitch of the kent note rises, it is repeated more frequently, and is often doubled.
The 2008–09 search effort in southwest Florida found no evidence of the bird:
An article by Dina Cappiello in the ''Houston Chronicle'' published 18 December 2005 presented Richard Prum's position as follows:
Likewise, the 2007–08 search season did not deliver conclusive evidence of the bird:
Usually two to five eggs are laid and incubated for 3 to 5 weeks.
The report also notes that drumming consistent with that of ivory-billed woodpecker had been heard in the region.
The bird is shiny blue-black with white markings on its neck and back and extensive white on the trailing edge of both the upper- and underwing.
An anonymous $10,000 reward was offered in June 2006 for information leading to the discovery of an ivory-billed woodpecker nest, roost or feeding site.
The Auburn/University of Windsor team continued search efforts but planned to cease updates on their web site in August 2009:
It concluded not only that the Cuban and American Ivory-billed woodpeckers are genetically distinct, but also that they and the imperial form a North American clade within ''Campephilus'' that appeared in the Mid-Pleistocene.
The paper was not published.
Hence they occur at low densities even in healthy populations.
A 2007 paper concluded that the Luneau video was consistent with the pileated woodpecker:
“Searches there and searches conducted by other agencies throughout the Southeast are still turning up reports of sounds that cannot be explained away.
New video analysis of Pileated Woodpeckers in escape flights comparable to that of the putative Ivory-billed Woodpecker filmed in Arkansas shows that Pileated Woodpeckers can display a wingbeat frequency equivalent to that of the Arkansas bird during escape flight.
Bret Tobalske, an ornithologist who specializes in the flight mechanics of woodpeckers, performed an analysis of wing motion and concluded that the bird in the 2008 video is a large woodpecker.
The flight speed, narrow wings, and prominent white patches on the dorsal surfaces of the wings are also consistent with ivory-billed but not pileated woodpecker.
Doubt was also cast on some of the auditory evidence (ARU recordings of double-raps) for the presence of ivory-billed woodpeckers in Arkansas and Florida.
When perched with the wings folded, ivory-bills of both sexes present a large patch of white on the lower back, roughly triangular in shape.
It is interesting to note that, despite his harsh criticism of the 2005 evidence, Jerome A. Jackson agrees with the value of additional searches.
The crest is black in juveniles and females.
Team members had no sightings of ivorybills and only two sound detections in 2008.… So where does all this leave us?
Among North American woodpeckers, the ivory-bill is unique in having a bill whose tip is quite flattened laterally, shaped much like a beveled wood chisel.
The parents will continue feeding them for another two months.
Two prominent forks made it possible to scale frames from the video relative to a photo of a pileated woodpecker specimen that was mounted on the tree.
"We don't believe a recoverable population of ivory-billed woodpeckers exists," says Ron Rohrbaugh, a conservation biologist at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, who headed the original search team.
There have been a few sightings but no photographs, some interesting recordings of “kent” calls and of double rap drums, and photographs taken of cavities and bark scaling.
At that time, the ivory-billed woodpecker ranged from east Texas to North Carolina, and from southern Illinois to Florida and Cuba.
Some skeptics, including Richard Prum, believe the video could have been of a pileated woodpecker.
One of these more reliable sightings was on 27 February 2004.
This report led to more intensive searches in the area and in the White River National Wildlife Refuge, undertaken in secrecy for fear of a stampede of bird-watchers, by experienced observers over the next fourteen months.
Reports of at least one male ivory-billed woodpecker in Arkansas in 2004 were investigated and subsequently published in April 2005 by a team led by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology.
The species had not been documented to occur since 1944.
Standard measurements attained included a wing chord length of , a tail length of , a bill length of  and a tarsus length of .
The exact source of the sound was not found because of the swampy terrain, but signs of active woodpeckers were found (i.e., scaled bark and large tree cavities).
imperialis'') of western Mexico is, or was, the largest woodpecker.
The critical frames from the Arkansas video that were used to identify the bird as an Ivory-billed Woodpecker are shown to be equally, or more, compatible with the Pileated Woodpecker.…The identification of the bird filmed in Arkansas in April 2004 as an Ivory-billed Woodpecker is best regarded as unsafe.
The ivory-billed woodpecker feeds mainly on the larvae of wood-boring beetles, but also eats seeds, fruit, and other insects.
Searchers documented more possible sightings and possible ivory-bill double knocks heard, but the definitive photograph, like the bird itself, remained elusive.
The ivory-billed woodpecker is thought to pair for life.
It also has a white neck stripe but the back is normally black.
p. bairdii''), after a long interval, was in 1987; it has not been seen since.
Because of habitat destruction and, to a lesser extent, hunting, its numbers have dwindled to the point where it is uncertain whether any remain, though there have been reports that it has been seen again.
But Ronald Rohrbaugh and others are convinced the research should continue, not only in Arkansas, but in other states that are part of the bird’s historic range.
The first audio and only motion picture recording made of the ivory-billed woodpecker was created as part of a 1935 study by a group of Cornell scientists in the Singer Tract in Madison Parish, Louisiana.
In March 2007 the Florida Ornithological Society Records Committee voted unanimously not to accept the 2005–06 reports of the ivory-billed woodpecker on the Choctawhatchee River:
Ivory-bills have a prominent crest, although in juveniles it is ragged.
There is some controversy over whether the Cuban ivory-billed woodpecker is more appropriately recognized as a separate species.
Only two large woodpeckers occur north of the Rio Grande, but the flap rate is about ten standard deviations greater than the mean flap rate of the pileated woodpecker.
The Committee is waiting for unequivocal proof that the species still exists.
Pretty much in the same position as in June 2006.
While Dr. Hill and Dr. Mennill are themselves convinced of the bird's existence in Florida, they are quick to acknowledge that they have not yet conclusively proven the species' existence.
The underwing is also white along its forward edge, resulting in a black line running along the middle of the underwing, expanding to more extensive black at the wingtip.
The search teams covered lots of ground and tried new survey techniques….
Young learn to fly about seven to eight weeks after hatching.
This evidence remains inconclusive as it excludes the photographic or DNA evidence that many experts cite as necessary before the presence of the species can be confirmed.
Searches in this area of Florida through 2009 failed to produce definitive confirmation.
Other nicknames for the bird are '''King of the Woodpeckers''' and '''Elvis in Feathers'''.
By 1938, an estimated twenty woodpeckers remained in the wild, some six to eight of which were in the old-growth forest called the Singer Tract, owned by the Singer Sewing Company in Madison Parish in northeastern Louisiana, where logging rights were held by the Chicago Mill and Lumber Company.
While recent evidence suggesting that American ivory-billed woodpeckers may still exist in the wild has caused excitement in the ornithology community, no similar evidence exists for the Cuban Ivory-billed bird, believed to be extinct since the last sighting in the late 1980s.
Therefore only evidence that undoubtedly showed a living bird would be considered sufficient to accept a report.
''(9 February 2009)'' There has been little to report, and my students and I Geoff Hill have been enjoying the calm.
Interviews with residents of Brinkley, Arkansas, heard on National Public Radio following the reported rediscovery were shared with musician Sufjan Stevens, who used the material to write a song titled "The Lord God Bird".
No definitive confirmation of those reports emerged, despite intensive searching over five years following the initial sightings.
The vastness of the forest combined with the highly mobile nature of the bird warrant additional searching.”
A series of lectures discuss the videos and a set of factors that affect the difficulty of detecting and photographing ivory-billed woodpeckers.
The bird uses its enormous white bill to hammer, wedge, and peel the bark off dead trees to find the insects.
As of August 2007, hundreds of birds have been recorded, including pileated woodpeckers, but not the ivory-billed woodpecker.
In September 2006, new claims that the ivory-billed woodpecker may not be extinct were released by a research group consisting of members from Auburn University in Alabama and the University of Windsor in Ontario.
Prior to the American Civil War, much of the Southern United States was covered in vast tracts of primeval hardwood forests that were suitable as habitat for the bird.
The American Birding Association largely stayed out of the debate.
The secrecy of the search permitted The Nature Conservancy and Cornell University to quietly buy up Ivory-billed habitat to add to the  of the Big Woods protected by the Conservancy.
According to a Cornell University press release from January 2009, the 2008–09 season will be the last Cornell-sponsored search, absent confirmation of the bird:
After the Civil War, the timber industry deforested millions of acres in the South, leaving only sparse isolated tracts of suitable habitat.
There were numerous unconfirmed reports of the bird, but many ornithologists believed the species had been wiped out completely, and it was assessed as "extinct" by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources in 1994.
In adults, the bill is ivory in color, chalky white in juveniles.
The '''ivory-billed woodpecker''' (''Campephilus principalis'') is one of the largest woodpeckers in the world, at roughly 20&nbsp;inches (51&nbsp;cm) in length and 30&nbsp;inches (76&nbsp;cm) in wingspan.
The two look similar despite differences in size and plumage.
That same video included an earlier image of what was suggested to be such a bird perching on a Water Tupelo (''Nyssa aquatica'').
But after five years of fruitless searching, hopes of saving the species have faded.
21 May 2005 – 26 April 2006.
These characteristics distinguish it from the smaller and darker-billed pileated woodpecker.
The more common pileated woodpecker may compete for food with this species.
“The search teams were very skilled, not only technically but in the execution of the search,” said Dr. John Fitzpatrick, director of the Cornell Lab of Ornithology.
Pileated juveniles and adults have a red crest and a white chin.
An analysis of videos obtained in the Pearl River in Louisiana in 2006 and 2008 during encounters with birds that were identified in the field as ivory-billed woodpeckers was published in 2011 along with comments by independent experts.
The ivory-billed woodpecker is sometimes referred to as the '''Grail Bird''', the '''Lord God Bird''', or the '''Good God Bird''', all based on the exclamations of awed onlookers.
Pileateds normally have no white on the trailing edges of their wings and when perched normally show only a small patch of white on each side of the body near the edge of the wing.
Avian artist Julie Zickefoose analyzed the 2006 video and commented on the "rared-back pose, long but fluffy and squared-off crest, and extremely long, erect head and neck" and an unusual short flight that does not seem to be consistent with a pileated woodpecker.
The closely related and likewise possibly extinct imperial woodpecker (''C.
The American Birding Association (ABA) lists the ivory-billed woodpecker as a Class 6 species, a category the ABA defines as "definitely or probably extinct."
Dr. Geoffrey E. Hill of Auburn University and Dr. Daniel Mennill of the University of Windsor have revealed a collection of evidence that the birds may still exist in the cypress swamps of the Florida panhandle.
In May 2006, it was announced that a large search effort led by the Cornell team had been suspended for the season with only a handful of unconfirmed, fleeting sightings to report.
A large woodpecker was videotaped on 25 April 2004; its size, wing pattern at rest and in flight, and white plumage on its back between the wings were cited as evidence that the woodpecker sighted was an ivory-billed woodpecker.
The ABA Checklist Committee has not changed the status of the Ivory-billed Woodpecker from Code 6 (EXTINCT) to another level that would reflect a small surviving population.
“We remain committed to our original goal of striving to locate breeding pairs,” says Cornell Lab of Ornithology director John Fitzpatrick.
The Lab and its partners concluded the 2006–07 field season in Arkansas at the end of April with no additional definitive evidence of ivory-bills to complement the data gathered in 2004 and 2005.
The last reported sighting of the Cuban subspecies (''C.
In males, the crest is black along its forward edge, changing abruptly to red on the side and rear.
A woodpecker "festival", a woodpecker hairstyle (a sort of mohawk with red, white, and black dye), and an "Ivory-bill Burger" (made with 100% beef) have been featured locally.
It is native to the virgin forests of the southeastern United States (along with a separate subspecies native to Cuba).
“We will continue to accept and investigate credible reports of Ivory-billed Woodpeckers, and to promote protection and restoration of the old growth conditions upon which this magnificent species depended across the entire southeastern United States.”
In late September 2006, a team of ornithologists from Auburn University and the University of Windsor published reports of their own sightings of ivory-billed woodpeckers along the Choctawhatchee River in northwest Florida, beginning in 2005.
Bobby Harrison of Huntsville, Alabama and Tim Gallagher of Ithaca, New York, both reported seeing an ivory-billed woodpecker at the same time.
The celebration included exhibits, birding tours, educational presentations, a vendor market, and more.
Both parents work together to excavate a nest in a dead or partially dead tree about 8–15m from the ground before they have their young.
Ivory-billed Woodpecker, ''Campephilus principalis.''
On page 13 of ''Winging It'' (November/December 2005), a brief reference was made:
''(12 June 2008)'' We completed our 2008 effort to get definitive evidence for ivorybills in the Choctawhatchee River Basin in early May….
Lovette, a member of the committee, said that more testing is needed to support that change, but concluded that "These results will likely initiate an interesting debate on how we should classify these birds."
The bird's distinctive bill is not visible in either photo and the photos&nbsp;– taken from a distance&nbsp;– are very grainy.
These birds need about  per pair so they can find enough food to feed their young and themselves.
The pileated normally is brownish-black, smoky, or slaty black in color.
As of February 2010, the Cornell researchers concluded there was no hope of saving the bird, if it still exists:
Two of the factors, the vast size of the habitats that must be searched and dense vegetation that limits visibility, are evident in video footage that was obtained using a drone over the Pearl, Choctawhatchee, and Apalachicola Rivers.
In the afternoon of 27 January 2002, after ten days, a rapping sound similar to the "double knock" made by the ivory-billed woodpecker was heard and recorded.
We have a large body of evidence that Ivory-billed Woodpeckers persist along the Choctawhatchee River in the Florida panhandle, but we do not have definitive proof that they exist.
Jackson accused the Fitzpatrick team of "untruths", and Fitzpatrick accused Jackson of obviating the normal peer-review system with an opinion piece "treated as a scientific contribution by the public media."
A recording of the bird, made by Arthur A. Allen, can be found  here.
The most common, a kent or hant, sounds like a toy trumpet often repeated in series.
The two sides each published additional responses that seemed, to many ornithological observers, to have departed markedly from accepted scientific decorum.
The video documentation of the bird(s) from Arkansas, however, has been debated by many, although the record was accepted by the Arkansas Bird Records Committee.
We have found no signs of Ivory-billed Woodpeckers.
This assessment was later altered to "critically endangered" on the grounds that the species could still be extant.
Fish and Wildlife Service-funded Ivory-billed Woodpecker searches will continue through the 2008–09 search season,” says Laurie Fenwood, Ivory-billed Woodpecker Recovery Team Coordinator for the U.S, Fish and Wildlife Service.…If no birds are confirmed, the Cornell Lab of Ornithology will not send an organized team into the field next year.
In March 2006, a team headed by David A. Sibley of Concord, MA published a response in the journal ''Science'', asserting that the videotape was most likely of a pileated woodpecker, with mistakes having been made in the interpretation of its posture.
The last specimen taken in Florida was in 1925; there have been numerous sight reports of varying credibility since, and one record of a feather found in a nest cavity in 1968 that was identified as an Ivory-billed Woodpecker inner secondary by Alexander Wetmore.
In December 2008, the Nature Conservancy announced a reward of $50,000 to the person who can lead a project biologist to a living ivory-billed woodpecker.
“We’ll return to Arkansas for at least another field season,” says  Rohrbaugh.
Prum, intrigued by some of the recordings taken in Arkansas' Big Woods, said the evidence thus far is refutable.
In a ''Perspectives in Ornithology'' commentary published in ''The Auk'' in January 2006, ornithologist Jerome Jackson detailed his skepticism of the Ivory-bill evidence:
The American Ornithologists' Union Committee on Classification and Nomenclature has said it is not yet ready to list the American and Cuban as separate species.
Brinkley hosted "The Call of the Ivory-billed Woodpecker Celebration" in February 2006.
One group of researchers stated:
The study does not attempt to define a lineage linking the three birds, though it does imply that the Cuban bird is more closely related to the imperial.
About fifteen sightings occurred during the period (seven of which were considered compelling enough to mention in the scientific article), possibly all of the same bird.
There were a few double knock detections in January, but not by my paid crew, Brian Rolek, or me.
The bird's drum is a single or double rap.
Prum, Robbins, Brett Benz, and I remain steadfast in our belief that the bird in the Luneau video is a normal Pileated Woodpecker.
Their evidence includes 14 sightings of the birds and 300 recordings of sounds that can be attributed to the ivory-billed woodpecker, but also includes tell-tale foraging signs and appropriately sized tree nest cavities (Hill ''et al.
In October 2009, Cornell scientists announced that their search for the ivory-billed woodpecker in North America was being suspended.
However, pileated woodpeckers, apparently aberrant individuals, have been reported with white trailing edges on the wings, forming a white triangular patch on the lower back when perched.
In sum, no evidence confirms the alleged rediscovery of the ivory-billed woodpecker.
It has a typical  wingspan.
They feed the chicks for months.
Almost no forests today can maintain an ivory-billed woodpecker population.
Despite published reports from Arkansas, Florida, and Louisiana and sporadic reports elsewhere in the historic range of the species since the 1940s, there is no conclusive evidence for the continued existence of the ivory-billed woodpecker; i.e., there are no unambiguous photographs, videos, specimens or DNA samples from feathers or feces of the ivory-billed woodpecker.
These reports were accompanied by evidence that the authors themselves considered suggestive for the existence of ivory-billed woodpeckers.
Ivory-billeds are known to prefer thick hardwood swamps and pine forests, with large amounts of dead and decaying trees.
One of the most rancorous debates in the history of ornithology had begun in earnest.
The expedition was inconclusive, however, as it was determined that the recorded sounds were likely gunshot echoes rather than the distinctive double rap of the ivory-billed woodpecker.
The CLO team responded in the same issue of ''Science'', standing by their original findings, stating:
…In mid-March the Cornell Lab of Ornithology team will join the South Carolina search along the Congaree, PeeDee, and Santee Rivers.
A size comparison was carried out using part of the tree in which the bird in the 2006 video was perched.
Either the excitement of the ivorybill hunt causes competent birders to see and hear things that do not exist and leads competent sound analysts to misidentify hundreds of recorded sounds, or the few ivorybills in the Choctawhatchee River Basin are among the most elusive birds on the planet.
These observations were made on the heels of the much-publicized “rediscovery” of the species in Arkansas (Fitzpatrick et al.
Lowery presented the photos at the 1971 annual meeting of the American Ornithologists Union.
VOTE: NOT ACCEPT (0–7)
Skeptics dismissed the photos as frauds; seeing that the bird is in roughly the same position in both photos, they suggested they may have been of a mounted specimen.
It describes the potential for a thinly distributed population in the area, though no birds have been located away from the primary site.
However, there’s no way to know for sure yet if reported double knocks and kent-like sounds were made by an ivory-bill or something else.”
…The work begins in Florida in early January and continues through mid-March.
Cornell University did not field a search team in Arkansas during 2008–2009, but focused on mangrove habitats in southwest Florida, with a later visit planned for South Carolina.
No sightings, double knocks or calls, no replies to our many double-knock imitations.
They conclude that it lacked certain features of an ivory-billed woodpecker, and had others consistent with the pileated; they asserted positively that the blurry video images belonged to pileated woodpecker.
The Cuban Exile journalist and author John O'Donnell-Rosales, who was born in the area of Cuba with the last confirmed sightings, reported sightings near the Alabama coastal delta in 1994, but these were never properly investigated by state wildlife officials.
We continue to work to get definitive documentation of the Ivory-billed Woodpecker in the Choctawhatchee River Basin.… To my knowledge, there have been no sightings of Ivory-billed Woodpeckers in the Choctawhatchee region since last spring.
A conversational call, also recorded, is given between individuals at the nest, and has been described as ''kent-kent-kent''.
Since the cousin was kidnapped and could not tell the people who were trying to find her where she was, she gave an implicit hint that she saw an Ivorybill, telling her finders, where she was.
In the fall of 2006, researchers developed and installed an "autonomous observatory" using robotic video cameras with image processing software that detects and records high resolution video of birds in flight inside a high probability zone in the Cache River area.
The photos, taken with a cheap Instamatic camera, show what appears to be a male Ivory-billed perched on the trunks of two trees in the Atchafalaya Basin of Louisiana.
These claims are contradicted by experimental data and fail to explain evidence in the Luneau video of white dorsal plumage, distinctive flight behavior, and a perched woodpecker with white upper parts."
The chin of an ivory-bill is black.
The research team is currently undertaking a more complete survey of the Choctawhatchee River, in hopes of obtaining photographic evidence of the bird's existence.
By 1944, the last known ivory-billed woodpecker, a female, was gone from the cut-over tract.
The family will eventually split up in late fall or early winter.
On the basis of the comparison, it is clear that the bird in the video is a large woodpecker, and the size appears to be consistent with an ivory-billed woodpecker.
Seven members of the Cornell Lab of Ornithology’s mobile search team will plunge into some of the most forbidding wilderness in southwestern Florida.
''(2 August 2009)'' I haven’t posted many updates on this site in the past 9 months because there hasn’t not  been much to report.… Since the winter of 2008, we have had few sightings or sound detections by anyone—none by Brian or me—and none that I would rate very highly.… In short, our experience over the past year indicates that ivorybills have moved out of the areas where we encountered them from 2005 to 2008.… There is no way to know whether the birds are in different areas in the Choctawhatchee Basin, different forests in the region, or dead.…I won’t post any more updates on this site.
