Harvard won its first title of either variety in 2011, losing a dramatic play-off game to Princeton for the NCAA tournament bid, then rebounded to win outright championships in 2012, 2013, and 2014.
Preppy fashion started around 1912 to the late 1940s and 1950s as the Ivy League style of dress.
During that time Penn has had 8 undefeated Ivy League Football Championships and Harvard has had 6 undefeated Ivy League Football Championships.
All eight are in the top 20 for number of sports offered for both men and women among Division I schools.
A basketball league was later created in 1902, when Columbia, Cornell, Harvard, Yale and Princeton formed the Eastern Intercollegiate Basketball League; they were later joined by Penn and Dartmouth.
A common folk etymology attributes the name to the Roman numeral for four (IV), asserting that there was such a sports league originally with four members.
The table above includes the number of team championships won from the beginning of official Ivy League competition (1956–57 academic year) through 2011–12.
In 2013, 46% of Harvard College students came from families in the top 3.8% of all American households (over $200,000 per annum).
While the term was in use as early as 1933, it only became official after the formation of the NCAA Division&nbsp;I athletic conference in 1954.
Penn and Brown were officially founded as nonsectarian schools.
Yale and Columbia previously fielded teams in the league but no longer do so.
Rivalries run deep in the Ivy League.
The eight Little Ivies are Amherst College, Bates College, Bowdoin College, Colby College, Middlebury College, Swarthmore College, Wesleyan University, and Williams College.
In addition to varsity football, Penn, Princeton and Cornell also field teams in the eight-team Collegiate Sprint Football League, in which all players must weigh 172 pounds or less.
Aspects of Ivy stereotyping were illustrated during the 1988 presidential election, when George H. W. Bush (Yale '48) derided Michael Dukakis (graduate of Harvard Law School) for having "foreign-policy views born in Harvard Yard's boutique."
The movie ''Animal House'' includes a satiric version of the formerly common visits by Dartmouth men to Massachusetts to meet Smith and Mount Holyoke women, a drive of more than two hours.
Only once has one of the other six schools earned more than eight titles in a single academic year (Cornell with nine in 2005–06).
The supposed "IV League" was formed over a century ago and consisted of Harvard, Yale, Princeton, and a fourth school that varies depending on who is telling the story.
The eight institutions are Brown University, Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, Harvard University, the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, and Yale University.
The term has been used to describe the Little Ivies, a grouping of small liberal arts colleges in the Northeastern United States.
Later in Penn's early history, the university changed its officially recognized founding date to 1749, which was used for all of the nineteenth century, including a centennial celebration in 1849.
All they know is that both are full of rich, fancy, stuck-up and possibly dangerous intellectuals who never sit down to supper in their undershirt no matter how hot the weather gets."
The principles established reiterated those put forward in the Harvard-Yale-Princeton Presidents' Agreement of 1916.
Ivy planting ceremonies are reported for Yale, Simmons, Bryn Mawr and many others.
A business writer, warning in 2001 against discriminatory hiring, presented a cautionary example of an attitude to avoid (the bracketed phrase is his):
"Religious affiliation" refers to financial sponsorship, formal association with, and promotion by, a religious denomination.
Undergraduate enrollments range from about 4,000 to 14,000, making them larger than those of a typical private liberal arts college and smaller than a typical public state university.
Seven out of the eight Ivy League schools were founded before the American Revolution; Cornell was founded just after the American Civil War.
Nationally, 35% of American university students qualify for a Pell Grant.
Listed from in order from greatest number of Nobel laureates are: Harvard with 153 Nobel winners, the most out of any university in the world.
Since its inception, an Ivy League school has yet to win either the men's or women's Division I NCAA Basketball Tournament.
However, the Ivy League has not played any postseason games at all since 1956 due to the league's concerns about the extended December schedule's effects on academics.
Other uses include the Southern Ivies and the Public Ivies.
The Yale-Princeton series is the nation's second longest, exceeded only by "The Rivalry" between Lehigh and Lafayette, which began later in 1884 but included two or three games in each of 17 early seasons.
The clothing stores J.
The universities provide significant financial aid to help increase the enrollment of lower income and middle class students.
Within a year of this statement and having held month-long discussions about the proposal, on December 3, 1936, the idea of "the formation of an Ivy League" gained enough traction among the undergraduate bodies of the universities that the ''Columbia Daily Spectator'', ''The Cornell Daily Sun'', ''The Dartmouth'', ''The Harvard Crimson'', ''The Daily Pennsylvanian'', ''The Daily Princetonian'' and the ''Yale Daily News'' would simultaneously run an editorial entitled "Now Is the Time", encouraging the seven universities to form the league in an effort to preserve the ideals of athletics.
Princeton's "Ivy Club" was founded in 1879.
Admitted students come from around the world, although students from New England and the Northeastern United States make up a significant proportion of students.
This included the Southern public college movement which blossomed in the decades surrounding the turn of the 19th century when Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina and Virginia established what became the flagship universities for each of these states.
In the 33 academic years beginning 1979–80, Princeton has averaged 11 championships per year, one-third of the conference total of 33 sponsored sports.
In urging them to consider "Army and Navy and Georgetown and Fordham and Syracuse and Brown and Pitt" as candidates for membership, he exhorted:
Princeton or Cornell has won every indoor and outdoor track and field championship, both men's and women's, every year since 2002–03, with one exception (Columbia women won indoor championship in 2012).
Harvard's team, "The Oneida", won the race and was presented with trophy black walnut oars from then presidential nominee General Franklin Pierce.
To this day, the IRA Championship Regatta determines the national champion in rowing and all of the Ivies are regularly invited to compete.
Ivy champions are recognized in sixteen men's and sixteen women's sports.
The Ivy League style is said to be the predecessor to the preppy style of dress.
Phrases such as "Ivy League snobbery" are ubiquitous in nonfiction and fiction writing of the early and mid-twentieth century.
In 1801, a majority of the first board of trustees for what became the University of South Carolina were Princeton alumni.
Thomas Cooper, an Oxford alumnus and University of Pennsylvania faculty member, became the second president of the South Carolina college.
The conference name is also commonly used to refer to those eight schools as a group.
An unscientific survey of Harvard seniors from the Class of 2013 found that 42% hailed from the Northeast and 55% overall were planning on working and residing in the Northeast.
In the 2011–2012 academic year, students qualifying for Pell Grants (federally funded scholarships on the basis of need) comprised 20% at Harvard, 18% at Cornell, 17% at Penn, 16% at Columbia, 15% at Dartmouth and Brown, 14% at Yale, and 12% at Princeton.
Penn and Princeton are the last remaining founding members of the league from its 1934 debut, and Cornell is the next-oldest, joining in 1937.
In 1899, Penn's board of trustees formally adopted a third founding date of 1740, in response to a petition from Penn's General Alumni Society.
Both of these totals are considerably higher than those of other historically strong programs such as Alabama, which has won 15, Notre Dame, which claims 11 but is credited by many sources with 13, and USC, which has won 11.
Press and Brooks Brothers represent perhaps the quintessential Ivy League dress manner.
The Ivy League is often associated with the upper class White Anglo-Saxon Protestant community of the Northeast, Old Money, or more generally, the American upper middle and upper classes.
Similarly, the founder of The College of William & Mary, in 1693, was a British graduate of the University of Edinburgh.
Unlike most Division I athletic conferences, the Ivy League prohibits the granting of athletic scholarships; all scholarships awarded are need-based (financial aid).
+ '''Teams in Ivy League competition'''
Brown's charter promised no religious tests and "full liberty of conscience", but placed control in the hands of a board of twenty-two Baptists, five Quakers, four Congregationalists, and five Episcopalians.
Through the EIBL, it is the oldest basketball conference in Division I.
In 1954, the presidents extended the Ivy Group Agreement to all intercollegiate sports, effective with the 1955–56 basketball season.
"Planting the ivy" was a customary class day ceremony at many colleges in the 1800s.
Track and field (indoor)
As noted by Irene Harwarth, Mindi Maline, and Elizabeth DeBra, "The 'Seven Sisters' was the name given to Barnard, Smith, Mount Holyoke, Vassar, Bryn Mawr, Wellesley, and Radcliffe, because of their parallel to the Ivy League men’s colleges."
The Ivy League is one of only two Division I conferences which award their official basketball championships solely on regular-season results; the other is the Southeastern Conference.
Similarly, no program other than Princeton and Harvard has won the women's swimming championship since Brown's 1999 title.
Penn has won 21 outright, Princeton 19 outright.
Seven of the eight schools were founded during the United States colonial period; the exception is Cornell, which was founded in 1865.
The Ivy League claims the EIBL's history as its own.
Harvard, Yale, Princeton and Penn each have over a dozen former scholar-athletes enshrined in the College Football Hall of Fame.
This can be seen in sport stripes and colours, equestrian clothing, plaid shirts, field jackets and nautical-themed accessories.
Press and Brooks Brothers, both being pioneers in preppy fashion, had stores on Ivy League school campuses, including Harvard, Princeton, and Yale.
The first formal athletic league involving eventual Ivy League schools (or any US colleges, for that matter) was created in 1870 with the formation of the Rowing Association of American Colleges.
This dates back to at least 1935.
Ivy League financial endowments range from Brown's $3 billion to Harvard's $36.4 billion, the largest financial endowment of any academic institution in the world.
Some of the Ivy League schools have identifiable Protestant roots, while others were founded as non-sectarian schools.
As all eight Ivy League universities are within the Northeast, it is no surprise that most graduates end up working and residing in the Northeast after graduation.
Students of the Ivy League largely hail from the Northeast, largely from the New York City, Boston, and Philadelphia areas.
Bush explained, however, that, unlike Harvard, Yale's reputation was "so diffuse, there isn't a symbol, I don't think, in the Yale situation, any symbolism in it.... Harvard boutique to me has the connotation of liberalism and elitism" and said ''Harvard'' in his remark was intended to represent "a philosophical enclave" and not a statement about class.
Swimming and diving
The term ''Ivy'' is often used to connote a positive comparison to or association with the Ivy League, often along academic lines.
Collaboration between the member schools is illustrated by the student-led Ivy Council that meets in the fall and spring of each year, with representatives from every Ivy League school.
In 2012, the bottom 25% of the American income distribution accounted for only 3–4% of students at Brown, a figure that had remained unchanged since 1992.
As late as the 1960s many of the Ivy League universities' undergraduate programs remained open only to men, with Cornell the only one to have been coeducational from its founding (1865) and Columbia being the last (1983) to become coeducational.
In a period when the only professional sports were fledgling baseball leagues, these high profile early contests between Princeton and Yale played a role in popularizing spectator sports, demonstrating their financial potential and raising public awareness of Ivy universities at a time when few people attended college.
In 1895, Cornell, Columbia, and Penn founded the Intercollegiate Rowing Association, which remains the oldest collegiate athletic organizing body in the US.
Before the formal establishment of the Ivy League, there was an "unwritten and unspoken agreement among certain Eastern colleges on athletic relations".
They had always had distinguished faculties; some of the first Americans with doctorates had taught for them; but they now decided that they could not both be world-class research institutions and be competitive in the highest ranks of American college sport; in addition, the schools experienced the scandals of any other big-time football programs, although more quietly.
These schools were known for their long-standing traditions in intercollegiate athletics, often being the first schools to participate in such activities.
This is followed by Columbia with 101 winners, Yale with 52, Cornell with 45, Princeton with 37, and Penn with 29 Nobel laureates.
The Ivy League teams are eligible for the FCS tournament held to determine the national champion, and the league champion is eligible for an automatic bid (and any other team may qualify for an at-large selection) from the NCAA.
The founders of the University of California came from Yale, hence the school colors of University of California are Yale Blue and California Gold.
Before they became coeducational, many of the Ivy schools maintained extensive social ties with nearby Seven Sisters women's colleges, including weekend visits, dances and parties inviting Ivy and Seven Sisters students to mingle.
In 1982 the Ivy League considered adding two members, with Army, Navy, and Northwestern as the most likely candidates; if it had done so, the league could probably have avoided being moved into the recently created Division I-AA (now Division I FCS) for football.
The University of Chicago and Duke University are often included as well."
Boston and New York City are traditionally where many Ivy League graduates end up living.
The Ivy League plays a strict 10-game schedule, compared to other FCS members' schedules of 11 (or, in some seasons, 12) regular season games, plus post-season, which was most recently expanded in 2013 to five rounds with 24 teams, with a bye week for the top eight teams.
By the 1980s, other brands such as Lacoste, Izod and Dooney & Bourke became associated with preppy style.'
Several sportswriters and other journalists used the term shortly later to refer to the older colleges, those along the northeastern seaboard of the United States, chiefly the nine institutions with origins dating from the colonial era, together with the United States Military Academy (West Point), the United States Naval Academy, and a few others.
Harvard University uses the date that the legislature of the Massachusetts Bay Colony formally allocated funds for the creation of a college.
The Ivy League schools are highly selective, with acceptance rates since 2000 ranging from 6 to 16 percent at each of the universities.
The first usage of ''Ivy'' in reference to a group of colleges is from sportswriter Stanley Woodward (1895–1965).
Ivy League institutions account for seven of the nine Colonial Colleges chartered before the American Revolution, the other two being Rutgers University and College of William & Mary.
Despite such collaboration, the universities did not seem to consider the formation of the league as imminent.
Further, Ivy League members have produced many Nobel laureates, winners of the Nobel Prize and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.
This phenomenon of a finale contest at a neutral site for the national title created a social occasion for the society elite of the metropolitan area akin to a Super Bowl in the era prior to the establishment of the NFL in 1920.
Bean, became part of conventional preppy style.
For the first three decades of the Yale-Princeton rivalry, the two played their season-ending game at a neutral site, usually New York City, and with one exception (1890: Harvard), the winner of the game also won at least a share of the national championship that year, covering the period 1869 through 1903.
The proposal did not succeed—on January 11, 1937, the athletic authorities at the schools rejected the "possibility of a heptagonal league in football such as these institutions maintain in basketball, baseball and track."
Princeton and Harvard have on occasion won ten or more Ivy League titles in a year, an achievement accomplished six times by Harvard and 21 times by Princeton, including a conference-record 15 championships in 2010–11.
In only 11 instances in the history of Ivy League basketball, and in only seven seasons since Yale's 1962 title, has neither Penn nor Princeton won at least a share of the Ivy League title in basketball, with Princeton champion or co-champion 26 times and Penn 25 times.
Yale, whose coach Walter Camp was the "Father of American Football," held on to its place as the all-time wins leader in college football throughout the entire 20th century, but was finally passed by Michigan on November 10, 2001.
Although these teams are not "varsity" sports, they compete annually in the Ivy Rugby Conference.
The tournaments will only award the Ivy League automatic bids for the NCAA Division&nbsp;I Men's and Women's Basketball Tournaments; the official conference championships will continue to be awarded based solely on regular-season results.
A Louis Auchincloss character dreads "the aridity of snobbery which he knew infected the Ivy League colleges".
In some sports, Ivy teams actually compete as members of another league, the Ivy championship being decided by isolating the members' records in play against each other; for example, the six league members who participate in ice hockey do so as members of ECAC Hockey, but an Ivy champion is extrapolated each year.
The earliest reference to the "Ivy colleges" came in 1933, when Stanley Woodward of the New York Herald Tribune used it to refer to the eight current members plus Army.
In 2014, 69% of incoming freshmen students at Yale College came from families with annual incomes of over $120,000, putting most Yale College students in the upper middle and/or upper class.
In particular, Princeton won 26 recognized national championships in college football (last in 1935), and Yale won 18 (last in 1927).
These seven were the primary colleges in the Northern and Middle Colonies, and their early faculties and founding boards were largely, therefore, drawn from other Ivy League institutions.
These football games were also financially profitable for the two universities, so much that they began to play baseball games in New York City as well, drawing record crowds for that sport also, largely from the same social demographic.
Rivalries exist between other Ivy league teams in other sports, including Cornell and Harvard in hockey, Harvard and Princeton in swimming, and Harvard and Penn in football (Penn and Harvard have won 28 Ivy League Football Championships since 1982, Penn-16; Harvard-12).
Harvard and Yale are football and crew rivals although the competition has become unbalanced; Harvard has won all but one of the last 15 football games and all but one of the last 13 crew races.
Longtime New England outdoor outfitters, such as L.L.
The term ''Ivy Plus'' is sometimes used to refer to the Ancient Eight plus several other schools for purposes of alumni associations, university affiliations, or endowment comparisons.
News & World Report'' 2016 university rankings, including the top four schools and five of the top nine.
In 1983, following the admission of women to Columbia College, Columbia University and Barnard College entered into an athletic consortium agreement by which students from both schools compete together on Columbia University women's athletic teams, which replaced the women's teams previously sponsored by Barnard.
For instance, Princeton and Penn are longstanding men's basketball rivals; "Puck Frinceton", and "Pennetrate the Puss" t-shirts are worn by Quaker fans at games.
A year later, the Ivy League absorbed the EIBL.
Ivy League schools are generally viewed as some of the most prestigious, and are ranked among the best universities worldwide.
All of the schools in the Ivy League are private and not currently associated with any religion.
During meetings, the presidents often discuss common procedures and initiatives for the universities.
The Ivy Group Agreement established the core tenet that an applicant's ability to play on a team would not influence admissions decisions:
Vacationing in Palm Beach, Florida, long popular with the East Coast upper class, led to the emergence of bright colour combinations in leisure wear seen in some brands such as Lilly Pulitzer.
Princeton has been a co-champion 7 times, sharing 4 of those titles with Penn (these 4 seasons represent the only times Penn has been co-champion).
Rowing teams from Harvard and Yale met in the first sporting event held between students of two U.S. colleges on Lake Winnipesaukee, New Hampshire, on August 3, 1852.
The 2007 edition of ''Newsweek's How to Get Into College Now'', the editors designated 25 schools as "New Ivies".
But of the 39 original member colleges in the NCAA, only two of them (Dartmouth and Penn) later became Ivies.
(The median household income in the U.S. in 2013 was $52,700.)
All eight universities place in the top fifteen of the ''U.S.
Church of England ''King's College'' broke up during the Revolution and was reformed as public nonsectarian Columbia College.
This is generally reckoned as the formal formation of the Ivy League.
In the early nineteenth century, the specific purpose of training Calvinist ministers was handed off to theological seminaries, but a denominational tone and such relics as compulsory chapel often lasted well into the twentieth century.
In 1906, the organization that eventually became the National Collegiate Athletic Association was formed, primarily to formalize rules for the emerging sport of football.
Ivy League style is a style of men's dress, popular during the late 1950s, believed to have originated on Ivy League campuses.
Romeyn Berry, Cornell's manager of athletics, reported the situation in January 1936 as follows:
In 1935, the Associated Press reported on an example of collaboration between the schools:
''New York Times'' columnist Maureen Dowd asked "Wasn't this a case of the pot calling the kettle elite?"
The Ivy League was the last Division I basketball conference to institute a conference postseason tournament; the first tournaments for men and women will be held at the end of the 2016–17 season.
In the seven academic years beginning 2005–06, Harvard has won Ivy titles in 22 different sports, two-thirds of the league total, and Princeton has won championships in 31 different sports, all except wrestling and men's tennis.
The governing body of the Ivy League is the Council of Ivy Group Presidents, composed of each university president.
Many universities are notorious for claiming laureates with only tenuous informal connections in order to inflate their count of winners.
Novels and memoirs attest this sense, as a social elite; to some degree independent of the actual schools.
However, they noted that the league "has such promising possibilities that it may not be dismissed and must be the subject of further consideration."
No team other than Harvard or Princeton has won the men's swimming conference title outright since 1972, although Yale, Columbia, and Cornell have shared the title with Harvard and Princeton during this time.
Part of the editorial read as follows:
These figures are self-reported by the universities themselves, who use widely varying definitions for which Nobel winners are claimed as affiliates, for example, only degree-holding alumni or active faculty or former faculty, visiting faculty, adjunct faculty, etc.
Although most Ivy League students come from upper middle and upper class families, the student body has become increasingly more economically and ethnically diverse.
On average, each Ivy school has more than 35 varsity teams.
Several reports suggest, however, that the proportion of students from less-affluent families remains low.
Harvard was chartered in 1650, although classes had been conducted for approximately a decade by then.
For this reason, any Ivy League team invited to the FCS playoffs turns down the bid.
After the Second World War, the present Ivy League institutions slowly widened their selection of their students.
The Ivies have been competing in sports as long as intercollegiate sports have existed in the United States.
Before the 2016–17 season, the automatic bids were based solely on regular-season record, with a one-game playoff (or series of one-game playoffs if more than two teams were tied) held to determine the automatic bid.
When Army and Navy departed the Eastern Intercollegiate Baseball League in 1992, all intercollegiate competition involving the eight schools became united under the Ivy League banner.
In the mid-twentieth century J.
At Penn, graduating seniors started the custom of planting ivy at a university building each spring in 1873 and that practice was formally designated as "Ivy Day" in 1874.
The ''Morris Dictionary of Word and Phrase Origins'' helped to perpetuate this belief.
The first known instance of the term ''Ivy League'' being used appeared in ''The Christian Science Monitor'' on February 7, 1935.
In 2009, the Big Red and Tigers met for their 70th game in the NCAA tournament.
U.S. News has named a member of the Ivy League as the best national university in each of the past sixteen years ending with the 2016 rankings:  Princeton nine times, Harvard twice and the two schools tied for first five times.
In 1893 an alumnus told ''The Harvard Crimson'', "In 1850, class day was placed upon the University Calendar.... the custom of planting the ivy, while the ivy oration was delivered, arose about this time."
Irrelevant" Jim Finn (Penn).
In February 1903, intercollegiate wrestling began when Yale accepted a challenge from Columbia, published in the Yale News.
This was the case not only at Barnard College and Radcliffe College, which are adjacent to Columbia and Harvard, but at more distant institutions as well.
The '''Ivy League''' is a collegiate athletic conference comprising sports teams from eight private institutions of higher education in the Northeastern United States.
"Ivy League" is sometimes used as a way of referring to an elite class, even though institutions such as Cornell University were among the first in the United States to reject racial and gender discrimination in their admissions policies.
In addition, the Ivy League has produced Super Bowl winners Kevin Boothe (Cornell), two-time Pro Bowler Zak DeOssie (Brown), Sean Morey (Brown), All-Pro selection Matt Birk (Harvard), Calvin Hill (Yale), Derrick Harmon (Cornell) and 1999 "Mr.
In men's lacrosse, Cornell and Princeton are perennial rivals, and they are the only two Ivy League teams to have won the NCAA tournament.
Students have long revered the ivied walls of older colleges.
Some typical preppy styles also reflect traditional upper class New England leisure activities, such as equestrian, sailing or yachting, hunting, fencing, rowing, lacrosse, tennis, golf, and rugby.
In the time before recruiting for college sports became dominated by those offering athletic scholarships and lowered academic standards for athletes, the Ivy League was successful in many sports relative to other universities in the country.
As part of the transition, Brown, the only Ivy that hadn't joined the EIBL, did so for the 1954–55 season.
The phrase ''Ivy League'' historically has been perceived as connected not only with academic excellence, but also with social elitism.
Today, these styles continue to be popular on Ivy League campuses, throughout the U.S., and abroad, and are oftentimes labeled as "Classic American style" or "Traditional American style".
Currently Dartmouth holds the record for most Ivy League football titles, with 18, followed closely by Harvard and Penn, each with 17 titles.
Two years later, Penn and Princeton also added wrestling teams, leading to the formation of the student-run Intercollegiate Wrestling Association, now the Eastern Intercollegiate Wrestling Association (EIWA), the first and oldest collegiate wrestling league in the US.
Ivy League teams' non-league games are often against the members of the Patriot League, which have similar academic standards and athletic scholarship policies.
The dual meet took place prior to a basketball game hosted by Columbia and resulted in a tie.
However, it is clear that Harvard, Princeton, Yale and Columbia met on November 23, 1876 at the so-called Massasoit Convention to decide on uniform rules for the emerging game of American football, which rapidly spread.
In 1945 the presidents of the eight schools signed the first ''Ivy Group Agreement'', which set academic, financial, and athletic standards for the football teams.
Beginning with the 1982 football season, the Ivy League has competed in Division I-AA (renamed  FCS in 2006).
Track and field (outdoor)
Penn was chartered in 1755, the same year collegiate classes began.
There were also some British graduates from the University of Cambridge, the University of Oxford, the University of St. Andrews, the University of Edinburgh, and elsewhere on their boards.
The RAAC hosted a de facto national championship in rowing during the period 1870–1894.
