She had dropped out of Yale to be with him, even forgoing a scholarship.
He led a very private life for more than a half-century.
Salinger's experiences in the war affected him emotionally.
The critic Louis Menand has observed that the early stories of Pulitzer Prize-winner Philip Roth were affected by "Salinger's voice and comic timing".
Salinger's writing has influenced several prominent writers, prompting Harold Brodkey (himself an O. Henry Award-winning author) to state in 1991: "His is the most influential body of work in English prose by anyone since Hemingway."
''The New York Times'' had asked Maynard to write an article for them which, when published as "An Eighteen-Year-Old Looks Back On Life" on April 23, 1972, made her a celebrity.
In the 1940s, Salinger confided to several people that he was working on a novel featuring Holden Caulfield, the teenage protagonist of his short story "Slight Rebellion off Madison", and ''The Catcher in the Rye'' was published on July 16, 1951, by Little, Brown and Company.
After Germany's defeat, Salinger signed up for a six-month period of "Denazification" duty in Germany for the Counterintelligence Corps.
The same year, Salinger began submitting short stories to ''The New Yorker''.
The case was settled in 2011 when Colting agreed not to publish or otherwise distribute the book, e-book, or any other editions of ''60 Years Later'' in the U.S. or Canada until ''The Catcher in the Rye'' enters the public domain, while also refraining from using the title "Coming through the Rye", dedicating the book to Salinger or referring to the title "The Catcher in the Rye", while Colting remains free to sell the book in other international territories without fear of interference.
In June 2009, Salinger consulted lawyers about the upcoming publication in the US of an unauthorized sequel to ''The Catcher in the Rye'' written by Swedish book publisher Fredrik Colting under the pseudonym 'J.
The critical acclaim accorded "Bananafish", coupled with problems Salinger had with stories being altered by the "slicks", led him to publish almost exclusively in ''The New Yorker''.
The ''Salinger'' biography is also described as a companion volume to a film documentary of the same title.
Lillian Ross, a staff writer for ''The New Yorker'' and longtime friend of Salinger's, wrote following his death, "Salinger loved movies, and he was more fun than anyone to discuss them with.
Biographer Paul Alexander called Salinger "the Greta Garbo of literature".
As a result of this experience, Salinger never again permitted film adaptations to be made from his work.
In 1996, Salinger gave a small publisher, Orchises Press, permission to publish "Hapworth 16, 1924", the previously uncollected novella.
He lived in Weissenburg and, soon after, married Sylvia Welter.
He also began to publish with less frequency.
This was followed by an adherence to a number of spiritual, medical, and nutritional belief systems including an interest in Christian Science, Edgar Cayce, homeopathy, acupuncture, and macrobiotics.
and Claire were initiated into the path of Kriya yoga in a small store-front Hindu temple in Washington, D.C., during the summer of 1955.
During the campaign from Normandy into Germany, Salinger arranged to meet with Ernest Hemingway, a writer who had influenced him and was then working as a war correspondent in Paris.
According to Maynard, by 1972 he had completed two new novels.
In 1972, Salinger's daughter Margaret was with him when he received a letter from Sylvia.
One of the stories, "The Ocean Full of Bowling Balls", is said to be a prequel to ''The Catcher in the Rye''.
Early in his time at Cornish he was relatively sociable, particularly with students at Windsor High School.
In 1961, the critic Alfred Kazin explained that Salinger's choice of teenagers as a subject matter was one reason for his appeal to young readers, but another was "a consciousness among youths that he speaks for them and virtually ''to'' them, in a language that is peculiarly honest and their own, with a vision of things that capture their most secret judgments of the world."
He also participated in the Glee Club, Aviation Club, French Club, and the Non-Commissioned Officers Club.
He also studied the writings of Ramakrishna's disciple Vivekananda; in the story "Hapworth 16, 1924", the character of Seymour Glass describes him as "one of the most exciting, original and best-equipped giants of this century."
In 1972, at the age of 53, Salinger had a relationship with 18-year-old Joyce Maynard that lasted for nine months.
It has been compared to Mark Twain's ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn''.
Louis Menand agrees, writing in ''The New Yorker'' that Salinger "stopped writing stories, in the conventional sense&nbsp;...
To my father, all Spanish speakers are Puerto Rican washerwomen, or the toothless, grinning-gypsy types in a Marx Brothers movie".
According to Ian Hamilton, Salinger was disappointed when "rumblings from Hollywood" over his 1943 short story "The Varioni Brothers" came to nothing.
Salinger stated in the 1970s that "Jerry Lewis tried for years to get his hands on the part of Holden."
After their marriage, J.D.
300 East 57th Street, New York, to Cornish, New Hampshire.
(His family called him Sonny.)
The book was not published.
Salinger became reclusive, publishing new work less frequently.
He spent a year reworking it with New Yorker editors and the magazine accepted the story, now titled "A Perfect Day for Bananafish", and published it in the January 31, 1948 issue.
Salinger's language, especially his energetic, realistically sparse dialogue, was revolutionary at the time his first stories were published and was seen by several critics as "the most distinguishing thing" about his work.
Maynard did not return to Yale that fall, and spent ten months as a guest in Salinger's Cornish home.
According to Margaret, his favorite movies include ''Gigi'' (1958), ''The Lady Vanishes'' (1938), ''The 39 Steps'' (1935; Phoebe's favorite movie in ''The Catcher in the Rye''), and the comedies of W.C. Fields, Laurel and Hardy, and the Marx Bros.. Predating VCRs, Salinger had an extensive collection of classic movies from the 1940s in 16&nbsp;mm prints.
He disparaged his sister's "gothic tales of our supposed childhood" and stated: "I can't say with any authority that she is consciously making anything up.
Salinger was impressed with Hemingway's friendliness and modesty, finding him more "soft" than his gruff public persona.
Salinger published ''Franny and Zooey'' in 1961, and ''Raise High the Roof Beam, Carpenters and Seymour: An Introduction'' in 1963.
On September 15, 1961, ''Time'' magazine devoted its cover to Salinger.
Mehrjui called Salinger's action "bewildering", explaining that he saw his film as "a kind of cultural exchange".
Salinger's "A Perfect Day for Bananafish" has an ending similar to that of Fitzgerald's earlier published short story "May Day".
According to one angry parent's tabulation, 237 instances of "goddamn," 58 uses of the synonym for a person of illegitimate birth, 31 "Chrissakes,"and one incident of flatulence constituted what was wrong with Salinger's book.
His father, Sol Salinger, sold kosher cheese, and was from a Jewish family of Lithuanian descent, his father having been the rabbi for the Adath Jeshurun congregation in Louisville, Kentucky.
Salinger wrote friends of a momentous change in his life in 1952, after several years of practicing Zen Buddhism, while reading ''The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna'' about Hindu religious teacher Sri Ramakrishna.
By the late 1950s, as Salinger became more reclusive and involved in religious study, Hamilton notes that his stories became longer, less plot-driven, and increasingly filled with digression and parenthetical remarks.
A 1979 study of censorship noted that ''The Catcher in the Rye'' "had the dubious distinction of being at once the most frequently censored book across the nation and the second-most frequently taught novel in public high schools" (after John Steinbeck's ''Of Mice and Men'').
As well as Idries Shah, Salinger also read the Taoist philosopher Lao Tse and the Hindu Swami Vivekananda who introduced the Indian philosophies of Vedanta and Yoga to the Western world.
Despite finding the debutante self-absorbed (he confided to a friend that "Little Oona's hopelessly in love with little Oona"), he called her often and wrote her long letters.
It was to be published that year, and listings for it appeared at Amazon.com and other book-sellers.
Newspapers began publishing articles about the "Catcher Cult", and the novel was banned in several countries—as well as some U.S. schools—because of its subject matter and what ''Catholic World'' reviewer Riley Hughes called an "excessive use of amateur swearing and coarse language".
Though Salinger sold his story with the hope—in the words of his agent Dorothy Olding—that it "would make a good movie", the film version of "Wiggily" was lambasted by critics upon its release in 1949.
In a July 1951 profile in ''Book of the Month Club News'', Salinger's friend and ''New Yorker'' editor William Maxwell asked Salinger about his literary influences.
William Maxwell, the magazine's fiction editor, was impressed enough with "the singular quality of the story" that the magazine asked Salinger to continue revising it.
Ian Hamilton adheres to this view, arguing that while Salinger's early stories for the "slicks" boasted "tight, energetic" dialogue, they had also been formulaic and sentimental.
Adolescents are featured or appear in all of Salinger's work, from his first published short story, "The Young Folks" (1940), to ''The Catcher in the Rye'' and his Glass family stories.
Recurring themes in Salinger's stories also connect to the ideas of innocence and adolescence, including the "corrupting influence of Hollywood and the world at large", the disconnect between teenagers and "phony" adults, and the perceptive, precocious intelligence of children.
Claire separated from him in September 1966; their divorce was finalized on October 3, 1967.
Though she committed herself to Kriya yoga, she remembered that Salinger would chronically leave Cornish to work on a story "for several weeks only to return with the piece he was supposed to be finishing all undone or destroyed and some new 'ism' we had to follow."
Titled ''The Young Folks'', the collection was to consist of twenty stories—ten, like the title story and "Slight Rebellion off Madison", were already in print; ten were previously unpublished.
These four stories were originally published between 1955 and 1959, and were the only ones Salinger had published since ''Nine Stories''.
Salinger sued to stop the book's publication.
Salinger's literary representative told ''The New York Times'' that the writer had broken his hip in May 2009, but that "his health had been excellent until a rather sudden decline after the new year."
In 1947, the author submitted a short story titled simply "The Bananafish" to ''The New Yorker''.
Several were published in ''Story'' magazine in the early 1940s before he began serving in World War II.
He considered studying special education but dropped out the following spring.
In her memoir, Margaret Salinger describes the detailed filing system her father had for his unpublished manuscripts: "A red mark meant, if I die before I finish my work, publish this 'as is,' blue meant publish but edit first, and so on."
The infant Margaret was sick much of the time, but Salinger, having embraced the tenets of Christian Science, refused to take her to a doctor.
It was the first time he had heard from her since the breakup, but as Margaret put it, "when he was finished with a person, he was through with them."
Already tightening his grip on publicity, though, Salinger refused to allow publishers of the collection to depict his characters in dust jacket illustrations, lest readers form preconceived notions of them.
In December 1941, however, the publication accepted "Slight Rebellion off Madison", a Manhattan-set story about a disaffected teenager named Holden Caulfield with "pre-war jitters".
While he was living with Maynard, Salinger continued to write in a disciplined fashion, a few hours every morning.
In late 1941, Salinger briefly worked on a Caribbean cruise ship, serving as an activity director and possibly as a performer.
After a few months, Salinger persuaded her to return to Cornish.
He became an adherent of Ramakrishna's Advaita Vedanta Hinduism, which advocated celibacy for those seeking enlightenment, and detachment from human responsibilities such as family.
Both of his biographers speculate that Salinger drew upon his wartime experiences in several stories, such as "For Esmé—with Love and Squalor", which is narrated by a traumatized soldier.
In a contributor's note Salinger gave to ''Harper's Magazine'' in 1946, he wrote: "I almost always write about very young people", a statement that has been referred to as his credo.
Musician Tomas Kalnoky of Streetlight Manifesto also cites Salinger as an influence, referencing him and Holden Caulfield, the main character of ''Catcher in the Rye'', in the song "Here's To Life".
Maynard's memoir of her life and her relationship with Salinger, ''At Home in the World: A Memoir'', was published the same year.
Their relationship ended when Oona began seeing Charlie Chaplin, whom she eventually married.
His depiction of adolescent alienation and loss of innocence in the protagonist Holden Caulfield was influential, especially among adolescent readers.
Renamed ''My Foolish Heart'' and starring Dana Andrews and Susan Hayward, the melodramatic film departed to such an extent from Salinger's story that Goldwyn biographer A. Scott Berg referred to it as a "bastardization".
Salinger continued to write while serving in the army, publishing several stories in slick magazines such as ''Collier's'' and ''The Saturday Evening Post''.
He seemed to lose interest in fiction as an art form—perhaps he thought there was something manipulative or inauthentic about literary device and authorial control."
In the fall of 1938, Salinger attended Ursinus College in Collegeville, Pennsylvania, and wrote a column called "skipped diploma", which included movie reviews.
"Bananafish" was also the first of Salinger's published stories to feature the Glasses, a fictional family consisting of two retired vaudeville performers and their seven precocious children: Seymour, Buddy, Boo Boo, Walt, Waker, Zooey, and Franny.
Afterward, Salinger struggled with unwanted attention, including a legal battle in the 1980s with biographer Ian Hamilton and the release in the late 1990s of memoirs written by two people close to him: Joyce Maynard, an ex-lover; and Margaret Salinger, his daughter.
In the wake of its 1950s success, Salinger received (and rejected) numerous offers to adapt ''The Catcher in the Rye'' for the screen, including one from Samuel Goldwyn.
Salinger''' (; January 1, 1919 January 27, 2010) was an American writer who won acclaim early in life.
Claire had supposedly intended to do it during a trip to New York City with Salinger, but she instead acted on a sudden impulse to take Margaret from the hotel and run away.
It was a great relief telling people about it."
Nevertheless, in her own autobiography, Maynard paints a different picture, saying Salinger abruptly ended the relationship and refused to take her back.
The representative believed that Salinger's death was not a painful one.
's becoming an actor.
When Brigitte Bardot wanted to buy the rights to "A Perfect Day for Bananafish", Salinger refused the request, but told his friend, Lillian Ross, longtime staff writer for ''The New Yorker'', "She's a cute, talented, lost ''enfante'', and I'm tempted to accommodate her, ''pour le sport''."
Salinger also insisted that Claire drop out of school and live with him, only four months shy of graduation, which she did.
In February 1955, at the age of 36, Salinger married Claire Douglas, a Radcliffe student (her father was the art critic Robert Langton Douglas).
The book's initial success was followed by a brief lull in popularity, but by the late 1950s, according to Ian Hamilton, it had "become the book all brooding adolescents had to buy, the indispensable manual from which cool styles of disaffectation could be borrowed."
Salinger was assigned to a counter-intelligence division, for which he used his proficiency in French and German to interrogate prisoners of war.
Salinger's family life was further marked by discord after the first child was born; according to Margaret's book, Claire felt that her daughter had replaced her in Salinger's affections.
Salinger died of natural causes on January 27, 2010, at his home in Cornish, New Hampshire.
Salinger identified closely with his characters, and used techniques such as interior monologue, letters, and extended telephone calls to display his gift for dialogue.
After abandoning Kriya yoga, Salinger tried Dianetics (the forerunner of Scientology), even meeting its founder L. Ron Hubbard, but according to Claire he was quickly disenchanted with it.
The success of ''The Catcher in the Rye'' led to public attention and scrutiny.
Salinger's Valley Forge 201 file reveals that he was a "mediocre" student, and unlike the overachievement enjoyed by members of the Glass family he would go on to write about, his recorded IQ was far from that of a genius.
The court in ''Salinger v. Random House'' ruled that Hamilton's extensive use of the letters, including quotation and paraphrasing, was not acceptable since the author's right to control publication overrode the right of fair use.
In 1939, Salinger attended a Columbia University School of General Studies evening writing class taught by Whit Burnett, longtime editor of ''Story'' magazine.
By one account, Eppes was an attractive young woman who misrepresented herself as an aspiring novelist, and managed to record audio of the interview as well as take several photographs of Salinger, both without his knowledge or consent.
In 1946, Whit Burnett agreed to help Salinger publish a collection of his short stories through ''Story'' Press's Lippincott Imprint.
But I write just for myself and my own pleasure."
Though the film could be distributed legally in Iran since the country has no official copyright relations with the United States, Salinger had his lawyers block a planned screening of the film at the Lincoln Center in 1998.
They had two children, Margaret (b. December 10, 1955) and Matthew (b. February 13, 1960).
Software developer Peter Norton bought the letters for US$156,500 and announced his intention to return them to Salinger.
The story "Teddy" features a ten-year-old child who expresses Vedantic insights.
Salinger did not learn that his mother was not of Jewish ancestry until just after he celebrated becoming a bar mitzvah.
A few weeks after ''Dream Catcher'' was published, Margaret's brother Matt discredited the memoir in a letter to ''The New York Observer''.
Of the writers in Salinger's generation, Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist John Updike attested that "the short stories of J. D. Salinger really opened my eyes as to how you can weave fiction out of a set of events that seem almost unconnected, or very lightly connected&nbsp;... Reading Salinger sticks in my mind as really having moved me a step up, as it were, toward knowing how to handle my own material."
Certain elements of the story "Franny", published in January 1955, are based on his relationship with Claire, including her ownership of the book ''The Way of the Pilgrim''.
Around this time, Salinger had isolated Claire from friends and relatives and made her—in the words of Margaret Salinger—"a virtual prisoner".
Salinger eventually published seven stories about the Glasses, developing a detailed family history and focusing particularly on Seymour, the brilliant but troubled eldest child.
He dropped out after one semester.
Salinger: A Writing Life (1935–65)'', but this book was more about his experience in tracking down information and the copyright fights over the planned biography than about Salinger himself.
In a 1953 interview with a high school newspaper, Salinger admitted that the novel was "sort of" autobiographical, explaining, "My boyhood was very much the same as that of the boy in the book&nbsp;...
In a rare 1974 interview with ''The New York Times'', he explained: "There is a marvelous peace in not publishing&nbsp;...
Maynard wrote that "he loves movies, not films", and Salinger argued that her father's "worldview is, essentially, a product of the movies of his day.
Authors such as Stephen Chbosky, Jonathan Safran Foer, Carl Hiaasen, Susan Minot, Haruki Murakami, Gwendoline Riley, Tom Robbins, Louis Sachar, Joel Stein and John Green have cited Salinger as an influence.
For this reason, Norman Mailer once remarked that Salinger was "the greatest mind ever to stay in prep school".
In 1953, Salinger published a collection of seven stories from ''The New Yorker'' ("Bananafish" among them), as well as two that the magazine had rejected.
Salinger was the literary editor of the class yearbook, ''Crossed Sabres''.
Salinger added that he was working on a play about Holden Caulfield, the protagonist of his story "Slight Rebellion off Madison", and hoped to play the part himself.
''Nine Stories'' spent three months on the ''New York Times'' Bestseller list.
Claire believed "it was to cover the fact that Jerry had just destroyed or junked or couldn't face the quality of, or couldn't face publishing, what he had created."
Because of their isolated location and Salinger's proclivities, they hardly saw other people for long stretches of time.
National Book Award finalist Richard Yates told ''The New York Times'' in 1977 that reading Salinger's stories for the first time was a landmark experience, and that "nothing quite like it has happened to me since".
Contemporary critics discuss a clear progression over the course of Salinger's published work, as evidenced by the increasingly negative reviews received by each of his three post-''Catcher'' story collections.
In 1996, a small publisher announced a deal with Salinger to publish "Hapworth 16, 1924" in book form, but amid the ensuing publicity the release was indefinitely delayed.
He graduated in 1936.
After a flurry of articles and critical reviews of the story appeared in the press, the publication date was pushed back repeatedly before apparently being cancelled altogether.
Among other topics, the book described how Maynard's mother had consulted with her on how to appeal to the aging author (who was dressing like a child), and described Joyce's relationship with him at length.
Salinger blamed Burnett for the book's failure to see print, and the two became estranged.
Salinger's final interview was in June 1980 with Betty Eppes of ''The Baton Rouge Advocate'', which has been represented somewhat differently, depending on the secondary source.
Although Salinger tried to escape public exposure as much as possible, he continued to struggle with unwanted attention from both the media and the public.
The magazine thereon offered Salinger a "first-look" contract that allowed them right of first refusal on any future stories.
Later, Hamilton published ''In Search of J.D.
In the spring of 1942, several months after the United States entered World War II, Salinger was drafted into the army, wherein he saw combat with the 12th Infantry Regiment, 4th Infantry Division.
In her book, she described the harrowing control that Salinger had over her mother and dispelled many of the Salinger myths established by Ian Hamilton's book.
The novel remains widely read and controversial, selling around 250,000 copies a year.
He brought her to the United States in April 1946, but the marriage fell apart after eight months and Sylvia returned to Germany.
Jerome David Salinger was born in New York City, on New Year's Day, 1919.
The collection was published as ''Nine Stories'' in the United States, and "For Esmé—with Love and Squalor" in the UK, after one of Salinger's best-known stories.
In the early 1940s, Salinger had confided in a letter to Whit Burnett that he was eager to sell the film rights to some of his stories in order to achieve financial security.
He also continued to submit stories to ''The New Yorker'', but with little success; it rejected all of his submissions from 1944 to 1946, a group of 15&nbsp;poems in 1945 alone.
Seven of Salinger's stories were rejected by the magazine that year, including "Lunch for Three", "Monologue for a Watery Highball", and "I Went to School with Adolf Hitler".
That fall, his father urged him to learn about the meat-importing business, and he went to work at a company in Vienna, Austria.
Maynard later writes in her own memoir how she came to find out that Salinger had begun relationships with young women by exchanging letters.
When Japan carried out the attack on Pearl Harbor that month, the story was rendered "unpublishable"; it did not appear in the magazine until 1946.
He published his final original work in 1965 and gave his last interview in 1980.
An unintended consequence of the lawsuit was that many details of Salinger's private life, including that he had spent the last twenty years writing, in his words, "Just a work of fiction&nbsp;... That's all", became public in the form of court transcripts.
In 1942, Salinger started dating Oona O'Neill, daughter of the playwright Eugene O'Neill.
Salinger's religious studies were reflected in some of his writing.
Burnett became Salinger's mentor, and they corresponded for several years.
Such style elements also "gave him the illusion of having, as it were, delivered his characters' destinies into their own keeping."
Salinger began writing stories "under the covers at night, with the aid of a flashlight".
The book's author filed an appeal on July 23, 2009; it was heard in the Second Circuit Court of Appeals on September 3, 2009.
Not only was he expelled from his current school, he had also been expelled from three previous schools.
'''Jerome David "J.D."
In 1948, his critically acclaimed story "A Perfect Day for Bananafish" appeared in ''The New Yorker'' magazine, which became home to much of his later work.
According to Margaret, her mother admitted to her years later that she went "over the edge" in the winter of 1957 and had made plans to murder her and then commit suicide.
The relationship ended, he told his daughter Margaret at a family outing, because Maynard wanted children, and he felt he was too old.
Maynard, at this time, was already an experienced writer for ''Seventeen'' magazine.
The novel was a popular success; within two months of its publication, ''The Catcher in the Rye'' had been reprinted eight times.
Therefore, he immediately agreed when, in mid-1948, independent film producer Samuel Goldwyn offered to buy the film rights to his short story "Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut".
Excerpts from his letters were also widely disseminated, most notably a bitter remark written in response to Oona O'Neill's marriage to Charlie Chaplin:
Then in 1932, the family moved to Park Avenue, and Salinger was enrolled at the McBurney School, a nearby private school.
(He loved Anne Bancroft, hated Audrey Hepburn, and said that he had seen ''Grand Illusion'' ten times.)"
He was hospitalized for a few weeks for combat stress reaction after Germany was defeated, and he later told his daughter: "You never really get the smell of burning flesh out of your nose entirely, no matter how long you live."
The two writers began corresponding; Salinger wrote Hemingway in July 1946 that their talks were among his few positive memories of the war.
Nonetheless, after Blaney's interview appeared prominently in the newspaper's editorial section, Salinger cut off all contact with the high schoolers without explanation.
Salinger wrote a letter to her warning about living with fame.
Margaret also offered many insights into other Salinger myths, including her father's supposed long-time interest in macrobiotics, and involvement with "alternative medicine" and Eastern philosophies.
His first new work in six years, the novella took up most of the June 19, 1965, issue of ''The New Yorker'', and was universally critically panned.
Since its publication, there has been sustained interest in the novel among filmmakers, with Billy Wilder, Harvey Weinstein, and Steven Spielberg among those seeking to secure the rights.
The book remains widely read; in 2004, the novel was selling about 250,000 copies per year, "with total worldwide sales over 10 million copies".
In the 1970s, several U.S. high school teachers who assigned the book were fired or forced to resign.
I just know that I grew up in a very different house, with two very different parents from those my sister describes."
Salinger's mother, Marie (née Jillich), was born in Atlantic, Iowa, of Scottish, German, and Irish descent, but changed her name to Miriam and considered herself Jewish after marrying Salinger's father.
Salinger's debut short story was published in the magazine's March–April 1940 issue.
It took the standards of ''The New Yorker'' editors, among them William Shawn, to refine his writing into the "spare, teasingly mysterious, withheld" qualities of "A Perfect Day for Bananafish" (1948), ''The Catcher in the Rye'', and his stories of the early 1950s.
According to Burnett, Salinger did not distinguish himself until a few weeks before the end of the second semester, at which point "he suddenly came to life" and completed three stories.
He enjoyed watching actors work, and he enjoyed knowing them.
One of Hamilton's arguments was that Salinger's experience with post-traumatic stress disorder left him psychologically scarred, and that he was unable to deal with the traumatic nature of his war service.
Salinger allowed that "the few men who lived through Bloody Mortain, a battle in which her father fought, were left with much to sicken them, body and soul", but she also painted a picture of her father as a man immensely proud of his service record, maintaining his military haircut and service jacket, and moving about his compound (and town) in an old Jeep.
