Recognized as a leading American entertainer of the 20th century, Benny portrayed his character as a miser, playing his violin badly.
He drove a Maxwell onto the stage in one of his last television specials.
Allen himself wrote, "For years people have been asking me if Jack and I are friendly.
Despite his failing health, Benny made several appearances on ''The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast'' in his final eighteen months, roasting Ronald Reagan, Johnny Carson, Bob Hope and Lucille Ball, in addition to himself being roasted in February 1974.
* Joseph Kearns – remembered as the cantankerous Mr. Wilson on the television version of ''Dennis the Menace'', as Ed, the superannuated guard to Jack's money vault
Benny's parents refused to let their son go on the road at 17, but it was the beginning of his long friendship with the Marx Brothers, especially Zeppo Marx.
As a tribute to his skinflint stage persona, visitors often leave pennies on his crypt.
Benny and Sarnoff eventually met several years later and became good friends.
Thus, after some three decades on radio and television in a weekly program, Jack Benny went out on top.
When Benny moved to television, audiences learned that his verbal talent was matched by his controlled repertory of dead-pan facial expressions and gesture.
He was the son of Meyer Kubelsky and Emma Sachs Kubelsky.
From the fall of 1954 to 1960, it appeared every other week, and from 1960 to 1965 it was seen weekly.
According to the commentary on the Criterion edition of the film, his close-ups were filmed on a rear-projection stage at the Paramount studio.
Benny was born in Chicago, Illinois, and grew up in nearby Waukegan, Illinois.
and Benny collapsed in helpless laughter.
When Paley said as much to Benny, the comedian agreed.
In the 1946 Christmas episode, for example, Benny buys shoelaces for Don, and is unable to make up his mind whether to give Wilson shoelaces with plastic tips or metal tips.
:... they had come to a point where they had the line, "Your money or your life."
The automobile was also featured in the 1943 Benny film ''The Meanest Man in the World''.
Their first meeting did not go well when he tried to leave during Sadie's violin performance.
Other musical contributions came in 1946 from the singing quartet the Sportsmen (members: Bill Days, Max Smith, Marty Sperzel and Gurney Bell) singing the middle Lucky Strike commercial.
Burns ultimately had to replace Benny in the film as well and went on to win an Academy Award for his performance.
Benny did his opening and closing monologues before a live audience, which he regarded as essential to timing of the material.
Your money or your life."
Postal Service had issued a stamp depicting Jack Benny in 1991, as part of a booklet of stamps honoring comedians; however, the stamp was issued at the then-current rate of 29 cents.
Few stars possessed the combination of daring, humility and comic timing to commit to such an extended payoff.
It's so expressive.
But Paley, according to CBS historian Robert Metz, also learned that Benny chafed under NBC's almost indifferent attitude toward the talent that attracted the listeners.
And when Benny asks where Blanc is going, Blanc replies, "to see his sister", '''Sue''' ('''Sue?
A separate sound gag involved a song Benny had written, "When You Say I Beg Your Pardon, Then I'll Come Back to You".
While Benny was top of the heap on NBC, CBS czar William S. Paley cast a hungry eye upon the comedian.
When Benny asks his name, Blanc replies '''Sy''', which would prompt the exchange, '''Sy?
As his trousers began to come off, Benny howled, "Allen, you haven't seen the ''end'' of me!"
Benny later observed that if he'd had this kind of relationship with Sarnoff earlier, when he was Sarnoff's number-one radio star, he never would have left NBC.
"Well, what do you expect," quipped Allen, "when the tree is in Brooklyn and the sap is in Hollywood."
He said that while the ratings were still very good (he cited a figure of some 18 million viewers per week, although he qualified that figure by saying he never believed the ratings services were doing anything more than guessing, no matter what they promised), advertisers were complaining that commercial time on his show was costing nearly twice as much as what they paid for most other shows, and he had grown tired of what was called the "rate race".
He loved the instrument, but hated practice.
When the ''Jack Benny Program'' began appearing on television in 1950, a 1916 Maxwell Model 25 Tourer became one of the production's standard props.
After the war, Benny made a conscious effort to remove stereotypical aspects from the Rochester character.
Benny left show business briefly in 1917 to join the United States Navy during World War I, and often entertained the troops with his violin playing.
Blanc was also featured with Benny in the classic ''Si-Sy'' routine, and on radio as the sound of Benny's Maxwell automobile.
After making his television debut in 1949 on local Los Angeles station KTTV, then a CBS affiliate, the network television version of ''The Jack Benny Program'' ran from October 28, 1950, to 1965, all but the last season on CBS.
By 1941, Jack Benny's Maxwell had become such a well-known aspect of popular culture that it was referenced in the Billy Mills song "I'm in Love with the Sound Effects Man" as heard on the June 17, 1941 ''Fibber McGee and Molly'' radio show (and later performed on a 1943 recording by Spike Jones).
Benny's parody was "Clown Hall Tonight."
And particularly in the last act, starting with the ''allegro vivacissimo''.
In his unpublished autobiography, ''I Always Had Shoes'' (portions of which were later incorporated by Jack's daughter, Joan Benny, into her memoir of her parents, ''Sunday Nights at Seven''), Benny said that he, not NBC, made the decision to end his TV series in 1965.
Crosby: "That's a nice thought, Jack, but Drambuie's an after-dinner drink."
He was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 1988.
She was working in the hosiery section of the Hollywood Boulevard branch of the May Company,  where Benny courted her.
General Foods switched the Benny program from Jell-O to Grape-Nuts from 1942 to 1944, and it was, naturally, ''The Grape Nuts Program Starring Jack Benny''.
That's all I can say."
I said your money or your life!"
A nearly identical exchange occurred over a year earlier, among renowned violinist Isaac Stern, actor Ronald Colman, Jack Benny, and Mary Livingstone.
According to Benny, the huge laugh resulted from the long buildup, and the audience's knowledge that Benny, with his pompous persona, would have to break into the conversation at some point.
Under legal pressure, Benjamin Kubelsky agreed to change his name to Ben K. Benny, sometimes spelled Bennie.
He's got the knack of cutting out all the weak slush and keeping in only the strong, punchy lines."
He was interred in a crypt at Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery in Culver City, California.
In a joint appearance with Phil Silvers on Dick Cavett's show, Benny recalled that he had advised Silvers not to appear on television.
Benny's bandleader and his singing actress wife now starred in their own hit sitcom, meaning Harris was featured on shows for two different networks.
According to Benny himself, Mary Livingstone got the biggest laugh he ever heard on the show, on the April 25, 1948, broadcast.
Benny was able to attract guests who rarely, if ever, appeared on television.
He died on December 26, 1974 at age 80.
Benny signed a five-year contract with MGM, where his first role was in ''The Hollywood Revue of 1929''.
I'll see you on television."
Mary Livingstone finally retired from show business permanently in 1958, as her friend Gracie Allen had done.
Benny would then drive Blanc to insanity by exchanging the gift countless times throughout the episode.
The punchline came to Benny staff writers John Tackaberry and Milt Josefsberg almost by accident.
Don Wilson, the rotund announcer, also appeared on the show.
In one episode of the Benny radio show, Ed the Guard actually agreed when Jack invited him to take a break and come back to the surface world, only to discover that modern conveniences and transportation, which hadn't been around the last time he'd been to the surface, terrorized and confused him.
Benny persuaded Disney to give him over 100 free admission tickets to Disneyland for his friends, but later in the show Disney apparently sent his pet tiger after Benny as revenge, at which point Benny opened his umbrella and soared above the stage like Mary Poppins.
Finally, Ed decides to return to his post fathoms below and stay there.
:'''Jack Benny:''' Well, I thought—
Minnie, their mother, enjoyed Benny's violin playing and invited him to accompany her boys in their act.
''The Jack Benny Program'' evolved from a variety show blending sketch comedy and musical interludes into the situation comedy form we now recognize, crafting particular situations and scenarios from the fictionalization of Benny the radio star.
Benny responded, "...winter is nearly here, and the leaves are falling."
The university established the Jack Benny Award in his honor in 1977 to recognize outstanding people in the field of comedy.
The audience laughed for almost 30 seconds.
Benny had no idea what Burns was talking about, so he proceeded to light up.
He convinced a number of his fellow NBC performers (notably Burns and Allen, Edgar Bergen, Red Skelton and Kate Smith) to join him.
Blanc is perhaps best remembered as the perpetually frustrated violin teacher, Professor LeBlanc, who was as likely to assault his student out of insane exasperation as he was to jump out the window before he got out the door.
Because Paley took a personal interest in the Benny negotiations, as opposed to Sarnoff, who had never met his top-rated star, Benny was convinced to make the jump.
Jack Benny sits down and begins a conversation.
Benny's comic persona changed over the course of his career.
Led first by Phil Harris and later by Bob Crosby, the orchestra, and in particular band member Frank Remley, were jokingly portrayed as often being too drunk to play properly, using an overturned bass drum to play cards on just minutes before a show, and so enamored of liquor that the sight of a glass of milk would make them sick.
Its motto matches his famous statement as "Home of the '39ers".
Canadian singer Gisele MacKenzie, who toured with Benny in the early 1950s, guest starred seven times on ''The Jack Benny Program''.
For example, on one program, Don Wilson accidentally misread Lucky Strike's slogan ("Be happy, go Lucky") as "Be Lucky, go happy", prompting a story arc over several weeks that had Wilson unable to appear on the show due to being traumatized by the error.
Each year, Benny would buy a ridiculously cheap Christmas gift for Don Wilson, from a harried store clerk played by Mel Blanc.
Lucky Strike was the sponsor.
The company also gave Benny the opportunity to produce and package other radio programs (including his 1947 summer replacement series starring Jack Paar), and invest in other entertainment ventures, including the production of a 1949 feature film, ''The Lucky Stiff'', starring Dorothy Lamour, and the 1948 Broadway version of Mister Roberts, starring Henry Fonda.
They met again in 1926.
Benny, who listened to the Allen show answered in kind at the end of his January 3, 1937 show.
Tack, maybe he was half asleep—in defense of himself, says, "I'm thinking it over."
Benny answered the prize-winning question correctly and Allen crowned him "king" and showered him with a passel of almost meaningless prizes.
One guest star on the Jack Benny show was Rod Serling who starred in a spoof of ''The Twilight Zone'' in which Benny goes to his own house..and finds that no one knows who he is!
In 1964, Walt Disney was a guest, primarily to promote his production of ''Mary Poppins''.
The cartoon ends with a classic Benny look of befuddlement.
Jack Benny Middle School in Waukegan, Illinois, is named after the famous comedian.
Benny does a take with his smile slowly fading and mutters, "Well!
Despite a battery of tests, Benny's ailment could not be determined.
In keeping with his "stingy" schtick, on one of his television specials he remarked that, to his way of looking at things, a "special" is when the price of coffee is marked down.
That will be forever."
His radio and television programs, popular from the 1930s to the 1970s, were a major influence on the sitcom genre.
Benny and his archaic auto were featured in a series of television and print ads for Texaco from the 1950s through the 1970s.
Crosby also got consistent laughs by frequently joking about his more famous brother Bing Crosby's vast wealth.
That fill the breeze.
At the funeral George Burns, Benny's best friend for more than fifty years, attempted to deliver a eulogy but broke down shortly after he began and was unable to continue.
"—would not have worked with any other comedian than Benny.
The basement vault gag was also used in the cartoon ''The Mouse that Jack Built'' and an episode of ''The Lucy Show''.
Arriving at NBC on March 17, Benny did ''The Chevrolet Program'' until April 1, 1934.
Initially scheduled as a series of five "specials" during the 1950–1951 season, the show appeared every six weeks for the 1951–1952 season, every four weeks for the 1952–1953 season and every three weeks in 1953–1954.
American Tobacco's ''Lucky Strike'' was his longest-lasting radio sponsor, from October 1944 through to the end of his original radio series.
Benny was known for comic timing and the ability to cause laughter with a pregnant pause or a single expression, such as his signature exasperated "''Well!''"
To Paley, according to Metz, that was foolish thinking at best: Paley believed listeners were listening because of the talent, not because of which platform hosted them.
Benny was added into The Broadcasting and Cable Hall of Fame, and the National Radio Hall of Fame.
NBC, under the leadership of David Sarnoff, seemed at the time to think that listeners were listening to NBC because of NBC itself.
George Burns described Benny as "the greatest editor of material in the business.
This provoked famous violinist Jan Kubelik, who feared that the young vaudevillian with a similar name would damage his reputation.
When Laurel ultimately passed on appearing, Jack agreed to play it.
They reached the Palace Theater, the "Mecca of Vaudeville", and did not do well.
* singer/bandleader Bob Crosby – succeeded Phil Harris in the early 1950s;
The network dropped Benny at the end of the season.
For a decade, the two went at it back and forth, so convincingly that fans of either show could have been forgiven for believing they had become blood enemies.
Remley was portrayed in various unflattering situations, such as being thrown into a garbage can by a road sweeper who had found him passed out in the street at 4&nbsp;am, and on a wanted poster at the Beverly Hills police station.
Its inane lyrics and insipid melody guaranteed that it would never be published or recorded, but Benny continued to try to con, extort, or otherwise inveigle some of his musical guests (including The Smothers Brothers and Peter, Paul and Mary) to perform it.
Benny says he has no objections to the song in and of itself, only as ''his theme.''
For the 1953–1954 season, half the episodes were live and half were filmed during the summer, to allow Benny to continue doing his radio show.
The alarm rang off even when Benny opened his safe with the correct combination.
This was in contrast to successful radio or television comedians, such as Bob Hope, who would change writers frequently.
Benny may have had an unbilled cameo role in ''Casablanca'', claimed by a contemporary newspaper article and advertisement and reportedly in the ''Casablanca'' press book.
It didn't matter that Benny was still ''in'' the suit.
A New Year's Eve episode, in particular, shows their mutual love and respect as they quietly toast one another with champagne.
During his early radio shows, there was no recurring theme, the program instead opening each week with a different then-current popular song.
One evening, his violin performance was booed by the troops, so with prompting from fellow sailor and actor Pat O'Brien, he ad-libbed his way out of the jam and left them laughing.
In fact, the joke is probably not so memorable for the length of the laugh it provoked, but because it became the definitive "Jack Benny joke"—the joke that best illustrated Benny's "stingy man" persona.
This stage character was everything that Jack Benny was not: cheap, petty, vain and self-congratulatory.
Benny's television program relied more on guest stars and less on his regulars than his radio program.
In 1911, Benny was playing in the same theater as the young Marx Brothers.
As a gag, Benny made a 1957 appearance on the then-wildly popular ''$64,000 Question''.
When Salisbury left the act, Benny found a new pianist, Lyman Woods, and renamed the act "From Grand Opera to Ragtime".
* Artie Auerbach – as the Yiddish-accented Mr. Kitzel ("hoo, hoo, ''hoo!
He continued to make occasional specials into the 1970s, the last one airing in January 1974.
By 1921, the fiddle was more of a prop, and the low-key comedy took over.
In the cartoon, Benny and Livingstone agree to spend their anniversary at the Kit-Kat Club, which they discover the hard way is inside the mouth of a live cat.
They worked together for five years and slowly integrated comedy elements to the show.
The actual longest laugh known to collectors of ''The Jack Benny Program'' lasted in excess of 32 seconds.
Livingstone appeared rarely if at all on the television show.
Bob Hope also delivered a eulogy in which he stated, "For a man who was the undisputed master of comedy timing, you would have to say this is the only time when Jack Benny's timing was all wrong.
In fact, Benny was a fairly good violinist who achieved the illusion of a bad one, not by deliberately playing poorly, but by striving to play pieces that were too difficult for his skill level.
away from collapse.
His character was eager to antagonize Benny.
With his mock-befuddled one-liners and sharp retorts, Rochester broke comedic racial barriers.
It was rumored that Benny requested that, in lieu of monetary compensation, he receive a copy of the finished film.
(Poor Ed thought a crosstown bus was "a red and yellow dragon".)
In addition to its being on the program, Benny would often make public appearances in Maxwells.
Broadway'' (1933) as themselves.
:'''Mary Livingstone (to Jack):''' Oh, shut up!
The next year, Benny formed a vaudeville musical duo with pianist Cora Salisbury, a buxom 45-year-old widow who needed a partner for her act.
On the broadcast of January 8, 1950, journalist Drew Pearson was the subject of a joke gone wrong.
NBC, with its smash Sunday night lineup now broken up, offered lucrative new deals to two of those Sunday night hits, ''The Fred Allen Show'' and ''The Phil Harris-Alice Faye Show''.
Now what the hell has that got to do with ''me?''"
His radio shows often ended with the orchestra playing "Hooray for Hollywood".
This time, the audience laughed louder and longer than they had during the pause.
Benny had commented, "If it isn't a $30,000 Strad, I'm out $120."
After asking for a match to light a cigarette, the mugger demands, "Don't make a move, this is a stickup.
The cast included character actors and comedians:
In fact, the radio show alluded frequently to its television counterparts.
Benny even had a sound-based running gag of his own: his famous basement vault alarm, allegedly installed by Spike Jones, ringing off with a shattering cacophony of whistles, sirens, bells, and blasts, before ending invariably with the sound of a foghorn.
While in a coma, he was visited by close friends including George Burns, Bob Hope, Frank Sinatra, Johnny Carson and John Rowles.
In September 1954, CBS premiered Chrysler's ''Shower of Stars'' co-hosted by Jack Benny and William Lundigan.
Benny was so impressed with MacKenzie's talents that he served as co-executive producer and guest starred on her 1957–1958 NBC variety show, ''The Gisele MacKenzie Show''.
In one appearance, Ed asked Benny, "By the way, Mr. Benny...what's it like on the outside?"
Livingstone died nine years later on June 30, 1983.
The robber then repeated his demand: "Look, bud!
He wrote in a later column, "I think you're right."
To Benny's eternal frustration, he could never get Burns to laugh.
Benny teamed with Fred Allen for the best-remembered running gag in classic radio history, in terms of character dialogue.
After exchanging them repeatedly, Mel Blanc is heard screaming insanely, "Plastic tips!
The television viewers learned to live without Mary Livingstone, who was afflicted by a striking case of stage fright.
Common situations included hosting parties, income tax time, nights on the town, "backstage" interactions between Jack and his cast at the radio studio during show rehearsals, contract negotiations, or traveling by train or plane to and from Jack's many personal appearances throughout the country (hence the "Train leaving on track five" gag).
The actual length of the laugh the joke got was five seconds when originally delivered and seven seconds when the gag was reprised on a follow-up show.
The vault also featured a guard named Ed (voiced by Joseph Kearns) who had been on post down below before, apparently, the end of the Civil War, the end of the Revolutionary War, the founding of Los Angeles, on Jack's 38th birthday, and even the beginning of humanity.
But Benny alone sustained a classic repertoire of running gags in his own right, including his skinflint radio and television persona; regular cast members' and guest stars' reference to his "baby blue" eyes, always sure to elicit a self-satisfied smirk or patently false attempt at modesty from Benny; perpetually giving his age as 39; and ineptitude at violin playing, most frequently demonstrated by futile attempts to perform Rodolphe Kreutzer's   Etude No.
In a statement released on the day after Allen's death, Benny said, "People have often asked me if Fred Allen and I were really friends in real life.
And that's the line that went in the script... By the way, that was ''not'' the biggest laugh that Jack ever got.
Benny paused, and the studio audience—knowing his skinflint character—laughed.
In fairness, Benny himself shared Fred Allen's ambivalence about television, though not quite to Allen's extent.
Calling the sketch "King for a Day", Allen played the host and Benny a contestant who sneaked onto the show using the alias Myron Proudfoot.
Allen proudly announced, "Tomorrow night, in your ermine robe, you will be whisked by bicycle to Orange, New Jersey, where you will be the judge in a chicken-cleaning contest," to which Benny joyously declared, "I'm ''king'' for a day!"
On the contrary, he publicized it – not just in conversations, but in interviews and on the air.” Historical accounts (like those by longtime Benny writer Milt Josefsberg) indicate that Benny's role was essentially as head writer and director of his radio programs, though he was not credited in either capacity.
I don't think that Jack Benny has an enemy in the world....He is my favourite comedian and I hope to be his friend until he is forty.
His music teacher was Otto Graham Sr., a neighbor and father of Otto Graham of NFL fame.
Benny felt he got the credit or blame either way, not the actor saying the lines, so there was emphasis on the comedic bottom line.
Shortly after the war, Benny developed a one-man act, "Ben K. Benny: Fiddle Funology".
This gag became well known, and was used in several Bugs Bunny cartoons which Mel Blanc also voiced.
The last of these is probably the most memorable: Robert McKimson engaged Benny and his actual cast (Mary Livingstone, Eddie Anderson, and Don Wilson) to do the voices for the mouse versions of their characters, with Mel Blanc—the usual Warner Brothers cartoon voicemeister—reprising his old vocal turn as the always-aging Maxwell, always a ''phat''-phat-''bang!''
Day appeared sporadically, and Harris had left the radio program in 1952, although he did make a guest appearance on the television show (Bob Crosby, Phil's "replacement", frequently appeared on television through 1956).
Some years after their split, Kelly resurfaced as a dowdy fat girl and Jack gave her a part in an act of three girls: one homely, one fat and one who couldn't sing.
Johnny Carson was the first award recipient.
On a segment often played in ''Tonight Show'' retrospectives, Benny talks with Johnny Carson about this.
