He purchased plots and novels from the young Sinclair Lewis and used incidents from newspaper clippings as writing material.
He wrote to William Chaney, then living in Chicago.
London witnessed animal cruelty in the training of circus animals, and his subsequent novels ''Jerry of the Islands'' and ''Michael, Brother of Jerry'' included a foreword entreating the public to become more informed about this practice.
Kingman says that by 1903, the couple were close to separation as they were "extremely incompatible".
I write a book for no other reason than to add three or four hundred acres to my magnificent estate."
I still subscribe to that sentiment.
Joseph Noel calls the events from 1903 to 1905 "a domestic drama that would have intrigued the pen of an Ibsen.... London's had comedy relief in it and a sort of easy-going romance."
Late-stage alcoholism also causes systemic failure.
Support from Club members led to a temporary cessation of trained animal acts at Ringling-Barnum and Bailey in 1925.
Flora Wellman was living with Chaney in San Francisco when she became pregnant.
Father William Judge, "The Saint of Dawson", had a facility in Dawson that provided shelter, food and any available medicine to London and others.
London wrote from a socialist viewpoint, which is evident in his novel ''The Iron Heel''.
Flora left Ohio and moved to the Pacific coast when her father remarried after her mother died.
He contributed a number of articles to the high school's magazine, ''The Aegis''.
The court ruled that "Jack London's... 'definition of a scab' is merely rhetorical hyperbole, a lusty and imaginative expression of the contempt felt by union members towards those who refuse to join", and as such was not libelous and was protected under the First Amendment.
Presented as an historical essay set in the future, the story narrates events between 1976 and 1987, in which China, with an ever-increasing population, is taking over and colonizing its neighbors with the intention of taking over the entire Earth.
Harris was incensed and suggested he should receive 1/60th of the royalties from ''The Iron Heel,'' the disputed material constituting about that fraction of the whole novel.
Set in the harsh Klondike, it recounts the haphazard trek of a new arrival who has ignored an old-timer's warning about the risks of traveling alone.
However, at least one line, according to Stasz, is authentic, being referenced by London, and written in his own hand, in the autograph book of Australian suffragette Vida Goldstein:
Those who defend London against charges of racism cite the letter he wrote to the ''Japanese-American Commercial Weekly'' in 1913:
On his fears about China, he admits, "it must be taken into consideration that the above postulate is itself a product of Western race-egotism, urged by our belief in our own righteousness and fostered by a faith in ourselves which may be as erroneous as are most fond race fancies."
The house burned down in the fire after the 1906 San Francisco earthquake; the California Historical Society placed a plaque at the site in 1953.
London explained both writers based their stories on the same newspaper account.
When he returned, the country was in the grip of the panic of '93 and Oakland was swept by labor unrest.
After a few months, his sloop became damaged beyond repair.
He often closed his letters "Yours for the Revolution."
On August 18, 1904, London went with his close friend, the poet George Sterling, to "Summer High Jinks" at the Bohemian Grove.
Other stories from the Klondike period include: "All Gold Canyon", about a battle between a gold prospector and a claim jumper; "The Law of Life", about an aging American Indian man abandoned by his tribe and left to die; "Love of Life", about a trek by a prospector across the Canadian tundra; "To the Man on Trail," which tells the story of a prospector fleeing the Mounted Police in a sled race, and raises the question of the contrast between written law and morality; and "An Odyssey of the North," which raises questions of conditional morality, and paints a sympathetic portrait of a man of mixed White and Aleut ancestry.
In 1893, he signed on to the sealing schooner ''Sophie Sutherland'', bound for the coast of Japan.
London's socialist politics are explicitly on display here.
When I tell her morality is only evidence of low blood pressure, she hates me.
In 1896, after a summer of intense studying to pass certification exams, he was admitted.
Many of London's stories are based on his visits to Hawaii, the last one for 10&nbsp;months beginning in December 1915.
During the marriage, London continued his friendship with Anna Strunsky, co-authoring ''The Kempton-Wace Letters'', an epistolary novel contrasting two philosophies of love.
London was largely self-educated.
"The Unparalleled Invasion" describes germ warfare against China; "Goliath" is about an irresistible energy weapon; "The Shadow and the Flash" is a tale about two brothers who take different routes to achieving invisibility; "A Relic of the Pliocene" is a tall tale about an encounter of a modern-day man with a mammoth.
She was a major maternal figure throughout London's life.
In the same year, the ''San Francisco Chronicle'' published a story about the twenty-year-old London giving nightly speeches in Oakland's City Hall Park, an activity he was arrested for a year later.
In 1906, London published in ''Collier's'' magazine his eye-witness report of the San Francisco earthquake.
George Orwell, however, identified a fascist strain in London's outlook:
He was arrested by Japanese authorities in Shimonoseki, but released through the intervention of American ambassador Lloyd Griscom.
After publishing a tame version of this story—with a sunny outcome—in ''The Youth's Companion'' in 1902, London offered a second, more severe take on the man's predicament in ''The Century Magazine'' in 1908.
London was introduced to Kittredge by his MacMillan publisher, George Platt Brett, Sr., while Kittredge served as Brett's secretary.
When you are dust, my father will be ashes."
This conjecture appears to be a rumor, or speculation based on incidents in his fiction writings.
Whether Wellman and Chaney were legally married is unknown.
Egerton Ryerson Young claimed ''The Call of the Wild'' (1903) was taken from Young's book ''My Dogs in the Northland'' (1902).
The grave is marked by a mossy boulder.
as inaccessible as Mont Blanc."
London wrote that Johnson was "superb.
He ran unsuccessfully as the high-profile Socialist nominee for mayor of Oakland in 1901 (receiving 245 votes) and 1905 (improving to 981 votes), toured the country lecturing on socialism in 1906, and published two collections of essays about socialism: ''The War of the Classes'' (1905) and ''Revolution, and other Essays'' (1906).
In his autobiographical novel, ''John Barleycorn,'' London mentioned the pub's likeness seventeen times.
Bessie is devoted to purity.
London was born near Third and Brannan Streets in San Francisco.
His pet name for Bess had been "Mother-Girl;" his pet name for Charmian was "Mate-Woman."
Recent scholarship based upon firsthand documents challenges this caricature."
By contrast, many of London's short stories are notable for their empathetic portrayal of Mexican ("The Mexican"), Asian ("The Chinago"), and Hawaiian ("Koolau the Leper") characters.
While London had pride in his children, the marriage was strained.
In his memoir, ''John Barleycorn'', he claims also to have stolen French Frank's mistress Mamie.
This theme was also the subject of a story he wrote in 1910 called "The Unparalleled Invasion".
Anna, writing "Dane Kempton's" letters, arguing for a romantic view of marriage, while London, writing "Herbert Wace's" letters, argued for a scientific view, based on Darwinism and eugenics.
The most serious charge of plagiarism was based on London's "The Bishop's Vision", Chapter 7 of his novel ''The Iron Heel'' (1908).
As Labor (1994) observes: "To compare the two versions is itself an instructive lesson in what distinguished a great work of literary art from a good children's story."
London joined the Socialist Labor Party in April 1896.
His struggles there inspired London's short story, "To Build a Fire" (1902, revised in 1908), which many critics assess as his best.
Falling through the ice into a creek in seventy-five-below weather, the unnamed man is keenly aware that survival depends on his untested skills at quickly building a fire to dry his clothes and warm his extremities.
A year later, it was discovered that Charles Forrest McLean had published a fictional story also based on the same incident.
In 1889, London began working 12 to 18&nbsp;hours a day at Hickmott's Cannery.
Financial circumstances forced him to leave in 1897 and he never graduated.
Stasz mentions a personal meeting between London and Big Bill Haywood in 1912.
In an unflattering portrait of London's ranch days, California cultural historian Kevin Starr refers to this period as "post-socialist" and says "... by 1911 ... London was more bored by the class struggle than he cared to admit."
Beginning in December 1914, London worked on ''The Acorn Planter, A California Forest Play'', to be performed as one of the annual Grove Plays, but it was never selected.
London left Oakland with a social conscience and socialist leanings; he returned to become an activist for socialism.
"The Red One" is a late story from a period when London was intrigued by the theories of the psychiatrist and writer Jung.
London's "strength of utterance" is at its height in his stories, and they are painstakingly well-constructed.
After grueling jobs in a jute mill and a street-railway power plant, London joined Kelly's Army and began his career as a tramp.
I'd rather sing one wild song and burst my heart with it, than live a thousand years watching my digestion and being afraid of the wet.
His first published work was "Typhoon off the Coast of Japan", an account of his sailing experiences.
After many experiences as a hobo and a sailor, he returned to Oakland and attended Oakland High School.
Stasz says, "Both acknowledged publicly that they were not marrying out of love, but from friendship and a belief that they would produce sturdy children.
His death certificate gives the cause as uremia, following acute renal colic, a type of pain often described as "the worst pain...ever experienced", commonly caused by kidney stones.
London's last visit to Hawaii, beginning in December 1915, lasted eight months.
The buildings and property were later preserved as Jack London State Historic Park, in Glen Ellen, California.
At the time of his death, he suffered from dysentery, late-stage alcoholism, and uremia; he was in extreme pain and taking morphine.
Sympathetic observers such as Stasz treat his projects as potentially feasible, and ascribe their failure to bad luck or to being ahead of their time.
(She later became California's first ''poet laureate'' and an important figure in the San Francisco literary community).
London asked William Randolph Hearst, the owner of the ''San Francisco Examiner'', to be allowed to transfer to the Imperial Russian Army, where he felt that restrictions on his reporting and his movements would be less severe.
London desperately wanted to attend the University of California, Berkeley.
London's ashes were buried on his property not far from the Wolf House.
With his love of violence and physical strength, his belief in 'natural aristocracy', his animal-worship and exaltation of the primitive, he had in him what one might fairly call a Fascist strain.
Chaney concluded by saying that he was more to be pitied than London.
Chaney responded that he could not be London's father because he was impotent; he casually asserted that London's mother had relations with other men and averred that she had slandered him when she said he insisted on an abortion.
London was a boxing fan and an avid amateur boxer.
Stasz notes that "London regarded the Wobblies as a welcome addition to the Socialist cause, although he never joined them in going so far as to recommend sabotage."
Most biographers, including Russ Kingman, now agree he died of uremia aggravated by an accidental morphine overdose.
Heinold's First and Last Chance Saloon is now unofficially named Jack London's Rendezvous in his honor.
On July 24, 1903, London told Bessie he was leaving and moved out.
He was proud to own the first concrete silo in California, a circular piggery that he designed.
Seven years ago I wrote you that I'd rather be ashes than dust.
The Bonds, especially Hiram, were active Republicans.
Uremia is also known as uremic poisoning.
Although the family was working class, it was not as impoverished as London's later accounts claimed.
London's funeral took place on November 26, 1916, attended only by close friends, relatives, and workers of the property.
Biographer Clarice Stasz and others believe London's father was astrologer William Chaney.
Charmian's aunt and foster mother, a disciple of Victoria Woodhull, had raised her without prudishness.
After giving birth, Flora turned the baby over for care to Virginia Prentiss, an African-American woman and former slave.
Heinold lent London tuition money to attend college.
While living at his rented villa on Lake Merritt in Oakland, London met poet George Sterling; in time they became best friends.
In 1918, the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the American Humane Education Society teamed up to create the Jack London Club, which sought to inform the public about cruelty to circus animals and encourage them to protest this establishment.
In "Koolau the Leper", London describes Koolau, who is a Hawaiian leper—and thus a very different sort of "superman" than Martin Eden—and who fights off an entire cavalry troop to elude capture, as "indomitable spiritually—a&nbsp;... magnificent rebel".
As a schoolboy, London often studied at Heinold's First and Last Chance Saloon, a port-side bar in Oakland.
Released through the personal intervention of President Theodore Roosevelt, London departed the front in June 1904.
He referred to his books as "the tools of my trade".
Are you afraid to die?
He wrote: "Next to my wife, the ranch is the dearest thing in the world to me."
Both children were born in Piedmont, California.
In desperation, she shot herself.
The biographer Stasz notes that the passage "has many marks of London's style" but the only line that could be safely attributed to London was the first.
London was an atheist.
His first published story since high school was "To the Man On Trail", which has frequently been collected in anthologies.
In 1886, he went to the Oakland Public Library and found a sympathetic librarian, Ina Coolbrith, who encouraged his learning.
There have been several posthumous anthologies drawn from this pool of stories.
Stasz writes that London "had taken fully to heart the vision, expressed in his agrarian fiction, of the land as the closest earthly version of Eden ... he educated himself through the study of agricultural manuals and scientific tomes.
The ranch (abutting stone remnants of Wolf House) is now a National Historic Landmark and is protected in Jack London State Historic Park.
A collection of ''Jack London's San Francisco Stories'' was published in October 2010 by Sydney Samizdat Press.
London's war correspondence from the Russo-Japanese War, as well as his unfinished novel ''Cherry'', show he admired much about Japanese customs and capabilities.
Other noted members of the Bohemian Club during this time included Ambrose Bierce, Gelett Burgess, Allan Dunn, John Muir, Frank Norris, and Herman George Scheffauer.
In 1906, the ''New York World'' published "deadly parallel" columns showing eighteen passages from London's short story "Love of Life" side by side with similar passages from a nonfiction article by Augustus Biddle and J. K Macdonald, titled "Lost in the Land of the Midnight Sun".
London married Elizabeth "Bessie" Maddern on April 7, 1900, the same day ''The Son of the Wolf'' was published.
Macmillan's promotional campaign propelled it to swift success.
I believe that with my death I am just as much obliterated as the last mosquito you and I squashed."
In his Glen Ellen ranch years, London felt some ambivalence toward socialism and complained about the "inefficient Italian labourers" in his employ.
Starr notes that London was absent from his ranch about six months a year between 1910 and 1916, and says, "He liked the show of managerial power, but not grinding attention to detail .... London's workers laughed at his efforts to play big-time rancher and considered the operation a rich man's hobby."
Some nineteen original collections of short stories were published during London's brief life or shortly after his death.
The couple also visited Goldfield, Nevada, in 1907, where they were guests of the Bond brothers, London's Dawson City landlords.
The biographer Stasz writes, "Following London's death, for a number of reasons, a biographical myth developed in which he has been portrayed as an alcoholic womanizer who committed suicide.
On July 12, 1897, London (age 21) and his sister's husband Captain Shepard sailed to join the Klondike Gold Rush.
This character is based on Hawaiian leper Kaluaikoolau, who in 1893 revolted and resisted capture from forces of the Provisional Government of Hawaii in the Kalalau Valley.
On returning to California in 1898, London began working to get published, a struggle described in his novel, ''Martin Eden'' (serialized in 1908, published in 1909).
In broad outline, London was restless in his first marriage, sought extramarital sexual affairs, and found, in Charmian Kittredge, not only a sexually active and adventurous partner, but his future life-companion.
Because he was using morphine, many older sources describe London's death as a suicide, and some still do.
London told some of his critics that man's actions are the main cause of the behavior of their animals, and he would show this in another story, ''The Call of the Wild''.
won on Saturday was bigness, coolness, quickness, cleverness, and vast physical superiority... Because a white man wishes a white man to win, this should not prevent him from giving absolute credit to the best man, even when that best man was black.
Their first child, Joan, was born on January 15, 1901 and their second, Bessie (later called Becky), on October 20, 1902.
London was part of the radical literary group "The Crowd" in San Francisco and a passionate advocate of unionization, socialism, and the rights of workers.
In 1902, Sterling helped London find a home closer to his own in nearby Piedmont.
The ranch was an economic failure.
When ''The Overland Monthly'' offered him only five dollars for it—and was slow paying—London came close to abandoning his writing career.
", Kingman says, "they were comfortable together... Jack had made it clear to Bessie that he did not love her, but that he liked her enough to make a successful marriage."
Bess had been part of his circle of friends for a number of years.
Heinold's was the place where London met Alexander McLean, a captain known for his cruelty at sea.
Jack London's mother, Flora Wellman, was the fifth and youngest child of Pennsylvania Canal builder Marshall Wellman and his first wife, Eleanor Garrett Jones.
He concluded that his only hope of escaping the work "trap" was to get an education and "sell his brains".
Marshall Wellman was descended from Thomas Wellman, an early Puritan settler in the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Marshall Bond's diary mentions friendly sparring with London on political issues as a camp pastime.
London was devastated by his father's letter; in the months following, he quit school at Berkeley and went to the Klondike during the gold rush boom.
"The Mexican" combines boxing with a social theme, as a young Mexican endures an unfair fight and ethnic prejudice in order to earn money with which to aid the revolution.
All hail to Johnson."
He was suffering from kidney failure, but he continued to work.
In accordance with his wishes, he was cremated and buried next to some pioneer children, under a rock that belonged to the Wolf House.
In 1908, London had reported on an earlier fight of Johnson's, contrasting the black boxer's coolness and intellectual style, with the apelike appearance and fighting style of his Canadian opponent, Tommy Burns:
This was the setting for some of his first successful stories.
Dear Miss Goldstein:–
In the novel, his fictional character contrasted two women he had known.
He wrote in a letter to Elwyn Hoffman, "expression, you see—with me—is far easier than invention."
London reportedly complained to friends Joseph Noel and George Sterling:
Despite being frequently attributed to London, the passage does not appear at all in the extensive collection of his writings at Sonoma State University's website.
Stasz notes "Even more so than today journalists' quotes were unreliable or even sheer inventions" and says no direct source in London's writings has been found.
The Bond brothers were working in Nevada as mining engineers.
In the text, a cruel French Canadian brutalizes his dog, and the dog retaliates and kills the man.
Additionally, during travels on the ''Snark'', he and Charmian may have picked up unspecified tropical infections.
Late in 1876, Flora Wellman married John London, a partially disabled Civil War veteran, and brought her baby John, later known as Jack, to live with the newly married couple.
A constant gnawing pain affected his hip and leg muscles, and his face was stricken with marks that always reminded him of the struggles he faced in the Klondike.
He hired both Italian and Chinese stonemasons, whose distinctly different styles are obvious.
In 1905, London purchased a  ranch in Glen Ellen, Sonoma County, California, on the eastern slope of Sonoma Mountain, for $26,450.
After divorcing Maddern, London married Charmian Kittredge in 1905.
Here London wrote one of his most celebrated works, ''The Call of the Wild.''
London's writings have been popular among the Japanese, who believe he portrayed them positively.
Biographer Russ Kingman called Charmian "Jack's soul-mate, always at his side, and a perfect match."
In his autobiographical memoir ''John Barleycorn'', he claims, as a youth, to have drunkenly stumbled overboard into the San Francisco Bay, "some maundering fancy of going out with the tide suddenly obsessed me".
London had contrasted the concepts of the "Mother Woman" and the "Mate Woman" in ''The Kempton-Wace Letters.''
His gums became swollen, leading to the loss of his four front teeth.
Seeking a way out, he borrowed money from his foster mother Virginia Prentiss, bought the sloop ''Razzle-Dazzle'' from an oyster pirate named French Frank, and became an oyster pirate.
London shared common concerns among European Americans in California about Asian immigration, described as "the yellow peril"; he used the latter term as the title of a 1904 essay.
Reading both provides an illustration of London's growth and maturation as a writer.
When she refused, he disclaimed responsibility for the child.
Many of these stories were located in the Klondike and the Pacific.
In his late (1913) book ''The Cruise of the Snark'', London writes, about appeals to him for membership of the Snark's crew from office workers and other "toilers" who longed for escape from the cities, and of being cheated by workmen.
It was described as too difficult to set to music.
Several of London's stories would today be classified as science fiction.
No evidence suggests that London wrote for student publications while studying at Berkeley.
At 17, he confessed to the bar's owner, John Heinold, his desire to attend university and pursue a career as a writer.
London's time in the harsh Klondike, however, was detrimental to his health.
London had been a robust man but had suffered several serious illnesses, including scurvy in the Klondike.
Stasz notes that in his memoirs, Chaney refers to London's mother Flora Wellman as having been his "wife"; he also cites an advertisement in which Flora called herself "Florence Wellman Chaney".
He desperately wanted the ranch to become a successful business enterprise.
In 1894, he spent 30&nbsp;days for vagrancy in the Erie County Penitentiary at Buffalo, New York.
In 1916, he resigned from the Glen Ellen chapter of the Socialist Party, but stated emphatically he did so "because of its lack of fire and fight, and its loss of emphasis on the class struggle."
He hoped to adapt the wisdom of Asian sustainable agriculture to the United States.
After Charmian's death in 1955, she was also cremated and then buried with her husband in the same simple spot that her husband chose.
