He took a job as an assistant athletic director with the government's National Youth Administration (NYA) in Atascadero, California.
His salary that year was the highest any Dodger had been paid to that point: $35,000 ($ in  dollars).
Although the team enjoyed ultimate success, 1955 was the worst year of Robinson's individual career.
And if any of you cannot use the money, I will see that you are all traded."
On April 15, 2008, she announced that in 2010 the foundation will be opening a museum devoted to Jackie in Lower Manhattan.
In 2011, the U.S. placed a plaque at Robinson's Montreal home to honor the ending of segregation in baseball.
Rickey shortly thereafter became general manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Robinson was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962.
The Woodward article made national headlines.
While Robinson wore several different numbers during his UCLA career, the school chose 42 because it had become indelibly identified with him.
Robinson's continued success spawned a string of death threats.
He was one of four black players on the 1939 UCLA Bruins football team; the others were Woody Strode, Kenny Washington, and Ray Bartlett.
After his discharge, he struggled with drug problems.
Whether fans supported or opposed it, Robinson's presence on the field was a boon to attendance; more than one million people went to games involving Robinson in 1946, an amazing figure by International League standards.
He believed that everything unpleasant that happened to him happened because of his blackness."
Protesting the major leagues' ongoing lack of minority managers and central office personnel, Robinson turned down an invitation to appear in an old-timers' game at Yankee Stadium in 1969.
We never had a threatening or unpleasant experience there.
In late January 1937, the ''Pasadena Star-News'' newspaper reported that Robinson "for two years has been the outstanding athlete at Muir, starring in football, basketball, track, baseball and tennis."
He had 175 hits (scoring 125 runs) including 31 doubles, 5 triples, and 12 home runs, driving in 48 runs for the year.
The Yankees' Mariano Rivera, who retired at the end of the 2013 season, was the last player in Major League Baseball to wear jersey number 42 on a regular basis.
Robinson also talked frequently with Larry Doby, who endured his own hardships since becoming the first black player in the American League with the Cleveland Indians, as the two spoke to one another via telephone throughout the season.
In a 12–7 win against the St. Louis Cardinals on August 29, , he hit for the cycle—a home run, a triple, a double, and a single in the same game.
Despite Robinson's regular-season heroics, the Dodgers lost the pennant on Bobby Thomson's famous home run, known as the Shot Heard 'Round the World, on October 3, 1951.
Brookside Park, situated next to the Rose Bowl, features a baseball diamond and stadium named Jackie Robinson Field.
The experience led to a personal friendship between Robinson and Louis.
Robinson's funeral service on October 27, 1972, at Upper Manhattan's Riverside Church adjacent to Grant's Tomb in Morningside Heights attracted 2,500 mourners.
Although he required Robinson to keep the arrangement a secret for the time being, Rickey committed to formally signing Robinson before November 1, 1945.
Rickey did not offer compensation to the Monarchs, instead believing all Negro league players were free agents due to the contracts' not containing a reserve clause.
In 1999, he was named by ''Time'' on its list of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century.
In 1997, MLB "universally" retired his uniform number, 42, across all major league teams; he was the first pro athlete in any sport to be so honored.
In his first year of eligibility for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962, Robinson encouraged voters to consider only his on-field qualifications, rather than his cultural impact on the game.
Following an incident where Greenberg collided with Robinson at first base, he "whispered a few words into Robinson's ear", which Robinson later characterized as "words of encouragement."
On June 4, 1972, the Dodgers retired his uniform number, 42, alongside those of Roy Campanella (39) and Sandy Koufax (32).
In early 1945, while Robinson was at Sam Huston College, the Kansas City Monarchs sent him a written offer to play professional baseball in the Negro leagues.
In 1976, his home in Brooklyn, the Jackie Robinson House, was declared a National Historic Landmark.
In 1964, he helped found, with Harlem businessman Dunbar McLaurin, Freedom National Bank—a black-owned and operated commercial bank based in Harlem.
At a time when only a few black students played mainstream college football, this made UCLA college football's most integrated team.
This forced a best-of-three playoff series against the crosstown rival New York Giants.
Toward the end of his career, he played about 2,000 innings at third base and about 1,175 innings in the outfield, excelling at both.
After much lobbying of local officials by Rickey himself, the Royals were allowed to host a game involving Robinson in Daytona Beach.
The Dodgers tried Robinson in the outfield and as a third baseman, both because of his diminishing abilities and because Gilliam was established at second base.
Ultimately, the Dodgers won the National League pennant, but lost in five games to the New York Yankees in the 1949 World Series.
Robinson played in six World Series and contributed to the Dodgers' 1955 World Series championship.
On April 22, 1947, during a game between the Dodgers and the Philadelphia Phillies, Phillies players and manager Ben Chapman called Robinson a "nigger" from their dugout and yelled that he should "go back to the cotton fields".
He finished the year with 99 runs scored, a .328 batting average, and 12 stolen bases.
After Robinson's death, his widow founded the Jackie Robinson Foundation, of which she remains an officer as of 2015.
Larry Doby, who broke the color line in the American League the same year as Robinson, said, "One of the things that was disappointing and disheartening to a lot of the black players at the time was that Jack was not the best player.
Robinson was one of only two players during the span of 1947–56 to accumulate at least 125 steals while registering a slugging percentage over .425 (Minnie Miñoso was the other).
He lost the weight during training camp, but dieting left him weak at the plate.
", reached number&nbsp;13 on the charts; Count Basie recorded a famous version.
As it was a fledgling program, few students tried out for the basketball team, and Robinson even resorted to inserting himself into the lineup for exhibition games.
In the spring semester of 1941, despite his mother's and Isum's reservations, Robinson left college just shy of graduation.
With the track and field squad, he won awards in the broad jump.
After Muir, Robinson attended Pasadena Junior College (PJC), where he continued his athletic career by participating in basketball, football, baseball, and track.
She became an assistant professor at the Yale School of Nursing and director of nursing at the Connecticut Mental Health Center.
Robinson also openly criticized segregated hotels and restaurants that served the Dodger organization; a number of these establishments integrated as a result, including the five-star Chase Park Hotel in St. Louis.
Brooklyn residents want to turn his home into a city landmark.
Dodgers teammate Pee Wee Reese once came to Robinson's defense with the famous line, "You can hate a man for many reasons.
Woodward's article received the E. P. Dutton Award in 1947 for Best Sports Reporting.
Robinson took the former player's advice and wrote to Monarchs' co-owner Thomas Baird.
In 1970, Robinson established the Jackie Robinson Construction Company to build housing for low-income families.
In 1956, Robinson had 61 runs, a .275 batting average, and 12 steals.
Robinson's career is generally considered to mark the beginning of the post–"long ball" era in baseball, in which a reliance on raw power-hitting gave way to balanced offensive strategies that used footspeed to create runs through aggressive baserunning.
Robinson exhibited the combination of hitting ability and speed which exemplified the new era.
Pitching against Robinson was Warren Sandel who had played against him when they both lived in California.
On April 18, 1946, Roosevelt Stadium hosted the Jersey City Giants' season opener against the Montreal Royals, marking the professional debut of the Royals' Jackie Robinson and the first time the color barrier had been broken in a game between two minor league clubs.
Robinson was active in politics throughout his post-baseball life.
That year, on the television show ''Youth Wants to Know'', Robinson challenged the Yankees' general manager, George Weiss, on the racial record of his team, which had yet to sign a black player.
In what was later referred to as "The Noble Experiment", Robinson was the first black baseball player in the International League since the 1880s.
In 1938, he was elected to the All-Southland Junior College Team for baseball and selected as the region's Most Valuable Player.
Following Stanky's trade to the Boston Braves in March 1948, Robinson took over second base, where he logged a .980 fielding percentage that year (second in the National League at the position, fractionally behind Stanky).
In 1966, Robinson was hired as general manager for the short-lived Brooklyn Dodgers of the Continental Football League.
He also appeared in the 1945 Negro League All-Star Game, going hitless in five at-bats.
After a short season, Robinson returned to California in December 1941 to pursue a career as running back for the Los Angeles Bulldogs of the Pacific Coast Football League.
For the 60th anniversary of Robinson's major league debut, MLB invited players to wear the number 42 on Jackie Robinson Day in 2007.
Also while at PJC, he was elected to the Lancers, a student-run police organization responsible for patrolling various school activities.
Although the Army's initial July 1941 guidelines for OCS had been drafted as race neutral, few black applicants were admitted into OCS until after subsequent directives by Army leadership.
Robinson has also been recognized outside of baseball.
Rickey was especially interested in making sure his eventual signee could withstand the inevitable racial abuse that would be directed at him.
Robinson was aghast: "Are you looking for a Negro who is afraid to fight back?"
In 1999, he was posthumously named to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.
She also served on the board of the Freedom National Bank until it closed in 1990.
Robinson was also the subject of a 2016 PBS documentary, ''Jackie Robinson'', which was directed by Ken Burns and features Jamie Foxx doing voice-over as Robinson.
In 1997, a $325,000 bronze sculpture (equal to $ today) by artists Ralph Helmick, Stu Schecter, and John Outterbridge depicting oversized nine-foot busts of Robinson and his brother Mack was erected at Garfield Avenue, across from the main entrance of Pasadena City Hall; a granite footprint lists multiple donors to the commission project, which was organized by the Robinson Memorial Foundation and supported by members of the Robinson family.
His cumulative performance earned him the inaugural Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award (separate National and American League Rookie of the Year honors were not awarded until 1949).
From 1957 to 1964, Robinson was the vice president for personnel at Chock full o'Nuts; he was the first black person to serve as vice president of a major American corporation.
Jewish baseball star Hank Greenberg, who had to deal with racial epithets during his career, also encouraged Robinson.
He accumulated 197 stolen bases in total, including 19 steals of home.
As at Muir High School, most of Jackie's teammates were white.
Robinson broke the baseball color line when the Brooklyn Dodgers started him at first base on April 15, 1947.
Robinson thus became the first black player to openly play for a minor league team against a major league team since the ''de facto'' baseball color line had been implemented in the 1880s.
In late 1950, Rickey's contract as the Dodgers' team President expired.
He was also a member of the tennis team.
Martin Luther King, Jr. said that he was "a legend and a symbol in his own time", and that he "challenged the dark skies of intolerance and frustration."
City Island Ballpark in Daytona Beach, Florida was renamed Jackie Robinson Ballpark in 1990 and a statue of Robinson with two children stands in front of the ballpark.
For the performance Robinson earned the Most Valuable Player Award for the National League.
She and Jackie had three children: Jackie Robinson Jr. (born November 18, 1946, died 1971, the year before Jackie), Sharon Robinson (born January 13, 1950), and David Robinson (born May 14, 1952).
accessdate=June 8, 2016}}
During the 1951 season, Robinson led the National League in double plays made by a second baseman for the second year in a row, with 137.
After receiving her permission, Commissioner Bud Selig not only allowed Griffey to wear the number, but also extended an invitation to all major league teams to do the same.
The UCLA Bruins baseball team plays in Jackie Robinson Stadium, which, because of the efforts of Jackie's brother Mack, features a memorial statue of Robinson by sculptor Richard H. Ellis.
In Jacksonville, the stadium was padlocked shut without warning on game day, by order of the city's Parks and Public Property director.
Existence of the plot was leaked by the Cardinals' team physician, Robert Hyland, to a friend, the ''New York Herald Tribune'''s Rutherford "Rud" Rennie.
This parkway bisects the cemetery in close proximity to Robinson's gravesite.
His youngest son, David, who has six children, is a coffee grower and social activist in Tanzania.
While awaiting results of hospital tests on the ankle he had injured in junior college, Robinson boarded an Army bus with a fellow officer's wife; although the Army had commissioned its own unsegregated bus line, the bus driver ordered Robinson to move to the back of the bus.
In a famous three-hour exchange on August 28, 1945, Rickey asked Robinson if he could face the racial animus without taking the bait and reacting angrily—a concern given Robinson's prior arguments with law enforcement officials at PJC and in the military.
After supporting Richard Nixon in his 1960 presidential race against John F. Kennedy, Robinson later praised Kennedy effusively for his stance on civil rights.
Before Jack and I moved to Montreal, we had just been through some very rough treatment in the racially biased South during spring training in Florida.
He made his final public appearance on October 15, 1972, throwing the ceremonial first pitch before Game&nbsp;2 of the World Series.
Other teams, however, had more serious interest in signing a black ballplayer.
According to a poll conducted in 1947, Robinson was the second most popular man in the country, behind Bing Crosby.
The people were so welcoming and saw Jack as a player and as a man."
Robinson made his Royals debut at Daytona Beach's City Island Ballpark on March 17, 1946, in an exhibition game against the team's parent club, the Dodgers.
During his career, the Dodgers played in six World Series, and Robinson himself played in six All-Star Games.
Robinson's promotion met a generally positive, although mixed, reception among newspapers and white major league players.
Karl Downs to be the athletic director at Sam Huston College in Austin, then of the Southwestern Athletic Conference.
Robinson was among the 25 charter members of UCLA's Athletics Hall of Fame in 1984.
A number of buildings have been named in Robinson's honor.
In recognition of his achievements on and off the field, Robinson was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal and Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Despite the success of these two Robinsons and other black players, the number of African-American players in Major League Baseball has declined since the 1970s.
That year, Robinson was one of 10 students named to the school's Order of the Mast and Dagger (''Omicron Mu Delta''), awarded to students performing "outstanding service to the school and whose scholastic and citizenship record is worthy of recognition."
In all, Robinson played 47 games at shortstop for the Monarchs, hitting .387 with five home runs, and registering 13 stolen bases.
Robinson also has an asteroid named after him, 4319 Jackierobinson.
When he poured out that string of unconscionable abuse, he solidified and united thirty men."
The tutelage helped Robinson raise his batting average from .296 in 1948 to .342 in 1949.
Some Dodger players insinuated they would sit out rather than play alongside Robinson.
Robinson's interests began to shift toward the prospect of managing a major league team.
Washington, Strode, and Robinson made up three of the team's four backfield players.
Assessing himself, Robinson said, "I'm not concerned with your liking or disliking me&nbsp;... all I ask is that you respect me as a human being."
His best day at the plate was on June 17, when he hit two home runs and two doubles.
Complications of heart disease and diabetes weakened Robinson and made him almost blind by middle age.
By that time, however, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor had taken place, drawing the United States into World War II and ending Robinson's nascent football career.
Dodgers sportscaster Vin Scully later noted that the incident showed "how much of a competitor Robinson was."
During Robinson's first at bat, the Jersey City catcher, Dick Bouknight, demanded that Sandel throw at Robinson, but Sandel refused.
After World War II, several other forces were also leading the country toward increased equality for blacks, including their accelerated migration to the North, where their political clout grew, and President Harry Truman's desegregation of the military in 1948.
Although his former unit, the 761st Tank Battalion, became the first black tank unit to see combat in World War II, Robinson's court-martial proceedings prohibited him from being deployed overseas; thus, he never saw combat action.
Robinson's breaking of the baseball color line and his professional success symbolized these broader changes and demonstrated that the fight for equality was more than simply a political matter.
The year saw the release of a film biography of Robinson's life, ''The Jackie Robinson Story'', in which Robinson played himself, and actress Ruby Dee played Rachael "Rae" (Isum) Robinson.
In a letter read during the ceremony, Rachel Robinson, Jackie's widow, wrote: "I remember Montreal and that house very well and have always had warm feeling for that great city.
As an exception to the retired-number policy, MLB in 2007 began honoring Robinson by allowing players to wear number 42 on April 15, Jackie Robinson Day, which is now an annual observance.
He also kept the Dodgers in contention for the 1951 pennant.
Although he played well for the Monarchs, Robinson was frustrated with the experience.
Summer 1949 brought an unwanted distraction for Robinson.
The Dodgers, by playing Robinson, heralded the end of racial segregation that had relegated black players to the Negro leagues since the 1880s.
Twenty-five years after Robinson's death, the Interboro Parkway was renamed the Jackie Robinson Parkway in his memory.
In DeLand, a scheduled day game was called off, ostensibly because of faulty electrical lighting.
The reporter, concerned about projecting Hyland's anonymity and job, in turn leaked it to his ''Tribune'' colleague and editor, Stanley Woodward, whose own subsequent reporting with other sources protected Hyland.
In 1997, the United States Mint issued a Jackie Robinson commemorative silver dollar, and five dollar gold coin.
A statue by sculptor William Behrends, unveiled at KeySpan Park on November 1, 2005, commemorates this event by representing Reese with his arm around Robinson.
Robinson named Lee "Jeep" Handley, who played for the Phillies at the time, as the first opposing player to wish him well.
Among those Rickey discussed prospects with was Wendell Smith, writer for the black weekly ''Pittsburgh Courier'', who according to Cleveland Indians owner and team president Bill Veeck "influenced Rickey to take Jack Robinson, for which he's never completely gotten credit."
Robinson's presence was controversial in racially charged Florida.
Some, notably the St. Louis Cardinals, threatened to strike if Robinson played, but also to spread the walkout across the entire National League.
At Muir Tech, Robinson played several sports at the varsity level and lettered in four of them: football, basketball, track, and baseball.
He played shortstop and catcher on the baseball team, quarterback on the football team, and guard on the basketball team.
In 1954, Robinson had 62 runs, a .311 batting average, and 7 steals.
Robinson nonetheless became the target of rough physical play by opponents (particularly the Cardinals).
Robinson missed the game because manager Walter Alston decided to play Gilliam at second and Don Hoak at third base.
It would have succeeded, wrote Smith, "…if Rud Rennie and Stanley Woodward hadn't exposed their intentions in the ''New York Herald Tribune''."
While a senior at UCLA, Robinson met his future wife, Rachel Isum (born 1922), a UCLA freshman who was familiar with Robinson's athletic career at PJC.
Robinson's Hollywood exploits, however, did not sit well with Dodgers co-owner Walter O'Malley, who referred to Robinson as "Rickey's prima donna".
After the threat was exposed, National League President Ford Frick and Baseball Commissioner Happy Chandler let it be known that any striking players would be suspended.
During the last game of the regular season, in the 13th inning, he had a hit to tie the game, and then won the game with a home run in the 14th.
In 1950, Robinson led the National League in double plays made by a second baseman with 133.
'''Jack Roosevelt''' "'''Jackie'''" '''Robinson''' (January 31, 1919&nbsp;– October 24, 1972) was an American professional baseball second baseman who became the first African American to play in Major League Baseball (MLB) in the modern era.
Black fans began flocking to see the Dodgers when they came to town, abandoning their Negro league teams.
Robinson always considered his business career as advancing the cause of black people in commerce and industry.
At one time, he received a seven-inch gash in his leg from Enos Slaughter.
He was not necessarily the best player in the Negro leagues, and black talents Satchel Paige and Josh Gibson were upset when Robinson was selected first.
Because of his off-season activities, Robinson reported to training camp  overweight.
This is the United States of America and one citizen has as much right to play as another."
On the football team, he played quarterback and safety.
After the government ceased NYA operations, Robinson traveled to Honolulu in fall 1941 to play football for the semi-professional, racially integrated Honolulu Bears.
It honors Robinson with large quotations spanning the inner curve of the facade and features a large freestanding statue of his number, 42, which has become an attraction in itself.
He gratefully accepted a plaque honoring the twenty-fifth anniversary of his MLB debut, but also commented, "I'm going to be tremendously more pleased and more proud when I look at that third base coaching line one day and see a black face managing in baseball."
Robinson retired from baseball at age 37 on January 5, 1957.
The brewing mutiny ended when Dodgers management took a stand for Robinson.
After obtaining a commitment from Robinson to "turn the other cheek" to racial antagonism, Rickey agreed to sign him to a contract for $600 a month, equal to $ today.
He was a shortstop and leadoff hitter for the baseball team, and he broke school broad-jump records held by his brother Mack.
After his acquittal, he was transferred to Camp Breckinridge, Kentucky, where he served as a coach for army athletics until receiving an honorable discharge in November 1944.
He also scored four runs, drove in three, and stole two bases in the Royals' 14–1 victory.
At the November 2006 groundbreaking for a new ballpark for the New York Mets, Citi Field, it was announced that the main entrance, modeled on the one in Brooklyn's old Ebbets Field, would be called the Jackie Robinson Rotunda.
An event on July 6, 1944 derailed Robinson's military career.
"You will find that the friends that you think you have in the press box will not support you, that you will be outcasts," threatened Chandler.
During the season, Robinson pursued potential major-league interests.
Robinson Jr. eventually completed the treatment program at Daytop Village in Seymour, Connecticut, and became a counselor at the institution.
Robinson then accepted an offer from his old friend and pastor Rev.
In 1948, Reese put his arm around Robinson in response to fans who shouted racial slurs at Robinson before a game in Cincinnati.
Those who do it will encounter quick retribution.
Baseball fans also voted Robinson as the starting second baseman for the 1949 All-Star Game—the first All-Star Game to include black players.
Robinson accepted a contract for $400 per month.
By then, he had begun to exhibit the effects of diabetes, and to lose interest in the prospect of playing or managing professional baseball.
Sportswriter Dick Young, whom Robinson had described as a "bigot", said, "If there was one flaw in Jackie, it was the common one.
Robinson was reluctant to testify, but he eventually agreed to do so, fearing it might negatively affect his career if he declined.
Under the terms of the retirement, a grandfather clause allowed the handful of players who wore number 42 to continue doing so in tribute to Robinson, until such time as they subsequently changed teams or jersey numbers.
In a move paralleling that of MLB when it retired the number, UCLA allowed three athletes (in women's soccer, softball, and football) who were already wearing 42 to continue to do so for the remainder of their UCLA careers.
Robinson had an exceptional 10-year baseball career.
In 1953, Robinson had 109 runs, a .329 batting average, and 17 steals, leading the Dodgers to another National League pennant (and another World Series loss to the Yankees, this time in six games).
The tribute was continued in 2008, when, during games on April 15, all members of the Mets, Cardinals, Washington Nationals, and Tampa Bay Rays wore Robinson's number 42.
