Jacob suggested that all the spotted, speckled, and brown goats and sheep of Laban's flock, at any given moment, would be his wages.
Confused, Isaac exclaimed, "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau!"
Laban asked what he could pay Jacob.
Recent excavations in the Timna Valley dating copper mining to the 10th century BCE also discovered what may be the earliest camel bones found in Israel or even outside the Arabian peninsula, dating to around 930 BCE.
It is suggested that she realized prophetically that Isaac's blessings would go to Jacob, since she was told before the twins' birth that the older son would serve the younger.
The Qur'an makes it clear that Jacob was blessed by God as a prophet and, therefore, Muslims believe that his father, being a prophet as well, also knew of his son's greatness.
The Catholic church considers Jacob as a Saint along with other biblical patriarchs.
Genesis 27:28-29 states Isaac's blessing:  "Therefore God give thee of the dew of heavens, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine:  Let people serve thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee."
Popular English translations typically reference the face off with God, ranging from active "wrestles with God" to passive "God contends", but various other meanings have also been suggested.
While he is still called Jacob in later texts, his name Israel makes some consider him the eponymous ancestor of the Israelites.
This is seen as evidence that the stories of Abraham, Joseph, Jacob, and Esau were written after this time.
Jacob is also the protagonist of the Testament of Jacob, of the Ladder of Jacob and of the Prayer of Joseph, which interpret the experience of this Patriarch in the context of merkabah mysticism.
Thus Joseph’s half brothers were jealous of him and they ridiculed him often.
The word was that the only kingdom prospering was Egypt.
According to Steven Feldman of the Center for Online Judaic Studies, most scholars would date the stories of the patriarchs to the period of the monarchy.
He later rebuked his two sons for their anger in his deathbed blessing (Genesis 49:5-7).
In the morning, when the truth became known, Laban justified his action, saying that in his country it was unheard of to give a younger daughter before the older.
Israel then said, “Now let me die, since I have seen your face, because you are still alive.” ()
and Jacob answered simply, "I am."
When Jacob heard of these dreams, he rebuked his son for proposing the idea that the house of Jacob would even bow down to Joseph.
Isaac demanded that Jacob come close so he could feel him, but the goatskins felt just like Esau's hairy skin.
Josephus uses only the terms "angel", "divine angel", and "angel of God", describing the struggle as no small victory.
God opened Leah's womb and she gave birth to four sons rapidly: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah.
His flocks were often fed in the pastures of Shechem as well as Dothan.
'''Jacob''', later given the name '''Israel''', is regarded as a Patriarch of the Israelites.
The twelve sons became the progenitors of the "Tribes of Israel".
After Isaac sent Jacob away to find a wife, Esau realized his own Canaanite wives were evil in his father's eyes and so he took a daughter of Isaac's half-brother, Ishmael, as another wife.
As Jacob neared the land of Canaan, he sent messengers ahead to his brother Esau.
Lastly, he let Benjamin go with them and said “may God Almighty give you mercy… If I am bereaved, I am bereaved!” ()
(According to The Testaments of the Patriarchs, Testament of Naphtali, Chapter 1, lines 9-12, Bilhah and Zilpah were daughters of Rotheus and Euna, servants of Laban.)
According to the Midrash, the plural form of the word "weeping" indicates the double sorrow that Rebecca also died at this time.
Geller wrote that, "in the context of the wrestling bout, the name implies that Jacob won this supremacy, linked to that of God's, by a kind of theomachy."
(38:46) Jacob is described as a good-doer (21:72) and the Qur'an further makes it clear that God inspired Jacob to contribute towards purification and hold the contact prayer.
(38:47) The Qur'an specifically mentions that Jacob was guided (6:84) and inspired (4:163) and was chosen to enforce the awareness of the Hereafter.
He engaged in earnest prayer to God, then sent on before him a tribute of flocks and herds to Esau, "a present to my lord Esau from thy servant Jacob".
Before she sent Jacob to his father, she dressed him in Esau's garments and laid goatskins on his arms and neck to simulate hairy skin.
Israel then became angry with the loss of Joseph, Simeon, and now possibly Benjamin.
He requested that Esau go out to the fields with his weapons (quiver and bow) to kill some venison.
Bilhah gave birth to Dan and Naphtali.
The truth was, Joseph's older brothers had turned on him, apprehended him and ultimately sold into slavery on a caravan headed for Egypt.
In Thompson's ''The Historicity of the Patriarchal Narratives'', he suggests that the patriarchal narratives arose in a response to some present situation, expressed as an imaginative picture of the past to embody present hope.
Jacob buried her and erected a monument over her grave.
Nine of the sons returned to their father Israel from Egypt, stockpiled with grain on their donkeys.
(19:6) Jacob’s second mention is in the Qur'an’s second chapter.
Apparently he had some reservations about leaving the land of his forefathers, but God reassured him not to fear that he would rise again.
Jacob and his twin brother, Esau, were born to Isaac and Rebecca after 20 years of marriage, when Isaac was 60 years of age (, ).
Because the Pharaoh had such a high regard for Joseph, practically making him his equal, it was an honor to meet his father.
Yaqub (), also known as Jacob in the Old Testament, is recognized in Islam as a prophet who received inspiration from God.
According to the Book of Genesis, Jacob (;  Standard&nbsp;'''') was the third Hebrew progenitor with whom God made a covenant.
Without doubt Joseph is torn to pieces.” He rent his clothes and put sackcloth around his waist mourning for days.
Jacob then transported his family and flocks across the ford Jabbok by night, then recrossed back to send over his possessions, being left alone in communion with God.
Israel’s heart “stood still” and just couldn’t believe what he was hearing.
Some commentators say the name comes from the verb ''śārar'' ("to rule, be strong, have authority over"), thereby making the name mean "God rules" or "God judges"; or "the prince of God" (from the King James Version) or "El (God) fights/struggles".
When Rebecca heard about his murderous intentions, she ordered Jacob to travel to her brother Laban's house in Haran, until Esau's anger subsided.
The house of Jacob dwelt in Hebron, in the land of Canaan.
No one from the house of Jacob could comfort him during this time of bereavement.
She convinced Isaac to send Jacob away by telling him that she despaired of his marrying a local girl from the idol-worshipping families of Canaan (as Esau had done).
Jacob wanted to know how things were doing, so he asked Joseph to go down there and return with a report.
However, Joseph was displeased that his father’s right hand was not on the head of his firstborn, so he switched his father’s hands.
Etymologically, it has been suggested that the name "Israel" comes from the Hebrew words לִשְׂרות (lisrot, "wrestle") and אֵל (El, "God").
In Shechem, Jacob's daughter Dinah was kidnapped and raped by the ruler's son, who desired to marry the girl.
Jacob actually diverted himself to Succoth and was not recorded as rejoining Esau until, at Machpelah, the two bury their father Isaac, who lived to be 180, and was 60 years older than they were.
After 17 years in Egypt, Jacob died and Joseph carried Jacob's remains to the land of Canaan, and gave him a stately burial in the same Cave of Machpelah as were buried Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Rebecca, and Jacob's first wife, Leah.
En route, Israel stopped at Beersheba for the night to make a sacrificial offering to his God, Yahweh.
God told Jacob that he should leave, which he and his wives and children did without informing Laban.
Israel declared that they would be heirs to the inheritance of the house of Israel, as if they were his own children, just as Reuben and Simeon were.
In the majority of these references, Jacob is mentioned alongside fellow prophets and patriarchs as an ancient and pious prophet.
Although Esau sold Jacob his own birthright, which was his blessing, for "red pottage", Esau still hated Jacob for receiving his blessing that their father Isaac unknowingly had given to him.
Israel also mentioned that the money that was returned to their money sacks was probably a mistake or an oversight on their part.
As Jacob lay on his deathbed, he asked his twelve sons to testify their faith to him before he departed from this world to the next.
Literal Christian interpreters like Henry M. Morris say that the stranger was "God Himself and, therefore, Christ in His preincarnate state", citing Jacob's own evaluation and the name he assumed thereafter, "one who fights victoriously with God", and adding that God had appeared in the human form of the Angel of the Lord to eat a meal with Abraham in Genesis 18.
Along with other patriarchs his feast day is celebrated in the Byzantine rite of the Catholic Church on the Second Sunday before the Advent (December 11–17), under the title ''the Sunday of the Forefathers''.
God remembered Rachel, who gave birth to Joseph and Benjamin.
After Joseph was born, Jacob decided to return home to his parents.
Before they left, Rachel stole the ''teraphim,'' considered to be household idols, from Laban's house.
According to the second opinion, Rebekah was 14 years old at the time of their marriage, and 34 years old at the birth of Jacob and Essau.
After Joseph prepared his family for the meeting, the brothers came before the Pharaoh first, formally requesting to pasture in Egyptian lands.
Isaac then blessed Jacob with the blessing that was meant for Esau.
The realization that he had been deceived shocked Isaac, yet he acknowledged that Jacob had received the blessings by adding, "Indeed, he will be or remain blessed!"
As Isaac aged, he became blind and was uncertain when he would die, so he decided to bestow Esau's birthright upon him.
When Laban planned to deceive Jacob into marrying Leah instead of Rachel, the Midrash recounts that both Jacob and Rachel suspected that Laban would pull such a trick; Laban was known as the "Aramean" (deceiver), and changed Jacob's wages ten times during his employ (Genesis 31:7).
(12: 83, 86-87, 96) Islamic literature fleshes out the narrative of Jacob, and mentions that his wives included Rachel.
In the morning, Jacob awakened and continued on his way to Haran, after naming the place where he had spent the night "Bethel", "God's house".
Jacob himself took the foremost position.
He feared his father would curse him as soon as he felt him, but Rebecca offered to take the curse herself, then insisted that Jacob obey her.
It was still in their possession, and so they all became afraid.
In the second year of this great famine, when Israel (Jacob) was about 130 years old, he told his ten sons of Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah, to go to Egypt and buy grain.
Isaac then requested that Esau make "savory meat" for him out of the venison, according to the way he enjoyed it the most, so that he could eat it and bless Esau.
Rebecca overheard this conversation.
Jacob was finally reunited with his father Isaac in Mamre (outside Hebron).
The couple therefore devised a series of signs by which Jacob could identify the veiled bride on his wedding night.
She quickly ordered Jacob to bring her two kid goats from their flock so that he could take Esau's place in serving Isaac and receiving his blessing.
Jacob is later mentioned in the Qur'an in the context of the promise bestowed to Zechariah, regarding the birth of John the Baptist.
The prophecy also said that "the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger;"   (Genesis 25:25 KJV)
The Qur'an narrates the story of Joseph in detail, and Jacob, being Joseph's father, is mentioned thrice and is referenced another 25 times.
Jacob then demanded a blessing, and the being declared in Genesis 32:28 that, from then on, Jacob would be called יִשְׂרָאֵל, Israel (''Yisra`el'', meaning "one that struggled with the divine angel" (Josephus), "one who has prevailed with God" (Rashi), "a man seeing God" (Whiston), "he will rule as God" (Strong), or "a prince with God" (Morris), from , "prevail", "have power as a prince").
It was here, after twenty-two years, that Jacob saw his son Joseph once again.
Later that day, the report that Jacob ended up receiving came from Joseph's brothers who brought before him a coat laden with blood.
When Reuben, the eldest, mentioned that they needed to bring Benjamin to Egypt to prove their word as honest men, their father became furious with them.
They were directed to disembark at Goshen.
Finally, Joseph’s father was brought out to meet the Pharaoh.
When the time came for Rebecca to give birth, the firstborn, Esau, came out covered with red hair, as if he were wearing a hairy garment, and his heel was grasped by the hand of Jacob, the secondborn.
"...and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; but Jacob was a simple man, dwelling in tents" ().
There are two opinions in the Midrash as to how old Rebekah was at the time of her marriage and, consequently, at the twins' birth.
But Israel refused saying, “but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he.” A declaration he made, just as Israel himself was to his firstborn brother Esau.
Afterwards, Jacob named the place Penuel (''Penuw`el'', ''Peniy`el'', meaning "face of God"), saying: "I have seen God face to face and lived."
When Joseph was seventeen years old, Jacob made a long coat or tunic of many colors for him.
Jacob protested that his father would recognize their deception since Esau was hairy and he himself was smooth-skinned.
Jacob condemned this act, saying: "You have brought trouble on me by making me a stench to the Canaanites and Perizzites, the people living in this land."
Esau offered to accompany them on their way back to Israel, but Jacob protested that his children were still young and tender (born 6 to 13 years prior in the narrative); Jacob suggested eventually catching up with Esau at Mount Seir.
Jewish Apocalyptic literature of the Hellenistic period includes many ancient texts with narratives about Jacob, many times with details different from Genesis.
As a result of a severe drought in Canaan, Jacob and his sons moved to Egypt at the time when his son Joseph was viceroy.
After the meeting, the families were directed to pasture in the land of Ramses where they lived in the province of Goshen.
Zilpah gave birth to Gad and Asher.
The house of Israel acquired many possessions and multiplied exceedingly during the course of seventeen years, even through the worst of the seven-year famine.
They spoke of being accused of as spies and that their brother Simeon, had been taken prisoner.
Jacob had twelve sons and at least one daughter, by his two wives, Leah and Rachel, and by their handmaidens Bilhah and Zilpah.
The biblical account of the life of Jacob is found in the Book of Genesis, chapters 25-50.
Although the death of Rebecca, Jacob's mother, is not explicitly recorded in the Bible, Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died and was buried at Bethel, at a place that Jacob calls ''Allon Bachuth'' (אלון בכות), "Oak of Weepings" (Genesis 35:8).
They returned with the news that Esau was coming to meet Jacob with an army of 400 men.
In that case, since Isaac was 60 when Jacob and Essau were born and they had been married for 20 years, then Isaac was 40 years old when he married Rebekah (Gen. 25:20), making Rebekah 3 years old at the time of her marriage, and 23 years old at the birth of Jacob and Essau.
Jacob then made a further move while Rachel was pregnant; near Bethlehem, Rachel went into labor and died as she gave birth to her second son, Benjamin (Jacob's twelfth son).
He led the servants of Pharaoh, and the elders of the houses Israel and Egypt beyond the Jordan River to Atad where they observed seven days of mourning.
Seeing that she had left off childbearing temporarily, Leah then gave her handmaid Zilpah to Jacob in marriage so that Leah could raise more children through her.
Arriving in Haran, Jacob saw a well where shepherds were gathering their flocks to water them and met Laban's younger daughter, Rachel, Jacob's first cousin; she was working as a shepherdess.
This time, Judah spoke to his father in order to persuade him about having Benjamin accompany them, so as to prevent Egyptian retribution.
When the being saw that he did not overpower Jacob, he touched Jacob on the sinew of his thigh (the ''gid hanasheh'', גיד הנשה), and, as a result, Jacob developed a limp (Genesis 32:31).
tells the account of Esau selling his birthright to Jacob.
I will go and see him before I die.” ()
In a rage, Laban pursued Jacob for seven days.
Not too long afterward, Israel had fallen ill, losing much of his vision.
Twenty years later, throughout the Middle East a severe famine occurred like none other that lasted seven years.
Gerhard von Rad, in his ''Old Testament Theology'', seems to take a middle view, explaining that the patriarch "saga" describes actual events subsequently interpreted by the community through its own experience.
Similarly Job lost everything, and stayed patient and kept faith in God, and eventually everything was returned to him and some things were multiplied for him.
Jacob then settled in Migdal Eder, where his firstborn, Reuben, slept with Rachel's servant Bilhah; Jacob's response was not given at the time, but he did condemn Reuben for it later, in his deathbed blessing.
Then they buried him in the cave of Machpelah, the property of Abraham when he bought it from the Hittites.
Israel was embalmed and a great ceremonial journey to Canaan was prepared by Joseph.
His original name ''Ya'akov'' is sometimes explained as having meant "holder of the heel" or "supplanter", because he was born holding his twin brother Esau's heel, and eventually supplanted Esau in obtaining their father Isaac's blessing.
Looking upon the wagons he declared “Joseph my son is still alive.
N. M. Sarna indicates that an inability to precisely date the patriarchs, according to the present state of knowledge does not necessarily invalidate the historicity of the narratives.
When Laban reached Rachel's tent, she hid the ''teraphim'' by sitting on them and stating she could not get up because she was menstruating.
Jacob is mentioned 16 times in the Qur'an.
The Pharaoh honored their stay and even made the notion that if there were any competent men in their house, then they may elect a chief herdsman to oversee Egyptian livestock.
Jacob did as his mother instructed and, when he returned with the kids, Rebekah made the savory meat that Isaac loved.
Jacob's twelve sons, named in Genesis, were Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and Benjamin.
When their father came out to meet them, his sons told him that Joseph was still alive, that he was the governor over all of Egypt and that he wanted the house of Israel to move to Egypt.
This incident is the source of the mitzvah of porging.
As time passed, Laban's sons noticed that Jacob was taking the better part of their flocks, and so Laban's friendly attitude towards Jacob began to change.
The more important are the book of Jubilees and the Book of Biblical Antiquities.
Still trying to get at the truth, Isaac asked him directly, "Art thou my very son Esau?"
The first is the role he plays in the story of his son Joseph.
Jacob placed peeled rods of poplar, hazel, and chestnut within the flocks' watering holes or troughs, an action he later attributes to a dream.
They embraced each other and wept together for quite a while.
In contrast to the Judeo-Christian view of Jacob, one main difference is that the story of Jacob's blessing, in which he deceives Isaac, is not accepted in Islam.
In the narrative, Jacob does not trust some of his older sons (12: 11, 18, 23) because they do not respect him.
Muslims believe that he preached the same monotheistic faith as his forefathers ʾIbrāhīm, ʾIsḥāq and Ismā'īl.
The Hebrew Bible says at  and , that God changed Jacob's name to Israel.
Afterward, Israel died and the family, including the Egyptians, mourned him seventy days.
Yet, he contemplated his son’s words about these dreams.
Continuing their journey to Egypt, when they approached in proximity, Israel sent his son Judah ahead to find out where the caravans were to stop.
That is one obvious, but not universally held, interpretation of .
Joseph swore to do as his father asked of him.
The night before he caught up to him, God appeared to Laban in a dream and warned him not to say anything good or bad to Jacob.
The offspring of Jacob's sons became the tribes of Israel following the Exodus, when the Israelites conquered and settled in the Land of Israel.
With great apprehension, Jacob prepared for the worst.
Following the example of Sarah, who gave her handmaid to Abraham after years of infertility, Rachel gave Jacob her handmaid, Bilhah, in marriage so that Rachel could raise children through her.
Scholars such as Thomas L. Thompson view the patriarchical narratives, including the life of Jacob, as late (6th and 5th centuries BCE) literary compositions that have ideological and theological purposes but are unreliable for historical reconstruction of the presettlement period of Israel’s past.
Laban agreed to the arrangement.
Rather, he requested to be carried to the land of Canaan to be buried with his forefathers.
Jacob is also cited in the ''Hadith'' as an example of one who was patient and trusting in God in the face of suffering.
According to the Sages, this was a prophetic reference to the End of Days, when Jacob's descendants will come to Mount Seir, the home of Edom, to deliver judgment against Esau's descendants for persecuting them throughout the millennia (see ).
Of all the children in his household, he loved Rachel’s firstborn son, Joseph, the most.
He vowed to kill Jacob as soon as Isaac died.
Laban the Aramean was reluctant to release him, as God had blessed his flock on account of Jacob.
(Esau referred to the dish as "that same red pottage", giving rise to his nickname,  (''`Edom'', meaning "Red").)
He couldn’t understand how they were put in a position to tell the Egyptians all about their family.
It turned out that Joseph, who identified his brothers in Egypt, was able to secretly return that money that they used to pay for the grain, back to them.
Some commentators cite this placement as proof that Jacob continued to favor Joseph over Leah's children, as presumably the rear position would have been safer from a frontal assault by Esau, which Jacob feared.
In the morning, Jacob assembled his 4 wives and 11 sons, placing the maidservants and their children in front, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph in the rear.
Moreover, the attitudes of their parents toward them also differed: "And Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison: but Rebecca loved Jacob."
He is acknowledged as a patriarch of Islam.
Other scholars speculate that the name is derived from a longer form such as  (''Ya'aqov'el'') meaning "may God protect".
The second son they named יעקב, Jacob (Ya`aqob or Ya`aqov, meaning "heel-catcher", "supplanter", "leg-puller", "he who follows upon the heels of one", from , ''`aqab'' or ''`aqav'', "seize by the heel", "circumvent", "restrain", a wordplay upon , ''`iqqebah'' or ''`iqqbah'', "heel").
The boys displayed very different natures as they matured.
According to the Qur'an, Jacob remained in the company of the elect throughout his life.
Because the terminology is ambiguous ("el" in ''Yisra`el'') and inconsistent, and because this being refused to reveal his name, there are varying views as to whether he was a man, an angel, or God.
However, he agreed to give Rachel in marriage as well if Jacob would work another seven years.
They relayed to their father all that had happened in Egypt.
(2:132) Each son testified in front of Jacob that they would promise to remain Muslim (in submission to God) until the day of their death, that is they would surrender their wholeselves to God alone and would worship only Him.
Jacob returned to Bethel, where he had another vision of blessing.
According to the traditional counting cited by Rashi, Isaac was 37 years old at the time of the Binding of Isaac, and news of Rebekah's birth reached Abraham immediately after that event.
In addition, Jacob also adopted the two sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim.
Then Israel laid his right hand on the younger Ephraim’s head and his left hand on the eldest Manasseh’s head and blessed Joseph.
Rebekah was uncomfortable during her pregnancy and went to inquire of God why she was suffering.
Sometime afterward, the sons of Jacob by Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah, were feeding his flocks in Shechem.
Israel (Jacob) was 147 years old when he called to his favorite son Joseph and pleaded that he not be buried in Egypt.
A conservative interpretation is that, at Isaac's burial, Jacob obtained the records of Esau, who had been married 80 years prior, and incorporated them into his own family records, and that Moses augmented and published them.
But when Rachel saw her sister being taken out to the wedding canopy, her heart went out to her for the public shame Leah would suffer if she were exposed.
Esau was heartbroken by the deception and begged for his own blessing.
Jacob is mentioned in a number of sacred scriptures, including the Hebrew Bible, the New Testament, the Talmud, the Quran, the Book of Mormon and Bahá'í scripture.
