To answer the question about the "exceptional violence," the compulsive "ferocity," and the "exaggeration" of the "attacks," he would say that these critics organize and practice in his case "a sort of obsessive personality cult which philosophers should know how to question and above all to moderate".
Derrida was a regular visiting professor at several other major American and European universities, including Johns Hopkins University, Yale University, New York University, Stony Brook University and The New School for Social Research.
* He met with Palestinian intellectuals during a 1988 visit to Jerusalem.
He insisted that Derrida's conception of ''iterability'' and its alleged "corrupting" effect on meaning stems from Derrida's ignorance of the type–token distinction that exists in current linguistics and philosophy of language.
''Of Spirit'' is an important contribution to the long debate on Heidegger's Nazism and appeared at the same time as the French publication of a book by a previously unknown Chilean writer, Victor Farías, who charged that Heidegger's philosophy amounted to a wholehearted endorsement of the Nazi ''Sturmabteilung'' (SA) faction.
Searle also argued that Derrida's disagreement with Austin turned on his having misunderstood Austin's type–token distinction and his failure to understand Austin's concept of failure in relation to performativity.
Particularly in his later writings, Derrida addressed ethical and political themes in his work.
Derrida differed from other participants by his lack of explicit commitment to structuralism, having already been critical of the movement.
Prof. Dr. Peter Hommelhoff, Rector at Heidelberg by that time, would summarize Derrida's place as: "Beyond the boundaries of philosophy as an academic discipline he was a leading intellectual figure not only for the humanities but for the cultural perception of a whole age."
Derrida insisted that a distinct political undertone had pervaded his texts from the very beginning of his career.
Later editions of ''The Heidegger Controversy'' by MIT Press also omitted the Derrida interview.
Some critics consider ''Speech and Phenomena'' (1967) to be his most important work.
His first lengthy academic manuscript, written as a dissertation for his ''diplôme d'études supérieures'' and submitted in 1954, concerned the work of Edmund Husserl.
With "Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences", his contribution to a 1966 colloquium on structuralism at Johns Hopkins University, his work began to gain international prominence.
He called Farías a weak reader of Heidegger's thought, adding that much of the evidence Farías and his supporters touted as new had long been known within the philosophical community.
Derrida is best known for developing a form of semiotic analysis known as deconstruction, which he discussed in numerous texts, and developed in the context of phenomenology.
In a 1991 interview Derrida commented on a similar verse, also from book IV of the same Gide work: "I hated the homes, the families, all the places where man thinks to find rest" (''Je haïssais les foyers, les familles, tous lieux où l'homme pense trouver un repos'').
Bennington, Brault, Kamuf, Naas, Elizabeth Rottenberg, and David Wills are currently engaged in translating Derrida's previously unpublished seminars, which span from 1959 to 2003.
In 1994, Searle argued that the ideas upon which ''deconstruction'' is founded are essentially a consequence of a series of conceptual confusions made by Derrida as a result of his outdated knowledge or are merely banalities.
His book, ''Adieu à Emmanuel Lévinas'', reveals his mentorship by this philosopher and Talmudic scholar who practiced the phenomenological encounter with the Other in the form of the Face, which commanded human response.
Others, however, including Derrida himself, have argued that much of the philosophical work done in his "political turn" can be dated to earlier essays.
Derrida utilized Bracha L. Ettinger's interpretation of Lévinas' notion of femininity and transformed his own earlier reading of this subject respectively.
He praised the accomplishments of structuralism but also maintained reservations about its internal limitations; this has led US academics to label his thought as a form of post-structuralism.
Derrida suggested in an interview that part of the reason for the attacks on his work, was that it questioned and modified "the rules of the dominant discourse, it tries to politicize and democratize education and the university scene."
in particular, which inspired Derrida as an adolescent, is a famous verse from Gide's ''Les nourritures terrestres'', book IV.
Crucial readings in his adolescence were Rousseau's ''Reveries of a Solitary Walker'' and ''Confessions'', André Gide's journal, ''La porte étroite'', ''Les nourritures terrestres'' and ''The Immoralist''; and the works of Friedrich Nietzsche.
In an appendix added to the 1972 edition of his ''History of Madness'', Foucault disputed Derrida's interpretation of his work, and accused Derrida of practicing "a historically well-determined little pedagogy ... which teaches the student that there is nothing outside the text .... A pedagogy which inversely gives to the voice of the masters that infinite sovereignty that allows it indefinitely to re-say the text."
According to Searle, the consistent pattern of Derrida's rhetoric is:
With his Nazi political engagement in 1933, however, Heidegger came out as a champion of the "German Spirit," and only withdrew from an exalting interpretation of the term in 1953.
In 1995, Searle gave a brief reply to Derrida in ''The Construction of Social Reality''.
Perhaps Derrida's most quoted and famous assertion, which appears in an essay on Rousseau in his book ''Of Grammatology'' (1967), is the statement that "there is no out-of-context" (''il n'y a pas de hors-texte'').
In the late 1940s, he attended the  and the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, where his professor of philosophy was Étienne Borne.
In 1986 Derrida became Professor of the Humanities at the University of California, Irvine, where he taught until shortly before his death in 2004.
He secretly skipped school for a year rather than attend the Jewish lycée formed by displaced teachers and students, and also took part in numerous football competitions (he dreamed of becoming a professional player).
(a) announce a preposterous thesis, e.g.
Claiming that a clear sender of Searle's message could not be established, he suggested that Searle had formed with Austin a ''société à responsabilité limitée'' (a "limited liability company") due to the ways in which the ambiguities of authorship within Searle's reply circumvented the very speech act of his reply.
Derrida mentioned, in particular, "everything I say about the media, technology, the spectacle, and the 'criticism of the show', so to speak, and the markets – the becoming-a-spectacle of everything, and the exploitation of the spectacle."
Searle explains, "When Derrida writes about the philosophy of language he refers typically to Rousseau and Condillac, not to mention Plato.
Searle agreed with Derrida's proposal that intentionality presupposes iterability, but did not apply the same concept of intentionality used by Derrida, being unable or unwilling to engage with the continental conceptual apparatus.
Searle was particularly hostile to Derrida's deconstructionist framework and much later refused to let his response to Derrida be printed along with Derrida's papers in the 1988 collection ''Limited Inc''.
He is one of the major figures associated with post-structuralism and postmodern philosophy.
His parents, Haïm Aaron Prosper Charles (Aimé) Derrida (1896–1970) and Georgette Sultana Esther Safar (1901–1991), named him "Jackie", "which they considered to be an American name", though he would later adopt a more "correct" version of his first name when he moved to Paris; some reports indicate that he was named Jackie after the American child actor Jackie Coogan, who had become well-known around the world via his role in the 1921 Charlie Chaplin film ''The Kid''.
On the first day of the school year in 1942, French administrators in Algeria — implementing anti-Semitic quotas set by the Vichy government — expelled Derrida from his lycée.
The level of hostility can be seen from Searle's statement that "It would be a mistake to regard Derrida's discussion of Austin as a confrontation between two prominent philosophical traditions", to which Derrida replied that that sentence was "the only sentence of the "reply" to which I can subscribe".
By questioning the dominant discourses, and trying to modify them, he attempted to democratize the university scene and to politicize it.
On Derrida's scholarship and writing style, Noam Chomsky wrote "I found the scholarship appalling, based on pathetic misreading; and the argument, such as it was, failed to come close to the kinds of standards I've been familiar with since virtually childhood".
He became a well-known and influential public figure, while his approach to philosophy and the notorious difficulty of his work made him controversial.
He received the 2001 Adorno-Preis from the University of Frankfurt.
During his career Derrida published more than 40 books, together with hundreds of essays and public presentations.
Derrida, in his response to Searle ( in ''Limited Inc''), ridiculed Searle's positions.
* He protested against the death penalty, dedicating his seminar in his last years to the production of a non-utilitarian argument for its abolition, and was active in the campaign to free Mumia Abu-Jamal.
And in his 1972 essay ''Signature Event Context'' he said:
* In 1981 Derrida, on the prompting of Roger Scruton and others, founded the French Jan Hus association with structuralist historian Jean-Pierre Vernant.
Derrida was born at daybreak on July 15, 1930, in a summer home in El Biar (Algiers), Algeria, into a Sephardic Jewish family (originally from Toledo) that became French in 1870 when the Crémieux Decree granted full French citizenship to the indigenous Arabic-speaking Jews of Algeria.
Twenty-four academics, belonging to different schools and groups – often in disagreement with each other and with deconstruction – signed a letter addressed to ''The New York Review of Books'', in which they expressed their indignation for the magazine's behaviour as well as that of Sheenan and Wolin.
On several occasions Derrida has acknowledged his debt to Husserl and Heidegger, and stated that without them he would have not said a single word.
His papers were filed in the university archives.
His elder brother Paul Moïse died at less than three months old, the year before Derrida was born, leading him to suspect throughout his life his role as a replacement for his deceased brother.''''
Searle considered the omission of parasitic discourse forms to be justified by the narrow scope of Austin's inquiry.
Derrida received a grant for studies at Harvard University, and he spent the 1956–1957 academic year reading Joyce's ''Ulysses'' at the Widener Library.
Derrida approaches texts as constructed around binary oppositions which all speech has to articulate if it intends to make any sense whatsoever.
In 1964, on the recommendation of Louis Althusser and Jean Hyppolite, Derrida got a permanent teaching position at the ENS, which he kept until 1984.
Derrida traveled widely and held a series of visiting and permanent positions.
* He registered his concerns against the proliferation of nuclear weapons in 1984.
Many elements of Derrida's thought were already present in this work.
He in turn describes logocentrism as phallocratic, patriarchal and masculinist.
Carlo Ginzburg briefly labeled Derrida's criticism in ''Cogito and the History of Madness'', as "facile, nihilistic objections," without giving further argumentation.
His reading also included Camus and Sartre.
In another essay in ''Writing and Difference'' entitled "Violence and Metaphysics: An Essay on the Thought of Emmanuel Levinas", the roots of another major theme in Derrida's thought emerges: the Other as opposed to the Same "Deconstructive analysis deprives the present of its prestige and exposes it to something ''tout autre'', "wholly other," beyond what is foreseeable from the present, beyond the horizon of the "same"."
Derrida takes Searle to task for his attempt to get around this issue by grounding final authority in the speaker's inaccessible "intention".
I have the challenge of trying to be unpredictable after him, which is impossible... so I'll try to pretend to be unpredictable after Geoff.
In recent years, a number of translations have appeared by Michael Naas (also a Derrida scholar) and Pascale-Anne Brault.
The phrase ''Families, I hate you!''
In June 1957, he married the psychoanalyst Marguerite Aucouturier in Boston.
He called Derrida's conclusion "preposterous" and stated that "Derrida, as far as I can tell, does not have an argument.
Derrida argues that intention cannot possibly govern how an iteration signifies, once it becomes hearable or readable.
Deconstruction is an attempt to expose and undermine such metaphysics.
Derrida attempts to approach the very heart of the Western intellectual tradition, characterizing this tradition as "a search for a transcendental being that serves as the origin or guarantor of meaning".
Some critics have suggested that Searle, by being so grounded in the analytical tradition that he was unable to engage with Derrida's continental phenomenological tradition, was at fault for the unsuccessful nature of the exchange.
(c) when the reformulation from ''(b)'' is acknowledged then proceed as if the ''original'' formulation from ''(a)'' was accepted.
He argued that Austin had missed the fact that any speech event is framed by a "structure of absence" (the words that are left unsaid due to contextual constraints) and by "iterability" (the constraints on what can be said, given by what has been said in the past).
Paul R. Gross and Norman Levitt also criticized his work for misusing scientific terms and concepts in ''Higher Superstition: The Academic Left and Its Quarrels With Science'' (1994).
Geoffrey Bennington, Avital Ronell and Samuel Weber belong to a group of Derrida translators.
Many of Derrida's translators are esteemed thinkers in their own right.
Derrida called his challenge to the assumptions of Western culture "deconstruction".
Rather, any claims about de Man's work should be understood in relation to the entire body of his scholarship.
Derrida responded to Farías in an interview, "Heidegger, the Philosopher's Hell" and a subsequent article, "Comment donner raison?
By 2000, theorizing "democracy to come," and thinking the limitations of existing democracies, had become important concerns.
Derrida in turn responded to Sheehan and Wolin, in "The Work of Intellectuals and the Press (The Bad Example: How the New York Review of Books and Company do Business)," which was published in the book ''Points...''.
On multiple occasions, Derrida referred to himself as a historian.
With François Châtelet and others he in 1983 co-founded the Collège international de philosophie (CIPH), an institution intended to provide a location for philosophical research which could not be carried out elsewhere in the academia.
In his 1989 ''Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity'', Richard Rorty argues that Derrida (especially in his book, ''The Post Card: From Socrates to Freud and Beyond'', one section of which is an experiment in fiction) purposefully uses words that cannot be defined (e.g., ''différance''), and uses previously definable words in contexts diverse enough to make understanding impossible, so that the reader will never be able to contextualize Derrida's literary self.
Derrida became full professor (''directeur d'études'') at the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales in Paris from 1984 (he had been elected at the end of 1983).
Derrida continued to produce readings of literature, writing extensively on Maurice Blanchot, Paul Celan, and others.
Having started as a student of de Man, Gayatri Spivak took on the translation of ''Of Grammatology'' early in her career and has since revised it into a second edition.
Derrida's method consisted in demonstrating the forms and varieties of this originary complexity, and their multiple consequences in many fields.
In 1968, he published his influential essay "Plato's Pharmacy" in the French journal ''Tel Quel'' .
Derrida began his career examining the limits of phenomenology.
The conference was also where he met Paul de Man, who would be a close friend and source of great controversy, as well as where he first met the French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan, with whose work Derrida enjoyed a mixed relationship.
Those who argue Derrida engaged in an "ethical turn" refer to works such as ''The Gift of Death'' as evidence that he began more directly applying deconstruction to the relationship between ethics and religion.
He continued arguing how problematic was establishing the relation between "nonfiction or standard discourse" and "fiction," defined as its "parasite, “for part of the most originary essence of the latter is to allow fiction, the simulacrum, parasitism, to take place-and in so doing to "de-essentialize" itself as it were”.
Derrida wrote on both of them, including a long book on Nancy: ''Le Toucher, Jean-Luc Nancy'' (''On Touching—Jean-Luc Nancy'', 2005).
Critics of Derrida have argued that he minimizes the antisemitic character of de Man's writing.
Derrida questioned assumptions of the Western philosophical tradition and also more broadly Western culture.
He also influenced architecture (in the form of deconstructivism), music, art, and art criticism.
In 1991 he published ''The Other Heading'', in which he discussed the concept of identity (as in cultural identity, European identity, and national identity), in the name of which in Europe have been unleashed "the worst violences," "the crimes of xenophobia, racism, anti-Semitism, religious or nationalist fanaticism."
The attempt to "ground the meaning relations constitutive of the world in an instance that itself lies outside all relationality" was referred to by Heidegger as logocentrism, and Derrida argues that the philosophical enterprise is ''essentially'' logocentric, and that this is a paradigm inherited from Judaism and Hellenism.
One "infelicity," for instance, occurs when it cannot be known whether a given speech act is "sincere" or "merely citational" (and therefore possibly ironic, etc.).
Derrida's contemporary readings of Emmanuel Levinas, Walter Benjamin, Carl Schmitt, Jan Patočka, on themes such as law, justice, responsibility, and friendship, had a significant impact on fields beyond philosophy.
Texts cited as evidence of such a turn include ''Force of Law'' (1990), as well as ''Specters of Marx'' (1994) and ''Politics of Friendship'' (1994).
In other words, every structural or "synchronic" phenomenon has a history, and the structure cannot be understood without understanding its genesis.
Jean-Luc Nancy, Richard Rorty, Geoffrey Hartman, Harold Bloom, Rosalind Krauss, Hélène Cixous, Julia Kristeva, Duncan Kennedy, Gary Peller, Drucilla Cornell, Alan Hunt, Hayden White, Mario Kopić, and Alun Munslow are some of the authors who have been influenced by deconstruction.
He would finally argue that the indispensable question would then become:
Derrida was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
In garbling his message Derrida is attempting to escape the naïve, positive metaphysical projects of his predecessors.
Beyond these explicit political interventions, however, Derrida was engaged in rethinking politics and the political itself, within and beyond philosophy.
Derrida argues that every iteration is necessarily "citational," due to the graphematic nature of speech and writing, and that language could not work at all without the ever-present and ineradicable possibility of such alternate readings.
It is this thought of originary complexity that sets Derrida's work in motion, and from which all of its terms are derived, including "deconstruction".
Late in his life, Derrida participated in making two biographical documentaries, ''D'ailleurs, Derrida'' (''Derrida's Elsewhere'') by Safaa Fathy (1999), and ''Derrida'' by Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering Kofman (2002).
This originary complexity must not be understood as an original ''positing'', but more like a default of origin, which Derrida refers to as iterability, inscription, or textuality.
The revised idea—-for example—-that ''everything exists in some context'' is a banality but a charade ensues as if the original claim--''nothing exists outside of text'' ''sic''--had been established.
The effect of Derrida's paper was such that by the time the conference proceedings were published in 1970, the title of the collection had become ''The Structuralist Controversy''.
He achieved this by conducting thorough, careful, sensitive, and yet transformational readings of philosophical and literary texts, to determine what aspects of those texts run counter to their apparent systematicity (structural unity) or intended sense (authorial genesis).
It follows the shifting role of ''Geist'' (spirit) through Heidegger's work, noting that, in 1927, "spirit" was one of the philosophical terms that Heidegger set his sights on dismantling.
In this work, Derrida interprets passages from the Bible, particularly on Abraham and the Sacrifice of Isaac,  and from Søren Kierkegaard's ''Fear and Trembling''.
Critical obituaries of Derrida were published in ''The New York Times'', ''The Economist'', and ''The Independent''.
Following the war, from 1960 to 1964, Derrida taught philosophy at the Sorbonne, where he was an assistant of Suzanne Bachelard (daughter of Gaston), Georges Canguilhem, Paul Ricœur (who in these years coined the term ''school of suspicion'') and Jean Wahl.
Derrida often worked in a collaborative arrangement, allowing his prolific output to be translated into English in a timely fashion.
He considers "four guiding threads" of Heideggerian philosophy that form "the knot of this ''Geflecht'' braid": "the question of the question," "the essence of technology," "the discourse of animality," and "epochality" or "the hidden teleology or the narrative order."
In his brief reply to Derrida, "Reiterating the Differences: A Reply to Derrida", Searle argued that Derrida's critique was unwarranted because it assumed that Austin's theory attempted to give a full account of language and meaning when its aim was much narrower.
Derrida once explained that this assertion "which for some has become a sort of slogan, in general so badly understood, of deconstruction (...) means nothing else: there is nothing outside context.
It was followed by an exchange of letters.
In 1965 Derrida began an association with the ''Tel Quel'' group of literary and philosophical theorists, which lasted for seven years.
After visiting the Husserl Archive in Leuven, Belgium (1953–1954), he completed his master's degree in philosophy ('''') on Edmund Husserl (see below).
The magazine ''The Nation'' responded to the NYT obituary saying that "even though American papers had scorned and trivialized Derrida before, the tone seemed particularly caustic for an obituary of an internationally acclaimed philosopher who had profoundly influenced two generations of American humanities scholars."
He then passed the highly competitive ''agrégation'' exam in 1956.
Derrida seems to have viewed Bennington in particular as a kind of rabbinical explicator, noting at the end of the "Applied Derrida" conference, held at the University of Luton in 1995 that: "everything has been said and, as usual, Geoff Bennington has said everything before I have even opened my mouth.
In 1991, when Wolin published a Derrida interview on Heidegger in the first edition of ''The Heidegger Controversy'', Derrida argued that the interview was an intentionally malicious mistranslation, which was "demonstrably execrable" and "weak, simplistic, and compulsively aggressive".
Derrida argued that the focus on intentionality in speech-act theory was misguided because intentionality is restricted to that which is already established as a possible intention.
Derrida refers to his procedure for uncovering and unsettling these dichotomies as deconstruction of Western culture.
Others cite ''Of Grammatology, Writing and Difference'', and ''Margins of Philosophy''.
Barbara Johnson's translation of Derrida's ''Dissimination'' was published by The Athlone Press in 1981.
Commentators have frequently interpreted the exchange as a prominent example of a confrontation between analytical and continental philosophy.
* In the 2002 French presidential election he refused to vote in the run-off between far right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen and Jacques Chirac, citing a lack of acceptable choices.
Rorty, however, argues that this intentional obfuscation is philosophically grounded.
Derrida was the third of five children.
This "logocentrism," Derrida argues, creates "marked" or hierarchized binary oppositions that have an effect on everything from our conception of speech's relation to writing to our understanding of racial difference.
Derrida delivered a eulogy at Levinas' funeral, later published as ''Adieu à Emmanuel Lévinas'', an appreciation and exploration of Levinas's moral philosophy.
He was active in the collective "89 for equality", which campaigned for the right of foreigners to vote in local elections.
"there is no outside-text" (''il n'y a pas de hors-texte'');
''Memoires for Paul de Man'', a book-length lecture series presented first at Yale and then at Irvine as Derrida's Wellek Lecture, followed in 1986, with a revision in 1989 that included "Like the Sound of the Sea Deep Within a Shell: Paul de Man's War".
A second son, Jean, was born in 1967.
In 1962 he published ''Edmund Husserl's Origin of Geometry: An Introduction'', which contained his own translation of Husserl's essay.
Although his membership in Class IV, Section 1 (Philosophy and Religious Studies) was rejected; he was subsequently elected to Class IV, Section 3 (Literary Criticism, including Philology).
Volumes I and II of ''The Beast and the Sovereign'' (presenting Derrida's seminars from December 12, 2001 to March 27, 2002 and from December 11, 2002 to March 26, 2003), as well as ''The Death Penalty, Volume I'' (covering December 8, 1999 to March 22, 2000), have appeared in English translation.
While sympathetic to Austin's departure from a purely denotational account of language to one that includes "force", Derrida was sceptical of the framework of normativity employed by Austin.
In the end the protesters were outnumbered—336 votes to 204—when Cambridge put the motion to a vote; though almost all of those voting in favour were not from the philosophy faculty.
In the interviews collected in ''Positions'' (1972), Derrida said: "In this essay the problematic of writing was already in place as such, bound to the irreducible structure of 'deferral' in its relationships to consciousness, presence, science, history and the history of science, the disappearance or delay of the origin, etc.
The university had sued in an attempt to get manuscripts and correspondence from Derrida's widow and children that it believed the philosopher had promised to UC Irvine's collection, although it dropped the suit in 2007.
* While supportive of the American government in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 9/11, he opposed the 2003 invasion of Iraq (see ''Rogues'' and his contribution to ''Philosophy in a Time of Terror'' with Giovanna Borradori and Jürgen Habermas).
Some have argued that Derrida's work took a "political turn" in the 1990s.
He sees these often unacknowledged assumptions as part of a "metaphysics of presence" to which philosophy has bound itself.
Other than Rousseau, Husserl, Heidegger and Levinas, these three books discussed, and/or relied upon, the works of many philosophers and authors, including linguist Saussure, Hegel, Foucault, Bataille, Descartes, anthropologist Lévi-Strauss, paleontologist Leroi-Gourhan, psychoanalyst Freud, and writers such as Jabès and Artaud.
The matter achieved public exposure owing to a friendly review of Wolin's book by Thomas Sheehan that appeared in ''The New York Review of Books'', in which Sheehan characterised Derrida's protests as an imposition of censorship.
Other influences upon Derrida are Martin Heidegger, Plato, Søren Kierkegaard, Alexandre Kojève, Maurice Blanchot, Antonin Artaud, Roland Barthes, Georges Bataille, Edmund Husserl, Emmanuel Lévinas, Ferdinand de Saussure, Sigmund Freud, Karl Marx, Claude Lévi-Strauss, James Joyce, Samuel Beckett, J. L. Austin and Stéphane Mallarmé.
As Searle explains, "Most importantly, from the fact that different tokens of a sentence type can be uttered on different occasions with different intentions, that is, different speaker meanings, nothing of any significance follows about the original speaker meaning of the original utterance token."
He simply declares that there is nothing outside of texts..." Searle's reference here is not to anything forwarded in the debate, but to a mistranslation of the phrase "''il n'y a pas dehors du texte''," ("There is no outside-text") which appears in Derrida's ''Of Grammatology''.
″"''il n'y a pas de hors-texte''" means nothing else: there is nothing outside contexts";
Searle also wrote in ''The New York Review of Books'' that he was surprised by "the low level of philosophical argumentation, the deliberate obscurantism of the prose, the wildly exaggerated claims, and the constant striving to give the appearance of profundity by making claims that seem paradoxical, but under analysis often turn out to be silly or trivial."
In 1985 Sylviane Agacinski gave birth to Derrida's third child, Daniel.
Ultimately, fourteen essays were collected into ''The Work of Mourning'' (2001), which was expanded in the 2003 French edition, ''Chaque fois unique, la fin du monde'' (literally, "The end of the world, unique each time"), to include essays dedicated to Gérard Granel and Maurice Blanchot.
In the 1980s, during the American culture wars, conservatives started a dispute over Derrida's influence and legacy upon American intellectuals, and claimed that he influenced American literary critics and theorists more than academic philosophers.
This, in turn, caused Derrida to criticize Searle for not being sufficiently familiar with phenomenological perspectives on intentionality.
In the early 1960s, Derrida began speaking and writing publicly, addressing the most topical debates at the time.
In the early 1970s, Searle had a brief exchange with Jacques Derrida regarding speech-act theory.
This approach to text is, in a broad sense, influenced by the semiology of Ferdinand de Saussure.
Derrida spent his youth in Algiers and in El-Biar.
He died during surgery in a hospital in Paris in the early hours of October 9, 2004.
Derrida's philosophical friends, allies, and students included Paul de Man, Jean-François Lyotard, Michel Foucault, Louis Althusser, Emmanuel Levinas, Maurice Blanchot, Gilles Deleuze, Jean-Luc Nancy, Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, Sarah Kofman, Hélène Cixous, Bernard Stiegler, Alexander García Düttmann, Joseph Cohen, Geoffrey Bennington, Jean-Luc Marion, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Raphael Zagury-Orly, Jacques Ehrmann, Avital Ronell, Judith Butler, Ernesto Laclau, Samuel Weber and Catherine Malabou.
Searle did not reply.
His work still has a major influence in the academe of Continental Europe, South America and all other countries where continental philosophy is predominant, particularly in debates around ontology, epistemology (especially concerning social sciences), ethics, aesthetics, hermeneutics, and the philosophy of language.
The text of Derrida's defense was based on an abandoned draft thesis he had prepared in 1957 under the direction of Jean Hyppolite at the ENS titled "The Ideality of the Literary Object" ("L'idéalité de l’objet littéraire"); his 1980 dissertation was subsequently published in English translation as "The Time of a Thesis: Punctuations".
With his detailed readings of works from Plato to Rousseau to Heidegger, Derrida frequently argues that Western philosophy has uncritically allowed metaphorical depth models to govern its conception of language and consciousness.
The exchange was characterized by a degree of mutual hostility between the philosophers, each of whom accused the other of having misunderstood his basic points.
Among the questions asked in these essays are "What is 'meaning', what are its historical relationships to what is purportedly identified under the rubric 'voice' as a value of presence, presence of the object, presence of meaning to consciousness, self-presence in so called living speech and in self-consciousness?"
Three quarrels (or disputes) in particular went out of academic circles and received international mass media coverage: the 1972–88 quarrel with John Searle, the analytic philosophers' pressures on Cambridge University not to award Derrida an honorary degree and a dispute with Richard Wolin and the NYRB.
Among the places in which Derrida mentions the ''Spectacle'', a 1997 interview about the notion of the intellectual.
Nevertheless, the attempt to understand the political implications of notions of responsibility, reason of state, the other, decision, sovereignty, Europe, friendship, difference, faith, and so on, became much more marked from the early 1990s on.
Derrida was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 2003, which reduced his speaking and travelling engagements.
In the October 2002, at the theatrical opening of the film ''Derrida'', he said that, in many ways, he felt more and more close to Guy Debord's work, and that this closeness appears in Derrida's texts.
In this adolescent period, Derrida found in the works of philosophers and writers (such as Rousseau, Nietzsche, and Gide) an instrument of revolt against family and society.
On some occasions, Derrida referred to deconstruction as a radicalization of a certain spirit of Marxism.
All speech acts borrow a language whose significance is determined by historical-linguistic context, and by the alternate possibilities that this context makes possible.
Commenting on Derrida's ''Specters of Marx'', Terry Eagleton wrote "The portentousness is ingrained in the very letter of this book, as one theatrically inflected rhetorical question tumbles hard on the heels of another in a tiresomely mannered syntax which lays itself wide open to parody."
His wife, Marguerite, gave birth to their first child, Pierre, in 1963.
He was awarded honorary doctorates by the University of Cambridge (1992), Columbia University, The New School for Social Research, the University of Essex, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, the University of Silesia, the University of Coimbra and many others around the world.
In a paper entitled ''Ghostwriting'' Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak—the translator of Derrida's ''De la grammatologie'' (''Of Grammatology'') into English—criticised Derrida's understanding of Marx.
(b) when challenged on ''(a)'' respond that you have been misunderstood and revise the claim in ''(a)'' such that it becomes a truism, e.g.
Derrida received increasing attention in the United States after 1972, where he was a regular visiting professor and lecturer at several major American universities.
Derrida asks, "What of this meantime?"
