The icon of Jagannath is a carved and decorated wooden stump with large round eyes and with stumps as hands, with the conspicuous absence of legs.
The conglomerate of Jagannath, Balabhadra, Subhadra and Sudarshan Chakra worshipped together on a common platform are called the Chaturdha Murty or the "Four-fold Form".
According to the "Niladri Mahodaya" Idol of Jagannath is placed on the Chakra Yantra, the idol of Balabhadra on the Shankha Yantra and the idol of Subhadra on the Padma Yantra.
The tantric literary texts identify Jagannath with Mahabhairav.
A traveling pilgrim came before Indradyumna and described the great God Nila Madhava (Blue Vishnu) being worshipped at Nilachal (Blue Mountain) in Odra (Odisha).
Balabhadra's face is white, his eyes are oval-shaped, and his stump-like arms are at eye level.
In connection to the possible tribal origins of the Jagannath cult, a pertinent point has been raised by Pandit Nilakantha Das in ''The Orissa Historical Review Journal'', April 1958, whereby it has been argued that:
This Narayana of the Savaras and became Jagannath.
After Anantavarman Chodaganga, who commissioned the temple at Puri, his chief queen, Kasturikamodini, built a temple in his homeland in Tekkali (present Andhra Pradesh), east of his first capital Kalinganagar, in 1150.
There are various opinions about the place where the image of Jagannath was lying buried.
Therefore, as a solution, the erstwhile consort (Shri) of Jagannath was relieved from dual images of Jagannath-Shri and Subhadra, the sister to both to deities was introduced.
Ramachandra Deva recovered the sacred essence of Jagannath and restored it to new Idols which he consecrated first in Khurda in 1587 and then in Puri in 1590.
The story of Patita Pavana has been associated with Salabega a Muslim devotee of Jagannath.
Kamada Ganesh) and enshrined them in the Kanchi Ganesh shrine at the Jagannath Temple in Puri.
J.P. Das  notes that this story is mentioned in a Madala panji chronicle of the Jagannath Temple of Puri, in relation to Gajapati Purushottama.
To the Europeans, the iconography of Jagannatha remained a mystery from the time of Bruton's visit until the 19th century.
Kapila Samhita also refers to Ratha Yatra.
However, in the town of Kantilo in Odisha, there is a temple dedicated to a deity named Nila Madhava, of uncertain genealogy.
::parjyupasyo jagannatho guruh sarvarthasidhida dah |
Thus, Jagannath became known to Europeans as a pagan divinity of monstrous form.
The temple was dedicated to the god Dadhivaman, and the inscription reveals that the image installed was of the wooden God, and not the famous Puri Trinity of Jagannath-Balabhadra-Subhadra.
Vidyapati did not touch food or water before seeing the Lord.
The divination of Nila Madhava went on:
As per Madala Panji,the deities were not transferred anywhere and worshipped peacefully in the Jagannath Temple thereafter.
As regards to archeological findings, Queen Vasata in the 8th century built the famous Narsinghnath temple built in brick at Sripur or Shreepur on the banks of river Mahanadi in present Mahasamund district.
Anncharlott Eschmann has pointed out that the Nabakalevara ritual is the ceremony of periodical renewal of the body of the deity, is a tribal custom.
In the Andhra village Jambulapadu in (Anantapur), Narasimha Svami is worshipped as a pillar to which a sheet shaped in the form of a lion's head is attached.
The colour is predominantly black, and the eyes are round and large.
The ''Madala panji'' records a legend of King Yayati recovering the wooden images of Jagannath from the Sonepur region, where they lay buried for over 144 years.
Attempts to label Jagannath as the ninth Avatar of Vishnu are controversial.
It has been asserted by researcher J. P. Das  that the historicity of this event is not certain.
Certain scholars like Pandit Nilakantha Das have opined that the three main images of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra represent the Jain Trinity of Samyak Jnana, Samyak Charita and Samyak Drusti.
: "Before Choraganga actually came to Orissa it appears from tradition that, Nilmadhava so much made of the Nihilists and perhaps accepted by the local Savaras, with whom also perhaps mixed up Uddas, has just been replaced by the image of the neem-wood, called Sawrinarayana.
For the restoration of Jagannath worship he was considered the second Indradyumna.
In the Dasgoba Copper Plate Inscription of the late 12th century, Chodaganga's grandson Rajaraja III praised his grandfather for having built the Jagannath temple which had been "neglected" by previous kings, which indicates epigraphical evidence of the existence of a Jagannath temple at Puri before the construction of the present temple.
He converted noted scholars like Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya to his philososphy.
He spirited away the relic to a remote village in Odisha known as Khandait Kalua, where he preserved and worshipped the relic.
The temple's historical records Madala panji maintains that the temple was originally built by King Yayati of the Somavamsi dynasty on the site of the present shrine.
Although Jagannath has been identified with other traditions in the past, He is now identified more with Vaishnav tradition.
Upon receiving the devotion of the King, the Purusottama himself took the form of Visvakarma and secretly made the idols of daru (wood).
Jagannath is venerated by all Hindu sects, not just Vaishnavas, and has a pan-Indian influence.
After the British occupation of Odisha in 1803, the temple and its priests received special treatment from the East India Company, which decided to protect the institution for economic and political reasons.
As a matter of tradition, it is strictly forbidden for non-Hindus to enter the Jagannath temple.
After sometime they grew up and served to guide him to the spot.
As per historians, the Deula and the Mukhashala were built in the 12th century by Ganga King Anangabheemadeva, the grandson of Anantavarman Chodaganga and the Natamandapa and Bhogamandapa were constructed subsequently during the reign of Gajapati Purushottama Deva (1461–1491) and Prataprudra Deva (1495–1532) respectively.
To this day a Gururdwara in Puri commemorates Guru Nanak's visit to Puri.
In fact there is no foundation in traditional sculpture for the construction of image of Gods and Goddesses in wood).
The chariot for Jagannath is approximately 45 feet high and 35 feet square and takes about 2 months to construct.
The ''murtis'' of Jagannath, Balabhadra, Subhadra and Sudarshana Chakra are made of neem wood.
According to them Jagannath is Sunnya Purusa, Nirakar and Niranjan who is ever present in Nilachala to do cosmic play&nbsp;...
The temple plaque opens with a salutation to Purushottam, also titled Narasimha, suggesting a trend in Vaishnav tradition to stress the ugra (violent) aspect of Vishnu.
There are miniature shrines on the three outer sides of the main temple.
Such a state of affairs, combined with hearsay and imagination, led William Burton, the first English traveller to Puri in 1633, to claim that Jagannatha "is in a shape like a serpent, with seven hoods".
One of the most popular legends associated with Jagannath is that of ''Kanchi Avijana'' (or "Conquest of Kanchi"), also termed as "Kanchi-Kaveri".
Jayadev's composition Gita Govinda put a new emphasis on the concept of Radha and Krishna in East Indian Vaishnavism.
The installation of Jagannath at Puri temple took place several years after Yayati Kesari had come to throne, viz., in Yayati's 9th regnal years.
As per current predominant thought, Jagannath, embodies the metamorphosis of tribal god into a pre-eminent deity of the classical Hindu pantheon.
The deity of Jagannath is about .
Verrier Elwin has argued that:
The most significant ritual associated with the Ratha Yatra is the ''chhera pahara''.
Jagannath is considered the combination of 5 Gods Vishnu, Shiva, Surya, Ganesh and Durga by Shaktas.
Jagannath unable to bear his devotee's plight used to come to the Gate of the temple everynight to console Ramachandra.
To protect the idols of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra from descecration, he had his faithful servants shift the idols to Banpur, near Chilika Lake.
The temple is built on an elevated platform, as compared to Lingaraja temple and other temples belonging to this type.
Then King Indradyumna, appointed Vishwakarma, the architect of gods, a Brahmin carpenter to carve the murti of the deity from a log which would eventually wash up on the shore at Puri.
That there was an earlier temple of Jagannath at Purushottama Kshetra prior to the present one built by Chodaganga Deva in the 12th century, is established by Sanskrit playwright Murari Mishra's Anargharaghava Natakam (c. 9th century), which refers to Purushottama being worshipped on the seashore.
As per Elwin there is an alternative Savara legend, according to which there are three most important and prominent Kittungs (Gods) - two brothers and a sister, Ramma, Bimma and Sitaboi.
In Odisha, kings of Mayurbhanj and Parlakhemundi also organized the Ratha Yatra, though the most grand festival in terms of scale and popularity takes place at Puri.
Jagannath is said to assume the form of any God to satisfy his devotee's desire.
Jagannath is worshipped along with Lord Balabhadra or Balarama who is alternatively considered to be an incarnation of Seshanaga.
At the king's request, his priest and his younger brother Vidyapati went in search of the legendary divinity.
Due to his efforts several Jagannath temples were set up at different places in Odisha.
According to these texts, Jagannath is Bhairav, and Goddess Vimala is the Shakti.
The Gajapati king cleanses the road before the chariots with a gold-handled broom and sprinkles sandalwood water and powder with utmost devotion.
bauddha ruparē bijē chanti jagannāthē
Some followers of Buddhism pray to Jagannath in mantra "''Namoh Jagannath Buddhaya''".
The Brahmin, however, tied some mustard seeds on a corner of his cloth and made a hole in it so that they dropped out one by one on the way.
In the war between the army, of Kalinga inspired by the Divine support of Jagannath and the of army of Kanchi, Purushottam Deva led his army to victory.
In 1615,Kalyanmal, son of Todarmal attacked Puri and so the Lords were hidden at Gurubadai in Chilika.
In this period, Indrabhuti emerged as a worshipper of Jagannath in 717.
British historian William Wilson Hunter in the first volume on the British province of Odisha and the temple of Jagannath has remarked that the aboriginal people worshipped a Blue Stone inside dense forests as Nila Madhava.
(Stanza 5 from Jan Brzezinski's translation of ''Patitapavana Astakam'' )
Various legends have mentioned the origin of Patita Pavana.
Unlike other deities of the Hindu gods, there is no anthropomorphic or artistic aspect to the ''murti'' of Jagannath, which has not been designed to represent the image of a human being.
He left a great influence on the then king of Odisha, Prataprudra Deva, and the people of Odisha.
In the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharata, a reference has been made to the Jagannath Dharma.
There is also something striking about the figures constituting the Jagannath triad.
This is because there is an Oriya convention, according to which the younger brother's wife (i.e.
The situation changed during the rule of Anangabhima III 1211–1239 when Balabhadra and Subhadra are mentioned for the first time in the Pataleshwara inscription dating back to 1237.
'''1328''': Epigraphic sources reveal that the inscriptions of Bhanudeva II (1306–1328) of Eastern Ganga dynasty make the first mention of the name, 'Jagannath'.
According to the Puri Grant of 1313, Bhanudeva granted villages in the 7th Anka of Purushottama Jagannath deva.
# There is no caste distinction in the cult of Jagannath which is akin to the practices of tribals and significantly different from classical Vaishnavism.
Cunningham also asserts that the Brahma Padartha/Mani (Divine Life material) is nothing but a Buddhist relic (Buddha's Tooth).
It has been argued that the most important message of the Visara Mahanty and Yayati Kesari legends to Jagannath's devotees is proclaimed in the very beginning of the Madala Panji temple chronicle which commences with the words
This extensive popularity of Shree Jagannath among Bengalis can be related to Shree Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
At some point of time the figure of Lord Balabhadra may have been added to satisfy the Saivas to the existing couple Jagannath and Devi Subhadra.
Jagannath, as a dutiful son, offers oblations in memory of parents of all the human Avatars of Vishnu annually.
The Dasgoba copper plated inscription dating to 1198 also mentions only Purushottama Jagannath in the context that the Puri temple had been originally built by Ganga king Anantavarman Chodaganga (1078–1147) for Vishnu and Lakshmi.
Most of them have no idea of untouchability and accept food even from the Douss (Douss are treated as
Oriya Vaishnavism gradually centred on Jagannath as the principal deity.
The third deity, Devi Subhadra, who represents the Sakti element is still worshipped with the Bhuvaneshwari Mantra.
In this temple, Jagannath is part of a triad of deities that includes Balabhadra and goddess Subhadra.
Historian K. C. Panigrahi suggested  that Puri's legendary account of the claimed invasion of Odisha under the Yavana general Raktabahu in the 4th/5th century during the reign of the legendary King Sovanadeva (Legendary) may contain a historical reminiscence of the conquest of Odisha by the Rastrakuta King Govinda III during the reign of the Bhaumakara king Subhakara deva who ruled in coastal Odisha around 800.
At this juncture, a major change had to be introduced into the relationship between the deities since as per traditional Odia culture, the elder brother is not permitted even to see the face of younger brother's spouse.
Pragyonpayabiniscayasidhi, written by Indrabhuti and published from Baroda also has description of Jagannath by Siddha Anangavajja.
Everyone was anxious about the divine work, including the King Indradyumna.
He descecrated and burnt the idols of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra.
The waist is the limit of the body.
Jagannatha consented and assuming the form of a log of wood, floated down the Mahanadi to Puri, where he was taken out and placed in the temple."
Jagannath is worshipped as Purushottama form of Vishnu, Gaudiya Vaishnavs have identified him strongly with Krishna.
The temple is built in the Kalinga style of architecture, with the Pancharatha (Five chariots) type consisting of two anurathas, two konakas and one ratha.
It is significant to note that the early epigraphic and literary sources refer only to a unitary deity Purushottama Jagannath.
These sources are silent on the existence of Balabhadra and Subhadra.
Every year in the month of Bhadra, Jagannath is dressed and decorated in the form of the Vamana avatar of Vishnu.
To avenge his humiliation, he ordered his minister to get the princess married to a sweeper.
This lion-head explains Jagannath's large round eyes, typical of Narasimha on account of his fury (krodh).
Take Me out and make four deities from that log.
ṭhākurē bōilē rājā hōilu ki bāi
ବଉଦ୍ଧ ରୁପରେ କଳି କଳାନ୍ତକ ସାଧି
Prior to the advent of ISKCON movement Jagannath, and his most important festival the annual Ratha Yatra were relatively unknown in the West.
Such practices of renewal of wooden deities are found among the primitive tribes like Savaras and Konds.
Jagannath is also worshipped as "Purushottama" ("The Best of All").
The legend has such a powerful impact on the Oriya culture that the simple mention of white horse-black horse evokes the imagery of Kanchi conquest of the God in devotees minds.
Moved by his prayers, Jagannath and Balabhadra, left their temple in Puri and started an expedition to Kanchi on horseback.
As per historical records, Gajapati Purushottam Deva's expedition towards Virupaksha Raya II's Kanchi (Vijayanagar) Kingdom started during 1476 with Govinda Bhanjha as commander-in-chief.
kuṭāntaka darpagañja aṭa kṛpānidhi
However, In Puri, too, no pre-16th-century sources of the Yayati Kesari account are known.
Hunter hypothesized that with the passage of time, the Aryan elements assimilated Jagannath into fold of Hinduism where as per more sophisticated customs, Jagannath is being offered cooked food.
The Lion Gate (Singhadwara) is the main gate to the temple, guarded by two guardian deities Jaya and Vijaya.
Because of his devotion, Guru Nanak was reverentially escorted to the temple to have darshan of Jagannath.
The day also marks the beginning of preparations for Bengal's biggest religious festival,the Durga Puja.
The traditions and practices which centre in and around this famous temple are also still South Indian or Dravidian to a large extent."
:Sastha di sa antarena, pada je pani hela khina |Baudharupa heba pain, padapani chadile tahi
'''1211''': Emperor Anangabhima deva (1211–1238) donated his vast empire to Sri Purushottama Jagannath calling it Purshottama Samrajya or empire of Jagannath and declared himself as his servant (Rauta).
This culture also influenced Buddhism in Nepal and Tibet.
Moved by his intense desire to have darshan of God, Jagannath assumed the form of Patita Pavana to bless and offer salvation to Haridas Thakur.
The texts of the above prove that Jagannath was worshipped in Puri by the Oriyas as a form of Buddha from a long time.
The Mahabharat amply describes King Indradyumna's Ashvamedh Yagna and the advent of the four deities of the Jagannath cult.
'''12th century''': The Gitagovinda of Jayadeva mentions of the glory of Jagannath.
According to the Saivas, Jagannath is Bhairav.
kaḷijugē basibu bauddha rupa hōi
These Daitas are the hereditary servitors of Jagannath.
Tradition maintains Ramachandra Deva pined for darshan of Jagannath.
This theory identifies the ''Jina'' of Kalinga recorded to have been restored to Odisha by Kharvela in his Hathigumpha inscription with Jagannath.
Jagannath-Vishnu equated with Shiva, is interpreted to convey the oneness of God.
It describes how the holy Indradyumna tank was formed by the trodding of ground by thousands of cows donated by Indradyumna to Brahmins.
He offered the princess in marriage to King Purusottam, calling the King a Royal sweeper of God.
The king of Odisha had built the great temple at Puri and wished to install Jagannatha in it, and he found a Brahmin to fetch it from Seori-Narayan, but nobody knew where it was except the old hermit, Savar.
However, out of curiosity, the King (or in some versions, Queen Gundicha) could not help stealing a glance at Vishwakarma's work.
The top upper portions of the deities' heads are triangular in shape, evoking the Trimundi (Triangular head).
To the right of Jagannath is the Sudarshana chakra, a post-like structure that may have originated in processional Siva lingas, but that also has some parallels in pillars seen in orthodox Vaishnava contexts, in folk settings, and in tribal areas.
The Mangu, Punjabi and Bauli mathas of Puri are associated with Guru Nanak.
The head of the Jagannath image makes sense when perceived as a lion's head, where the emphasis is on the jaws, rather than as a human head.
ଠାକୁରେ ବୋଇଲେ ରାଜା ହୋଇଲୁ କି ବାଇ,
B. Majumadar, guru Nanak spent time with Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in Puri taking part in Kirtan which both of them found pleasure in.
Although Dr. Mayadhar Mansingh thought it (''Jagannath triad'') to be a Buddhist triad, in his other book ''History of Oriya Literature'', he writes:
Jagannath temple is a pancharatha with well-developed pagas.
Later, Purushottam Deva himself passed by with his army.
King Purusottam brought back the Princess Padmavati of Kanchi to Puri.
In fact, there is no historical evidence of worship of Jagannath at Puri prior to the 10th century, when Yayati Kesari was the ruler.
Sirpur or Shreepur was then the capital of Dakshin Kosala (Chhattisgarh region) kingdom.
Jagannath in his Hathi Besha (elephant form) has been venerated by devotees like Ganapati Bhatta of Maharashtra as the God Ganesh.
Under the banner of the assimilative and all embracing Jagannath, Guru Nanak and Tulsidas met.
The German Indologist Kulke termed Anangibhima III the originator of the triad of Jagannath, Balabhadra, and Subhadra suggesting that Balabhadra was added after Laksmi's transformation into Subhadra.
The temple is known as the ''Shri Mandira'' to the devotees.
Various traditions identify Jagannath with different Avatars of Vishnu.
They have presented arguments concerning the Jagannath's tribal origins.
The Skanda Purana and Brahma Purana have attributed the creation of the Jagannathpuri during the reign of Indradyumna, a pious king and an ascetic who ruled from Ujjain.
During the Mughal period, some attacks are recorded, led by Hindu generals.
The king was very perturbed by this development and appealed to Brahma to help him.
Europeans were still excluded from the great sanctuary and even General Alexander Cunningham, one of the doyens of Indian archaeology, had a rather vague knowledge of the appearance of the Puri images, chiefly based, it seems, on secondary sources.
The Alarnatha Temple stands testimony to his stay in Odisha.
Jara Savara, an aborigine, picked it and worshipped it.
At Puri he founded the Ramanuja Math for propagating Vaishnavism in Odisha.
Jagannath is considered the epitome of Tantric worship.
Jagannath is worshipped as part of a triad on the "Ratnavedi" (jewelled platform) along with his brother Balabhadra and sister Subhadra.
Further, the Buddhist relic, the tooth relic, cannot be the ''Brahma Padartha'' (life material), as the relic has been kept at Anuradhapura in Sri Lanka.
In modern culture, Kanchi Vijaya is a major motif in Odissi dance.
କଳିଜୁଗେ ବସିବୁ ବଉଦ୍ଧ ରୁପ ହୋଇ ॥ (''Deuḷa toḷā'', Oriya Bhagabata)
Local tradition mentions Jagannath manifested as Patita Pavana to bless Haridas Thakur, a Vaishnav Saint born a Muslim.
This is the first temple in the history of Kalingaan temple architecture where all the chambers like Jagamohana, Bhogamandapa and Natyamandapa were built along with the main temple.
Therefore, the Buddhist Jagannath was shifted before the arrival of Hieun-Tsang and destruction of the Puspagiri Vihar.
"''Jagannath, the Lord of deities, never abandons Sri Purushottama (Puri) even though crores of Brahma (Brahmanda) are destroyed.''"
It is therefore believed that Jagannath is worshipped as a wooden ''murti'' or Daru Brahma with the Sri Narasimha hymn dedicated to the Narasimha Avatar.
The argument, that because there is no caste distinction inside the Jagannath temples, the images are of Buddhist descent, cannot be accepted on merit.
However he is most frequently identified with Krishna, the eighth Avatar of Vishnu.
The ''Madalapanji'' describes that from 16th to 18th century the deities of Jagannath Temple were transferred many times to different places.
Caste barriers never existed among devotees in Jagannath's temple.
From the times of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Jagannath has been strongly associated with Krishna.
'Gajasimhas' (elephant lions) carved in recesses of the pagas, the 'Jhampasimhas' (Jumping lions) are also placed properly.
The last attack on Srimandir was made in 1733, led by Taqi Khan.
It is, however, believed that the original images are in a pond near the temple.
In the Mahabharata, the tale of King Indradyumna and the tank named after him is a direct reference to the Jagannath lore.
Jaina or Buddhist worship and practice were also retained there in making the offering acceptable by all clans and castes with equal reverence."
The oldest and most famous Jagannath deity is established in Puri.
The Ratha Yatra is also termed as the Shri Gundicha Yatra.
In his own account of 1321, Odoric reported how the people put the "idols" on chariots, and the king and queen and all the people drew them from the "church" with song and music.
Jean-Baptiste Tavernier later described in detail the priceless jewellery of Jagannatha, which however, he never saw.
The term "Kaivalya" ("liberation"), exclusively common in the cult of Jagannath, is derived from Jaina tradition.
On the other hand, the importance or role of Sudarshana chakra, the fourth deity remains unexplained.
