The result of an analysis across the Jaguar’s historic range was the identification of about 51 areas that are priorities for jaguar conservation.
The USFWS was ultimately ordered by the court to develop a jaguar recovery plan and designate critical habitat for the cats.
Size and weight vary considerably: weights are normally in the range of 56–96&nbsp;kg (124–211 lb).
The jaguar is more of a dietary generalist than its Old World cousins: the American tropics have a high diversity of small animals but relatively low populations and diversity of the large ungulates which this genus favors.
The Aztecs formed an elite warrior class known as the Jaguar Knights.
In 1990 Belize created the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary as the world's first wilderness reserve for jaguar protection and study.
The flag of the Department of Amazonas, a Colombian department, features a black jaguar silhouette pouncing towards a hunter.
The adjoining Maya Biosphere Reserve in Guatemala, with an area measuring 15,000&nbsp;km2 (9,000&nbsp;mi2), may have 465–550 animals.
Local people have anecdotally reported that when hunting a pair of horses bound together, the jaguar will kill one horse and then drag it while the other horse, still living, is dragged in their wake.
The word 'jaguar' comes to English from one of the Tupi–Guarani languages, presumably the Amazonian trade language Tupinambá, via Portuguese ''jaguar''.
The jaguar and its name are widely used as a symbol in contemporary culture.
When it occurs, conflict is typically over territory: a male's range may encompass that of two or three females, and he will not tolerate intrusions by other adult males.
A year earlier, 125–180 jaguars were estimated to be living in Mexico's 4,000-km2 (2400-mi2) Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, with another 350 in the state of Chiapas.
The later Moche culture of northern Peru used the jaguar as a symbol of power in many of their ceramics.
The jaguar may hunt during the day if game is available and is a relatively energetic feline, spending as much as 50–60 percent of its time active.
A short and stocky limb structure makes the jaguar adept at climbing, crawling, and swimming.
The jaguar and the cougar, the next-largest feline of the Americas, are often sympatric (related species sharing overlapping territory) and have often been studied in conjunction.
Female estrus is 6–17 days out of a full 37-day cycle, and females will advertise fertility with urinary scent marks and increased vocalization.
''Onca'' is the Portuguese ''onça'', with the cedilla dropped for typographical reasons, found in English as ''ounce'' for the snow leopard, ''Panthera uncia''.
Based on morphological evidence, British zoologist Reginald Pocock concluded the jaguar is most closely related to the leopard.
Critics, including the Center of Biological Diversity and New Mexico Department of Game and Fish, were concerned the jaguar was being sacrificed for the government's new border fence, which is to be built along many of the cat's typical crossings between the United States and Mexico.
The 1960s had particularly significant declines, with more than 15,000 jaguar skins brought out of the Brazilian Amazon yearly; the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 1973 brought about a sharp decline in the pelt trade.
The cat is believed to mate throughout the year in the wild, although births may increase when prey is plentiful.
The jaguar has also been termed a keystone species, as it is assumed, through controlling the population levels of prey such as herbivorous and granivorous mammals, apex felids maintain the structural integrity of forest systems.
The jaguar, ''Panthera onca'', is the only extant New World member of the genus ''Panthera''.
This allows it to pierce the shells of armored reptiles and to employ an unusual killing method: it bites directly through the skull of prey between the ears to deliver a fatal bite to the brain.
All hunting of jaguars is prohibited in Argentina, Belize, Colombia, French Guiana, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, the United States (where it is listed as endangered under the Endangered Species Act), Uruguay and Venezuela.
Jaguars have been found at elevations as high as 3,800&nbsp;m, but they typically avoid montane forest and are not found in the high plateau of central Mexico or in the Andes.
The specific word for jaguar is ''yaguareté'', with the suffix -''eté'' meaning "real" or "true".
Human attitudes in the areas surrounding reserves and laws and regulations to prevent poaching are essential to make conservation areas effective.
As with large African cats, a key concern in jaguar ecotourism is the considerable habitat space the species requires, so if ecotourism is used to aid in jaguar conservation, some considerations need to be made as to how existing ecosystems will be kept intact, or how new ecosystems that are large enough to support a growing jaguar population will be put into place.
This strength adaptation allows the jaguar to pierce turtle shells.
The Maya saw these powerful felines as their companions in the spiritual world, and a number of Maya rulers bore names that incorporated the Mayan word for jaguar (''b'alam'' in many of the Mayan languages).
Jaguars also have rounder heads and shorter, stockier limbs compared to leopards.
During this period, the biggest exporters were Brazil and Paraguay, and the biggest importers were the USA and Germany.
o. hernandesii'' (Mexican jaguar'): Western Mexico – including
One of them, called 'Macho B', had been previously photographed in 1996 in the area.
The countries included in this range are Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica (particularly on the Osa Peninsula), Ecuador, French Guiana, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, the United States and Venezuela.
In the early Pleistocene, the forerunners of modern jaguars crossed Beringia, the land bridge that once spanned the Bering Strait and connected Asia and North America.
The smallest females have low weights of .
Between 2004 and 2007, two or three jaguars have been reported by researchers around Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge in southern Arizona.
However, field work has shown this may be natural variability and the population increases may not be sustained.
In 2011, a 200-pound male jaguar was photographed near Cochise in southern Arizona by a hunter after being treed by his dogs (the animal left the scene unharmed).
The jaguars preferred habitats are usually swamps and wooded regions, but jaguars also live in scrublands and deserts.
Recent studies have also failed to find evidence for well-defined subspecies, which are no longer recognized.
Legal action by the Center for Biological Diversity led to federal listing of the cat on the endangered species list in 1997.
In the early 20th century, the jaguar's range extended as far north as the Grand Canyon, and as far west as Southern California.
The habitat of the cat includes the rain forests of South and Central America, open, seasonally flooded wetlands, and dry grassland terrain.
Compared to the similarly colored Old World leopard, the jaguar is bigger, heavier and relatively stocky in build.
In pre-Columbian Central and South America, the jaguar was a symbol of power and strength.
The only extant cat native to North America that roars, the jaguar was recorded as an animal of the Americas by Thomas Jefferson in 1799.
Adults generally meet only to court and mate (though limited noncourting socialization has been observed anecdotally) and carve out large territories for themselves.
It has been reported that "an individual jaguar can drag an  bull  in its jaws and pulverize the heaviest bones".
On killing prey, the jaguar will drag the carcass to a thicket or other secluded spot.
The jaguar can take virtually any terrestrial or riparian vertebrate found in Central or South America, with a preference for large prey.
While dense rainforest is its preferred habitat, the jaguar will range across a variety of forested and open terrains.
o. peruviana'' (Peruvian jaguar): Coastal Peru
Larson (1997) studied the morphological variation in the jaguar and showed there is clinal north–south variation, but also the differentiation within the supposed subspecies is larger than that between them, and thus does not warrant subspecies subdivision.
The coastal Diegueño (Kumeyaay people) of San Diego and Cahuilla Indians of Palm Springs had words for jaguar and the cats persisted there until about 1860.
Umbrella species serve as "mobile links" at the landscape scale, in the jaguar's case through predation.
However, accurately determining what effect species like the jaguar have on ecosystems is difficult, because data must be compared from regions where the species is absent as well as its current habitats, while controlling for the effects of human activity.
The jaguar hunts wild animals weighing up to 300&nbsp;kg (660&nbsp;lb) in dense jungle, and its short and sturdy physique is thus an adaptation to its prey and environment.
Melanistic jaguars are informally known as black panthers, but (as with all forms of polymorphism) they do not form a separate species.
Pocock's subspecies divisions are still regularly listed in general descriptions of the cat.
A comparative study of bite force adjusted for body size ranked it as the top felid, alongside the clouded leopard and ahead of the lion and tiger.
The young are born blind, gaining sight after two weeks.
For any permanent population in the USA to thrive, protection from killing, an adequate prey base, and connectivity with Mexican populations are essential.
The last female jaguar in the United States was shot by a hunter in Arizona's White Mountains in 1963.
The jaguar is a stalk-and-ambush rather than a chase predator.
Pairs separate after mating, and females provide all parenting.
The base coat of the jaguar is generally a tawny yellow, but can range to reddish-brown and black, for most of the body.
Typical lifespan in the wild is estimated at around 12–15 years; in captivity, the jaguar lives up to 23 years, placing it among the longest-lived cats.
Its present range extends from Mexico, through Central America and into South America, including much of Amazonian Brazil.
The jaguar is a protected species in the United States under the Endangered Species Act, which has stopped the shooting of the animal for its pelt.
Apparently this jaguar has been photographed numerous times over the past nine months through June 2013.
The loss of parts of its range, including its virtual elimination from its historic northern areas and the increasing fragmentation of the remaining range, have contributed to this status.
In the Brazilian Pantanal, weights of  or more are not uncommon in old males, with the highest recorded weight, for a Jaguar weighed on an empty stomach being .
The jaguar is the third-largest feline after the tiger and the lion, and the largest in the Americas.
El Jefe and other males may have originated from a breeding population in Sonora, Mexico, 125 miles (200 kilometers) to the south of Tucson.
The spots on the head and neck are generally solid, as are those on the tail, where they may merge to form a band.
The spots vary over individual coats and between individual jaguars: rosettes may include one or several dots, and the shapes of the dots vary.
o. arizonensis'' (Arizonan jaguar): Southern Arizona to Sonora, Mexico
The jaguar has been an American cat since crossing the Bering Land Bridge during the Pleistocene epoch; the immediate ancestor of modern animals is ''Panthera onca augusta'', which was larger than the contemporary cat.
The cat is covered in rosettes for camouflage in the dappled light of its forest habitat.
From the beginning of the 20th-century Jaguars were hunted in large numbers, but over-harvest and habitat destruction reduced the availability and induced hunters and traders to gradually shift to smaller species by the 1960s.
A genetic study by Eizirik and coworkers in 2001 confirmed the absence of a clear geographical subspecies structure, although they found that major geographical barriers, such as the Amazon River, limited the exchange of genes between the different populations.
Each unit was graded on a scale integrating unit size, connectivity, habitat quality, jaguar hunting, prey hunting, and jaguar population status into a prioritization assessment.
It begins eating at the neck and chest, rather than the midsection.
Later consideration of his work suggested only three subspecies should be recognized.
Cubs are weaned at three months, but remain in the birth den for six months before leaving to accompany their mother on hunts.
This situation may be advantageous to the cougar.
The daily food requirement of a  animal, at the extreme low end of the species' weight range, has been estimated at .
A second 2011 sighting of an Arizona jaguar was reported by a Homeland Security border pilot in June 2011, and conservation researchers sighted two jaguars within 30 miles of the Mexico/U.S.
Fossils of extinct ''Panthera'' species, such as the European jaguar (''Panthera gombaszoegensis'') and the American lion (''Panthera atrox''), show characteristics of both the lion and the jaguar.
Detailed work performed under the auspices of the Wildlife Conservation Society revealed the animal has lost 37 percent of its historic range, with its status unknown in an additional 18 percent.
Cabot's 1544 map has a drawing of jaguar ranging over the Pennsylvania and Ohio valleys.
Based on geographic origins and skull morphology, he recognized eight subspecies.
In setting up protected reserves, efforts generally also have to be focused on the surrounding areas, as jaguars are unlikely to confine themselves to the bounds of a reservation, especially if the population is increasing in size.
Seymour grouped these in three subspecies.
A 100&nbsp;kg (220&nbsp;lb) jaguar can bite with a force of 503.57 kgf (1110&nbsp;lbf) at canine teeth and 705.79 kgf (1556&nbsp;lbf) at carnassial notch.
The position of the remaining species varies between studies and is effectively unresolved.
However, the ventral areas are white.
It occurs in the 400&nbsp;km² Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary in Belize, the 5,300&nbsp;km² Sian Ka'an Biosphere Reserve in Mexico, the approximately 15,000&nbsp;km2 Manú National Park in Peru, the approximately 26,000&nbsp;km2 Xingu National Park in Brazil, and numerous other reserves throughout its range.
The species has no legal protection in Ecuador or Guyana.
The black form may be an example of heterozygote advantage; breeding in captivity is not yet conclusive on this.
The jaguar uses scrape marks, urine, and feces to mark its territory.
The jaguar is a near threatened species and its numbers are declining.
In February 2009, a  jaguar was caught, radio-collared and released in an area southwest of Tucson, Arizona; this is farther north than had previously been expected and represents a sign there may be a permanent breeding population of jaguars within southern Arizona.
This may be an adaptation to "cracking open" turtle shells; following the late Pleistocene extinctions, armored reptiles such as turtles would have formed an abundant prey base for the jaguar.
The crest of Argentina's national federation in rugby union features a jaguar; however, because of a journalist error, the country's national team is nicknamed ''Los Pumas''.
On 2 March 2009, Macho B was recaptured and euthanized after he was found to be suffering from kidney failure; the animal was thought to be 16 years old, older than any known wild jaguar.
Thus, the keystone predator hypothesis is not accepted by all scientists.
They will continue in their mother's company for one to two years before leaving to establish a territory for themselves.
While jaguars now live only in the Americas, they are descended from Old World cats.
However, the cat will eat any small species that can be caught, including frogs, mice, birds (mainly ground-based species such as cracids), fish, sloths, monkeys, and turtles; a study conducted in Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary in Belize, for example, revealed that the diets of jaguars there consisted primarily of armadillos and pacas.
It is a keystone species, playing an important role in stabilizing ecosystems and regulating the populations of the animals it hunts.
Completion of the United States–Mexico barrier as currently proposed will reduce the viability of any population currently residing in the United States, by reducing gene flow with Mexican populations, and prevent any further northward expansion for the species.
However, DNA evidence is inconclusive and the position of the jaguar relative to the other species varies between studies.
The major risks to the jaguar include deforestation across its habitat, increasing competition for food with human beings, poaching, hurricanes in northern parts of its range, and the behavior of ranchers who will often kill the cat where it preys on livestock.
To estimate population sizes within specific areas and to keep track of individual jaguars, camera trapping and wildlife tracking telemetry are widely used, and feces may be sought out with the help of detector dogs to study jaguar health and diet.
Jaguar females reach sexual maturity at about two years of age, and males at three or four.
The jaguar attacks from cover and usually from a target's blind spot with a quick pounce; the species' ambushing abilities are considered nearly peerless in the animal kingdom by both indigenous people and field researchers, and are probably a product of its role as an apex predator in several different environments.
In Mexican Spanish, its nickname is ''el tigre'': 16th century Spaniards  had no native word in their language for a cat smaller than a lion but bigger than a leopard nor had ever encountered such a creature in the Old World, and so named it after a cat whose ferocity would have only been known to them through Roman writings, popular literature during the Renaissance.
Jaguar is widely used as a product name, most prominently for a British luxury car brand.
These hotspots, described as jaguar conservation units, are large areas populated by about 50 jaguars.
Their legs are also short, considerably shorter when compared to a small tiger or lion in a similar weight range, but are thick and powerful.
In September 2015 the jaguar "El Jefe" was photographed via camera trap and analysis of his spots confirms that he has been in southeastern Arizona (30 miles south of Tucson) since 2011.
This method has been used in tiger conservation, and has seen some success.
Some jaguars will also take domestic livestock.
Its broader prey niche, including its ability to take smaller prey, may give it an advantage over the jaguar in human-altered landscapes; while both are classified as near-threatened species, the cougar has a significantly larger current distribution.
Their roar often resembles a repetitive cough, and they may also vocalize mews and grunts.
The ambush may include leaping into water after prey, as a jaguar is quite capable of carrying a large kill while swimming; its strength is such that carcasses as large as a heifer can be hauled up a tree to avoid flood levels.
In September 2012, a jaguar was photographed in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona, the second such sighting in this region in two years.
Both sexes will range more widely than usual during courtship.
The jaguar also has an effect on other predators.
The reservation includes parts of Pima, Santa Cruz and Cochise counties in Arizona and Hidalgo County in New Mexico.
This has been said to derive from the παν- "all" and θήρ from θηρευτής "predator", meaning "predator of all" (animals), though this may be a folk etymology—it may instead be ultimately of Sanskrit origin, from ''pundarikam'', the Sanskrit word for "tiger".
Threats include loss and fragmentation of habitat.
The territory of a male can contain those of several females.
It is an opportunistic hunter and its diet encompasses at least 87 species.
However, recent studies underlined that to maintain the robust exchange across the jaguar gene pool necessary for maintaining the species, it is important that jaguar habitats are interconnected.
DNA evidence shows the lion, tiger, leopard, jaguar, snow leopard, and clouded leopard share a common ancestor, and that this group is between six and ten million years old; the fossil record points to the emergence of ''Panthera'' just two to 3.8 million years ago.
A subsequent, more detailed study confirmed the predicted population structure within the Colombian jaguars.
As usual with albinos in the wild, selection keeps the frequency close to the rate of mutation.
Work employing GPS telemetry in 2003 and 2004 found densities of only six to seven jaguars per 100&nbsp;km2 in the critical Pantanal region, compared with 10 to 11 using traditional methods; this suggests the widely used sampling methods may inflate the actual numbers of cats.
This willingness to take livestock has induced ranch owners to hire full-time jaguar hunters.
It is accepted that mid-sized prey species undergo population increases in the absence of the keystone predators, and  this has been hypothesized to have cascading negative effects.
The jaguar tends to take larger prey, usually over  and the cougar smaller, usually between , reducing the latter's size.
Given its historical distribution, the jaguar has featured prominently in the mythology of numerous indigenous American cultures, including those of the Maya and Aztec.
It derives from the Latin ''lyncea'' lynx, with the letter L confused with the definite article (Italian ''lonza'', Old French ''l'once)''.
Hence, it is being supported by selection.
o. augusta and P. o. mesembrina'' lived throughout the Americas during the Pleistocene.
The name has been adopted by sports franchises, including the NFL's Jacksonville Jaguars and the Mexican soccer club Chiapas F.C.
In Aztec mythology, the jaguar was considered to be the totem animal of the powerful deity Tezcatlipoca.
Like the other big cats, the jaguar is capable of roaring and does so to warn territorial and mating competitors away; intensive bouts of counter-calling between individuals have been observed in the wild.
Jaguars in Venezuela or Brazil are much larger with average weights of about 95&nbsp;kg (220&nbsp;lb) in males and of about  to  in females.
Historically, the jaguar was recorded in far eastern Texas, and the northern parts of Arizona and New Mexico.
With prey such as smaller dogs, a paw swipe to the skull may be sufficient to kill it.
o. centralis'' (Central American jaguar): El Salvador to Colombia
For captive animals in the  range, more than  of meat daily are recommended.
The only recorded description of an active jaguar den with breeding adults and kittens in the U.S. was in the Tehachapi Mountains of California prior to 1860.
o. goldmani'' (Goldman's jaguar): Yucatán Peninsula to Belize and Guatemala
The jaguar's elusive nature and the inaccessibility of much of its preferred habitat make it a difficult animal to sight, let alone study.
The black morph is less common than the spotted form but, at about six percent of the population, it is several orders of magnitude above the mutation rate.
The cat will walk slowly down forest paths, listening for and stalking prey before rushing or ambushing.
The cat will range across tropical, subtropical, and dry deciduous forests (including, historically, oak forests in the United States).
Jaguar populations are rapidly declining.
The historic range of the species included much of the southern half of the United States, and in the south extended much farther to cover most of the South American continent.
Color morphism occurs in the species.
More encouragingly, the probability of long-term survival was considered high in 70 percent of its remaining range, particularly in the Amazon basin and the adjoining Gran Chaco and Pantanal.
The jaguar is largely a solitary, opportunistic, stalk-and-ambush predator at the top of the food chain (an apex predator).
The jaguar has an exceptionally powerful bite, even relative to the other big cats.
A study of the jaguar in the Chamela-Cuixmala Biosphere Reserve on the Mexican Pacific coast, showed ranges of just about 50&nbsp;kg (110&nbsp;lb), about the size of a female cougar.
In the wild, consumption is naturally more erratic; wild cats expend considerable energy in the capture and kill of prey, and they may consume up to  of meat at one feeding, followed by periods of famine.
Ice age fossils of the jaguar, dated between 40,000 and 11,500 years ago, have been discovered in the United States, including some at an important site as far north as Missouri.
The jaguar prefers to live by rivers, swamps, and in dense rainforest with thick cover for stalking prey.
These jaguar ancestors then moved south into Central and South America, feeding on the deer and other grazing animals that once covered the landscape in huge herds.
Unlike all other ''Panthera'' species, jaguars very rarely attack humans.
A near-black melanistic form occurs regularly.
Female territories, which range from 25 to 40&nbsp;km2 in size, may overlap, but the animals generally avoid one another.
Its preferred habitats are usually swamps and wooded regions, but jaguars also live in scrublands and deserts.
Of these habitats, the jaguar much prefers dense forest; the cat has lost range most rapidly in regions of drier habitat, such as the Argentine pampas, the arid grasslands of Mexico, and the southwestern United States.
The gestation period lasts 93–105 days; females give birth to up to four cubs, and most commonly to two.
The first component of its taxonomic designation, ''Panthera'', is Latin, from the Greek word for leopard, πάνθηρ, the type species for the genus.
Sometimes jaguars in captivity attack zookeepers.
The head is robust and the jaw extremely powerful, it has the third highest bite force of all felids, after the lion and tiger.
Jaguar conservation is complicated by the species' extremely large range which spans 18 countries with different policies and regulations.
The animal was later confirmed to be indeed the same male individual ('Macho B') that was photographed in 2004.
Male ranges cover roughly twice as much area, varying in size with the availability of game and space, and do not overlap.
On March 4, 2014 Federal wildlife officials set aside nearly 1,200 square miles along the U.S.-Mexico border as habitat essential for the conservation of the jaguar.
In 1991, 600–1,000 (the highest total) were estimated to be living in Belize.
In Mesoamerica, the Olmec—an early and influential culture of the Gulf Coast region roughly contemporaneous with the Chavín—developed a distinct "were-jaguar" motif of sculptures and figurines showing stylised jaguars or humans with jaguar characteristics.
The mother will not tolerate the presence of males after the birth of cubs, given a risk of infanticide; this behavior is also found in the tiger.
When adapted to the prey, the jaguar has been shown to take cattle as a large portion of its diet; while land clearance for grazing is a problem for the species, the jaguar population may have increased when cattle were first introduced to South America, as the animals took advantage of the new prey base.
Hunting of jaguars is restricted to "problem animals" in Brazil, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico and Peru, while trophy hunting is still permitted in Bolivia.
Like all cats, the jaguar is an obligate carnivore, feeding only on meat.
There is evidence that jaguars in the wild consume the roots of ''Banisteriopsis caapi''.
Their tails are the shortest of any big cat, at  in length.
To facilitate this, a new project, the Paseo del Jaguar, has been established to connect several jaguar hotspots.
However, on January 7, 2008, George W. Bush appointee H. Dale Hall, Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), signed a recommendation to abandon jaguar recovery as a federal goal under the Endangered Species Act.
