Further, Jain texts mention that "attachment to possessions (''parigraha'') is of two kinds: attachment to internal possessions (''ābhyantara parigraha''), and attachment to external possessions (''bāhya parigraha'').
Additionally, according to the ''Tattvartha Sutra'' (a sacred Jain text), "Infatuation is attachment to possessions."
Sāmāyika is particularly important during the Paryushana religious festival.
This includes the recognition of all perspectives and a humble respect for differences in beliefs.
''Parasparopagraho Jivanam'' ("the function of souls is to help one another") is the motto of Jainism.
Happiness with  little sorrow
Jains believe that the intent and emotions behind an act of violence are more important than the action itself.
The Shaivite king Koon Pandiyan, who briefly converted to Jainism, is said to have ordered a massacre of 8,000 Jains after his re-conversion to Shaivism.
Mahavir Jayanti, the birth of Mahāvīra, the last ''tirthankara'' of this era, is usually celebrated in late March or early April based on the lunar calendar.
The central tenet is non-violence and love towards all living beings.
Karnataka (9.89%), Uttar Pradesh (4.79%), Delhi (3.73%) and Tamil Nadu (2.01%) also have significant Jain populations.
''Balabhadra'' are nonviolent heroes, ''narayana'' are violent heroes, and ''pratinarayana'' can be described as villains.
The supplementary vows include three ''guņa vratas'' (merit vows) and four ''śikşā vratas''.
Unchecked attachment to possessions is said to result in direct harm to oneself and others.
Monks and nuns live extremely austere and ascetic lifestyles.
Extreme sorrow and misery
Sambandar converted the contemporary Pandya king to Shaivism.
The Sittannavasal cavern continued to be the "Holy Sramana Abode" until the 7th and 8th centuries.
Sorrow with very little Happiness
According to the 2001 Indian census, Jains have the highest degree of literacy of any religious community in India (94.1 percent), and their manuscript libraries are the oldest in the country.
The relationship between the soul and karma is explained by the analogy of gold.
''Sallekhana'' is seen as spiritual detachment requiring a great deal of spiritual accomplishment and maturity and a declaration that a person is finished with this world and has chosen to leave.
Of the nine ''balabhadra'', eight attain liberation and the last goes to heaven.
In its modifications, it is said to be the subject of knowledge and enjoyment, or suffering, in varying degrees, according to its circumstances.
He appears in the tradition as one who, from the beginning, had followed a religion established long ago.
Average lifespan of people
According to the Jain text, ''Purushartha Siddhyupaya'', "killing any living being out of passions is ''hiṃsā'' (injury) and abstaining from such act is ''ahimsa'' (non-injury)".
They have contributed to the culture and language in the Indian states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Gujrat, Rajasthan and Maharashtra.
Jain monks have to follow six duties known as ''avashyakas'': ''sāmāyika'' (practising serenity), ''chaturvimshati'' (praising the ''tirthankara''), ''vandan'' (respecting teachers and monks), ''pratikramana'' (introspection), ''kayotsarga'' (stillness), and ''pratyakhyana'' (renunciation).
The Muslims rulers, such as Mahmud Ghazni (1001), Mohammad Ghori (1175) and Ala-ud-din Muhammed Shah Khilji (1298) further oppressed the Jain community.
In this ''ara'', though religion is practiced in lax and diluted form, no liberation is possible.
Moderate happiness and no sorrow
Samprati (c.224215 BCE) (grandson of the Maurya emperor Ashoka) is said to have been converted to Jainism by a Jain monk named ''Suhastin''.
Followers of the path practiced and preached by the jinas are known as Jains.
They follow the five main vows strictly and observe complete abstinence.
Such stories of destruction of one sect by another sect were common at the time, and were used as a way to prove the superiority of one sect over the other.
Rishabha, the first ''tirthankara'', is usually depicted in either the lotus position or kayotsarga, the standing position.
Later on, some learned ''Āchāryas'' started to restore, compile, and put into written words the teachings of Mahāvīra, that were the subject matter of ''Aagamas''.
The soul removes its ignorance (''mithyatva'') at the 4th stage, vowlessness (''avirati'') at the 6th stage, passions (''kashaya'') at the 12th stage, and yoga (activities of body, mind and speech) at the 14th stage, and thus attains liberation.
Jains form 0.37% of India's population.
Followers of Jainism take five main vows: ''ahimsa'' (non-violence), ''satya'' (not lying), ''asteya'' (not stealing), ''brahmacharya'' (chastity), and ''aparigraha'' (non-attachment).
In his words, he asks:
#''nirjarā bhāvanā'' – gradual shedding of karmic matter;
The Jains suffered isolated violent persecutions by these groups, but the main factor responsible for the decline of their religion was the success of Hindu reformist movements.
Forgiveness is asked by saying ''Micchami Dukkadam'' to others, which means, "If I have offended you in any way, knowingly or unknowingly, in thought, word or action, then I seek your forgiveness."
According to the Jain texts, the universe is divided into three parts, the upper, middle, and lower worlds, called respectively ''urdhva loka'', ''madhya loka'', and ''adho loka''.
Jains have developed a type of meditation called sāmāyika, a term derived from the word samaya.
For example, if a person kills another living being out of carelessness and then later regrets the act, the bondage (''bandha'') of karma is less compared to when a person kills the same kind of living being with anger, revenge, etc.
According to Jainism, there are six simple substances in existence, namely, Soul, Matter, Time, Space, ''Dharma'' and ''Adharma''.
The majority of Jains currently reside in India.
Though he possesses worldly power, he often finds his ambitions dwarfed by the vastness of the cosmos.
'''The following table depicts the six''' '''''aras''''' '''of''' '''''avasarpiṇī'''''
It emphatically supports vegetarianism in chapter 26 and states that giving up animal sacrifice is worth more than a thousand offerings in fire in verse 259.
On Diwali morning, ''Nirvan Ladoo'' is offered after praying to Mahāvīra in all Jain temples all across the world.
The goal of ''sāmāyika'' is to achieve a feeling of perfect calmness and to understand the unchanging truth of the self.
According to the legends, the ''narayana'' ultimately kill the ''pratinarayana''.
It seems likely that this assembly was the model upon which tradition fabricated the Sangam legend."
After the attainment of ''Kevala Jnāna'' (omniscience), the ''tirthankara'' discourses in a divine preaching hall called ''samavasarana''.
Mahāvīra (6th century BC) is revered as the last ''Tīrthankara'' of ''avasarpiṇī''.
The ''sallekhana'' (or Santhara) vow is observed at the end of life most commonly by Jain monks and nuns.
Jains believe that Jainism is eternal and while it may be forgotten, it will be revived from time to time.
is called ''Jina''.
Another such legend about Vishnuvardhana ordering the Jains to be crushed in an oil mill does not appear to be historically true.
This trend will start reversing at the onset of ''utsarpinī kāl'' with the ''Dukhama-dukhamā'' ''ara'' being the first ''ara'' of ''utsarpinī'' (half-time cycle of regeneration).
According to Jain cosmology, currently we are in the 5th ''ara'' of ''avasarpiṇī'' (half time cycle of degeneration).
The Yapaniyas, believed to have originated from the Ardhaphalaka, followed Digambara nudity along with several Śvētāmbara beliefs.
The Buddhist king Ashoka (304232 BCE) is said to have ordered killings of 18,000 Jains or Ajivikas after someone drew a picture of Buddha bowing at the feet of Mahāvīra.
They comprise twenty-four ''tīrthaṅkaras'', twelve ''chakravartins'', nine ''balabhadra'', nine ''narayana'', and nine ''pratinarayana''.
Diwali is a festival that marks the anniversary of Mahāvīra's attainment of ''moksha''.
In reality, however, these qualities are found to be obstructed due to the soul's association with ''karmic'' matter.
As reality is complex, no single proposition can express its full nature.
''Āchārya Dharasen'', in the first century CE, guided two ''Āchāryas'', ''Āchārya Pushpadant'' and ''Āchārya Bhutabali'', to put these teachings in written form.
He is distinguished from other ''tirthankara'' by the long locks of hair falling to his shoulders.
There is inscriptional evidence for the presence of Jain monks in south India by the second or first centuries BC, and archaeological evidence of Jain monks in Saurashtra in Gujarat by the second century CE.
Most of the Jains are concentrated in the states of Maharashtra (31.46% of Indian Jains), Rajasthan (13.97%), Gujarat (13.02%) and Madhya Pradesh (12.74%).
With 46 million followers (0.1%), Jainism is relatively small compared to major world religions.
Jain monks and nuns have neither a permanent home nor any possessions.
Jains were the earliest known cultivators of Kannada literature, which they dominated until the 12th century.
Rishabhanatha, the first ''tirthankara'', was revered and worshiped in Pithunda and was known as the Kalinga Jina.
Several Jain temples have been built in both of these places.
The earliest known Jain image is in the Patna museum.
The concept of anekāntavāda (non-absolutism) is further explained by Syādvāda and Nayavāda.
The ''Digambara'' sect of Jainism maintains that the ''Agamas'' were lost during the same famine in which the ''purvas'' were lost.
A large number of ''ayagapata'', votive tablets for offerings and the worship of ''Tīrthankara'', were excavated from Kankali Tila, Mathura.
The nature of the soul-substance is said to be freedom.
The ''tirthankara'' is a guide and teacher who points the way to enlightenment, but the struggle for enlightenment is one's own.
Jainism has contributed significantly to Indian art and architecture.
King Vanaraja (c. 720780 CE) of the Chawda dynasty in northern Gujarat, raised by a Jain monk named Silunga Suri, supported Jainism during his rule.
Yakshas and yakshinis, attendant spirits who guard the ''tirthankara'', are usually shown with them.
In this mantra, Jains worship the qualities (''gunas'') of the spiritually supreme, including those who have already attained salvation, in order to adopt similar behavior.
After his conversion he was credited with actively spreading Jainism to many parts of India and beyond, both by making it possible for monks to travel to barbarian lands, and by building and renovating thousands of temples and establishing millions of icons.
The first two are regarded as indirect knowledge and the remaining three as direct knowledge.
* the three sex-passions (male sex-passion, female sex-passion, neuter sex-passion); and
Every object has infinite aspects, but when we describe one in practice, we speak only of relevant aspects and ignore the irrelevant.
Although they admit that plants must be destroyed for the sake of food, they accept such violence only as much as it is necessary for human survival.
Three palyopama years
These comprise thirty-two works: eleven ''angās'', twelve ''upanga āgamas'', four ''chedasūtras'', four ''mūlasūtras'', and the last, a ''pratikraman'', or ''Avashyak sūtra''.
In addition to the four passions of the mind, the remaining ten internal possessions are:
Jainism is a philosophy of eternity, and Jains believe their religion to be eternal.
He was a disciple of Bhadrabahu, the last ''srut-kevali'' (knower of all "Jain Agamas"), who migrated to South India.
It is independent and self-sufficient, and does not require any superior power to govern it.
A monolithic,  statue of Bahubali, referred to as ''Gommateshvara'', built by the Ganga minister and commander Chavundaraya, is situated on a hilltop in Shravanabelagola in the Hassan district of Karnataka state.
The following two verses of the ''Ratnakaranda śrāvakācāra'' expound the definition of God according to Jainism:
Jains illustrate this theory through the parable of the blind men and an elephant.
The principle of ''ahimsa'' (non-violence or non-injury) is the most fundamental and well-known aspect of Jainism.
Jains trace their history through a succession of twenty-four teachers and revivers of the Jain path known as ''Tirthankaras''.
This includes non-materialism and non-attachment to objects, places and people.
According to the Jain text ''Sarvārthasiddhi'', "He who has passions causes injury to himself by himself.
Syād here means "in some ways" or "from some perspective".
Degree of happiness
Rishabhanatha is said to be the first ''Tīrthankara'' of the present half-cycle (''avasarpiṇī'').
The present age is one of sorrow and misery.
''Nayavāda'' is a compound of two Sanskrit words: ''naya'' ("partial viewpoint") and ''vāda'' ("school of thought or debate").
The third main principle in Jainism is ''aparigraha'' which means non-attachment to worldly possessions.
For example, insects in the home are often escorted out instead of killed.
Excavations at Mathura revealed Jain statues from the time of the Kushan Empire (c.1st century CE).
Jains believe this allows one to achieve death with dignity and dispassion along with a great reduction of negative karma.
According to Champat Rai Jain:
; Supplementary vows and sallekhana
The first Mauryan emperor, Chandragupta Maurya (c.322298 BCE), became a Jain in the latter part of his life.
''Anekāntavāda'' is more formally stated by observing that objects are infinite in their qualities and modes of existence, so they cannot be completely grasped in all aspects and manifestations by finite human perception.
There are several legends about the massacre of Jains in ancient times.
All of them claim to understand and explain the true appearance of the elephant, but due to their limited perspectives, can only partly succeed.
Elaborate descriptions of the shape and function of the physical and metaphysical universe, and its constituents, are provided in the canonical Jain texts, in commentaries and in the writings of the Jain philosopher-monks.
The ''balabhadra'' and ''narayana'' are brothers.
Court poet to the Chalukya king Arikesari, a Rashtrakuta feudatory, he is best known for his ''Vikramarjuna Vijaya''.
Jain libraries, including those at Patan and Jaisalmer, have a large number of well-preserved manuscripts.
In this vow, there is voluntary and gradual reduction of food and liquid intake under some conditions.
Therefore, non-attachment also includes non-possessiveness and non-materialism.
They claim that there can be a partial or total destruction of a body or thing, but no substance can ever be destroyed.
Some examples include: eating only one or two meals per day, drinking only water all day, not eating after sunset, not eating processed foods, eating food without sugar/oil/salt.
Around the 7th century, Shaivism saw considerable growth at the expense of Jainism due to the efforts of the Shaivite saints like Sambandar and Appar.
In this story, each blind man feels a different part of an elephant: its trunk, leg, ear, and so on.
The Pallava king Mahendravarman I (600630 CE) converted from Jainism to Shaivism under the influence of Appar.
705.6 quintillion years
The word "Jain" derives from the Sanskrit word ''jina'' (conqueror).
''Svetambara'' monks carry a ''rayoharan'' (a broom-like object made from dense, thick thread strands).
''Digambara monks'' and nuns carry a broom-like object, called a ''picchi'' (made from fallen peacock feathers) to sweep the ground ahead of them or before sitting down to avoid inadvertently crushing small insects.
It is made up of six constituents: ''Jīva'', the living entity; ''Pudgala'', matter; ''Dharma tattva'', the substance responsible for motion; ''Adharma tattva'', the substance responsible for rest; ''Akāśa'', space; and ''Kāla'', time.
It recommends conquering anger by forgiveness, pride by humility, deceitfulness by straight-forwardness and greed by contentment.
Each of the twenty-four ''tirthankara'' is associated with distinctive emblems, which are listed in such texts as ''Tiloyapannati'', ''Kahavaali'' and ''Pravacanasaarodhara''.
Jain texts like ''Harivamsa Purana'' and Hindu Texts like ''Vishnu Purana'' mention that India came to be known as ''Bharatavarsha'' in his memory.
One of the greatest ''chakravartins'' mentioned in Jain scriptures is Bharata Chakravartin.
Jains extend the practice of nonviolence and kindness not only towards other humans but towards all living beings.
# ''Tiryancha'' (subhuman like flora or fauna)
The ancient city Pithunda, capital of Kalinga (modern Odisha), is described in the Jain text ''Uttaradhyana Sutra'' as an important centre at the time of Mahāvīra, and was frequented by merchants from Champa.
The earliest record of Digambara beliefs is contained in the Prakrit ''Suttapahuda'' of the ''Digambara Acharya'', ''Kundakunda'' (c.2nd century CE).
Jain texts propound that the universe was never created, nor will it ever cease to exist.
The five transgression of this vow as mentioned in the ''Tattvārthsūtra'' are: "Prompting another to steal, receiving stolen goods, underbuying in a disordered state, using false weights and measures, and deceiving others with artificial or imitation goods".
A ''chakravartī'' is an emperor of the world and lord of the material realm.
There are 26 caves, 200 stone beds, 60 inscriptions and over 100 sculptures in and around Madurai.
#''bodhidurlabha bhāvanā'' – the extreme difficulty in obtaining human birth and, subsequently, in attaining true faith; and
On antiquity of Jainism, Dr. Heinrich Zimmer was of the view that:
Female monastics of the ''Digambara'' sect wear unstitched plain white sarees and are referred to as ''Aryikas''.
Great emphasis is placed on the internal control of thoughts, as they influence behavior, actions and goals.Through Samayika, Jains try to achieve control over Mana (Mind), Vachana (Speech) and Kaya (Actions).
It is generally represented by a tree with twelve branches.
They vandalised idols and destroyed temples or converted them into mosques.
Jain temples, homes, offices, and shops are decorated with lights and diyas (small oil lamps).
Jainism encourages its adherents to consider the views and beliefs of their rivals and opposing parties,  including other religions.
This is also the site where Jain ascetics of yesteryear wrote great epics and books on grammar in Tamil.
* the six defects (laughter, like, dislike, sorrow, fear, disgust);
The discourse delivered is called ''Śhrut Jnāna'' and comprises eleven ''angas'' and fourteen ''purvas''.
They are also called human spiritual guides.
''Tirthankara-nama-karma'' is a special type of ''karma'', bondage of which raises a soul to the supreme status of a ''tirthankara''.
''Tirthankara'' represented without clothes, and monks with cloth wrapped around the left arm, are identified as the Ardhaphalaka ("half-clothed") mentioned in texts.
Syādvāda and Nayavāda expand on the concept of anekāntavāda (non-absolutism).
The principle of ''anekāntavāda'' influenced Mahatma Gandhi to adopt principles of religious tolerance and non-violence.
Smaller Jain communities also exist in Kenya and Canada.
''Nayavāda'' is the theory of partial standpoints or viewpoints.
Jains revere ''Vardhamana'' Mahāvīra (6th century BCE) as the twenty-fourth ''tirthankara'' of this era.
Whether injury is then caused to other living beings or not, it is immaterial."
#''āsrava bhāvanā'' – influx of karmic matter;
Sthulabhadra, a pupil of Acharya Bhadrabahu, stayed in Magadha.
#''anyatva bhāvanā'' – the distinctiveness between the body and the soul;
This is said to be the essence of the Jaina scripture.
It involves minimizing intentional and unintentional harm to other living creatures by actions, speech or thoughts.
Adikavi Pampa is one of the greatest Kannada poets.
Monks of the ''Digambara'' ("sky-clad") tradition do not wear clothes.
#''anitya bhāvanā'' – the transitoriness of the world;
Monks and nuns, particularly in Rajasthan, have published numerous research monographs.
#''Ahimsa'': ''Ahimsa'' means nonviolence or non-injury.
This statue was voted as the first in the SMS poll Seven Wonders of India conducted by ''The Times of India''.
''Ṛṣabhanātha'' is said to be the founder of Jainism in the present half cycle.
Jain philosophy is the oldest Indian philosophy that separates body (matter) from the soul (consciousness) completely.
A Statue of Ahimsa (depicting Rishabhanatha) was erected in Nashik district in 2015 which is  tall.
The Śvētāmbaras believe women may attain liberation and that the ''tirthankara'' Māllīnātha was female.
The decline of Jainism continued after the Muslim conquests on the Indian subcontinent.
; Syādvāda and Nayavāda
It is believed that meditation will assist in managing and balancing one's passions.
The ''Tirukkuṛaḷ'' by Thiruvalluvar is considered to be the work of a Jain by scholars such as Ka.
The Lingayats destroyed various temples belonging to Jains and adapted them to their use.
Average height of people
Some conversions were peaceful, however; Pir Mahabir Khamdayat (c.13th century CE) is well known for his peaceful propagation of Islam.
Jains wrote about the ''tirthankaras'' and other aspects of the faith.
Major Jain festivals include ''Paryushana'' and Daslakshana, ''Mahavir Jayanti'', and ''Diwali''.
Jain monks and nuns observe these vows absolutely whereas householders (''śrāvakas'') observe them within their practical limitations.
There are no set rules, and followers are encouraged to practice according to their ability and desires.
The Jains also enjoyed amicable relations with the rulers of the tributary Vedic Hindu kingdoms during this period; however, their number and influence had diminished significantly due to their rivalry with the Shaivite and Vaisnavite sects.
''Digambara'' saw this as being opposed to the Jain tenets which, according to them, required complete nudity.
#''Aparigraha'': ''Aparigraha'' means non-possessiveness.
