The urban construction booms have continued in the 21st century and are shaping skylines in Jakarta.
Also located in East Jakarta are Taman Mini Indonesia Indah and Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport.
5 of 1974'' relating to the Fundamentals of Regional Government, Jakarta was confirmed as the capital of Indonesia and one of Indonesia's (then) 26 provinces.
The number of passengers in 2014 reached 208 million, rising from 158 million in the previous year.
Preparation works started in April 2012, and groundbreaking was done in October 2013, with the first, 15.2&nbsp;km-long line between Hotel Indonesia and Lebak Bulus scheduled to be operational by 2018, and the north–south line MRT network is scheduled to be operational by 2020.
In 1971, ''becak'' were banned from major roads, and shortly thereafter the government attempted a total ban, which substantially reduced their numbers but did not eliminate them.
Its current name derives from the word ''Jayakarta''.
There are several modern statues in the park made by artists of the ASEAN countries, which contributes to the nickname of the park ''"Taman persahabatan seniman ASEAN"'' ("Park of the ASEAN artists friendship").
The Chinese in Jakarta traditionally reside around old urban areas, such as Pinangsia, Pluit and Glodok (Jakarta Chinatown) areas.
Gelora Bung Karno Stadium, located in Central Jakarta, hosted the group stage, quarterfinal and final of 2007 AFC Asian Cup along with Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam.
Large-scale and medium-scale industries are concentrated in North Jakarta.
Jakarta has a bustling luxury property market.
KRL Jabotabek serves all municipalities in Jakarta excluding the Thousand Islands, as well as all neighboring cities and regencies.
Another football team in Jakarta is Persitara who compete in Liga Indonesia Premier Division and play its games in Kamal Muara Stadium.
Following World War II, Indonesian Republicans withdrew from Allied-occupied Jakarta during their fight for Indonesian independence and established their capital in Yogyakarta.
The Jakarta Flona (Flora dan Fauna), the flower and decoration plants and pet exhibition, is held in this park around August annually.
The most famous Jakarta's landmark that become the symbol of the city is the 132&nbsp;m (433&nbsp;ft) tall obelisk of National Monument (''Monumen Nasional'' or ''Monas'') right in the centre of Merdeka Square, Jakarta's Central Park.
According to the Government's ''Jakarta in Figures'' document, the population stood at 10,187,595 in 2011 and 9,761,407 in 2012.
The Kopaja and MetroMini economy minibus systems also provide important services for Jakarta commuters with numerous routes throughout the city.
Other popular street foods include ''nasi goreng'' (fried rice), ''sate'' (skewered meats), ''pecel lele'' (fried catfish), ''bakso'' (meatballs), ''bakpau'' (Chinese bun) and ''siomay'' (fish dumplings).
Jakarta has numerous shopping malls and markets.
The projects will initiate once approved by the Finance Ministry.
One of the most popular local dishes in Jakarta is ''Soto Betawi'' which is made from chunks of beef meat and offals in rich and spicy cow's milk or coconut milk broth.
In 1974, Based on the ''Act No.
The area includes Jakarta's Chinatown and Dutch colonial landmarks such as the Chinese Langgam building and Toko Merah.
*Jagorawi Toll Road linking to Bogor and Ciawi in the south
Several Indonesian national heroes are commemorated in statues, such as Diponegoro and Kartini statues in Merdeka Square, Sudirman and Thamrin statues located in each respectable avenues, also Sukarno and Hatta statues in Proclamation Monument also on the entrance of Soekarno–Hatta International Airport.
The main mode of transportation between the islands are speed boats or small ferries.
Seibu flagship store is located in Grand Indonesia Shopping Town, and French luxury department store, Galeries Lafayette opened its doors for the first time in South East Asia in Pacific Place.
It is easier to find Javanese Gamelan instead of ''Tanjidor'' (a mixture between Betawi and Portuguese music), ''Marawis'' (a mixture between Betawi and Yemeni music) or ''Gambang Kromong'' (a mixture between Betawi and Chinese music).
Projects included a clover-leaf highway, a major boulevard (Jalan MH Thamrin-Sudirman), monuments such as The National Monument, Hotel Indonesia, a shopping centre, and a new parliament building.
* Central Jakarta (''Jakarta Pusat'') is Jakarta's smallest city and home to most of Jakarta's administrative and political centre.
The area in and around modern Jakarta was part of the fourth century Sundanese kingdom of Tarumanagara, one of the oldest Hindu kingdoms in Indonesia.
The Jakarta provincial government, like all other provincial governments in Indonesia, relies on transfers from the central government for the bulk of budget income.
Tourism stakeholders are expecting greater marketing of the Jakarta as a tourism destination.
The major rail stations are Gambir, Jakarta Kota, Jatinegara, Pasar Senen, Manggarai, and Tanah Abang.
Another example is the ban on trucks passing main avenues during the day.
Through the relationship with Prince Jayawikarta from the Sultanate of Banten, Dutch ships arrived in Jayakarta in 1596.
The elite suburbs Menteng, developed during the 1910s, was the city's first attempt at creating an ideal and healthy housing area for the middle class.
However, this month-long fair also features entertainment, including arts and music performances by local musicians.
Next to a myriad of Indonesian food and regional specialties from all over Indonesia, foreign food is also represented: Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Thai, Indian, American, French, Italian, Vietnamese, Middle Eastern, and modern fusion food can all be found in Jakarta.
It is the location of the Tanjung Priok.
Jakarta's main seaport Tanjung Priok serves many ferry connections to different parts of Indonesia.
The annual "Jakarta Great Sale" is held every year in June and July to celebrate Jakarta's anniversary, with about 73 participating shopping centres in 2012.
While the population of Greater Jakarta (Jabodetabek Region) has risen from 8.2&nbsp;million in 1970 jump to 28.5&nbsp;million in 2010.
Total population (2010 Census)
Suharto resigned as president, and Jakarta has remained the focal point of democratic change in Indonesia.
Water supply had been privatised by government of then President Suharto in 1998 to the French company Suez Environnement and the British company Thames Water International.
The houses were built of nangka wood (''Artocarpus integrifolia'') and comprised three rooms.
The large number of spectators flocking to the main stadium usually worsen the traffic congestion in Jakarta.
The area of DKI Jakarta is 664&nbsp;km2, suggesting a population density of 15,174 people/km2 as the ninth largest urban population density in the world.
There are significant religious minorities, notably Christian and Buddhist.
Jakarta's most popular home football club is Persija, which plays its matches in their home stadium at Bung Karno Stadium.
A second airport, Halim Perdanakusuma Airport (HLP) serves domestic flight of low cost airline, private and VIP/presidential flights.
The Satrio-Casablanca corridor, 3.5-kilometre street is a new shopping belt in Jakarta.
Jakarta is home to a number of universities, of which the University of Indonesia (UI) is the largest and oldest tertiary-level educational institution in Indonesia.
For the future, ''Metromini AC'' bus it is also possible to enter TransJakarta bus lanes to enhance integrated bus rapid transit system.
Today the airport is running over capacity.
The Sumatran people of the city is very diverse.
He began control of migration to the city to stem overcrowding and poverty.
Many of Islamic organizations headquarter in Jakarta, such as Nahdlatul Ulama, Indonesian Ulema Council, Muhammadiyah, Jaringan Islam Liberal, and Front Pembela Islam.
In 2014, per capita GRDP of DKI Jakarta inhabitants was Rp 174.87 million or USD 14,727.
Chinese also had influenced Betawi culture, such as the popularity of Chinese cakes and sweets, firecrackers, to Betawi wedding attire that demonstrates Chinese and Arab influences.
Lieutenant General Ali Sadikin served as Governor from the mid-1960s commencement of the "New Order" through to 1977; he rehabilitated roads and bridges, encouraged the arts, built several hospitals, and a large number of new schools.
Marine tourism, such as diving, water bicycle, and wind surfing, is the most important touristic activity in this territory.
However, some festivals such as the ''Jalan Jaksa Festival'' or ''Kemang Festival'' include efforts to preserve Betawi arts by inviting artists to give performances.
Jakarta has a tropical monsoon climate (''Am'') according to the Köppen climate classification system.
They gave priority to education, social welfare programs and religious propagation activities.
Much of the rioting targeted Chinese Indonesians.
Port of Tanjung Priok is Indonesia's busiest port, and the 21st busiest port in the world in 2013, handling over 6.59 million TEUs.
Thousand Islands (''Kepulauan Seribu'')
The airport's IATA code, CGK, originates from the name of the Cengkareng locality, Tangerang, Banten, although the location of this airport is located outside of the city, it is used as a gate out by the Jakartans and citizen of the surrounding areas, therefore at the main gate of the airport, there is an inscription "Jakarta Airports".
Since 1950, Jakarta has attracted people from all parts of Java and other Indonesian islands.
A monument stands where the generals' bodies were dumped.
Several features include a deer park and 33 trees that represent the 33 provinces of Indonesia.
Taman Suropati was known as Burgemeester Bisschopplein during the Dutch colonial time.
In Jakarta there are also markets that sell specific collectable items, such as antique goods in Surabaya Street and gemstones in Rawabening Market.
The modernist organizations mostly catered to a socioeconomic class of educated urban elites and merchant traders.
*Jakarta-Serpong Toll Road linking to Serpong
Population Density(per km2)in 2014
This phase will be 42.1 kilometres long, which include 18 stations, and expected to be operated by the first half of 2018, prior to the 2018 Asian Games.
The harbour area became known as Sunda Kelapa (Sundanese: '''ᮞᮥᮔ᮪ᮓ ᮊᮜᮕ''') and by the fourteenth century, it was a major trading port for Sunda kingdom.
As per 2014, the population stood at 10,075,310 people.
Jakarta MRT will be a combination of both subways and elevated rails.
According to 2010 Census, there were roughly 346,000 Batak, 305,000 Minangkabau and 155,000 Malays.
It has a high conservation value because of its unique and special ecosystems.
Local (non-central government) sources of revenue are incomes from various taxes such as vehicle ownership and vehicle transfer fees and so on.
However, because of the large amount of floating garbage which kept jamming the propeller, it is no longer in service.
Long-distance railways and local tram services were first introduced during the Dutch colonial era.
Jemaah Islamiah-connected bombings occurred almost annually in the city between 2000 and 2005, with another bombing in 2009.
Betawi arts have a low profile in Jakarta, and most Betawi have moved to the suburbs of Jakarta, displaced by new migrants.
The city's population in 2000 was 35.16% Javanese, 27.65% Betawi, and 15.27% Sundanese.
Initially it was called Waterlooplein and functioned as the ceremonial square during the Netherlands East Indies colonial period.
There has been a significant Chinese community in Jakarta for many centuries.
This cooperation is mainly because Jakarta and Rotterdam are dealing with similar problems; both cities lies in low-lying flat plain prone of flooding.
The sex ratio was 102.8 (males per 100 females) in 2010 and 101.3 in 2014.
Jakarta is also a member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21 and the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group.
By 1930 Batavia had more than 500,000 inhabitants, including 37,067 Europeans.
The project will be built by 2025.
Those without access to piped water supply get water mostly from wells that are often salty and polluted with bacteria.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, around 400 Arabs and Moors lived in Batavia, a number which changed little during the following decades.
The former Batavia Stadhuis in Jakarta Old Town is also the city's landmark.
The surrounding cities of Jakarta are served by KRL Jabodetabek, a commuter rail system which serves commuters both in and around Jakarta.
Traditional markets include Blok M, Tanah Abang, Senen, Pasar Baru, Glodok, Mangga Dua, Cempaka Mas, and Jatinegara.
The language and Betawi culture are distinct from those of the Sundanese or Javanese, forming itself as a language island in the surrounding area.
A number of colonial monuments and memorials erected on the square during the colonial period were demolished during the Sukarno era.
It has a governor (instead of a mayor).
All these rivers, combined with the wet season rains and insufficient drainage due to clogging, make Jakarta prone to flooding.
As per 2014, the population of Greater Jakarta was 30,326,103, accounts for 11% of Indonesia's population.
Customer growth in the 7 first years of the concessions had been lower than before, despite substantial inflation-adjusted tariff increases during this period.
Today, the city has continued as the capital of Indonesia since the country's independence was declared in 1945.
The monorail project was relaunched in 2013 and the groundbreaking was done in October 2013.
* Thousand Islands (''Kepulauan Seribu''), formerly a district within the city of North Jakarta, is a collection of 105 small islands located on the Java Sea.
The airport is named after the first President of Indonesia, Soekarno, and the first vice-president, Mohammad Hatta.
In June 2011, Jakarta had only 10.5% green open space (''Ruang Terbuka Hijau'') and will be added to 13.94% public green open space.
Among the commodities traded, fabrics, especially imported cotton, ''batik'' and clothing occupied by Arab communities.
Some of statues and monuments in Jakarta are nationalist, such as the West Irian Liberation monument and Dirgantara statue.
In 1966, Jakarta was declared a "special capital region" (''daerah khusus ibukota''), thus gaining a status approximately equivalent to that of a province.
According to the Chinese source, ''Chu-fan-chi'', written circa 1225, Chou Ju-kua reported in the early 13th century Srivijaya still ruled Sumatra, the Malay peninsula and western Java (Sunda).
* West Jakarta (''Jakarta Barat'') has the highest concentration of small-scale industries in Jakarta.
Land is expensive and rents are high.
Several foreign art and culture centres are also established in Jakarta, and mainly serve to promote culture and language through learning centres, libraries, and art galleries.
The square was created by Dutch Governor-General Herman Willem Daendels (1810) and was originally named Koningsplein (King's Square).
Sunda Kelapa was renamed Jayakarta, and became a fiefdom of the Sultanate of Banten which became a major Southeast Asia trading centre.
Traditional music is often found at high-class hotels, including Wayang and Gamelan performances.
However the project cancelled in January 2015, due to disagreements between the Jakarta administration and PT Jakarta Monorail over the monorail's route.
Tourism is contributing a growing amount of income to the city.
The ability of the regional government to respond to the many problems of Jakarta is constrained by extremely limited finances.
Tensions reached a peak in when four students were shot dead at Trisakti University by security forces; four days of riots and violence ensued that killed an estimated 1,200, and destroyed or damaged 6,000 buildings.
Jayawikarta is thought to have made trading connections with the English merchants, rivals of the Dutch, by allowing them to build houses directly across from the Dutch buildings in 1615.
The five radiating toll roads are the:
The Betawi people are mostly descended from various Southeast-Asian ethnic groups brought or attracted to Batavia to meet labour needs, and include people from different parts of Indonesia.
Located on the northwest coast of the world's most populous island of Java, Jakarta is the country's economic, cultural and political center, with a population of 10,075,310 .
Jakarta is listed as an alpha-global city in the 2012 Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network (GaWC) research.
By the 1920s, the architectural taste have begun to shift in favor of rationalism and modernist movement, particularly there was increasing art deco architecture.
North Jakarta (''Jakarta Utara'')
Some major private universities in Jakarta are: Trisakti University, Mercu Buana University, Tarumanagara University, Atma Jaya University, Pelita Harapan University, Bina Nusantara University, and Pancasila University.
From the early 1940s to 1991 they were a common form of local transportation in the city.
Jakarta signed sister city agreements with other cities, one of them is Casablanca, Morocco's largest city, that have signed sister city agreement on 21 September 1990.
The Jakarta Fair is held annually from mid-June to mid-July to celebrate the anniversary of the city and is largely centred around a trade fair.
Four of the major international schools located in Jakarta are the Gandhi Memorial International School, IPEKA International Christian School, Jakarta Intercultural School and the British School Jakarta.
To promote friendship between two cities, ''Jalan Casablanca'', a main avenue famous for its shopping and business centres in South Jakarta, was named after Jakarta's Moroccan sister city.
Architects such as J.C. Schultze and Eduard Cuypers designed some significant buildings in Jakarta.
Foreign investment contributed to a real estate boom which changed the face of the city.
*Also located in Menteng are Menteng Park () and the Situ Lembang pond.
Public parks are included in public green open space.
Both foreign companies subsequently sold their concessions to Indonesian companies.
Kamal, North Jakarta.
In October 1965, Jakarta was the site of an abortive coup attempt in which 6 top generals were killed, precipitating a violent anti-communist purge in which half-a million people were killed, including many ethnic Chinese, and the beginning of Suharto's New Order.
"Jayakarta" translates as "victorious deed", "complete act", or "complete victory".
Other popular Betawi dishes includes ''soto kaki, nasi uduk, kerak telor'' (spicy omelette), ''nasi ulam, asinan, ketoprak, rujak'' and ''gado-gado'' Betawi (salad in peanut sauce).
Colonial buildings and structures in Jakarta include those that were constructed during the Dutch colonial period of Indonesia.
The dominant styles of the Dutch colonial period can be divided into three periods: the Dutch Golden Age (17th to late 18th century), the transitional style period (late 18th century – 19th century), and Dutch modernism (20th century).
According to PALYJA in its western half of the concession the service coverage ratio increased substantially from 34% in 1998 to 59% in 2007 and 65% in 2010.
The "Betawi" (''Orang Betawi'', or "people of Batavia") are the descendants of the people living in and around Batavia, and recognised as an ethnic group from around the 18th–19th century.
It has become a recreation place for people and is occasionally also used as an exhibition place or for other events.
Other rivers include the Pesanggrahan, and Sunter.
He also cleared out slum dwellers for new development projects—some for the benefit of the Suharto family—and tried to eliminate rickshaws and ban street vendors.
TransJakarta has the world's longest bus rapid transit routes (172&nbsp;km in length) and has more than 669 buses in operation.
When fully operational in 2023, it will triple existing annual capacity.
The Port of Tanjung Priok has 20 terminals: general cargo, multipurpose terminal, scraps terminal, passenger terminal, dry bulk terminal, liquid bulk terminal, oil terminal, chemicals terminal and three container terminals, 76 berths, a quay length of 16,853 metres, a total storage area of 661,822 m2 and a storage capacity of 401,468 tonnes.
The population has risen from 4.5&nbsp;million in 1970 doubled to 9.5&nbsp;million in 2010, counting only its legal residents.
The most notable monument in the square is the Monumen Pembebasan Irian Barat (Monument of the Liberation of West Irian).
Betawi people are a creole ethnic group that came from various parts of Indonesia and intermarriage with Chinese, Arabs, and Europeans.
It was the de facto capital of the Dutch East Indies (known as '''Batavia''' at that time).
In January 2014, Central Government agreed to build 2 dams in Ciawi, Bogor and a 1.2 kilometres tunnel from Ciliwung River to Cisadane River to ease Jakarta floods.
Jakarta Selatan functions as Jakarta's ground water buffer, but recently the green belt areas are threatened by new developments.
Rivers flow from the Puncak highlands to the south of the city, across the city northwards towards the Java Sea; the most important is the Ciliwung River, which divides the city into the western and eastern principalities.
Census the population of Jakarta was 85.36% Muslim, 7.53% Protestant, 3.30% Buddhist, 3.15% Catholic, 0.21% Hindu, and 0.06% Confucianist.
Many multistorey shopping centres are located here, such as Kuningan City, Mal Ambassador, Kota Kasablanka, and Lotte Shopping Avenue.
A notable feature of Jakarta's present road system is the toll road network.
The varying water levels during the dry and wet seasons were also a contributing factor to the close-down.
As the largest city and the capital, Jakarta houses many students from around Indonesia, many of whom reside in dormitories or home-stay residences.
First established in 2013 to promote Jakarta as sports tourism city.
*Merdeka Square () is an almost 1&nbsp;km2 field housing the symbol of Jakarta, Monas or Monumen Nasional (National Monument).
The Dutch burned the English fort, and forced the English to retreat on their ships.
Soekarno–Hatta International Airport is the 18th busiest airport in the world, serving 12,314,667 passengers, according to Airports Council International.
The ERP was planned to be implemented in the three-in-one zone and along Jl.
In 2005 tariffs were frozen, leading the private water companies to cut down on investments.
The source reports the port of Sunda as strategic and thriving, pepper from Sunda being among the best in quality.
South Jakarta (''Jakarta Selatan'')
Since Jakarta is regarded as the 'melting-pot' and a miniature version of Indonesia, many traditional foods from far-flung regions in Indonesia can be found in Jakarta.
Jakarta has several performing art centres, such as the classical concert hall Aula Simfonia Jakarta in Kemayoran, Taman Ismail Marzuki (TIM) art centre in Cikini, Gedung Kesenian Jakarta near Pasar Baru, Balai Sarbini in Plaza Semanggi area, Bentara Budaya Jakarta in Palmerah area, ''Pasar Seni'' (Art Market) in Ancol, and traditional Indonesian art performances at the pavilions of some provinces in Taman Mini Indonesia Indah.
Located in the western part of Java, Jakarta's wet season rainfall peak is January and February with average monthly rainfall of , and its dry season low point is August with a monthly average of .
It is characterised by large parks and Dutch colonial buildings.
Jakarta lies in a low, flat basin, ranged from  with average elevation  above sea level; 40% of Jakarta, particularly the northern areas, is below sea level, while the southern parts are comparatively hilly.
566&nbsp;trillion (around $US 56&nbsp;billion).
The administrative cities/municipalities of Jakarta are:
Implemented solutions include a 'three-in-one' rush-hour law, during which cars with fewer than three passengers are prohibited from driving on the main avenues.
In August 2007, Jakarta held its first ever election to choose a governor, whereas previously the city's governors were appointed by the local house of representatives.
Jakarta hosts several prestigious art and culture festivals, and exhibitions, such as the annual Jakarta International Film Festival (JiFFest), Jakarta International Java Jazz Festival, Jakarta Fashion Week, Jakarta Fashion & Food Festival (JFFF), Jakarta Fair, Indonesia Creative Products and Jakarta Arts and Crafts exhibition.
In September 1945, the government of Jakarta City was changed from the Japanese  into the Jakarta National Administration.
Jakarta was host of the 1962 Asian Games and will host the upcoming 2018 Asian Games, co-hosted by Palembang.
It has more buildings taller than 500 feet (150 m) than any other Southeast Asia's cities as well as southern hemisphere.
After a long term efforts and attempts made by the government regarding the development of Mass Rapid Transit system in Indonesia's capital, Jakarta Mass Rapid Transit is currently under construction, with a north–south line between Kota and Lebak Bulus; and an east–west line, which will connect to the north–south line at Sawah Besar Station.
Last data update was on 2014 by end of year Jakarta have a GRDP (Gross Regional Domestic Product) was Rp.
;America and Oceania
80% of the water distributed in Jakarta comes through the West Tarum Canal system from Jatiluhur reservoir on the Citarum River  southeast of the city.
For example, traditional Padang restaurants and low-budget ''Warteg'' (''Warung Tegal'') foodstalls are ubiquitous in the capital.
The local cuisine of Jakarta is the Betawi cuisine, which reflects various foreign culinary traditions that have influenced the inhabitants of Jakarta for centuries.
