St. Ann's Bay was named "Saint Gloria" by Columbus, as the first sighting of the land.
Ages 10 – 19 years.
The House of Assembly in Jamaica resented and resisted the new laws.
Hurricanes Charlie and Gilbert hit Jamaica directly in 1951 and 1988, respectively, causing major damage and many deaths.
There is a considerable amount of technical support for transport and agricultural aviation.
Digicel entered the broadband market in 2010 by offering WiMAX broadband, capable of up to 6 Mbit/s per subscriber.
Jamaica depends on petroleum imports to satisfy its national energy needs.
Inhabited by the indigenous Arawak and Taíno peoples, the island came under Spanish rule following the arrival of Christopher Columbus in 1494.
Under British colonial rule, Jamaica became a leading sugar exporter, with its plantation economy highly dependent on slaves imported from Africa.
Many other small, rural centres are served by private fields on sugar estates or bauxite mines.
Protestants form the majority in the country, and Roman Catholics are a minority (2% of the population).
The following year Blue and John Crow Mountains National Park was created on roughly  of wilderness, which supports thousands of tree and fern species and rare animals.
When the Spanish arrived in 1494, except for small agricultural clearings, the country was deeply forested.
The scale of emigration has been widespread and similar to other Caribbean entities such as Puerto Rico, Guyana, and The Bahamas.
There has also been emigration of Jamaicans to Cuba.
A new entrant to the Jamaican communications market, Flow Jamaica, laid a new submarine cable connecting Jamaica to the United States.
The Government of Jamaica remains committed to lowering inflation, with a long-term objective of bringing it in line with that of its major trading partners.
The birth of hip-hop in New York City owed much to the city's Jamaican community.
The transport infrastructure in Jamaica consists of roadways, railways and air transport, with roadways forming the backbone of the island's internal transport system.
Additionally, there are many community and teacher training colleges.
Just 20% of imported fuels are used for road transportation, the rest being used by the bauxite industry, electricity generation, and aviation.
Jamaican waters contain considerable resources of fresh-and saltwater fish.
The Jamaican Government has, since the late 1990s and in cooperation with private investors, embarked on a campaign of infrastructural improvement projects, one of which includes the creation of a system of freeways, the first such access-controlled roadways of their kind on the island, connecting the main population centres of the island.
Tourism, which is the largest foreign exchange earner, showed improvement as well.
After a period of steady growth from 1985 to 1995, real GDP decreased by 1.8% and 2.4% in 1996 and 1997, respectively.
In early 2005, an Opposition leader, Edward Seaga, called for the merger of the JDF and JCF.
The Jamaican Maroons fought the British during the 18th century.
FLOW Jamaica currently has the most broadband and cable subscribers on the island and also has 1 million mobile subscribers, second to Digicel (which had, at its peak, over 2 Million mobile subscriptions on its network).
* '''Tertiary''' – Community Colleges, Teachers' Colleges with The Mico Teachers' College (now The MICO University College) being the oldest founded in 1836,The Shortwood Teachers' College (which was once an all-female teacher training institution), Vocational Training Centres, Colleges and Universities – Publicly and privately owned.
Emphasis has been placed on maintaining strict fiscal discipline, greater openness to trade and financial flows, market liberalisation and reduction in the size of government.
Among the island's protected areas are the Cockpit Country, Hellshire Hills, and Litchfield forest reserves.
The company will focus on 4G LTE data offerings and will first go live in the Kingston Metropolitan Area and will expand to the rest of Jamaica thereafter.
Other religions in Jamaica include Jehovah's Witnesses (2% population), the Bahá'í faith, which counts perhaps 8,000 adherents and 21 Local Spiritual Assemblies, Buddhism, and Hinduism.
Jamaica has a wide variety of industrial and commercial activities.
The 1st Engineer Regiment was formed due to an increased demand for military engineers and their role is to provide engineering services whenever and wherever they are needed.
All the members of the Cabinet are appointed by the governor-general on the advice of the prime minister.
The party with current administrative and legislative power is the Jamaica Labour Party, with a one-seat parliamentary majority .
The JDF is based on the British military model with similar organisation, training, weapons and traditions.
The government implemented a new Debt Management Initiative, the Jamaica Debt Exchange (JDX) on 14 January 2010.
Presently the following categories of schools exist:
Many Jamaicans have emigrated to other countries, especially to the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada.
The economy in 1997 was marked by low levels of import growth, high levels of private capital inflows and relative stability in the foreign exchange market.
The loan agreement is for a period of three years.
With inflation for the 2006 calendar year down to 6.0% and unemployment down to 8.9%, the nominal GDP grew by an unprecedented 2.9%.
The Jamaican education system has only recently begun to offer formal instruction in Patois, while retaining JSE as the "official language of instruction".
There was also a decline in tourism, which was important to the economy.
The growth was fueled by strong private investments in bauxite/alumina, tourism, the manufacturing industry and, to a lesser extent, the agricultural sector.
In 1655, the English, led by Sir William Penn and General Robert Venables, took over the last Spanish fort in Jamaica.
The national football team qualified for the 1998 FIFA World Cup.
An estimated 1.3 million foreign tourists visit Jamaica every year.
Due to rising foreign and local debt, accompanied by large fiscal deficits, the government sought International Monetary Fund (IMF) financing from the United States and others.
There are several other ports positioned around the island, including Port Esquivel in St. Catherine (WINDALCO), Rocky Point in Clarendon, Port Kaiser in St. Elizabeth, Port Rhoades in Discovery Bay, Reynolds Pier in Ocho Rios, and Boundbrook Port in Port Antonio.
The offer was taken up by over 95% of local financial institutions and was deemed a success by the government.
Many ethnic Southeast Asian and Chinese descendents continue to reside in Jamaica today.
Members (then restricted to European-Jamaicans) claimed that the slaves were content and objected to Parliament's interference in island affairs.
As with other oceanic islands, land mammals are mostly bats.
The name is still used today by modern Maroon descendants, who have certain rights and autonomy at the community of Accompong.
Association football and horse-racing are other popular sports in Jamaica.
The global economic downturn had a significant impact on the Jamaican economy for the years 2007 to 2009, resulting in negative economic growth.
Kingston Harbour is the seventh-largest natural harbour in the world, which contributed to the city being designated as the capital in 1872.
Digicel's competitor, FLOW Jamaica, has a network consisting of ADSL, Coaxial and Fibre to the Home (inherited from LIME) and only offers speeds up to 100 Mbit/s.
Most of these schools were established by the churches.
The annual inflation rate decreased from a high of 80.2% in 1991 to 7.9% in 1998.
Jamaica is a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with legislative power vested in the bicameral Parliament of Jamaica, consisting of an appointed Senate and a directly elected House of Representatives.
Rugby league in Jamaica is growing with universities and high schools taking up the sport.
As with the British model, NCOs are given several levels of professional training as they rise up the ranks.
Jamaica is also home to Red Stripe beer and Jamaican Blue Mountain Coffee.
Jamaica is also home to about 50 species of reptiles, the largest of which is the American crocodile; however, it is only present within the Black River and a few other areas.
* '''Early childhood''' – Basic, Infant and privately operated pre-school.
Beginning in the 1840s, the British imported Chinese and Indian indentured labour to work on plantations.
Kingston is the country's capital and largest city, with a population of 937,700.
Many other internationally known artists were born in Jamaica, including Millie Small, Lee "Scratch" Perry, Gregory Isaacs, Half Pint, Protoje, Peter Tosh, Bunny Wailer, Big Youth, Jimmy Cliff, Dennis Brown, Desmond Dekker, Beres Hammond, Beenie Man, Shaggy, Grace Jones, Shabba Ranks, Super Cat, Buju Banton, Sean Paul, I Wayne, Bounty Killer and many others.
However, crime in Jamaica has recently shown a downward trend.
After emancipation the West Indian Commission granted a sum of money to establish Elementary Schools, now known as ''All Age Schools''.
While planning the abolition of slavery, the British Parliament passed laws to improve conditions for slaves.
The population in 1834 was 371,070, of whom 15,000 were white, 5,000 free black; 40,000 'coloured' or free people of color (mixed race); and 311,070 were slaves.
The genre jungle emerged from London's Jamaican diaspora.
Currently, only Digicel offers LTE to its customers  whereas FLOW Jamaica has committed to launching LTE in the cities of Kingston and Montego Bay, places where Digicel's LTE network is currently only found in, in short order.
Combined with the effects of a slowdown in the global economy in 1970, the voters elected the PNP (People's National Party) in 1972.
It lies between latitudes 17° and 19°N, and longitudes 76° and 79°W.
One and a half kilometres west of St. Ann's Bay is the site of the first Spanish settlement on the island, Sevilla, which was established in 1509 and abandoned around 1524 because it was deemed unhealthy.
Supported by multilateral financial institutions, Jamaica has, since the early 1980s, sought to implement structural reforms aimed at fostering private sector activity and increasing the role of market forces in resource allocation.
The slaves dispersed into the mountains, joining the ''maroons,'' those who had previously escaped to live with the Taíno native people.
January's bauxite production recorded a 7.1% increase relative to January 1998 and continued expansion of alumina production through 2009 is planned by Alcoa.
Although the UK had outlawed the importation of slaves, some were still smuggled in from Spanish colonies and directly.
The country's two mobile operators – FLOW Jamaica (formerly LIME, bMobile and Cable and Wireless Jamaica) and Digicel Jamaica have spent millions in network upgrades and expansion.
Many sent their children off to England to access quality education.
There are five local universities namely: The University of the West Indies (Mona Campus); the University of Technology, Jamaica formerly The College of Art Science and Technology (CAST); the Northern Caribbean University formerly West Indies College; the University College of The Caribbean and the International University of the Caribbean.
Some of the communities were broken up and the British deported Maroons to Nova Scotia and, later, Sierra Leone.
In 1958, it became a province in the Federation of the West Indies, a federation among the British West Indies.
* '''Primary''' – Publicly and privately owned (Privately owned being called Preparatory Schools).
The only non-bat native mammal extant in Jamaica is the Jamaican hutia, locally known as the coney.
The responsibility for water and sanitation policies within the government rests with the Ministry of Water and Housing, and the main service provider is the National Water Commission.
However, the primary spoken language is an English-based creole called Jamaican Patois (or Patwa).
Cactus and similar dry-area plants are found along the south and southwest coastal area.
Named '''', it remained a possession of Spain until 1655, when England (later Great Britain) conquered the island and renamed it Jamaica.
It was announced that the Office and Utilities Regulations (OUR), Ministry of Science, Technology, Energy and Mining (MSTEM) and the Spectrum Management Authority (SMA) have given approval for another mobile operator licence in January 2016.
Jamaica is the third largest island in the Caribbean.
Both operators currently provide islandwide coverage with HSPA+ (3G) technology.
On 13 April 2011, limited passenger service was resumed between May Pen, Spanish Town and Linstead.
The Coast Guard is divided between seagoing crews and support crews who conduct maritime safety and maritime law enforcement as well as defence-related operations.
Sabina Park is the only Test venue in the island, but the Greenfield Stadium is also used for cricket.
In 1992, Jamaica's first marine park, covering nearly , was established in Montego Bay.
Due to a high rate of emigration for work since the 1960s, Jamaica has a large diaspora around the world, particularly in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Primarily working as merchants and traders, the Jewish community was forced to live a clandestine life, calling themselves "Portugals".
An early group of Jews arrived in 1510, soon after the son of Christopher Columbus settled on the island.
Independence, however widely celebrated in Jamaica, has been questioned in the early 21st century.
Christianity is the largest religion practised in Jamaica.
Enlisted soldiers are given basic training at Up Park Camp or JDF Training Depot, Newcastle, both in St. Andrew.
The European settlers cut down the great timber trees for building and ships' supplies, and cleared the plains, savannas, and mountain slopes for intense agricultural cultivation.
30,000 barrels/day of crude imports are processed into various motor fuels and asphalt by the Petrojam Refinery in Kingston.
Some rappers, such as The Notorious B.I.G.
Beautiful and exotic birds, such as the Jamaican tody and the doctor bird (the national bird), can be found among a large number of others.
Large-scale migration from Jamaica to the UK occurred primarily in the 1950s and 1960s (when the country was still under British rule).
The Hurricanes Rugby League are a professional rugby league team who are hoping to compete in either the USA Rugby League or the AMNRL by 2013 during that time they will be training young players aged 14–19 who will be part of the Hurricanes RL Academy in the hope of developing into full-time professional players.
The newest operator, Digicel was granted a licence in 2001 to operate mobile services in the newly liberalised telecom market that had once been the sole domain of the incumbent FLOW (then Cable and Wireless Jamaica) monopoly.
The Jamaica national cricket team competes regionally, and also provides players for the West Indies team.
* '''Secondary''' – Publicly and privately owned.
Other gardens were the Cinchona Plantation, founded in 1868, and the Hope Botanical Gardens founded in 1874.
Among the variety of terrestrial, aquatic and marine ecosystems are dry and wet limestone forests, rainforest, riparian woodland, wetlands, caves, rivers, seagrass beds and coral reefs.
Reggae has also influenced American rap music, as they share roots as rhythmic, African styles of music.
Additionally, some Jamaicans speak one or more of Jamaican Sign Language, American Sign Language or the indigenous Jamaican Country Sign Language (Konchri Sain).
'''Jamaica''' () is an island country situated in the Caribbean Sea, consisting of the third-largest island of the Greater Antilles.
In 2012, the Ministry of National Security reported a 30 percent decrease in murders.
Their first international was a 37–22 loss to the United States national rugby league team in November 2009.
The JDF Air Wing is divided into three flight units, a training unit, a support unit and the JDF Air Wing (National Reserve).
Fish that occasionally enter freshwater and estuarine environments include snook, jewfish, mangrove snapper, and mullets.
Age cohort: 2 – 5 years.
Economic deterioration continued into the mid-1980s, exacerbated by a number of factors.
It was estimated in 2004 that up to 2.5 million Jamaicans and Jamaican descendants live abroad.
The official language is Jamaican Standard English (JSE) or Standard Jamaican English (SJE), which is "used in all domains of public life", including the government, the legal system, the media, and education.
According to the 2001 census, the country's largest Protestant denominations are the Church of God (24%), Seventh-day Adventist Church (11%), Pentecostal (10%), Baptist (7%), Anglican (4%), United Church (2%), Methodist (2%), Moravian (1%) and Plymouth Brethren (1%) The Christian faith gained acceptance as British Christian abolitionists and Baptist missionaries joined educated former slaves in the struggle against slavery.
With 2.8 million people, Jamaica is the third-most populous Anglophone country in the Americas (after the United States and Canada), and the fourth-most populous country in the Caribbean.
There are also opportunities for those who cannot afford further education in the vocational arena through the Human Employment and Resource Training-National Training Agency (HEART Trust-NTA) programme, which is opened to all working age national population and through an extensive scholarship network for the various universities.
This project has so far seen the completion of  of freeway.
The West India Regiment was used extensively by the British Empire in policing the empire from 1795 to 1926.
Jamaica is the fourth-largest island country in the Caribbean, by area.
Recent economic performance shows the Jamaican economy is recovering.
Jamaica produces enormous quantities of drinking alcohol (at least 5% water content), most of which appears to be consumed as beverages, and none of it used as motor fuel.
Reynolds Jamaica Mines, Ltd. left the Jamaican industry.
Filming for the fictional island of San Monique in ''Live and Let Die'' took place in Jamaica.
Tourist attractions include Dunn's River Falls in St. Ann, YS Falls in St. Elizabeth, the Blue Lagoon in Portland, believed to be the crater of an extinct volcano.
Since independence Jamaica has consistently produced world class athletes in track and field.
The governor-general is nominated by the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the entire Cabinet and appointed by the monarch.
None of Jamaica's eight species of native snakes is venomous.
With the pirates installed in Port Royal, the Spanish would be deterred from attacking.
A study found that the average admixture on the island was 78.3% Sub-Saharan African, 16.0% European, and 5.7% East Asian.
In recent years the JDF has been called on to assist the nation's police, the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF), in fighting drug smuggling and a rising crime rate which includes one of the highest murder rates in the world.
An investment programme in island transportation and utility infrastructure and gains in the tourism, mining, and service sectors all contributed this figure.
In Jamaica involvement in athletics begins at a very young age and most high schools maintain rigorous athletics programs with their top athletes competing in national competitions (most notably the VMBS Girls and Boys Athletics Championships) and international meets (most notably the Penn Relays).
When the English captured Jamaica in 1655, the Spanish colonists fled after freeing their slaves.
The head of government and Prime Minister of Jamaica is Andrew Holness.
The great number of Jamaicans living abroad has become known as the Jamaican diaspora.
FLOW has committed to expanding its Fibre offering to more areas in order to combat Digicel's entrance into the market.
Jamaica attained full independence by leaving the federation in 1962.
Other noteworthy Jamaican sprinters include Arthur Wint, the first Jamaican Olympic Gold Medalist; Donald Quarrie, Olympic Champion and former 200m world record holder; Roy Anthony Bridge, part of the International Olympic Committee; Merlene Ottey; Delloreen Ennis-London; Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, the current World and Olympic 100m Champion; Kerron Stewart; Aleen Bailey; Juliet Cuthbert; Veronica Campbell-Brown; Sherone Simpson; Brigitte Foster-Hylton; Yohan Blake; Herb McKenley; George Rhoden, Olympic Gold Medalist; Deon Hemmings, Olympic Gold Medalist; as well as Asafa Powell, former 100m world record holder and 2x 100m Olympic finalist and Gold medal winner in the men's 2008 Olympic 4 × 100 m.
The journalist and author H. G. de Lisser (1878–1944) used his native country as the setting for his many novels.
Major sectors of the Jamaican economy include agriculture, mining, manufacturing, tourism, and financial and insurance services.
Another popular Jamaican-based film is the 1993 Disney comedy ''Cool Runnings'', which is loosely based on the true story of Jamaica's first bobsled team trying to make it in the Winter Olympics.
By 2009, the rate was 62 per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the highest in the world.
The Taino still inhabited Jamaica when the English took control of the island in 1655.
Born at Falmouth, de Lisser worked as a reporter for the ''Jamaica Times'' at a young age and in 1920 began publishing the magazine ''Planters' Punch''.
Cable and Wireless Communications (parent company of LIME) acquired the company in late 2014 and replaced their brand LIME with FLOW.
They are surrounded by a narrow coastal plain.
The capital was moved to Spanish Town, then called ''St.
Marlon James (1970), novelist has published three novels: ''John Crow's Devil'' (2005), ''The Book of Night Women'' (2009) and ''A Brief History of Seven Killings'' (2014), winner of the 2015 Man Booker Prize
The island achieved independence from the United Kingdom on 6 August 1962.
Education is free from the early childhood to secondary levels.
The American film ''Cocktail'' (1988), starring Tom Cruise, is one of the more popular films to depict Jamaica.
Owing to the success of the JDX program, the Bruce Golding-led government was successful in entering into a borrowing arrangement with the IMF on 4 February 2010 for the amount of US$1.27b.
Jamaica's plant life has changed considerably over the centuries.
It came into force with the Jamaica Independence Act, 1962 of the United Kingdom parliament, which gave Jamaica independence.
The British leaders agreed with the viability of this strategy to forestall outside aggression.
According to ESPN, the highest paid Jamaican professional athlete in 2011 was Justin Masterson, starting pitcher for the Cleveland Indians.
The first and third largest alumina producers, Alpart and Alcoa, closed, and there was a significant reduction in production by the second-largest producer, Alcan.
Students are taught Spanish in school from the primary level upwards; about 40–45% of educated people in Jamaica knows some form of Spanish.
Under treaties of 1738 and 1739, the British agreed to stop trying to round them up in exchange for their leaving the colonial settlements alone, but serving if needed for military actions.
Since 2011 the murder rate has continued to fall following the downward trend started in 2010, with increases in police patrols, curfews and more effective anti-gang activities.
The Spanish were forcibly evicted by the English at Ocho Rios in St. Ann.
By the early 1670s, as the British developed sugar cane plantations and imported more slaves, black people formed a majority of the population.
Though a small nation, Jamaican culture has a strong global presence.
Tourism and mining are the leading earners of foreign exchange.
Slang names such as "Jamrock", "Jamdown" ("Jamdung" in Jamaican Patois), or briefly "Ja", have derived from this.
Some regions on the south coast, such as the Liguanea Plain and the Pedro Plains, are relatively dry rain-shadow areas.
The island,  in area, lies about  south of Cuba, and  west of Hispaniola, the island containing the nation-states of Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
A wind farm, owned by the Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica, was established at Wigton, Manchester.
To aid the navigation of shipping, Jamaica operates nine lighthouses.
Half the Jamaican economy relies on services, with half of its income coming from services such as tourism.
It became a staple in island diets.
The West Indies Regiment was reformed in 1958 as part of the West Indies Federation, after dissolution of the Federation the JDF was established.
Others were part of the Iberian colonization of the New World, after overtly converting to Catholicism, as only Catholics were allowed in the Spanish colonies.
Christopher Columbus claimed Jamaica for Spain after landing there in 1494.
Jamaica has also produced several world class amateur and professional boxers including Trevor Berbick and Mike McCallum.
The monarch and the governor-general serve largely ceremonial roles, apart from their reserve powers for use in certain constitutional crisis situations.
Band artist groups that came from Jamaica include Black Uhuru, Third World Band, Inner Circle, Chalice Reggae Band, Culture, Fab Five and Morgan Heritage.
So far, the only James Bond film adaptation to have been set in Jamaica is ''Doctor No''.
Digicel opted for the more widely used GSM wireless system, while a past operator, Oceanic (which became Claro Jamaica and later merged with Digicel Jamaica in 2011) opted for the CDMA standard.
The optimism of the first decade was accompanied by a growing sense of inequality among many Afro-Jamaicans, and a concern that the benefits of growth were not being shared by the urban poor.
Jamaica also played an important role in the development of punk rock, through reggae and ska.
There is a small population of Jews, about 200, who describe themselves as Liberal-Conservative.
