However, he supported legislation to limit Johnson's powers, such as the Tenure of Office Act, which restricted Johnson in removing presidential appointees.
Blaine also saw the public regularly, and Guiteau became a regular at these sessions; Blaine, who had no intention of giving Guiteau a position for which he was not qualified nor one he had not earned, simply stated that the deadlock in the Senate over Robertson's nomination made it impossible to consider the Paris consulship, which required Senate confirmation.
Garfield came to chair the powerful House Appropriations Committee, but it was Ways and Means, with its influence over fiscal policy, that he really wanted to lead.
Home on medical leave, he refused to campaign for the nomination, leaving that to political managers who secured it at the local convention in September 1862, on the eighth ballot.
Garfield repeatedly received tentative assignments that were quickly withdrawn, to his frustration.
Local Republican Party leaders invited Garfield to enter politics upon the death of Cyrus Prentiss, the presumptive nominee for the local state senate seat.
Union Pacific officers and directors secretly purchased control of the Crédit Mobilier of America company, then contracted with the firm to have it undertake the construction of the railroad.
Throughout his political career, Garfield favored the gold standard and decried attempts to increase the money supply through the issuance of paper money not backed by gold, and later, through the free and unlimited coinage of silver.
Garfield demanded Brady's resignation and ordered prosecutions that would end in trials for conspiracy.
Another issue that caused Garfield trouble in his 1874 re-election bid was the so-called "Salary Grab" of 1873, which increased the compensation for members of Congress by 50 percent, retroactive to 1871.
James took his mother's side and when Belden died in 1880, noted the fact in his diary with satisfaction.
With Rosecrans, Garfield devised the Tullahoma Campaign to pursue and trap Confederate General Braxton Bragg in Tullahoma.
He left the White House for the last time on September 5, traveling in a specially cushioned railway car; a spur line to the Franklyn Cottage, a seaside mansion given over to his use, was built in a night by volunteers.
Guiteau had followed various professions in his life, but in 1880 had determined to gain federal office by supporting what he expected to be the winning Republican ticket.
As the convention began, Senator Roscoe Conkling of New York, the floor leader for the Grant forces (known as the Stalwart faction), proposed that the delegates pledge to support the eventual nominee in the general election.
The need to go from town to town to find a place as a teacher disgusted Garfield, and he thereafter developed a dislike of what he called "place-seeking", which became, he said, "the law of my life".
Guiteau was indicted on October 14, 1881, for the murder of the President.
Robertson was confirmed as Collector and Garfield's victory was clear.
Orange Township was located in the Western Reserve, and like many who settled there, Garfield's ancestors were from New England.
Historians agree that massive infection was a significant factor in President Garfield's demise.
At the end of the fighting, the Confederates withdrew from the field, and Garfield sent his troops to Prestonsburg to reprovision.
Biographer Peskin stated that medical malpractice did not contribute to Garfield's death; the inevitable infection and blood poisoning that would ensue from a deep bullet wound resulted in damage to multiple organs and spinal bone fragmentation.
Rosecrans had a voracious appetite for conversation, especially when he was unable to sleep; in Garfield, he found "the first well read person in the Army" and the ideal candidate for discussions that ran deep into the night.
The grossly inflated invoices submitted by the company were paid by the railroad, using federal funds appropriated to subsidize the project, and the company was allowed to purchase Union Pacific securities at par value, well below the market rate.
With his term cut short by his death after only 200 days, and much of it spent in ill health trying to recover from the attack, Garfield is little-remembered in the American cultural memory other than for his assassination; historians often forgo listing him in rankings of U.S. presidents due to the short length of his presidency.
His pavilion is dark waters and thick clouds of the skies!
Only Chandler's rejection by the Senate forestalled MacVeagh's resignation over the matter.
Having just been elected to the Senate with Sherman's support, Garfield entered the 1880 campaign season committed to Sherman as his choice for the Republican presidential nominee.
The feud with Conkling reached a climax when the president, at Blaine's instigation, nominated Conkling's enemy, Judge William H. Robertson, to be Collector of the Port of New York.
Seizing on the Democratic platform's call for a "tariff for revenue only", Republicans told Northern workers that a Hancock presidency would weaken the tariff protection that kept them in good jobs.
The trial lasted almost two months, from November 1862 to January 1863, and by the end of it, Garfield had at last procured an assignment as Chief of Staff to Major General William S. Rosecrans.
Garfield opposed the initial talk of impeaching President Johnson when Congress convened in December 1866.
Despite efforts to revive him, Garfield never awoke, and died at 10:35 pm that evening.
Garfield supported the proposed establishment of the United States civil service as a means of ridding officials of the annoyance of aggressive office seekers.
In a chaotic trial in which Guiteau often interrupted and argued, and in which his counsel used the insanity defense, the jury found him guilty on January 5, 1882, and he was sentenced to death by hanging.
Beginning on July 23, Garfield took a turn for the worse.
In 1865, Garfield was placed on the House Ways and Means Committee, a long-awaited opportunity to focus on financial and economic issues.
"My God, what is this?"
At Geauga Academy, which he attended from 1848 to 1850, Garfield learned academic subjects he had not previously had time for.
He was first elected to Congress in 1862 to represent Ohio's 19th District.
Although Garfield had supported Blaine, he had kept good relations with Hayes, and wholeheartedly supported the governor.
Garfield had attended church more to please his mother than to worship God, but in his late teens underwent a religious awakening, and attended many camp meetings, at one of which he was born again.
His efforts took him to Wall Street where, the day after Lincoln's assassination, a riotous crowd led him into an impromptu speech to calm it: "Fellow citizens!
According to historian Jean Edward Smith, Grant and Garfield had a "guarded relationship", since Grant promoted Thomas to command of the Army of the Cumberland, rather than Garfield, after Rosecrans was dismissed.
The two men were deep in conversation and did not notice Guiteau before he took out his revolver and shot Garfield twice, once in the back and once in the arm.
After the war, Garfield became a proponent of black suffrage, though he admitted that the idea of African Americans as political equals with whites gave him "a strong feeling of repugnance".
Garfield, appearing before the committee on January 14, 1873, confirmed much of this.
Garfield argued for an immediate advance, in line with demands from Halleck and Lincoln.
He returned to Hiram to teach at the Institute, and in 1857 was made its president.
Rivals were spoken of for the seat, such as Secretary Sherman, but he had presidential ambitions (for which he sought Garfield's support), and other candidates fell by the wayside.
He was forced to return home, where his wife nursed him back to health.
Garfield read military texts while anxiously awaiting the war effort, which he regarded as a holy crusade against the Slave Power.
In April 1861, the rebels bombarded Fort Sumter, one of the last federal outposts in the South, beginning the Civil War.
By then, Chase had left the Cabinet and had been appointed Chief Justice, and his relations with Garfield became more distant.
After initial Union success, Bragg retreated toward Chattanooga, where Rosecrans stalled and requested more troops and supplies.
Although he had no military training, Garfield knew that his place was in the Union Army.
Garfield was taken on a mattress upstairs to a private office, where several doctors examined him, probing the wound with unwashed fingers.
Although a Senate seat would be disposed of by the Ohio General Assembly after the resignation of John Sherman to become Treasury Secretary, Hayes needed Garfield's expertise to protect him from the agenda of a hostile Congress, and asked him not to seek it.
After obtaining contracts with the lowest bid, costs to run the mail routes would be escalated and profits would be divided among ring members.
Both Grant and Garfield won overwhelming re-election victories.
Garfield was responsible, as Appropriations Committee chairman, for shepherding the legislative appropriations bill through the House; during the debate in February 1873, Massachusetts Representative Benjamin Butler offered the increase as an amendment, and despite Garfield's opposition, it passed the House and eventually became law.
In October, he defeated D.B.
Garfield opined, "I would say Grant was not fit to be nominated and Greeley is not fit to be elected."
During Grant's first term, discontented with public service, Garfield pursued opportunities in the law, but declined a partnership offer when told his prospective partner was of "intemperate and licentious" reputation.
In the next round of voting, nearly all of the Sherman and Blaine delegates shifted their support to Garfield, giving him 399 votes and the Republican nomination.
Rutkow writes, "James Abram Garfield's presidency is reduced to a tantalizing 'what if.
On September 18, Garfield asked A.&nbsp;F. Rockwell, a friend, if he would have a place in history.
When told that his party, including his own campaign manager, Stephen W. Dorsey, was involved, Garfield directed MacVeagh and James to root out the corruption in the Post Office Department "to the bone", regardless of where it might lead.
Among those named were Vice President (and former House Speaker) Schuyler Colfax, Grant's second-term running mate (Massachusetts Senator Henry Wilson), Speaker James G. Blaine of Maine, and Garfield.
Between his election and his inauguration, Garfield was occupied with assembling a cabinet that would establish peace between Conkling's and Blaine's warring factions.
Garfield biographer Ira Rutkow pointed out that the future president's years at Williams gave Garfield the opportunity to know and respect those of different social backgrounds, and despite his origin as an unsophisticated Westerner, he was liked and respected by socially conscious New Englanders.
Crédit Mobilier showed large profits and stock gains, and distributed substantial dividends.
Naval reform continued under Arthur, if on a more modest scale than Garfield and Hunt had envisioned, ultimately ending in the construction of the Squadron of Evolution.
I love agitation and investigation and glory in defending unpopular truth against popular error."
Most of the Grant forces backed the former president to the end, creating a disgruntled Stalwart minority in the party.
Garfield did not consider Lincoln particularly worthy of re-election, but no viable alternative seemed available.
With the result, Garfield instantly achieved a reputation as a preeminent appellate lawyer.
The crowd applauded, but the speech, according to Peskin, "however sincerely intended, betrayed its hasty composition by the flatness of its tone and the conventionality of its subject matter."
From 1851 to 1854, he attended the Western Reserve Eclectic Institute (later named Hiram College) in Hiram, Ohio, a school run by the Disciples.
Even Garfield's enemies never claimed that his involvement&nbsp;... influenced his behavior".
He left home at age 16 in 1847.
In 1887, the James A. Garfield Monument was dedicated in Washington.
James' father Abram had been born in Worcester, New York, and came to Ohio to woo his childhood sweetheart, Mehitabel Ballou, only to find her married.
The attendant watching him sent for Bliss, who found him unconscious.
Garfield's accomplishments as president included a resurgence of presidential authority against senatorial courtesy in executive appointments, energizing American naval power, and purging corruption in the Post Office, all during his extremely short time in office.
When told that Indian chief Sitting Bull, a prisoner of the army, was starving, Garfield said, "Let him starve", then, "Oh, no, send him my oatmeal."
On May 19, 1890, Garfield's body was permanently interred, with great solemnity and fanfare, in a mausoleum in Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland.
I will go to jail for it.
Garfield foresaw conflict even before February 1866 when Johnson vetoed a bill to extend the life of the Freedmen's Bureau, charged with aiding the former slaves.
According to some historians and medical experts, Garfield might have survived his wounds had the doctors attending him had at their disposal today's medical research, techniques, and equipment.
Even before the convention began, however, a few Republicans, including Wharton Barker of Philadelphia, thought Garfield the best choice for the nomination.
On April 10, 1882, seven months after Garfield's death, the U.S. Post Office issued a postage stamp in his honor, the second stamp issued by the U.S. to honor an assassinated president.
Distracted by cabinet maneuvering, Garfield's inaugural address was not up to his typical oratorical standards.
Many radicals, led in the House by Pennsylvania's Thaddeus Stevens, wanted lands owned by rebels to be confiscated, but Lincoln threatened to veto any bill that would do that on a widespread basis.
The case turned on whether the defendants should instead have been tried by a civilian court, and resulted in a ruling that civilians could not be tried before military tribunals while the civil courts were operating.
They attacked the rebel positions on January 9, 1862, in the Battle of Middle Creek, the only pitched battle Garfield personally commanded.
Garfield was not at all enthused about the re-election of President Grant in 1872—until Horace Greeley, who emerged as the candidate of the Democrats and Liberal Republicans, became the only serious alternative.
Although he never stood again, he was able to sit up and write several times, and his recovery was viewed so positively that a steamer was fitted out as a seagoing hospital to aid with his convalescence.
There, Garfield could see the ocean as officials and reporters maintained what became (after an initial rally) a death watch.
He did not see education as a field in which he could realize his full potential.
A noted physician and surgeon, Bliss was an old friend of Garfield, and about a dozen doctors, led by Bliss, were soon probing the wound with unsterilized fingers and instruments.
Garfield, however, thought that part of the army had held and, with Rosecrans's approval, headed across Missionary Ridge to survey the scene.
There was no pretense of genius, or alternation of spasmodic effort, but a satisfactory accomplishment in all directions."
Tariffs had been raised to high levels during the Civil War.
In one high point, Garfield emphasized the civil rights of African-Americans, saying "Freedom can never yield its fullness of blessings so long as the law or its administration places the smallest obstacle in the pathway of any virtuous citizen."
Any celebration was short lived, as Garfield's youngest son, Neddie, fell ill with whooping cough shortly after the congressional election, and soon died.
Garfield took up the practice of law in 1865 as a means to improve his personal finances.
Garfield performed only one state act in August, signing an extradition paper.
Harrison said that Garfield was always a "student and instructor" and that his life works and death would "continue to be instructive and inspiring incidents in American history".
Garfield was hit by two shots; one glanced off his arm while the other pierced his back, shattering a rib and embedding itself in his abdomen.
His answer was to propose a "universal" education system funded by the federal government.
For Arthur, previously known for having been a "veteran spoilsman", civil service reform became his most noteworthy achievement.
With the South still disenfranchised and Northern public opinion behind them, the Republicans gained a two-thirds majority in both houses of Congress.
His finding was placed in the ''New England Journal of Education''.
Garfield's personal secretary, Joe Stanley Brown, wrote 40 years later, "to this day I cannot hear the sound of the low slow roll of the Atlantic on the shore, the sound which filled my ears as I walked from my cottage to his bedside, without recalling again that ghastly tragedy."
As part of the deal whereby they recognized Hayes as president, Southern Democrats secured the removal of federal troops from the South, ending Reconstruction.
He escaped through reading, devouring all the books he could find.
"Well, Doctor, we'll take that chance."
While serving in the army in early 1862, Garfield was approached by friends about running for Congress from Ohio's newly redrawn, heavily Republican 19th district.
The assassination of Abraham Lincoln was deemed a fluke due to the Civil War, and Garfield, like most people, saw no reason why the president should be guarded; Garfield's movements and plans were often printed in the newspapers.
In the meantime, he served on the court-martial of Fitz John Porter, a sensational trial in which Porter was tried for his tardiness at the Second Battle of Bull Run.
Historian Justus D. Doenecke, while deeming Garfield a bit of an enigma, chronicles his achievements, "by winning a victory over the Stalwarts, he enhanced both the power and prestige of his office.
Garfield had served nine terms in the House of Representatives, and had been elected to the Senate before his candidacy for the White House, though he declined the senatorship once he was president-elect.
Under the act, appointments were awarded on merit and competitive examination.
Justice and judgment are the establishment of His throne!
After Marshall's retreat, Garfield's command was the sole remaining Union force in eastern Kentucky, and he announced that any men who had fought for the Confederacy would be granted amnesty if they returned to their homes and lived peaceably and remained loyal to the Union.
Several of his doctors inserted their unsterilized fingers into the wound to probe for the bullet, a common practice in the 1880s.
Garfield authorized Blaine to call for a Pan-American conference in 1882 to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations and to serve as a forum for talks on increasing trade.
The time was 9:30&nbsp;a.m.
While there, he was most interested in the study of Greek and Latin, but was inclined to learn about and discuss any new thing he encountered.
Another monument, in Philadelphia's Fairmount Park, was erected in 1896.
James was her favorite child, and the two remained close for the rest of her life.
At Governor William Dennison's request, Garfield deferred his military ambitions to remain in the legislature, where he helped appropriate the funds to raise and equip Ohio's volunteer regiments.
Confederate troops under Brigadier General Humphrey Marshall held the town in numbers roughly equal to Garfield's own, but Garfield positioned his troops so as to deceive Marshall into believing that rebel forces were outnumbered.
Garfield believed that the key to improving the state of African American civil rights would be found in education aided by the federal government.
The Republican governors of the three states certified that Hayes had won their states, to the outrage of Democrats, who had the state legislatures submit rival returns, and threatened to prevent the counting of the electoral vote—under the Constitution, Congress is the final arbiter of the election.
At Williams, he had become more politically aware in the intensely anti-slavery atmosphere of the Massachusetts school, and began to consider politics as a career.
His temperature increased to ; doctors, concerned by a pus sac that had developed by the wound, operated and inserted a drainage tube.
I am a Stalwart and Arthur will be President."
Grant, however, appointed Morrison R. Waite.
He especially wished to eliminate the common practice whereby government workers, in exchange for their positions, were forced to kick back a percentage of their wages as political contributions.
Beginning at age 17, he attended several Ohio schools, then studied at Williams College in Williamstown, Massachusetts, from which he graduated in 1856.
His body was temporarily interred in a vault in Cleveland's Lake View Cemetery until his permanent memorial was built.
Beginning in 1882, the year after Garfield's death, the U.S. Post Office began issuing postage stamps honoring the late President.
He composed a speech, "Garfield vs. Hancock", and got it printed by the Republican National Committee.
At the same time, they hoped to negotiate a peace in the War of the Pacific then being fought by Bolivia, Chile, and Peru.
New York was represented by Thomas Lemuel James as Postmaster General.
Yet Doenecke criticizes Garfield's dismissal of Merritt in Robertson's favor, and wonders if the president was truly in command of the situation even after the latter's confirmation.
James was named for an older brother, dead in infancy.
The story broke in July 1872, in the middle of the presidential campaign.
But his response was, "No, my work is done."
Garfield's biographers were unwilling to exonerate him in Crédit Mobilier, with Allan Peskin writing "Did Garfield lie?
He was nominated by the party convention on the sixth ballot, and was elected, serving until 1861.
Garfield had stated, in September 1872, that Ames had offered him stock, but he had repeatedly refused it.
In December, Garfield was ordered to bring the 42nd to Kentucky, where they joined the Army of the Ohio under Brigadier General Don Carlos Buell.
Rutkow wrote that "Garfield's real offense was that he knowingly denied to the House investigating committee that he had agreed to accept the stock and that he had also received a dividend of $329."
Blaine favored a resolution that would not result in Peru yielding any territory, but Chile, which had by 1881 occupied the Peruvian capital, Lima, rejected any settlement that restored the previous ''status quo''.
More than 70,000 citizens, some waiting over three hours, passed by Garfield's coffin as his body lay in state in Washington; later, on September 25, 1881, in Cleveland, more than 150,000—a number equal to the entire population of that city—likewise paid their respects.
This labor would be used to good effect by Horatio Alger, who penned Garfield's campaign biography in 1880.
Garfield was more supportive of Lincoln when Lincoln took action against slavery.
One means of persuading the voter in that era was through orators expounding on the candidate's merits, but with the Republicans seeking more famous men, Guiteau received few opportunities to speak.
He instead wed her sister Eliza, who had been born in New Hampshire.
At the 1880 Republican National Convention, Senator-elect Garfield attended as campaign manager for Secretary of the Treasury John Sherman, and gave the presidential nomination speech for him.
Garfield's murder by a deranged office-seeker awakened public awareness of the need for civil service reform legislation.
When the president was acquitted in trial before the Senate, Garfield was shocked, and blamed the outcome of the trial on its presiding officer, Chief Justice Chase, his onetime mentor.
He purchased a gun he thought would look good in a museum, and followed Garfield several times, but each time his plans were frustrated, or he lost his nerve.
He shone as a student, and was especially interested in languages and elocution.
The 20th century saw no revival for Garfield.
Greeley had little luck taking advantage of the scandal.
The two men agreed politically, and both were part of the Radical wing of the Republican Party.
To Blaine's chagrin, the victorious Garfield returned to his goal of balancing the interests of party factions, and nominated a number of Conkling's Stalwart friends to offices.
Garfield not only favored abolition of slavery, but believed that the leaders of the rebellion had forfeited their constitutional rights.
When Congress reconvened after the election, Blaine, seeking to clear his name, demanded a House investigation.
Practical differences between the candidates were few, and Republicans began the campaign with the familiar theme of waving the bloody shirt: reminding Northern voters that the Democratic Party was responsible for secession and four years of civil war, and that if they held power they would reverse the gains of that war, dishonor Union veterans, and pay Confederate veterans pensions out of the federal treasury.
That Crédit Mobilier was a corrupt organization had been a secret badly kept, even mentioned on the floor of Congress, and editor Sam Bowles wrote at the time that Garfield, in his positions on committees dealing with finance, "had no more right to be ignorant in a matter of such grave importance as this, than the sentinel has to snore on his post".
He offered some of his colleagues the opportunity to buy Crédit Mobilier stock at par value, well below what it sold for on the market, and the railroad got its additional appropriations.
Grant and Hayes had both advocated civil service reform, and by 1881, civil service reform associations had organized with renewed energy across the nation.
One of President Garfield's more wearying duties was seeing office seekers, and he saw Guiteau at least once.
A year had passed, from 1867 to 1868, before Garfield had finally refused it.
Brady resigned and was eventually indicted for conspiracy.
Both Lincoln and Garfield were re-elected.
Eliza Garfield remarried in 1842, but soon left her second husband, Warren Belden (possibly Alfred Belden), and a then-scandalous divorce was awarded against her in 1850.
Rutkow, a professor of surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, has argued that starvation also played a role.
In September 1870, Garfield, who was then chairman of the House Banking Committee, led an investigation into the Black Friday Gold Panic scandal.
The following day, Garfield, by then also suffering from pneumonia and heart pains, marveled that he could not pick up a glass despite feeling well, and went to sleep without discomfort.
Blaine was not only the president's closest advisor, he was obsessed with knowing all that took place in the White House, and was even said to have spies posted there in his absence.
To obtain that faction's support for the ticket, former New York customs collector Chester A. Arthur, a member of Conkling's political machine, was chosen as the vice-presidential nominee.
When Congress assembled in December (to Johnson's chagrin without the elected representatives of the Southern states, who were excluded), Garfield urged conciliation on his colleagues, although he feared that Johnson, a former Democrat, might combine with other Democrats to gain political control if he rejoined the party.
Soon after the nomination, Garfield was ordered to report to War Secretary Edwin Stanton in Washington to discuss his military future.
To support himself at Geauga, he worked as a carpenter's assistant and as a teacher.
He awoke that evening around 10:15 pm with great pain in his chest.
Guiteau might have had syphilis, a disease that causes physiological mental impairment.
Garfield had long been anxious to escape hot, unhealthy Washington, and in early September the doctors agreed to move him to Elberon, where his wife had recovered earlier in the summer.
Marshall ordered his troops to withdraw to the forks of Middle Creek, on the road to Virginia; Garfield ordered his troops to pursue the Confederates.
Afterward, the legislature adjourned and Garfield spent the spring and early summer on a speaking tour of northeastern Ohio, encouraging enlistment in the new regiments.
At the ensuing Battle of Chickamauga on September 19 and 20, 1863, confusion among the wing commanders over Rosecrans's orders created a gap in the lines, resulting in a rout of the right flank.
He enhanced the powers of the presidency when he defied the powerful New York senator Roscoe Conkling by appointing William H. Robertson to the lucrative post of Collector of the Port of New York, starting a fracas that ended with Robertson's confirmation and Conkling's resignation from the Senate.
Garfield was ordered to report to Washington, where he was promoted to major general, a commission he would resign before taking a seat in the House of Representatives.
In 1873, after the death of Chase, Garfield appealed to Grant to appoint Justice Noah H. Swayne as Chief Justice.
Hancock and the Democrats expected to carry the Solid South, while much of the North was considered safe territory for Garfield and the Republicans; most of the campaign would involve a few close states, including New York and Indiana.
