The couple became engaged, but terminated the relationship after they decided against marriage in August.
As a result of his New York performance, his name and picture were carried in all the major eastern papers and he quickly became well known throughout the United States.
In addition, because of Riley's past agreements with the Redpath Lyceum Bureau, he was required to pay half of his fee to his agent Amos Walker.
Weeks before the festival, the festival board has a queen contest.
In 1897, Riley's publishers suggested that he create a multi-volume series of books containing his complete life works.
In 1901, Riley's doctor diagnosed him with neurasthenia, a nervous disorder, and recommended long periods of rest as a cure.
In February he submitted a poem entitled "At Last" to the ''Danbury News'', a Connecticut newspaper.
In 1895 Riley made his last tour, making stops in most of the major cities in the United States.
One reviewer, however, called the poems "weird, nightmarish, and eerie," and compared them to Edgar Allan Poe's works.
Her reputation was tarnished by the affair and she found it difficult to find employment once their relationship ended.
In 1884, Riley made another tour of the major cities in the eastern United States.
It received mixed reviews among literary critics who wrote of it that Riley's stories were not of the same quality as his poetry.
His earliest known poems are verses he wrote as clever advertisements for his customers.
Titled the ''Rhymes of Childhood'', the book was his most popular and sold millions of copies.
In 1908 he was elected member of the National Institute of Arts and Letters, and in 1912 they conferred upon him a special medal for poetry.
As a solution, Riley and his publishers began reusing poetry from other books and printing some of his earliest works.
He changed his appearance to look more mainstream, and began by shaving his mustache off and abandoning the flamboyant dress he employed in his early circuit tours.
Many of his poems, including those, where partially autobiographical, as he used events and people from his childhood as an inspiration for subject matter.
Riley authored a poem imitating the style of Edgar Allan Poe and submitted it to the ''Kokomo Dispatch'' under a fictitious name claiming it was a long lost Poe poem.
He opposed Riley's interest in poetry and encouraged him to find a different career.
In March 1888, Riley traveled to Washington, D.C. where he had dinner at the White House with other members of the International Copyright League and President of the United States Grover Cleveland.
Riley and two other men who were part of the plot waited two weeks for the poem to be published by major newspapers in Chicago, Boston, and New York to gauge their reaction; they were disappointed.
After completing his lecture circuit in 1885, Riley formed a partnership with Nye and his agent to begin a new tour.
In 1912, the governor of Indiana instituted Riley Day on the poet's birthday.
His poems tended to be humorous or sentimental, and of the approximately one thousand poems that Riley authored, the majority are in dialect.
In the aftermath of the Poe plot, Riley was dismissed from the ''Democrat'', so he returned to Greenfield to spend time writing poetry.
Among the newspapers to take an interest in the poems was the ''Indianapolis Journal'', a major Republican Party metropolitan newspaper in Indiana.
Riley began participating in local theater productions with the Adelphians to earn extra income, and during the winter months, when the demand for painting declined, Riley began writing poetry which he mailed to his brother living in Indianapolis.
A Liberty ship, commissioned April 23, 1942, was christened the ''SS James Whitcomb Riley''.
Riley's newest poems published in the 1894 book ''Armazindy'' received very negative reviews that referred to poems like "The Little Dog-Woggy" and "Jargon-Jingle" as "drivel" and to Riley as a "worn out genius."
Wabash College and Indiana University granted him similar awards.
His poems often contained morals and warnings for children, containing messages telling children to care for the less fortunate of society.
He began submitting his poems to more prominent literary magazines, including ''Scribner's Monthly'', but was informed that although he showed promise, his work was still short of the standards required for use in their publications.
The men traveled around Indiana creating large billboard-like signs on the sides of buildings and barns and in high places that would be visible from a distance.
Philip Greasley wrote that while "some critics have dismissed him as sub-literary, insincere, and an artificial entertainer, his defenders reply that an author so popular with millions of people in different walks of life must contribute something of value, and that his faults, if any, can be ignored."
He landed in Liverpool and traveled first to Dumfries, Scotland, the home and burial place of Robert Burns.
Bottsford pressed Riley for marriage several times, but Riley refused.
Although hinted at indirectly in some poems, Riley wrote very little on serious subject matter, and actually mocked attempts at serious poetry.
Riley became frustrated that despite his growing acclaim, he found it difficult to achieve financial success.
During his 1893 tour, Riley lectured mostly in the western United States, and in his 1894 tour in the east.
The story made national news and Riley feared his career was ruined.
The war had a negative physiological effect on him, and his relationship with his family quickly deteriorated.
In January 1878 on the advice of a friend, Riley paid an entrance fee to join a traveling lecture circuit where he could give poetry readings.
Among the first poems the newspaper purchased from Riley were "Song of the New Year", "An Empty Nest", and a short story entitled "A Remarkable Man".
They broke off their relationship a second time in 1881 when she discovered his correspondence with two other women, and found that he had taken a secret vacation to Wisconsin with one of them.
He no longer needed his job at the journal, and he left the job near the end of that year.
A few of his later poems were set to music and song, one of the most well known being A Short'nin' Bread Song—Pieced Out.
The negative press did not end however, as Nye and Pond threatened to sue Riley for causing their tour to end prematurely.
When traveling to one of the league's meetings in New York City that year, Riley was struck by Bell's palsy.
They generally consisted of sonnets and were strongly influenced by the works of John Greenleaf Whittier, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and Alfred, Lord Tennyson.
Their relationship remained unstable, but Riley became deeply attached to her.
Riley's sister, Mary, had become a close friend of Bottsworth and scolded him for his mistreatment of her.
Riley wrote gentle and romantic poems that were not in dialect.
His children's poems are "exuberant, performative, and often display Riley's penchant for using humorous characterization, repetition, and dialect to make his poetry accessible to a wide-ranging audience."
Riley renewed his relationship with Bottsworth for a third and final time in 1883.
Riley was warmly welcomed by its literary and theatrical community and he toured places that Shakespeare had frequented.
Boston was the literary center of the United States at the time, and Riley's impression on the city's literary community helped him finally to get his work accepted by prestigious periodicals.
She was very superstitious, and influenced Riley with many of her beliefs.
Riley returned to live near Indianapolis later in 1893, boarding in a private home in the Lockerbie district, then a small suburb.
Martin Riley, Riley's uncle, was an amateur poet who occasionally wrote verses for local newspapers.
Riley began sending correspondence to the famous American poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow during late 1875 seeking his endorsement to help him start a career as a poet.
The income from Riley's book allowed him to ease his busy work schedule; he submitted articles to the ''Journal'' less frequently and made fewer lecture stops.
This caused the other men to profit more than Riley from his own work.
Riley's father returned from the war partially paralyzed.
In addition to touring, Riley and Nye collaborated to write a book, ''Nye and Riley's Railway Guide'', a collection of humorous anecdotes and poems intended to parody popular tourist literature of the day.
Riley wrote of these early performances in his poem "When We First Played 'Show'," where he referred to himself as "Jamesy."
Riley's chief legacy was his influence in fostering the creation of a midwestern cultural identity and his contributions to the Golden Age of Indiana Literature.
In October he traveled to South Bend where he took a job at Stockford & Blowney painting verses on signs for a month; the short duration of his job may have been due to his frequent drunkenness at that time.
''The Century Magazine'' was the first such periodical to accept his work, running "In Swimming-Time" in its September 1883 issue.
The revelation damaged the credibility of the ''Dispatch'' and harmed Riley's reputation.
About the same time he and several friends began an advertisement company.
He made only a few trips during the decade, including one to Mexico in 1906.
Developing and maintaining his publicity became a constant job, and received more of his attention as his fame grew.
Many prominent literary and theatrical people attended the shows.
He was honored with annual Riley Day celebrations around the United States and was regularly called on to perform readings at national civic events.
This gave his poetry a unique appeal during a period of rapid industrialization and urbanization in the United States.
He stopped visiting other women and their relationship became more dedicated and stable.
Often punished, he had nothing kind to say of his teachers in his writings.
The family finances finally disintegrated and they were forced to sell their town home in April 1870 and return to their country farm.
The home became a destination for local schoolchildren to whom Riley would regularly recite poetry and tell stories.
He had repurchased his childhood home in 1893 and allowed his divorced sister, Mary, his widowed sister-in-law, Julia, and their daughters to live in the home.
Riley was a difficult patient, and generally refused to take any medicine except the patent medicines he had sold in his earlier years; the medicines often worsened his conditions, but his doctors could not sway his opinion.
Riley's friends frequently visited his home, and he developed a closer relationship with Eugene Debs.
For this reason, and the publicity Riley's work created, he was commonly known as the "Hoosier Poet."
They held their first meeting in July, naming themselves the Western Association of Writers.
The editors accepted his poem, paid him for it, and wrote him a letter encouraging him to submit more.
The editors of the ''Anderson Democrat'' discovered Riley's poems in the ''Indianapolis Journal'' and offered him a job as a reporter in February 1877.
In August 1875 he joined another traveling tonic show run by the Wizard Oil Company.
By 1890, Riley had authored almost all of his famous poems.
"Little Mandy's Christmas-Tree", "The Absence of Little Wesley", and "The Happy Little Cripple" were about poverty, the death of a child, and disabilities.
He spent the next months in his Greenfield home attempting to write an epic poem, but after several attempts gave up, believing he did not possess the ability.
The Redpath Bureau agreed to allow Riley to tour with Nye, provided he maintained his financial agreements with them.
Longfellow encouraged Riley to focus on poetry, and gave him advice for his upcoming performance.
Riley agreed, signing a ten-year agreement and granting half his receipts to his agent.
Riley was introduced by James Russell Lowell before his performance, and Lowell gave Riley a glowing endorsement to the crowd.
Riley's contemporaries acclaimed him "America's best-loved poet".
Thanks in part to an endorsement from poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, he eventually earned successive jobs at Indiana newspaper publishers during the latter 1870s.
As a lasting tribute, the citizens of Greenfield hold a festival every year in Riley's honor.
Riley's death shocked the nation and made front page headlines in major newspapers.
Taking place the first or second weekend of October, the "Riley Days" festival traditionally commences with a flower parade in which local school children place flowers around Myra Reynolds Richards' statue of Riley on the county courthouse lawn, while a band plays lively music in honor of the poet.
The election was exceptionally partisan in Indiana, and Riley found the atmosphere of the campaign stressful; he vowed never to become involved with politics again.
He continued to write poems regularly for the newspaper and to sell other poems to larger newspapers.
Among those he eulogized were Benjamin Harrison, Lew Wallace, and Henry Lawton.
Much to Riley's surprise, the news reports made him more popular than ever.
In the following years, other memorials intended to benefit children were created, including Camp Riley for youth with disabilities.
Ambrose Bierce criticized Riley for his frequent use of dialect.
The job provided little income and he returned to Greenfield in March 1871 where he started an apprenticeship to a painter.
With his health so poor, he decided to work on a legacy by which to be remembered in Indianapolis.
His birthplace and boyhood home, now the James Whitcomb Riley House, is preserved as a historical site.
Published in 1888, the book was somewhat successful and had three reprints.
He made both dramatic and comedic readings of his poetry, and by early 1879 could guarantee large crowds whenever he performed.
The literary community had dismissed his work, but Riley was instrumental in helping him to be accepted.
Even Riley's rival, Clemens, commented that the book was "charming" and made him weep for his "lost youth."
Riley is often remembered for his most famous poems, including the "The Raggedy Man" and "Little Orphant Annie".
Riley was a prolific writer who "achieved mass appeal partly due to his canny sense of marketing and publicity."
He submitted many poems to Longfellow, whom he considered to be the greatest living poet.
Because of the poor quality of the poems, his friends and publishers requested that he stop writing them, but he refused.
In 1950, there was a James Whitcomb Riley Elementary School in Hammond, Indiana, but it was torn down in 2006.
Hoping for a quick recovery, his family kept the news from the press until September.
While a few newspapers believed the poem to be authentic, the majority did not, claiming the quality was too poor to be authored by Poe.
Riley began sending poems to his brother again in February 1873.
During his lifetime he was known as the "Hoosier Poet" and "Children's Poet" for his dialect works and his children's poetry respectively.
Riley's poetry brought both tears and laughter according to ''The New York Sun''.
In 1896, Riley performed four shows in Denver.
It served with the United States Maritime Commission until being scrapped in 1971.
Often writing his verses in dialect, his poetry caused readers to recall a nostalgic and simpler time in earlier American history.
Riley was fond of his uncle who helped influence his early interest in poetry.
He recovered enough during the day to speak and joke with his companions.
He completed it during July and Bowen-Merrill published it in December with the title ''The Boss Girl, A Christmas Story and Other Sketches''.
His poem "The Educator" told of an intelligent but sinister teacher and may have been based on one of his instructors.
He and Sherley continued a show very similar to those that he and Nye had done.
Riley's accumulated debt and low income began causing him trouble in 1881, and he decided rejoining a lecture circuit would provide much needed funds.
Nye and Riley remained good friends, and Riley later wrote that Pond and Walker were the source of the problems.
They both placed "spirit rappings" in their homes on places like tables and bureaus to capture any spirits that may have been wandering about.
At a stop at the Masonic Temple Theatre in Louisville, Kentucky, in January 1890, Riley paid the hotel's bartender to sneak whiskey to his room.
He became more popular in spite of the bad press he received, and as a result extricated himself from poorly negotiated contracts that limited his earnings; he quickly became very wealthy.
Revell made extensive comparison to historical texts and Riley's dialect usage.
He traveled with the act, composing poetry and performing at the shows.
Riley's mother frequently told him stories of fairies, trolls, and giants, and read him children's poems.
The full details of the settlement were never disclosed, but whatever the case, Riley finally extricated himself from his old contracts and became a free agent.
Riley's alcohol addiction influenced some of his poems during his time working for the ''Journal'', including "On Quitting California," "John Golliher's Third Womern," and "The Dismal Fate of Tit."
His famous works include "Little Orphant Annie" and  "The Raggedy Man".
He completed the study and opened a business in Greenfield creating and maintaining signs.
Because of his success in the midwest, the circuit leaders invited him to make an east coast tour, starting in Boston at the Tremont Temple in February 1882.
By the end of 1882, Riley's finances began to improve dramatically, thanks largely to the income from his performances.
Burdette was a member of the Redpath Lyceum Bureau of Boston, a prominent lecture circuit whose regular speakers included Ralph Waldo Emerson.
Riley was "a quiet boy, not talkative, who would often go about with one eye shut as he observed and speculated."
Keeping his alcohol addiction secret, maintaining the persona of a simple rural poet and a friendly common person became most important.
George Ade worked with him from 1910 through 1916 to write his last five poems and several short autobiographical sketches as Riley dictated.
Longfellow finally replied in a brief letter, telling Riley that "I have read the poems in great pleasure, and think they show a true poetic faculty and insight."
Locally, he was still dealing with the stigma of the Poe plot.
He began traveling and performing with the Adelphians around central Indiana to earn an income while he searched for a new publisher.
''Flying Islands'' concerns a kingdom besieged by evil forces of a sinister queen who is defeated eventually by an angel-like heroine.
Many people thought the stories were exaggerated, and Riley's carefully cultivated image made it difficult for the public to believe he was an alcoholic.
His father regularly brought home a variety of clients and disadvantaged people to give them assistance.
In 1911 he donated land and funds to build a new library on Pennsylvania Avenue.
He found school difficult and was frequently in trouble.
Riley had become very wealthy by the time he ended touring in 1895, and was earning $1,000 a week.
This encouraged Riley, and he made another attempt to give up liquor as he returned to his public career.
The ''Indianapolis Journal'' and other newspapers refused to accept his poetry, leaving Riley desperate for income.
From an early age he developed a love of literature.
The book reprinted many poems Riley had already published, but included some new ones he wrote specifically for the book, including "The Days Gone By," "The Little White Hearse," and "The Serenade."
Riley thought Dunbar's work was "worthy of applause", and wrote him letters of recommendation to help him get his work published.
His mother taught him to read and write at home before sending him to the local community school in 1852.
He then traveled to Edinburgh, York, and London, reciting poetry for gatherings at each stop.
After recovering, Riley remained briefly in New York to participate in a show at Chickering Hall with Edgar Nye, Samuel Clemens, and several others.
To compensate for the lack of his own children, he became a doting uncle, showering gifts on his nieces and nephews.
His publisher continued recycling old works into new books, which remained in high demand.
As a poet, Riley achieved an uncommon level of fame during his own lifetime.
Postal Service issued a 10-cent stamp honoring Riley.
In early 1874, Riley returned to Greenfield to become a writer full-time.
Most of his growing number of critics suggested that he ignored the quality of the poems for the sake of making money.
The 1902 poem "America, Messiah of Nations" was written and read by Riley for the dedication of the Indianapolis Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument.
The newspaper had served to earn him fame and had published hundreds of his articles, stories, and poems.
Riley had stopped sending poetry to newspapers and magazines in the aftermath, but they soon began corresponding with him requesting that he resume writing.
Like his children's poems, they too contained morals, suggesting society should pity the downtrodden and be charitable.
''Rhymes of Childhood'' became Riley's best selling book, and sold millions of copies.
In an 1892 newspaper article, Riley confessed that he knew little of mathematics, geography, or science, and his understanding of proper grammar was poor.
He took his nephew Edmund Eital as a personal secretary and gave him a $50,000 wedding gift in 1912.
While Eitel handled the finances, Glass worked to organize his lecture tours.
He recited a recently composed poem, "A Childhood Home of Long Ago," telling of life in pioneer Indiana.
Their brief meeting was one of Riley's fondest memories, and he wrote a lengthy article on it after Longfellow's death only a month later.
Harris noticed Riley's interest in poetry and reading and encouraged him to pursue it further.
The constant labor had adverse effects on his health, which was worsened by his drinking.
During 1885, more than one hundred writers joined the group.
James Whitcomb Riley High School opened in South Bend, Indiana in 1924.
Walker threatened a separate suit demanding $1,000.
James Whitcomb Riley was born on October 7, 1849, in the town of Greenfield, Indiana, the third of the six children of Reuben Andrew and Elizabeth Marine Riley.
Riley agreed and printing of his first book began in August 1883, titled "The Old Swimmin'-Hole and 'Leven More Poems".
The annual celebration continued in Indiana until 1968.
Despite discussions and assurances from Pond that he would work to address the problem, Eitel had no success.
An employee of the ''Dispatch'' learned the truth of the incident and reported it to the ''Kokomo Tribune'', which published an expose that outed Riley as a conspirator behind the hoax.
The book, which contained humorous poetry and short stories, received mixed reviews.
Shortly after Riley's birth, the family moved into a larger house in town.
The poem was well received and was given good reviews by several newspapers.
He developed a close friendship with his landlords, the Nickum and Holstein families.
He was aided by editorials he authored and submitted to the ''Indianapolis Journal'' offering observations on events from his perspective as a "humble rural poet".
Riley lived in his parents' home until he was twenty-one years old.
Many of Riley's poems are filled with musical references.
With his mother's aid, Riley began creating plays and theatricals which he and his friends would practice and perform in the back of a local grocery store.
