He also knew the Impressionists, notably Édouard Manet, Monet, and Edgar Degas.
As he wrote to Henri Fantin-Latour, "General upheaval
He was a regular guest at parties at the American consulate, and with his usual wit, enchanted the guests with verbal flourishes such as "the artist's only positive virtue is idleness—and there are so few who are gifted at it."
Others linked it to Wilkie Collins's ''The Woman in White'', a popular novel of the time, or various other literary sources.
When Edgar Degas invited Whistler to exhibit with the first show by the Impressionists in 1874, Whistler turned down the invitation, as did Manet, and some scholars attributed this in part to Fantin-Latour's influence on both men.
During his life, he affected two generations of artists, in Europe and in the United States.
He painted the paneled room in a rich and unified palette of brilliant blue-greens with over-glazing and metallic gold leaf.
He found the work boring and he was frequently late or absent.
It has been satirized in endless variation in greeting cards and magazines, and by cartoon characters such as Donald Duck and Bullwinkle the Moose.
Young Whistler was a moody child prone to fits of temper and insolence, who—after bouts of ill-health—often drifted into periods of laziness.
What the journey did produce was Whistler's first three nocturnal paintings—which he termed "moonlights" and later re-titled as "nocturnes"—night scenes of the harbor painted with a blue or light green palette.
Mathews took Whistler's Tonalism to San Francisco, spawning a broad use of that technique among turn-of-the-century California artists.
A reviewer wrote, "The visitor is struck, on entering the gallery, with a curious sense of harmony and fitness pervading it, and is more interested, perhaps, in the general effect than in any one work."
Whistler was seldom without his sketchbook and was popular with his classmates for his caricatures.
Ruskin, who had been a champion of the Pre-Raphaelites and J. M. W. Turner, reviewed Whistler's work in his publication ''Fors Clavigera'' on July 2, 1877.
He was averse to sentimentality and moral allusion in painting, and was a leading proponent of the credo "art for art's sake".
To Whistler, however, art was its own end and the artist's responsibility was not to society, but to himself, to interpret through art, and to neither reproduce nor moralize what he saw.
Like Whistler, Monet and Pissarro both focused their efforts on views of the city, and it is likely that Whistler was exposed to the evolution of Impressionism founded by these artists and that they had seen his nocturnes.
The public reacted negatively, mostly because of its anti-Victorian simplicity during a time in England when sentimentality and flamboyant decoration were in vogue.
As a young artist, he maintained a close friendship with Dante Gabriel Rossetti, a member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.
Whistler's brother-in-law Francis Haden, a physician who was also an artist, spurred his interest in art and photography.
Nicholas I of Russia learned of George Whistler's ingenuity in engineering the Boston & Albany Railroad, and offered Whistler a position in 1842 engineering a railroad from St. Petersburg to Moscow.
Whistler's painting was widely noticed, although upstaged by Manet's more shocking painting ''Le déjeuner sur l'herbe''.
Many artists took refuge in England, joining Whistler, including Camille Pissarro and Monet, while Manet and Degas stayed in France.
Martin Hardie wrote "there are some who set him beside Rembrandt, perhaps above Rembrandt, as the greatest master of all time.
He eagerly accepted the assignment, and arrived in the city with girlfriend Maud, taking rooms in a dilapidated palazzo they shared with other artists, including John Singer Sargent.
After the initial shock of her moving in with her son, she aided him considerably by stabilizing his behavior somewhat, tending to his domestic needs, and providing an aura of conservative respectability that helped win over patrons.
William Merritt Chase complained of his sitting for a portrait by Whistler, "He proved to be a veritable tyrant, painting every day into the twilight, while my limbs ached with weariness and my head swam dizzily.
It was heard at the Queen's Bench of the High Court on November 25 and 26 of 1878.
The marriage took place on 11 August 1888, with the ceremony attended by a reporter from the ''Pall Mall Gazette'', so that the event receive publicity.
At the annual meeting on June 4, he was defeated for reelection by a vote of 18–19, with nine abstentions.
In the winter of 1842, the Whistlers moved from Springfield to St. Petersburg.
His focus on the importance of balance and harmony extended beyond the frame to the placement of his paintings to their settings, and further to the design of an entire architectural element, as in the Peacock Room.
As American critic Charles Caffin wrote in 1907:"He did better than attract a few followers and imitators; he influenced the whole world of art.
Whistler's mother noted in her diary, "the great artist remarked to me 'Your little boy has uncommon genius, but do not urge him beyond his inclination.'"
This ignited a feud within the membership ranks that overshadowed all other society business.
Queen Victoria so admired "the beautiful and artistic illumination" that she decreed henceforth, "that the Society should be called Royal."
In his blossoming enthusiasm for art, at fifteen, he informed his father by letter of his future direction, "I hope, dear father, you will not object to my choice."
The lawyer for John Ruskin, Attorney General Sir John Holker, cross-examined Whistler:
His good friend Fantin-Latour, growing more reactionary in his opinions, especially in his negativity concerning the emerging Impressionist school, found Whistler's new works surprising and confounding.
Whistler gained an enormous reputation as an etcher.
The Franco-Prussian War of 1870 fragmented the French art community.
During that year, he painted his first self-portrait, ''Portrait of Whistler with Hat'', a dark and thickly rendered work reminiscent of Rembrandt.
He illustrated the book ''Les Chauves-Souris'' with Antonio de La Gandara.
Historians speculate that Courbet's erotic painting of her as L'Origine du monde led to the breakup of the friendship between Whistler and Courbet.
In 1888, Whistler married Beatrice Godwin, (who was called 'Beatrix' or 'Trixie' by Whistler).
By 1871, Whistler returned to portraits and soon produced his most famous painting, the nearly monochromatic full-length figure entitled ''Arrangement in Grey and Black No.1'', but usually (and incorrectly) referred to as ''Whistler's Mother''.
Beatrix and her sisters Rosalind Birnie Philip  and Ethel Whibley posed for many of Whistler's paintings and drawings; with Ethel Whibley being the model for ''Mother of pearl and silver: The Andalusian'' (1888–1900).
The young artist made some valuable contacts in the art community and also sold some early paintings to Winans.
He later produced a group of etchings known as "The French Set", with the help of French master printer Auguste Delâtre.
The young artist followed the traditional curriculum of drawing from plaster casts and occasional live models, reveled in the atmosphere of art talk with older peers, and pleased his parents with a first-class mark in anatomy.
This achievement was widely appreciated by the members, but soon it was overshadowed by the dispute that inevitably arose with the Royal Academy of Arts.
The Pennells' vast collection of Whistler material was bequeathed to the Library of Congress.
James lived the first three years of his life in a modest house at 243 Worthen Street in Lowell.
After moving to St. Petersburg to join his father a year later, the young Whistler took private art lessons, then enrolled in the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts at age eleven.
However, it became clear that a career in religion did not suit him, so he applied to the United States Military Academy at West Point, where his father had taught drawing and other relatives had attended.
Fantin-Latour admitted, "I don't understand anything there; it's bizarre how one changes.
The work is unsentimental and effectively contrasts the mother in black and the daughter in white, with other colors kept restrained in the manner advised by his teacher Gleyre.
Their relationship was nearly at an end by then, but they continued to share opinions in occasional correspondence.
In 1890, he met Charles Lang Freer, who became a valuable patron in America, and ultimately, his most important collector.
Whistler hoped to recover £1,000 plus the costs of the action.
Colonel Robert E Lee was the West Point Superintendent and, after considerable indulgence toward Whistler, he had no choice but to dismiss the young cadet.
Whistler published his account of the trial in the pamphlet ''Whistler v. Ruskin: Art and Art Critics'', included in his later ''The Gentle Art of Making Enemies'' (1890), in December 1878, soon after the trial.
he would scream whenever I started to rest."
Whistler founded an art school in 1898, but his poor health and infrequent appearances led to its closure in 1901.
Among his creditors was Leyland, who oversaw the sale of Whistler's possessions.
You have no idea what an irritation it proves to the critics and consequent pleasure to me—besides it is really so charming and does so poetically say all that I want to say and ''no more'' than I wish!
He also immediately moved Hiffernan to another location.
He spent much of his free time playing billiards and idling about, was always broke, and although a charmer, had little acquaintance with women.
The three-month assignment stretched to fourteen months.
He followed it by painting ''At the Piano'' in 1859 in London, which he adopted as his home, while also regularly visiting friends in France.
In England, some considered it a painting in the Pre-Raphaelite manner.
The austere portrait in his normally constrained palette is another Whistler exercise in tonal harmony and composition.
(The Whistler Mansion, as it came to be known, stood at the corner of Chestnut and Edwards Streets in Springfield, where currently the Wood Museum of History stands.)
It was as if the portrait were hidden within the canvas and the master by passing his wands day after day over the surface evoked the image.
Haden took Whistler to visit collectors and to lectures, and gave him a watercolor set with instruction.
His close friendships with Monet and poet Stéphane Mallarmé, who translated the ''Ten O'Clock Lecture'' into French, helped strengthen respect for Whistler by the French public.
He was adept in many media, with over 500 paintings, as well as etchings, pastels, watercolors, drawings, and lithographs.
Some of the lithographs are of figures slightly draped; two or three of the very finest are of Thames subjects—including a "nocturne" at Limehouse; while others depict the Faubourg Saint-Germain in Paris, and Georgian churches in Soho and  Bloomsbury in London.
In later years, James Whistler played up his mother's connection to the American South and its roots, and presented himself as an impoverished Southern aristocrat (although it remains unclear to what extent he truly sympathized with the Southern cause during the American Civil War).
Whistler had a high-pitched, drawling voice and a unique manner of speech, full of calculated pauses.
Whistler's nocturnes were among his most innovative works.
Whistler was not so successful a portrait painter as the other famous expatriate American John Singer Sargent.
His book ''The Gentle Art of Making Enemies'' was published in 1890 to mixed success, but it afforded helpful publicity.
Whistler was sent to Christ Church Hall School with his mother's hopes that he would become a minister.
As luck would have it, the arrival in Paris of George Lucas, another rich friend, helped stabilize Whistler's finances for a while.
Whistler was drifting away from Courbet's "damned realism" and their friendship had wilted, as had his liaison with Joanna Hiffernan.
Thus, the family moved to Springfield, Massachusetts, then one of the United States' most prosperous cities, where they constructed a mansion in a posh district.
Personally, I prefer to regard them as the Jupiter and Venus, largest and brightest among the planets in the etcher's heaven."
They returned to London in February 1896, taking rooms at the Savoy Hotel while they sought medical treatment.
After West Point, Whistler worked as draftsman mapping the entire U.S. coast for military and maritime purposes.
He studied traditional art methods for a short time at the Ecole Impériale and at the atelier of Marc-Charles-Gabriel Gleyre.
Nonetheless, the jury reached a verdict in favor of Whistler, but awarded a mere farthing in nominal damages, and the court costs were split.
He is buried in Chiswick Old Cemetery in west London.
James Abbott Whistler was born in Lowell, Massachusetts, on July 10, 1834, the first child of Anna Matilda McNeill and George Washington Whistler.
For a few months he lived in Baltimore with a wealthy friend, Tom Winans, who even furnished Whistler with a studio and some spending cash.
In addition to Henri Fantin-Latour, Alphonse Legros, and Courbet, Whistler was friendly with many other French artists.
The marriage ceremony was arranged, as a member of parliament, Henry Labouchère arranged for the Chaplain to the House of Commons to marry the couple.
And I may  add that in this opinion Mr. Whistler himself entirely concurs."
Many of them returned to America and spread tales of Whistler's provocative egotism, sharp wit, and aesthetic pronouncements—establishing the legend of Whistler, much to his great satisfaction.
Whistler's major accomplishment at West Point was learning drawing and map making from American artist Robert W. Weir.
Again, although his mother is the subject, Whistler commented that the narrative was of little importance.
He took great care in the appropriate placement of the image on both his paintings and his custom-made frames.
His new friends reported, on the contrary, that Whistler rose early and put in a full day of effort.
When Wilde was publicly acknowledged to be a homosexual in 1895, Whistler openly mocked him.
Some saw it as "the dignified feeling of old ladyhood", "a grave sentiment of mourning", or a "perfect symbol of motherhood", others employed it as a fitting vehicle for mockery.
Whistler already was imagining an art career.
The Royal Academy rejected it, then grudgingly accepted it after lobbying by Sir William Boxall—but then hung the painting in an unfavorable location at its exhibition.
By around 1880, he added a stinger to the butterfly image to create a mark representing both his gentle, sensitive nature and his provocative, feisty spirit.
At the beginning and end of his career, he placed great emphasis on cleanness of line, though in a middle period he experimented more with inking and the use of plate-tone.
Around this time, in addition to portraiture, Whistler experimented with early color photography and with lithography, creating a series featuring London architecture and the human figure, mostly female nudes.
Reflecting the banner of realism of his adopted circle, Whistler painted his first exhibited work, ''La Mere Gerard'' in 1858.
for that he is indeed one of the very greatest masters of painting, in my opinion.
In his mother's honor, thereafter, he publicly adopted her maiden name McNeill as a middle name.
In May 1888, nine members wrote to Whistler to demand his resignation.
He felt welcomed by Monet, Auguste Rodin, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, and by Stéphane Mallarmé, and he set himself up a large studio.
Whistler's famous butterfly signature first developed in the 1860s out of his interest in Asian art.
Schwob had met Whistler in the mid-1890s through Stéphane Mallarmé they had other mutual friends including Oscar Wilde (until they argued) and Whistler's brother-in-law, Charles Whibley.
In 1861, after returning to Paris for a time, Whistler painted his first famous work, ''Symphony in White, No.
Leyland and his wife Frances.
In 1866, Whistler decided to visit Valparaíso, Chile, a journey that has puzzled scholars, although Whistler stated that he did it for political reasons.
The show was notable and noticed, however, for Whistler's design and decoration of the hall, which harmonized well with the paintings, in keeping with his art theories.
At the time, the opposing Victorian notion reigned, namely, that art, and indeed much human activity, had a moral or social function.
Furthermore, Whistler influenced the American art community in Venice, especially Frank Duveneck (and Duveneck's 'boys') and Robert Blum who emulated Whistler's vision of city and later spread his methods and influence back to America.
He is buried at St Nicholas Church, Chiswick.
A critic wrote, "despite a recklessly bold manner and sketchiness of the wildest and roughest kind, it has a genuine feeling for colour and a splendid power of composition and design, which evince a just appreciation of nature very rare amongst artists."
The Gilbert and Sullivan operetta ''Patience'' pokes fun at the Aesthetic movement, and the lead character of Reginald Bunthorne is often identified as a send-up of Oscar Wilde, though Bunthorne is more likely an amalgam of several prominent artists, writers, and Aesthetic figures.
The portrait was refused for exhibition at the conservative Royal Academy, but was shown in a private gallery under the title ''The Woman in White''.
He did his best to distract himself from the gloom of his financial affairs and the pending sale of all his goods at Sotheby's.
During this period Whistler became close to Gustave Courbet, the early leader of the French realist school, but when Hiffernan modeled in the nude for Courbet, Whistler became enraged and his relationship with Hiffernan began to fall apart.
Later the painting was purchased by the French government, the first Whistler work in a public collection, and is now housed in the Musée d'Orsay in Paris.
His art plans remained vague and his future uncertain.
Consciously, or unconsciously, his presence is felt in countless studios; his genius permeates modern artistic thought."
During the Ruskin trial (see below), Whistler claimed St. Petersburg, Russia, as his birthplace, declaring, "I shall be born when and where I want, and I do not choose to be born in Lowell."
After it was discovered that he was drawing sea serpents, mermaids, and whales on the margins of the maps, he was transferred to the etching division of the U. S. Coast Survey.
''At the Piano'' is a portrait composed of his niece and her mother in their London music room, an effort which clearly displayed his talent and promise.
It later was re-titled ''Harmony in Green and Rose: The Music Room''.
But the event of greatest consequence that year was his friendship with Henri Fantin-Latour, whom he met at the Louvre.
He corresponded with his many friends and colleagues.
On October 27, 2010, Swann Galleries set a record price for a Whistler print at auction, when ''Nocturne'', an etching and drypoint printed in black on warm, cream Japan paper, 1879–80 sold for $282,000.
In 1891, with help from his close friend Stéphane Mallarmé, ''Whistler's Mother'' was purchased by the French government for 4,000 francs.
In fact, Wilde did repeat in public many witticisms created by Whistler.
Later, Wilde struck at Whistler again, basing the murdered artist in his novel ''The Picture of Dorian Gray'' after Whistler.
His departure from West Point seems to have been precipitated by a failure in a chemistry exam where he was asked to describe silicon and began by saying, "Silicon is a gas."
No publicity was given to the ceremony to avoid the possibility of a furious Maud Franklin interrupting the marriage ceremony.
Unhappy with the first decorative result of the original scheme designed by Thomas Jeckyll (1827-1881), Frederick Leyland left the room in Whistler's care to make minor changes, "to harmonize" the room whose primary purpose was to display Leyland's china collection.
After her death, he adopted her maiden name, using it as an additional middle name.
Whistler had been disappointed over the irregular acceptance of his works for the Royal Academy exhibitions and the poor hanging and placement of his paintings.
Both were figures in the Café society of Paris, and they were often the "talk of the town".
Whistler had significant contact and exchanged ideas and ideals with Realist, Impressionist, and Symbolist painters.
After the trial, Whistler received a commission to do twelve etchings in Venice.
The latter was a great advocate of the work of Ingres, and impressed Whistler with two principles that he used for the rest of his career: line is more important than color and that black is the fundamental color of tonal harmony.
Whistler always blamed Leyland for his financial downfall.
Some of the Thames paintings also show compositional and thematic similarities with the Japanese prints of Hiroshige.
The deceptively simple design is in fact a balancing act of differing shapes, particularly the rectangles of curtain, picture on the wall, and floor which stabilize the curve of her face, dress, and chair.
Whistler influenced the art world and the broader culture of his time with his artistic theories and his friendships with leading artists and writers.
1: The White Girl''.
Whistler was an inimitable host.
Whistler was friendly with his fellow students at Gleyre's studio, including Ignace Schott, whose son Leon Dabo Whistler later would mentor.
He wrote to a friend, "I have learned to know a Venice in Venice that the others never seem to have perceived, and which, if I bring back with me as I propose, will far more than compensate for all annoyances delays & vexations of spirit."
He also worked very slowly and demanded extraordinarily long sittings.
Whistler's lover and model for ''The White Girl'', Joanna Hiffernan, also posed for Gustave Courbet.
Through him, Whistler was introduced to the circle of Gustave Courbet, which included Carolus-Duran (later the teacher of John Singer Sargent), Alphonse Legros, and Édouard Manet.
Other important portraits by Whistler include those of Thomas Carlyle (historian,1873), Maud Franklin (his mistress, 1876), Cicely Alexander (daughter of a London banker, 1873), Lady Meux (socialite, 1882), and Théodore Duret (critic, 1884).
I have seen, and heard, much of Cockney impudence before now; but never expected to hear a coxcomb ask two hundred guineas for flinging a pot of paint in the public's face.
The couple left soon after for Paris, to avoid any risk of a scene with Maud.
In the 1870s, Whistler painted full length portraits of F.R.
Stansky notes the irony that the Fine Art Society of London, which had organized a collection to pay for Ruskin's legal costs, supported him in etching "The Stones of Venice" (and in exhibiting the series in 1883), which helped recoup Whistler's costs.
When his portrait was painted by Sir William Boxall in 1848, the young Whistler exclaimed that the portrait was "very much like me and a very fine picture.
Critics thought the painting a failed "experiment" rather than art.
Beatrix was the daughter of the sculptor John Birnie Philip and his wife Frances Black.
The symbol was apt, for it combined both aspects of his personality—his art was characterized by a subtle delicacy, while his public persona was combative.
Whistler had counted on many artists to take his side as witnesses, but they refused, fearing damage to their reputations.
After Freer's death in 1919, the Peacock Room was permanently installed in the Freer Gallery of Art at the Smithsonian in Washington, D.C.
At that point, Whistler painted another self-portrait and entitled it ''Arrangement in Gray: Portrait of the Painter'' (c. 1872), and he also began to re-title many of his earlier works using terms associated with music, such as a "nocturne", "symphony", "harmony", "study" or "arrangement", to emphasize the tonal qualities and the composition and to de-emphasize the narrative content.
Their relationship soured by the mid-1880s, as Whistler turned against Wilde and the Aesthetic Movement.
The case came to trial the following year after delays caused by Ruskin's bouts of mental illness, while Whistler's financial condition continued to deteriorate.
In January 1864, Whistler's very religious and very proper mother arrived in London, upsetting her son's bohemian existence and temporarily exacerbating family tensions.
In 1837, the Whistlers moved from Lowell to Stonington, Connecticut, where George Whistler worked for the Stonington Railroad.
It was likely one of the first etchings Whistler made for the Fine Art Society on his arrival in Venice in September 1879 and also one of his most celebrated views of the city.
His most famous painting is "Arrangement in Grey and Black No.
In 1839, the Whistlers' fortunes improved considerably when George Whistler received the appointment that would make his fortune and fame - that of chief engineer for the Boston & Albany Railroad.
Whistler and twenty-five supporters resigned, while the anti-Whistler majority (in his view) was successful in purging him for his "eccentricities" and "non-English" background.
After a year in London, as counterpoint to his 1858 ''French set'', in 1860, he produced another set of etchings called ''Thames Set'', as well as some early impressionistic work, including ''The Thames in Ice''.
I don't recognize him anymore."
It took dozens of sittings to complete.
He often was arrogant and selfish toward friends and patrons.
The first five years of their marriage were very happy but her later life was a time of misery for the couple, because of her illness and eventual death from cancer.
Whistler was inspired by and incorporated many sources in his art, including the work of Rembrandt, Velázquez, Japanese art, and ancient Greek sculpture to develop his own highly influential and individual style.
Author Terry Mort uses the parallel to Whistler's commentary "Painting should be like breath on a glass" to that of fly fishing.
Whistler reveled in preparing and managing his social gatherings.
Whistler joined the Society of British Artists in 1884, and on June 1, 1886, he was elected president.
As he himself put it later: "If silicon were a gas, I would have been a general one day".
Whistler did his part in promoting the picture and popularizing the image.
It was displayed at the Royal Academy the following year, and in many exhibits to come.
In 1940 Whistler was commemorated on a United States postage stamp when the U.S. Post Office issued a set of 35 stamps commemorating America's famous Authors, Poets, Educators, Scientists, Composers, Artists, and Inventors: the 'Famous Americans Series'.
Whistler bucked authority, spouted sarcastic comments, and racked up demerits.
At a dinner Louise Jopling and Henry Labouchère insisted that they should be married before the end of the week.
For Mr. Whistler's own sake, no less than for the protection of the purchaser, Sir Coutts Lindsay founder of the Grosvenor Gallery ought not to have admitted works into the gallery in which the ill-educated conceit of the artist so nearly approached the aspect of willful imposture.
Bunthorne wears a monocle and has prominent white streaks in his dark hair, as did Whistler.
