Ratification of the treaty required a 2/3 super-majority of the Senate, and ratification was uncertain due to the opposition of various Senators, including those who opposed the annexation of any Mexican territory.
Polk's request ignited opposition to the war, as Polk had never before made public his desire to annex parts of Mexico (aside from lands claimed by Texas).
An old story told that Andrew Jackson had encouraged their romance when they began to court.
Van Buren and Polk faced pressure to rescind the Specie Circular, an act that had been signed by Jackson to boost the economy.
Though Van Buren had the stature of a former president and was widely seen as the frontrunner, he faced opposition from Southerners who feared his views on slavery, while Van Buren's favorable position on hard money and his handling of the Panic of 1837 also aroused opposition from "entrepreneurial conservatives."
Though Mexican President José Joaquín de Herrera was open to negotiations, Slidell's ambassadorial credentials were refused by a Mexican council of government.
Despite the increasingly polarizing slavery debate, Taylor and Cass both won a mix of northern and southern states.
After meeting with Gillespie, Army captain John C. Frémont led settlers in northern California to overthrow the Mexican garrison in Sonoma in what became known as the Bear Flag Revolt.
The two major issues during Polk's speakership were slavery and, after the Panic of 1837, the economy.
Polk challenged Jones to a re-match in 1843, campaigning across the state and publicly debating against Jones, but was defeated again, this time by a slightly greater margin of 3,833 votes.
Polk was a compromise between the Democrats of the North, like David Wilmot and Silas Wright, and Southern plantation owners led by John C. Calhoun.
In 1833, after being elected to a fifth consecutive term, Polk became the chair of the House Ways and Means Committee.
The Republic of Texas had gained independence from Mexico following the Texas Revolution of 1836.
As the balloting continued, anti-Cass forces from the Northeast led by George Bancroft rallied support for Polk.
With the acquisition of California, Polk had accomplished all four of his major presidential goals.
The family grew prosperous, with Samuel Polk turning to land speculation and becoming a county judge.
In 1831, he became an absentee cotton planter, sending slaves to clear plantation land that his father had left him near Somerville, Tennessee.
As in Texas, Mexico had failed to establish strong control over the sprawling expanse of California, and, as in Texas, many Americans had migrated to the region.
In 1845, Polk, fearful of French or British intervention, had sent Lieutenant Archibald H. Gillespie to California with orders to foment a pro-American rebellion that could be used to justify annexation of the territory.
In August 1846, American forces under Kearny captured Santa Fe, capital of the province of New Mexico.
Despite Polk's support of the annexation of Texas, Tyler considered running an independent re-election campaign, but he agreed to withdraw after Jackson encouraged Democrats to welcome Tyler's followers into the party.
James Knox Polk, the first of ten children, was born on November 2, 1795 in a log house in what is now Pineville, North Carolina in Mecklenburg County, just outside Charlotte.
Polk was licensed to practice law in June 1820.
Polk was reelected as clerk in 1821 without opposition, and would continue to serve until 1822.
With Jackson's support Polk ran against fellow Tennessean John Bell for Speaker.
In 1822 Polk joined the Tennessee militia as a captain in the cavalry regiment of the 5th Brigade.
During the course of the Mexican War, Generals Taylor and Scott emerged as strong Whig candidates, alongside anti-war Senator Thomas Corwin and longtime party leader Henry Clay.
Many Texians had migrated from the United States, and many Americans and Texians sought to make Texas a part of America following the Texas Revolution.
Polk's historic reputation was largely formed by the attacks made on him in his own time.
A Democrat, Polk served as the 13th Speaker of the House of Representatives (1835–39)—the only president to have served as House Speaker—and Governor of Tennessee (1839–41).
The potential annexation of the Republic of Texas by President John Tyler upended the presidential race; while Van Buren and the Whig frontrunner, Henry Clay, opposed the annexation and a potential war with Mexico over the disputed territory, Polk and Andrew Jackson strongly supported territorial acquisition.
Said what he intended to do and did it."
William Butler, who had replaced Winfield Scott as the commanding general in Mexico City, won the vice presidential nomination.
When he took office on March 4, 1845, Polk, at 49, became the youngest man at the time to assume the presidency.
She lived at Polk Place for over forty years after his death.
Because the Democratic Party was splintered into bitter factions, Polk promised to serve only one term if elected, hoping that his disappointed rival Democrats would unite behind him with the knowledge that another candidate would be chosen in four years.
Polk hoped that this would win him the backing of Democratic leaders such as Cass, Calhoun, Benton, Buchanan, and Silas Wright, all of whom were interested in seeking the presidency in the election of 1848.
Polk had the shortest retirement of all Presidents at 103 days.
In late 1847, Polk learned of Scott and Trist's attempt to bribe Mexican officials in an attempt to open negotiations, as well as Scott's court-martial of a close Polk friend, Gideon Johnson Pillow.
Joined by other anti-slavery Democrat from other states, the Barnburners held a convention nominating former President Martin Van Buren as their own presidential nominee.
In April 1847, Scott defeated a Mexican force led by Santa Anna at the Battle of Cerro Gordo.
After the outbreak of the Mexican-American War, Polk shook up his Cabinet, sending Bancroft to Great Britain as an ambassador, shifting Mason to his old position of Navy Secretary, and successfully nominating Nathan Clifford as Attorney General.
Polk refused to put forward another proposal, but left open the possibility of a British counter-offer.
and has subsequently ranked 8th in Schlesinger's 1962 poll, 11th in the Riders-McIver Poll (1996), 11th in the most recent Siena Poll (2002), 9th in the most recent ''Wall Street Journal'' Poll (2005), and 12th in the latest C-Span Poll (2009).
Polk had not attended the convention, and when he learned of his nomination, Polk stated: "It has been well observed that the office of President of the United States should neither be sought nor declined.
now became a popular rallying cry among Democrats.
He had never joined any church, but received a deathbed Methodist baptism.
Trist was ordered to seek the cession of Alta California, New Mexico, and Baja California, recognition of the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas, and American access across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.
In August, Scott defeated Santa Anna again at the Battle of Contreras and the Battle of Churubusco.
In an era of slow overland travel, the treaty gave the United States a route to more rapidly travel between its eastern and western coasts.
Polk privately favored Cass as his successor, but resisted becoming closely involved in the election.
However, the divisive issue of slavery blocked any such legislation, and Polk left office fearing that the United States might lose the western territories acquired during his presidency.
On September 20, 1819, Polk, with Grundy's endorsement, was elected clerk for the Tennessee State Senate.
Though Polk genuinely desired to avoid a war with Mexico, he more strongly desired the acquisition of Texas and Alta California.
Despite his party's gibes, Henry Clay, the Whig presidential nominee and himself a former Secretary of State, recognized that Polk could unify the Democrats for the 1844 election.
However, the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation and the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution freed all remaining slaves in rebel states long before the death of his wife in 1891.
Polk's practice was successful, in large part due to the many cases arising from debts after the Panic of 1819.
Polk attempted to make a more orderly house.
Woodbury was confirmed, but Woodward was rejected by the Senate in 1846.
The Whigs chose former Congressman Millard Fillmore of New York as Taylor's running mate.
Cuba was close to the United States and had slavery, so the idea appealed to Southerners but was unwelcome in the North.
As successful negotiations with the unstable Mexican government appeared unlikely, War Secretary Marcy ordered General Taylor to advance to the Rio Grande River.
Though the United States had been the first country to recognize Mexico's independence following the Mexican War of Independence, relations between the two countries began to sour in the 1830s.
In this role, Polk served as Jackson's most prominent House ally in the Bank War, engaging in an intense battle to defend Jackson's actions.
Cass led after the first ballot, and slowly gained support until he clinched the nomination on the fourth ballot.
However, Polk's actions strongly affected the 1848 race.
After being informed of his victory on November 15, 1844, Polk turned his attention towards forming a geographically-balanced Cabinet.
Woodbury died in 1851, but Grier served until 1870 and notably joined with the majority decision in ''Dred Scott v. Sandford''.
Polk avoided taking a position on the protectionist Tariff of 1842, but appealed to the key state of Pennsylvania by using rhetoric favorable towards tariffs.
Polk's actions were popular in the South and West; however, they were despised by many protectionists in the Northeast, especially Pennsylvania.
Taylor won acclaim for the result of the battle, but the theater remained inconclusive and Polk saw it as doing little to bring the war to an end.
Taylor and Commodore David Conner of the US Navy were both ordered to avoid provoking a war, while at the same time to prepare for war and respond to any Mexican breach of peace.
Naval Academy and of the Smithsonian Institution, the groundbreaking for the Washington Monument, and the issuance of the first United States postage stamp.
Santa Anna negotiated a truce with Scott, and the Mexican foreign minister notified Trist that they were ready to begin negotiations.
After Pakenham's rejection, Polk broke off negotiations and returned to the Democratic platform's "All Oregon" demand (which called for all of Oregon up to the 54-40 line that marked the southern boundary of Russian Alaska).
Polk's message was crafted to present the war as a just and necessary defense of the country against a neighbor that had long troubled the Untied States.
Britain's preferred partition was unacceptable to Polk, as it would have awarded the Puget Sound and all lands North of the Columbia River to Britain.
At its outbreak, the war enjoyed support across the nation.
In September 1847, Manuel de la Peña y Peña replaced Santa Anna as President of Mexico, and Pena and his Moderado allies showed a willingness to negotiate based on the terms Polk had relayed to Trist.
Slidell arrived in Mexico City in December 1845.
Previous U.S. administrations had offered to divide the region along the 49th parallel, which was not acceptable to Britain, as they had commercial interests along the Columbia River.
Though Jackson had won the popular vote, neither he nor any of the other candidates (John Quincy Adams, Henry Clay, and William H. Crawford) had won a majority of the electoral vote.
His first case was to defend his father against a public fighting charge.
Polk has been called the "least known consequential president" of the United States.
Santa Anna returned to Mexico City in September 1846, declaring that he would fight against the Americans.
In July 1846, American envoy Alexander Slidell Mackenzie met with Santa Anna, offering terms in which the US would pay to acquire the San Francisco Bay and other parts of Alta California.
In dissent were Buchanan, who called for more territory, and Secretary of the Treasury Walker, who wanted to annex all of Mexico.
In late 1845, Polk sent diplomat John Slidell to Mexico to purchase California for $20–40&nbsp;million.
At roughly the same time that Kearny captured Santa Fe, Commodore Robert F. Stockton landed in Los Angeles and proclaimed the capture of California.
Unsatisfactory conditions pertaining to the status of slavery in the territories acquired during the Polk administration led to the Compromise of 1850, one of the primary factors in the establishment of the Republican Party and later the beginning of the American Civil War.
* Acquire some or all of Oregon Country.
Unlike many of his peers, he never challenged anyone to a duel no matter how much they insulted his honor.
Polk's maneuvering was opposed at the national level by two powerful Senators, Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri and James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, both of whom sought a vice president of a lesser stature so as to clear the way for their own respective presidential candidacies in 1848.
Polk won the popular vote by a margin of about 39,000 out of 2.6&nbsp;million, and took the Electoral College with 170 votes to Clay's 105.
After the election, Bell and another prominent Tennessee politician, Senator Hugh Lawson White, formed a strong Tennessee Whig Party organization in opposition to Jackson's Democrats.
Polk received the document on February 19.
When Congress re-convened in December, he focused his efforts on granting immediate statehood to California, thereby avoiding the issue of the Wilmot Proviso.
In June 1844, Clay attempted to hedge his position on annexation, but this attempt alienated anti-annexation Northerners while doing little to appease pro-annexation forces.
Polk, like many other Democrats, fervently believed in the idea of Manifest Destiny, and he sought to create a bicoastal nation.
The agreement helped to establish a stronger American influence in the region, as the Polk administration sought to ensure that Great Britain would not dominate Central America.
The Senate ratified the treaty in a 41-14 vote.
The annexation of Texas would lead to increased tensions with Mexico, which had never recognized Texan independence.
Polk believed that these problems were local and not national.
Polk has been described as the first "dark horse" presidential nominee, but his nomination was less of a surprise that that of many future presidential nominees such as Franklin Pierce.
As the election drew closer, it became clear that most of the country favored the annexation of Texas, and some Southern Whig leaders supported Polk's campaign due to Clay's anti-annexation stance.
A separate measure to extend the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific coast was also defeated in the House, this time by a bipartisan alliance of northerners.
The Republican historians of the nineteenth century inherited this view.
Polk refused to support the proposed filibuster expedition of Narciso López, who sought to invade and annex Cuba.
Additionally, he built an independent treasury system that lasted until 1913, oversaw the opening of the U.S.
As the last congressional session before the 1848 election came to a close, Polk signed the lone territorial bill passed by Congress, which established the Territory of Oregon and prohibited slavery in it.
When he officially accepted the nomination, Polk announced that he would serve only one term.
These views were long reflected in the historical literature, until Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr and Bernard De Voto argued that Polk was nobody's tool, but set his own goals and achieved them.
Cass, Johnson, Calhoun, and Buchanan also received votes on the first ballot, and Cass took the lead after the fifth ballot.
Bell's victory over Polk represented the beginning of a rising anti-Jacksonian force in Tennessee.
Polk was then 28, and Sarah was 20 years old.
Polk was very disappointed by the outcome had a low opinion of Taylor, seeing the general as someone with poor judgment and few opinions.
Polk's last words illustrate his devotion to his wife: "I love you, Sarah.
Polk also retained the United States Ambassador to Texas, Andrew Jackson Donelson, who sought to convince the Texan leaders to accept annexation under the terms proposed by the Tyler administration.
Polk feared that the failure to provide for an organized government in New Mexico and especially California could lead to independence for those remote regions.
It would have provided for federally funded internal improvements on small harbors.
Though both sides sought an acceptable compromise, each also saw the territory as an important geopolitical asset that would play a large part in determining the dominant power in North America.
* Acquire California and New Mexico from Mexico.
Polk's time in the White House took its toll on his health.
Some Whigs, such as Abraham Lincoln, challenged Polk's version of events, but the House overwhelmingly approved of a resolution authorizing the president to call up fifty thousand volunteers.
However, in 1835, Polk defeated Bell in a re-match for the Speaker office.
The next day, Taylor led the army to victory in the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, eliminating the possibility of a Mexican incursion into the United States.
Whig politicians claimed that he was drawn from a well-deserved obscurity.
Whig politicians, including Abraham Lincoln and John Quincy Adams, contended that the Texas Annexation and the Mexican Cession enhanced the pro-slavery factions of the United States.
The Whigs publicly scorned Polk with the chant "Who is James K.
Polk's ambassador to the Republic of New Granada, Benjamin Alden Bidlack, negotiated the Mallarino–Bidlack Treaty with the government of New Granada.
However, the issue of slavery became increasingly polarizing during the 1840s, and Polk's expansionary policies increased its divisiveness.
It was an instance of a republic following the bad example of European monarchies, in not considering justice in their desire to acquire additional territory."
In March 1847, Polk learned that Taylor had ignored orders and had continued to march South, capturing the northern Mexican town of Saltillo.
Having been alienated from Scott, Polk ordered Scott to remain in Washington, leaving Taylor in command of Mexican operations.
"First, Polk accomplished the objectives of his presidential term as he defined them; second, he was the most decisive chief executive before the Civil War; and third, he greatly expanded the executive power of the presidency, particularly its war powers, its role as commander-in-chief, and its oversight of the executive branch."
"To look at that map," Robert Merry concluded, "and to take in the western and southwestern expanse included in it, is to see the magnitude of Polk's presidential accomplishments."
He was buried on the grounds of Polk Place.
Many Southerners supported the candidacy of former Vice President John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, the entrepreneurial conservatives rallied around Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, and former Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson also maintained a strong following among Democrats.
Frustrated by the lack of progress in negotiations, and troubled by rumors that Trist was willing to negotiate on the Rio Grande border, Polk ordered Trist to return to Washington.
Polk nominated both George W. Woodward of Pennsylvania and Levi Woodbury of New Hampshire in December 1845.
While he remained angry at Trist for disobeying orders, Polk and a majority of his Cabinet accepted the terms of the treaty.
In December 1845, Polk signed a resolution annexing Texas, and Texas became the 28th state in the union.
For all eternity, I love you."
(''Further information: President James K. Polk Historic Site'') His father, Samuel Polk, was a slaveholder, successful farmer and surveyor of Scots-Irish descent.
After Congress went into recess in the summer of 1826, Polk returned to Tennessee to see Sarah, and when Congress met again in the autumn, Polk returned to Washington with Sarah.
After graduation, Polk traveled to Nashville to study law under renowned Nashville trial attorney Felix Grundy.
However, after news of Buchanan's selection for State was leaked, Vice President Dallas (an in-state rival of Buchanan) and a slew of Southerners insisted that Walker receive the higher position at Treasury.
Polk's Democrats would pay a price for the resistance to the war and the growing issue of slavery, as Democrats lost control of the House in the 1846 elections.
Polk had been advised by Alejandro Atocha, an associate Santa Anna, that only the threat of war would allow the Mexican government the leeway to sell parts of Mexico.
At the 1848 Democratic National Convention, which lasted from May 22 to May 25, a message from Polk reiterated his absolute refusal to serve a second term.
Polk hoped that a show of force by the U.S. military under Taylor and Conner could avert war and lead to negotiations with the Mexican government.
Polk won the election with 49.5% of the popular vote and 170 of the 275 electoral votes.
Polk was able to pass the bill after personally winning the support of Senator Dixon Lewis, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.
While there, Polk joined the Dialectic Society where he regularly took part in debates and learned the art of oratory.
Polk argued instead for extending the Missouri Compromise line west to the Pacific Ocean.
Kearny captured Santa Fe without firing a shot, after the Mexican Govenor, Manuel Armijo, fled from the province.
A key aspect of Polk's strategy to become vice president was winning control of the Tennessee delegation to the 1844 Democratic National Convention.
He lost weight and had deep lines on his face and dark circles under his eyes.
Polk regarded the treatment of his diplomat as an insult and an "ample cause of war", and he prepared to ask Congress for a declaration of war.
In mid-1848, President Polk authorized his ambassador to Spain, Romulus Mitchell Saunders, to negotiate the purchase of Cuba and offer Spain up to $100&nbsp;million, an astounding sum at the time for one territory, equal to $ in present-day terms.
Incumbent President John Tyler—a former Democrat and Whig—had been expelled from the Whig Party in September 1841.
Polk and many other Southerners were against the measure (which passed in the House, but not in the Senate).
With Polk's help, the annexation resolution narrowly cleared the Senate.
Following his 1843 gubernatorial loss, Polk became determined to become the next Vice President of the United States.
The treaty also recognized the annexation of Texas and acknowledged American control over the disputed territory between the Nueces River and the Rio Grande.
A skirmish on the northern side of the Rio Grande ended in the death or capture of dozens of American soldiers, and became known as the Thornton Affair.
Polk frequently considered dismissing Buchanan from office, as he suspected Buchanan of placing his own presidential aspirations above service to Polk, but Buchanan always managed to convince Polk of his loyalty.
In October 1823 Polk voted for Andrew Jackson, a family friend and fellow Tennessean, to become the next United States Senator from Tennessee.
Secretary of State Buchanan was wary of a two-front war with both Mexico and Britain, but Polk was willing to risk war with both countries in pursuit of a favorable settlement.
Polk's oratory became popular, earning him the nickname "Napoleon of the Stump."
Nonetheless, the House resolution passed the Senate in a 40-2 vote, marking the beginning of the Mexican-American War.
In the election, Taylor won 47.3% of the popular vote and a majority of the electoral vote, giving the Whigs control of the presidency.
Polk also ordered Commodore Conner to allow Santa Anna to return to Mexico from his exile, and sent an army expedition led by Stephen W. Kearny towards Santa Fe.
Polk had misgivings about the federal government usurping power over public lands from the states; however, the delivery of the legislation on his last full day in office gave him no time to find constitutional grounds for a veto, or to draft a sufficient veto message, so Polk signed the bill.
He ran this plantation for the rest of his life, eventually taking it over completely from his brother-in-law.
Polk's will stipulated that their slaves were to be freed after his wife Sarah had died.
Though Van Buren had not been known for his anti-slavery views while president, he embraced them in 1848.
Jones, an entertaining story teller who had emerged in the legislature as one of Polk's most persistent opponents, defeated Polk by 3,243 votes.
Cass won 42.5% of the vote, while Van Buren finished with 10.1% of the popular vote, more than any other third party presidential candidate at that time.
Polk supported a territorial organization bill crafted by Senator John M. Clayton that would have prohibited slavery in Oregon while staying silent on the issue in California and New Mexico.
Polk decided that his Cabinet would not consist of presidential aspirants, though he chose to nominate Buchanan for the crucial and prestigious position of Secretary of State.
Pledged to serve only one term, Polk accomplished his four major objectives in just four years.
The decisive victory cleared the way for a march to Mexico City.
The Polks had connections with the university, then a small school of about 80 students: Sam Polk was their land agent for Tennessee, and his cousin, William Polk, was a trustee.
When Polk arrived in Washington, D.C. he roomed in Benjamin Burch's boarding house with some other Tennessee representatives, including Sam Houston.
Polk was successful in pursuing this goal, as his presidency saw the partition of Oregon Country with Britain, the annexation of Texas, and the acquisition of vast amounts of land from Mexico.
Polk sought re-election in 1841 against the Whig candidate, James C. Jones.
Slidell returned to Washington in May 1846, and gave his opinion that negotiations with the Mexican government were unlikely to be successful.
in reference to Polk's relative obscurity.
A freshman Democratic Congressman, David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, offered an amendment to the bill that would ban slavery in any newly-acquired lands.
Polk was a leader of Jacksonian Democracy during the Second Party System.
Senator Tom Corwin of Ohio remarked "James K. Polk, of Tennessee?
* Reestablish the Independent Treasury System.
Polk feared that passing the Rivers and Harbors Bill would encourage legislators to compete for favors for their home districts – a type of corruption that would spell doom to the virtue of the republic.
Van Buren was joined on the Free Soil Party's ticket by Charles Francis Adams Sr., son of former President and prominent Whig John Quincy Adams.
Polk defeated a challenge for the state party's leadership by former Senator Alfred O. P. Nicholson, and Polk instructed the Tennessee delegates to support his vice presidential nomination while remaining neutral on the presidency, thus opening up the possibility of a deal between Polk and Van Buren in which Van Buren would choose Polk as his running mate in exchange for the Tennessee delegation's votes.
However, on June 7, Polk learned that Mexico had ratified the treaty, thus ending the war.
In this regard he followed his hero Andrew Jackson, who had vetoed the Maysville Road Bill in 1830 on similar grounds.
Congress passed the Rivers and Harbors Bill in 1846 to provide $500,000 to improve rivers and harbors, but Polk vetoed the bill.
In March 1846, Slidell finally left Mexico after the government refused his demand to be formally received.
