It turned out that the agent had been swindled; the director of the school sent Joyce on to Trieste, which was then part of Austria-Hungary (until the First World War), and is today part of Italy.
On 16 June 1904, they first stepped out together, an event which would be commemorated by providing the date for the action of ''Ulysses'' (as "Bloomsday").
His godparents were Philip and Ellen McCann.
Joyce told the sculptor August Suter, that from his Jesuit education, he had 'learnt to arrange things in such a way that they become easy to survey and to judge.'
But there was another Joyce who asserted his allegiance to that tradition, and never left it, or wanted to leave it, behind him."
The view of history propounded in this text is very strongly influenced by Giambattista Vico, and the metaphysics of Giordano Bruno of Nola are important to the interplay of the "characters."
Joyce had begun his education at Clongowes Wood College, a Jesuit boarding school near Clane, County Kildare, in 1888 but had to leave in 1892 when his father could no longer pay the fees.
To achieve this level of accuracy, Joyce used the 1904 edition of Thom's Directory—a work that listed the owners and/or tenants of every residential and commercial property in the city.
Were it not for their support (along with Harriet Shaw Weaver's constant financial support), there is a good possibility that his books might never have been finished or published.
This publication led to his inclusion in the ''Imagist Anthology'', edited by Ezra Pound, who was a champion of Joyce's work.
Later, further negative comments surfaced from doctor and author Hervey Cleckley, who questioned the significance others had placed on the work.
Joyce was born in 41 Brighton Square, Rathgar, Dublin—about half a mile from his mother's birthplace in Terenure—into a middle-class family on the way down.
In turn, Joyce's poetry and prose became an inspiration for composers and musicians.
Joyce was first introduced to the Irish public by Arthur Griffith in his newspaper, ''The United Irishman'', in November 1901.
During this time, Joyce's eyes began to give him more and more problems and he often wore an eyepatch.
Nevertheless, after four years he was restless, and after the war he returned to Trieste as he had originally planned.
Joyce went to Paris in 1920 at an invitation from Ezra Pound, supposedly for a week, but the family ended up living there for the next twenty years.
In ''Ulysses'', Joyce employs stream of consciousness, parody, jokes, and virtually every other established literary technique to present his characters.
The book explores various areas of Dublin life, dwelling on its squalor and monotony.
It was only when Stuart Gilbert published his critical work on ''Ulysses'' in 1930 that the schema was supplied by Joyce to Gilbert.
His closest colleagues included leading figures of the generation, most notably, Thomas Kettle, Francis Sheehy-Skeffington and Oliver St. John Gogarty.
He was particularly fond of the early settings by Palmer.
Joyce also published a number of books of poetry.
Music is central to Joyce's biography and to the understanding of his writings.
Joyce had already failed to pass chemistry in English in Dublin.
Joyce returned to Ireland.
Joyce walked the  back to Dublin to stay with relatives for the night, and sent a friend to the tower the next day to pack his trunk.
Joyce's Irish experiences constitute an essential element of his writings, and provide all of the settings for his fiction and much of its subject matter.
''Ulysses'' in particular is set with precision in the streets and alleyways of the city.
''Ulysses'' has been called "a demonstration and summation of the entire Modernist movement".
What income he had came partially from his position at the Berlitz school and partially from teaching private students.
His father's family, originally from Fermoy in County Cork, had once owned a small salt and lime works.
By doing this I made myself a beggar but I retained my pride.
The most obvious example of the influence of Vico's cyclical theory of history is to be found in the opening and closing words of the book.
In other words, the book ends with the beginning of a sentence and begins with the end of the same sentence, turning the book into one great cycle.
Joyce's novel was not published in the United States until 1933.
Joyce became frustrated with life in Trieste and moved to Rome in late 1906, having secured employment as a letter-writing clerk in a bank.
He also became active in theatrical and literary circles in the city.
'The wolf may lose his skin but not his vice' or 'the leopard cannot change his spots.'"
Joyce returned to Dublin again briefly in mid-1912 during his years-long fight with Dublin publisher George Roberts over the publication of ''Dubliners''.
He acknowledged the debt he owed to his early Jesuit training.
He decided, on his twenty-second birthday, to revise the story into a novel he called ''Stephen Hero''.
On 1 January 2012, those restrictions were lessened by the expiry of copyright protection for much of the published work of James Joyce.
In 1895, Joyce, now aged 13, was elected to join the Sodality of Our Lady by his peers at Belvedere.
His sisters also noted his Holy Week attendance and that he did not seek to dissuade them.
In that year, he met Eugene and Maria Jolas who offered to serialise the book in their magazine ''transition''.
In 1901, the National Census of Ireland lists James Joyce (19) as an English- and Irish-speaking scholar living with his mother and father, six sisters and three brothers at Royal Terrace (now Inverness Road), Clontarf, Dublin.
Shortly after the publication of ''Ulysses'', he elucidated this preoccupation somewhat, saying, "For myself, I always write about Dublin, because if I can get to the heart of Dublin I can get to the heart of all the cities of the world.
A brilliant student, he excelled at the Jesuit schools Clongowes and Belvedere, despite the chaotic family life imposed by his father's alcoholism and unpredictable finances.
They met in 1907 and became lasting friends and mutual critics.
Although the conviction was based on the "Nausicaä" episode of ''Ulysses'', ''The Little Review'' had fuelled the fires of controversy with dada poet Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven's defence of ''Ulysses'' in an essay "The Modest Woman."
He was treated by Dr Louis Borsch in Paris, undergoing nine operations before Borsch's death in 1929.
In Paris, Maria and Eugene Jolas nursed Joyce during his long years of writing ''Finnegans Wake''.
1680) was a stonemason from Connemara.
Joyce's work has been an important influence on writers and scholars as diverse as Samuel Beckett, Seán Ó Ríordáin, Jorge Luis Borges, Flann O'Brien, Salman Rushdie, Robert Anton Wilson, John Updike, David Lodge and Joseph Campbell.
The writing was completed in October 1921.
The work and life of Joyce is celebrated annually on 16 June, known as Bloomsday, in Dublin and in an increasing number of cities worldwide, and critical studies in scholarly publications, such as the ''James Joyce Quarterly'', continue.
Now I make open war upon it by what I write and say and do.
The action of the novel, which takes place in a single day, 16 June 1904, sets the characters and incidents of the ''Odyssey'' of Homer in modern Dublin and represents Odysseus (Ulysses), Penelope and Telemachus in the characters of Leopold Bloom, his wife Molly Bloom and Stephen Dedalus, parodically contrasted with their lofty models.
Thus was born a text that became known, first, as ''Work in Progress'' and later ''Finnegans Wake''.
Psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan used Joyce's writings to explain his concept of the ''sinthome''.
I made secret war upon it when I was a student and declined to accept the positions it offered me.
There are at least five aspects to consider:
In Nabokov's opinion, ''Ulysses'' was brilliant, ''Finnegans Wake'' horrible—an attitude Jorge Luis Borges shared.
However, readers have been able to reach a consensus about the central cast of characters and general plot.
The unfinished ''Stephen Hero'' was published after his death.
French literary theorist Julia Kristéva characterised Joyce's novel writing as "polyphonic" and a hallmark of postmodernity alongside poets Mallarmé and Rimbaud.
Joyce's father and paternal grandfather both married into wealthy families, though the family's purported ancestor, Seán Mór Seoighe (fl.
Joyce was reluctant to publish the chapter titles because he wanted his work to stand separately from the Greek form.
Richard Ellmann suggests that this may have been because he found the technical lectures in French too difficult.
''A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man'' is a nearly complete rewrite of the abandoned novel ''Stephen Hero''.
My brother’s breakaway from Catholicism was due to other motives.
It was never published in this form, but years later, in Trieste, Joyce completely rewrote it as ''A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man''.
in Joyce's ''Finnegans Wake'' is the source of the word "quark", the name of one of the elementary particles proposed by the physicist Murray Gell-Mann in 1963.
Critics holding this view insist that Stephen, the protagonist of the semi-autobiographical ''A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man'' as well as ''Ulysses'', is not Joyce.
The role played by Beckett and other assistants included collating words from these languages on cards for Joyce to use and, as Joyce's eyesight worsened, of writing the text from the author's dictation.
The music Joyce knew:''' Music frequently found its way into Joyce's poetry and prose.
Partly because of this controversy, Joyce found it difficult to get a publisher to accept the book, but it was published in 1922 by Sylvia Beach from her well-known Rive Gauche bookshop, ''Shakespeare and Company''.
Much of the wordplay in the book stems from the use of multilingual puns which draw on a wide range of languages.
He detested falsity and believed in individual freedom more thoroughly than any man I have ever known.
Music to Joyce's words:''' Music that uses Joyce's texts most frequently appears as settings of his poems in songs, and occasionally as excerpts from prose works.
His only composition is a melody to his poem ''Bid adieu'', to which a piano accompaniment was added in the 1920s in Paris by the American composer Edmund J. Pendleton (1899–1987).
Joyce's method of stream of consciousness, literary allusions and free dream associations was pushed to the limit in ''Finnegans Wake'', which abandoned all conventions of plot and character construction and is written in a peculiar and obscure English, based mainly on complex multi-level puns.
Joyce wrote a number of other articles and at least two plays (since lost) during this period.
Gibson argues that Joyce "remained a Catholic intellectual if not a believer" since his thinking remained influenced by his cultural background, even though he dissented from that culture.
The use of classical mythology as an organising framework, the near-obsessive focus on external detail, and the occurrence of significant action within the minds of characters have also contributed to the development of literary modernism.
("vicus" is a pun on Vico) and ends "A way a lone a last a loved a long the."
While in Zurich he wrote ''Exiles'', published ''A Portrait...'', and began serious work on ''Ulysses''.
In Zurich, Joyce met one of his most enduring and important friends, the English socialist painter Frank Budgen, whose opinion Joyce constantly sought through the writing of ''Ulysses'' and ''Finnegans Wake''.
In 1915, after most of his students in Trieste were conscripted to fight in the First World War, Joyce moved to Zurich.
With Luciano Berio's ''Thema (Omaggio a Joyce)'' (1958) there is also a key work in the development of electro-acoustic music.
His relationship with religion was complex and not easily understood, even perhaps by himself.
In 1887, his father was appointed rate collector (i.e., a collector of local property taxes) by Dublin Corporation; the family subsequently moved to the fashionable adjacent small town of Bray  from Dublin.
In his book, ''The Mask of Sanity'', Cleckley refers to ''Finnegans Wake'' as "a 628-page collection of erudite gibberish indistinguishable to most people from the familiar word salad produced by hebephrenic patients on the back wards of any state hospital."
Some scholars, most notably Vladimir Nabokov, have mixed feelings on his work, often championing some of his fiction while condemning other works.
Joyce's skill at borrowing money saved him from indigence.
Indeed, Joyce said that the ideal reader of the ''Wake'' would suffer from "ideal insomnia" and, on completing the book, would turn to page one and start again, and so on in an endless cycle of reading.
One of his students in Trieste was Ettore Schmitz, better known by the pseudonym Italo Svevo.
With Artifoni's help, he moved back to Trieste and began teaching English there.
His daughter Lucia was born later that year.
Joyce also makes frequent use of the ''Irish Melodies'' of Thomas Moore and ballads such as George Barker's ''Dublin Bay'' and J.L.
Although Joyce scholarship has long identified an explicit recourse to musical structures in ''Ulysses'' (in particular the 'Sirens' episode) and ''Finnegans Wake'', more recent criticism has established a decisive reliance on Wagner's ''Ring'' in ''Finnegans Wake'' and an attempt to adapt the structures of opera and oratorio to the medium of fiction, notably in the 'Cyclops' episode of ''Ulysses''.
Throughout the 1930s he travelled frequently to Switzerland for eye surgeries and for treatments for his daughter Lucia, who, according to the Joyces, suffered from schizophrenia.
The Irish Party had dropped Parnell from leadership.
His relations with his brother Stanislaus (who had been interned in an Austrian prison camp for most of the war due to his pro-Italian politics) were more strained than ever.
However, L. A. G. Strong, William T. Noon, Robert Boyle and others have argued that Joyce, later in life, reconciled with the faith he rejected earlier in life and that his parting with the faith was succeeded by a not so obvious reunion, and that ''Ulysses'' and ''Finnegans Wake'' are essentially Catholic expressions.
James Augustine Aloysius Joyce was born on 2 February 1882 to John Stanislaus Joyce and Mary Jane "May" Murray, in the Dublin suburb of Rathgar.
Joyce enrolled at the recently established University College Dublin (UCD) in 1898, studying English, French and Italian.
Joyce's influence is also evident in fields other than literature.
Thanks to Ezra Pound, serial publication of the novel in the magazine ''The Little Review'' began in March 1918.
In the particular is contained the universal."
Furthermore, each chapter is associated with a specific colour, art or science, and bodily organ.
''Il lupo perde il pelo ma non il vizio'', the Italians say.
Molloy's ''Love's Old Sweet Song''.
The French philosopher Jacques Derrida has written a book on the use of language in ''Ulysses'', and the American philosopher Donald Davidson has written similarly on ''Finnegans Wake'' in comparison with Lewis Carroll.
Lucia was analysed by Carl Jung at the time, who after reading ''Ulysses'' is said to have concluded that her father had schizophrenia.
He found the city had changed, and some of his old friends noted his maturing from teacher to artist.
The philosophy of Thomas Aquinas continued to have a strong influence on him for most of his life.
In 1928, a court injunction against Roth was obtained and he ceased publication.
Though most of his adult life was spent abroad, Joyce's fictional universe centres on Dublin, and is populated largely by characters who closely resemble family members, enemies and friends from his time there.
Nevertheless, Joyce complained that, "I may have oversystematised ''Ulysses''," and played down the mythic correspondences by eliminating the chapter titles that had been taken from Homer.
Joyce's musicality:''' Joyce had considerable musical talent, which expressed itself in his singing, piano and guitar playing, as well as in a melody that he composed.
Fearing for her son's impiety, his mother tried unsuccessfully to get Joyce to make his confession and to take communion.
This has led many readers and critics to apply Joyce's oft-quoted description in the ''Wake'' of ''Ulysses'' as his "usylessly unreadable Blue Book of Eccles" to the ''Wake'' itself.
On 7 January 1904 Joyce attempted to publish ''A Portrait of the Artist'', an essay-story dealing with aesthetics, only to have it rejected by the free-thinking magazine ''Dana''.
But the Vatican's role in allying with the British Conservative Party to prevent Home Rule left a lasting impression on the young Joyce.
Joyce had it printed and distributed locally.
While preparing to return to Trieste he decided to take one of his sisters, Eva, back with him to help Nora run the home.
Kevin Sullivan maintains that, rather than reconciling with the faith, Joyce never left it.
After one of these drinking binges, he got into a fight over a misunderstanding with a man in St Stephen's Green; he was picked up and dusted off by a minor acquaintance of his father, Alfred H. Hunter, who took him into his home to tend to his injuries.
They were still on their way when he died 15&nbsp;minutes later.
Joyce and Nora went into self-imposed exile, moving first to Zurich in Switzerland, where he had supposedly acquired a post to teach English at the Berlitz Language School through an agent in England.
54, 1926) and Samuel Barber (''Three Songs'' op.
On 11 January 1941, he underwent surgery in Zurich for a perforated ulcer.
Later that year Nora gave birth to their first child, George, also known as Giorgio.
Joyce also hoped to augment his family's meagre income with his brother's earnings.
His first full-length poetry collection ''Chamber Music'' (1907; referring, Joyce joked, to the sound of urine hitting the side of a chamber pot) consisted of 36 short lyrics.
Unfortunately, this publication encountered problems with New York Postal Authorities; serialisation ground to a halt in December 1920; the editors were convicted of publishing obscenity in February 1921.
In 1893, John Joyce was dismissed with a pension, beginning the family's slide into poverty caused mainly by his drinking and general financial mismanagement.
Nevertheless, the book is also an affectionately detailed study of the city, and Joyce claimed that if Dublin were to be destroyed in some catastrophe it could be rebuilt, brick by brick, using his work as a model.
Jung said that she and her father were two people heading to the bottom of a river, except that Joyce was diving and Lucia was sinking.
But as Terrence Killeen points out this schema was developed after the novel had been written and was not something that Joyce consulted as he wrote the novel.
This approach is similar to, but far more extensive than that used by Lewis Carroll in ''Jabberwocky''.
A further consequence of the novel's ambiguous legal status as a banned book was that a number of "bootleg" versions appeared, most notably a number of pirate versions from the publisher Samuel Roth.
Joyce set himself to finishing ''Ulysses'' in Paris, delighted to find that he was gradually gaining fame as an avant-garde writer.
His father was angry at the treatment of Parnell by the Catholic church, the Irish Home Rule Party and the British Liberal Party and the resulting collaborative failure to secure Home Rule for Ireland.
Other well-known works are the short-story collection ''Dubliners'' (1914), and the novels ''A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man'' (1916) and ''Finnegans Wake'' (1939).
In 1904, in his early twenties, Joyce emigrated permanently to continental Europe with his partner (and later wife) Nora Barnacle.
My mind rejects the whole present social order and Christianity—home, the recognised virtues, classes of life and religious doctrines.
He visited Nora's family in Galway and liked Nora's mother very much.
In 1891 Joyce wrote a poem on the death of Charles Stewart Parnell.
It was also here that Ezra Pound brought him to the attention of English feminist and publisher Harriet Shaw Weaver, who would become Joyce's patron, providing him with thousands of pounds over the next 25 years and relieving him of the burden of teaching to focus on his writing.
This combination of kaleidoscopic writing with an extreme formal schematic structure renders the book a major contribution to the development of 20th-century modernist literature.
After graduating from UCD in 1902, Joyce left for Paris to study medicine, but he soon abandoned this.
Other poetry Joyce published in his lifetime includes "Gas From A Burner" (1912), ''Pomes Penyeach'' (1927) and "Ecce Puer" (written in 1932 to mark the birth of his grandson and the recent death of his father).
Joyce remained in Dublin for some time longer, drinking heavily.
He went on to attend University College Dublin.
It was published by the Black Sun Press in ''Collected Poems'' (1936).
Both popular and academic uses of Joyce's work were hampered by restrictions placed by Stephen J. Joyce, Joyce's grandson and executor of his literary estate.
This was due to a number of factors, including the death of his father in 1931, concern over the mental health of his daughter Lucia, and his own health problems, including failing eyesight.
Joyce had a light tenor voice; he was taught by Vincent O'Brien and Benedetto Palmieri; in 1904 won a bronze medal at the competitive music festival Feis Ceoil.
His trip was once again fruitless, and on his return he wrote the poem "Gas from a Burner", an invective against Roberts.
10, 1936) in addition to settings by major exponents of the 1950s and '60s avant-garde such as Elliott Carter (String Quartet No.
Correspondence relating to that venture with the Irish Woollen Mills were for a long time displayed in the windows of their premises in Dublin.
Opera as a genre:''' Joyce had a lifelong preoccupation with opera as a generic precedent for his own fiction.
The stories incorporate epiphanies, a word used particularly by Joyce, by which he meant a sudden consciousness of the "soul" of a thing.
On 10 March 1923 he informed a patron, Harriet Weaver: "Yesterday I wrote two pages—the first I have since the final ''Yes'' of ''Ulysses''.
In November of that same year, John Joyce was entered in ''Stubbs Gazette'' (a publisher of bankruptcies) and suspended from work.
Joyce returned to Zurich in late 1940, fleeing the Nazi occupation of France.
Some critics and biographers have opined along the lines of Andrew Gibson: "The modern James Joyce may have vigorously resisted the oppressive power of Catholic tradition.
But Joyce claimed ill health as the problem and wrote home that he was unwell and complained about the cold weather .
Somewhat cryptically, in an interview after completing Ulysses, in response to the question "When did you leave the Catholic Church", Joyce answered, "That's for the Church to say."
Joyce returned to Dublin in mid-1909 with George, to visit his father and work on getting ''Dubliners'' published.
Shortly thereafter he left Ireland with Nora to live on the continent.
He remained in Trieste for most of the next ten years.
He believed that poets in the measure of their gifts and personality were the repositories of the genuine spiritual life of their race and the priests were usurpers.
The elder Joyce had the poem printed and even sent a part to the Vatican Library.
1, 1951) and Luciano Berio (''Chamber Music'', 1953; ''Thema (Ommagio a Joyce)'', 1958; etc.)
Joseph Strick directed a film of the book in 1977 starring Luke Johnston, Bosco Hogan, T. P. McKenna and John Gielgud.
Likewise, Hugh Kenner and T. S. Eliot believed they saw between the lines of Joyce's work the outlook of a serious Christian and that beneath the veneer of the work lies a remnant of Catholic belief and attitude.
They lived in Trieste, Paris and Zurich.
In 1999, ''Time'' magazine named Joyce one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century, and stated: "Joyce ... revolutionised 20th century fiction".
Eva became homesick for Dublin and returned there a few years later, but Eileen spent the rest of her life on the continent, eventually marrying Czech bank cashier Frantisek Schaurek.
Like them, the writer retains the sense of blasphemy held as a liturgical ritual.
In 1900 his laudatory review of Henrik Ibsen's ''When We Dead Awaken'' was published in ''Fortnightly Review''; it was his first publication and, after learning basic Norwegian to send a fan letter to Ibsen, he received a letter of thanks from the dramatist.
He stayed on for a few months, appealing for finance his family could ill afford and reading late in the Bibliothèque Sainte-Geneviève.
Although he did not pursue the idea further at the time, he eventually commenced work on a novel using both the title and basic premise in 1914.
Griffith himself wrote a piece decrying the censorship of the student James Joyce.
Joyce attempted to burn the original manuscript in a fit of rage during an argument with Nora, though to his subsequent relief it was rescued by his sister.
It is also known from first hand testimonies and his own writing that Joyce attended Catholic Mass and Orthodox Sacred Liturgy, especially during Holy Week, purportedly for aesthetic reasons.
He returned to Trieste in January 1910 with another sister, Eileen, in tow.
Around this time Joyce was attacked by a dog, which engendered in him a lifelong cynophobia.
Often this happens in the form of allusions to (or partial quotations from) texts of Irish traditional songs, popular ballads, Roman Catholic chant and opera arias.
By 1926 Joyce had completed the first two parts of the book.
Joyce had written an article on the Irish Literary Theatre and his college magazine refused to print it.
In April 2013 the Central Bank of Ireland issued a silver €10 commemorative coin in honour of Joyce that misquoted a famous line from his masterwork ''Ulysses''.
His other writings include three books of poetry, a play, occasional journalism and his published letters.
He also bombarded friends still living there with requests for information and clarification.
She is buried by his side, as is their son Giorgio, who died in 1976.
Schmitz was a Catholic of Jewish origin and became a primary model for Leopold Bloom; most of the details about the Jewish faith in ''Ulysses'' came from Schmitz's responses to queries from Joyce.
