On February 26, David Crockett reported that Bowie, though suffering from his affliction, continued to crawl from his bed around noon every day and presented himself to the Alamo's inhabitants, which much boosted the morale of his comrades.
Bowie appeared before the council at some point and spoke for an hour, asking for a commission.
Most of the noncombatants in the fort, including Bowie's relatives, survived.
Jones changed his name in the 1960s because he feared his name was too similar to Davy Jones, a member of the already famous The Monkees.
James Bowie Elementary in Corsicana, Texas was also named in honor of James.
By then, the United States had outlawed the importation of slaves, and most southern states allowed anyone who informed on a slave trader to receive half of what the imported slaves would earn at auction as a reward.
Alcalde Ruiz said that Bowie was found "dead in his bed."
From 1956 to 1958, Bowie was the subject of a CBS television series, ''The Adventures of Jim Bowie'', which was primarily set in 1830s Louisiana, although later episodes ventured into the Mexican province of Texas.
After moving to Texas in 1830, Bowie became a Mexican citizen and married Ursula Veramendi, the daughter of the Mexican vice governor of the province.
The Mexican government passed laws in 1834 and 1835 that stopped much of the land speculation.
Bowie died with the other Alamo defenders on March 6.
After first ordering that Bowie be buried, as he was too brave a man to be burned like a dog, Santa Anna later had Bowie's body placed with those of the other Texians on the funeral pyre.
Born in Kentucky, Bowie spent most of his life in Louisiana, where he was raised and where he later worked as a land speculator.
Fearing the disease would reach San Antonio, Bowie sent his pregnant wife and their daughter to the family estate in Monclova in the company of her parents and brother.
His father had been wounded while fighting in the American Revolution, and in 1782 married the young woman who had nursed him back to health.
Bowie also is the namesake of rock star David Bowie, who was born David Robert Hayward-Jones.
Believing the war was over, many of the Texian volunteers left the army and returned to their families.
Bowie perished with the rest of the Alamo defenders on March 6, when the Mexicans attacked.
He arrived with 30&nbsp;men on January 19, where they found a force of 104&nbsp;men with a few weapons and a few cannons, but not many supplies and little gunpowder.
Houston offered Bowie a commission as an officer on his staff, but Bowie rejected the opportunity, explaining that he wanted to be in the midst of the fighting.
The article focused primarily on the exploits of Jim Bowie.
Bowie and 18&nbsp;companions ambushed the fleeing army and, after Piedras fled, marched the soldiers back to Nacogdoches.
In response to Andrew Jackson's plea for volunteers to fight the British in the War of 1812, James and Rezin enlisted in the Louisiana militia in late 1814.
The design of the knife continued to evolve, but today a Bowie knife generally is considered to have a blade  long and  wide, with a curved point, a "sharp false edge cut from both sides", and a cross-guard to protect the user's hands.
The following year the family acquired  along the Red River.
After Mexico won independence from Spain, government interest in the mining potential waned.
His appointment ended in May 1835 when President Antonio López de Santa Anna abolished the Coahuila y Tejas government and ordered the arrest of all Texans (including Bowie) doing business in Monclova.
The extent of Bowie's participation is unclear, but he returned to Louisiana before the invasion was repelled by Spanish troops.
Various eyewitnesses to the battle gave conflicting accounts of Bowie's death.
Neill went on furlough on February 11 to visit his sick family, leaving Travis, a member of the regular army, in command.
Multiple accounts exist of who designed and built the first Bowie knife.
The soldier maintained that Bowie verbally castigated a Mexican officer in fluent Spanish, and the officer ordered Bowie's tongue cut out and his still-breathing body thrown onto the funeral pyre.
Shortly after Bowie left San Antonio, Ben Milam led an assault on the city.
Wright then drew his sword cane and impaled Bowie.
In June 1819, he joined the Long expedition, an effort to liberate Texas from Spanish rule.
When he was a boy, one of his Indian friends even taught him to rope alligators.
According to Wallace O Chariton, The "most popular, and probably the most accurate" version is that Bowie died on his cot, "back braced against the wall, and using his pistols and his famous knife."
Bowie and the Alamo commander, James C. Neill, decided they did not have enough oxen to move the artillery, and they did not want to destroy the fortress.
His fame, and that of his knife, spread to England, and by the early 1830s many British manufacturers were producing Bowie knives for shipment to the United States.
Bowie's report of the expedition, written in Spanish, was printed in several newspapers, further establishing his reputation.
After a second battle, in which Piedras lost 33&nbsp;men, the Mexican army evacuated during the night.
This account has been disputed by numerous other witnesses, and it is thought to have been invented by the reporter.
On April 25, 1831, Bowie married nineteen-year-old Maria Ursula de Veramendi, the daughter of his business partner, who had become the vice governor of the province.
At Bowie's request Crockett and several others carried the cot over the line, leaving Rose alone on the other side.
According to his older brother John, James Bowie was born in Logan County, Kentucky, on March 10, 1796 (Historical marker: 36° 46' 25"N 86° 42' 10"W).
Santa Anna ordered the alcalde of San Antonio, Francisco Antonio Ruiz, to confirm the identities of Bowie, Travis, and Crockett.
He chose the surname Bowie because he admired James Bowie and the Bowie knife, although his pronunciation uses the  () variant.
Bowie made three trips to Lafitte's compound on Galveston Island.
Bowie was the ninth of ten children born to Elve Ap-Catesby Jones and John Bowie.
When the disgruntled purchasers considered suing the Bowies, they discovered that the documents in the case had been removed from the court; left without evidence, they declined to pursue a case.
On February 3, Davy Crockett appeared with thirty&nbsp;Tennesseans.
In 1828, after recovering from wounds suffered in the Sandbar Fight, Bowie decided to move to Coahuila y Texas, at that time a state in the Mexican federation.
Shortly before the senior Bowie died in 1818 or 1819, he gave ten slaves as well as horses and cattle to both James and Rezin.
With his citizenship assured, Bowie now had the right to buy up to 11&nbsp;leagues of public land.
The couple built a house in San Antonio on land Veramendi had given them near the San José Mission.
For the next seven years, the brothers worked together to develop several large estates in Lafourche Parish and Opelousas.
The 1824 Constitution of Mexico banned religions other than Roman Catholicism and gave preference to Mexican citizens in receiving land.
Bowie left a "frustratingly sparse paper trail" of his life, and for many "where history failed, the legends prevailed."
Bowie celebrated his appointment by getting very drunk and causing havoc in San Antonio, releasing all prisoners in the local jails and harassing citizens.
Several days before the ceremony, he signed a dowry contract promising to pay his new bride 15,000&nbsp;pesos (approximately $15,000 then, or $ today) in cash or property within two years of the marriage.
On November 3, 1835, Texas declared itself an independent state, and a provisional government was formed with Henry Smith of Brazoria elected provisional governor.
After obtaining permission from the Mexican government to mount an expedition into Indian territory to search for the legendary silver mine, Bowie, his brother Rezin, and ten others set out for San Saba on November 2, 1831.
Fearing for the safety of his wife's relatives in San Antonio, Bowie invited her cousins Getrudis Navarro and Juana Navarro Alsbury, as well as Alsbury's 18-month-old son, Alijo Perez Jr., to stay inside the walls of the Alamo.
Despite conflicting accounts of the manner of his death, the "most popular, and probably the most accurate" accounts maintain that he died in his bed after emptying his pistols into several Mexican soldiers.
On January 26, one of Bowie's men, James Bonham, organized a rally which passed a resolution in favor of holding the Alamo.
After its publication, several other eyewitnesses confirmed the account, but as Rose was deceased the story can only be authenticated by the word of the reporter, who admitted to embellishing other articles, "and thus many historians refuse to believe it."
When Wright attempted to retrieve his blade by placing his foot on Bowie's chest and tugging, Bowie pulled him down and disemboweled Wright with his large knife.
On January 1, 1830, Bowie left Louisiana for permanent residency in Texas.
Bowie also brought several black servants, some of whom worked at the Veramendi Palace, into the security of the Alamo fortress.
At the time, Bowie claimed to have a net worth of $223,000 ($ today), mostly in land of questionable title.
(Although some works refer to the alternate pronunciation  .)
At the end of the fight, the Texians had two wounded men, but had captured many horses and mules.
Within two years, they had established the first steam mill in Louisiana to be used for grinding sugar cane.
On August 2, 1832, he joined a group of other Texans and marched into Nacogdoches to "present their demands" to Piedras.
In many cases, "these stories were pure melodrama, with Bowie rescuing some naïve planter's son or damsel in distress."
Travis sent Juan Seguin on Bowie's horse, to recruit reinforcements on February 25, and  arrived.
Wright shot at and missed the prone Bowie, who returned fire and possibly hit Wright.
Bowie's reputation was cemented by his role in the Texas Revolution.
Wright died instantly, and Bowie, with Wright's sword still protruding from his chest, was shot again and stabbed by another member of the group.
They chose Bowie, infuriating Travis.
At the time of Bowie's birth, his father owned eight slaves, eleven head of cattle, seven horses, and one stud horse.
They sold that property in 1800 and relocated to Missouri, before moving to Spanish Louisiana in 1802, where they settled on Bushley Bayou in Rapides Parish.
On February 20, Bowie took an oath of allegiance to Mexico and then proceeded to San Antonio de Bexar.
Cós had sent approximately 187&nbsp;men to cut grass for his horses.
He stopped at Nacogdoches, at Jared E. Groce's farm on the Brazos River, and in San Felipe, where Bowie presented a letter of introduction to Stephen F. Austin from Thomas&nbsp;F. McKinney, one of the Old Three Hundred colonists.
He refused to answer to Travis, who called an election for the men to choose their own commander.
After mustering out of the militia, Bowie settled in Rapides Parish, where he supported himself by sawing planks and lumber and floating them down the bayou for sale.
The duellists each fired two shots and, as neither man had been injured, resolved their duel with a handshake.
The attempts at parley failed and Bowie and his group fought for their lives for the next 13&nbsp;hours.
According to legend, the mine had been operated by local Indians before being seized by the Spanish.
The Bowie children were raised on the frontier and even as small children were expected to help clear the land and plant crops.
Bowie County in northeast Texas, and the city of Bowie in Montague County, Texas, were both named in honor of James Bowie.
Bowie and Travis began sending out couriers with pleas for provisions and assistance.
Captain William&nbsp;Y. Lacey, who spent eight months living in the wilderness with Bowie, described him as a humble man who never used profanity or vulgarities.
The Anglos in Texas began agitating for war against Santa Anna, and Bowie worked with William B. Travis, the leader of the War Party, to gain support.
Stephen&nbsp;F. Austin formed an army of 500&nbsp;men to march on the Mexican forces in San Antonio with the cannon that had precipitated the fight.
A number of native groups roamed the area, including Comanche, Lipan Apache, Tawakoni, and Tonkawa.
He again was turned down as he "was not an officer of the government nor army."
His rise to fame began in 1827 on reports of the Sandbar Fight.
After a short time, however, they moved into the Veramendi Palace, living with Ursula's parents, who supplied them with spending money.
Despite his continual pronouncements of wealth, Bowie's estate was found to be very small.
Bowie's surname was pronounced to rhyme with the French "Louis" ( ).
When the customs officers offered the slaves for auction, Bowie purchased them and received back half the price he had paid, as allowed by the state laws.
As the Mexicans stopped to reload their cannon, the Texians climbed a bluff and picked off some of the soldiers.
Historian Raymond Thorp gave his birth date as April 10, but Thorp did not provide any documentation for that date.
Bonham signed the resolution first, with Bowie's signature second.
Newspapers picked up the story, which became known as the Sandbar Fight, and described in detail Bowie's fighting prowess and his unusual knife.
Some claim that Bowie designed it, while others attribute the design to noted knife makers of the time.
What began as a duel between two other men deteriorated into a melée in which Bowie, having been shot and stabbed, killed the sheriff of Rapides Parish with a large knife.
The Bowies moved frequently, first settling in Georgia, before moving to Kentucky.
His fame in Texas grew following his failed expedition to find the lost San Saba mine, during which his small party repelled an attack by a large Indian raiding party.
In May 1824, Congress authorized the superior courts of each territory to hear suits from those who claimed they had been overlooked.
The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the reversal in 1833.
Shortly after his marriage Bowie became fascinated with the story of the "lost" Los Almagres Mine (also known as the lost San Saba Mine and the lost Bowie Mine), said to be northwest of San Antonio near the ruin of the Spanish Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba.
Bowie later served as a delegate to the Convention of 1833, which formally requested that Texas become its own state within the Mexican federation.
The children learned to survive on the frontier and how to fish and run a farm and plantation.
According to the reporter's version of Rose's account, when Travis realized that the Mexican army would likely prevail, he drew a line in the sand and asked those willing to die for the cause to cross the line.
Bowie also lied about his age, claiming to be 30 rather than 35.
It serves as the frontier picquet guard, and if it were in the possession of Santa Anna, there is no stronghold from which to repel him in his march toward the Sabine."
The Arkansas Superior Court received 126&nbsp;claims in late 1827 from residents who claimed to have purchased land in former Spanish grants from the Bowie brothers.
Bowie became internationally famous as a result of a feud with Norris Wright, the sheriff of Rapides Parish.
On February 23, the bells of San Fernando sounded the alarm of the approach of the Mexicans.
After the cavalry retreated, they initiated a siege of the garrison.
Between 1830 and 1832 the Mexican Congress passed a series of laws that seemed to discriminate against Anglo colonists in the province of Coahuila y Tejas, increasing tension between the Anglo citizenry and Mexican officials.
The knife he carried had a blade that was  long and  wide.
The cholera epidemic instead struck Monclova, and between September 6 and September 14, Ursula, their children, her brother, and her parents all died of the disease.
Thirty-five&nbsp;years after the Alamo fell, a reporter identified Louis "Moses" Rose as the only man to have "deserted" the Texian forces at the Alamo.
The family moved again in 1809, settling on Bayou Teche in Louisiana before finding a permanent home in Opelousas in 1812.
When Bowie's mother was informed of his death, she calmly stated, "I'll wager no wounds were found in his back."
The scouting party left with 92&nbsp;men, many of them members of the New Orleans Grays who had just arrived in Texas.
Although much of the military supported the administration of President Anastasio Bustamante, Antonio López de Santa Anna led an insurrection against him in 1832.
Bowie never talked of his exploits despite his increasing fame.
With their profits, James and Rezin bought a plantation in Arkansas.
The doctors who had been present for the duel removed the bullets and patched Bowie's other wounds.
In early January 1836, Bowie went to San Felipe and asked the council to allow him to recruit a regiment.
He placed these in a coffin inscribed with the names of Bowie, Travis, and Crockett.
Bowie was elected a commander, with the rank of colonel, of the Texas Rangers later that year.
Without the capital required to buy large tracts, they entered into a partnership with pirate Jean Lafitte in 1818 to raise money.
After a confrontation in Alexandria one afternoon, Wright fired a shot at Bowie, after which Bowie resolved to carry his hunting knife at all times.
James Bowie became proficient with pistol, rifle, and knife, and had a reputation for fearlessness.
Other witnesses maintained that they saw several Mexican soldiers enter Bowie's room, bayonet him, and carry him, alive, from the room.
Although the Rangers would not be organized officially until 1835, Stephen&nbsp;F. Austin had founded the group by employing 30&nbsp;men to keep the peace and protect the colonists from attacks by hostile Indians.
The couple had two children, Marie Elve (b. March&nbsp;20, 1832) and James Veramendi (b. July&nbsp;18, 1833).
Bowie, on business in Natchez, heard of his family's deaths in November.
Witness accounts agreed that Bowie did not attack first, and the others had focused their attack on Bowie because "they considered him the most dangerous man among their opposition."
Edward Burleson was chosen as temporary commander of the troops in San Antonio.
To the surprise of the town, the surviving members of the group returned to San Antonio on December 6.
Bowie supported duellist Samuel Levi Wells III, while Wright supported Wells's opponent, Dr. Thomas Harris Maddox.
One Texian and ten Mexican troops had been killed.
Rezin Bowie's grandchildren, however, claimed that Rezin merely supervised his blacksmith, who was the creator of the knife.
His larger legacy is his position as "one of the legendary characters of the American frontier."
Bowie had been ill, and two&nbsp;doctors, including the fort surgeon, were unable to diagnose his illness.
Using this scheme, the brothers collected $65,000 to be used for their land speculation.
When the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory in 1803, it promised to honor all former land grant claims, and for the next 20&nbsp;years efforts were made to establish who owned what land.
Without government troops to keep hostile natives at bay, mining and mineral exploration were impossible.
The name "Texian Army" sometimes is applied to this militia.
James Bowie hurried to gather provisions and herd cattle into the Alamo compound.
The incident cemented Bowie's reputation across the South as a superb knife fighter.
A number of films have depicted the events of the Battle of the Alamo, and Bowie has appeared as a character in each.
The council refused Bowie's request, likely because of lingering animosity over his land dealings.
The Texas Revolution began on October&nbsp;2, 1835, with the Battle of Gonzales.
In January 1836, he arrived at the Alamo, where he commanded the volunteer forces until an illness left him bedridden.
The plantation became known as a model estate, but on February 12, 1831, they sold it and 65&nbsp;slaves for $90,000.
Bowie renounced his American citizenship and became a Mexican citizen on September 30, 1830, after promising to establish textile mills in the state of Coahuila y Tejas.
Bowie was shot in the hip; after regaining his feet he drew a knife, described as a butcher knife, and charged his attacker, who hit Bowie over the head with his empty pistol, breaking the pistol and knocking Bowie to the ground.
Bowie was baptized into the Roman Catholic faith in San Antonio on April 28, 1828, sponsored by the alcalde (chief administrator) of the town, Juan Martín de Veramendi, and the wife of the administrator, Josefa Navarro.
One&nbsp;year after the battle, Juan Seguin returned to the Alamo and gathered the remaining ashes from the funeral pyre.
One of the men under Bowie's command during the battle later praised him "as a born leader, never needlessly spending a bullet or imperiling a life, who repeatedly admonished... Keep under cover boys, and reserve your fire; we haven't a man to spare."
A newspaper article claimed that a Mexican soldier saw Bowie carried from his room on his cot, alive, after the conclusion of the battle.
There is disagreement among scholars as to whether the knife used in this fight was the same as what is now known as a Bowie knife, also called an Arkansas Toothpick.
His possessions were auctioned for only $99.50.
Maria Ursula, her parents, and both children died in September 1833 from cholera.
The Mexican troops quickened their pace in the hopes of reaching the safety of the city, but Bowie and his cavalry chased them.
All the children learned to read and write in English, but James and his elder brother Rezin could also read, write, and speak Spanish and French fluently.
The letter to Smith ended, "Colonel Neill and myself have come to the solemn resolution that we will rather die in these ditches than give it up to the enemy."
In 1825, the two brothers joined with their younger brother Stephen to buy Acadia, a plantation near Alexandria.
Although the Mexican army was able to get within 200&nbsp;yards (183&nbsp;m), the Texian defensive position protected them from fire.
The group encountered little resistance and, after capturing Nacogdoches, declared Texas an independent republic.
Through Bowie's connections because of his marriage and his fluency in Spanish, the predominantly Mexican population of San Antonio often furnished him with information about the movements of the Mexican army.
On each occasion, he bought smuggled slaves and took them directly to a customhouse to inform on his own actions.
After the Sandbar Fight and subsequent battles in which Bowie used his knife to defend himself, the Bowie knife became very popular.
At the time, the city was known as Bexar and had a population of 2500, mostly of Mexican descent, and Bowie's fluency in Spanish helped him establish himself in the area.
The following year, on September 19, 1827, Bowie and Wright attended a duel on a sandbar outside of Natchez, Mississippi.
After Houston received word that Santa Anna was leading a large force to San Antonio, Bowie offered to lead volunteers to defend the Alamo from the expected attack.
Bowie visited several Indian villages in East Texas in an attempt to persuade the reluctant tribes to fight against the Mexican government.
Various other stories circulated, with some witnesses claiming that Bowie shot himself and others saying he was killed by soldiers while too weak to lift his head.
In response to the rumblings, Mexican troops established military posts in several locations within the province, including San Antonio de Béxar.
Travis was disgusted, but two&nbsp;days later the men agreed to a joint command; Bowie would command the volunteers, and Travis would command the regular army and the volunteer cavalry.
Bowie had supported Wright's opponent in the race for sheriff, and Wright, a bank director, had been instrumental in turning down a Bowie loan application.
Cós surrendered and returned to Mexico, taking with him the last Mexican troops in Texas.
Other areas assembled similar volunteer militias, and Bowie commanded a group of the volunteers.
Santa Anna and his army began a siege of the Alamo on February 24.
Some believed that after the Mexican citizens left the area, the Lipan took over the mine.
Many craftsmen and manufacturers made their own versions, and major cities of the Old Southwest had "Bowie knife schools" that taught "the art of cut, thrust, and parry."
Bowie was forced to flee Monclova and return to the Anglo areas of Texas.
Houston knew that there were not enough men to hold the fort in an attack and had given Bowie authority to remove the artillery and blow up the fortification.
Six miles (10&nbsp;km) from their goal, the group stopped to negotiate with a large raiding party of Indians—reportedly more than 120 Tawakoni and Waco, plus another 40 Caddo.
In another letter, to Governor Smith, he reiterated his view that "the salvation of Texas depends in great measure on keeping Béxar out of the hands of the enemy.
Other members of the groups, who had various reasons for disliking each other, began fighting.
For the next 18&nbsp;months, Bowie traveled through Louisiana and Mississippi.
