In response, Governor Monroe called out the militia; the slave patrols soon captured some slaves accused of involvement.
In John Trumbull's painting ''Capture of the Hessians at the Battle of Trenton'', Monroe can be seen lying wounded at left center of the painting.
His mother Elizabeth Jones (1730–1774) married Spence Monroe in 1752 and they had several children.
Upon Elizabeth's death in 1830, Monroe moved to New York City to live with his daughter Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur who had married Samuel L. Gouverneur in the White House.
Monroe informed Congress in March 1822 that permanent stable governments had been established in the United Provinces of the River Plate (the core of present-day Argentina), Colombia, Chile, and Mexico.
The Battle of Trenton would be Monroe's only battle as he would spend the next three months recuperating from his wound.
Monroe thought that foreign and Federalist elements had created the Quasi War of 1798–1800 and were behind efforts to prevent the election of Thomas Jefferson as president in 1800.
He proclaimed that the Americas should be free from future European colonization and free from European interference in sovereign countries' affairs.
Monroe later fulfilled his youthful dream of becoming the owner of a large plantation and wielding great political power, but his plantation was never profitable.
His father Spence Monroe (1727–1774) was a moderately prosperous planter who also practiced carpentry.
They used the loot of 200 muskets and 300 swords to arm the Williamsburg militia.
Dominated by Democratic-Republicans, the 15th Congress was generally expansionist and more likely to support the popular Jackson.
Washington had differences with Monroe and discharged him as Minister to France, claiming his "inefficiency, disruptive maneuvers, and failure to safeguard the interests of his country."
Monroe ran for a House seat in the First Congress but was defeated by Madison.
Monroe supported the founding of colonies in Africa for freed slaves that would eventually form the nation of Liberia, whose capital, Monrovia, is named in his honor.
He made two long national tours in 1817 to build national trust.
With France and Britain at war, the Jay Treaty alarmed and angered the French.
Although Andrew Jackson served as a courier in a militia unit at age thirteen, Monroe is regarded as the last U.S. President who was a Revolutionary War veteran, since he served as an officer of the Continental Army and took part in combat.
After recuperating from his wound, he was appointed as a lieutenant colonel in the Virginia militia, and tasked to recruit and lead a regiment, but the regiment was never raised.
In Virginia, the struggle in 1788 over the ratification of the proposed Constitution involved more than a simple clash between federalists and anti-federalists.
Monroe sparked a constitutional controversy when, in 1817, he sent General Andrew Jackson to move against Spanish Florida to pursue hostile Seminole Indians and punish the Spanish for aiding them.
King carried only Connecticut, Delaware, and Massachusetts and won only 34 of 217 electoral votes cast.
Slave codes prevented slaves from being treated like whites, and they were given quick trials without a jury.
He was reelected Virginia's governor in 1811.
The Monroe Doctrine held that the United States considered the Western Hemisphere as no longer a place for European colonization; that any future effort to gain further political control in the hemisphere or to violate the independence of existing states would be treated as an act of hostility; and finally that there existed two different and incompatible political systems in the world.
Monroe sold his small inherited Virginia plantation in 1783 to enter law and politics.
* James Spence Monroe (1799–1801) –  his grave reads "J.S.
Monroe arranged to free all the Americans held in French prisons.
The Monroe Doctrine at the time of its adoption thus pertained more to the Russians in North America than to the former Spanish colonies.
With the rest of Washington's army, Monroe's regiment was chased off Long Island in the fall of 1776 and down the length of New Jersey crossing the Delaware River in December 1776.
Monroe largely ignored old party lines in making appointments to lower posts, which reduced political tensions and enabled the "Era of Good Feelings", which lasted through his administration.
Adams, under Monroe's supervision, wrote the instructions for the ministers (ambassadors) to these new countries.
The Monroes had the following children:
Florida was ceded to the U.S. in 1821.
He sold off his Highland Plantation (now called Ash Lawn-Highland).
For all her apparent vanity, however, she demonstrated genuine compassion during the fever epidemic that swept Washington during her father's Presidency.
Britain, with its powerful navy, also opposed re-conquest of Latin America and suggested that the United States join in proclaiming a "hands off" policy.
Monroe returned to the Virginia House of Burgesses and was elected to another term as governor in 1811, but served only four months.
According to William Seale, he took several slaves with him to Washington to serve at the White House from 1817 to 1825.
Monroe was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1782.
He was elected to Congress in November 1783 and served in Annapolis until Congress left for Trenton in June 1784.
Avoiding detection, the Americans approached the center of Trenton from north and south.
Gabriel and 26 other enslaved people who participated were all hanged for treason.
Monroe formulated plans for an offensive invasion of Canada to win the war, but a peace treaty was ratified in February 1815, before any armies moved north.
By that time, the government was meeting in the temporary capital of New York City.
He appointed 21 other federal judges, all to United States district courts, as no vacancies occurred on the one circuit court existing at the time.
Monroe was a wealthy Loudoun County plantation owner who owned numerous slave plantations including Oak Hill in Aldie.
Virginia ratified the Constitution in June 1788, largely because Monroe, Pendleton and followers suspended their reservations and vowed to press for changes after the new government had been established.
"What was the origin of our slave population?"
Monroe made balanced Cabinet choices, naming a southerner, John C. Calhoun, as Secretary of War, and a northerner, John Quincy Adams, as Secretary of State.
The result was a system of American isolationism under the sponsorship of the British navy.
The application for statehood in 1819 by the Missouri Territory as a slave state failed.
The boycott by Virginia delegates of the March 12 caucus removed the chances of Monroe's opponents, and he received the caucus nomination four days later.
Monroe's health began to slowly fail by the end of the 1820s and John Quincy Adams visited him there in April 1831.
Overseers moved or separated slave families from different Monroe plantations in accordance with production and maintenance needs of each satellite plantation.
Monroe influenced the Executive Council to pardon and sell some slaves instead of hanging them.
As Secretary of State, Monroe dismissed Mordecai Manuel Noah in 1815 from his post as consul to Tunis because he was Jewish.
After the Napoleonic wars (which ended in 1815), almost all of Spain's and Portugal's colonies in Latin America revolted and declared independence.
As president, he bought Florida from Spain and sought to ease partisan tensions, embarking on a tour of the country that was generally well received.
He took an active part in the new government, and in 1790 he was elected to the Senate of the first United States Congress, where he joined the Jeffersonians.
He had served a total of three years when he finally retired from that office by the rule of rotation.
Letters that do survive, such as ones written after the death of his son, contain no discussion of religion.
His presidency concluded the first period of American presidential history before the beginning of Jacksonian democracy and the Second Party System era.
With the ratification of the Treaty of 1818, under the successful diplomacy of his Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, the United States extended from the Atlantic to the Pacific, giving America harbor and fishing rights in the Pacific Northwest.
He gained experience as an executive as the Governor of Virginia and rose to national prominence as a diplomat in France, when he helped negotiate the Louisiana Purchase in 1803.
Monroe and his regiment crossed over and marched through a Nor'easter snow storm north and then east towards Trenton.
The United States and Britain jointly occupied the Oregon Country.
Knowing that this would slow the assault, after a volley of artillery fire, Lieutenant Monroe and General Washington's cousin, Captain William Washington and their men rushed to seize the guns before they could fire.
The capital of Liberia was named Monrovia after President Monroe.
He and his wife lived in Oak Hill, Virginia, until Elizabeth's death on September 23, 1830.
Congress demanded high subsidies for internal improvements, such as for the improvement of the Cumberland Road, during Monroe's presidency.
One of Monroe's slaves named Daniel often ran away from Monroe's plantation in Albermarle County, to visit other slaves or separated family members.
The articulation of an "American system" distinct from that of Europe was a basic tenet of Monroe's policy toward Latin America.
Monroe was not particularly interested in legal theory or practice, but chose to take it up because he thought that it offered "the most immediate rewards" and could ease his path to wealth, social standing, and political influence.
President Jefferson sent Monroe to France to assist Robert R. Livingston in negotiating the Louisiana Purchase.
Historians say the Virginia courts executed between 26 and 35 slaves.
When his presidency ended on March 4, 1825, James Monroe resided at Monroe Hill, what is now included in the grounds of the University of Virginia.
Monroe resigned his Senate seat after being appointed Minister to France in 1794.
Out of office, Monroe returned to practicing law in Virginia until elected governor there as a Democratic-Republican, his first term serving from 1799 to 1802.
He returned to Williamsburg in September 1779 and studied law with George Wythe, and then moved to Richmond to study law with Thomas Jefferson.
Monroe appointed one Justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, Smith Thompson.
When Monroe was Governor of Virginia in 1800, hundreds of slaves from Virginia planned to kidnap him, take Richmond, and negotiate for their freedom.
In 1650 he patented a large tract of land in Washington Parish, Westmoreland County, Virginia.
In 1780 the British invaded Richmond, and as Governor, Jefferson commissioned Monroe as a colonel to command the militia raised in response and act as liaison to the Continental Army in North Carolina.
With the Federalist Party in disarray due to the unpopularity of their opposition to the War of 1812, Monroe easily won the election.
He had met her while serving with the Continental Congress, which then met in New York, the temporary capital of the new nation.
"When it comes to Monroe's thoughts on religion," Bliss Isely notes, "less is known than that of any other President."
They were tried in an oyer and terminer court without the benefit of a jury, and four were convicted.
Monroe incurred debts by his lavish and expensive lifestyle and often sold property (including slaves) to pay them off.
Ex-Presidents Jefferson and Madison counseled Monroe to accept the offer, but Adams advised, "It would be more candid ... to avow our principles explicitly to Russia and France, than to come in as a cock-boat in the wake of the British man-of-war."
John Marshall, later Chief Justice of the United States, was among his classmates.
Captain Washington was badly wounded in both hands, and young Lieutenant James Monroe was carried from the field bleeding badly after he was struck in the left shoulder by a musket ball, which severed an artery.
Monroe accepted Adams' advice.
'''James Monroe''' (; April 28, 1758 – July 4, 1831) was the fifth President of the United States, serving between 1817 and 1825.
"the American continents," he stated, "by the free and independent condition which they have assumed and maintain, are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European Power."
Facing little opposition from the fractured Federalist Party, Monroe was easily elected president in 1816, winning over 80 percent of the electoral vote and becoming the last president during the First Party System era of American politics.
Federalists were likewise suspicious of Monroe, some seeing him as at best a French dupe and at worst a traitor.
In the famous painting, ''Washington Crossing the Delaware'', Monroe is depicted holding the American flag.
Monroe had little to do with the War of 1812, as President Madison and the War Hawks in Congress were dominant.
A strong friend of the French Revolution, Monroe tried to assure France that George Washington's policy of strict neutrality did not favor Britain.
The plan was to run Monroe for president in the 1808 election in cooperation with the Federalist Party, which had a strong base in New England.
Secretary of State John Quincy Adams suggested delaying formal recognition until Florida was secured.
George Washington and James Madison were leading supporters; Patrick Henry and George Mason were leading opponents.
Relations with Spain over the purchase of Spanish Florida proved to be troublesome, especially after Andrew Jackson  invaded that territory on what he believed to be the president's authorization, which Monroe later denied giving.
None of the executed slaves had killed any whites because the uprising had been foiled before it began.
The collapse of the Federalists left Monroe with no organized opposition at the end of his first term, and he ran for reelection unopposed, the only president other than Washington to do so.
Following the deaths of her husband and father, Eliza moved to Paris, France, where she died on January 27, 1840.
Washington ordered his force, that had shrunk 90% since the Battle of Brooklyn which is also known by the wider name, Battle of Long Island, and down to under 3,000 effective soldiers, to cross the Delaware River on Christmas Day 1776 in the Battle of Trenton.
To the dismay of states' rights proponents, he was willing to accept the federal government's financial assistance to emancipate and transport freed slaves to other countries.
After the failure of the treaty, Monroe returned to the United States in 1807.
Monroe stayed on at State until March 4, 1817, when he began his term as the new President of the United States.
However, the regular Democratic-Republicans overcame the Quids in the nominating caucus, kept control of the party in Virginia, and protected Madison's base.
Nonetheless, Monroe won near-unanimous reelection.
The government insisted that Paine be deported to the United States.
In June 1775, after the battles of Lexington and Concord, Monroe, and some other William and Mary students joined 24 older men in raiding the arsenal at the Governor's Palace in Williamsburg.
* Eliza Kortright Monroe Hay (1786–1840): Eliza was born in Fredericksburg, Virginia, in 1786, and was educated in Paris at the school of Madame Campan during the time her father was the United States Ambassador to France.
The Federalists did not even name a candidate, though Rufus King of New York did run in opposition to Monroe under the Federalist banner.
Monroe's practice of moving and separating slave families was common treatment of slaves in the South.
As ambassador, Monroe secured the release of Thomas Paine in revolutionary France after his arrest for opposition to the execution of Louis XVI.
Monroe therefore resigned as Secretary of War on March 15, 1815 and was formally reappointed Secretary of State.
Sixteen years old, he began forming a close relationship with his maternal uncle, the influential Judge Joseph Jones, who had been educated at the Inns of Court in London and was the executor of his father's estate.
Overseers treated the slaves harshly to force production, but the plantations barely broke even.
The James Monroe Family Home Site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979.
As governor he considered using the Virginia militia to force the outcome in favor of Jefferson.
In the 1790s he fretted over an aging George Washington being too much influenced by close advisers such as Alexander Hamilton, whom Monroe thought too close to Britain.
As president of Virginia's constitutional convention in the fall of 1829, Monroe reiterated his belief that slavery was a blight which, even as a British colony, Virginia had attempted to eradicate.
Both young officers were severely wounded.
Monroe's popularity remained undiminished even when he followed difficult nationalist policies at a time when the country's commitment to nationalism started to show serious fractures.
Monroe resumed studying law under Jefferson, and continued until 1783.
With about $100,000 in Federal grant money, the organization also bought land for the freedmen in what is today Liberia.
Although it is Monroe's most famous contribution to history, the speech was written by Adams, who designed the doctrine in cooperation with Britain.
Virginians held a full spectrum of opinions about the merits of the proposed change in national government.
He called out the state militia to suppress Gabriel's Rebellion.
Monroe took pride as the United States was the first nation to extend recognition and to set an example to the rest of the world for its support of the "cause of liberty and humanity".
Monroe formally announced in his message to Congress on December 2, 1823, what was later called the Monroe Doctrine.
The fourth died in jail from exposure to the cold.
Monroe was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in April 1818.
Declaration of Independence was proclaimed and 5 years after the death of two other Founding Fathers who became Presidents: John Adams and Thomas Jefferson.
He soon joined the "Democratic-Republican" faction led by Jefferson and Madison, and by 1791 was the party leader in the Senate.
Frequent stops on these tours allowed innumerable ceremonies of welcome and expressions of good will.
It is now owned by his ''alma mater'', the College of William and Mary, which has opened it to the public as a historic site.
John Randolph of Roanoke led the Quid effort to stop Jefferson's choice of James Madison.
The problem of imperial invasion was intensified by a Russian claim to the Pacific coast down to the fifty-first parallel and simultaneous European pressure to have all of Latin America returned to its colonial status.
Riker volunteered to lend his medical bag to the efforts saying that as many doctors as possible would be needed fearing severe casualties from a clash with the battle-tested German-speaking Hessian professional mercenary soldiers.
The war went very badly, and when the British burned the U.S. Capitol and the White House on August 24, 1814, Madison removed John Armstrong as Secretary of War and turned to Monroe for help, appointing him Secretary of War on September 27.
Monroe decided on political grounds not to offer Henry Clay the State Department, and Clay turned down the War Department and remained Speaker of the House, so Monroe lacked an outstanding westerner in his cabinet.
Monroe was an absentee slaveholder in that he had his overseers run the plantations while he lived elsewhere.
Lacking serious opposition, the Democratic-Republican Party's Congressional caucus stopped meeting, and for practical purposes the Democratic-Republican Party stopped operating.
In October 1823, Richard Rush, the American minister in London, advised that Foreign Secretary George Canning was proposing that the U.S. and Britain jointly declare their opposition to European intervention.
Monroe was originally buried in New York at the Gouverneur family's vault in the New York City Marble Cemetery.
Their daughter, Hortense, was named in honor of her childhood friend, Hortense de Beauharnais, step-daughter of Napoleon.
James Monroe married Elizabeth Kortright (1768–1830), daughter of Laurence Kortright and Hannah Aspinwall Kortright, on February 16, 1786, in New York City.
First tutored at home by his mother Elizabeth, between the ages of 11 and 16, the young Monroe studied at Campbell town Academy, a school run by Reverend Archibald Campbell of Washington Parish.
Galvanized by the British initiative, Monroe consulted with American leaders and then formulated a plan with Adams.
Monroe thought that Spain could have endangered the U.S. retention of its Southwest and caused the dominance of the Northeast.
An indeterminate number of anti-Virginia Republicans, led by the New York delegation, objected to the caucus system along with the Federalists.
Monroe", so the proper names are speculative but typical of naming patterns of the time, which passed on family names.
Down to mere days before their enlistments expired, the Army's commander, General Washington decided that only a bold step could save the Army and the revolutionary cause from oblivion.
In 1823, he announced the United States' opposition to any European intervention in the recently independent countries of the Americas with the Monroe Doctrine, which became a landmark in American foreign policy.
He was humiliated by Washington's criticism for his support of revolutionary France as minister to the nation.
Governor Monroe postponed the slaves' executions to check their identities; he granted a pardon to one, and allowed two to hang.
In 1790 he was elected by the Virginia legislature as United States Senator.
The James Monroe Tomb is a U.S. National Historic Landmark.
But American policy had come to favor Britain, and Monroe was stunned by the United States' signing of the Jay Treaty in London.
In early 1776, about a year and a half after his enrollment, Monroe dropped out of college and joined the 3rd Virginia Regiment (established December 28, 1775) in the Continental Army where his background as a college student and the son of a well-known planter enabled him to obtain an officer's commission.
News of Jackson's exploits ignited a congressional investigation of the First Seminole War.
Monroe was the last president who was a Founding Father of the United States and the last president from the Virginian dynasty and the Republican Generation.
James Monroe was born on April 28, 1758, in his parents' house located in a wooded area of Westmoreland County, Virginia.
Noah protested and gained letters from Adams, Jefferson, and Madison supporting church-state separation and tolerance for Jews.
There he excelled as a pupil and progressed through Latin and mathematics faster than most boys his age.
Monroe was not a candidate for president, and Madison was elected.
There were few serious European attempts at intervention.
He also gained the freedom of Adrienne de La Fayette and issued her and her family American passports (they had been granted citizenship by the U.S. government for contributions during the Revolution.)
Scheer says that Monroe "helped secure a modicum of civil protection for slaves sentenced to death for capital crimes."
The Missouri Compromise lasted until 1854, when Stephen A. Douglas's Kansas-Nebraska Act repealed it.
He was alarmed by the Spanish diplomat Don Diego de Gardoqui, who in 1785 tried to convince Congress to allow Spain to close the Mississippi River to American traffic for 30 years.
The Panic of 1819 caused a painful economic depression.
The Federalist Party continued to fade away during his administration; it maintained its vitality and organizational integrity in Delaware and a few localities, but lacked influence in national politics.
Along the way, the soldiers were spotted by a young patriot doctor, John Riker, whose dogs had been awakened in the pre-dawn early morning.
Monroe was raised in a family that belonged to the Church of England when it was the state church in Virginia before the Revolution.
When the Hessians sounded the alarm, they tried to get several of their artillery pieces in action to pour grapeshot into the Americans marching down towards the homes they had commandeered.
Monroe believed that the Indians must progress from the hunting stage to become an agricultural people, noting in 1817, "A hunter or savage state requires a greater extent of territory to sustain it than is compatible with progress and just claims of civilized life."
Of the initial group, the patrol took five slaves alive.
Monroe was part of the American Colonization Society formed in 1816, the members of which included Henry Clay and Andrew Jackson.
The United States, therefore, promised to refrain from intervention in European affairs and demanded Europe to abstain from interfering with American matters.
They found common ground with some abolitionists in supporting colonization.
Sidbury says some trials had a few measures to prevent abuses, such as an appointed attorney, but they were "hardly 'fair'".
After studying law under Thomas Jefferson from 1780 to 1783, he served as a delegate  in the Continental Congress.
Those who held the middle ground in the ideological struggle became the central figures.
She used that for travel to her husband, imprisoned in Olmutz.
On October 15, 1799, as some slave traders tried to transport a group of slaves from Southampton to Georgia, the slaves revolted and killed the traders.
As an anti-federalist delegate to the Virginia convention that considered ratification of the United States Constitution, Monroe opposed ratification, claiming it gave too much power to the central government.
This defiance underlined Monroe's populist ideals and added credit to the local offices that he was so fond of visiting on his speech tours.
During the War of 1812, Monroe held the critical roles of Secretary of State and the Secretary of War under President James Madison.
His death came 55 years after the U.S.
When Monroe and the British signed a renewal in December 1806, Jefferson decided not to even submit it to the Senate for ratification.
At the convention, Monroe made his final public statement on slavery, proposing that Virginia emancipate and deport its bondsmen with "the aid of the Union."
His paternal great-grandfather Patrick Andrew Monroe emigrated to America from Scotland in the mid-17th century.
After the election Monroe quickly reconciled with Jefferson, but did not speak with Madison, a former friend, until 1810.
As nationalism surged, partisan fury subsided and the "Era of Good Feelings" ensued until the Panic of 1819 struck and dispute over the admission of Missouri embroiled the country in 1820.
