The best known is ''Rigid Body Sings'', closely based on "Comin' Through the Rye" by Robert Burns, which he apparently used to sing while accompanying himself on a guitar.
He had been born "John Clerk", adding the surname Maxwell to his own after he inherited (as an infant in 1793) the Middlebie country estate near Corsock, Kirkcudbrightshire, from connections to the Maxwell family, themselves members of the peerage.
He is also known for presenting the first durable colour photograph in 1861 and for his foundational work on analysing the rigidity of rod-and-joint frameworks (trusses) like those in many bridges.
In 1854, Maxwell graduated from Trinity with a degree in mathematics.
He never seemed to resent the epithet, bearing it without complaint for many years.
Maxwell was also the first to make explicit use of dimensional analysis, in 1871.
Around 1862, while lecturing at King's College, Maxwell calculated that the speed of propagation of an electromagnetic field is approximately that of the speed of light.
Maxwell's interests ranged far beyond the school syllabus and he did not pay particular attention to examination performance.
The work was not entirely original, since René Descartes had also examined the properties of such multifocal ellipses in the seventeenth century, but he had simplified their construction.
He photographed a tartan ribbon three times, through red, green, and blue filters, also making a fourth photograph through a yellow filter, which, according to Maxwell's account, was not used in the demonstration.
The only desire which I can have is like David to serve my own generation by the will of God, and then fall asleep.''
In 1874, he constructed a plaster thermodynamic visualisation as a way of exploring phase transitions, based on the American scientist Josiah Willard Gibbs's graphical thermodynamics papers.
The formula, called the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, gives the fraction of gas molecules moving at a specified velocity at any given temperature.
His mother was taken ill with abdominal cancer and, after an unsuccessful operation, died in December 1839 when he was eight years old.
The relationship between the two men could not be described as being close, because Faraday was 40&nbsp;years Maxwell's senior and showed signs of senility.
At that time, Maxwell believed that the propagation of light required a medium for the waves, dubbed the luminiferous aether.
Maxwell is buried at Parton Kirk, near Castle Douglas in Galloway close to where he grew up.
Maxwell left the Academy in 1847 at age 16 and began attending classes at the University of Edinburgh.
Thomas Young later proposed that this paradox could be explained by colours being perceived through a limited number of channels in the eyes, which he proposed to be threefold, the ''trichromatic color theory''.
Because Sutton's photographic plates were  insensitive to red and barely sensitive to green, the results of this pioneering experiment were far from perfect.
In it he described a mechanical means of drawing mathematical curves with a piece of twine, and the properties of ellipses, Cartesian ovals, and related curves with more than two foci.
Since neither was observed, Maxwell concluded that the rings must be composed of numerous small particles he called "brick-bats", each independently orbiting Saturn.
Maxwell used the recently developed Linear algebra to prove Young's theory.
Maxwell expressed electromagnetism in the algebra of quaternions and made the electromagnetic potential the centrepiece of his theory.
At age 18, Maxwell contributed two papers for the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Maxwell was made a fellow of Trinity on 10 October 1855, sooner than was the norm, and was asked to prepare lectures on hydrostatics and optics and to set examination papers.
It has the opening lines
His mannerisms and Galloway accent struck the other boys as rustic.
Maxwell was granted the Chair of Natural Philosophy at King's College, London, instead.
The paper presented a simplified model of Faraday's work and how the two phenomena were related.
His father assisted him in the task of preparing the necessary references, but died on 2 April at Glenlair before either knew the result of Maxwell's candidacy.
With the coloured spinning tops invented by Forbes, Maxwell was able to demonstrate that white light would result from a mixture of red, green, and blue light.
They nevertheless maintained a strong respect for each other's talents.
Descriptions of Maxwell remark upon his remarkable intellectual qualities being matched by social awkwardness.
Indeed, his knowledge of scripture was already very detailed; he could give chapter and verse for almost any quotation from the psalms.
Through this practice he discovered photoelasticity, which is a means of determining the stress distribution within physical structures.
In it he provided a conceptual model for electromagnetic induction, consisting of tiny spinning cells of magnetic flux.
On the centenary of Maxwell's birthday, Einstein described Maxwell's work as the "most profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of Newton".
All indications suggest that Maxwell had maintained an unquenchable curiosity from an early age.
Maxwell helped develop the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, a statistical means of describing aspects of the kinetic theory of gases.
This time is especially noteworthy for the advances Maxwell made in the fields of electricity and magnetism.
... Again I assert the Right of Trespass on any plot of Holy Ground which any man has set apart.
'''James Clerk Maxwell'''  (13 June 1831&nbsp;– 5 November 1879) was a Scottish scientist in the field of mathematical physics.
Recognising the potential of the young boy, Maxwell's mother Frances took responsibility for James's early education, which in the Victorian era was largely the job of the woman of the house.
Maxwell accepted the professorship at Aberdeen, leaving Cambridge in November 1856.
One facet of this conversion may have aligned him with an antipositivist position.
John dismissed the tutor in November 1841 and, after considerable thought, sent James to the prestigious Edinburgh Academy.
He lodged during term times at the house of his aunt Isabella.
Nothing is to be holy ground consecrated to Stationary Faith, whether positive or negative.
He lived in Aberdeen during the six months of the academic year and spent the summers at Glenlair, which he had inherited from his father.
The minister who regularly visited him in his last weeks was astonished at his lucidity and the immense power and scope of his memory, but comments more particularly,
He was unsuccessful in applying for Forbes's recently vacated chair at Edinburgh, the post instead going to Tait.
But a Candle is coming to drive out all Ghosts and Bugbears.
Attending both Church of Scotland (his father's denomination) and Episcopalian (his mother's denomination) services as a child, Maxwell later underwent an evangelical conversion in April 1853.
Researchers in 1961 concluded that the seemingly impossible partial success of the red-filtered exposure was due to ultraviolet light, which is strongly reflected by some red dyes, not entirely blocked by the red filter used, and within the range of sensitivity of the wet collodion process Sutton employed.
His famous twenty equations, in their modern form of four partial differential equations, first appeared in fully developed form in his textbook ''A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism'' in 1873.
His work ''Oval Curves'' was presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh by James Forbes, a professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University, but Maxwell was deemed too young to present the work himself.
From 1855 to 1872, he published at intervals a series of investigations concerning the perception of colour, colour-blindness, and colour theory, and was awarded the Rumford Medal for ''On the Theory of Colour Vision''.
James Clerk Maxwell was born on 13 June 1831 at 14 India Street, Edinburgh, to John Clerk Maxwell of Middlebie, an advocate, and Frances Cay daughter of Robert Hodshon Cay and sister of John Cay.
By understanding the propagation of electromagnetism as a field emitted by active particles, Maxwell could advance his work on light.
Maxwell would often attend lectures at the Royal Institution, where he came into regular contact with Michael Faraday.
His father was a man of comfortable means of the Clerk family of Penicuik, holders of the baronetcy of Clerk of Penicuik.
You may search the Scriptures and not find a text to stop you in your explorations.
He considered this to be more than just a coincidence, commenting, "We can scarcely avoid the conclusion that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena."
They were engaged in February 1858 and married in Aberdeen on 2 June 1858.
It was unknown how they could remain stable without breaking up, drifting away or crashing into Saturn.
Maxwell was fascinated by geometry at an early age, rediscovering the regular polyhedra before he received any formal instruction.
Buoyed by his success as a research student, he would be free, apart from some tutoring and examining duties, to pursue scientific interests at his own leisure.
''... his illness drew out the whole heart and soul and spirit of the man: his firm and undoubting faith in the Incarnation and all its results; in the full sufficiency of the Atonement; in the work of the Holy Spirit.
James was the first cousin of the artist Jemima Blackburn and cousin (the son of his mother's brother) of the civil engineer William Dyce Cay.
He did not find his classes at Edinburgh University very demanding, and was therefore able to immerse himself in private study during free time at the university and particularly when back home at Glenlair.
Tayler, the uncle of a class-mate, G.W.H.
Sceptics pretend to have read them, and have found certain witty objections ... which too many of the orthodox unread admit, and shut up the subject as haunted.
The nature and perception of colour was one such interest which he had begun at Edinburgh University while he was a student of Forbes.
At eight he could recite long passages of Milton and the whole of the 119th psalm (176 verses).
On his return to Cambridge, Maxwell writes to his recent host a chatty and affectionate letter including the following testimony,
The following February he was urged by Forbes to apply for the newly vacant Chair of Natural Philosophy at Marischal College, Aberdeen.
The academic staff of Edinburgh University included some highly regarded names; his first year tutors included Sir William Hamilton, who lectured him on logic and metaphysics, Philip Kelland on mathematics, and James Forbes on natural philosophy.
This paper is considered a central paper of the early days of control theory.
Social isolation at the Academy ended when he met Lewis Campbell and Peter Guthrie Tait, two boys of a similar age who were to become notable scholars later in life.
Maxwell decided to remain at Trinity after graduating and applied for a fellowship, which was a process that he could expect to take a couple of years.
The extent to which Maxwell "ploughed up" his Christian beliefs and put them to the intellectual test, can be judged only incompletely from his writings.
His discoveries helped usher in the era of modern physics, laying the foundation for such fields as special relativity and quantum mechanics.
His paper ''Experiments on Colour'' laid out the principles of colour combination and was presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in March 1855.
''Christianity — that is, the religion of the Bible — is the only scheme or form of belief which disavows any possessions on such a tenure.
But there is plenty of evidence, especially from his undergraduate days, that he did deeply examine his faith.
Maxwell's work on thermodynamics led him to devise the thought experiment that came to be known as Maxwell's demon, where the second law of thermodynamics is violated by an imaginary being capable of sorting particles by energy.
At Trinity he was elected to the elite secret society known as the Cambridge Apostles.
In October 1850, already an accomplished mathematician, Maxwell left Scotland for the University of Cambridge.
I have the capacity of being more wicked than any example that man could set me, and ... if I escape, it is only by God's grace helping me to get rid of myself, partially in science, more completely in society, — but not perfectly except by committing myself to God ...''
The 25-year-old Maxwell was a good fifteen years younger than any other professor at Marischal.
He committed himself to lecturing 15&nbsp;hours a week, including a weekly ''pro bono'' lecture to the local working men's college.
In the kinetic theory, temperatures and heat involve only molecular movement.
This period of his life would see him display the world's first light-fast colour photograph, further develop his ideas on the viscosity of gases, and propose a system of defining physical quantities—now known as dimensional analysis.
When Maxwell was young his family moved to Glenlair House, which his parents had built on the  Middlebie estate.
Working on the problem further, Maxwell showed that the equations predict the existence of waves of oscillating electric and magnetic fields that travel through empty space at a speed that could be predicted from simple electrical experiments; using the data available at the time, Maxwell obtained a velocity of .
He wrote the textbook ''Theory of Heat'' (1871) and the treatise ''Matter and Motion'' (1876).
In a passage added to a letter from his father to his sister-in-law Jane Cay in 1834, his mother described this innate sense of inquisitiveness:
''I have been thinking how very gently I have always been dealt with.
Maxwell had studied and commented on electricity and magnetism as early as 1855 when his paper ''On Faraday's lines of force'' was read to the Cambridge Philosophical Society.
On the marriage record, Maxwell is listed as Professor of Natural Philosophy in Marischal College, Aberdeen.
The problem took on a particular resonance at that time because St John's College, Cambridge had chosen it as the topic for the 1857 Adams Prize.
His contributions to the science are considered by many to be of the same magnitude as those of Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein.
Many have a great deal, and every one has some.
I have never had a violent shove all my life.
He examined the nature of both electric and magnetic fields in his two-part paper ''On physical lines of force'', which was published in 1861.
Maxwell's time at King's was probably the most productive of his career.
He was awarded the Royal Society's Rumford Medal in 1860 for his work on colour and was later elected to the Society in 1861.
... Never hide anything, be it weed or no, nor seem to wish it hidden.
As most physicists of the time, Maxwell had a strong interest in psychology.
Newton also showed that an orange paint made of yellow and red could look exactly like a monochromatic orange light, although being composed of two monochromatic yellow and red lights.
This is one of the few purely mathematical papers he had written, demonstrating Maxwell's growing stature as a mathematician.
There was no room for two professors of Natural Philosophy, so Maxwell, despite his scientific reputation, found himself laid off.
All fallow land is to be ploughed up and a regular system of rotation followed.
In 1860 Marischal College merged with the neighbouring King's College to form the University of Aberdeen.
His most notable achievement was to formulate the classical theory of electromagnetic radiation, bringing together for the first time electricity, magnetism, and light as manifestations of the same phenomenon.
In the first additional part he discussed the nature of electrostatics and displacement current.
During an 1861 Royal Institution lecture on colour theory, Maxwell presented the world's first demonstration of colour photography by this principle of three-colour analysis and synthesis.
In 1881 Oliver Heaviside replaced Maxwell's electromagnetic potential field by 'force fields' as the centrepiece of electromagnetic theory.
Maxwell was awarded the £130 Adams Prize in 1859 for his essay ''On the stability of the motion of Saturn's rings''; he was the only entrant to have made enough headway to submit an entry.
He had gauged and fathomed all the schemes and systems of philosophy, and had found them utterly empty and unsatisfying — "unworkable" was his own word about them — and he turned with simple faith to the Gospel of the Saviour.''
Two more parts were later added to and published in that same paper in early 1862.
He scored second highest in the final examination, coming behind Edward Routh and earning himself the title of Second Wrangler.
His work was so detailed and convincing that when George Biddell Airy read it he commented "It is one of the most remarkable applications of mathematics to physics that I have ever seen."
They had had one earlier child, a daughter named Elizabeth, who died in infancy.
In 1871 he became the first Cavendish Professor of Physics at Cambridge.
The paper was delivered to the Royal Society by his tutor Kelland instead.
Between 1859 and 1866, he developed the theory of the distributions of velocities in particles of a gas, work later generalised by Ludwig Boltzmann.
Maxwell also introduced the concept of the ''electromagnetic field'' in comparison to force lines that Faraday described.
Little is known about the young man John hired to instruct his son, except that he treated the younger boy harshly, chiding him for being slow and wayward.
His formal schooling began unsuccessfully under the guidance of a sixteen-year-old hired tutor.
There he would experiment with improvised chemical, electric, and magnetic apparatus, but his chief concerns regarded the properties of polarised light.
After recovering from a near-fatal bout of smallpox in 1860, Maxwell moved to London with his wife.
Maxwell was also interested in applying his theory of color perception, namely in colour photography.
Maxwell's biographer and friend, Lewis Campbell, adopted an uncharacteristic reticence on the subject of Katherine, though describing their married life as "one of unexampled devotion".
''Now my great plan, which was conceived of old, ... is to let nothing be wilfully left unexamined.
These difficulties inspired Albert Einstein to formulate the theory of special relativity; in the process Einstein dispensed with the requirement of a stationary luminiferous aether.
Maxwell's religious beliefs and related activities have been the focus of a number of papers.
As a great lover of Scottish poetry, Maxwell memorised poems and wrote his own.
By the age of three, everything that moved, shone, or made a noise drew the question: "what's the go o' that?"
He constructed shaped blocks of gelatine, subjected them to various stresses, and with a pair of polarising prisms given to him by William Nicol, viewed the coloured fringes that had developed within the jelly.
A few years later there was a debate between Heaviside and Peter Guthrie Tait about the relative merits of vector analysis and quaternions.
Certainly, his knowledge of the Bible was remarkable, so his confidence in the Scriptures was not based on ignorance.
In the second additional part, he dealt with the rotation of the plane of the polarisation of light in a magnetic field, a phenomenon that had been discovered by Faraday and is now known as the Faraday effect.
A collection of his poems was published by his friend Lewis Campbell in 1882.
Heaviside reduced the complexity of Maxwell's theory down to four differential equations, known now collectively as Maxwell's Laws or Maxwell's equations.
He initially attended Peterhouse, but before the end of his first term transferred to Trinity, where he believed it would be easier to obtain a fellowship.
The first year had been full, obliging him to join the second year with classmates a year his senior.
He engaged himself with his new responsibilities as head of a department, devising the syllabus and preparing lectures.
He focused his attention on a problem that had eluded scientists for two hundred years: the nature of Saturn's rings.
His collected works were issued in two volumes by the Cambridge University Press in 1890.
His other paper was ''Rolling Curves'' and, just as with the paper ''Oval Curves'' that he had written at the Edinburgh Academy, he was again considered too young to stand at the rostrum to present it himself.
He demonstrated that to be the case, inventing color matching experiments and Colorimetry.
In November 1851, Maxwell studied under William Hopkins, whose success in nurturing mathematical genius had earned him the nickname of "senior wrangler-maker".
Through him Maxwell met Dewar's daughter, Katherine Mary Dewar.
It was considered the final word on the issue until direct observations by the ''Voyager'' flybys of the 1980s confirmed Maxwell's prediction.
In the course of his 1855 paper, Maxwell proposed that, if three black-and-white photographs of a scene were taken through red, green and blue filters and transparent prints of the images were projected onto a screen using three projectors equipped with similar filters, when superimposed on the screen the result would be perceived by the human eye as a complete reproduction of all the colours in the scene.
As death approached Maxwell told a Cambridge colleague
One of these, ''On the Equilibrium of Elastic Solids'', laid the foundation for an important discovery later in his life, which was the temporary double refraction produced in viscous liquids by shear stress.
Maxwell died in Cambridge of abdominal cancer on 5 November 1879 at the age of 48.
With the publication of ''A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field'' in 1865, Maxwell demonstrated that electric and magnetic fields travel through space as waves moving at the speed of light.
He was later declared equal with Routh in the more exacting ordeal of the Smith's Prize examination.
His mother had died at the same age of the same type of cancer.
In 1857 Maxwell befriended the Reverend Daniel Dewar, who was then the Principal of Marischal.
Many physicists regard Maxwell as the 19th-century scientist having the greatest influence on 20th-century physics.
He reduced all of the current knowledge into a linked set of differential equations with 20 equations in 20 variables.
This approach generalised the previously established laws of thermodynamics and explained existing observations and experiments in a better way than had been achieved previously.
You may fly to the ends of the world and find no God but the Author of Salvation.
The extended biography ''The Life of James Clerk Maxwell'', by his former schoolfellow and lifelong friend Professor Lewis Campbell, was published in 1882.
The use of scalar and vector potentials is now standard in the solution of Maxwell's equations.
The unification of light and electrical phenomena led to the prediction of the existence of radio waves.
Here alone all is free.
Isaac Newton had demonstrated, using prisms, that white lights, such as sunlight, are composed of a number of monochromatic components which could then be recombined into white light.
But there are extensive and important tracts in the territory of the Scoffer, the Pantheist, the Quietist, Formalist, Dogmatist, Sensualist, and the rest, which are openly and solemnly Tabooed.
... Now I am convinced that no one but a Christian can actually purge his land of these holy spots.
Here "governors" refers to the governor or the centrifugal governor used to regulate steam engines.
In his paper ''On reciprocal figures, frames and diagrams of forces'' (1870) he discussed the rigidity of various designs of lattice.
Most of this work was done by Maxwell at Glenlair during the period between holding his London post and his taking up the Cavendish chair.
He wrote his first scientific paper at the age of 14.
Maxwell's intellectual understanding of his Christian faith and of science grew rapidly during his Cambridge years.
Maxwell was put in charge of the development of the Cavendish Laboratory, supervising every step in the progress of the building and of the purchase of the collection of apparatus.
Maxwell's equations for electromagnetism have been called the "second great unification in physics" after the first one realised by Isaac Newton.
I do not say that no Christians have enclosed places of this sort.
Stemming directly from his psychological work on colour perception: if a sum of any three lights could reproduce any perceivable colour, then colour photographs could be produced with a set of three colored filters.
Maxwell was an evangelical Presbyterian and in his later years became an Elder of the Church of Scotland.
The ten-year-old Maxwell, having been raised in isolation on his father's countryside estate, did not fit in well at school.
By finding photographic materials more sensitive to the less refrangible rays, the representation of the colours of objects might be greatly improved."
According to Heaviside, the electromagnetic potential field was arbitrary and needed to be "murdered".
During this time his passion for drawing was encouraged by his older cousin Jemima.
Seven years Maxwell's senior, comparatively little is known of Katherine, although it is known that she helped in his lab and worked on experiments in viscosity.
Maxwell published a paper ''On governors'' in the ''Proceedings of Royal Society'', vol.
Let us follow the light.''''
Maxwell's parents met and married when they were well into their thirties; his mother was nearly 40 when he was born.
Maxwell proposed that light is an undulation in the same medium that is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.
The result was the realisation that there was no need for the greater physical insights provided by quaternions if the theory was purely local, and vector analysis became commonplace.
Having arrived on his first day of school wearing a pair of homemade shoes and a tunic, he earned the unkind nickname of "Daftie".
James's education was then overseen by his father and his father's sister-in-law Jane, both of whom played pivotal roles in his life.
They were close friends and Cay acted as his best man when Maxwell married.
Hence the paradox that puzzled physicists of the time: two complex lights (composed of more than one monochromatic light) could look alike but be physically different, called ''metameres''.
He joined the "Apostles", an exclusive debating society of the intellectual elite, where through his essays he sought to work out this understanding.
