Adele won the award at the 85th Academy Awards, and Smith won at the 88th Academy Awards.
In 1999 Electronic Arts acquired the licence and released ''Tomorrow Never Dies'' on 16 December 1999.
It was not until the penultimate novel, ''You Only Live Twice'', that Fleming gave Bond a sense of family background.
* 2008 ''By Royal Command'' & ''SilverFin'' (graphic novel)
All the books were published in the UK through Jonathan Cape.
The Palmer series were produced by Harry Saltzman, who also used key crew members from the Bond series, including designer Ken Adam, editor Peter R. Hunt and composer John Barry.
* 1964 ''You Only Live Twice''
* 1955 ''Moonraker''
Most of the Bond novels and short stories have since been adapted for illustration, as well as Kingsley Amis's ''Colonel Sun''; the works were written by Henry Gammidge or Jim Lawrence with Yaroslav Horak replacing McClusky as artist in 1966.
A second volume, subtitled ''Secret Servant'' was released on 2 November 2006 in the UK, published by John Murray.
The book was the first to be written after the release of ''Dr.
For the first five novels, Fleming armed Bond with a Beretta 418 until he received a letter from a thirty-one-year-old Bond enthusiast and gun expert, Geoffrey Boothroyd, criticising Fleming's choice of firearm for Bond, calling it "a lady's gun – and not a very nice lady at that!"
The ''Young Bond'' series of novels was started by Charlie Higson and, between 2005 and 2009, five novels and one short story were published.
Fleming also endowed Bond with many of his own traits, including sharing the same golf handicap, the taste for scrambled eggs and using the same brand of toiletries.
The novels are penned by Samantha Weinberg under the pseudonym Kate Westbrook, who is depicted as the book's "editor".
For the film adaptations of Bond, the pre-mission briefing by Q Branch became one of the motifs that ran through the series.
Between 1953 and 1966, two years after his death, twelve novels and two short-story collections were published, with the last two books – ''The Man with the Golden Gun'' and ''Octopussy and The Living Daylights'' – published posthumously.
Since then, there have been numerous video games either based on the films or using original storylines.
Likewise, in ''Moonraker'', Special Branch Officer Gala Brand thinks that Bond is "certainly good-looking&nbsp;... Rather like Hoagy Carmichael in a way.
It was later reprinted in the United States by DC Comics as part of its ''Showcase'' anthology series, in January 1963.
In October 2014 it was announced that Anthony Horowitz was to write a ''Bond'' continuation novel.
One of the films that reacted against the portrayal of Bond was the Harry Palmer series, whose first film, ''The Ipcress File'' was released in 1965.
In 2001, it was voted as the "best-loved one-liner in cinema" by British cinema goers, and in 2005, it was honoured as the 22nd greatest quotation in cinema history by the American Film Institute as part of their 100 Years Series.
* 2006 ''Secret Servant: The Moneypenny Diaries''
A Bond film staple are the theme songs heard during their title sequences sung by well-known popular singers.
Cinematically, Bond has been a major influence within the spy genre since the release of ''Dr.
There have also been two independent productions of Bond films: ''Casino Royale'' (a 1967 spoof) and ''Never Say Never Again'' (a 1983 remake of an earlier Eon-produced film, ''Thunderball'').
Other 1960s television series inspired by Bond include ''I Spy'', and ''Get Smart''.
* 1999 "Live at Five" (short story)
Richard Hannay and Bulldog Drummond).
In 1983 the first Bond video game, developed and published by Parker Brothers, was released for the Atari 2600, the Atari 5200, the Atari 800, the Commodore 64 and the ColecoVision.
* 2008 ''The Moneypenny Diaries: Final Fling''
In thanks, Fleming gave the MI6 Armourer in his novels the name Major Boothroyd and, in ''Dr.
The films are also noted for Bond's relationships with various women, who are sometimes referred to as "Bond girls".
* 1990 ''Brokenclaw''
''Goldfinger''—notably featuring 007 being threatened with the novel's circular saw, rather than the film's laser beam—and ''Diamonds Are Forever''.
The gadgets assumed a higher profile in the 1964 film ''Goldfinger''.
* 1959 ''Goldfinger''
Bond returned to his Bentley for the subsequent novels.
After the Fleming and Amis material had been adapted, original stories were produced, continuing in the ''Daily Express'' and ''Sunday Express'' until May 1977.
Bond's most famous car is the silver grey Aston Martin DB5, first seen in ''Goldfinger''; it later featured in ''Thunderball'', ''GoldenEye'', ''Tomorrow Never Dies'', ''Casino Royale'', ''Skyfall'' and ''Spectre''.
He started the story shortly before his wedding to his pregnant girlfriend, Ann Charteris, in order to distract himself from his forthcoming nuptials.
* 2001 ''Never Dream of Dying''
That black hair falling down over the right eyebrow.
The result of a court case in the High Court in London in 1963 allowed Kevin McClory to produce a remake of ''Thunderball'' titled ''Never Say Never Again'' in 1983.
No'', starring Sean Connery as Bond.
The '''''James Bond''''' series focuses on a fictional British Secret Service agent created in 1953 by writer Ian Fleming, who featured him in twelve novels and two short-story collections.
Ken HughesJohn HustonJoseph McGrathRobert ParrishVal GuestRichard Talmadge
In October 2013 Ian Fleming Publications announced that Stephen Cole would continue the series, with the first edition scheduled to be released in Autumn 2014.
* 1997 ''Tomorrow Never Dies'' (novelization)
With the release of the 1981 film ''For Your Eyes Only'', Marvel Comics published a two-issue comic book adaptation of the film.
* 1981 ''Licence Renewed''
* 1983 ''Icebreaker''
* 2015 ''Trigger Mortis''
But there was something a bit cruel in the mouth, and the eyes were cold."
'', which was described as the "first network television imitation" of Bond, largely because Fleming provided advice and ideas on the development of the series, even giving the main character the name Napoleon Solo.
The James Bond character and related media have triggered a number of criticisms and reactions across the political spectrum, and are still highly debated in popular culture studies.
The documentary included James Bond in dramatised scenes from
* 1956 ''Diamonds Are Forever''
The character has also been adapted for television, radio, comic strip, video games and film.
This was the first American comic book appearance of James Bond and is noteworthy for being a relatively rare example of a British comic being reprinted in a fairly high-profile American comic.
The illustrator, John McLusky, however, felt that Fleming's 007 looked too "outdated" and "pre-war" and changed Bond to give him a more masculine look.
When ''Octopussy'' was released in the cinemas in 1983, Marvel published an accompanying comic; Eclipse also produced a one-off comic for ''Licence to Kill'', although Timothy Dalton refused to allow his likeness to be used.
Much the same bones.
It is also noticeable that, although Bond uses a number of pieces of equipment from Q Branch, including the Little Nellie autogyro, a jet pack and the exploding attaché case, the villains are also well-equipped with custom-made devices, including Scaramanga's golden gun, Rosa Klebb's poison-tipped shoes, Oddjob's steel-rimmed bowler hat and Blofeld's communication devices in his agents' vanity case.
The latest novel is ''Trigger Mortis'' by Anthony Horowitz, published in September 2015.
In 1991 a TV cartoon series ''James Bond Jr.'' was produced with Corey Burton in the role of Bond's nephew, also called James Bond.
Other handguns used by Bond in the Fleming books included the Colt Detective Special and a long-barrelled Colt .45 Army Special.
* 1989 ''Win, Lose or Die''
The novel was adapted for American audiences to show Bond as an American agent working for "Combined Intelligence", while the character Felix Leiter—American in the novel—became British onscreen and was renamed "Clarence Leiter".
The first parody was the 1964 film ''Carry On Spying'', which shows the villain Dr. Crow being overcome by agents who included James Bind (Charles Hawtry) and Daphne Honeybutt (Barbara Windsor).
The UK Film Distributors' Association have stated that the importance of the Bond series of films to the British film industry cannot be overstated, as they "form the backbone of the industry".
* 1984 ''Role of Honour''
Davey noted that "Bond's gizmos follow the zeitgeist more closely than any other&nbsp;... nuance in the films" as they moved from the potential representations of the future in the early films, through to the brand-name obsessions of the later films.
* 1998 ''The Facts of Death''
He has, however, also needed to drive a number of other vehicles, ranging from a Citroën 2CV to a Routemaster Bus, amongst others.
The first Young Bond novel, ''SilverFin'' was also adapted and released as a graphic novel on 2 October 2008 by Puffin Books.
* 1999 ''The World Is Not Enough'' (novelization)
* 2000 ''DoubleShot''
The game received very positive reviews, won the BAFTA Interactive Entertainment Award for UK Developer of the Year in 1998 and sold over eight million copies worldwide, grossing $250 million.
* 1997 ''Zero Minus Ten''
However, the effects of the two Eon-produced Bond films ''Dr.
* 1965 ''The Man with the Golden Gun''
* 1999 ''High Time to Kill''
The first instalment of the trilogy, subtitled ''Guardian Angel'', was released on 10 October 2005 in the UK.
* 2007 ''Double or Die''
* 1957 ''From Russia, with Love''
Following its success, a second story was adapted and on 3 April 2010 BBC Radio 4 broadcast ''Goldfinger'' with Stephens again playing Bond.
With MGM losing revenue from lost licensing fees, the franchise was removed from EA to Activision.
Geographers have considered the role of exotic locations in the movies in the dynamics of the Cold War, with power struggles among blocs playing out in the peripheral areas.
Set in the 1950s two weeks after the events of ''Goldfinger'', it contains material written, but previously unreleased, by Fleming.
As of , there have been twenty-four films in the Eon Productions series.
Boothroyd also gave Fleming advice on the Berns-Martin triple draw shoulder holster and a number of the weapons used by SMERSH and other villains.
The most recent Bond film, ''Spectre'' (2015), stars Daniel Craig in his fourth portrayal of Bond; he is the sixth actor to play Bond in the Eon series.
In a fictional obituary, purportedly published in ''The Times'', Bond's parents were given as Andrew Bond, from the village of Glencoe, Scotland, and Monique Delacroix, from the canton of Vaud, Switzerland.
* 1992 ''Death is Forever''
The play was adapted from Fleming's novel by Archie Scottney and was directed by Martin Jarvis.
* 2006 ''Blood Fever''
Benson had previously been the author of ''The James Bond Bedside Companion'', first published in 1984.
Sir Ian McKellen was Goldfinger and Stephens' ''Die Another Day'' co-star Rosamund Pike played Pussy Galore.
The name James Bond came from that of the American ornithologist James Bond, a Caribbean bird expert and author of the definitive field guide ''Birds of the West Indies''.
* 1993 ''Never Send Flowers''
The actor Toby Stephens, who played Bond villain Gustav Graves in the Eon Productions version of ''Die Another Day'', played Bond, while Dr. No was played by David Suchet.
In 1997 the first-person shooter video game ''GoldenEye 007'' was developed by Rare for the Nintendo 64, based on the 1995 Pierce Brosnan film ''GoldenEye''.
No'', saw M ordering Bond to leave his Beretta behind and take up the Walther PPK, which the film Bond used in eighteen films.
As at 2015 Eon holds the full adaptation rights to all of Fleming's Bond novels.
No'', a quarter of the world's population have seen at least one Bond film.
In the early Bond stories Fleming gave Bond a battleship-grey Bentley 4½ Litre with an Amherst Villiers supercharger.
* 2002 ''The Man with the Red Tattoo''
By 2012, James Bond had become such a symbol of the United Kingdom that the character, played by Craig, appeared in the opening ceremony of the 2012 London Olympics as Queen Elizabeth II's escort.
Activision subsequently released the ''007: Quantum of Solace'' game on 31 October 2008, based on the film of the same name.
In 1954 CBS paid Ian Fleming $1,000 ($ in  dollars) to adapt his novel ''Casino Royale'' into a one-hour television adventure as part of its ''Climax!''
In October 2000, they released ''The World Is Not Enough'' for the Nintendo 64 followed by ''007 Racing'' for the PlayStation on 21 November 2000.
The 23 James Bond films produced by Eon Productions, which have grossed $4,910,000,000 in box office returns alone, have made the series one of the highest-grossing ever.
The "James Bond Theme" was written by Monty Norman and was first orchestrated by the John Barry Orchestra for 1962's ''Dr.
* 1988 ''Scorpius''
In 2001, Norman won £30,000 in libel damages from the ''The Sunday Times'' newspaper, which suggested that Barry was entirely responsible for the composition.
After completing the manuscript for ''Casino Royale'', Fleming showed the manuscript to his friend (and later editor) William Plomer to read.
In 1996 the American author Raymond Benson became the author of the Bond novels.
Gardner went on to write sixteen Bond books in total; two of the books he wrote – ''Licence to Kill'' and ''GoldenEye'' – were novelizations of Eon Productions films of the same name.
The theme, as written by Norman and arranged by Barry, was described by another Bond film composer, David Arnold, as "bebop-swing vibe coupled with that vicious, dark, distorted electric guitar, definitely an instrument of rock 'n' roll&nbsp;... it represented everything about the character you would want: It was cocky, swaggering, confident, dark, dangerous, suggestive, sexy, unstoppable.
* 1953 ''Casino Royale''
* 2005 ''SilverFin''
The film, produced by Jack Schwartzman's Taliafilm production company and starring Sean Connery as Bond, was not part of the Eon series of Bond films.
Throughout the life of the film series, a number of tie-in products have been released.
And he did it in two minutes."
Fleming did not provide Bond's date of birth, but John Pearson's fictional biography of Bond, ''James Bond: The Authorized Biography of 007'', gives Bond a birth date on 11 November 1920, while a study by John Griswold puts the date at 11 November 1921.
American conservative critics, particularly in the 1960s and 1970s, saw Bond as a nihilistic, hedonistic, and amoral character that challenged family values.
''The Moneypenny Diaries'' are a trilogy of novels chronicling the life of Miss Moneypenny, M's personal secretary.
''Trigger Mortis'' was released on 8 September 2015.
No'' provided no spy-related gadgets, but a Geiger counter was used; industrial designer Andy Davey observed that the first ever onscreen spy-gadget was the attaché case shown in ''From Russia with Love'', which he described as "a classic 007 product".
By the time he moved on to other, non-Bond related projects in 2002, Benson had written six Bond novels, three novelizations and three short stories.
No'' with his arrangement of the Bond Theme.
He further explained that:
* 2008 ''Devil May Care''
The Bond of the films has driven a number of cars, including the Aston Martin V8 Vantage, during the 1980s, the V12 Vanquish and DBS during the 2000s, as well as the Lotus Esprit; the BMW Z3, BMW 750iL and the BMW Z8.
Niven had been Fleming's preference for the role of Bond.
Although novelizations of two of the Eon Productions Bond films appeared in print, ''James Bond, The Spy Who Loved Me'' and ''James Bond and Moonraker'', both written by screenwriter Christopher Wood, the series of novels did not continue until the 1980s.
Following the release of the film ''Dr.
* 2009 "A Hard Man to Kill" (short story)
On 24 May 2008 BBC Radio 4 broadcast an adaptation of ''Dr.
Several comic book adaptations of the James Bond films have been published through the years: at the time of ''Dr.
* 2011 ''Carte Blanche''
* 1991 ''The Man from Barbarossa''
Other critics claim that 21st century Bond movies reflect imperial nostalgia.
Boothroyd suggested that Bond should swap his Beretta for a Walther PPK 7.65mm and this exchange of arms made it to ''Dr.
* 1999 "Midsummer Night's Doom" (short story)
A year later another new version was released for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 under the title ''GoldenEye 007: Reloaded''.
The 2005 American Film Institute's '100 Years' series recognised the character of James Bond himself as the third greatest film hero.
In 1973 a BBC documentary ''Omnibus: The British Hero'' featured Christopher Cazenove playing a number of such title characters (e.g.
After Bond's car was written off by Hugo Drax in ''Moonraker'', Fleming gave Bond a Mark II Continental Bentley, which he used in the remaining books of the series.
Gardner moved the Bond series into the 1980s, although he retained the ages of the characters as they were when Fleming had left them.
Television also saw the effect of Bond films, with the NBC series ''The Man from U.N.C.L.E.
A new version of ''GoldenEye 007'' featuring Daniel Craig was released exclusively for the Nintendo Wii and a handheld version for the Nintendo DS in November 2010.
In 2006 Electronic Arts announced a game based on then-upcoming film ''Casino Royale'': the game was cancelled because it would not be ready by the film's release in November of that year.
* 2002 ''Die Another Day'' (novelization)
No'' in 1962, with 22 secret agent films released in 1966 alone attempting to capitalise on the Bond franchise's popularity and success.
Additionally Charlie Higson wrote a series on a young James Bond, and Kate Westbrook wrote three novels based on the diaries of a recurring series character, Moneypenny.
also moved onto the cinema screen, with eight films released: all were testaments to Bond's prominence in popular culture.
* 1995 ''GoldenEye'' (novelization)
The eponymous hero of the series was what academic Jeremy Packer called an "anti-Bond", or what Christoph Lindner calls "the thinking man's Bond".
In 1967 ''Casino Royale'' was adapted into a parody Bond film starring David Niven as Sir James Bond and Ursula Andress as Vesper Lynd.
* 1966 ''Octopussy and The Living Daylights'' (short stories)
The first strip, ''Casino Royale'' was published from 7 July 1958 to 13 December 1958 and was written by Anthony Hern and illustrated by John McLusky.
He was also placed at number 11 on a similar list by ''Empire'' and as the fifth greatest movie character of all time by ''Premiere''.
Cape finally published it in 1953 on the recommendation of Fleming's older brother Peter, an established travel writer.
In ''Tomorrow Never Dies'' and the two subsequent films, Bond's main weapon was the Walther P99 semi-automatic pistol.
On 26 September 2013 ''Solo'', written by William Boyd, was published, set in 1969.
Among those types were his brother, Peter, who had been involved in behind-the-lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war.
* 1997 "Blast From the Past" (short story)
In November 2005, Electronic Arts released a video game adaptation of ''007: From Russia with Love'', which involved Sean Connery's image and voice-over for Bond.
No'' that the "signature introduction would become the most famous and loved film line ever".
In October 2012 ''007 Legends'' was released, which featured one mission from each of the Bond actors of the Eon Productions' series.
After initial reluctance, Fleming, who felt the strips would lack the quality of his writing, agreed.
No'' and ''From Russia with Love'' had an effect on the novel ''The Man with the Golden Gun'', through the increased number of devices used in Fleming's final story.
A third volume, subtitled ''Final Fling'' was released on 1 May 2008.
The films are the longest continually running and the third-highest-grossing film series to date, which started in 1962 with ''Dr.
The BBC have adapted five of the Fleming novels for broadcast: in 1990 ''You Only Live Twice'' was adapted into a 90-minute radio play for BBC Radio 4 with Michael Jayston playing James Bond.
Fleming, a keen birdwatcher himself, had a copy of Bond's guide and he later explained to the ornithologist's wife that "It struck me that this brief, unromantic, Anglo-Saxon and yet very masculine name was just what I needed, and so a second James Bond was born".
* 2007 ''Hurricane Gold''
To aid the ''Daily Express'' in illustrating Bond, Fleming commissioned an artist to create a sketch of how he believed James Bond looked.
On another occasion, Fleming said: "I wanted the simplest, dullest, plainest-sounding name I could find, 'James Bond' was much better than something more interesting, like 'Peregrine Carruthers'.
* 1982 ''For Special Services''
No'''s release in October 1962, a comic book adaptation of the screenplay, written by Norman J. Nodel, was published in Britain as part of the ''Classics Illustrated'' anthology series.
* 1954 ''Live and Let Die''
No'' in 1962, the line "Bond&nbsp;... James Bond", became a catch phrase that entered the lexicon of Western popular culture: writers Cork and Scivally said of the introduction in ''Dr.
Left-leaning observers often accuse Bond novels and films of misogyny and sexism.
* 1986 ''Nobody Lives for Ever''
In 2012 the novel ''From Russia, with Love'' was dramatized for Radio 4; it featured a full cast again starring Stephens as Bond.
Bond's tastes are also often taken from Fleming's own as was his behaviour, with Bond's love of golf and gambling mirroring Fleming's own.
It is estimated that since ''Dr.
The production was repeated a number of times between 2008 and 2011.
New Bond stories were also drawn up and published from 1989 onwards through Marvel, Eclipse Comics and Dark Horse Comics.
After Fleming's death a continuation novel, ''Colonel Sun'', was written by Kingsley Amis (as Robert Markham) and published in 1968.
It was also one of the earliest comics to be censored on racial grounds (some skin tones and dialogue were changed for the American market).
Bond also used a variety of rifles, including the Savage Model 99 in "For Your Eyes Only" and a Winchester .308 target rifle in "The Living Daylights".
In May 2014 Stephens again played Bond, in ''On Her Majesty's Secret Service'', with Alfred Molina as Blofeld, and Joanna Lumley as Irma Bunt.
Aside from Fleming's brother, a number of others also provided some aspects of Bond's make up, including Conrad O'Brien-ffrench, Patrick Dalzel-Job and Bill "Biffy" Dunderdale.
Other important elements which run through most of the films include Bond's cars, his guns, and the gadgets with which he is supplied by Q Branch.
In 1997 the Sony Corporation acquired all or some of McClory's rights in an undisclosed deal, which were then subsequently acquired by MGM, whilst on 4 December 1997, MGM announced that the company had purchased the rights to ''Never Say Never Again'' from Taliafilm.
