Cagney named it Verney Farm, taking the first syllable from Billie's maiden name and the second from his own surname.
While Cagney was in New York, his brother, who had effectively become his agent, angled for a substantial pay raise and more personal freedom for his brother.
After two weeks in the hospital, Zimmermann became his full-time caregiver, traveling with Billie Vernon and him wherever they went.
Cagney made a rare TV appearance in the lead role of the movie ''Terrible Joe Moran'' in 1984.
After the stroke, Cagney was no longer able to undertake many of his favorite pastimes, including horseback riding and dancing, and as he became more depressed, he even gave up painting.
He became one of Hollywood's biggest stars and one of Warner Bros.' biggest contracts.
He secured several other roles, receiving good notices, before landing the lead in the 1929 play ''Penny Arcade''.
The success of ''The Public Enemy'' and ''Blonde Crazy'' forced Warner Bros.' hand.
''Pitter Patter'' was not hugely successful, but it did well enough to run for 32 weeks, enabling Cagney to join the vaudeville circuit.
Cagney Productions, which shared the production credit with Robert Montgomery's company, made a brief return, though in name only.
It was agreed so we put in all those fits and headaches."
Al Jolson, sensing film potential, bought the rights for $20,000.
Cinema had changed in the 10 years since Walsh last directed Cagney (in ''The Strawberry Blonde''), and the actor's portrayal of gangsters had also changed.
Filming began the day after the attack on Pearl Harbor, and the cast and crew worked in a "patriotic frenzy" as the United States' involvement in World War II gave the cast and crew a feeling that "they might be sending the last message from the free world", according to actress Rosemary DeCamp.
He spent several weeks touring the US, entertaining troops with vaudeville routines and scenes from ''Yankee Doodle Dandy''.
Cagney again received good reviews; Graham Greene stated, "Mr. Cagney, of the bull-calf brow, is as always a superb and witty actor".
''The Roaring Twenties'' was the last film in which Cagney's character's violence was explained by poor upbringing, or his environment, as was the case in ''The Public Enemy''.
Cagney was given a $500-a-week, three-week contract.
They cast him in the comedy ''Blonde Crazy'', again opposite Blondell.
I said 'I don't give a shit what you tell him, I'm not going to say that line.'"
He later recalled how he was able to shed his own natural shy persona when he stepped onto the stage: "For there I am not myself.
It is one of the quietest, most reflective, subtlest jobs that Mr. Cagney has ever done."
(1932), ''Angels with Dirty Faces'' (1938), and ''White Heat'' (1949), and was typecast or limited by this view earlier in his career.
His next notable film was 1934's ''Here Comes the Navy'', which paired him with Pat O'Brien for the first time.
I certainly lost all consciousness of him when I put on skirts, wig, paint, powder, feathers and spangles."
He took a role in the Guild's fight against the Mafia, which had begun to take an active interest in the movie industry.
Cagney held a variety of jobs early in his life, giving all his earnings to his family: junior architect, copy boy for ''The New York Sun'', book custodian at the New York Public Library, bellhop, draughtsman, and night doorkeeper.
While the major studios were producing patriotic war movies, Cagney was determined to continue dispelling his tough-guy image, so he produced a movie that was a "complete and exhilarating exposition of the Cagney 'alter-ego' on film".
Cagney played Martin "Moe the Gimp" Snyder, a lame Jewish-American gangster from Chicago, a part Spencer Tracy had turned down.
He said to a journalist, "It's what the people want me to do.
Vernon was in the chorus line of the show, and with help from the Actors’ Equity Association, Cagney understudied Tracy on the Broadway show, providing them with a desperately needed steady income.
He engaged in amateur boxing, and was a runner-up for the New York State lightweight title.
The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards and won three, including Cagney's for Best Actor.
It is unclear whether this cowardice is real or just feigned for the Kids' benefit.
They also decided to dub his impaired speech, using the impersonator Rich Little.
The ruse proved so successful that when Spencer Tracy came to visit, his taxi driver refused to drive up to the house, saying, "I hear they shoot!"
Encouraged by his wife and Zimmermann, Cagney accepted an offer from the director Miloš Forman to star in a small but pivotal role in the film ''Ragtime'' (1981).
The family moved twice while he was still young, first to East 79th Street, and then to East 96th Street.
She died on August 11, 2004.
He is best remembered for playing multifaceted tough guys in movies such as ''The Public Enemy'' (1931), ''Taxi!''
Insisting on doing his own stunts, Cagney required judo training from expert Ken Kuniyuki and Jack Halloran, a former policeman.
The former had Cagney in a comedy role, and received mixed reviews.
From that point on, violence was attached to mania, as in ''White Heat''.
These roles led to a part in George Kelly's ''Maggie the Magnificent'', a play the critics disliked, though they liked Cagney's performance.
Cagney was born on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City.
Cagney loved that no concrete roads surrounded the property, only dirt tracks.
The first version of the National Labor Relations Act was passed in 1935 and growing tensions between labor and management fueled the movement.
Cagney appreciated the $35 a week he was paid, which he called "a mountain of money for me in those worrisome days."
Cagney was the second of seven children, two of whom died within months of birth.
As Cagney recalled, "We shot it in twenty days, and that was long enough for me.
As with ''Pitter Patter'', Cagney went to the audition with little confidence he would get the part.
Cagney became president of the Screen Actors Guild in 1942 for a two-year term.
Later in 1957, Cagney ventured behind the camera for the first and only time to direct ''Short Cut to Hell'', a remake of the 1941 Alan Ladd film ''This Gun for Hire'', which in turn was based on the Graham Greene novel ''A Gun for Sale''.
Therefore, Florence James has the unique distinction of being the first director to put him on a stage.
The film was a success, and ''The New York Times''' Bosley Crowther singled its star out for praise: "It is Mr. Cagney's performance, controlled to the last detail, that gives life and strong, heroic stature to the principal figure in the film.
I never dreamed it would be shown in the movie.
I refused to say it.
Had Cagney's mother had her way, his stage career would have ended when he quit ''Every Sailor'' after two months; proud as she was of his performance, she preferred that he get an education.
Cagney received assurances from Wilder that the script was balanced.
He had no experience with drama at this point.
The red-haired, blue-eyed Cagney graduated from Stuyvesant High School in New York City, in 1918, and attended Columbia College of Columbia University, where he intended to major in Art.
The wartime spy film was a success, and Cagney was keen to begin production of his new project, an adaptation of William Saroyan's Broadway play ''The Time of Your Life''.
In 1935, Cagney was listed as one of the Top Ten Moneymakers in Hollywood for the first time, and was cast more frequently in nongangster roles; he played a lawyer who joins the FBI in ''G-Men'', and he also took on his first, and only, Shakespearean role, as top-billed Nick Bottom in ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' alongside Joe E. Brown as Flute and Mickey Rooney as Puck
However, by the time of the 1948 election, he had become disillusioned with Harry S. Truman, and voted for Thomas E. Dewey, his first non-Democratic vote.
He made up his mind that he would get a job doing something else."
Meanwhile, while being represented by his brother William in court, Cagney went back to New York to search for a country property where he could indulge his passion for farming.
Cagney was a very private man, and while he was very willing to give the press opportunities for photographs, he generally spent his time out of the public eye.
While revisiting his old haunts, he runs into his old friend Jerry Connolly, played by O'Brien, who is now a priest concerned about the Dead End Kids' futures, particularly as they idolize Rocky.
Notable for a famous scene in which Cagney pushes a grapefruit against Mae Clark's face, the film thrust him into the spotlight.
Day herself was full of praise for Cagney, stating that he was "the most professional actor I've ever known.
Cagney himself acknowledged the importance of the walkout for other actors in breaking the dominance of the studio system.
Filmmakers have mimicked it many times, such as Lee Marvin's character splashing scalding coffee in the face of Gloria Grahame in ''The Big Heat''.
In 1920, Cagney was a member of the chorus for the show ''Pitter Patter'', where he met Frances Willard "Billie" Vernon.
The "Merriam tax" was an underhanded method of funneling studio funds to politicians; during the 1934 Californian gubernatorial campaign, the studio executives would 'tax' their actors, automatically taking a day's pay from their biggest-earners, ultimately sending nearly half a million dollars to the gubernatorial campaign of Frank Merriam.
''Night Nurse'' was actually released three months after ''The Public Enemy'', and Gable punched Stanwyck in the film, knocking her character unconscious, then carried her across the hall, where she woke up later.
Cagney had worked with Ford before on ''What Price Glory?
In his opening scene, Cagney spoke fluent Yiddish, a language he had picked up during his boyhood in New York City.
Cagney, however, walked out and came back to a better contract.
This somewhat exaggerated view was enhanced by his public contractual wranglings with Warner Bros. at the time, his joining of the Screen Actors Guild in 1933, and his involvement in the revolt against the so-called "Merriam tax".
In 1955, having shot three films, Cagney bought a  farm in Stanfordville, Dutchess County, New York, for $100,000.
Cagney saw this role (and ''Women Go on Forever'') as significant because of the talented directors he met.
There is no braggadocio in it, no straining for bold or sharp effects.
They were directors who could play all the parts in the play better than the actors cast for them."
He signed and sold only one painting, purchased by Johnny Carson to benefit a charity.
He also threatened to quit Hollywood and go back to Columbia University to follow his brothers into medicine.
One of the few positive aspects was his friendship with Pamela Tiffin, to whom he gave acting guidance, including the secret that he had learned over his career: "You walk in, plant yourself squarely on both feet, look the other fella in the eye, and tell the truth."
In fact, it was one of the worst experiences of his long career.
Cagney starred as Rocky Sullivan, a gangster fresh out of jail and looking for his former associate, played by Humphrey Bogart, who owes him money.
Retitled ''Sinners' Holiday'', the film was released in 1930.
Some day, though, I'd like to make another movie that kids could go and see."
He was always 'real'.
While compared unfavorably to ''White Heat'' by critics, it was fairly successful at the box office, with $500,000 going straight to Cagney Productions' bankers to pay off their losses.
Playing opposite Cagney in ''Maggie the Magnificent'' was Joan Blondell, who starred again with him a few months later in Marie Baumer's new play ''Penny Arcade''.
Cagney was accused of being a communist sympathizer in 1934, and again in 1940.
In his first professional acting performance, Cagney danced costumed as a woman in the chorus line of the revue ''Every Sailor'', in 1919.
Cagney's two films of 1938, ''Boy Meets Girl'' and ''Angels with Dirty Faces'', both costarred Pat O'Brien.
After rave reviews, Warner Bros. signed him for an initial $500-a-week, three-week contract to reprise his role; this was quickly extended to a seven-year contract.
Known for his consistently energetic performances, distinctive vocal style, and deadpan comic timing, he won acclaim and major awards for a wide variety of performances.
Warner Bros. refused to cave in this time, and suspended Cagney.
During World War II, Cagney raised money for war bonds by taking part in racing exhibitions at the Roosevelt Raceway and selling seats for the premiere of ''Yankee Doodle Dandy''.
The renowned painter Sergei Bongart taught Cagney in his later life and owned two of Cagney's works.
The show's management insisted that he copy Broadway lead Lee Tracy's performance, despite Cagney's discomfort in doing so, but the day before the show sailed for England, they decided to replace him.
He felt he had worked too many years inside studios, and combined with a visit to Dachau concentration camp during filming, he decided that he had had enough, and retired afterward.
Cagney described the script as "that extremely rare thing, the perfect script".
Cagney Jr. died from a heart attack on January 27, 1984 in Washington, DC, two years before his father's death.
He expanded it over the years to .
Cagney alleged that, having failed to scare off the Guild and him, they sent a hitman to kill him by dropping a heavy light onto his head.
Fanzines in the 1930s, however, described his politics as "radical".
Warner Brothers′ succession of gangster movie hits, in particular ''Little Caesar'' with Edward G. Robinson, culminated with the 1931 film ''The Public Enemy''.
Cagney (as well as Jean Harlow) publicly refused to pay and Cagney even threatened that, if the studios took a day's pay for Merriam's campaign, he would give a week's pay to Upton Sinclair, Merriam's opponent in the race.
Tracy had to go the rest of the way on foot.
He also became involved in a "liberal group...with a leftist slant," along with Ronald Reagan.
After a messy shootout, Sullivan is eventually captured by the police and sentenced to death in the electric chair.
This time, he slapped co-star Evalyn Knapp.
Critics praised the film.
The actor made it clear to reporters afterwards that television was not his medium: "I do enough work in movies.
As Vernon recalled, "Jimmy said that it was all over.
Upon hearing of the rumor of a hit, George Raft made a call, and the hit was supposedly canceled.
Lemmon was shocked; he had done it on a whim, and thought no one else had noticed.
Burns Mantle wrote that it "...contained the most honest acting now to be seen in New York."
His father, James Francis Cagney, Sr., was of Irish descent.
The two stars got on well; they had both previously worked in vaudeville, and they entertained the cast and crew off-screen by singing and dancing.
He turned it into a working farm, selling some of the dairy cattle and replacing them with beef cattle.
In his acceptance speech, Cagney lightly chastised the impressionist Frank Gorshin, saying, "Oh, Frankie, just in passing, I never said 'MMMMmmmm, you dirty rat!'
Cagney had long been told by friends that he would make an excellent director, so when he was approached by his friend, producer A. C. Lyles, he instinctively said yes.
Charlton Heston opened the ceremony, and Frank Sinatra introduced Cagney.
Cagney had concerns with the script, remembering back 23 years to ''Boy Meets Girl'', in which scenes were reshot to try to make them funnier by speeding up the pacing, with the opposite effect.
"He saw the film repeatedly just to see that scene, and was often shushed by angry patrons when his delighted laughter got too loud."
A paid première, with seats ranging from $25 to $25,000, raised $5,750,000 for war bonds for the US treasury.
Afterward, he joined a number of companies as a performer in a variety of roles.
He worked for an independent film company for a year while the suit was being settled—and established his own production company, Cagney Productions, in 1942, before returning to Warner four years later.
Among the chorus line performers was 16-year-old Frances Willard "Billie" Vernon, whom he married in 1922.
Cagney himself had the idea of playing Jarrett as psychotic; he later stated, "it was essentially a cheapie one-two-three-four kind of thing, so I suggested we make him nuts.
In the film, he portrays Harry Delano, a tough guy who becomes a killer, but generates sympathy because of his unfortunate upbringing.
He later recalled an argument he had with director John Adolfi about a line: "There was a line in the show where I was supposed to be crying on my mother's breast...
Cagney secured the lead role in the 1926–27 season West End production of ''Broadway'' by George Abbott.
In 1938, he received his first Academy Award for Best Actor nomination, for ''Angels with Dirty Faces'', for his subtle portrayal of the tough guy/man-child Rocky Sullivan.
He refused to give interviews to the British press, preferring to concentrate on rehearsals and performances.
The line was 'I'm your baby, ain't I?'
Cagney also became involved in political causes, and in 1936, agreed to sponsor the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League.
The courts eventually decided the Warner Bros. lawsuit in Cagney's favor.
Warner Bros. refused, so Cagney once again walked out.
Cagney, though, insisted that Fred Astaire had been the first choice, but turned it down.
Cagney secured his first significant nondancing role in 1925.
He also took German and joined the Student Army Training Corps but dropped out after one semester, returning home upon the death of his father during the 1918 flu pandemic.
He exited retirement, 20 years later, for a part in the movie ''Ragtime'' (1981), mainly to aid his recovery from a stroke.
Cagney's portrayal of Cody Jarrett in the 1949 film ''White Heat'' is one of his most memorable.
'', and they had gotten along fairly well.
", a line commonly used by impressionists.
While negotiating the rights for his third independent film, Cagney starred in 20th Century Fox's ''13 Rue Madeleine'' for $300,000 for two months of work.
The show received rave reviews and was followed by ''Grand Street Follies of 1929''.
Unknown to Cagney, the League was in fact a front organization for the Communist International (Comintern), which sought to enlist support for the Soviet Union and its foreign policies.
They were not successful at first; the dance studio Cagney set up had few clients and folded, and Vernon  and he toured the studios, but garnered no interest.
By 1980, Cagney was contributing financially to the Republican Party, supporting his friend Ronald Reagan's bid for the presidency in the 1980 election.
While Cagney was working for the New York Public Library, he met Florence James, who helped him into an acting career.
He played a young tough guy in the three-act play ''Outside Looking In'' by Maxwell Anderson, earning $200 a week.
A wartime play in which the chorus was made up of servicemen dressed as women, it was originally titled ''Every Woman''.
They married on September 28, 1922, and the marriage lasted until his death in 1986.
Many critics of the time and since have declared it Cagney's best film, drawing parallels between Cohan and Cagney; they both began their careers in vaudeville, struggled for years before reaching the peak of their profession, were surrounded with family and married early, and both had a wife who was happy to sit back while he went on to stardom.
The Cagneys had hoped that an action film would appeal more to audiences, but it fared worse at the box office than ''Johnny Come Lately''.
When the film was released, Snyder reportedly asked how Cagney had so accurately copied his limp, but Cagney himself insisted he had not, having based it on personal observation of other people when they limped: "What I did was very simple.
So keen was the studio to follow up the success of Robinson's ''Little Caesar'' that Cagney actually shot ''Smart Money'' (for which he received second billing in a supporting role) at the same time as ''The Public Enemy''.
– was voted the 18th-greatest movie line by the American Film Institute.
So many Hollywood stars attended—said to be more than for any event in history—that one columnist wrote at the time that a bomb in the dining room would have ended the movie industry.
Cagney's health was fragile and more strokes had confined him to a wheelchair, but the producers worked his real-life mobility problem into the story.
He had done what many thought unthinkable: taking on the studios and winning.
And you never needed drops to make your eyes shine when Jimmy was on the set."
According to Cagney, the film "made money but it was no great winner", and reviews varied from excellent (''Time'') to poor (New York's ''PM'').
Cagney cut short his imminent tirade, saying "When I started this picture, you said that we would tangle asses before this was over.
The closest he got to it in the film was, "Come out and take it, you dirty, yellow-bellied rat, or I'll give it to you through the door!"
Cagney had demonstrated the power of the walkout in keeping the studios to their word.
In September 1942, he was elected president of the Screen Actors Guild.
The film was swiftly followed by ''The Crowd Roars'' and ''Winner Take All''.
However, after the initial rushes, each was reassigned the other's part.
This role of the sympathetic "bad" guy was a recurring character type for Cagney throughout his career.
Some of the extras on set actually became terrified of the actor because of his violent portrayal.
The next day, Cagney was slightly late on set, incensing Ford.
Cohan was given a private showing of the film shortly before his death, and thanked Cagney "for a wonderful job".
His coaches encouraged him to turn professional, but his mother would not allow it.
Cagney himself refused to say, insisting he liked the ambiguity.
What I actually did say was 'Judy, Judy, Judy!
Warner Bros. had allowed Cagney his change of pace, but was keen to get him back to playing tough guys, which was more lucrative.
Cagney was cleared by U.S. Representative Martin Dies, Jr., on the House Un-American Activities Committee.
His biographers disagree as to the actual location: either on the corner of Avenue D and 8th Street or in a top-floor apartment at 391 East Eighth.
While the critics panned ''Penny Arcade'', they praised Cagney and Blondell.
For Cagney's next film, he traveled to Ireland for ''Shake Hands with the Devil'', directed by Michael Anderson.
Cagney thought that Murphy had the looks to be a movie star, and suggested that he come to Hollywood.
Cagney's career began winding down, and he made only one film in 1960, the critically acclaimed ''The Gallant Hours'', in which he played Admiral William F. "Bull" Halsey.
In his acceptance speech, Cagney said, "I've always maintained that in this business, you're only as good as the other fellow thinks you are.
Cagney's next film was ''Mister Roberts'', directed by John Ford and slated to star Spencer Tracy.
While Cagney was not nominated, he had thoroughly enjoyed the production.
He also drew caricatures of the cast and crew.
Cagney himself was offered grapefruit in almost every restaurant he visited for years after, and Clarke claimed it virtually ruined her career because of typecasting.
The house was rather run-down and ramshackle, and Billie was initially reluctant to move in, but soon came to love the place, as well.
Cagney had hoped to spend some time tracing his Irish ancestry, but time constraints and poor weather meant that he was unable to do so.
Cagney was diagnosed with glaucoma and began taking eye drops, but continued to have vision problems.
Cagney's frequent co-star, Pat O'Brien, appeared with him on the British chat show ''Parkinson'' in the early 1980s and they both made a surprise appearance at the Queen Mother's command birthday performance at the London Palladium in 1980.
Ford walked away, and they had no more problems, though Cagney never particularly liked Ford.
Cagney received good reviews, and immediately starred in another gangster role in ''The Doorway to Hell''.
He later said, "I would have kicked his brains out.
