The stadium has played host to one women's test match where India lost to West Indies and one Women's One Day International where India beat New Zealand in 1985.
Horticulture plays a vital role in the economic development of the state.
The ''Dumhal'' is a famous dance in the Kashmir Valley, performed by men of the Wattal region.
File:Tso Kiagar Lake Ladakh.jpg|Lake Tso Moriri
of the University of Illinois on the basis that the language is spoken as a native language by less than 1% of the population, and has rendered Kashmiri, spoken by 53% of the population, into a functional "minority language," effectively restricting its use to home and family.
In the late 19th- and early 20th centuries, although some boundary agreements were signed between Great Britain, Tibet, Afghanistan and Russia over the northern borders of Kashmir, China never accepted these agreements, and the official Chinese position did not change with the communist revolution in 1949.
File:Kashmir top.jpg|Topographic map of J&K (Kashmir valley, Jammu region and Ladakh region are visible by altitude)
Chanting in Sanskrit and Tibetan language forms an integral part of Ladakh's Buddhist lifestyle.
However, the holy shrines of Jammu and the Buddhist monasteries of Ladakh continue to remain popular pilgrimage and tourism destinations.
The Maharaja initially fought back but appealed for assistance to the India, who agreed on the condition that the ruler accede to India.
The security forces say the unidentified dead are militants who may have originally come from outside India.
Minar Pimple, Senior Director of Global Operations at Amnesty International states.Till now, not a single member of the security forces deployed in the state has been tried for human rights violations in a civilian court.
After the 1987 state legislative assembly election, some of the results were disputed.
* Another reason for the abandonment of the referendum is because demographic changes after 1947 have been effected in Pakistan-administered Kashmir, as generations of Pakistani individuals non-native to the region have been allowed to take residence in Pakistan-administered Kashmir.
Since 1995, Malik has renounced the use of violence and calls for strictly peaceful methods to resolve the dispute.
The contribution should be significantly greater now as the numbers of Indian visitors have increased considerably.
The Kashmir valley is known for its sericulture and cold-water fisheries.
Bhau Fort in Jammu city is the major attraction for the tourists visiting that city.
Influential political parties include the Jammu & Kashmir National Conference (NC), the Indian National Congress (INC), the Jammu and Kashmir People's Democratic Party (PDP), the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and other smaller regional parties.
Tourists from across India visit Jammu in a pilgrimage to Mata Vaishno Devi.
Much of the northeast of the state is covered by the Karakoram-West Tibetan Plateau alpine steppe.
Of these, 25 seats were reserved for the areas of Jammu and Kashmir State that came under Pakistani occupation; this was reduced to 24 after the 12th amendment of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir:
Cable car is used as ski lift
* A statement from the British Cabinet Mission in India in 1946 confirmed that Jammu and Kashmir, a princely state at the time of partition, was a sovereign territory, and Article 7 of the Indian Independence Act of 1947 dealing with lapse of suzerainty of the British Crown over the Indian states reaffirmed this fact, so the Kashmiri people had a vested right of self-determination from the time of independence.
However, Urdu written in the Persian script is the official language of the state.
The use of Urdu as the official language of Jammu and Kashmir has also been criticised by Rajeshwari V. Pandharipande
Ladakh is famous for its unique Indo-Tibetan culture.
As a consequence, houseboats became popular among those who were unable to purchase land in the Valley and has now become an integral part of the Kashmiri lifestyle.
Amnesty International has strongly condemned the implementation of this Act that grants virtual immunity to security forces from prosecution.
*An estimated 50,000-150,000 Kashmiri Muslims and 150,000-300,000 Kashmiri Pandits have been internally displaced due to the conflict.
Annual precipitation is only around 100&nbsp;mm (4&nbsp;inches) per year and humidity is very low.
However, the predominant political movement in the Valley of Kashmir (Jammu and Kashmir National Conference) was secular, and was allied with the Indian National Congress since the 1930s.
However, industrial development in the state faces several major constraints including extreme mountainous landscape and power shortage.
It is expected to increase tourism and travel to Kashmir.
Maulana Azad Stadium is a stadium in Jammu and is one of the home venues for the Jammu and Kashmir cricket team.
In the end, no withdrawal was ever carried out, India insisting that Pakistan had to withdraw first, and Pakistan contending that there was no guarantee that India would withdraw afterwards.
The 2009 edition of the Freedom in the World (report) by the US-based NGO Freedom House rated Jammu and Kashmir as "Partly Free", while in comparison, the same report rated Pakistan-administered Kashmir as "Not Free."
In 1990, an Armed Forces Act, which gives special powers to the Indian security forces, has been enforced in Jammu and Kashmir.
Designed by the then ruling National Conference, the flag of Jammu and Kashmir features a plough on a red background symbolising labour; it replaced the Maharaja's state flag.
No agreement could be reached between the two countries on the process of demilitarisation.
*The Kashmiri's right of self-determination was further secured by the progressive development of customary international law in relation to this collective freedom.
Non-Kashmiri Muslim ethnic groups (Paharis, Gujjars and Bakarwalas), who dominate areas along the Line of Control, have remained indifferent to the separatist campaign.
A part of the erstwhile Princely State of Kashmir and Jammu, the region is the subject of a territorial conflict among China, India and Pakistan.
This lack of accountability has in turn facilitated other serious abuses
* 525,000 refugees from Indian-administered portions of the state (mainly the Jammu province) migrated to Pakistan and Azad Kashmir in 1947–48.
Furthermore, India alleges that in Jammu & Kashmir state of India, the demographics of the Kashmir Valley have been altered after separatist militants coerced 250,000 Kashmiri Hindus to leave the region.
Rising into the mountains, the broadleaf forests grade into western Himalayan subalpine conifer forests.
The region of Kashmir is known for its horticulture industry and is the wealthiest region in the state.
Maharaja Hari Singh signed the Instrument of Accession on 26 October 1947 in return for military aid and assistance, which was accepted by the Governor General the next day.
In 2003, then Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf announced that Pakistan was willing to back off from demand for UN resolutions for Kashmir.
Jammu and Kashmir had a Muslim majority (77% Muslim by the previous census in 1941).
So many in India too had expectations that Kashmir would join India.
Around the highest elevations, there is no vegetation, simply rock and ice.
They also say that many of the missing people have crossed into Pakistan-administered Kashmir to engage in militancy.
In 1970, the state government of Jammu and Kashmir established its own education board and university.
Jammu and Kashmir  is one of India's two administrative divisions (the other being the Union territory of Lakshadweep which is overwhelmingly Muslim) with a Muslim majority population.
Many speakers of these languages use Urdu or English as a second language.
'''Jammu and Kashmir'''
Similar to Gujjars, ''Gaddis'' are primarily herdsmen who hail from the Chamba region in Himachal Pradesh.
It has a mere 4% incidence of poverty, one of the lowest in the country.
In the hot season, Jammu city is very hot and can reach up to 40&nbsp;°C (104&nbsp;°F) whilst in July and August, very heavy though erratic rainfall occurs with monthly extremes of up to 650 millimetres (25.5&nbsp;inches).
* India has consistently told that UN resolutions are now completely irrelevant and Kashmir dispute is a bilateral issue and it has to be resolved under 1972 Simla Agreement and 1999 Lahore Declaration.
Jammu and Kashmir has an international border with China in the north and east, and the Line of Control separates it from the Pakistani-administered territories of Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan in the west and northwest respectively.
In addition, there are ''Kendriya Vidyalayas'' (run by the Government of India) and Indian Army schools that impart secondary school education.
Stadium has hosted home games for Jammu and Kashmir in domestic tournaments since 1966.
The Constitution of India does not allow people from regions other than Jammu and Kashmir to purchase land in the state.
It passed a resolution in August 1948 proposing a three-part process.
According to political scientist Alexander Evans, approximately 99% of the total population of 160,000–170,000 of Kashmiri Brahmins, also called Kashmiri Pandits, (''i.e.''
After a delimitation in 1988, the total number of seats increased to 111, of which 87 were within Indian-administered territory.
According to an estimate by the Central Intelligence Agency, about 300,000 Kashmiri Pandits from the entire state of Jammu and Kashmir have been internally displaced due to the ongoing violence.
Every year, thousands of Hindu pilgrims visit holy shrines of Vaishno Devi and Amarnath, which has had significant impact on the state's economy.
It is located mostly in the Himalayan mountains, and shares borders with the states of Himachal Pradesh and Punjab to the south.
With the impending independence of India, the British announced that the British Paramountcy over the princely states would end, and the states were free to choose between the new Dominions of India and Pakistan or to remain independent.
The Government of India has been keen to economically integrate Jammu and Kashmir with the rest of India.
State's Gross Domestic Product (in million INR)
The people of Ladakh are of Indo-Tibetan origin, while the southern area of Jammu includes many communities tracing their ancestry to the nearby Indian states of Haryana and Punjab, as well as the city of Delhi.
The tourism economy in the Kashmir valley was worst hit.
The Maharaja was faced with indecision.
Like all the states of India, Jammu and Kashmir has a multi-party democratic system of governance with a bicameral legislature.
Known for their semi-nomadic lifestyle, Gujjars are also found in large numbers in the Kashmir Valley.
In September, rainfall declines, and by October conditions are hot but extremely dry, with minimal rainfall and temperatures of around 29&nbsp;°C (84&nbsp;°F).
Annual masked dance festivals, weaving and archery are an important part of traditional life in Ladakh.
Parts of the region were hit by militants, but violence has ebbed there, along with the Valley, after India and Pakistan started a peace process in 2004.
Jammu and Kashmir is home to several Himalayan glaciers.
Hindustani is widely understood by peoples.
By 1956–57 they had completed a military road through the Aksai Chin area to provide better communication between Xinjiang and western Tibet.
Ladakh Marathon is held at Leh, is the marathon recognised by Association of International Marathons and Distance Races.
The western districts of the former princely state known as Azad Kashmir and the northern territories known as Gilgit-Baltistan have been under Pakistani control since 1947.
This resulted in a split in which Bitta Karate, Salim Nanhaji, and other senior comrades joined Farooq Papa.
The Katra-Banihal section is under construction.
Indians from other states cannot purchase land or property in the state.
Yasin Malik, a leader of one faction of the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front, was one of the Kashmiris to organise militancy in Kashmir, along with Ashfaq Majid Wani and Farooq Ahmed Dar (alias Bitta Karate).
About 96.4% of the population of the Kashmir valley are Muslim followed by Hindus (2.45%) and Sikhs (0.98%) and others (0.17%) Shias live in the district of Badgam, where they are a majority.
Along the northeastern flank of the Valley runs the main range of the Himalayas.
Statehood is demanded in Hindu-dominated districts.
Bage-e-Bahu is another tourist destination.
* The popular Kashmiri insurgency which erupted on 1989 demonstrates that the Kashmiri people no longer wish to remain within India.
Gaddis are generally associated with emotive music played on the flute.
The Pahari-speaking people mostly live in and around the Pir Panjal region with some in the northern Kashmir valley.
University-level education is provided by University of Kashmir, University of Jammu, Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology of Srinagar, Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology of Jammu, Islamic University of Science & Technology, Baba Ghulam Shah Badhshah University, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Institution of Technicians and Engineers (Kashmir), Islamia College of Science and Commerce, Srinagar.
All the rivers freeze over and locals make river crossings during this period because their high levels from glacier melt in summer inhibits crossing.
The Himalayas divide the Kashmir valley from Ladakh while the Pir Panjal range, which encloses the valley from the west and the south, separates it from the Great Plains of northern India.
Jammu and Kashmir's economy is predominantly dependent on agriculture and allied activities.
Being held at height of 11,500 feet, it is known as the highest marathon in the world.
Tourism in the Kashmir valley has rebounded in recent years, and in 2009, the state became one of the top tourist destinations of India.
India has control of 60% of the area of the former Princely State of Jammu and Kashmir (Jammu, Kashmir Valley, Ladakh and Siachen Glacier); Pakistan controls 30% of the region (Gilgit–Baltistan and Azad Kashmir).
People adorned with gold and silver ornaments and turquoise headgears throng the streets during Ladakhi festivals.
Because of its closeness to the Arabian Sea, Srinagar receives as much as  of rain from this source, with the wettest months being March to May with around 85 millimetres (3.3&nbsp;inches) per month.
There was indication from the previous INC Government to bring parity with the other states, but this does not seem to have received the required support to pass into law.
Wood from Kashmir is used to make high-quality cricket bats, popularly known as ''Kashmir Willow''.
India and Pakistan fought two further wars in 1965 and 1971.
File:Gulmarg.JPG|View from the Gulmarg slopes.
Following the logic of Partition, many people in Pakistan expected that Kashmir would join Pakistan.
After 2 months of deliberations and president's rule, the BJP and the PDP announced an agreement for a coalition government, and PDP patron Mufti Mohammad Sayeed was sworn-in as CM for a second term, with Nirmal Singh of the BJP sworn-in as deputy CM.
This is handled by Jammu and Kashmir State Board of School Education (abbreviated as JKBOSE).
Kashmir has been noted for its fine arts for centuries, including poetry and handicrafts.
Across from the main Himalaya Range, even the southwest cloudbands break up and the climate of Ladakh and Zanskar is extremely dry and cold.
The women perform the Rouff, another traditional folk dance.
Jammu province region has a 70:30 Hindu-Muslim ratio.
Srinagar has an outdoor stadium namely Bakshi Stadium for hosting football matches.
Notable higher education or research institutes in Jammu and Kashmir include the National Institute of Technology, Srinagar, Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, Srinagar, Government College of Engineering and Technology, Jammu, Government Medical College, Srinagar and Government Medical College, Jammu.
With an average altitude of  above sea-level, the Siachen Glacier is  long making it the longest Himalayan glacier.
After ''Dogras'', ''Gujjars'' form the second-largest ethnic group in Jammu.
In Jammu and Kashmir, the principal spoken languages are Kashmiri, Urdu, Dogri, Punjabi, Pahari, Balti, Ladakhi, Gojri, Shina and Pashto.
* India cites the 1951 elected Constituent assembly of Jammu and Kashmir, which voted in favour of confirming accession to India.
Jammu and Kashmir follows the 10+2 pattern for education of children.
Foreign tourists have been slower to return.
''Kawa'', traditional green tea with spices and almond, is consumed all through the day in the chilly winter climate of Kashmir.
The resulting Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 lasted till the end of 1948.
Additionally, as the language is regarded as a "neutral" and non-native language of the multilingual region, its acceptance was broadly accepted by Kashmiri Muslims.
The Doda district has deposits of high-grade sapphire.
While the Government of India accepted the accession, it added the proviso that it would be submitted to a "reference to the people" after the state is cleared of the invaders, since "only the people, not the Maharaja, could decide where Kashmiris wanted to live."
Following the latter war, the countries reached the Simla Agreement, agreeing on a Line of Control between their respective regions and committing to a peaceful resolution of the dispute through bilateral negotiations.
* The 1948–49 U.N. resolutions can no longer be applied, according to India, because of changes in the original territory, with some parts "having been handed over to China by Pakistan and demographic changes having been effected in Azad Kashmir and the Northern Areas."
A special United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan (UNCIP) was set up to negotiate the withdrawal arrangements as per the Security Council resolution.
The Shia population is estimated to comprise 14% of the state's population.
The situation has become increasingly tense politically in recent years.
India's belated discovery of this road led to border clashes between the two countries that culminated in the Sino-Indian war of October 1962.
In response Pakistan holds that:
China administers 10% (Aksai Chin and Trans-Karakoram Tract) of the state since 1962.
Besides Kashmir, several areas in the Jammu region have a lot of tourist potential as well.
The British government still advises against all travel to Jammu and Kashmir with the exception of the cities of Jammu and Srinagar, travel between these two cities on the Jammu-Srinagar highway, and the region of Ladakh, while Canada excludes the entire region excepting Leh.
China has occupied Aksai Chin since 1962 and, in addition, an adjoining region, the Trans-Karakoram Tract was ceded by Pakistan to China in 1963.
For intermittent periods between 1957, when the state approved its own Constitution, and the death of Sheikh Abdullah in 1982, the state had alternating spells of stability and discontent.
Union territory status has been the key demand of Leh Buddhists for many years.
In recent years, several consumer goods companies have opened manufacturing units in the region.
In March 2001,the then Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan during his visit to India and Pakistan, remarked that Kashmir resolutions are only advisory recommendations and comparing with those on East Timor and Iraq was like comparing apples and oranges, since those resolutions were passed under chapter VII, which make it enforceable by UNSC.
After dominating Kashmir's politics for years, the National Conference's influence waned in 2002, when INC and PDP formed a political alliance and rose to power.
At the time of drafting the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, 100 seats were earmarked for direct elections from territorial constituencies.
The three stripes represent the three distinct administrative divisions of the state, namely Jammu, Valley of Kashmir, and Ladakh.
Since then, the region has seen a prolonged, bloody conflict between separatists and the Indian Army, both of whom have been accused of widespread human rights abuses, including abductions, massacres, rapes and armed robbery.
However, following the unrest in 2008, which included more than 500,000 protesters at a rally on 18 August, secessionist movements gained a boost.
Because of Jammu and Kashmir's wide range of elevations, its biogeography is diverse.
Ladakh is the largest region in the state with over 200,000 people.
File:Zanskar.jpg|River rafting in the Zanskar subdistrict of Kargil
These give way to a broad band of western Himalayan broadleaf forests running from northwest-southeast across the Kashmir Valley.
* In 2007 there have been reports of extrajudicial killings in Indian-administered Kashmir  by Indian security forces while claiming they were caught up in encounters with militants.
The Aksai Chin region in the east, bordering Tibet, has been under Chinese control since 1962.
Kashmiri saffron is very famous and brings the state a handsome amount of foreign exchange.
Maharaja Hari Singh became the ruler of the princely state of Jammu and Kashmir in 1925, and he was the reigning monarch at the conclusion of the British rule in the subcontinent in 1947.
The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) has identified several industrial sectors which can attract investment in the state, and accordingly, it is working with the union and the state government to set up industrial parks and special economic zones.
* Moreover, India alleges that Pakistan failed to fulfill the pre-conditions by withdrawing its troops from the Kashmir region as was required under the same U.N. resolution of 13 August 1948 which discussed the plebiscite.
The language is said to function as a symbol of identity among Muslims of South Asia.
Mata Vaishno Devi is located in the Trikuta Hills, about 40 to 45&nbsp;km from Jammu City.
The state has special autonomy under Article 370 of the Constitution of India.
In the 2014 election, the voter turnout was recorded at 65% - the highest in the history of the state.
Private and public schools are recognised by the board to impart education to students.
File:Nageen Lake .jpg|Nageen Lake
Horticultural produce from the state includes apples, apricots, cherries, pears, plums, almonds and walnuts.
The state is one of the largest recipients of grants from New Delhi, totalling US$812 million per year.
This densely settled and beautiful valley has an average height of  above sea-level but the surrounding Pir Panjal range has an average elevation of .
Government Degree College for Boys Anantnag, Central University of Kashmir located at Ganderbal and Central University of Jammu located at Raya Suchani in the Samba district of Jammu.
Hindu pandits were specifically affected in this region due to their status in the local society.
Above the tree line are found northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows.
Under the power-sharing agreement, INC leader Ghulam Nabi Azad replaced PDP's Mufti Mohammad Sayeed as the Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir in late 2005.
% Buddhist and other
These schools follow the Central Board of Secondary Education pattern.
* United Nations Security Council Resolution 47 on Kashmir was passed by UNSC under chapter VI of UN Charter, which are non binding and have no mandatory enforceability.
Board examinations are conducted for students in class VIII, X and XII.
It was reported that more than a million tourists visited Kashmir in 2011.
In 1989, a widespread popular and armed insurgency started in Kashmir.
The climate of Jammu and Kashmir varies greatly owing to its rugged topography.
File:Mountains near Rohtang Pass, Himachal Pradesh.jpg|Mountains near Rohtang Pass
The Chenab formula was a compromise proposed in the 1960s, in which the Kashmir valley and other Muslim-dominated areas north of the Chenab river would go to Pakistan, and Jammu and other Hindu-dominated regions would go to India.
The city has a golf course named Royal Springs Golf Course, Srinagar located on the banks of Dal lake, which is considered as one of the best golf courses of India.
Human rights organisations have strongly condemned Indian troops for widespread abuses and murder of civilians while accusing these civilians of being militants.
Jammu and Kashmir is the only Indian state to have its own official state flag along with national flag and constitution.
In an attempt to improve the infrastructure in the state, Indian Railways is constructing the ambitious Kashmir Railway project at a cost of more than US$2.5 billion.
Ladakhi food has much in common with Tibetan food, the most prominent foods being thukpa, noodle soup; and tsampa, known in Ladakhi as ''Ngampe'', roasted barley flour.
Jammu's Dogra culture and tradition is very similar to that of neighbouring Punjab and Himachal Pradesh.
The major ethnic groups living in Jammu and Kashmir include Kashmiris, Gujjars/Bakarwals, Paharis, Dogras and Ladakhis.
In this region, almost all above 3,000 metres (9,750&nbsp;ft) above sea level, winters are extremely cold.
In the 2008 Kashmir Elections that were held from 17 November to 24 December, the National Conference party and the Congress party together won enough seats in the state assembly to form a ruling alliance.
Before the insurgency intensified in 1989, tourism formed an important part of the Kashmiri economy.
The Jammu & Kashmir Assembly is the only state in India to have a 6-year term, in contrast to the norm of a 5-year term followed in every other state's Assembly.
Education in the state is divided into primary, middle, high secondary, college and university level.
It was accepted by India but effectively rejected by Pakistan.
The UNCIP made three visits to the subcontinent between 1948 and 1949, trying to find a solution agreeable to both India and Pakistan.
Most of the buildings in the Valley and Ladakh are made from softwood and are influenced by Indian, Tibetan, and Islamic architecture.
'''India-administrated Jammu and Kashmir'''
