Van Eyck utilised a new level of virtuosity, mainly through the use of oil as a medium; the fact that oil dries so slowly allowed him more time and more scope for blending and mixing layers of different pigments.
Till-Holger Borchert says that van Eyck did not paint her as "the Madonna in a church", but instead as metaphor, presenting Mary "as the Church".
Van Eyck was the only 15th-century Netherlandish painter to sign his canvases.
Started sometime before 1426 and completed by 1432, the polyptych is seen as representing "the final conquest of reality in the North", differing from the great works of the Early Renaissance in Italy by virtue of its willingness to forgo classical idealisation in favor of the faithful observation of nature.
(1433), ''Joris van der Paele'' (c. 1434–36), ''Nicolas Rolin'' (1435) and ''Jan de Leeuw'' (1436).
In the earliest significant source on van Eyck, a 1454 biography in Genoese humanist Bartolomeo Facio's ''De viris illustribus'', Jan van Eyck is named "the leading painter" of his day.
They are decorative but also function to set the context for the significance of the imagery, similar to the function of margins in medieval manuscripts.
Mary's role in van Eyck's donor portraits reflects the beliefs of the period, and should be viewed in the context of the cult and worship surrounding her at the time, especially in terms of the often densely layered iconography.
He depicts overly large Madonnas, whose unrealistic size shows the separation between the heavenly from earthly, but placed them in everyday settings such as churches, domestic chambers or seated with court officials.
Van Eyck undertook a number of other journeys on Philip's behalf between 1426 and 1429, journeys described in records as "secret" commissions, for which he was paid multiples of his annual salary.
Van Eyck's task was to paint the bride, so that the Duke could visualise her before their marriage.
She usually wears red.
He died young in July 1441, leaving behind many unfinished works to be completed by workshop journeymen; works that are nevertheless today considered major examples of Early Flemish painting.
In ''Portrait of Margaret van Eyck'' of 1439 the lettering acclaims ''My husband Johannes completed me in the year 1439 on 17 June, at the age of 33.
The signature is sometimes inscribed using Greek lettering such as ''AAE IXH XAN''.
They seem to serve a number functions.
They breathe life into portraits and give voice to those worshiping Mary but also play a functional role; given that contemporary religious works were commissioned for private devotion, the inscriptions may have been intended to be read as an incantation or personalized indulgence prayers.
Jan van Eyck has often been linked as brother to painter and peer Hubert van Eyck, because both have been thought to originate from the same town in Belgium.
His work comes from the International Gothic style, but he soon eclipsed it, in part through a greater emphasis on naturalism and realism.
This text sheds light on aspects of Jan van Eyck's production now lost, citing a bathing scene owned by a prominent Italian, but mistakenly attributing to van Eyck a world map painted by another.
This level of education was rare amongst painters, and surely made him more attractive to Philip as ''Valet de chambre''.
Van Eyck incorporated a wide variety of iconographic elements, often conveying what he saw as a co-existence of the spiritual and material worlds.
He served as both court artist and diplomat and became a senior member of the Tournai painters' guild.
Growing affluence across northern Europe meant that portraiture was no longer the preserve of royalty or the high aristocracy.
Today it is difficult to decide which parts of the altarpiece are by Jan and which by Hubert.
''Portrait of Jan de Leeuw'' also bears its original frame, which is painted over to look like bronze.
The words may be related to a type of formula of modesty sometimes seen in medieval literature, where the writer prefaces his work with an apology for a lack of perfection, although, given the typical lavishness of the signatures and mottos, it may merely be a playful reference.
Over the following decade van Eyck's reputation and technical ability grew, mostly from his innovative approaches towards the handling and manipulating of oil paint.
He had a sister Margareta, and at least two brothers, Hubert (died 1426) and Lambert (active between 1431 and 1442), both of whom were also painters.
Campbell sees in many examples a "certain consistency which suggest that he himself had painted them", rather than they are later additions.
The later works contain very exact architectural details, but are not modeled any actual historical buildings.
He often altered the relative proportions of his models head and body so that he could better focus on the elements of their features that interested him.
Most of these miniatures were destroyed by fire in 1904 and survive only in photographs and copies; only three pages at most attributed to Hand G now survive, those with large miniatures of the ''Birth of John the Baptist'', the ''Finding of the True Cross'' and the ''Office of the Dead'' (or ''Requiem Mass''), with the bas-de-page miniatures and initials of the first and last of these.
The upper portions of the right hand panel of the ''Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych'' are generally considered the work of a weaker painter with a less individual style.
The small ''Portrait of a Man with a Blue Chaperon'' of c. 1430 is his earliest surviving portrait.
To him the day-to-day is harmoniously steeped in symbolism, such that, according to Harbison, "descriptive data were rearranged&nbsp;... so that they illustrated not earthly existence but what he considered supernatural truth."
Of his aspiration to record beard growth he wrote, "die stoppelen vanden barde wal grijsachtig" (''the stubble of the beard grizzled'').
His signature usually contains his personal motto ''ALS IK KAN'' (or a variant) – "As I Can", or "As Best I Can" – taken from the Flemish saying "As I can, not as I would", and which forms a pun on his name.
The symbols were often subtly woven into the paintings so that they only became apparent after close and repeated viewing, while much of the iconography reflects the idea that, according to John Ward, there is a "promised passage from sin and death to salvation and rebirth".
It is thought that Lambert took over after 1441.
With this gesture Isabella extends her presence out of the pictorial space and into that of the viewer.
The stone parapet at the base of the canvas of ''Léal Souvenir'' is painted as if to simulate marked or scarred stone and contains three separate layers of inscriptions, each rendered in an illusionistic manner, giving the impression they are chiseled onto stone.
The Marian paintings are characterized by complex depictions of both physical space and light sources.
The embedded symbols were meant to meld into the scenes and "was a deliberate strategy to create an experience of spiritual revelation."
Typically he showed his sitters as dignified, yet did not hide their imperfections.
Examples include the ''Portrait of Jan de Leeuw'' which reads ''...&nbsp;Jan de Leeuw, who first opened his eyes on the Feast of St Ursula 21 October, 1401.
Many of the original frames are lost and known only through copies or inventory records.
After John's death in 1425 he moved to Bruges and came to the attention of Philip the Good c. 1425.
This led to distortions; in the portrait of his wife he altered the angle of her nose, and gave her a fashionably high forehead that nature had not.
But this work contain a number of motifs that later reappear; she is already Queen of Heaven, wearing a crown adorned with flowers and stars.
The evidence for attributing van Eyck rests on part on the fact that although the figures are mostly of the International Gothic type, they reappear in some of his later work.
A number of extant portraits may be wings of dismantled polyptychs.
In 1426 he departed for "certain distant lands", possibly to the Holy Land, a theory given weight by the topographical accuracy of Jerusalem in ''The Three Marys at the Tomb'', a painting completed by members of his workshop c 1440.
Early in 1442 Lambert had the body exhumed and placed in a location inside St. Donatian's Cathedral.
In the 1432 ''Ghent Altarpiece'' Mary wears a crown adorned with flowers and stars.
It is noted for its realism and acute observation of the small details of the sitter's appearance; the man has a light beard of one or two days' growth, a reoccurring feature in van Eyck's early male portraits, where the sitter is often either unshaven, or according to Lorne Campbell "rather inefficiently shaved".
In ''Madonna in the Church'' she dominates the cathedral; her head is almost level with the approximately sixty feet high gallery.
The idea of a saint appearing before a layperson was common in Northern donor portraits of the period.
Notes made on the reverse of his paper study for the ''Portrait of Cardinal Niccolò Albergati'' give insight Eyck's approach.
As a mark of respect, Philip made a one off payment to Jan's widow Margaret, to a value equal to the artist's annual salary.
Facio places him among the best artists of the early 15th century, along with Rogier van der Weyden, Gentile da Fabriano, and Pisanello.
Ten, including the Ghent altarpiece, are dated and signed with a variation of his motto, ALS IK KAN (''As I (Eyck) can'') always written in Greek characters, transliterate as a pun on his name.
After Jan's death, Lambert van Eyck continued to run the workshop, and over the next few years Jan's reputation and stature steadily grew.
The London ''Portrait of a Man'' was likely half of a double portrait or pendant; the last record of the original frames contained many inscriptions, but not all were original; the frames were often overpainted by later artists.
More difficult to discern are the settings for paintings such as ''Madonna of Chancellor Rolin'', where the location is a fusion of the earthly and celestial.
It is known that van Eyck was considered revolutionary within his lifetime; his designs and methods were heavily copied and reproduced.
And he founded two chaplaincies here in the choir of the Lord.
Craig Harbison describes the blending of realism and symbolism as perhaps "the most important aspect of early Flemish art".
Tell tale signs are hinges on original frames, the sitter's orientation, or praying hands, or the inclusion of iconographical elements in an otherwise seemingly secular portrait.
Art historians in the 19th century thought the work was executed early in van Eyck's career and attributed her scale as the mistake of a relatively immature painter.
It is thought that van Eyck died leaving the panel unfinished but with completed underdrawings, and the upper area was finished by workshop members or followers.
The word ''Kan'' derives from the Middle Dutch word ''kunnen'' related to the German ''Kunst'' ("art").
Van Eyck pioneered, and his innovations were taken up and developed by van der Weyden, Memling and Christus.
In his single panel portraits they give voice to the sitter, most notably in ''Portrait of Margaret van Eyck'', where the Greek lettering on the frame translates as ''My husband Johannes completed me in the year 1439 on 17 June, at the age of 33.
He was highly influential and his techniques and style were quickly adopted and refined by Robert Campin and Rogier van der Weyden and later generations of Early Netherlandish painters.
However, by his later works, the sitter is at more of a distance, and the attention to detail less marked.
The different elements of the cathedral are in ''Madonna in the Church '' are so specifically detailed, and the elements of Gothic and contemporary architecture so well delineated, that many art and architecture historians have concluded that he must have had enough architectural knowledge to make nuanced distinctions.
Eyck usually gives Mary three roles: Mother of Christ; the personification of the "Ecclesia Triumphans"; or Queen of Heaven.
His local and international reputation was aided by his ties to the then political and cultural influence of the Burgundian court.
On 18 October 1427, the Feast of St. Luke, he travelled to Tournai to attend a banquet in his honour, also attended by Robert Campin and Rogier van der Weyden.
Her monumental stature borrows from the works of 12th- and 13th-century Italian artists such as Cimabue and Giotto, who in turn reflect a tradition reaching back to an Italo-Byzantine type and emphasis her identification with the cathedral itself.
She is thought to have been of aristocratic birth, though from the lower nobility, evidenced from her clothes in this portrait which are fashionable but not of the sumptuousness worn by the bride in the ''Arnolfini Portrait''.
Apart from the ''Ghent Altarpiece'' and the illuminated miniatures of the Turin-Milan Hours, about 20 surviving paintings are confidently attributed to him, all dated between 1432 and 1439.
In his early portraits the sitters are often shown holding objects indicative of their profession.
Since 1901 Jan van Eyck has often been credited as the anonymous artist known as Hand G of the Turin-Milan Hours.
Art historian Otto Pächt describes the interior of ''Madonna in the Church'' as a "throne room" which envelopes her as if a "carrying case".
Many of his frames are heavily inscribed, which serves a dual purpose.
The frames serve other illusionistic purposes; in ''Portrait of Isabella of Portugal'' her eyes gaze coyly but directly out of the painting, as rests her hands on the edge of the a faux stone parapet.
The years between 1434 and 1436 are generally considered his high point when he produced works including the ''Madonna of Chancellor Rolin'', ''Lucca Madonna'' and ''Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele''.
With this income he endowed the churches with embroidered cloths and metal accessories such as chalices, plates and candlesticks.
The letterings seem to serve different functions depending on the type of work on which they appear.
He only completed it in 1436, however."
In other instances members of his workshop finished incomplete paintings after his death.
The iconography was embedded in the work unobtrusively; typically the references comprised small but key background details.
But in all the buildings in van Eyck's work, the structure is imagined and probably an idealized formation of what he viewed as a perfect architectural space.
The ''Dresden Triptych'' is van Eyck's only extant religious work to contain his motto.
Van Eyck's religious paintings in particular "always present the spectator with a transfigured view of visible reality".
On the other aspects of his attempts to record the old man's face he noted, "the iris of the eye, near the back of the pupil, brownish yellow.
Van Eyck painted both secular and religious subject matter, including commissioned portraits, donor portraits (with the donor kneeling before a seated Virgin Mary) and both large and portable altarpieces.
It is particularly interesting that Facio shows as much enthusiasm for Netherlandish painters as he does for Italian painters.
van Eyck typically set the inscriptions in the sitters voice, so that they, according to Till-Holger Borchert "appear to be speaking".
His emergence as a collectable painter generally follows his appointment to Philip's court, and from this point his activity in the court is comparatively well documented.
Yet the earthly churches are heavily decorated with heavenly symbols.
After his return, he was preoccupied with completing the ''Ghent Altarpiece'', which was concentrated on 6 May 1432 at Saint Bavo Cathedral during an official ceremony for Philip.
The concept of purgatory as an intermediary state that each soul had to pass through before admission to heaven was at its height.
''Portrait of Isabella of Portugal'' dates to his 1428 visit to Portugal for Philip to draw up a preliminary marriage agreement with the daughter of John I of Portugal.
The signatures are usually completed in a decorative script, often of a kind reserved for legal documents, as can be seen in ''Léal Souvenir'' and the ''Arnolfini Portrait'', the latter of which is signed "Johannes de eyck fuit hic 1434" ("Jan van Eyck was here 1434"), a way of recording his presence.
Two extant copies of his ''Woman Bathing'' were made in the 60 years after death, but it is known mostly through its appearance in Willem van Haecht's expansive 1628 painting ''The Gallery of Cornelis van der Geest'', a view of a collector's gallery which contains many other identifiable old masters.
He was well paid by Philip, who sought that the painter was secure financially and thus had artistic freedom and could paint "whenever he pleased".
Hands play a special significance in van Eyck's paintings and at least one is prominently held up.
Because of the regular salary he received from the court he was not dependent on commissions, and thus had relative artistic freedom.
Three works are confidently attributed but know only from copies.
Each employed rich and complex iconographical elements to create a heightened sense of contemporary beliefs and spiritual ideals.
This suggests a date of birth of 1395 at the latest.
Van Eyck's work is characterised by the use of symbolism and biblical references.
If this is correct, the Turin illustrations are the only known works from his early period; according to Thomas Kren the earlier dates for Hand G precede any known panel painting in an Eyckian style, which "raises provocative questions about the role that manuscript illumination may have played in the vaunted verisimilitude of Eyckian oil painting".
Records from 1437 on suggest that he was held in high esteem by the upper ranks of Burgundian nobility while also accepting many foreign commissions.
He pioneered portraiture during the 1430s and was admired as far away as Italy for the naturalness of his depictions.
This claim is still considered credible on etymological grounds, considering that "Van Eyck" means "of Eyck" which is an old variant spelling of "eik".
Very little is known of Margaret, even her maiden name is lost - contemporary records refer to her mainly as ''Damoiselle Marguierite''.
Giorgio Vasari credits him (erroneously) with the invention of oil painting in 1550.
LUCI CONPARATA INVENITUR PRIOR'' Inscriptions are present in all of van Eyck's paintings, but predominant in his Marian paintings.
From the coats of arms on his tombstone, it is believed he came from the gentry class.
Four more were lost in 1904: all the elements of the pages with the miniatures called ''The Prayer on the Shore'' (or ''Duke William of Bavaria at the Seashore'', the ''Sovereign's prayer'' etc.
Campbell lists other van Eyck unshaven sitters; ''Niccolò Albergati'' (1431), ''Jodocus Vijdt'' (1432), ''Jan van Eyck?''
The man in ''Léal Souvenir'' may have been a legal professional as he holds a scroll resembling a legal document.
Except for the ''Ghent Altarpiece'', all of van Eyck's religious works feature the Virgin Mary as the central figure.
Later, as the widow of a renowned painter Margaret was afforded a modest pension by the city of Bruges after Jan's death.
The idea of Mary as a metaphor for the Church itself is especially strong in his later paintings.
Further the notes on his study preparatory drawing for ''Portrait of Cardinal Niccolò Albergati'' are written in the Maasland dialect.
After John's death in 1425 he was employed as court painter to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, in Lille, where he remained until 1429 after which he moved to Bruges, working for Philip until his death there in 1441.
Van Eyck's iconography is often so densely and intricately layered that a work has to be viewed multiple times before even the most obvious meaning of an element is apparent.
Harbison notes that van Eyck's privately commissioned works are unusually heavily inscribed with prayer, and that the words may have served a similar function to prayer tablets, or more exactly "Prayer Wings", of the type seen in the reconstructed London ''Virgin and Child'' triptych.
''Woman Bathing'' bears many similarities to ''Arnolfini Portrait'', including an interior with a bed and a small dog, a mirror and its reflection, a chest of drawers and clogs on the floor, while the angle the attendant woman faces from, and her dress and the outline of her figure, are broadly similar.
He took employment as painter and ''Valet de chambre'' with John of Bavaria-Straubing, ruler of Holland, in the Hague around 1422, when he was already a master painter with workshop assistants.
Now Jan van Eyck has painted me, you can see when he began it.
Another significant, and rather younger, painter who worked in Southern France, Barthélemy van Eyck, is presumed to be a relation.
This can be seen in his ''Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele'', reads An inscription on the lower imitation frame refers to the donation, "Joris van der Paele, canon of this church, had this work made by painter Jan van Eyck.
), and the night-scene of the ''Betrayal of Christ'' (which was already described by Durrieu as "worn" before the fire), the ''Coronation of the Virgin'' and its bas-de-page, and the large picture only of the seascape ''Voyage of St Julian & St Martha''.
Van Eyck was highly sought after as a portrait artist.
Prayer was the most obvious means of decreasing time in limbo, while the wealthy could commission new churches, extensions to existing ones, or devotional portraits.
It evidences many of the elements that were to become standard in his portraiture style, including the three-quarters view (a type he revived from antiquity which soon spread across Europe), directional lighting, elaborate headdress, and for the single portraits, the framing of the figure within an undefined narrow space, set against a flat black background.
Unlike most of his peers his reputation never diminished and he remained well regarded over the following centuries.
In 1449 he is mentioned by the Italian humanist and antiquarian Ciriaco de' Pizzicolli as a painter of note and ability, and he is recorded by Bartolomeo Facio in 1456.
On the contours next to the white, bluish&nbsp;... the white also yellowish&nbsp;..."
Van Eyck first served John of Bavaria-Straubing, then ruler of Holland, Hainault and Zeeland.
His style was widely adopted, most notably by van der Weyden, Petrus Christus and Hans Memling.
He worked on panel, either as single panels, diptych, triptychs, or polyptychs.
From surviving copies it can be deduced that apart from the actual oak frame there were two other 'painted on' frames, one of which was lettered with gothic inscription to the top, while a faux stone parapet provided support for her hands to rest upon.
Such works are many and include the ''Ince Hall Madonna'', ''Saint Jerome in His Study'', a ''Madonna of Jan Vos'' (''Virgin and Child with St Barbara and Elizabeth'') c. 1443, the Ypres ''Maelbeke Madonna'' c. 1440–45, ''Triptych of Petrus Wyts'', late 15th century, and a ''St Christopher'' now in Philadelphia of c. 1460–70, as well of a series of 15th-century pencil on paper drawings of the twelve apostles.
Even though we can assume, given the demand and fashion, he produced a number of triptychs, only the ''Dresden'' example survives.
It is also supported by the fact that his daughter Lievine was in a nunnery in Maaseik after her father's death.
Their precise nature is still unknown, but they seem to involve his acting as envoy of the court.
The habit of signing his work ensured that his reputation survived, and attribution has not been as difficult and uncertain as with other first generation artists of the early Netherlandish school.
This blend of the earthly and heavenly evidences van Eyck's belief that the "essential truth of Christian doctrine" can be found in "the marriage of secular and sacred worlds, of reality and symbol".
Pieces such as the ''Dresden Tryptich'' were usually commissioned for private devotion, and van Eyck would have expected the viewer to contemplate text and imagery in unison.
'''Jan van Eyck''' () (before c. 1390 – 9 July 1441) was an Early Netherlandish painter active in Bruges and one of the most significant Northern Renaissance artists of the 15th century.
At least some of this income was invested in lottery.
Foremost among these is the ''Ghent Altarpiece'' painted for the merchant, financier and politician Jodocus Vijdts and his wife Elisabeth Borluut.
The few surviving records indicate that he was born c. 1380–90, most likely in Maaseik.
One of Jan's most famous works, the ''Ghent Altarpiece'', is believed to be a collaboration between the two, begun c. 1420 by Hubert and completed by Jan in 1432.
This was not unusual; the widow or other relative of a master would often carry on the business after their death.
The earlier works tend to be donor portraits, where Mary is presented as an apparition before a donor kneeling in prayer to the side.
The ''Léal Souvenir'' portrait of 1432 continues the adherence to realism and acute observation of the small details of the sitter's appearance.
Members of his workshop completed works based on his designs in the years after his death in the summer of 1441.
Van Eyck's portraits are characterized by his manipulation of oil paint and a meticulous attention to detail; his keen powers of observation and his tendency to apply layers of thin translucent glazes to create intensity of color and tone.
By this time van Eyck had assembled a small workshop and was involved in redecorating the Binnenhof palace in The Hague.
Jan van Eyck produced paintings for private clients in addition to his work at the court.
The interior panels of the small 1437 ''Dresden Triptych'' are outlined with two layers of painted bronze frames, inscribed with mostly Latin lettering.
A heavenly throne is clearly represented in some domestic chambers (for example in the ''Lucca Madonna'').
Another brother, Lambert, is mentioned in Burgundian court documents, and there is a conjecture that he too was a painter, and that he may have overseen the closing of Jan van Eyck's Bruges workshop.
He was identified in the late 1500s as having been born in Maaseik, then a diocese of Liège.
It is not known where Jan was educated, but he had knowledge of Latin and used the Greek and Hebrew alphabets in many of the inscriptions, indicating that he was schooled in the classics.
She is truly the reflection of eternal light and a spotless mirror of God".
He designed and painted the frames for his single head portraits to look like imitation stone, with the signature or other inscriptions giving the impression that they had been chiseled into the stone.
The descriptions are less forensic, more of an overview, while the forms are broader and flatter.
Such as his difficult journey to Lisbon along with a group intended to prepare the ground for the Duke's wedding to Isabella of Portugal.
In addition, there are coats of arms connected with the Wittelsbach family with whom he had connections in the Hague, while some of the figures in the miniatures echo the horsemen in the ''Ghent Altarpiece''.
The lettering on the arched throne above Mary's depiction in the ''Ghent Altarpiece'' is taken from a passage from the Book of Wisdom (7:29): "She is more beautiful than the sun and the army of the stars; compared to the light she is superior.
Because Portugal was ridden with plague, their court was itinerant and the Dutch party met them at the out of the way castle of Aviz.
Indeed, his motto is sometimes recorded in a manner intended to mimic Christ's monogram ''IHC XPC'', for example in his 1440 ''Portrait of Christ''.
However, his apparent age in the London probable self-portrait of 1433 suggests to most scholars a date closer to 1380.
This can be seen from the many examples of features that would be unlikely in a contemporary church, including the placing of a round arched triforium above a pointed colonnade in the Berlin work.
The idea that her size represents her embodiment as the church was first suggested by Erwin Panofsky in 1941.
The ''Arnolfini Portrait'' of 1432 is filled with illusionism and symbolism, as is the 1435 ''Madonna of Chancellor Rolin'', commissioned to display Rolin's power, influence and piety.
An emerging merchant middle class, coupled with a growing awareness of humanist ideas of individual identity, led to a demand both for secular and donor portraits.
The ''Office of the Dead'' is often seen as recalling Jan's 1438–40 ''Madonna in the Church''.
A number of designs were reproduced by second generation Netherlandish artists of the first rank, including Petrus Christus, who painted a version of the ''Exeter Madonna''.
In ''Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele'' (1434–36), the Canon seems to have just paused momentarily to reflect on a passage from his hand-held bible as the Virgin and Child with two saints appear before him, as if embodiments of his prayer.
The princess was probably not particularly attractive, and that is exactly how Van Eyck conveyed her in the now lost portrait.
Today, eight three-quarters view portraits (excluding the London possible self-portrait) are attributed.
The texts are drawn from a variety of sources, in the central frames from biblical descriptions of the assumption, while the inner wings are lined with fragments of prayers dedicated to saints Michael and Catherine.
Many of van Eyck's paintings are heavily inscribed, in lettering of Greek, Latin or vernacular Dutch.
She is sometimes shown reading a Book of Hours.
Many of van Eyck's religious works contain a reduced interior space that is nonetheless subtly managed and arranged to convey a sense of intimacy without feeling constricted.
By contrast the inscriptions on his public, formal religious commissions are written from the point of view of the patron, and there to underscore his piousness, charity and dedication to the saint who he is shown accompanying.
Van Eyck spent nine months there, returning successfully to the Netherlands with Isabella as a bride to be; the couple married on Christmas Day of 1429.
This distortion of scale is found in a number of other of his Madonna paintings, including ''Annunciation''.
Given the accuracy of the descriptions, many scholars have tried to link the painting with particular buildings.
The ''Madonna of Chancellor Rolin'' is lit from both from the central portico and side windows, while the floor-tiles in comparison to other elements shows that the figures are only about six feet from the columned loggia screen, and that Rolin might have had to squeeze himself through the opening to get out that way.
