Sales were good for a year—only 321 copies remained unsold at the end of 1818—and then declined.
In December 1800 George Austen unexpectedly announced his decision to retire from the ministry, leave Steventon, and move the family to Bath.
The Lefroy family intervened and sent him away at the end of January.
The story centres on an invalid clergyman with little money and four unmarried daughters.
Austen made light of her condition, describing it as "bile" and rheumatism.
In 1806 the family moved to Southampton, where they shared a house with Frank Austen and his new wife.
Scholars have uncovered little on this since.
She completed the initial draft in August 1797, aged 21, (later published as ''Pride and Prejudice''); as with all of her novels, Austen read the work aloud to her family as she was working on it and it became an "established favourite".
Around the start of the 20th century, members of the literary elite reacted against the popularization of Austen.
Austen's ''History'' parodied popular historical writing, particularly Oliver Goldsmith's ''History of England'' (1764).
Several of Austen's major works have been subject to academic study.
Austen probably joined in these activities, first as a spectator and later as a participant.
Among these works are a satirical novel in letters titled ''Love and Freindship'' , in which she mocked popular novels of sensibility, and ''The History of England'', a manuscript of 34 pages accompanied by 13 watercolour miniatures by her sister, Cassandra.
'''Jane Austen''' (; 16 December 1775&nbsp;– 18 July 1817) was an English novelist known primarily for her six major novels which interpret, critique and comment upon the British landed gentry at the end of the 18th century.
While retirement and travel were good for the elder Austens, Jane Austen was shocked to be told she was moving from the only home she had ever known.
Austen apparently had unfettered access both to her father's library and that of a family friend, Warren Hastings.
Her brother Henry later said that "Jane was fond of dancing, and excelled in it".
Austen had many admiring readers in the 19th century who considered themselves part of a literary elite: they viewed their appreciation of Austen's works as a mark of their cultural taste.
A large part of this time they spent visiting various branches of the family.
They moved for the autumn months to the newly fashionable seaside resort of Worthing, on the Sussex coast, where they resided at Stanford Cottage.
Both girls caught typhus and Jane nearly died.
As her disease progressed she experienced difficulty walking, abd generally lacked energy; by mid-April she was confined to bed.
Their younger brother, Harris Bigg-Wither, had recently finished his education at Oxford and was also at home.
Henry and Frank could no longer afford the contributions they had made to support their mother and sisters.
These were the last of Austen's novels to be published during her lifetime.
Reviews were favourable and the novel became fashionable among young aristocratic opinion-makers; the edition sold out by mid-1813.
The period since World War II has seen more scholarship on Austen using a diversity of critical approaches, including feminist theory, and perhaps most controversially, postcolonial theory.
Private theatricals formed an essential part of Austen's education.
Yet her rejection of these genres is incomplete and complex, as evidenced by ''Northanger Abbey'' and ''Emma''.
Philosopher and literary critic George Henry Lewes expressed this viewpoint in a series of enthusiastic articles published in the 1840s and 1850s.
While ''Mansfield Park'' was ignored by reviewers, it was a great success with the public.
From the 19th century, her family members published conclusions to her incomplete novels, and by 2000 there were over 100 printed adaptations.
An indication of her state of mind is her lack of productivity as a writer during the time she lived at Bath.
Henry, through his clerical connections, arranged for his sister to be buried in the north aisle of the nave of Winchester Cathedral.
Austen was subsequently educated at home, until leaving for boarding school with her sister early in 1785.
The epitaph composed by her brother James praises Austen's personal qualities, expresses hope for her salvation, mentions the "extraordinary endowments of her mind", but does not explicitly mention her achievements as a writer.
After Austen's death, Cassandra, Henry Austen, and Murray arranged for the publication of ''Persuasion'' and ''Northanger Abbey'' as a set.
Austen completed her work about a year later.
Austen used comedy to explore the individualism of women's lives and gender relations, and she appears to have used it to find the goodness in life, often fusing it with "ethical sensibility", creating artistic tension.
They referred to themselves as ''Janeites'' in order to distinguish themselves from the masses who did not properly understand her works.
The Chapman text has remained the basis for all subsequent published editions of Austen's works.
The remainder of her education came from reading, guided by her father and brothers James and Henry.
Most of the reviews were short and on balance favourable, although superficial and cautious.
The publication of James Edward Austen-Leigh's ''A Memoir of Jane Austen'' in 1869 introduced Austen to a wider public as "dear aunt Jane", the respectable maiden aunt.
He believes that the well-spring of her wit and irony is her own attitude that comedy "is the saving grace of life".
In 1814, Austen wrote a letter to her niece, Fanny Knight, who had asked for advice about a serious relationship, telling her that "having written so much on one side of the question, I shall now turn around & entreat you not to commit yourself farther, & not to think of accepting him unless you really do like him.
In ''Sense and Sensibility'' Austen presents characters who are more complex than in staple sentimental fiction, according to critic Keymer, who notes that although it is a parody of popular sentimental fiction, "Marianne in her sentimental histrionics responds to the calculating world&nbsp;... with a quite justifiable scream of female distress."
Socializing with the neighbours often meant dancing, either impromptu in someone's home after supper or at the balls held regularly at the assembly rooms in the town hall.
She was able to make some revisions to ''Susan'', and she began and then abandoned a new novel, ''The Watsons'', but there was nothing like the productivity of the years 1795–1799.
All copies were sold within six months, and Austen's earnings on this novel were larger than for any of her other novels.
As an art form, the 18th-century novel lacked the seriousness of its equivalents from the 19th century, when novels were treated as "the natural vehicle for discussion and ventilation of what mattered in life".
Through her brother Henry, the publisher Thomas Egerton agreed to publish ''Sense and Sensibility'', which appeared in October 1811.
From 1773 until 1796, he supplemented this income by farming and by teaching three or four boys at a time, who boarded at his home.
After a few months at home, her mother placed her with Elizabeth Littlewood, who lived nearby, and nursed and raised her for a year or eighteen months.
Honan suggests, and Tomalin agrees, that Austen chose to stop work on the novel after her father died on 21 January 1805 and her personal circumstances resembled those of her characters too closely for her comfort.
A 2005 British production of ''Pride and Prejudice'', directed by Joe Wright and starring Keira Knightley and Matthew Macfadyen, was followed in 2007 by ITV's ''Mansfield Park'', ''Northanger Abbey'' and ''Persuasion'', and in 2016 by ''Love & Friendship'', a film version of ''Lady Susan'' that borrowed the title of Austen's ''Love and '' sic.
The other important early review was attributed to Richard Whately in 1821.
Though essentially comic, Austen's plots highlight women's traditional dependence on marriage to secure social standing and economic security.
As Austen grew into adulthood, she continued to live at her parents' home, carrying out activities normal for women of her age and social standing: she practised the fortepiano, assisted her sister and mother with supervising servants, and attended female relatives during childbirth and older relatives on their deathbeds.
Austen was feeling unwell by early 1816, but ignored the warning signs and continued as usual.
A significant transition in her posthumous reputation occurred in 1869, fifty-two years after her death, when her nephew's publication of ''A Memoir of Jane Austen'' introduced her to a wider audience.
Her sister later remembered that it was read to the family "before 1796" and was told through a series of letters.
While Murray prepared ''Emma'' for publication, Austen began to write a new novel she titled ''The Elliots'', later published as ''Persuasion''.
Crosby replied that he had not agreed to publish the book by any particular time, or at all, and that Austen could repurchase the manuscript for the £10 he had paid her and find another publisher.
Publication of the ''Memoir'' spurred the reissue of Austen's novels&nbsp;— the first popular editions were released in 1883 and fancy illustrated editions and collectors' sets quickly followed.
When Austen was twenty, Tom Lefroy, a neighbour, visited Steventon from December 1795 to January 1796.
Egerton then published ''Pride and Prejudice'', a revision of ''First Impressions'', in January 1813.
She also attended church regularly, socialized frequently with friends and neighbours, and read novels—often of her own composition—aloud with her family in the evenings.
With these resources, Austen could provide her parents a comfortable old age, give Cassandra a permanent home and, perhaps, assist her brothers in their careers.
Anything is to be preferred or endured rather than marrying without Affection".
Austen began a second novel, ''First Impressions'', in 1796.
In 1783, according to family tradition, Jane and Cassandra were sent to Oxford to be educated by Mrs. Ann Cawley, and they moved with her to Southampton later in the year.
No contemporary letters or diaries describe how Austen felt about this proposal.
In 1804, while living in Bath, Austen started but did not complete a new novel, ''The Watsons''.
They married on 26 April 1764 at Walcot Church in Bath.
Jane, Cassandra, and their mother were left in a precarious financial situation.
Together these collections amounted to a large and varied library.
They spent part of the time in rented quarters in Bath before leaving the city in June 1805 for a family visit to Steventon & Godmersham.
It stands alone in Austen's work as a study of an adult woman whose intelligence and force of character are greater than those of anyone she encounters."
During the twentieth and twenty-first centuries Austen's writings have inspired a large number of critical essays and literary anthologies, establishing her as an author of international fame.
Crosby promised early publication and went so far as to advertise the book publicly as being "in the press", but did nothing more.
Austen's works critique the novels of sensibility of the second half of the 18th century and are part of the transition to 19th-century literary realism.
In January 1817 she began ''The Brothers'' (titled ''Sanditon'' when published in 1925), and completed twelve chapters before stopping work in mid-March 1817, probably due to illness.
They most often focused on the moral lessons of the novels.
She continued to work in spite of her illness.
The majority of biographers rely on Dr. Vincent Cope's 1964 retrospective diagnosis and list her cause of death as Addison's disease, although her final illness has also been described as resulting from Hodgkin's lymphoma.
For the next four years, the family's living arrangements reflected their financial insecurity.
Lefroy and Austen would have been introduced at a ball or other neighbourhood social gathering, and it is clear from Austen's letters to Cassandra that they spent considerable time together: "I am almost afraid to tell you how my Irish friend and I behaved.
Lascelles's innovative work included an analysis of the books Austen read and the effect of her reading on her work, an extended analysis of Austen's style, and her "narrative art".
George was sent to live with a local family at a young age because, as Austen biographer Le Faye describes it, she needed to care for a brother who was  "mentally abnormal and subject to fits".
At this time, her father made the first attempt to publish one of her novels.
Henry acted as his sister's literary agent and his large circle of friends and acquaintances in London included bankers, merchants, publishers, painters and actors.
He was the heir to extensive family estates located in the area where the sisters had grown up.
Life was quieter in Chawton than it had been since the family's move to Bath in 1800.
Her niece Anna described the family's life in Chawton: "It was a very quiet life, according to our ideas, but they were great readers, and besides the housekeeping our aunts occupied themselves in working with the poor and in teaching some girl or boy to read or write."
She did not have the resources to buy the copyright back at that time, but was able to purchase it in 1816.
Bigg-Wither proposed and Austen accepted.
Austen was born at Steventon on 16 December 1775.
Critic Robert Polhemus writes,  "To appreciate the drama and achievement of Austen, we need to realize how deep was her passion for both reverence and ridicule .... and her comic imagination reveals both the harmonies and the telling contradictions of her mind and vision as she tries to reconcile her satirical bias with her sense of the good."
However, Austen had known him since both were young and the marriage offered many practical advantages to Austen and her family.
Austen's earnings from ''Sense and Sensibility'' provided her with some financial and psychological independence.
Her sister was Austen's closest friend and confidante throughout her life.
Following the completion of ''First Impressions'', Austen returned to ''Elinor and Marianne'' and from November 1797 until mid-1798, revised it heavily; she eliminated the epistolary format in favour of third-person narration and produced something close to ''Sense and Sensibility''.
Since then, Austen's novels have been continuously in print.
Austen died in Winchester on 18 July 1817, at the age of 41.
Tomalin writes: "Told in letters, it is as neatly plotted as a play, and as cynical in tone as any of the most outrageous of the Restoration dramatists who may have provided some of her inspiration&nbsp;...
Austen's plots often explore the dependence of women on marriage in the pursuit of favorable social standing and economic security.
It was here that Austen is thought to have written her fair copy of ''Lady Susan'' and added its "Conclusion".
Between 1793 and 1795 Austen wrote ''Lady Susan'', a short epistolary novel, usually described as her most ambitious and sophisticated early work.
After 1786, Austen "never again lived anywhere beyond the bounds of her immediate family environment".
With the publication in 1939 of Mary Lascelles's ''Jane Austen and Her Art'', the academic study of Austen took hold.
''Mansfield Park'' was published by Egerton in May 1814.
In this setting, she was able to be productive as a writer once more.
They agreed that she "combined Henry Fielding's and Samuel Richardson's qualities of interiority and irony, realism and satire to form an author superior to both".
For much of Jane's life, George Austen served as the rector of the Anglican parishes at Steventon, Hampshire, and a nearby village.
In December 1802 Austen received her only known proposal of marriage.
Yet in ''Northanger Abbey'' she alludes to the trope, with the heroine, Catherine, anticipating a move to a remote locale.
As described by Caroline Austen, Jane's niece, and Reginald Bigg-Wither, a descendant, Harris was not attractive—he was a large, plain-looking man who spoke little, stuttered when he did speak, was aggressive in conversation, and almost completely tactless.
By October 1813 Egerton was able to begin selling a second edition.
Austen was forced to postpone publishing either of these completed novels by family financial troubles.
Austen was particularly proud of her accomplishments as a seamstress.
Tomalin describes it as "a loving and polished eulogy".
The manuscript remained in Crosby's hands, unpublished, until Austen repurchased the copyright from him in 1816.
In 1788 her portrait may have been commissioned by her great uncle, Francis Austen.
During the middle of 1798, after finishing revisions of ''Elinor and Marianne'', Austen began writing a third novel with the working title ''Susan''—later ''Northanger Abbey''—a satire on the popular Gothic novel.
Using the review as a platform to defend the then-disreputable genre of the novel, he praised Austen's realism.
The continuing disconnection between the popular appreciation of Austen, particularly by modern Janeites, and the academic appreciation of Austen has widened considerably.
In 1793 Austen began butn abandoned a short play, later titled ''Sir Charles Grandison or the happy Man, a comedy in 6 acts'', which she returned to and completed around 1800.
Similar to William Wordsworth, who excoriated the modern frantic novel in the "Preface" to his ''Lyrical Ballads'' (1800), Austen distances herself from escapist novels; the discipline and innovation she demonstrates is similar to his, and she shows "that rhetorically less is artistically more."
Richardson's ''Pamela'' was the prototype for the sentimental novel, a didactic love story with a happy ending, written at a time women were beginning to have the right to choose husbands and yet were restricted by social conventions.
Dissatisfied with the ending of ''The Elliots'', she rewrote the final two chapters, finished on 6 August 1816.
Cadell returned Mr. Austen's letter, marking it "Declined by Return of Post".
Murray disposed of the remaining copies in 1820; her novels remained out of print for twelve years.
Most of the early biographical material was written by her relatives and reflects the family's biases in favour of "good quiet Aunt Jane".
Rather than delving too deeply into the psyche of her characters, Austen enjoys them and imbues them with humour, according to critic John Bayley.
Honan speculates that not long after writing ''Love and Freindship''  in 1789, Austen decided to "write for profit, to make stories her central effort", that is, to become a professional writer.
Austen's ''Juvenilia'' are often, according to scholar Richard Jenkyns, "boisterous" and "anarchic"; he compares them to the work of 18th-century novelist Laurence Sterne and the 20th-century comedy group Monty Python.
From 1811 until 1816, with the publication of ''Sense and Sensibility'' (1811),  ''Pride and Prejudice'' (1813), ''Mansfield Park'' (1814) and ''Emma'' (1815), she achieved success as a published writer.
He exposed her to a social world not normally visible from a small parish in rural Hampshire.
Her father's ilness, later fatal, was sudden, and left him, as she told her brother Francis, "quite insensible of his own state".
In November 1797, George Austen wrote to Thomas Cadell, an established publisher in London, to ask if he would consider publishing ''First Impressions''.
The second was R. W. Chapman's 1923 edition of Austen's collected works.
If Tom Lefroy later visited Hampshire, he was carefully kept away from the Austens, and Jane Austen never saw him again.
Perhaps as early as 1787, Austen began to write poems, stories and plays for her own and her family's amusement.
In October 1833, Bentley released the first collected edition of her works.
Nor does she completely denigrate Gothic fiction: instead she transforms settings and situations, such that the heroine is still imprisoned, yet her imprisonment is mundane and real – regulated manners and the strict rules of the ballroom.
Whenever she made that decision, beginning in about 1793, Austen began to write longer, more sophisticated works.
According to biographer Park Honan, life in the Austen home was lived in "an open, amused, easy intellectual atmosphere" where the ideas of those with whom the Austens might disagree politically or socially were considered and discussed.
This was a short parody of various school textbook abridgments of Austen's favourite contemporary novel, ''The History of Sir Charles Grandison'' (1753), by Samuel Richardson.
Only a few  personal and family letters remain (only c 160 out of Austen's 3,000 letters are extant), and her sister Cassandra (to whom most of the letters were addressed) burned "the greater part" of the ones she kept and censored those she did not destroy.
She worked with variety of literary forms, extensively revising three major novels, and began a fourth.
In early 1803, Henry Austen offered ''Susan'' to Benjamin Crosby, a London publisher, who paid £10 for the copyright.
Edward, James, Henry, and Francis Austen pledged to make annual contributions to support their mother and sisters.
Henry Austen contributed a ''Biographical Note'' which for the first time identified his sister as the author of the novels.
She eschewed popular Gothic fiction, stories of terror in which a heroine typically was stranded in a remote location, a castle or abbey (32 novels contained the word "abbey" in their title between 1784 and 1818).
Austen's parents, George Austen (1731–1805), and his wife Cassandra (1739–1827), were members of gentry families.
The sisters returned home before December 1786; the Austens could not afford to send both the daughters to school.
For example, Henry James responded negatively to what he described as "a beguiled infatuation" with Austen, a rising tide of public interest that exceeded Austen's "intrinsic merit and interest".
She sent short pieces of writing to her newborn nieces Fanny Catherine and Jane Anna Elizabeth.
Walter Scott noted Austen's "resistance to the trashy sensationalism of much of modern fiction&nbsp;– 'the ephemeral productions which supply the regular demand of watering places and circulating libraries'".
During the last quarter of the 19th century, the first books of criticism on Austen were published.
Marriage was impractical, as both Lefroy and Austen must have known.
He may also have been deaf and mute.
It is unlike any of Austen's other works.
In mid-1815 Austen moved her work from Egerton to John Murray, a better known London publisher, who published ''Emma'' in December 1815 and a second edition of ''Mansfield Park'' in February 1816.
Scott and Whately set the tone for almost all subsequent 19th-century Austen criticism.
A more revisionist approach in the 1940s, together with F. R. Leavis's and Ian Watt's pronouncement that Austen was one of the great writers of English fiction, did much to cement Austen's reputation amongst academics.
Austen wrote, for example: "Henry the 4th ascended the throne of England much to his own satisfaction in the year 1399, after having prevailed on his cousin & predecessor Richard the 2nd, to resign it to him, & to retire for the rest of his Life to Pomfret Castle, where he happened to be murdered."
Though Austen disliked the Prince, she could scarcely refuse the request.
This theme continued later in the century with novelist Henry James, who referred to Austen several times with approval and on one occasion ranked her with Shakespeare, Cervantes, and Henry Fielding as among "the fine painters of life".
Concern arose that academics were taking over Austen criticism and that it was becoming increasingly esoteric, a debate that has continued since.
The success of her humour lies in her modesty and lack of superiority, allowing her most successful characters, such as Elizabeth Bennet, to transcend the trivialities of life, which the more foolish characters are overly absorbed in.
The narrative style allowed her to employ free indirect speech&nbsp;– she was the first English novelist to do so extensively&nbsp;– through which she had the ability to present a character's thoughts directly to the reader and yet still retain narrative control.
During her time at Chawton, Jane Austen successfully published four novels, which were generally well received.
She completed her first draft in July 1816.
The style allows an author to vary discourse between the narrator's voice and values and those of the characters.
In his essay, Bradley groups of Austen's novels into "early" and "late" works, a distinction still used by scholars today.
The Austens did not socialise with gentry and entertained only when family visited.
Sutherland describes the novel as "a study in the harsh economic realities of dependent women's lives".
The school curriculum probably included some French, spelling, needlework, dancing and music and, perhaps, drama.
Austen attempted Richardson's epistolary style, but found the flexibility of narrative more conducive to her realism, a realism in which each conversation and gesture carries a weight of significance.
Part of Austen's fame rests on the historical and literary significance that she was the first woman to write great comic novels.
Austen biographer Claire Tomalin describes the novella's heroine as a sexual predator who uses her intelligence and charm to manipulate, betray and abuse her lovers, friends and family.
''Emma'' sold well but the new edition of ''Mansfield Park'' did poorly, and this failure offset most of the profits Austen earned on ''Emma''.
She came from a large family: there were six brothers and one sister.
Most of the plays were comedies, which suggests how Austen's satirical gifts were cultivated.
Samuel Johnson's influence is evident, in that she follows his advice to write "a representation of life as may excite mirth".
On 5 April 1809, about three months before the family's move to Chawton, Austen wrote an angry letter to Richard Crosby, offering him a new manuscript of ''Susan'' if needed to secure the immediate publication of the novel, and requesting the return of the original so she could find another publisher.
The first examination came from a 1911 essay by Oxford Shakespearean scholar A. C. Bradley.
Jane, Cassandra and their mother moved into Chawton cottage on 7 July 1809.
From age seven until thirteen, the family and friends staged a series of plays, including Richard Sheridan's ''The Rivals'' (1775) and David Garrick's ''Bon Ton''.
There is manuscript evidence that Austen continued to work on these pieces as late as the period 1809–1811, and that her niece and nephew, Anna and James Edward Austen, made further additions as late as 1814.
In addition, shortly after the publication of ''Emma'', Henry Austen repurchased the copyright for ''Susan'' from Crosby.
By the middle of that year, her decline was unmistakable, and she began a slow, irregular, deterioration.
Cassandra was a member of the prominent Leigh family.
She wrote two additional novels, ''Northanger Abbey'' and ''Persuasion'', both published posthumously in 1818, and began a third, eventually titled ''Sanditon'', but died before its completion.
From 1995 a large number of Austen adaptations began to appear, with Ang Lee's film of ''Sense and Sensibility'', for which screenwriter and star Emma Thompson won an Academy Award, and the BBC's immensely popular TV mini-series ''Pride and Prejudice'', starring Jennifer Ehle and Colin Firth.
Austen wrote almost daily, but privately, and seems to have been relieved of some household responsibilities to give her more opportunity to write.
Austen later compiled "fair copies" of 29 of these early works into three bound notebooks, now referred to as the ''Juvenilia'', containing pieces originally written between 1787 and 1793.
Rather than full-scale rejection or parody, Austen transforms the genre, juxtaposing reality, with descriptions of elegant rooms and modern comforts, against the heroine's "novel-fueled" desires.
