She also received $80,000.
It introduces terms like "social capital", "mixed primary uses", and "eyes on the street", which became popular in urban design, sociology, and other fields.
Working for the State Department during McCarthyism, Jacobs received a questionnaire regarding her political beliefs and loyalties.
Through her life, she fought to alter the way in which city development was approached.
What's important is not that she died but that she lived, and that her life's work has greatly influenced the way we think.
For the first time I liked school and for the first time I made good marks.
Nevertheless, she was pro-union and purportedly appreciated the writing of Saul Alinsky; therefore she was under suspicion.
As the title suggests, her outlook was far more pessimistic than in her previous books.
''Architectural Forum'' printed the speech that year, along with photos of East Harlem.
''Cities and the Wealth of Nations'' attempts to do for economics what ''The Death and Life of Great American Cities'' did for modern urban planning, though it has not received the same critical attention.
At the end of the conference, the ''Jane Jacobs Prize'' was created.
She was selected to be an officer of the Order of Canada in 1996 for her seminal writings and thought-provoking commentaries on urban development.
Jacobs died in Toronto Western Hospital aged 89, on April 25, 2006, apparently of a stroke.
Arguably, either could turn out to be true."
His plan, funded as "slum clearance" by Title I of the Housing Act of 1949, also called for several blocks to be razed and replaced with upscale high-rises.
Childe, like other materialists like Maisels or Henri Lefebvre defines 'urban' or 'civilization' as Synoecism—as a literate, socially stratified, monolithic political community, whereas, as one can see from ''The Economy of Cities'' or from ''Cities and the Wealth of Nations'', Jacobs defines the city purely along the lines of geographically dense trade giving way to entrepreneurial discovery and subsequent improvements in the division of labor.
It includes an annual stipend of $5,000 for three years to be given to "celebrate Toronto's original, unsung heroes – by seeking out citizens who are engaged in activities that contribute to the city’s vitality".
Jacobs is remembered as being an advocate for the mindful development of cities and leaving "a legacy of empowerment for citizens to trust their common sense and become advocates for their place".
Topics include environmental and economic development, growth and expansion, and how economies and environments keep themselves alive through "self-refueling."
(From the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s, the foundation's Humanities Division sponsored an "Urban Design Studies" research program, of which Jacobs was the best known grantee.)
However, gentrification was also caused by "the completely unexpected influx of affluent residents back into the inner city".
This was almost my undoing because after I had garnered, statistically, a certain number of credits I became the property of Barnard College at Columbia, and once I was the property of Barnard I had to take, it seemed, what Barnard wanted me to take, not what I wanted to learn.
Her first job was for a trade magazine, first as a secretary, then as an editor.
In an interview with Bill Steigerwald in ''Reason Magazine'', Jacobs said that if she is remembered for being a great intellectual she will be remembered not for her work concerning city planning, but for the discovery of import replacement.
She was survived by a brother, James Butzner
The 2010 Jane Jacobs Medal for Lifetime Leadership was given to Elizabeth Barlow Rogers, for her longtime work as writer, Park Administrator and co-founder of Central Park Conservancy.
Encouraged by this success, Butzner petitioned the War Production Board to support more operations in Scranton.
Jacobs claims that import replacement builds up local infrastructure, skills, and production.
Jacobs was also active in a fight against a plan of Royal St. George's College (an established school very close to Jacobs' long-time residence in Toronto’s Annex district) to reconfigure its facilities.
She concludes with her observation that the popular equating of political secession with political and economic failure is the result of the Enlightenment, which perceived nature as a force for "standardization, uniformity, universality, and immutability."
The exhibit includes furniture from previous homes in New York (her dining room is set up) and from Scranton, Pennsylvania.
'''Jane Jacobs'''  (born '''Jane Butzner'''; May 4, 1916 – April 25, 2006) was an American-Canadian journalist, author, and activist best known for her influence on urban studies.
Robert Moses has generally been identified as her archrival during this period.
While Jacobs saw her greatest legacy to be her contributions to economic theory, it is in the realm of urban planning that she has had her most extensive impact.
The concept had a huge influence on planners and architects such as Oscar Newman, who operationalized the idea through a series of studies that would culminate in his defensible space theory.
''The Question of Separatism'' was also not mentioned in the bibliography of her 2006 obituary in the ''The Globe and Mail''.
Jacobs was well known for organizing grassroots efforts to protect existing neighborhoods from "slum clearance" – and particularly for her opposition to Robert Moses in his plans to overhaul her neighborhood, Greenwich Village.
Jacobs was born '''Jane Butzner''' in Scranton, Pennsylvania, the daughter of John Decker Butzner, a doctor, and Bess Robison Butzner, a former teacher and nurse.
She also had an influence on Vancouver's urban planning.
The thesis of this book is that cities are the primary drivers of economic development.
After Jacobs' death in April 2006, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced a Jane Jacobs Day, held on June 28, 2006.
Jacobs argues that it is not the nation-state, rather it is the city which is the true player in this worldwide game.
She calls these two patterns "Moral Syndrome A", or commercial moral syndrome, and "Moral Syndrome B", or guardian moral syndrome.
She was instrumental in the eventual cancellation of the Lower Manhattan Expressway, which would have passed directly through SoHo and Little Italy, and was arrested in 1968 for inciting a crowd at a public hearing on the project.
Because of her ideas, today, many distressed urban neighbourhoods are more likely to be gentrified than cleared for redevelopment.
Jacobs was anti-communist, and had left the Federal Workers Union because of its apparent communist sympathies.
Jacobs also comments on the nature of economic and biological diversity and its role in the development and growth of the two kinds of systems.
In May 1958, Gilpatric invited Jacobs to begin serving as a reviewer for grant proposals.
She decided to leave the U.S. in part because she opposed the Vietnam War, she worried about the fate of her two draft-age sons, and she did not want to continue fighting the City of New York.
While working there she met Robert Hyde Jacobs Jr., a Columbia-educated architect who was designing warplanes for Grumman.
Glaeser agreed that these housing projects proved to be Moses' greatest failures, "Moses spent millions and evicted tens of thousands to create buildings that became centers of crime, poverty, and despair."
Soon after her arrest in 1968, Jacobs moved to Toronto, eventually settling at 69 Albany Avenue in The Annex from 1971 until her death in 2006.
During the 1950s and 1960s, her own home neighborhood of Greenwich Village was being transformed by developers, the expansion of New York University (NYU), and by the urban renewal plans of Robert Moses.
She studied at Columbia University's School of General Studies for two years, taking courses in geology, zoology, law, political science, and economics.
Jacobs never shied away from expressing her political support for specific candidates.
However, Jacobs' definition is supposition, since 'city' is defined simply as a large town or "a large human settlement" indicating permanence.
Critics erroneously claim that her ideas parrot the idea of import substitution advanced earlier by scholars such as Andre Gunder Frank.
Such arguments suggest that the ideas apply only to cities with similar issues to those of New York, where Jacobs developed many of her ideas.
''The Death and Life of Great American Cities'' remains one of the most influential books in the history of American city planning.
Jacobs received the second Vincent Scully Prize from the National Building Museum in 2000.
Is suburban sprawl, with its murders of communities and wastes of land, time, and energy, a sign of decay?
Since then, naturalists and their readers have gradually realized that nature is a force for diversity, and that, "diversity itself is of the essence of excellence."
In 1954, she was assigned to cover a development in Philadelphia designed by Edmund Bacon.
Jacobs painted a devastating picture of the entire profession of city planning, labeling it a pseudoscience.
In 2016, to mark the 100th anniversary of Jacobs' birth, a Toronto gallery is staging "Jane at Home", an exhibition running from April 29 to May 8.
In her foreword to her answer, she said:
Kirk came to the ''Architectural Forum'' offices to describe the impact that "revitalization" had on East Harlem, and he introduced Jacobs to the neighborhood.
She has been characterized as a major influence on decentralist  and radical centrist thought.
Jacobs also claims that the increased production is subsequently exported to other cities, giving those other cities a new opportunity to engage in import replacement, thus producing a positive cycle of growth.
Issues of gentrification have dominated criticism of Jane Jacobs’ planning ideas.
She and her husband chose Toronto because it was pleasant and offered employment opportunities, and they moved to an area of the city that included so many Americans avoiding the draft it was called the "American ghetto".
Samuel R. Delany's book ''Times Square Red, Times Square Blue'' relies heavily on ''The Death and Life of Great American Cities'' in its analysis of the nature of social relations within the realm of urban studies.
William (Bill) Teron accepted the 2013 award "for his influential career in public policy and passionate advocacy for quality design and commitment to development in the Ottawa area."
In the biological world, free energy is given through sunlight, but in the economic world human creativity and natural resources supply this free energy, or at least starter energy.
She sold articles to the ''Sunday Herald Tribune'', ''Cue'' magazine, and ''Vogue''.
The Jacobses rejected the rapidly growing suburbs as "parasitic", choosing instead to remain in Greenwich Village.
It is the current fear of radical ideas and of people who propound them.
Her observations about the ways in which cities function revolutionized the urban planning profession and discredited many accepted planning models that dominated mid-century planning.
For example, she advocated the preservation of older buildings specifically because their lack of economic value made them affordable for poor people.
She quickly became a leading figure in her new city and helped stop the proposed Spadina Expressway.
Moses—who had already forced through the Cross Bronx Expressway and other roadways against neighborhood opposition—envisioned a freeway, referred to as the Lower Manhattan Expressway or "LOMEX", directly through Washington Square Park.
Her thesis focused on "five pillars of our culture that we depend on to stand firm," which can be summarized as the nuclear family (but also community), education, science, representational government and taxes, and corporate and professional accountability.
Jacobs is credited, along with Lewis Mumford, with inspiring the New Urbanist movement.
Both received $100,000, in addition to the medal.
These experiences, she later said, "… gave me more of a notion of what was going on in the city and what business was like, what work was like."
Jacobs fought an uphill battle against dominant trends of planning despite the United States remaining very much a suburban nation, the work of Jacobs has contributed to city living being rehabilitated and revitalized.
Economist Tyler Cowen has criticized her ideas for not addressing problems of scale or infrastructure, and suggests that economists disagree with some of her approaches to development.
The earliest remains of mankind uncovered by archaeologists do not give us more information other than they were hunter-gatherers as there is no evidence yet of farming or settlement, implying nomadic lifestyles until further discoveries are found.
Beginning with a concise treatment of classical economics, this book challenges one of the fundamental assumptions of the greatest economists.
The origins of the contemporary secessionist-movement in the Quiet Revolution are examined, along with Canada’s historical reliance on natural resources and foreign-owned manufacturing for its own economic development.
Although her editors expected a positive story, Jacobs criticized Bacon's project, reacting against the apparent lack of care shown for the poor African Americans who were directly affected.
Upon her death her family's statement noted:
In places like the West Village, the factors that she argued would maintain economic and cultural diversity have instead led to gentrification and some of the most expensive real estate in the world.
In 1955, Jacobs met William Kirk, an Episcopal minister who worked in East Harlem.
Contrary to her expectations, the talk was received with enthusiasm, but it also marked her as a threat to established urban planners, real estate owners, and developers.
As a mother and a writer who criticized experts in the male-dominated field of urban planning, Jacobs endured scorn from established figures.
Many of these contributors participated in a series of panel discussions on "Jane Jacobs and the Future of New York".
A frequent theme of her work was to ask whether we are building cities for people or for cars.
Jacobs' book advances the view that Quebec's eventual independence is best for Montreal, Toronto, the rest of Canada, and the world; and that such independence can be achieved peacefully.
Her influential book ''The Death and Life of Great American Cities'' (1961) argued that urban renewal did not respect the needs of most city-dwellers.
Her own home sold in the 2000s for more than $3 million.
Although Toronto council initially rejected the school’s plans, the decision was later reversed – and the project was given the go-ahead by the Ontario Municipal Board (OMB) when opponents failed to produce credible witnesses and tried to withdraw from the case during the hearing.
Jacobs left ''Amerika'' in 1952 when it announced that it would relocate to Washington, D.C. She found a well-paying job at ''Architectural Forum'', published by Henry Luce of Time Inc. After early success on the job, Jacobs began to take assignments on urban planning and "urban blight".
In 1962 she gave up her position at ''Architectural Forum'' to become a full-time author and mother.
Papers such as ''The New York Times'' were sympathetic to Moses, while the newly created ''Village Voice'' covered community rallies and advocated against the expressway.
In 2012, Anne Golden took the prize "for her long-standing leadership in public policy, her academic work and her varied leadership experience in business, not-for-profit and government sectors."
They bought a three-story building at 555 Hudson St. Jane continued to write for ''Amerika'' after the war, while Robert left Grumman and resumed work as an architect.
A 1943 article on economic decline in Scranton was well-publicized and led the Murray Corporation to locate a warplane factory there.
Walks are organized and led by local volunteers, coordinated by a headquarters office in Toronto.
TCCA did upgrade the ferry service and the airport is still in operation as of 2015.
The interpretive walks typically apply ideas Jacobs identified or espoused to local areas, which are explored on foot and sometimes by bicycle.
After months of trials conducted in New York City (to which Jacobs commuted from Toronto), her charge was reduced to disorderly conduct.
Jacobs suggested not only that the redesign be stopped but also the school be forced from the neighborhood entirely.
The Committee succeeded in blocking the project.
The City of Toronto proclaimed her birthday the following year, May 4, 2007, as Jane Jacobs Day.
Jacobs has been called "the mother of Vancouverism", referring to that city's use of her "density done well" philosophy.
A Jane's Walk event was later held in New York on September 29 and 30, 2007.
They were a Protestant family in a heavily Roman Catholic town.
She restates the idea of import replacement from her earlier book ''The Economy of Cities'', while speculating on the further ramifications of considering the city first and the nation second, or not at all.
Richard Kahan, as founder and CEO of the Urban Assembly, which created and manages 22 secondary public schools located in many of the lowest income neighborhoods in New York City, received the 2009 Jane Jacobs Medal for Lifetime Leadership.
The Community and Urban Sociology section of the American Sociological Association awarded her its Outstanding Lifetime Contribution award in 2002.
She was arrested twice during demonstrations.
In Melbourne in the 1960s, resident associations fought against large-scale high-rise housing projects of the Housing Commission of Victoria, which they argued had little regard for the impact on local communities.
The apparent opposition between Childe and Jacobs theories rests in their definition of 'city,' 'civilization,' or 'urban.'
Please remember her by reading her books and implementing her ideas.
Published in 2004 by Random House, in ''Dark Age Ahead'' Jacobs argued that "North American" civilization showed signs of spiral of decline comparable to the collapse of the Roman empire.
Without the requirements of literacy, monumental building, or the signs of specialized civil and armed forces, 'cities' can be accurately be interpreted to exists thousands of years before when Childe and Maisels place them.
She also had considerable influence on the regeneration of the St. Lawrence neighborhood, a housing project regarded as a major success.
This led to angry responses from various rich and powerful men.
However, in the conclusion she wrote that, "At a given time it is hard to tell whether forces of cultural life or death are in the ascendancy.
Robert Caro has cited it as the strongest influence on ''The Power Broker'', his Pulitzer-winning biography of Robert Moses, though Caro does not mention Jacobs by name even once in the book despite Jacobs' battles with Moses over his proposed Lower Manhattan Expressway.
In 1961, Random House published the product of her research: ''The Death and Life of Great American Cities''.
Similarly, she claims that the guardian moral syndrome is applicable to government, charities, hunter-gatherers, and religious institutions.
As with her other work, she used an observational approach.
The extent to which her ideas facilitated this phenomenon was at the time unimaginable.
Joint Emergency Committee to Close Washington Square to Traffic, and other names), which recruited such members as Margaret Mead, Eleanor Roosevelt, Lewis Mumford, Charles Abrams, and William H. Whyte.
Jacobs asserts that such an approach is colonial and hence backward, citing by example Canada buying its skis and furniture from Norway or Norwegian-owned factories in Canada, the latter procedure being a product of Canadian tariffs designed specifically to foster such factories.
She was also accused of inattention to racial inequality, and her concept of "unslumming" has been compared with gentrification.
They renovated their new house, in the middle of a mixed residential and commercial area, and created a garden in the backyard.
Butzner and Jacobs married in 1944.
Following the election, Toronto City Council’s earlier decision to approve the bridge was reversed and bridge construction project was stopped.
The sisters soon moved there from Brooklyn.
Another interpretation of history, generally and erroneously considered to be contradictory to Jacobs' is supported by Marxist archaeologist Vere Gordon Childe and in recent times by another historical materialist Charles Keith Maisels These writers argue that agriculture preceded cities.
She argues that in cities trade in wild animals and grains allowed for the initial division of labor necessary for the discovery of husbandry and agriculture; these discoveries then moved out of the city due to land competition.
In 2008, the event spread to eight cities and towns across Canada, and by 2015, Jane's Walks were taking place in 189 cities in 36 countries, on six continents.
Jacobs continued to fight the expressway when plans resurfaced in 1962, 1965, and 1968, and she became a local hero for her opposition to the project.
The book is infused with many real-world economic and biological examples, which help keep the book "down to earth" and comprehensible, if dense.
Furthermore, her harsh criticisms of "slum clearing" and "high-rise housing" projects were instrumental in discrediting these once universally supported planning practices.
Arguably, her own white-collar family’s conversion of an old candy shop into a home was indicative of the gentrifying trend that would continue under the influence of Jacobs’s ideas.
By arguing that cities were living beings and ecosystems, she advocated ideas such as "mixed use" development and bottom-up planning.
She criticized the construction of the World Trade Center as a disaster for Manhattan's waterfront.
Since then, Jacobs’ ideas have been analysed many times, often in regard to the outcomes that their influences have produced.
Classical (and Neo-classical) economists consider the nation-state to be the main player in macroeconomics.
She was also famous for introducing concepts such as the "Ballet of the Sidewalk" and "Eyes on the Street", a reference to what would later be known as natural surveillance.
She did not have a college degree or any formal training in urban planning, and was criticized for lacking such credentials and being imprecise.
After moving to Toronto in 1968, she joined the opposition to the Spadina Expressway and the associated network of expressways in Toronto planned and under construction.
An accompanying exhibit publication includes essays and articles by such architecture critics, artists, activists and journalists as Malcolm Gladwell, Reverend Billy, Robert Neuwirth, Tom Wolfe, Thomas de Monchaux, and William McDonough.
Her brother, John Decker Butzner, Jr., served as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
The relevant public views of René Lévesque, Claude Ryan, and then Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau are also critically analyzed, an example being their failure to recognize that two respective, independent currencies are essential to the success of an independent Quebec and a smaller resultant Canada, an issue that is central to her book.
On June 25, 1958, the city closed Washington Square Park to traffic, and the Joint Committee held a ribbon tying (not cutting) ceremony.
Her main argument is that explosive economic growth derives from urban import replacement.
Widely read by both planning professionals and the general public, the book is a strong critique of the urban renewal policies of the 1950s, which, she claimed, destroyed communities and created isolated, unnatural urban spaces.
The Canadian Urban Institute offers an award in Jacobs' name, the '''Jane Jacobs Lifetime Achievement Award''', to recognize a person "who has had significant impact on the health of their region consistent with Jane Jacob’s belief that successful cities foster a place-based, community-centred approach."
The ''Fortune'' piece brought Jacobs to the attention of Chadbourne Gilpatric, then Associate Director of the Humanities Division at the Rockefeller Foundation.
However, even this would lead to confusion since in practice, import substitution in India and Latin America were government subsidized and mandated, whereas Jacobs' concept of import replacement is a free market process of discovery and division of labor within a city.
The planners and developers that she fought in order to preserve the West Village were among those who initially criticised her ideas.
The walks normally take place in early May, on or close to her May 4 birthday.
Caro reportedly cut a chapter about Jacobs due to his book's length.
She became a feature writer for the Office of War Information, and then a reporter for ''Amerika'', a publication of the U.S. State Department.
The plan forced 132 families out of their homes and displaced 1,000 small businesses—the result was Washington Square Village.
Later that year, the Rockefeller Foundation awarded a grant to Jacobs to produce a critical study of city planning and urban life in the US.
Jacobs was criticized as a "militant dame" and a "housewife": an amateur who had no right to interfere with an established discipline.
The foundation had moved aggressively into urban topics, with a recent award to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for studies of urban aesthetics that would culminate in the publication of Kevin A. Lynch's ''Image of the City''.
Another interesting insight is the creation of economic diversity through the combination of different technologies, for example the typewriter and television as inputs and outputs of a computer system: this can lead to the creation of "new species of work".
Jacobs's and Newman's work would go on to impact American housing policy through the HOPE VI Program, an effort by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development to demolish the high-rise public housing projects so reviled by Jacobs, and to replace them with low-rise, mixed-income housing.
She addressed leading architects, urban planners, and intellectuals (including Lewis Mumford), speaking on the topic of East Harlem.
That many of these older structures have increased in economic value solely due to their age was implausible in 1961.
During her first several years in the city, Jacobs held a variety of jobs, working mainly as a stenographer and freelance writer, often writing about working districts in the city.
In addition to her local politics, she was a notable opponent of the Vietnam War, and marched on the Pentagon in October 1967.
The 2011 winner was Eberhard Zeidler, while his daughter, Margie Zeidler, won the 2015 award.
She backed an ecologist, Tooker Gomberg, who lost Toronto's 2000 mayoralty race, and was an adviser to David Miller's successful mayoral campaign in 2003, at a time when he was seen as a longshot.
Import substitution was a national economic theory implying that if a nation substituted its imports with national production the nation would become wealthier, whereas Jacob's idea is entirely about cities and could be called urban import substitution.
She was accused of inciting a riot, criminal mischief, and obstructing public administration.
Jacobs said, "Cities, to thrive in the 21st century, must separate themselves politically from their surrounding areas."
Or is rising interest in means of overcoming sprawl a sign of vigor and adaptability in North American culture?
The influential Harvard Economist Edward Glaeser, known for his work on urban studies, acknowledged  that Jane Jacobs (1960s) had been prescient in attacking Moses for "replacing well-functioning neighborhoods with Le Corbusier-inspired towers."
Concepts are furnished with both economic and biological examples, showing their coherence in both worlds.
It was published in 1980 and reprinted in 2011 with a previously unpublished 2005 interview with Robin Philpot on the subject in which she evokes the relative overlooking of that book among her usual readership.
This book is written as a Platonic dialogue.
Curated by Jane's son, Jim Jacobs, it offers glimpses of her home life, where she also worked.
Such an outcome, Jacobs believed, would in the long run doom Quebec's independence as much as it would hinder Canada's own future.
She urged this audience to "respect – in the deepest sense – strips of chaos that have a weird wisdom of their own not yet encompassed in our concept of urban order."
Gilpatric encouraged Jacobs to "explore the field of urban design to look for ideas and actions which may improve thinking on how the design of cities might better serve urban life, including cultural and humane value."
It appears that she (as described by characters in her book) took newspaper clippings of moral judgements related to work, collected and sorted them to find that they fit two patterns of moral behaviour that were mutually exclusive.
Her book was also criticized from the left for leaving out race and accepting gentrification.
In 1956, Jacobs delivered a lecture at Harvard University, standing in for Douglas Haskell of ''Architectural Forum''.
In 1935, during the Great Depression, she moved to New York City with her sister Betty.
During the mayoral campaign, Jacobs helped lobby against the construction of a bridge to join the city's waterfront to Toronto City Centre Airport (TCCA).
After graduating from Scranton High School, she worked for a year as the unpaid assistant to the women's page editor at the ''Scranton Tribune''.
Jacobs was an advocate of a Province of Toronto to separate the city proper from Ontario.
