For many years Fonda took ballet class to keep fit, but after fracturing her foot while filming ''The China Syndrome'', she was no longer able to participate.
''Newsday'' called her "the loveliest and most gifted of all our new young actresses".
After this came the comedies ''Any Wednesday'' (1966), opposite Jason Robards and Dean Jones, and ''Barefoot in the Park'' (1967), co-starring Robert Redford.
In 2009, she returned to Broadway after a 45-year absence, in the play ''33 Variations'', which earned her a  Tony Award nomination, while her recurring role in the HBO drama series ''The Newsroom'' (2012-2014), has earned her two Emmy Award nominations.
She demonstrated with Women in Black against Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip outside the residence of Israel's Prime Minister.
Naval Academy plebes, who had not yet been born when Fonda protested the Vietnam war, shouted out "Goodnight, Jane Fonda!
She rose to fame in 1960s films such as ''Period of Adjustment'' (1962), ''Sunday in New York'' (1963), ''Cat Ballou'' (1965), ''Barefoot in the Park'' (1967) and ''Barbarella'' (1968).
Both sides were using the POWs for propaganda ...
It was considered by many to have been the film that brought Fonda to bankable stardom.
In July, she marched in a Toronto protest called the "March for Jobs, Justice, and Climate," which was organized by dozens of nonprofits, labor unions, and environmental activists, including Canadian author Naomi Klein.
In December 2002, Fonda visited Israel and the West Bank as part of a tour focusing on stopping violence against women.
Fonda refused to press charges.
In 2004, she was awarded the Women's eNews 21 Leaders for the 21st Century award as one of Seven Who Change Their Worlds.
By calling into question the legitimacy of Tel Aviv, they are supporting a one-state solution, which means the destruction of the State of Israel."
They celebrate the same words Americans do.''
She has a brother, Peter, an actor, and a maternal half-sister, Frances de Villers Brokaw (aka "Pan"), whose daughter is Pilar Corrias, owner of Pilar Corrias Gallery in London.
She describes her beliefs as being "outside of established religion", with a more feminist slant, and views God as something that "lives within each of us as Spirit (or soul)."
The film was a huge critical and box office success, becoming the second highest-grossing release of the year.
She released five workout books and thirteen audio programs, through 1995.
In 2013, Fonda had a small role in ''The Butler'', portraying First Lady Nancy Reagan.
She won another BAFTA Award for Best Actress in 1979 with ''The China Syndrome'', about a cover-up of a vulnerability in a nuclear power plant.
Her visits to the POW camp led to persistent and exaggerated rumors which were repeated widely in the press and continued to circulate on the Internet decades later.
Fonda grew up an atheist, but turned to Christianity in the early 2000s.
But if they did I can't blame them.
In a 1988 interview with Barbara Walters, Fonda expressed regret for some of her comments and actions, stating:I would like to say something, not just to Vietnam veterans in New England, but to men who were in Vietnam, who I hurt, or whose pain I caused to deepen because of things that I said or did.
She currently stars with Lily Tomlin and Martin Sheen in the Netflix original series ''Grace and Frankie'' (2015).
Other signers included actor Danny Glover, musician David Byrne, journalist John Pilger, and authors Alice Walker, Naomi Klein, and Howard Zinn.
Since 2009, Fonda has been in a relationship with record producer Richard Perry.
On April 14, 1950, when Fonda was twelve, her mother committed suicide while under treatment at Craig House psychiatric hospital in Beacon, NY.
She turned down ''An Unmarried Woman'' because she felt the part was not relevant.
In June 2016, the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting; in the video, Fonda and others told the stories of the people killed there.
A faked composite photograph, which gave the false impression that the two had shared a speaker's platform, was also circulated.
Divorced from second husband Tom Hayden, she married billionaire media mogul Ted Turner in 1991 and retired from acting.
It was a song about the day 'Uncle Ho' declared their country's independence in Hanoi's Ba Dinh Square.
In September 2009, she was one of more than 1,500 signatories to a letter protesting the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival's spotlight on Tel Aviv.
During the course of her visit, Fonda visited American prisoners of war (POWs), and brought back messages from them to their families.
I have been to Israel many times and love the country and its people."
Here is my best, honest recollection of what happened: someone (I don't remember who) led me towards the gun, and I sat down, still laughing, still applauding.
In 1972, Fonda helped fund and organize the Indochina Peace Campaign, which continued to mobilize antiwar activists across the nation after the 1973 Paris Peace Agreement, through 1975, when the United States withdrew from Vietnam.
Everyone was laughing and clapping, including me&nbsp;...
But the truth is that my career, far from being destroyed after the war, flourished with a vigor it had not previously enjoyed."''
To compensate, she began participating in aerobics and strengthening exercises under the direction of Leni Cazden.
He died five months later.
Contrary to the lies that have been circulated, the protest letter was not demonizing Israeli films and filmmakers."
In the same year, Fonda spoke out against the war at a rally organized by Vietnam Veterans Against the War (VVAW) in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania.
Fonda made radio broadcasts on Hanoi Radio throughout her two-week tour, commenting on her visits to villages, hospitals, schools, and factories damaged in the war and denouncing U.S. military policy in Vietnam.
She and Lily Tomlin play aging women whose husbands reveal they are in love.
In ''My Life So Far'', Fonda stated that she considers patriarchy to be harmful to men as well as women.
I have apologized numerous times for any pain I may have caused servicemen and their families because of this photograph.
In September 2005, Fonda was scheduled to join British politician and anti-war activist George Galloway at two stops on his U.S. book tour, Madison, Wisconsin and Chicago.
Fonda's career breakthrough came with ''Cat Ballou'' (1965), in which she played a schoolmarm turned outlaw.
It would be the first of 22 workout videos released by her over the next 13 years which would collectively sell over 17 million copies.
On May 4, 1970, Fonda appeared before an assembly at the University of New Mexico, in Albuquerque, to speak on GI rights and issues.
Fonda in her autobiography revisited the incident: "I was shocked by the news and felt like a fool."
On January 19, 1973, three days after obtaining a divorce from Vadim in Santo Domingo, Fonda married activist Tom Hayden in a free-form ceremony at her home in Laurel Canyon.
She appeared in ''A Doll's House'' (1973), ''Steelyard Blues'' and ''The Blue Bird'' (1976).
This was followed by the romantic drama ''Stanley & Iris'' (1990) with Robert De Niro, which would be her final film for 15 years.
These were not men who had been starved.
''Period of Adjustment'' and ''Walk on the Wild Side'' followed in 1962.
— a reference to Fonda's recently released film, ''They Shoot Horses, Don't They?
The march aimed to show businesses and politicians alike that climate change is inherently linked to issues that may seem unrelated.
Fonda emphasized that she, "in no way, supports the destruction of Israel.
She averaged almost two movies a year throughout the decade, starting in 1960 with ''Tall Story'', in which she recreated one of her Broadway roles as a college cheerleader pursuing a basketball star, played by Anthony Perkins.
In 1994, the United Nations Population Fund made Fonda a Goodwill Ambassador.
Filming on the first season was completed in November 2014, and the show premiered online on May 8, 2015.
Fonda, as well as the named POWs, have personally denied the rumors, and subsequent interviews with the POWs showed these rumored allegations to be false as the persons named had never met Fonda.
She supported Huey Newton and the Black Panthers in the early 1970s, stating "Revolution is an act of love; we are the children of revolution, born to be rebels.
Her upcoming film roles include ''Fathers and Daughters'' with Russell Crowe.
Republican National Committee Chairman Ed Gillespie called Kerry a "Jane Fonda Democrat".
Only three others had received such an award – Jeanne Moreau, Alain Resnais, and Gerard Oury.
She also released another five exercise videos between 2010 and 2012.
I went to bed thinking about acting.
The endeavor succeeded and the Daybreak Star Cultural Center was constructed in the city's Discovery Park.
'''Jane Fonda''' (born '''Jayne Seymour Fonda'''; December 21, 1937) is an American actress, writer, political activist, former fashion model and fitness guru.
Some critics responded that her apology came at a time when a group of New England Veterans had launched a campaign to disrupt a film project she was working on, leading to the charge that her apology was motivated at least partly by self-interest.
In her 2005 autobiography, she wrote that she was manipulated into sitting on the battery; she had been horrified at the implications of the pictures and regretted they were taken.
The exercise videos were produced and directed by Sidney Galanty, who helped to put the deal together with video distributor Stuart Karl, of Karl Home Video.
''"The suggestion is that because of my actions against the war my career had been destroyed ...
Fonda was very selective by the end of the 1960s, turning down lead roles in ''Rosemary's Baby'' and ''Bonnie and Clyde'', which went to Mia Farrow and Faye Dunaway, respectively.
I began to cry and clap.
She was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of an alcoholic murder suspect in the 1986 thriller ''The Morning After'', opposite Jeff Bridges.
Fonda was a visible political activist in the counterculture era during the Vietnam War and has been more recently involved in advocacy for women.
Fonda's communications, as well as those of her husband, Tom Hayden, were intercepted by Britain's Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ).
A seven-time Academy Award nominee, she received her first nomination for ''They Shoot Horses, Don't They'' (1969) and went on to win two Best Actress Oscars in the 1970s for ''Klute'' (1971) and ''Coming Home'' (1978).
The quiet was broken when Beat poet Gregory Corso staggered onto the stage.
She practices Zazen meditation and Yoga.
Subsequent films have included ''Georgia Rule'' (2007), ''The Butler'' (2013), ''This Is Where I Leave You'' (2014) and ''Youth'' (2015).
In 1968, she played the title role in the science fiction spoof ''Barbarella'', which established her status as a sex symbol.
I memorized a song called "Day Ma Di", written by anti-war South Vietnamese students.
The protestors called themselves "They Shoot Students, Don't They?"
At 15 Fonda taught dance at Fire Island Pines, New York.
She would subsequently release 23 workout videos with the series selling a total of 17 million copies combined, more than any other exercise series.
Fonda visited Hanoi in July 1972 to witness firsthand the bombing damage to the dikes.
Fonda became interested in acting in 1954, while appearing with her father in a charity performance of ''The Country Girl'', at the Omaha Community Playhouse.
According to her father, their surname came from an Italian ancestor who immigrated to the Netherlands in the 1500s.
Under the UKUSA Agreement, the GCHQ sent the intercepted data on Americans to the U.S. government.
She also voiced a character on ''The Simpsons''.
She achieved this goal when she purchased the screen rights to the play ''On Golden Pond,'' specifically for her father and her.
''Jane Fonda's Workout'' became the highest selling home video of the next few years, selling over a million copies.
In 1982, she released her first exercise video, ''Jane Fonda's Workout'', which became the highest-selling video of the time.
She also states that for many years, she feared to call herself a feminist, because she believed that all feminists were "anti-male".
Columnist Joseph Kraft, who was also touring North Vietnam, said he believed the damage to the dikes was incidental and was being used as propaganda by Hanoi, and that, if the U.S. Air Force were "truly going after the dikes, it would do so in a methodical, not a harum-scarum way".
The protest letter said that the spotlight on Tel Aviv was part of "the Israeli propaganda machine" because it was supported in part by funding from the Israeli government and had been described by the Israeli Consul General Amir Gissin as being part of a Brand Israel campaign intended to draw attention away from Israel's conflict with the Palestinians.
It was the most horrible thing I could possibly have done.
From comments ascribed to her in interviews, some have inferred that she personally blamed the situation on anger at her outspoken political views: "I can't say I was blacklisted, but I was greylisted."
But the photo exists, delivering its message regardless of what I was doing or feeling.
I was exhausted and an emotional wreck after the 2-week visit&nbsp;...
After dropping out of Vassar, she went to Paris for two years to study art.
The same year, she starred in ''The Electric Horseman'' with her previous co-star, Robert Redford.
Because of her tour of North Vietnam during wartime and the subsequent rumors circulated about her visit, resentment against her among some veterans and currently serving U.S. military still exists.
She played an acting diva in Paolo Sorrentino's ''Youth'' in 2015, for which she earned a Golden Globe Award nomination.
Her role continued throughout the show's three seasons, and Fonda received two Emmy nominations for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.
which contained strong, frank criticism of the war by servicemen and servicewomen; it was released in 1972.
Later that year, Fonda's father married socialite Susan Blanchard (born 1928), just nine years his daughter's senior; this marriage ended in divorce.
The same year she starred alongside Catherine Keener in ''Peace, Love and Misunderstanding'', playing a hippy grandmother.
She returned to acting with her first film in 15 years, the 2005 comedy ''Monster in Law''.
Also, Kerry's opponents circulated a photograph showing Fonda and Kerry in the same large crowd at a 1970 anti-war rally, although they were sitting several rows apart.
She later visited Jewish and Arab doctors and patients at a Jerusalem hospital, followed by visits to Ramallah to see a physical rehabilitation center, and a Palestinian refugee camp.
Fonda spoke at an anti-war rally earlier in the day at the Navy Memorial, where members of the organization Free Republic picketed in a counter protest.
Fonda said, "The image of Jane Fonda, Barbarella, Henry Fonda's daughter ... sitting on an enemy aircraft gun was a betrayal ... the largest lapse of judgment that I can even imagine."
I hardly even thought about where I was sitting.
In 1972, Fonda starred as a reporter alongside Yves Montand in ''Tout Va Bien'', directed by Jean-Luc Godard and Jean-Pierre Gorin.
She has been involved in the feminist movement since the 1970s, which dovetails with her activism in support of civil rights.
It runs in our blood."
In 1982, Fonda and Hayden unofficially adopted an African-American teenager, Mary Luana Williams (known as Lulu), who was the daughter of members of the Black Panthers.
In 1980, Fonda starred in ''9 to 5'' with Lily Tomlin and Dolly Parton.
In May 2005, she returned to the screen with the box office success ''Monster-in-Law'', starring opposite Jennifer Lopez.
The dialogue was made into a movie (''F.T.A.'')
In January 2009, Fonda started chronicling her Broadway return in a blog, with posts about topics ranging from her Pilates class to her fears and excitement about her new play.
It all had nothing to do with where I was sitting.
There will be no two-state solution unless this happens."
In 1982, Fonda released her first exercise video, titled ''Jane Fonda's Workout'', inspired by her best-selling book, ''Jane Fonda's Workout Book''.
She reduced acting because of her political activism providing a new focus in her life.
Fonda and Hayden were divorced on June 10, 1990 in Santa Monica.
'', which had just been screened in Albuquerque.
She had more film work the following year, appearing in the comedies ''Better Living Through Chemistry'' and ''This is Where I Leave You''.
In 2005, she, Robin Morgan and Gloria Steinem co-founded the Women's Media Center, an organization that works to amplify the voices of women in the media through advocacy, media and leadership training, and the creation of original content.
Her first husband was ''Barbarella'' director Roger Vadim.
In contrast, the tragedy ''They Shoot Horses, Don't They?''
Having been diagnosed with breast cancer, Fonda underwent a lumpectomy in November 2010, and has recovered.
Her other nominations were for ''Julia'' (1977), ''The China Syndrome'' (1979), ''On Golden Pond'' (1981) and ''The Morning After'' (1986).
After touring and photographing dike systems in North Vietnam, she said the United States had been intentionally targeting the dike system along the Red River.
It galvanized such hostility.
She published an autobiography in 2005.
It certainly has been wildly distorted.
It's not something that I will apologize for."
On January 27, 2007, Fonda participated in an anti-war rally and march held on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., declaring that "silence is no longer an option".
These are the words Ho pronounced at the historic ceremony.
Fonda appears as a joint-lead in the Netflix series ''Grace and Frankie''.
Upon returning to the states, in 1958, she met Lee Strasberg and the meeting changed the course of her life, Fonda saying, "I went to the Actors Studio and Lee Strasberg told me I had talent.
However, in her 2005 autobiography, ''My Life So Far'', she rejected such simplification.
Hier continued, saying that "it is clear that the script the protesters are reading from might as well have been written by Hamas."
The cameras flashed&nbsp;...
This was considered one of the influences that started the fitness craze among baby boomers, then approaching middle age.
She ended the decade by appearing in ''Old Gringo''.
She is a two-time Academy Award winner and two time BAFTA Award winner.
It happened on my last day in Hanoi.
But now, with her increased understanding of patriarchy, she feels that feminism is beneficial to both men and women, and states that she "still loves men", adding that when she divorced Ted Turner, she felt like she had also divorced the world of patriarchy, and was very happy to have done so.
Fonda made her Broadway debut in the 1960 play ''There Was a Little Girl'', for which she received the first of two Tony Award nominations, and made her screen debut later the same year in ''Tall Story''.
The video's release led many people to buy the then-new VCR in order to watch and perform the workout at home.
I knew I was slaughtering it, but everyone seemed delighted that I was making the attempt.
During the 1960s, Fonda engaged in political activism in support of the Civil Rights Movement, and in opposition to the Vietnam War.
The ''Leni Workout'' became the ''Jane Fonda Workout,'' which began a second career for her, continuing for many years.
The couple had a daughter, Vanessa, born on September 28, 1968, in Paris, France, and named for actress and activist Vanessa Redgrave.
(1969) won her critical acclaim, and she earned her first Oscar nomination for the role.
The tour, described as "political vaudeville" by Fonda, visited military towns along the West Coast, with the goal of establishing a dialogue with soldiers about their upcoming deployments to Vietnam.
This practice has since been prohibited by the academy's ''Plebe Summer Standard Operating Procedures''.
I woke up thinking about acting.
Fonda argued that the military campaign in Iraq will turn people all over the world against America, and asserted that a global hatred of America would result in more terrorist attacks in the aftermath of the war.
She attended Greenwich Academy in Greenwich, Connecticut.
She later distinguished between regret over the use of her image as propaganda and pride for her anti-war activism: "There are hundreds of American delegations that had met with the POWs.
Their son, Troy O'Donovan Garity, was born on July 7, 1973 in Los Angeles and was given his paternal grandmother's maiden name, as the names "Fonda and Hayden carried too much baggage".
She called the Black Panthers "our revolutionary vanguard ... we must support them with love, money, propaganda and risk."
I will go to my grave regretting the photograph of me in an anti-aircraft gun, which looks like I was trying to shoot at American planes.
Hayden chose O'Donovan as the middle name after Irish revolutionary Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa.
This comedy Western received five Oscar nominations and was one of the year's top ten films at the box office.
He told reporters that he "considered it a debt of honor", adding "she spit in our faces for 37 years.
Fonda filmed her second movie in French when she had a leading role in the 2011 drama ''All Together''.
Fonda, in ''The Huffington Post'', said she regretted some of the language used in the original protest letter and how it "was perhaps too easily misunderstood.
", the company replied "Goodnight, bitch!"
Fonda continued appearing in feature films throughout the 1980s, winning an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in 1984 for ''The Dollmaker'', and starring in the role of Dr. Martha Livingston in ''Agnes of God'' (1985).
Fonda attended the Emma Willard School in Troy, New York, and Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, where she was an undistinguished student.
She uses Twitter and has a Facebook page.
In 2015, Fonda expressed disapproval with President Barack Obama's permitting of arctic drilling (Petroleum exploration in the Arctic) at the Sundance Film Festival.
In 2014, she was the recipient of the American Film Institute AFI Life Achievement Award.
Fonda and Hayden wanted to give their son a name that "was both American and Vietnamese" and chose "Troy", an Anglicization of the Vietnamese "Troi", as the only name they could think of meeting that requirement.
However, she also had detractors—in the same year, the ''Harvard Lampoon'' named her the "Year's Worst Actress" for ''The Chapman Report''.
It is possible that it was a set up, that the Vietnamese had it all planned.
If I was used, I allowed it to happen&nbsp;... a two-minute lapse of sanity that will haunt me forever&nbsp;...
In 2013, it was revealed that Fonda was one of approximately 1,600 Americans whose communications between 1967 and 1973 were monitored by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) as part of Project Minaret, a program that some NSA officials have described as "disreputable if not downright illegal".
Rabbi Marvin Hier of the Simon Wiesenthal Center stated that "People who support letters like this are people who do not support a two-state solution.
Two years later, Fonda had a supporting role in the drama ''Georgia Rule'', alongside Felicity Huffman and Lindsay Lohan.
She stated that the incident was a "betrayal" of American forces and of the "country that gave me privilege".
It hurt so many soldiers.
She offered to help raise funds for VVAW and, for her efforts, was rewarded with the title of Honorary National Coordinator.
Fonda had long wanted to work with her father, hoping it would help their strained relationship.
In a 2011 entry at her official website, Fonda explained:
Jayne Seymour Fonda was born on December 21, 1937, in New York City, the daughter of actor Henry Fonda and the Canadian-born socialite Frances Ford Brokaw (née Seymour).
In 2011, she published a second memoir, ''Prime Time''.
Fonda currently serves on the board of the organization.
