Joplin began using heroin again when she returned to the United States.
During another Garden concert, where she got solo billing on December 19, some observers believed Joplin tried to incite the audience to riot.
According to Joplin biographer Ellis Amburn, in Gravenites' snapshots they "look like a carefree, happy, healthy young couple having a tremendously good time."
", according to a statement made by her attorney Robert Gordon in 1995 at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony.
Her friend Peggy Caserta claims in her book, ''Going Down With Janis'' (1973), that she had encouraged a reluctant Joplin to perform at Woodstock.
After splitting from Big Brother and the Holding Company, Joplin formed a new backup group, the Kozmic Blues Band, composed of session musicians like keyboardist Stephen Ryder and saxophonist Cornelius "Snooky" Flowers, as well as Big Brother and the Holding Company guitarist Sam Andrew and future Full Tilt Boogie Band bassist Brad Campbell.
On Sunday, October 4, 1970, producer Paul Rothchild became concerned when Joplin failed to show up at Sunset Sound Recorders for a recording session.
Her singing was not included (by her own insistence) in the 1970 documentary film or the soundtrack for ''Woodstock: Music from the Original Soundtrack and More'', although the 25th anniversary director's cut of ''Woodstock'' includes her performance of "Work Me, Lord".
In the late 1990s, the musical play ''Love, Janis'' was created and directed by Randal Myler, with input from Janis' younger sister Laura and Big Brother guitarist Sam Andrew, with an aim to take it to Off Broadway.
After releasing two albums with the band, she left Big Brother to continue as a solo artist with her own backing groups, first the Kozmic Blues Band and then the Full Tilt Boogie Band.
Whatever she does and whatever she sings she'll do it well because her vocal talents are boundless.
At the last stop in Calgary, she took to the stage with Jerry Garcia while her band was tuning up.
Other kids at high school would routinely taunt her and call her names like "pig", "freak", "nigger lover", or "creep".
Due to persistent persuading by keyboardist and close friend Stephen Ryder, Joplin avoided drug use for several weeks, enjoining bandmate Dave Getz to promise that using needles would not be allowed in their rehearsal space or in her apartment or in the homes of her bandmates whom she visited.
Finally it's ''my'' band!"
Footage of Joplin and the band in the studio shows Joplin in great form and taking charge during the recording for "Summertime."
One of her performances was at a benefit by local musicians for Texas bluesman Mance Lipscomb, who was suffering from major health problems.
1 on the ''Billboard'' 200 album chart eight weeks after its release, remaining for eight (nonconsecutive) weeks.
However, the album's recording quality and engineering, as well as the musicianship, were considered superior to her previous releases, and some music critics argued that the band was working in a much more constructive way to support Joplin's sensational vocal talents.
The band went to Chicago for a four-week engagement in August 1966, then found themselves stranded after the promoter ran out of money when their concerts did not attract the expected audience levels, and he was unable to pay them.
Joplin attended her high school reunion on August 14, accompanied by fellow musician and friend Bob Neuwirth, road manager John Cooke, and sister Laura, but it was reportedly an unhappy experience for her.
Joplin took a more active role in putting together the Full Tilt Boogie Band than she did with her prior group.
''Live at Winterland '68'', recorded at the Winterland Ballroom on April 12 and 13, 1968, features Joplin and Big Brother and the Holding Company at the height of their mutual career working through a selection of tracks from their albums.
In her interview with Dalton she added that she felt most comfortable performing at small, cheap venues in San Francisco that were associated with the counterculture.
In 1964, Joplin and future Jefferson Airplane guitarist Jorma Kaukonen recorded a number of blues standards, which incidentally featured Margareta Kaukonen using a typewriter in the background.
On ''This Is Tom Jones'', they performed "Little Girl Blue" and "Raise Your Hand," the latter with Jones singing a duet with Joplin.
Other reviewers, such as reporter Carl Bernstein of the ''Washington Post'', generally ignored the band's flaws and devoted entire articles to celebrating the singer's magic.
Joplin told her family how great it was, but her mother and father remained distant on the subject as they did not really understand the hippie movement.
Five singles by Joplin went into the Billboard Top 100, including "Me and Bobby McGee", which reached number 1 in March 1971.
Now living in New York where he worked with IBM computers, he visited her, wearing a blue serge suit, to ask her father for her hand in marriage.
The documentary film of the festival that was released to theaters in 1970 includes, on the left side of a split screen, 37 seconds of footage of Joplin and Caserta walking toward Joplin's dressing room tent.
In a proper room, I would imagine there would be no adjectives to describe her."
''Cheap Thrills'' produced very popular hits with "Piece of My Heart" and "Summertime."
The album was certified gold at release and sold over a million copies in the first month of its release.
During her time at Lamar University, she commuted to Austin to perform solo, accompanying herself on guitar.
''Cheap Thrills'' reached No.
In May 1965, Joplin's friends threw her a bus-fare party so she could go back home.
After returning to San Francisco for two hometown shows at the Palace of Fine Arts Festival on August 31 and September 1, Joplin announced that she would be leaving Big Brother.
In 2013, Washington's Arena Stage featured a production of ''A Night with Janis Joplin'', starring Mary Bridget Davies.
Janis remained at Woodstock for the remainder of the festival.
Their final gig with Joplin was the one at Madison Square Garden with Winter and Butterfield.
Joplin's last performance with Big Brother, not counting two reunions in 1970, was at a Family Dog benefit on December 1, 1968.
In early 1965, Joplin's friends in San Francisco, noticing the detrimental effects on her from regularly injecting methamphetamine (she was described as "skeletal" and "emaciated"), persuaded her to return to Port Arthur, Texas.
One month later, Owsley Stanley recorded them at the Carousel Ballroom, released as ''Live at the Carousel Ballroom 1968'' in 2012.
In June, Joplin was photographed at an outdoor concert in San Francisco that celebrated the summer solstice.
On November 4, 2013, Joplin was awarded with the 2,510th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her contributions to the music industry.
According to a statement in the early 1990s by a close friend of Caserta and Joplin's, Caserta's book angered the Los Angeles heroin dealer she described in detail, including the make and model of his car.
Primarily a painter while still in school, she first began singing blues and folk music with friends.
Her name is Janis Joplin."
It was a ''New York Times'' Critics' Pick.
... and had joined the Peace Corps after college and worked in a small village in Turkey.
The film captured Cass Elliot, of The Mamas & the Papas, seated in the audience silently mouthing "Wow!
This is the way she came across in a huge, high-ceilinged roller skating rink without any acoustics but, thankfully a good enough sound system behind her.
Peggy Caserta and Seth Morgan had both failed to meet Joplin the Friday immediately prior to her death, October 2, and Joplin had been expecting both of them to keep her company that night.
One of Joplin's earliest major performances in 1967 was the Mantra-Rock Dance, a musical event held on January 29 at the Avalon Ballroom by the San Francisco Hare Krishna temple.
It was around this time that Joplin began wearing multi-coloured feather boas in her hair.
Joplin checked into the Landmark Motor Hotel in Hollywood on August 24, 1970, near Sunset Sound Recorders, where she began rehearsing and recording her album.
Joplin's Porsche was recently auctioned off for $1.6 million, on an episode of ''Chasing Classic Cars''.
The Stax-Volt R&B sound was typified by the use of horns and had a more bluesy, funky, soul, pop-oriented sound than most of the hard-rock psychedelic bands of the period.
Another trademark was her flamboyant hair styles, which often included colored streaks, and accessories such as scarves, beads, and feathers.
''Rolling Stone'' ranked Joplin number 46 on its 2004 list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time and number 28 on its 2008 list of 100 Greatest Singers of All Time.
The Full Tilt Boogie Band began touring in May 1970.
Cooke believes Joplin had accidentally been given heroin that was much more potent than normal, as several of her dealer's other customers also overdosed that week.
According to Ellis Amburn, in 1973 a "carful of dope dealers" visited a Los Angeles lesbian bar Caserta had been frequenting since Joplin was alive.
Five years later, Joplin told ''Rolling Stone'' magazine writer David Dalton the following about her first stint in San Francisco:  "I didn't have many friends and I didn't like the ones I had."
Her performances of "Kozmic Blues" and "Work Me, Lord" at Woodstock are notable, though her voice breaks while she sings.
This was her standard stage costume in the spring and summer of 1970.
Niehaus and Joplin were photographed by the press at Rio Carnival in Rio de Janeiro.
Biographer Myra Friedman said she witnessed a duet Joplin sang with Tina Turner during The Rolling Stones concert at the Garden on Thanksgiving Day.
"Combination of the Two" and a version of Big Mama Thornton's "Ball 'n' Chain" appear in the DVD box set of D. A. Pennebaker's documentary ''Monterey Pop'' released by The Criterion Collection.
Lennon told Dick Cavett on-camera the following year that Joplin's recorded birthday wishes arrived at his home after her death.
(No security was used in Frankfurt, so by the end of the concert the stage was so packed with people the band members could not see each other.)
Despite Graham's announcement that the Fillmore West gig was Big Brother's last concert with Joplin, the band—with Joplin still as lead vocalist—toured the United States that fall.
At the 1976 Montreux Jazz Festival, Nina Simone, whom Joplin admired greatly, commented on Joplin and referred to the documentary ''Janis'' (1975) that evidently was screened at the festival:
That's really heavy!"
Amburn quoted Caserta's friend Kim Chappell, who was in the alley behind the bar: "I was stabbed because, when Peggy's book came out, her dealer, the same one who'd given Janis her last fix, didn't like it that he was referred to and was out to get Peggy.
By early 1969, Joplin was allegedly shooting at least $200 worth of heroin per day, ($1300 in 2016 dollars) although efforts were made to keep her clean during the recording of ''I Got Dem Ol' Kozmic Blues Again Mama!''.
On one episode of ''The Dick Cavett Show'', they performed "Try (Just a Little Bit Harder)" as well as "To Love Somebody".
Reviews of the new group were mixed.
An opera buff at the time, he wrote, "Miss Joplin, in her early 20s, has been for the last year or two the vocalist with Big Brother and the Holding Company, a rock quintet of superior electric expertise.
Additionally, Kim France reported in ''The New York Times'' article, "Nothin' Left to Lose" (May 2, 1999): "Once she became famous, Joplin cursed like a truck driver, did not believe in wearing undergarments, was rarely seen without her bottle of Southern Comfort and delighted in playing the role of sexual predator."
Another film  was made of the band's performance in Stockholm, featuring Joplin's interpretation of "Summertime."
As Dick Cavett interviewed Joplin, she admitted that she had a terrible time touring in Europe, claiming that audiences there are very uptight and don't "get down".
The campus newspaper, ''The Daily Texan'', ran a profile of her in the issue dated July 27, 1962, headlined "She Dares to Be Different."
Originally planned to be titled ''Pearl''—Joplin's nickname and the title of her last album—the film was fictionalized after her family declined to allow the producers the rights to her story.
Joplin and Big Brother began playing clubs in San Francisco, at the Fillmore West, Winterland and the Avalon Ballroom.
When Joplin was not at Sunset Sound Recorders, she liked to drive her Porsche over the speed limit "on the winding part of Sunset Blvd.
In 2005, she received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.
She and Morgan were engaged to be married in early September, even though he visited Sunset Sound Recorders for just eight of Joplin's many rehearsals and sessions.
He was not interested in experimenting with hard drugs.
Some of her full performances of ''Festival Express'' exist, although all the footage has yet to be released.
Footage of her performance of "Tell Mama" in Calgary became an MTV video in the early 1980s, and the song was included on the ''Farewell Song'' (1982) album.
Joplin was ultimately unhappy with her performance, however, and blamed Caserta.
Among Joplin's last public appearances were two broadcasts of ''The Dick Cavett Show''.
Caserta survived "a near-fatal OD in December 1995," wrote Alice Echols.
Shortly thereafter, network employees wiped the videotape.
In 1992, the first major biography of Joplin in two decades, ''Love, Janis'', authored by her younger sister, Laura Joplin, was published.
After switching managers from Chet Helms to Julius Karpen in 1966, the group signed with top artist manager Albert Grossman, whom they met for the first time at Monterey Pop.
In the "Tell Mama" video shown on MTV in the 1980s, Joplin wore a psychedelically colored, loose-fitting costume and feathers in her hair.
In it, Joplin puts on a concert for the audience, while telling stories of her past inspirations including Odetta, Aretha Franklin, and others.
Another song by Baez, "Children of the Eighties," mentioned Joplin.
At the same time, Peggy Caserta's memoir, ''Going Down With Janis'' (1974), attracted a lot of attention, with its provocative title referring to her performing a sex act with Joplin while they were high on heroin, in September 1970.
(During her college years, Joplin had been voted "Ugliest Man on Campus" by frat boys.)
She was recruited to join the group by Chet Helms, a promoter who had known her in Texas and who at the time was managing Big Brother.
Grossman and Friedman knew during that Joplin's lifetime her friend Caserta, whom Friedman met during the New York sessions for ''Cheap Thrills'' and on later occasions, used heroin.
Over the next two years, she made three appearances on the primetime Cavett program, and all were preserved.
By 1968, the band was being billed as "Janis Joplin and Big Brother and the Holding Company," and the media coverage given to Joplin generated resentment within the band.
On Saturday afternoon, when she and the band were flown by helicopter with the pregnant Joan Baez and her mother from a nearby motel to the festival site and Joplin saw the enormous crowd, she instantly became incredibly nervous and giddy.
I read, I painted, I thought.
This information was published by David Crosby in 1988.
The demanding role of the singing Janis attracted rock vocalists ranging from relative unknowns to pop stars Laura Branigan and Beth Hart.
On August 8, Joplin performed at the Capitol Theatre in Port Chester, New York.
In Brazil, Joplin was romanced by a fellow American tourist named David (George) Niehaus, who was traveling around the world.
This session included seven tracks: "Typewriter Talk," "Trouble in Mind," "Kansas City Blues," "Hesitation Blues," "Nobody Knows You When You're Down and Out," "Daddy, Daddy, Daddy", and "Long Black Train Blues," and was later released as the bootleg album ''The Typewriter Tape''.
In November 2009, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum honored her as part of its annual American Music Masters Series; among the artifacts at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Museum exhibition are Joplin's scarf and necklaces, her 1965 Porsche 356 Cabriolet with psychedelically designed painting, and a sheet of LSD blotting paper designed by Robert Crumb, designer of the ''Cheap Thrills'' cover.
during Joplin's performance of "Ball and Chain."
Another of her performances was reviewed in the ''Austin American-Statesman''.
When they realized who I was, they felt that my death would also hit Peggy, and so they stabbed me."
On April 7, 1968, the last day of their East Coast tour, Joplin and Big Brother performed with Jimi Hendrix, Buddy Guy, Joni Mitchell, Richie Havens, Paul Butterfield, and Elvin Bishop at the "Wake for Martin Luther King, Jr." concert in New York.
Upon landing and getting off the helicopter, Joplin was approached by reporters asking her questions.
Helms enlisted Travis Rivers, a friend of both Helms and Joplin, to travel with her from Texas to California.
Joplin, along with Grace Slick of Jefferson Airplane, opened opportunities in the rock music business for future female singers.
On September 26, 1970, Joplin recorded vocals for "Half Moon" and "Cry Baby".
Amburn added in 1992, "Janis was trying to kick heroin in Brazil, and one of the nicest things about George was that he wasn't into drugs."
The album had a raw quality, including the sound of a cocktail glass breaking and the broken shards being swept away during the song "Turtle Blues."
She followed Creedence Clearwater Revival.
Full Tilt Boogie's road manager, John Cooke, drove to the Landmark Motor Hotel in Hollywood where Joplin was staying.
Audiences and critics alike referred to her stage presence as "electric".
Together with the premiere of the documentary film ''Monterey Pop'' at New York's Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts on December 26, 1968, the album launched Joplin's successful, albeit short, musical career.
But even Janis on an off-night was incredible."
Big Brother guitarist James Gurley "got clean and sober in 1984," wrote Ellis Amburn.
In early 1967, Joplin met Country Joe McDonald of the group Country Joe and the Fish.
She died of a drug overdose in 1970, aged 27, after releasing three albums.
On August 8, 2014, the United States Postal Service revealed a commemorative stamp honoring Janis Joplin, as part of its Music Icons Forever Stamp series during a first-day-of-issue ceremony at the Outside Lands Music Festival at Golden Gate Park.
She had two younger siblings, Michael and Laura.
Gleason wrote that the new band was a "drag" and Joplin should "scrap" her new band and "go right back to being a member of Big Brother...(if they'll have her)."
These tracks were later issued as a new album in 1995, entitled ''This is Janis Joplin 1965'' by James Gurley.
A Serge Gainsbourg-penned French language song by English singer Jane Birkin, "Ex fan des sixties" (1978), references Joplin alongside other disappeared "idols" such as Jimi Hendrix, Brian Jones, and Marc Bolan.
Simone also included Joplin in her song "Stars", and opened her act with a rendition of "Little Girl Blue".
The album featured a cover design by counterculture cartoonist Robert Crumb.
On January 13, 2000, Caserta appeared on-camera for a segment about Joplin on ''20/20''.
Janis Joplin and Big Brother performed there along with the Hare Krishna founder Bhaktivedanta Swami, Allen Ginsberg, Moby Grape, and Grateful Dead, donating proceeds to the Krishna temple.
When a visitor injected drugs in front of Joplin and Getz, Joplin angrily reminded Getz that he had broken his promise.
The ''Kozmic Blues'' album, released in September 1969, was certified gold later that year but did not match the success of ''Cheap Thrills''.
Back in Port Arthur in the spring of 1965, Joplin changed her lifestyle.
She and Paul Rothchild agreed she would record the vocal the following day.
The result of the sessions was the posthumously released ''Pearl'' (1971), which became the biggest-selling album of her career and featured her biggest hit single, a cover of Kris Kristofferson's "Me and Bobby McGee".
She pulled through, however, and the audience was so pleased they cheered her on for an encore, to which she replied and sang "Ball and Chain".
During the recording, Joplin was said to be the first person to enter the studio and the last person to leave.
She finished the night with long versions of "Get It While You Can" and "Ball and Chain".
For part of this concert she was joined onstage by Johnny Winter and Paul Butterfield.
Joplin was among several singers who had been contacted by Yoko Ono with a request for a taped greeting for Lennon's 30th birthday, on October 9.
''Janis'', which was reviewed by the ''Washington Post'' on March 21, 1975, shows Joplin arriving in Frankfurt by plane and waiting inside a bus next to the Frankfurt venue, while an American fan who is visiting Germany expresses enthusiasm to the camera.
On December 15, 2015, Amy J. Berg released her biographical documentary film, ''Janis: Little Girl Blue'', narrated by Cat Power.
Joplin appeared at Woodstock starting at approximately 2:00&nbsp;a.m., on Sunday, August 17, 1969.
Laura Joplin, Janis' younger sister, said in an interview that her sister went straight to her parents' home in Port Arthur, Texas, following Woodstock, was incredibly vibrant and happy after coming home, and really loved the festival.
Two tracks, "Coo Coo" and "The Last Time", were released separately as a single, while the tracks from the previous single, "Blindman" and "All Is Loneliness", were added to the remaining eight tracks.
From June 28 to July 4, 1970, Joplin and Full Tilt Boogie joined the all-star ''Festival Express'' train tour through Canada, performing alongside Buddy Guy, The Band, Ten Years After, Grateful Dead, Delaney and Bonnie, Eric Andersen, and Ian & Sylvia.
Stevie Nicks considers Joplin one of her idols, and has said:
On Saturday, October 3, Joplin visited Sunset Sound Recorders to listen to the instrumental track for Nick Gravenites's song "Buried Alive in the Blues", which the band had recorded one week earlier.
I've decided to go and dig some other jungles for a couple of weeks."
Her relationship with Niehaus soon ended because he witnessed her shooting drugs at her new home in Larkspur, California, her romantic relationship with Peggy Caserta, who also was an intravenous addict, and Joplin's refusal to take some time off work and travel the world with him.
In the circumstances the band signed to Bob Shad's record label Mainstream Records; recordings for the label took place in Chicago in September, but these were not satisfactory, and the band returned to San Francisco, continuing to perform live, including at the Love Pageant Rally.
The opening acts on this night were Chicago (then still called Chicago Transit Authority) and Santana.
The band recorded two tracks "Blindman" and "All Is Loneliness" in Los Angeles, and these were released by Mainstream as a single which did not sell well.
During the many long-distance telephone conversations that Joplin and Friedman had in September 1970 and on October 1, Joplin never mentioned Caserta, and Friedman assumed Caserta had been out of Joplin's life for a while.
Gravenites also took color photographs of the two during their Brazilian vacation.
The family attended the Church of Christ.
After midnight, Joplin drove him and a fan back to the  Landmark Motor Hotel.
Despite being "stabbed three times in the chest, puncturing both lungs," Chappell eventually recovered.
Sam Andrew, the lead guitarist who had left Big Brother with Joplin in December 1968 to form her back-up band, quit in late summer 1969 and returned to Big Brother.
As a teen, she became overweight, and her skin broke out so badly she was left with deep scars that required dermabrasion.
Also included was the social commentary of the ''a cappella'' "Mercedes Benz" song written by Joplin, Bob Neuwirth, and Beat poet Michael McClure.
Within a few days, Joplin became a regular customer of the same heroin dealer.
For approximately the first two weeks of Joplin's stay at the Landmark, she did not know Caserta was in Los Angeles.
She also revealed that she was a big fan of Tina Turner's, saying Turner was an incredible singer, dancer, and show woman.
For her first major studio recording, Janis played a major role in the arrangement and production of the recordings that would become Big Brother and the Holding Company's second album, ''Cheap Thrills''.
She told her construction crew to design a carport to be shaped like a flying saucer, according to biographer Ellis Amburn, the concrete foundation for which was poured the day before she died.
She then burst into a two-hour set, starting with "Tell Mama".
She deferred them to Caserta as she was too excited to speak.
Joplin, who was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995, was well known for her performing ability.
Joplin jammed with the other performers on the train, and her performances on this tour are considered to be among her greatest.
During her performance, her voice became slightly hoarse and wheezy, and she found it hard to dance.
At the end of the year, the Kozmic Blues Band broke up.
Joplin begged Caserta for heroin, and when Caserta refused to provide it, Joplin reportedly admonished her by saying, "Don't think if you can get it, I can't get it."
Joplin held a press conference in Port Arthur during her reunion visit.
The article began, "She goes barefooted when she feels like it, wears Levis to class because they're more comfortable, and carries her Autoharp with her everywhere she goes so that in case she gets the urge to break into song, it will be handy.
De Blanc, who traveled frequently, terminated plans for the marriage soon afterward.
In addition to Woodstock, Joplin also had problems at Madison Square Garden, in 1969.
During the ''Festival Express'' tour, Joplin was accompanied by ''Rolling Stone'' writer David Dalton, who later wrote several articles and two books on Joplin.
Likewise, Leonard Cohen's song, "Chelsea Hotel #2" (1974), is about Joplin, and lyricist Robert Hunter has commented that Jerry Garcia's "Birdsong" from his first solo album, ''Garcia'' (1972), is about Joplin and the end of her suffering through death.
Joplin, well known to the boutique's employees, made a practice of putting aside vintage and other one-of-a-kind garments she favored on stage and off.
She avoided drugs and alcohol, adopted a beehive hairdo, and enrolled as an anthropology major at Lamar University in nearby Beaumont, Texas.
The image, which was later published in two books by David Dalton, shows her before she relapsed into drugs.
Gabriel Mekler, who produced the ''Kozmic Blues'', told publicist-turned-biographer Myra Friedman after Joplin's death that the singer had lived in his house during the June 1969 recording sessions at his insistence so he could keep her away from drugs and her drug-using friends.
Instead, he stayed at Joplin's Larkspur home while she stayed alone at the Landmark, although several times she visited Larkspur to be with him and to check the progress of renovations she was having done on the house.
Bette Midler earned a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the film.
When asked by a reporter if she ever entertained at Thomas Jefferson High School when she was a student there, Joplin replied, "Only when I walked down the aisles."
At the time of this June 1970 interview, she had already performed in the Bay Area for what turned out to be the last time.
I didn't hate niggers."
