c) Solar, solsticial and cosmological elements.
The ''flamen Portunalis'' oiled the arms of Quirinus with an ointment kept in a peculiar container named ''persillum'', term perhaps derived from Etruscan ''persie''.
After the new readings proposed by A. Maggiani, in case 3 one should read TINS: the difficulty has thus dissolved.
the current situation of man in the universe, and not to endings as transitions, which are under the jurisdiction of the gods of beginning owing to the ambivalent nature of the concept.
''Cozeiuod''  ''orieso.''
Janus and the depiction of Boreas as Bifrons: climatological elements.
Even though the lists overlap to a certain extent (five epithets are common to Macrobius's and Lydus's list), the explanations of the epithets differ remarkably.
The proof are the numerous equivalent expressions.
Although Janus had no flamen, he was closely associated with the rex sacrorum who performed his sacrifices and took part in most of his rites: the ''rex'' held the first place in the ordo sacerdotum, hierarchy of priests.
Schilling supposes it was probably a ''sacrum'' originally entrusted to the ''gens Horatia'' that allowed the desacralisation of the ''iuvenes'' at the end of the military season, later transferred to the state.
or else see in the god a sort of cosmological principle, interpreting him as a uranic deity.
''Κήνουλος (Coenulus) ''and ''Κιβουλλιος (Cibullius)'' are not attested by Latin sources.
It has long been believed that Janus was present among the theonyms on the outer rim of the Piacenza Liver in case 3 under the name of Ani.
Numerous toponyms of places located at the boundary between the territory of two communities, especially Etrurians and Latins or Umbrians, are named after the god.
Later on, however, the Sabines and Romans agreed on creating a new community together.
Olistene, the daughter of Janus with Camese, may reflect in her name that of the olive or ''oleaster'', or of Oreithyia.
In Italy there is a trace of a conflict between worshippers of the Argive Hera (Diomedes and the Diomedians of the south) and of the Penates.
Janus had no flamen or specialised priest ''(sacerdos)'' assigned to him, but the King of the Sacred Rites ''(rex sacrorum)'' himself carried out his ceremonies.
The ''tigillum'' consisted of a beam on two posts.
The figure of the IE initial god (Vâyu, Vayu, Mainyu, Janus) may open the sacrifice (Vâyu and Janus), preside over the start of the voyage of the soul after death (Iranian Vayu), "stand at the opening of the drama of the moral history of the world" (the Zoroastrian Mainyus).
William Betham argued that the cult arrived from the Middle East and that Janus corresponds to the ''Baal-ianus'' or Belinus of the Chaldeans, sharing a common origin with the Oannes of Berosus.
Janus Quirinus was closely associated with the anniversaries of the dedications of the temples of Mars on 1 June (a date that corresponded with the festival of Carna, a deity associated with Janus: see below) and of that of Quirinus on 29 June (which was the last day of the month in the pre-Julian calendar).
''Pater'' is perhaps the most frequent epithet of Janus, found also in the composition ''Ianuspater''.
It could also be referred to the white willow tree, used to make objects of trelliswork.
It contained a statue of the god with the right hand showing the number 300 and the left the number 65—i.e., the length in days of the solar year, and twelve altars, one for each month.
This proves that the Greeks of the 5th century BC knew the image of Janus.
Thus there is a reciprocal link between the god of beginnings and unending motion, who bestows life to the beings of this world (Cerus Manus) as well as presiding over its end, and the goddess of the hearth of man, which symbolises through fire the presence of life.
These two pillars would be at the origin of the theology of the divine twins, one of whom is mortal (related to the NE pillar, as confining with the region where the sun does not shine) and the other is immortal (related to the SE pillar and the region where the sun always shines).
Renard thinks that while Janus is the god of motion and transitions he is not concerned directly with purification, while the arch is more associated with Juno.
The god with two faces appeared repeatedly in Babylonian art.
Vesta is a virgin goddess but at the same time she is considered the mother of Rome: she is thought to be indispensable to the existence and survival of the community.
His function of ''custos'' guardian is highlighted by the location of his temple inside the pomerium but not far from the gate of Porta Collina or Quirinalis, near the shrines of Sancus and Salus.
The rite is discussed in detail in the section below.
Another etymology proposed by Nigidius Figulus is related by Macrobius: ''Ianus'' would be Apollo and Diana ''Iana'', by the addition of a ''D'' for the sake of euphony.
However Martianus's depiction does not look to be confined to a division Heaven-Earth as it includes the Underworld and other obscure regions or remote recesses of Heaven.
Modern scholars have conjectured that it derives from the Indo-European root meaning transitional movement (cf.
Since borders often coincided with rivers and the border of Rome (and other Italics) with Etruria was the Tiber, it has been argued that its crossing had a religious connotation; it would have involved a set of rigorous apotropaic practices and a devotional attitude.
In the video game series, Deus Ex (series), Janus is an anonymous hacker and leader of the hacker group, the Juggernaut Collective.
Shortly afterwards, on 9 January, on the ''feria'' of the Agonium of January the rex sacrorum offered the sacrifice of a ram to Janus.
He has never been known to be seen by anyone, even from the Collective.
On the role of Janus in the rite of the Tigillum Sororium see also the section below.
Festus and other ancient authors  explain Curiatius by the aetiological legend of the Tigillum: the expiation undergone by P. Horatius after his victory over the Alban Curiatii for the murder of his own sister, by walking under a beam with his head veiled.
A similar solar interpretation has been offered by A. Audin who interprets the god as the issue of a long process of development, starting with the Sumeric cultures, from the two solar pillars located on the eastern side of temples, each of them marking the direction of the rising sun at the dates of the two solstices: the southeastern corresponding to the Winter and the northeastern to the Summer solstice.
The purification is then the prerequisite for fertility.
In Act I Scene 2 of Shakespeare's ''Othello'', Iago invokes the name of Janus after the failure of his premiere plot to undo the titular character.
Iago guides (if not forces) the story through inception, climax, and finale.
Vesta is thence the goddess of the hearth of homes as well as of the city.
In other towns of ancient Latium the function of presiding over beginnings was probably performed by other deities of feminine sex, notably the ''Fortuna Primigenia'' of Praeneste.
b) The Janiculum may have been inhabited by people who were not Latin but had close alliances with Rome.
His schemes prompt the beginning of each of the main characters' ends: in his absence, Othello and Desdemona would likely have remained married and Cassio would have remained in his respected position of power.
The rites concerning Janus were numerous.
Whatever the case, it is certain that Janus and Juno show a peculiar reciprocal affinity: while Janus is ''Iunonius'', Juno is ''Ianualis'', as she presides over childbirth and the menstrual cycle, and opens doors.
Macrobius gives the same interpretation of the epithet in his list: "Consivius from sowing (conserendo), i. e. from the propagation of the human genre, that is disseminated by the working of Janus."
It formed a walled enclosure with gates at each end, situated between the old Roman Forum and that of Julius Caesar, which had been consecrated by Numa Pompilius himself.
In Hinduism the image of double or four faced gods is quite common, as it is a symbolic depiction of the divine power of seeing through space and time.
The origin of this epithet might be either concrete, referring directly to the image of the god reproduced on coins and supposed to have been introduced by king Numa in the sanctuary at the lowest point of the Argiletum, or to a feature of the Ianus of the ''Porta Belli'', the double gate ritually opened at the beginning of wars, or abstract, deriving metaphorically from the liminal, intermediary functions of the god themselves: both in time and space passages connected two different spheres, realms or worlds.
As may be expected the opening verses of the Carmen, are devoted to honouring Janus, thence were named ''versus ianuli''.
Thence the analogy with the rite of the Tigillum Sororium would be apparent: both in the myth and in the rite Janus, the god of motion, goes through a low passage to attain Carna as Horatius passes under the ''tigillum'' to obtain his purification and the restitution to the condition of citizen eligible for civil activities, including family life.
So in IE religions there is an introducer god (as Vedic Vâyu and Roman Janus) and a god of ending, a nurturer goddess and a genie of fire (as Vedic Saraswati and Agni, Avestic Armaiti, Anâitâ and Roman Vesta) who show a sort of mutual solidarity: the concept of 'god of ending' is defined in connection to the human referential, i.e.
Macrobius's list and explanation are probably based directly on Cornelius Labeo's work, as he cites this author often in his ''Saturnalia'', as when he gives a list of Maia's cult epithets  and mentions one of his works, ''Fasti''.
In Augustan ideology this symbolic meaning was strongly emphasised.
Carna was a nymph of the sacred ''lucus'' of Helernus, made goddess of hinges by Janus with the name of Cardea, and had the power of protecting and purifying thresholds and the doorposts.
It is conventionally thought that the month of January is named for Janus (Ianuarius), but according to ancient Roman farmers' almanacs Juno was the tutelary deity of the month.
There is though a greater degree of fuzziness concerning the function and role of goddesses, which may have formed a preexisting structure allowing the absorption of the local Mediterranean mother goddesses, nurturers and protectresses .
Reproductions of the image of such a god, named Usmu, on cylinders in Sumero-Accadic art is to be found in H. Frankfort's work ''Cylinder seals'' (London 1939) especially in plates at p.&nbsp;106, 123, 132, 133, 137, 165, 245, 247, 254.
Moreover, it is part of the different interpretation of the meaning of the ritual of the Tigillum Sororium proposed by Herbert Jennings Rose, Kurt Latte and Robert Schilling himself.
Hence, Janus was worshipped at the beginnings of the harvest and planting times, as well as at marriages, deaths and other beginnings.
Roman and Greek authors maintained Janus was an exclusively Roman god.
Othello's characters believe him to have only the best of intentions, even going as far as to call him "honest Iago," completely unaware that he spends every unwatched second plotting their undoing.
For Janus the title is not just a term of respect; principally it marks his primordial role.
dun; ianusue uet põmelios eum recum''";
Cakes made of spelt (''far'') and salt were offered to the god and burnt on the altar.
The rites of the Salii marked the springtime beginning of the war season in March and its closing in October.
Augustine shows astonishment at the fact that some of the dii selecti may be engaged in such tasks: "In fact Janus himself first, when pregnancy is conceived,... opens the way to receiving the semen" .
Another analogous correspondence may be found in the festival of the Quirinalia of February, last month of the ancient calendar of Numa.
''Patulcius'' and ''Clusivius'' or ''Clusius'' are epithets related to an inherent quality and function of doors, that of standing open or shut.
Janus would have also effected the miracle of turning the waters of the spring at the foot of the Viminal from cold to scorching hot in order to fend off the assault of the Sabines of king Titus Tatius, come to avenge the kidnapping of their daughters by the Romans.
Janus's patronage of a rite of passage would be natural.
Quirinus is a god that incarnates the ''quirites'', i.e.
In fact the building of the Forum Transitorium was completed and inaugurated by Nerva in 96 CE.
They include the Indian goddess Aditi who is called ''two faced'' as she is the one who starts and concludes ceremonies, and Scandinavian god Heimdallr.
Janus as the Gatekeeper has jurisdiction over every kind of door and passage and the power of opening or closing them.
Her habit of deceiving her male pursuers by hiding in crags in the soil reveals her association not only with vegetation but also with rocks, caverns, and underpassages.
Gagé thinks the magic power of the ''Tigillum Sororium'' should be ascribed to the lively and burgeoning nature of wood.
Moreover, besides the kalends Janus and Juno are also associated at the rite of the Tigillum Sororium of 1 October, in which they bear the epithets ''Ianus Curiatius'' and ''Iuno Sororia''.
Numa built the ''Ianus geminus'' (also ''Janus Bifrons'', ''Janus Quirinus'' or ''Portae Belli''), a passage ritually opened at times of war, and shut again when Roman arms rested.
Maggiani remarks that this earlier identification was in contradiction with the testimony ascribed to Varro by Johannes Lydus that Janus was named ''caelum'' among the Etruscans.
For the same reason everybody devoted a short time to his usual business, exchanged dates, figs and honey as a token of well wishing and made gifts of coins called ''strenae''.
Literary works also preserve some of Janus's cult epithets, such as Ovid's long passage of the ''Fasti'' devoted to Janus at the beginning of Book I (89-293), Tertullian, Augustine and Arnobius.
His temple named Janus Geminus had to stand open in times of war.
The supreme god Brahma is represented with four faces.
The cult of Janus looks to be related to social groups remained at the fringe of the Phrygian ones.
Iānus would then be an action name expressing the idea of going, passing, formed on the root *yā- 2- theme II of the root *ey- go from which eō, ειμι.
Thus the god of beginning is not structurally reducible to a sovereign god, nor the goddess of ending to any of the three categories on to which the goddesses are distributed.
It is however apparent that they exchanged their epithets, as Curiatius is connected to (Juno) Curitis and Sororia to (Janus) Geminus.
These epithets, which swap the functional qualities of the gods, are the most remarkable apparent proof of their proximity.
Janus was faithful to his liminal role also in the marking of this last act.
He presides over the concrete and abstract beginnings of the world, such as religion and the gods themselves, he too holds the access to Heaven and to other gods: this is the reason why men must invoke him first, regardless of the god they want to pray or placate.
In Macrobius Camese is a male: after Camese's death Janus reigned alone.
b) The ''Tigillum Sororium'' would be related to a gentilician cult of wood of the Horatii, as surmised by the episodes of the ''pons sublicius'' defended by Horatius Cocles and of the posts of the main entrance of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, on which Marcus Horatius Pulvillus lay his hand during the dedication rite.
Thus the Salii enacted the dialectic nature present in the warring and peaceful aspect of the Roman people, particularly the ''iuvenes''.
The reciprocity of the two gods' situations is subsumed under the role of opener and closer played by Janus as Ovid states: "Why are you hidden in peace, and open when the arms have been moved?"
This observation was made first by the ''Roscher Lexicon'': "Ianus is he too, doubtlessly, a god of wind" and repeated in the ''RE Pauly-Wissowa'' s.v.
Almost all of these modern explanations were originally formulated by the ancients.
The beliefs in the magic power of trees is reflected in the use of the olive wood, as for the rolls of the ship Argos: the myth of the Argonauts has links with Corcyra, remembered by Lucius Ampelius.
While Janus sometimes is named  ''belliger'' and sometimes ''pacificus'' in accord with his general function of beginner, he is mentioned as ''Janus Quirinus'' in relation to the closing of the rites of March at the end of the month together with Pax, Salus and Concordia: This feature is a reflection of the aspect of Janus Quirinus which stresses the ''quirinal '' function of bringing peace back and the hope of soldiers for a victorious return.
Juno Curitis is also the protectress of the ''iuvenes'', the young soldiers.
Although the location is not strictly identical there is some approximation in his situations on the Liver and in Martianus' system.
They belong to the family of the nymphs or genies of springs.
The ''Janus quadrifrons'' or ''quadriformis'', brought according to tradition from Falerii in 241 BC and installed by Domitian in the Forum Transitorium, although having a different meaning, seems to be connected to the same theological complex, as its image purports an ability to rule over every direction, element and time of the year.
C. Koch on the other hand sees the epithet Janus Quirinus as a reflection of the god's patronage over the two months beginning and ending the year, after their addition by king Numa in his reform of the calendar.
The four-sided structure known as the Arch of Janus in the Forum Transitorium dates from the 1st century CE: according to common opinion it was built by the Emperor Domitian.
Renard concludes that the rite is under the tutelage of both Janus and Juno, being a rite of transition under the patronage of Janus and of desacralisation and fertility under that of Juno: through it the ''iuvenes'' coming back from campaign were restituted to their fertile condition of husbands and peasants.
Camese may be reflected in Carmenta: Evander's mother is from Arcadia, comes to Latium as an exile migrant and has her two festivals in January: Camese's name at any rate does not look Latin.
After him it was closed very few times, one after the end of the first Punic War, three times under Augustus and once by Nero.
This explanation has been accepted by A.
On the other hand, Lydus's authority cannot have consulted these documents precisely because he offers different (and sometimes bizarre) explanations for the common epithets: it seems likely he received a list with no interpretations appended and his interpretations are only his own.
As a consequence the position of the gods of beginning would not be the issue of a diachronic process of debasement undergone by a supreme uranic god, but rather a structural feature inherent to their theology.
Cephalonia as a place at the cross of famous winds.
Etruscan medals from Volterra too show the double headed god and the Janus Quadrifrons from Falerii may have an Etruscan origin.
This is one of the features of Janus as shown by the myth that associates him with Carna, Cardea, Crane.
Moreover, both the passages that this etymology requires present difficulties, particularly as it seems Consus cannot be etymologically related to adjective ''consivius'' or ''conseuius'', found in Ops Consivia and thence the implied notion of sowing.
The Roman statue of the Janus of the Argiletum, traditionally ascribed to Numa, was possibly very ancient, perhaps a sort of xoanon, like the Greek ones of the 8th century BC.
They might or might not have been related to the cult of the Dioscuri.
The compound ''Ianus Quirinus'' is to be found also in the rite of the spolia opima, a ''lex regia'' ascribed to Numa, which prescribed that the third rank spoils of a king or chief killed in battle, those conquered by a common soldier, be consecrated to ''Ianus Quirinus''.
Here the model is thought to be provided by the cult of the ''Magni Dei'' or Cabeiri preserved at Samothrace and worshipped particularly among sailing merchants.
Capdeville sees this epithet as related exclusively to the characters of the legend and the rite itself: he invokes the analysis by Dumézil as his authority.
As the rites of the Salii mimic the passage from peace to war and back to peace by moving between the two poles of Mars and Quirinus in the monthly cycle of March, so they do in the ceremonies of October, the ''Equus October'' ("October Horse") taking place on the Campus Martius the ''Armilustrium'', purification of the arms, on the Aventine, and the Tubilustrium on the 23rd.
As Ovid writes in his ''Fasti'', 1 June was the festival day of Carna, besides being the kalendary festival of the month of Juno and the festival of Juno Moneta.
Ovid seems to purposefully conflate and identify Carna with Cardea in the aetiologic myth related above.
January 1 was new year day: the day was consecrated to Janus since it was the first of the new year and of the month (kalends) of Janus: the ''feria'' had an augural character as Romans believed the beginning of anything was an omen for the whole.
However the etymology of ''Curiatius'' remains uncertain.
This dialectic was reflected materially by the location of the temple of Mars outside the pomerium and of the temple of Quirinus inside it.
Elsewhere Lydus cites the epithet θυρέος to justify the key held by Janus.
This would be a further element in explaining the role of Juno in the ''Tigillum''.
In fact it is debated whether his original function was only that of god of gates and the function of god of harbours was a later addition: Paul the Deacon writes: "... he is depicted holding a key in his hand and was thought to be the god of gates".
This rite was supposed to commemorate the expiation of the murder of his own sister by Marcus Horatius.
Clusiuius,  I. Patulcius,  I. Iunonius,  I. Quirinus'' (Servius ''Aen.''
The rite of the bride's oiling the posts of the door of her new home with wolf fat at her arrival, though not mentioning Janus explicitly, is a rite of passage related to the ''ianua''.
The rite was repeated every year on 1 October.
In the poem Janus would be represented by Tiberinus.
The structure of the patrician sodalitas, made up by the two groups of the Salii Palatini, who were consecrated to Mars and whose institution was traditionally ascribed to Numa (with headquarter on the Palatine), and the Salii Collini or Agonales, consecrated to Quirinus and whose foundation was ascribed to Tullus Hostilius, (with headquarter on the Quirinal) reflects in its division the dialectic symbolic role they played in the rites of the opening and closing of the military season.
''Conseuius'' the Sower, which opens the carmen and is attested as an old form of ''Consivius'' in Tertullian; ''Patultius'': the Opener; ''Iancus'' or ''Ianeus'': the Gatekeeper; ''Duonus Cerus'': the Good Creator; ''rex'' king (potissimum melios eum ''recum'': the most powerful and best of kings); ''diuum patrem (partem)'':  father of the gods (or part of the gods); ''diuum deus'': god of the gods; ''ianitos'': the Janitor, Gatekeeper.
This fact created a problem as the god of beginnings looked to be located in a situation other than the initial, i.e.
From ''Ianus'' derived ''ianua'' ("door"), and hence the English word "janitor" (Latin, ''ianitor'').
Apart from the rites solemnizing the beginning of the new year and of every month, there were the special times of the year which marked the beginning and closing of the military season, in March and October respectively.
Janus presided over the beginning and ending of conflict, and hence war and peace.
M. Renard sees the association of Janus with Crane as reminiscent of widespread rites of lustration and fertility performed through ritual walking under low crags or holes in the soil or natural hollows in trees, which in turn are reflected in the lustrative rite of the Tigillum Sororium.
Its location was on the vicus leading to the Carinae, perhaps at the point of the crossing of the pomerium.
The sites of the cults of Janus at Rome and his associations in ancient Latium.
He is usually depicted as having two faces, since he looks to the future and to the past.
Contradictions of the ancient Roman calendar on the beginning of the new year: originally March was the first month and February the last one.
He appears selfless and compassionate but, in truth, is power-hungry, amoral, and without regard for the well-being of others.
In the myth of Janus and Carna (see section below) Carna had the habit when pursued by a young man of asking him out of shyness for a hidden recess and thereupon fleeing: but two headed Janus saw her hiding in a crag under some rocks.
Many reconstructions have been proposed:
Schilling and Capdeville counter that it is his function of presiding over the return to peace that gave Janus this epithet, as confirmed by his association on 30 March with Pax, Concordia  and Salus, even though it is true that Janus as god of all beginnings presides also over that of war and is thus often called ''belliger'', bringer of war as well as ''pacificus''.
Any rite or religious act whatever required the invocation of Janus first, with a corresponding invocation to Vesta at the end (''Janus primus'' and ''Vesta extrema'').
Ovid states that in most ancient times there were no animal sacrifices and gods were propitiated with offerings of spelt and pure salt.
He is the initiator of human life, of new historical ages, and financial enterprises: according to myth he was the first to mint coins and the as, first coin of the liberal series, bears his effigy on one face.
He has an altar, later a temple near the ''Porta Carmentalis'', where the road leading to Veii ended, as well as being present on the Janiculum, a gateway from Rome out to Etruria.
Furthermore, Janus' common two-faced depiction is the perfect visual metaphor for Iago's character.
He has under his tutelage the stepping in and out of the door of homes, the ''ianua'', which took its name from him, and not vice versa.
Macrobius, which explains the name as Latin, deriving it from the verb ''ire'' ("to go").
According to some scholars, mostly Francophone, it looks to be strictly related to the ideas of the passage of the Roman people from war back to peace, from the condition of ''miles'', soldier, to that of ''quiris'', citizen occupied in peaceful business, as the rites of the ''Porta Belli'' imply.
Since movement and change are interconnected, he has a double nature, symbolised in his two headed image.
While Janus has the first place Vesta has the last, both in theology and in ritual (''Ianus primus, Vesta extrema'').
Schilling  opines that it is related to ''curia'', as the Tigillum was located not far from the ''curiae veteres'': however this interpretation, although supported by an inscription (''lictor curiatius'' ) is considered unacceptable by Renard because of the different quantity of the ''u'', short in ''curiatius'', ''curis'' and ''Curitis'' and long in ''curia''.
The myth of Crane has been studied by M. Renard and G. Dumezil.
The Winter solstice was thought to occur on 25 December.
In general, Janus is at the origin of time as the guardian of the gates of Heaven: Jupiter himself can move forth and back because of Janus's working.
In wartime the gates of the Janus were opened, and in its interior sacrifices and ''vaticinia'' were held, to forecast the outcome of military deeds.
The initial role of Janus in the political-religious operations of January: the ''nuncupatio votorum'' spanning the year, the imperial symbol of the boat in the opening rite of the sailing season, the ''vota felicia'': Janus and his myths allow for an ancient interpretation of the ''vota felicia'', different from the Isiadic one.
Nonetheless he is inferior to the sovereign god Oðinn: the ''Minor Völuspá'' defines his relationship to Oðinn almost with the same terms as those in which Varro defines that of Janus, god of the ''prima'' to Jupiter, god of the ''summa'': Heimdallr is born as the ''firstborn '' (''primigenius'', ''var einn borinn í árdaga''), Oðinn is born as the ''greatest'' (''maximus'', ''var einn borinn öllum meiri'').
The ''comune'' of Selvazzano di Dentro near Padua has a grove and an altar of Janus depicted on its standard, but their existence is unproved.
P. Grimal has taken up this interpretation connecting it to a vase with red figures representing Boreas pursuing the nymph Oreithyia: Boreas is depicted as a two headed winged demon, the two faces with beards, one black and the other fair, perhaps symbolising the double movement of the winds Boreas and Antiboreas.
However Greek authors make of Camese Janus's sister and spouse: Atheneus citing a certain Drakon of Corcyra writes that Janus fathered with his sister Camese a son named Aithex and a daughter named Olistene.
As far as man is concerned it is obviously of the greatest importance, even though both Augustine and some modern scholars see it as minor.
In accord with his fundamental character of being the Beginner Janus was considered by Romans the first king of Latium, sometimes along with Camese.
Behind the ''tigillum'', on opposite sides of the alley, stood the two altars of Janus Curiatius and Juno Sororia.
While there is no direct proof of an original solar meaning of Janus, this being the issue of learned speculations of the Roman erudits initiated into the mysteries and of emperors as Domitian, the derivation from a Syrian cosmogonic deity proposed by P. Grimal looks more acceptable.
The temple of Janus was dedicated by Gaius Duilius on 17 August, day of the Portunalia.
The manuscript has:
These included the rite of the ''arma movēre'' on 1 March and that of the ''arma condĕre'' at the end of the month performed by the Salii, and the ''Tigillum Sororium'' on 1 October.
Only after this month-long set of rites was accomplished was it fas to undertake military campaigns.
So does the legend of their foundation itself: the peace- loving king Numa instituted the Salii of Mars Gradivus, foreseeing the future wars of the Romans while the warmonger king Tullus, in a battle during a longstanding war with the Sabines, swore to found a second group of Salii should he obtain victory.
Numa in his regulation of the Roman calendar called the first month ''Januarius'' after Janus, according to tradition considered the highest divinity at the time.
Janus was also involved in spatial transitions, presiding over home doors, city gates and boundaries.
a) The vagueness of Janus's association with the cults of primitive Latium and his indifference towards the social composition of the Roman State suggest that he was a god of an earlier amphibious merchant society in which the role of the guardian god was indispensable.
Paul the Deacon mentions the ''versus ianuli, iovii, iunonii, minervii''.
Thence one may argue that the articulation Ianus-Ianitores could be interpreted as connected to the theologem of the Gates of Heaven (the ''Synplegades'') which open on the Heaven on one side and on Earth or the Underworld on the other.
Similarly, in the expression ''duonus Cerus'', Cerus means creator and is considered a masculine form related to Ceres.
According to Capdeville he may also be found on the outer rim of the Piacenza Liver on case 14 in the compound form ''CULALP'', i.e., "of Culśanś and of Alpan(u)" on the authority of Pfiffig, but perhaps here it is the female goddess Culśu, the guardian of the door of the Underworld.
However no Latin source cites relationships of any kind between Consus and Janus Consivius.
the Romans in their civil capacity of producers and fathers.
As the story's primary agent of change, it's fitting that Iago align himself with Janus.
The main sources of Janus's cult epithets are the fragments of the Carmen Saliare preserved by Varro in his work De Lingua Latina, a list preserved in a passage of Macrobius's Saturnalia (I 9, 15-16), another in a passage of Johannes Lydus's De Mensibus (IV 1), a list in Cedrenus's  ''Historiarum Compendium'' (I p.&nbsp;295 7 Bonn), partly dependent on Lydus's, and one in Servius Honoratus's commentary to the ''Aeneis'' (VII 610).
The epithets that can be identified are: ''Cozeuios'', i.e.
Similarly, his tutelage extends to the covered passages named ''iani'' and foremost to the gates of the city, including the cultic gate of the ''Argiletum'', named ''Ianus Geminus'' or ''Porta Ianualis'' from which he protects Rome against the Sabines.
This function is a particular case of his function of patron of beginnings.
He though does not consider ''Conseuius'' to be an epithet of Janus but a theonym in its own right.
