Following a series of defeats across the Pacific during 1942-1945, which culminated in the Soviet invasion of Manchuria and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, Japan agreed to an unconditional surrender on August 15.
The Ryukyu Islands, which include Okinawa, are a chain to the south of Kyushu.
The character  means "sun" or "day";  means "base" or "origin".
New and used cars are inexpensive; car ownership fees and fuel levies are used to promote energy efficiency.
Almost all children continue their education at a three-year senior high school, and, according to the MEXT,  about 75.9 percent of high school graduates attended a university, junior college, trade school, or other higher education institution.
The Central Highland has a typical inland humid continental climate, with large temperature differences between summer and winter seasons, as well as large diurnal variation; precipitation is light, though winters are usually snowy.
The earliest works of Japanese literature include the ''Kojiki'' and ''Nihon Shoki'' chronicles and the ''Man'yōshū'' poetry anthology, all from the 8th century and written in Chinese characters.
In 2011, Japan's population dropped for a fifth year, falling by 204,000 people to 126.24 million people.
It is also the world's fourth-largest exporter and fourth-largest importer.
In 1941, following its defeat in the brief Soviet–Japanese Border War, Japan negotiated the Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact, which lasted until 1945 with the Soviet invasion of Manchuria.
Japan has close economic and military relations with the United States; the US-Japan security alliance acts as the cornerstone of the nation's foreign policy.
As a ceremonial figurehead, he is defined by the constitution as "the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people."
There are 175 airports in Japan; the largest domestic airport, Haneda Airport, is Asia's second-busiest airport.
It's estimated that 16% of the world's gold and 22% of the world's silver is contained in electronic technology in Japan.
Accordingly, Japan's Self-Defence force is a usual military that has never fired shots outside Japan.
In 1931 Japan invaded and occupied Manchuria and following international condemnation of this occupation, Japan resigned from the League of Nations in 1933.
World War&nbsp;I enabled Japan, on the side of the victorious Allies, to widen its influence and territorial holdings in Asia.
Japan has hosted the Winter Olympics twice: Sapporo in 1972 and Nagano in 1998.
A Paleolithic culture around 30,000&nbsp;BC constitutes the first known habitation of the Japanese archipelago.
Notable classical composers from Japan include Toru Takemitsu and Rentarō Taki.
The nation is currently undergoing administrative reorganization by merging many of the cities, towns and villages with each other.
As a result, the habitable zones, mainly located in coastal areas, have extremely high population densities.
They are primarily the result of large oceanic movements occurring over hundreds of millions of years from the mid-Silurian to the Pleistocene as a result of the subduction of the Philippine Sea Plate beneath the continental Amurian Plate and Okinawa Plate to the south, and subduction of the Pacific Plate under the Okhotsk Plate to the north.
The islands of Japan are located in a volcanic zone on the Pacific Ring of Fire.
However, these estimates are based on people affiliated with a temple, rather than the number of true believers.
On March 11, 2011, Japan suffered the strongest earthquake in its recorded history; this triggered the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster, one of the worst disasters in the history of nuclear power.
Japan has 108 active volcanoes.
Japan's population grew from 35 million in 1873 to 70 million in 1935.
Hokusai coined the term manga.
The Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF) is a regular participant in RIMPAC maritime exercises.
The period of overall real economic growth from the 1960s to the 1980s has been called the Japanese post-war economic miracle: it averaged 7.5 percent in the 1960s and 1970s, and 3.2 percent in the 1980s and early 1990s.
It is one of the G4 nations seeking permanent membership in the Security Council.
The most dominant native ethnic group is the Yamato people; primary minority groups include the indigenous Ainu and Ryukyuan peoples, as well as social minority groups like the ''burakumin''.
Japanese writing uses kanji (Chinese characters) and two sets of kana (syllabaries based on cursive script and radical of kanji), as well as the Latin alphabet and Arabic numerals.
Historically influenced by Chinese law, the Japanese legal system developed independently during the Edo period through texts such as ''Kujikata Osadamegaki''.
The economy recovered after 2005; GDP growth for that year was 2.8 percent, surpassing the growth rates of the US and European Union during the same period.
However, since the late 19th century the judicial system has been largely based on the civil law of Europe, notably Germany.
The population of 126&nbsp;million is the world's tenth largest.
Japan's main import markets  were China (21.3 percent), the US (8.8 percent), Australia (6.4 percent), Saudi Arabia (6.2 percent), United Arab Emirates (5.0 percent), South Korea (4.6 percent) and Qatar (4.0 percent).
The Japanese word for Japan is , which is pronounced Nippon or Nihon.
On the other hand, the succeeding Ashikaga shogunate failed to control the feudal warlords (''daimyo''), and a civil war (the Ōnin War) began in 1467, opening the century-long Sengoku period ("Warring States").
Japan consists of 47 prefectures, each overseen by an elected governor, legislature and administrative bureaucracy.
Japan has two Nobel Prize-winning authors—Yasunari Kawabata (1968) and Kenzaburō Ōe (1994).
The Shrines of Ise have been celebrated as the prototype of Japanese architecture.
Japan later achieved rapid growth to become the second-largest economy in the world, until surpassed by China in 2010.
Golf is also popular in Japan, as are forms of auto racing like the Super GT series and Formula Nippon.
Japanese martial arts such as judo, karate and kendo are also widely practiced and enjoyed by spectators in the country.
The Okinawan Japanese dialect is also spoken in the region.
The Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of Japanese 15-year-olds as sixth best in the world.
, Japan is the third largest national economy in the world, after the United States and China, in terms of nominal GDP, and the fourth largest national economy in the world, after the United States, China and India, in terms of purchasing power parity.
The Japanese population is rapidly aging as a result of a post–World War II baby boom followed by a decrease in birth rates.
Japan hosted the Summer Olympics in Tokyo in 1964.
The northernmost zone, Hokkaido, has a humid continental climate with long, cold winters and very warm to cool summers.
Although Japan has officially renounced its right to declare war, it maintains a modern military with the world's eighth largest military budget, used for self-defense and peacekeeping roles.
Japan's exports amounted to US$4,210 per capita in 2005. , Japan's main export markets were China (18.1 percent), the United States (17.8 percent), South Korea (7.7 percent), Thailand (5.5 percent) and Hong Kong (5.1 percent).
Japan entered into a long period of isolation in the early 17th century, which was ended in 1853 when a United States fleet pressured Japan to open to the West.
An account of Heian court life is given in ''The Pillow Book'' by Sei Shōnagon, while ''The Tale of Genji'' by Murasaki Shikibu is often described as the world's first novel.
Japan has a developed system for the protection and promotion of both tangible and intangible Cultural Properties and National Treasures.
Japanese people make up 98.5% of Japan's total population.
The Diet is dominated by the social liberal Democratic Party of Japan and the conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
Other studies have suggested that only 30 percent of the population identify themselves as belonging to a religion.
Japan signed a security pact with Australia in March 2007 and with India in October 2008.
Japan lacks significant domestic reserves and so has a heavy dependence on imported energy.
The average winter temperature in Japan is  and the average summer temperature is .
Responding to rising concern about the problem, the government introduced several environmental protection laws in 1970.
On March 31, 1854, Commodore Matthew Perry and the "Black Ships" of the United States Navy forced the opening of Japan to the outside world with the Convention of Kanagawa.
, Japan's public debt was estimated at more than 200 percent of its annual gross domestic product, the largest of any nation in the world.
In the early Heian period, the system of phonograms known as ''kana'' (Hiragana and Katakana) was developed.
Japan has a low unemployment rate of around four percent.
It is ranked first in the Country Brand Indexand sixth in the Global Competitiveness Report 2015–2016.
The Japanese variant of capitalism has many distinct features: keiretsu enterprises are influential, and lifetime employment and seniority-based career advancement are relatively common in the Japanese work environment.
The Allied occupation ended with the Treaty of San Francisco in 1952 and Japan was granted membership in the United Nations in 1956.
Since adopting its revised constitution in 1947, Japan has maintained a unitary constitutional monarchy with an Emperor and an elected legislature called the National Diet.
Current environmental issues include urban air pollution (NOx, suspended particulate matter, and toxics), waste management, water eutrophication, nature conservation, climate change, chemical management and international co-operation for conservation.
Today Japan ranks highly for competitiveness and economic freedom.
He said Japan wanted to play a key role and offered neighboring countries Japan's support.
Japan will host the 2019 IRB Rugby World Cup.
Many instruments, such as the koto, were introduced in the 9th and 10th centuries.
Japanese is an agglutinative language distinguished by a system of honorifics reflecting the hierarchical nature of Japanese society, with verb forms and particular vocabulary indicating the relative status of speaker and listener.
Nearly two decades of internal conflict and insurrection followed before the Meiji Emperor was restored as head of state in 1868 and the Empire of Japan was proclaimed, with the Emperor as a divine symbol of the nation.
About 73 percent of Japan is forested, mountainous, and unsuitable for agricultural, industrial, or residential use.
After he was assassinated in 1582, his successor Toyotomi Hideyoshi unified the nation in 1590 and launched two unsuccessful invasions of Korea in 1592 and 1597.
Proposals for a new Maglev route between Tokyo and Osaka are at an advanced stage.
It is the world's fifth largest donor of official development assistance, donating US$9.2 billion in 2014.
In 784, Emperor Kanmu moved the capital from Nara to Nagaoka-kyō before relocating it to Heian-kyō (modern Kyoto) in 794.
After the Meiji Restoration, many Western sports were introduced in Japan and began to spread through the education system.
Four sites have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List for their outstanding natural value.
Tokugawa Ieyasu served as regent for Hideyoshi's son and used his position to gain political and military support.
Former Japanese Prime Minister and current Finance Minister Tarō Asō described Japan as being a nation of "one race, one civilization, one language and one culture", which drew criticism from representatives of ethnic minorities such as the Ainu.
Nineteen sites have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List, fifteen of which are of cultural significance.
In modern Shanghainese, a Wu dialect, the pronunciation of characters  Japan is ''Zeppen'' .
This was the start of the Muromachi period (1336–1573).
Modern Japan's economic growth began in the Edo period.
'''Japan''' (or ''Nihon'' ) is an island country in East Asia.
Ashikaga Takauji established the shogunate in Muromachi, Kyoto.
As of June 2015, more than 40 coal-fired power plants are planned or under construction in Japan.
This marked the beginning of the Heian period (794–1185), during which a distinctly indigenous Japanese culture emerged, noted for its art, poetry and prose.
It is a participant in the International Space Station: the Japanese Experiment Module (Kibo) was added to the station during Space Shuttle assembly flights in 2008.
Japan maintains one of the largest military budgets of any country in the world.
The Meiji era saw the decline of traditional literary forms as Japanese literature integrated Western influences.
Public and private schools generally require students to take Japanese language classes as well as English language courses.
Tokugawa Ieyasu was appointed shogun by Emperor Go-Yōzei in 1603, and he established the Tokugawa shogunate in Edo (modern Tokyo).
It holds 294 seats in the lower house and 83 seats in the upper house.
Japanese streets are decorated on Tanabata, Obon and Christmas.
The Ainu language, which has no proven relationship to Japanese or any other language, is moribund, with only a few elderly native speakers remaining in Hokkaido.
Approximately 9.1 million people live in the core city of Tokyo, the capital city of Japan, which is the sixth largest city proper in the OECD and the fourth leading global city in the world.
Japan is a world leader in fundamental scientific research, having produced twenty-one Nobel laureates in either physics, chemistry or medicine, and three Fields medalists.
Adopting Western political, judicial and military institutions, the Cabinet organized the Privy Council, introduced the Meiji Constitution, and assembled the Imperial Diet.
In 2012, about 24.1 percent of the population was over 65, and the proportion is projected to rise to almost 40 percent by 2050.
Zainichi Koreans, Chinese, Filipinos, Brazilians mostly of Japanese descent, Peruvians mostly of Japanese descent and Americans are among the small minority groups in Japan.
Japan Business Federation has called on the government to lift the ban on arms exports so that Japan can join multinational projects such as the Joint Strike Fighter.
Few children learn these languages, but in recent years the local governments have sought to increase awareness of the traditional languages.
Primary schools, secondary schools and universities were introduced in 1872 as a result of the Meiji Restoration.
Efforts to revive economic growth were unsuccessful and further hampered by the global slowdown in 2000.
''Kaguya'' is the largest lunar mission since the Apollo program.
This decline was made worse by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, which killed nearly 16,000 people with approximately another 2,600 still listed as missing as of 2014.
The service sector accounts for three quarters of the gross domestic product.
Subsequent similar treaties with Western countries in the Bakumatsu period brought economic and political crises.
Despite early resistance, Buddhism was promoted by the ruling class and gained widespread acceptance beginning in the Asuka period (592–710).
Nearly 700,000 researchers share a US$130 billion research and development budget, the third largest in the world.
People without insurance through employers can participate in a national health insurance program administered by local governments.
The interaction between Japanese and European art has been significant: for example ukiyo-e prints, which began to be exported in the 19th century in the movement known as Japonism, had a significant influence on the development of modern art in the West, most notably on post-Impressionism.
Many of today's enterprises were founded at the time, and Japan emerged as the most developed nation in Asia.
During the 16th century, traders and Jesuit missionaries from Portugal reached Japan for the first time, initiating direct commercial and cultural exchange between Japan and the West.
The Ryukyu Islands have a subtropical climate, with warm winters and hot summers.
Patients are free to select the physicians or facilities of their choice.
The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) is Japan's space agency; it conducts space, planetary, and aviation research, and leads development of rockets and satellites.
The main body of Japanese statutory law is called the Six Codes.
Besides Japanese, the Ryukyuan languages (Amami, Kunigami, Okinawan, Miyako, Yaeyama, Yonaguni), also part of the Japonic language family, are spoken in the Ryukyu Islands chain.
Fewer than one percent of Japanese are Christian.
It entered a lunar orbit on October 4, flying at an altitude of about .
Japan is the most successful Asian Rugby Union country, winning the Asian Five Nations a record 6 times and winning the newly formed IRB Pacific Nations Cup in 2011.
Japan leads the world in robotics production and use, possessing more than 20% (300,000 of 1.3 million) of the world's industrial robots —though its share was historically even higher, representing one-half of all industrial robots worldwide in 2000.
As a signatory of the Kyoto Protocol, and host of the 1997 conference that created it, Japan is under treaty obligation to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions and to take other steps to curb climate change.
Since 1947, compulsory education in Japan comprises elementary and middle school, which together last for nine years (from age 6 to age 15).
Japan also faces an ongoing dispute with North Korea over the latter's abduction of Japanese citizens and its nuclear weapons and missile program (see also Six-party talks).
After his death, the Hōjō clan came to power as regents for the shoguns.
Buddhism began to spread during the Heian era chiefly through two major sects, Tendai by Saichō, and Shingon by Kūkai.
The Prime Minister is the head of the Cabinet, and he appoints and dismisses the Ministers of State.
It has some of the world's largest banks, and the Tokyo Stock Exchange (known for its Nikkei 225 and TOPIX indices) stands as the second largest in the world by market capitalization.
In August 2011, Moody's rating has cut Japan's long-term sovereign debt rating one notch from Aa3 to Aa2 inline with the size of the country's deficit and borrowing level.
The accompanied recitative of the Noh drama dates from the 14th century and the popular folk music, with the guitar-like shamisen, from the sixteenth.
Japan's legislative organ is the National Diet, seated in Chiyoda, Tokyo.
However, by May 2012 all of the country's nuclear power plants had been taken offline because of ongoing public opposition following the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster in March 2011, though government officials continued to try to sway public opinion in favor of returning at least some of Japan's 50 nuclear reactors to service.
The LDP has enjoyed near continuous electoral success since 1955, except for a brief 11-month period between 1993 and 1994, and from 2009 to 2012.
Most Japanese continue to see Japan as a monocultural society.
A member state of the United Nations since 1956, Japan has served as a non-permanent Security Council member for a total of 20 years, most recently for 2009 and 2010.
Pure Land Buddhism (Jōdo-shū, Jōdo Shinshū) became greatly popular in the latter half of the 11th century.
The climate of Japan is predominantly temperate, but varies greatly from north to south.
The Michelin Guide has awarded restaurants in Japan more Michelin stars than the rest of the world combined.
Destructive earthquakes, often resulting in tsunami, occur several times each century.
The war cost Japan, it's colonies, China and the war's other combatants tens of millions of lives and left much of Japan's industry and infrastructure destroyed.
Japan is a constitutional monarchy whereby the power of the Emperor is very limited.
The Prime Minister of Japan is the head of government and is appointed by the Emperor after being designated by the Diet from among its members.
Around 300 BC, the Yayoi people began to enter the Japanese islands, intermingling with the Jōmon.
Immigration and birth incentives are sometimes suggested as a solution to provide younger workers to support the nation's aging population.
Nevertheless, the level of participation remains high, especially during festivals and occasions such as the first shrine visit of the New Year.
In Japan, health care is provided by national and local governments.
Japan first appears in written history in the Chinese ''Book of Han''.
The country has the world's third-largest economy by nominal GDP and the world's fourth-largest economy by purchasing power parity.
The Allies also convened the International Military Tribunal for the Far East on May 3, 1946 to prosecute some Japanese leaders for war crimes.
The country is divided into 47 prefectures in eight regions.
This allowed Oda Nobunaga to obtain European technology and firearms, which he used to conquer many other daimyo.
The subsequent "Shōwa period" initially saw the power of the military increased and brought about Japanese expansionism and militarization along with the totalitarianism and ultranationalism that are a part of fascist ideology.
''SELENE'' is also known as ''Kaguya'', after the lunar princess of ''The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter''.
A single network of high-speed, divided, limited-access toll roads connects major cities and is operated by toll-collecting enterprises.
The main islands, from north to south, are Hokkaido, Honshu, Shikoku and Kyushu.
Power is held chiefly by the Prime Minister and other elected members of the Diet, while sovereignty is vested in the Japanese people.
There is universal suffrage for adults over 18 years of age, with a secret ballot for all elected offices.
Since the establishment of the Japan Professional Football League in 1992, association football has also gained a wide following.
According to the UNHCR, in 2012 Japan accepted just 18 refugees for resettlement, while the US took in 76,000.
Japanese animation is called anime.
A 1993 survey by the Cultural Affairs Agency found that more Japanese had sung karaoke that year than had participated in traditional pursuits such as flower arranging (ikebana) or tea ceremonies.
In 2013, it was announced that Japan would be importing shale natural gas.
This was the greatest decline since at least 1947, when comparable figures were first compiled.
The subducting plates pulled Japan eastward, opening the Sea of Japan around 15 million years ago.
, two reactors at Sendai are likely to restart in early 2015.
During the Meiji period from 1868, Japan expanded economically with the embrace of the market economy.
The 1923 Tokyo earthquake killed over 140,000 people.
The mountains of the Chūgoku and Shikoku regions shelter the Seto Inland Sea from seasonal winds, bringing mild weather year-round.
Famous ukiyo-e artists include Hokusai and Hiroshige.
The Constitution requires that the Emperor promulgate legislation passed by the Diet, without specifically giving him the power to oppose legislation.
Japanese cuisine is known for its emphasis on seasonality of food, quality of ingredients and presentation.
Japan is the highest-ranked Asian country in the Global Peace Index.
Some 20 million people, around 17 per cent of the population, were below the poverty line in 2007.
The Old Mandarin or possibly early Wu Chinese pronunciation of Japan was recorded by Marco Polo as ''Cipangu''.
Today the name  is used as a formal modern-day equivalent simply meaning "the State of Japan"; countries like Japan whose long form does not contain a descriptive designation are generally given a name appended by the character , meaning "country", "nation" or "state".
Each prefecture is further divided into cities, towns and villages.
In 1185, following the defeat of the Taira clan in the Genpei War, sung in the epic Tale of Heike, samurai Minamoto no Yoritomo was appointed shogun by Emperor Go-Toba, and he established a base of power in Kamakura.
Japan ranks 39th in the 2016 Environmental Performance Index, which measures a nation's commitment to environmental sustainability.
The study of Western sciences, known as ''rangaku'', continued through contact with the Dutch enclave at Dejima in Nagasaki.
The forces have been recently used in peacekeeping operations; the deployment of troops to Iraq marked the first overseas use of Japan's military since World War II.
In the period of rapid economic growth after World War II, environmental policies were downplayed by the government and industrial corporations; as a result, environmental pollution was widespread in the 1950s and 1960s.
Payment for personal medical services is offered through a universal health insurance system that provides relative equality of access, with fees set by a government committee.
Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties that use traditional recipes and local ingredients.
Japanese music is eclectic and diverse.
Japan has full religious freedom based on Article 20 of its Constitution.
The history of Japanese painting exhibits synthesis and competition between native Japanese aesthetics and adaptation of imported ideas.
Akihito is the current Emperor of Japan; Naruhito, Crown Prince of Japan, stands as next in line to the Chrysanthemum Throne.
Japan has a total of 6,852 islands extending along the Pacific coast of East Asia.
