We believe therefore, that India must sever the British connection and attain Purna Swaraj or complete independence.
About the latter he wrote, "The Japanese victories had stirred up my enthusiasm&nbsp;... Nationalistic ideas filled my mind&nbsp;...
Nehru led newly independent India from 1947 to 1964, during its first years of independence from British rule.
Though life is logical, we have to face all contingencies, and unless we are prepared to face them, we will go under.
But, unlike his father, he had only a desultory interest in his profession and did not relish either the practice of law or the company of lawyers.
As Prime Minister, he set out to realise his vision of India.
Later, Pakistan handed over some portion of Kashmir near Siachen controlled by Pakistan since 1948 to China.
In none of these provinces had the League previously had a majority – only the arrest of Congress members made it possible.
Communist and socialist parties were the main beneficiaries although some right wing groups like Bharatiya Jana Sangh also did well.
Frank Moraes wrote: "If Nehru's sympathy was with any country it was with France, whose culture he greatly admired."
Nehru, thus, left behind a disputed legacy, being "either adored or reviled for India's progress or lack of it".
Recognising the People's Republic of China soon after its founding (while most of the Western bloc continued relations with the Republic of China), Nehru argued for its inclusion in the United Nations and refused to brand the Chinese as the aggressors in their conflict with Korea.
The second one was by a knife-wielding rickshaw-puller in Maharashtra in 1955.
Later when he had begun his institutional schooling in 1905 at Harrow, a leading school in England, he was greatly influenced by G.M.
Nehru had led the Congress to a major victory in the 1957 elections, but his government was facing rising problems and criticism.
Kashmir was a disputed territory between India and Pakistan, the two having gone to war with each other over the state in 1948.
Twelve huge C-130 Hercules transports, complete with US crews and maintenance teams, took off for New Delhi to fly Indian troops and equipment to the battle zone.
His mother, Swaruprani Thussu (1868–1938), who came from a well-known Kashmiri Brahmin family settled in Lahore, was Motilal's second wife, the first having died in child birth.
The Congress asked the people of India to observe 26 January as Independence Day.
Nehru's health began declining steadily after 1962, and he spent months recuperating in Kashmir through 1963.
Nehru visit to Europe in 1936 proved to be the watershed in his political and economic thinking.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union competed to make India an ally throughout the Cold War.
A new type of entity, the union territory, replaced the classification as a Part C or Part D state.
He wanted to model India as a secular country; his secular policies remain a subject of debate.
Nehru's theosophical interests had induced him to the study of the Buddhist and Hindu scriptures.
The rajpramukh was appointed by the President of India.
During the drafting of the Indian constitution, many Indian leaders (except Nehru) of that time were in favour of allowing each Princely state or Covenanting State to be independent as a federal state along the lines suggested originally by the Government of India act (1935).
Gandhi's death and funeral linked the distant state with the Indian people and made more understand the need to suppress religious parties during the transition to independence for the Indian people.
The Muslim League under Mohammed Ali Jinnah (who was to become the creator of Pakistan) had fared badly at the polls.
In the rift that formed within the Congress following the sudden closure of the non-co-operation movement after the Chauri Chaura incident, Nehru remained loyal to Gandhi and did not join the Swaraj Party formed by his father Motilal Nehru and CR Das.
State planning, controls, and regulations were argued to have impaired economic growth.
Nehru also called Dr. Homi J. Bhabha, a nuclear physicist, who was entrusted with complete authority over all nuclear related affairs and programs and answered only to Nehru himself.
In foreign policy, he took a leading role in Non-Alignment while projecting India as a regional hegemon in South Asia.
During the war, Nehru volunteered for the St John Ambulance and worked as one of the provincial secretaries of the organisation in Allahabad.
Nehru, who had reluctantly heeded Gandhi's call for immediate independence, for he had desired to support the Allied war effort during the Second World War, came out of a lengthy prison term to a much altered political landscape.
The volume of exports went up at an annual rate of 2.9 per cent in 1951–1960 to 7.6 per cent in 1971–1980.
Gandhi brokered a further compromise by reducing the time given from two years to one.
Under the influence of a tutor, Ferdinand T. Brooks, he became interested in science and theosophy.
He passed his bar examinations in 1912 and was admitted to the English bar.
The British Indian Empire, which included present-day India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, was divided into two types of territories: the Provinces of British India, which were governed directly by British officials responsible to the Governor-General of India; and princely states, under the rule of local hereditary rulers who recognised British suzerainty in return for local autonomy, in most cases as established by treaty.
Demands for dominion status was rejected by the British in 1929.
Nehru led the faction of the Congress party which promoted Hindi as the lingua-franca of the Indian nation.
Nehru's improved relations with the US under John F. Kennedy proved useful during the war, as in 1962, President of Pakistan (then closely aligned with the Americans) Ayub Khan was made to guarantee his neutrality in regards to India, who was threatened by "communist aggression from Red China".
Negotiations took place in Delhi from December 1953 to April 1954 between the Delegation of the PRC Government and the Delegation of the Indian Government on the relations between the two countries with respect to the disputed territories of Aksai Chin and South Tibet.
These requests were rejected by the Kennedy Administration (which was involved in the Cuban Missile Crisis during most of the Sino-Indian War), leading to a cool down in Indo-US relations.
Nehru along with his aide V.K.
We had differences from the time we became co-workers and yet I have said for some years and say so now that not Rajaji but Jawaharlal will be my successor.Gandhi called on the British to leave India; Nehru, though reluctant to embarrass the allied war effort, had no alternative but to join Gandhi.
Linlithgow made Nehru an offer on 8 October 1940.
Canada prepared to ship six transport planes.
They became widely recognised and accepted throughout the region during the premiership of Indira Gandhi and the 3-year rule of the Janata Party (1977–1980).
During this period, he also studied politics, economics, history and literature desultorily.
They acted courageously and did not submit so easily to unjust oppression; their outlook widened and they began to think a little in terms of India as a whole.&nbsp;...
Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere, and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it.
Indira moved into Nehru's official residence to attend to him and became his constant companion in his travels across India and the world.
This has led to accusations of selective secularism.
Yasmin Khan argued that Gandhi's death and funeral helped consolidate the authority of the new Indian state under Nehru and Patel.
In his autobiography, he analysed Christianity and Islam, and their impact on India.
During Nehru's second term as general secretary of the Congress, he proposed certain resolutions concerning the foreign policy of India.
Under the London Declaration, India agreed that, when it became a republic in January 1950, it would join the Commonwealth of Nations and accept the British monarch as a "symbol of the free association of its independent member nations and as such the Head of the Commonwealth."
His government oversaw the establishment of many institutions of higher learning, including the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, the Indian Institutes of Technology, the Indian Institutes of Management and the National Institutes of Technology.
However, Cold War suspicions and the American distrust of Nehruvian socialism cooled relations between India and the US, which suspected Nehru of tacitly supporting the Soviet Union.
Many documentaries about Nehru's life have been produced.
The pact had been initiated earlier in the year at Allahabad at a meeting of the All-India Congress Committee which was held at the Nehru residence at Anand Bhawan.
He was disconcerted with what he saw as a "very much an English-knowing upper class affair".
Nehru angrily declared that "all the old problems ... pale into insignificance before the latest stand taken by the Muslim League leader in Lahore".
Nehru maintained good relations with Britain even after the Suez Crisis.
When the First World War broke out in August 1914, sympathy in India was divided.
The government therefore directed investment primarily into key public sector industries – steel, iron, coal, and power – promoting their development with subsidies and protectionist policies.
Kamala gave birth to a boy in November 1924, but he lived only for a week.
The constitution of 1950 distinguished between three main types of states: Part A states, which were the former governors' provinces of British India, were ruled by an elected governor and state legislature.
The goal was to assert the power of the government, legitimise the Congress party's control and suppress all religious para-military groups.
Jawaharlal Nehru was a passionate advocate of education for India's children and youth, believing it essential for India's future progress.
During the mid-1930s, Nehru was much concerned with developments in Europe, which seemed to be drifting toward another world war.
Only Jinnah got something more precise.
'''Jawaharlal Nehru''' (; ; 14 November 1889 – 27 May 1964) was the first Prime Minister of India and a central figure in Indian politics before and after independence.
Following the Quit India resolution passed by the Congress party in Bombay (now Mumbai) on 8 August 1942, the entire Congress working committee, including Gandhi and Nehru, was arrested and imprisoned.
He noted that someone had once defined the Indian Civil Service, "with which we are unfortunately still afflicted in this country, as neither Indian, nor civil, nor a service".
The numbers at Jinnah's meetings, once counted in thousands soon numbered only a few hundreds.
After the Lahore session of the Congress in 1929, Nehru gradually emerged as the paramount leader of the Indian independence movement.
Nehru also maintained good relations with the British Empire.
On 28 May, Nehru was cremated in accordance with Hindu rites at the Shantivan on the banks of the Yamuna River, witnessed by many hundreds of thousands of mourners who had flocked into the streets of Delhi and the cremation grounds.'''
If the British failed to meet the deadline, the Congress would call upon all Indians to fight for complete independence.
Most notably, Nehru allowed Muslims to keep their personal law in matters relating to marriage and inheritance.
1944) and Sanjay (b.
After an exhaustive and divisive debate with the non-Hindi speakers, Hindi was adopted as the official language of India in 1950 with English continuing as an associate official language for a period of fifteen years, after which Hindi would become the sole official language.
But, in comparison to other industrial powers in Europe and East Asia, the growth rates were considered anaemic at best.
Nehru closely worked with Subhash Bose in developing good relations with governments of free countries all over the world.
Gandhi stepped back into a more spiritual role.
A pledge of independence was read out, which included a readiness to withhold taxes.
His father, Motilal Nehru (1861–1931), a wealthy barrister who belonged to the Kashmiri Pandit community, served twice as President of the Indian National Congress during the Independence Struggle.
In pursuit of a single, unified India, Nehru warned, "Integrate or perish."
The Congress in 1912 had been the party of moderates and elites.
The Muslim League under his old Congress colleague and now ''bête noire'', Muhammad Ali Jinnah, had come to dominate Muslim politics in India.
The Nehru family homes at Anand Bhavan and Swaraj Bhavan are also preserved to commemorate Nehru and his family's legacy.
He ridiculed the Indian Civil Service (ICS) for its support of British policies.
Under Nehru, the Indian Parliament enacted many changes to Hindu law to criminalise caste discrimination and increase the legal rights and social freedoms of women.
Nehru was alleged to have had relationships with Shraddha Mata, Padmaja Naidu and Edwina Mountbatten.
Agricultural production expanded until the early 1960s, as additional land was brought under cultivation and some irrigation projects began to have an effect.
He remained popular with the people of India in spite of political troubles in his final years and failure of leadership during the 1962 Sino-Indian War.
Some historians attribute this dramatic decline to his surprise and chagrin over the Sino-Indian War, which he perceived as a betrayal of trust.
He was in Europe in early 1936, visiting his ailing wife, shortly before she died in a sanitarium in Switzerland.
Indira and Feroze had two sons – Rajiv (b.
Nehru considered the salt satyagraha the high-water mark of his association with Gandhi, and felt that its lasting importance was in changing the attitudes of Indians:
Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless, we will not see him again, as we have seen him for these many years, we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow, not only for me, but for millions and millions in this country.
He was then succeeded by his socialist colleagues Bose (1938–39) and Azad (1940–46).
The complex also houses the offices of the 'Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund', established in 1964 under the Chairmanship of Dr S. Radhakrishnan, then President of India.
Nehru ordered the raising of an elite Indian-trained "Tibetan Armed Force" composed of Tibetan refugees, which served with distinction in future wars against Pakistan in 1965 and 1971.
The Part C states included both the former chief commissioners' provinces and some princely states, and each was governed by a chief commissioner appointed by the President of India.
He also spoke out against the censorship acts passed by the British government in India.
He was charged with breach of the salt law, tried summarily behind prison walls and sentenced to six months of imprisonment.
There was substantial industrial development.
During the conflict, Nehru wrote two desperate letters to US President John F. Kennedy, requesting 12 squadrons of fighter jets and a modern radar system.
Western scholars have mostly praised Nehru for the integration of the states into a modern republic but the act was not accepted universally in India.
On 23 October 1939, the Congress condemned the Viceroy's attitude and called upon the Congress ministries in the various provinces to resign in protest.
Girish Karnad's historical play, ''Tughlaq'' (1962) is an allegory about the Nehruvian era.
Cripps's mission failed as Gandhi would accept nothing less than independence.
Nehru would continue to maintain his commitment to the non-aligned movement despite calls from some to settle down on one permanent ally.
Nehru, while a pacifist, was not blind to the political and geostrategic reality of India in 1947.
The US had hoped to court Nehru after its intervention in favour of Nasser during the Suez crisis.
On 30 January 1948, Gandhi was shot while he was walking to a platform from which he was to address a prayer meeting.
This effectively ensured the current "virtual indefinite policy of bilingualism" of the Indian Republic.
India lagged behind the miracle economies (Japan, West Germany, France, and Italy).
Nehru was one of the leaders who objected to the time given to the British – he pressed Gandhi to demand immediate actions from the British.
Nehru was elected in his place and held the presidency for two years (1936–37).
It was a radical break from the British colonial period.
Several nationalist leaders banded together in 1916 under the leadership of Annie Besant to voice a demand for self-government, and to obtain the status of a Dominion within the British Empire as enjoyed by Australia, Canada, South Africa, New Zealand and Newfoundland at the time.
Essentially, it was an acceptance of the principle of Pakistan – but not in so many words.
He wrote: "for nearly three years Brooks was with me and in many ways he influenced me greatly".
Efforts by the Indian Government to make Hindi the sole official language after 1965 were not acceptable to many non-Hindi Indian states, who wanted the continued use of English.
He firmly placed India on the side of democracy and freedom during a time when the world was under the threat of fascism.
The British government was subsequently forced to release Besant and make significant concessions after a period of intense protest.
The trio combined to oust Dr. Prasad as Congress President in 1936.
Nehru remarked about the unprecedented popular response, "it seemed as though a spring had been suddenly released".
For this purpose, Nehru oversaw the creation of mass village enrolment programmes and the construction of thousands of schools.
The process began by Nehru was finally completed by his daughter by the end of 1971.
A deadlock was reached.
The CIA later revealed that at that time the Chinese had neither the fuel nor runways long enough for using their air force effectively in Tibet.
He remained unconscious until he died.
We have to be prepared with all modern defence methods and a well-equipped army, navy and air force."
In Ketan Mehta's film ''Sardar'', Nehru was portrayed by Benjamin Gilani.
The collection of these letters was later published as a book ''Letters from a Father to His Daughter''.
Nehru harboured doubts regarding the ineffectualness of the Congress but agreed to work for the party in support of the Indian civil rights movement in South Africa.
Nehru was one of the first nationalist leaders to realise the sufferings of the people in the states ruled by Indian Princes.
The treaty was disregarded in the 1960s, but in the 1970s, the Five Principles again came to be seen as important in Sino-Indian relations, and more generally as norms of relations between states.
When the elections following the introduction of provincial autonomy (under the government of India act 1935) brought the Congress party to power in a majority of the provinces, Nehru's popularity and power was unmatched.
But the real importance, to my mind, lay in the effect they had on our own people, and especially the village masses.&nbsp;... Non-cooperation dragged them out of the mire and gave them self-respect and self-reliance.&nbsp;...
Nehru also launched initiatives such as the provision of free milk and meals to children to fight malnutrition.
Toward the end of the war India had increased her support for Tibetan refugees and revolutionaries, some of them having settled in India, as they were fighting the same common enemy in the region.
First, Britain must give an assurance of full independence for India after the war and allow the election of a constituent assembly to frame a new constitution; second, although the Indian armed forces would remain under the British Commander-in-Chief, Indians must be included immediately in the central government and given a chance to share power and responsibility.
According to former Indian diplomat G Parthasarathy, "only after we got nothing from the US did arms supplies from the Soviet Union to India commence".
Of course these movements exercised tremendous pressure on the British Government and shook the government machinery.
In 1927, his efforts paid off and the Congress was invited to attend the congress of oppressed nationalities in Brussels in Belgium.
Nehru, eager for a compromise, was hopeful.
Prime Minister Winston Churchill dispatched Sir Stafford Cripps, a member of the war Cabinet who was known to be politically close to Nehru and also knew Jinnah, with proposals for a settlement of the constitutional problem.
Gandhi did not disagree with Nehru's move, but felt that if he resigned, his popularity with Indians would cease to stifle the party's membership.
Nehru who had been supporting the cause of the people of the princely states for many years was made the President of the conference in 1935.
After returning to India in August 1912, Nehru enrolled himself as an advocate of the Allahabad High Court and tried to settle down as a barrister.
The episode greatly raised the prestige of Nehru and India amongst the third world nations.
Although educated Indians "by and large took a vicarious pleasure" in seeing the British rulers humbled, the ruling upper classes sided with the Allies.
The influence of the moderates on Congress politics began to wane after Gokhale died in 1915.
Trevelyan's Garibaldi books, which he had received as prizes for academic merit.
He appointed the National Planning Commission in 1938 to help in framing such policies.
Menon's passionate defence of Indian sovereignty in Kashmir enlarged his base of support in India, and led to the Indian press temporarily dubbing him the "Hero of Kashmir".
The war also put an end to Nehru's earlier hopes that India and China would form a strong Asian Axis to counteract the increasing influence of the Cold War bloc superpowers.
He took office as the Prime Minister of India on 15 August, and delivered his inaugural address titled "Tryst with Destiny".
He viewed Garibaldi as a revolutionary hero.
The issue was resolved during the premiership of Lal Bahadur Shastri, who under great pressure from Nehru's daughter, Indira Gandhi, was made to give assurances that English would continue to be used as the official language as long the non-Hindi speaking states wanted.
Disillusioned by alleged intra-party corruption and bickering, Nehru contemplated resigning but continued to serve.
A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance.
Nehru was then at the peak of his popularity in India; the only (minor) criticism came from the far-right.
This was headed by Justice Fazal Ali and the commission itself was also known as the Fazal Ali Commission.
The Jawaharlal Nehru Port near the city of Mumbai is a modern port and dock designed to handle a huge cargo and traffic load.
The text of the Act did not satisfy the DMK and increased their scepticism that his assurances might not be honoured by future administrations.
But these achievements were seriously compromised in the aftermath of the Quit India Movement in 1942, which saw the British effectively crush the Congress as a political organisation.
After much deliberation the Congress under Nehru informed the government that it would co-operate with the British but on certain conditions.
Plans for a mass civil disobedience were also underway.
In India, his birthday is celebrated as ''Children's Day''.
Nehru's daughter, Indira Gandhi, was able to fulfill her father's dream by the 42nd amendment (1976) of the Indian constitution by which India officially became "socialist" and "secular".
While India's economy grew faster than both the United Kingdom and the United States – low initial income and rapid population increase – meant that growth was inadequate for any sort of catch-up with rich income nations.
He commissioned the first study of the human effects of nuclear explosions, and campaigned ceaselessly for the abolition of what he called "these frightful engines of destruction".
Jinnah however had greatly strengthened his own position and that of the League.
Indian, British, and world opinion increasingly began to recognise the legitimacy of the claims by the Congress party for independence.
In March 1940 Jinnah passed what would come to be known as the "Pakistan Resolution", declaring "Muslims are a nation according to any definition of a nation, and they must have their homelands, their territory and their State."
Divorce also would be governed by the secular law, and maintenance of a divorced wife would be along the lines set down in the civil law.
I mused of Indian freedom and Asiatic freedom from the thraldom of Europe."
At midnight on New Year's Eve 1929, Nehru hoisted the tricolour flag of India upon the banks of the Ravi in Lahore.
During this time, he continued to study the scholars of the Fabian Society including Beatrice Webb.
He opened up its ranks to membership from across the political spectrum.
He wrote: "Decidedly the atmosphere was not intellectually stimulating and a sense of the utter insipidity of life grew upon me."
Nehru drafted the Indian declaration of independence, which stated:
His idea of a secular nation-state was seemingly validated when the Congress, under his leadership, swept the 1937 provincial elections and formed the government in several provinces; on the other hand, the separatist Muslim League fared much poorer.
During the period where all of the Congress leadership were in jail, the Muslim League under Jinnah grew in power.
When World war II started, Viceroy Linlithgow had unilaterally declared India a belligerent on the side of the Britain, without consulting the elected Indian representatives.
Nehru and Patel suppressed the RSS, the Muslim National Guards, and the Khaksars, with some 200,000 arrests.
Nehru, the man and politician made such a powerful imprint on India that his death on 27 May 1964, left India with no clear political heir to his leadership (although his daughter was widely expected to succeed him before she turned it down in favour of Shastri).
Nehru assumed the presidency of the Congress party during the Lahore session on 29 December 1929 and introduced a successful resolution calling for complete independence.
The election of his daughter Indira as Congress President in 1959 aroused criticism for alleged nepotism, although actually Nehru had disapproved of her election, partly because he considered it smacked of "dynastism"; he said, indeed it was "wholly undemocratic and an undesirable thing", and refused her a position in his cabinet.
He was also given the responsibility of planning the economy of a future India.
The Special Marriage Act allowed Muslims to marry under it and thereby retain the protections, generally beneficial to Muslim women, that could not be found in the personal law.
Nehru remains a popular symbol of the Congress Party which frequently celebrates his memory.
