...until around 1967, the worlds of jazz and rock were nearly completely separate.
While there is a discernible rock and funk influence in the timbres of the instruments employed, other tonal and rhythmic textures, such as the Indian tambora and tablas and Cuban congas and bongos, create a multi-layered soundscape.
Handy wrote about his adopting of the blues:
In 1924 Louis Armstrong joined the Fletcher Henderson dance band for a year, as featured soloist.
But critic Joachim-Ernst Berendt argues that its terms of reference and its definition should be broader, defining jazz as a "form of art music which originated in the United States through the confrontation of the Negro with European music" and arguing that it differs from European music in that jazz has a "special relationship to time defined as 'swing'", involves "a spontaneity and vitality of musical production in which improvisation plays a role" and contains a "sonority and manner of phrasing which mirror the individuality of the performing jazz musician".
The question of the origin of the word ''jazz'' has resulted in considerable research, and its history is well documented.
This was the birth of Afro-Cuban jazz.
The music evolved from what went before.
Some musicians, including Pharoah Sanders, Hubert Laws and Wayne Shorter, began using African instruments such as kalimbas, bells, beaded gourds and other instruments which were not traditional to jazz.
* The reestablishment of the blues as the music's primary organizing and functional principle.
Bebop made use of several relatively common chord progressions, such as blues (at base, I-IV-V, but infused with II-V motion) and 'rhythm changes' (I-VI-II-V) - the chords to the 1930s pop standard "I Got Rhythm."
Tresillo is the most basic and most prevalent duple-pulse rhythmic cell in sub-Saharan African music traditions and the music of the African Diaspora.
Jazz critic Kevin Whitehead documented the free jazz scene in Amsterdam and some of its main exponents such as the ICP (Instant Composers Pool) orchestra in his book ''New Dutch Swing''.
Latin jazz specialists like Cal Tjader tended to be the exception.
Although some jazz purists protested against the blend of jazz and rock, many jazz innovators crossed over from the contemporary hard bop scene into fusion.
Within the context of jazz however, harmony is the primary referent, not rhythm.
In addition, the quartet responded to the leader by playing with increasing freedom.
While Coltrane used over-blowing frequently as an emotional exclamation-point, Sanders would opt to overblow his entire solo, resulting in a constant screaming and screeching in the altissimo range of the instrument.
The use of the word in a musical context was documented as early as 1915 in the ''Chicago Daily Tribune.''
As late as 1861, a traveler in North Carolina saw dancers dressed in costumes that included horned headdresses and cow tails and heard music provided by a sheepskin-covered "gumbo box", apparently a frame drum; triangles and jawbones furnished the auxiliary percussion.
The genre's origins lie in seminal work by John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Bill Evans, Charles Mingus, Wayne Shorter and Herbie Hancock.
These divergences from the jazz mainstream of the time initially met with a divided, sometimes hostile, response among fans and fellow musicians, especially established swing players, who bristled at the new harmonic sounds.
Its first documented use in a musical context in New Orleans was in a November 14, 1916 ''Times-Picayune'' article about "jas bands."
Afro-Creole pianist Jelly Roll Morton began his career in Storyville.
Claude Debussy did have some influence on jazz, for example, on Bix Beiderbecke's piano playing.
Bebop musicians eliminated Western-style functional harmony in their music while retaining the strong central tonality of the blues as a basis for drawing upon various African matrices.
Swing is the most important and enduring African-based rhythmic technique used in jazz.
Some of the earliest Mississippi Delta settlers came from the vicinity of New Orleans, where drumming was never actively discouraged for very long and homemade drums were used to accompany public dancing until the outbreak of the Civil War.
Morton loosened ragtime's rigid rhythmic feeling, decreasing its embellishments and employing a swing feeling.
The figure was later used by Scott Joplin and other ragtime composers.
Till then, however, I had never heard this slur used by a more sophisticated Negro, or by any white man.
In the same year, Sonny Sharrock, Peter Brötzmann, Bill Laswell and Ronald Shannon Jackson recorded the first album under the name Last Exit (free jazz band), a similarly aggressive blend of thrash and free jazz.
He incorporated parallel fourths, with McCoy Tyner-type vamps.
Although jazz is considered highly difficult to define, at least in part because it contains so many varied subgenres, improvisation is consistently regarded as being one of its key elements.
"I didn't write out the music for ''Kind of Blue'', but brought in sketches for what everybody was supposed to play because I wanted a lot of spontaneity," recalled Davis.
The second group of revivalists consisted of younger musicians, such as those in the Lu Watters band, Conrad Janis, and Ward Kimball and his Firehouse Five Plus Two Jazz Band.
The track "So What" has only two chords: D-7 and E-7.
Whether in the cotton field of the Delta or on the Levee up St. Louis way, it was always the same.
Later styles such as modal jazz abandoned the strict notion of a chord progression, allowing the individual musicians to improvise even more freely within the context of a given scale or mode.
It was spelled 'J-A-S-S.' That was dirty, and if you knew what it was, you wouldn't say it in front of ladies."
In 1966 jazz trumpeter Don Ellis and Indian sitar player Harihar Rao founded the Hindustani Jazz Sextet.
A distinctive European contemporary jazz (often incorporating elements of free jazz but not limited to it) also flourished because of the emergence of European musicians such as Peter Brötzmann, John Surman, Zbigniew Namysłowski, Albert Mangelsdorff, Kenny Wheeler, and Mike Westbrook, who were anxious to develop new approaches reflecting their national and regional musical cultures and contexts.
Musicians using this approach include Pat Metheny, John Abercrombie, John Scofield and the Swedish group e.s.t.
The use of clave brought the African ''timeline'', or ''key pattern'', into jazz.
This movement included musicians such as Valery Ponomarev and Bobby Watson, Dennis Irwin and James Williams.
Most of these players were originally Midwesterners, although there were a small number of New Orleans musicians involved.
Nu jazz is influenced by jazz harmony and melodies, and there are usually no improvisational aspects.
Nevertheless, women were hired into many of the big-league big bands such as Woody Herman and Gerald Wilson.
The primitive southern Negro, as he sang, was sure to bear down on the third and seventh tone of the scale, slurring between major and minor.
Among these musicians were Jazz Messenger alumni Benny Green, Branford Marsalis and Ralph Peterson, Jr., as well as Kenny Washington, Lewis Nash, Curtis Lundy, Cyrus Chestnut, Mark Shim, Craig Handy, Greg Hutchinson and Marc Cary, Taurus Mateen and Geri Allen.
In developing his late style, Coltrane was especially influenced by the dissonance of Ayler's trio with bassist Gary Peacock and drummer Sunny Murray, a rhythm section honed with Cecil Taylor as leader.
Unlike hard bop, soul jazz generally emphasized repetitive grooves and melodic hooks, and improvisations were often less complex than in other jazz styles.
I had to keep going and ended up writing a sixteen-bar bridge."
Armstrong's solos went well beyond the theme-improvisation concept, and extemporized on chords, rather than melodies.
Coltrane studied Nicolas Slonimsky's ''Thesaurus of Scales and Melodic Patterns'', which contains material that is virtually identical to portions of "Giant Steps".
Other styles and genres abound in the 2000s, such as Latin and Afro-Cuban jazz.
Key albums include ''Speak No Evil'' by Shorter; ''The Real McCoy'' by McCoy Tyner; ''Maiden Voyage'' by Hancock; ''Miles Smiles'' by Davis; and ''Search for the New Land'' by Lee Morgan (an artist who is not typically associated with the post-bop genre).
Pianist Randy Weston's music incorporated African elements, such as in the large-scale suite "Uhuru Africa" (with the participation of poet Langston Hughes) and "Highlife: Music From the New African Nations."
European classical music performance is evaluated by its fidelity to the musical score, with much less discretion over interpretation, ornamentation and accompaniment: the classical performer's primary goal is to play a composition as it was written.
John Storm Roberts states that the musical genre habanera "reached the U.S. twenty years before the first rag was published."
Furthermore, I question the assumption that smooth jazz is an unfortunate and unwelcomed evolutionary outcome of the jazz-fusion era.
Coleman's audience decreased, but his music and concepts influenced many musicians, both in terms of music technique and of the music's meaning.
In the early 1980s, a commercial form of jazz fusion called smooth jazz became successful, garnering significant radio airplay.
In London, the Pop Group began to mix free jazz and dub reggae into their brand of punk rock.
There was a resurgence of interest in jazz and other forms of African-American cultural expression during the Black Arts Movement and Black nationalist period of the 1960s and 1970s.
The classically trained pianist Scott Joplin produced his "Original Rags" in 1898, and in 1899 had an international hit with "Maple Leaf Rag", a multi-strain ragtime march with four parts that feature recurring themes and a bass line with copious seventh chords.
While women such as Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald, Dinah Washington, Ethel Waters, Betty Carter, Adelaide Hall, Abbey Lincoln, and Anita O'Day are famous for their jazz singing, women have achieved much less recognition for their contributions as composers, bandleaders, and instrumental performers.
Gillespie and Pozo's brief collaboration produced some of the most enduring Afro-Cuban jazz standards.
New forms of chromaticism and dissonance were introduced into jazz, and the dissonant tritone (or "flatted fifth") interval became the "most important interval of bebop" Chord progressions for bebop tunes were often taken directly from popular swing-era songs and reused with a new and more complex melody to form new compositions, a practice which was already well-established in earlier jazz, but came to be central to the bebop style.
''Down Beat'' described the album as "music beyond category", and awarded it Album of the Year in the magazine's polls that year.
(1970) and Davis' ''Agharta'' (1975), which Nicholson said "suggested the potential of evolving into something that might eventually define itself as a wholly independent genre quite apart from the sound and conventions of anything that had gone before."
Typically, the band would only play an even-eighth "Latin" feel in the A section of the head, and swing throughout all of the solos.
The blues form which is ubiquitous in jazz is characterized by specific chord progressions, of which the twelve-bar blues progression is the most common.
A similar reaction took place against free jazz.
Usually such music was associated with annual festivals, when the year's crop was harvested and several days were set aside for celebration.
Jazz rap developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and incorporates jazz influences into hip hop.
They were also the first band in the United States to publicly utilize the term ''Afro-Cuban'' as the band's moniker, thus identifying itself and acknowledging the West African roots of the musical form they were playing.
In New York, No Wave took direct inspiration from both free jazz and punk.
Mark Levine observes that when mixed in with more conventional "playing the changes", pentatonic scales provide "structure and a feeling of increased space."
Armstrong, perhaps more than any other musician, codified the rhythmic technique of swing in jazz, and broadened the jazz solo vocabulary.
Other recent vocalists have achieved popularity with a mix of traditional jazz and pop/rock forms, such as Diana Krall, Norah Jones, Cassandra Wilson, Kurt Elling and Jamie Cullum.
Generally, the term post-bop is taken to mean jazz from the mid-sixties onwards that assimilates influences from hard bop, modal jazz, the avant-garde and free jazz, without necessarily being immediately identifiable as any of the above.
This was a drumming tradition that was distinct from its Caribbean counterparts, expressing a uniquely African-American sensibility.
The dictionary does nonetheless provide the useful description of triple subdivisions of the beat contrasted with duple subdivisions: swing superimposes six subdivisions of the beat over a basic pulse structure or four subdivisions.
Acid jazz developed in the UK in the 1980s and 1990s, influenced by jazz-funk and electronic dance music.
''The New Harvard Dictionary of Music'' states that swing is: "An intangible rhythmic momentum in jazz ...
Auditory inclinations were the African legacy in Parker's life, reconfirmed by the experience of the blues tonal system, a sound world at odds with the Western diatonic chord categories.
When the men were drafted for WWII, many all-women big band jazz bands took over.
Bebop then revived tonal-harmonic ideas transmitted through the blues and reconstructed and expanded others in a basically non-Western harmonic approach.
A series of recordings with the Classic Quartet in the first half of 1965 show Coltrane's playing becoming increasingly abstract, with greater incorporation of devices like multiphonics, utilization of overtones, and playing in the altissimo register, as well as a mutated return to Coltrane's sheets of sound.
The American Dialect Society named it the Word of the Twentieth Century.
traveled to the U.S. to learn it firsthand.
Most post-bop artists worked in other genres as well, with a particularly strong overlap with the later hard bop.
As well as the electric instruments of rock (such as electric guitar, electric bass, electric piano and synthesizer keyboards), fusion also used the powerful amplification, "fuzz" pedals, wah-wah pedals and other effects that were used by 1970s-era rock bands.
* A developed and even more highly syncopated, linear rhythmic complexity and a melodic angularity in which the blue note of the fifth degree was established as an important melodic-harmonic device.
The abolition of slavery in 1865 led to new opportunities for the education of freed African Americans.
According to Gillespie, Pozo composed the layered, contrapuntal guajeos (Afro-Cuban ostinatos) of the A section and the introduction, while Gillespie wrote the bridge.
An influential style referred to as the Chicago School (or Chicago Style) was developed by white musicians including Bud Freeman, Jimmy McPartland.
According to Schuller, by comparison, the solos by Armstrong's bandmates (including a young Coleman Hawkins), sounded "stiff, stodgy," with "jerky rhythms and a grey undistinguished tone quality."
These younger rising stars rejected avant-garde approaches and instead championed the acoustic jazz sound of Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk and early recordings of the first Miles Davis quintet.
The earliest written record of the word is in a 1912 article in the ''Los Angeles Times'' in which a minor league baseball pitcher described a pitch which he called a ''jazz ball'' "because it wobbles and you simply can't do anything with it."
''The New York Times'' used stories and headlines to pick at jazz: Siberian villagers were said by the paper to have used jazz to scare off bears, when in fact they had used pots and pans; another story claimed that the fatal heart attack of a celebrated conductor was caused by jazz.
He often composed specifically for the style and skills of these individuals, such as "Jeep's Blues" for Johnny Hodges, "Concerto for Cootie" for Cootie Williams (which later became "Do Nothing Till You Hear from Me" with Bob Russell's lyrics), and "The Mooche" for Tricky Sam Nanton and Bubber Miley.
Although the foundation of jazz is deeply rooted within the  black experience of the United States, different cultures have contributed their own experience and styles to the art form as well.
Weather Report's subsequent releases were creative funk-jazz works.
It was broadcast on the radio "live" nightly across America for many years, especially by Earl Hines and his Grand Terrace Cafe Orchestra broadcasting coast-to-coast from Chicago (well placed for "live" US time-zones).
Some well known artists of the time include Sweet Emma Barrett, Mary Lou Williams, Billie Pierce, Jeanette Kimball and Lovie Austin.
The habanera was the first of many Cuban music genres which enjoyed periods of popularity in the United States, and reinforced and inspired the use of tresillo-based rhythms in African-American music.
Much of this French jazz was a combination of African-American jazz and the symphonic styles in which French musicians were well-trained; in this, it is easy to see the inspiration taken from Paul Whiteman, since his style was also a fusion of the two.
The Bad Plus have also incorporated elements of free jazz into their music.
An early 1940s style known as "jumping the blues" or jump blues used small combos, uptempo music and blues chord progressions, drawing on boogie-woogie from the 1930s.
I'd been getting bored with the stereotyped changes that were being used, ... and I kept thinking there's bound to be something else.
Musicians from Havana and New Orleans would take the twice-daily ferry between both cities to perform, and the habanera quickly took root in the musically fertile Crescent City.
Belgian guitar virtuoso Django Reinhardt popularized gypsy jazz, a mix of 1930s American swing, French dance hall "musette" and Eastern European folk with a languid, seductive feel; the main instruments are steel stringed guitar, violin, and double bass, and solos pass from one player to another as the guitar and bass play the role of the rhythm section.
According to jazz writer Stuart Nicholson, "just as free jazz appeared on the verge of creating a whole new musical language in the 1960s ... jazz-rock briefly suggested the promise of doing the same" with albums such as Williams' ''Emergency!''
While for an outside observer, the harmonic innovations in bebop would appear to be inspired by experiences in Western "serious" music, from Claude Debussy to Arnold Schoenberg, such a scheme cannot be sustained by the evidence from a cognitive approach.
Post-bop jazz is a form of small-combo jazz derived from earlier bop styles.
Examples of this style include Lydia Lunch's ''Queen of Siam'', Gray, the work of James Chance and the Contortions (who mixed Soul with free jazz and punk) and the Lounge Lizards (the first group to call themselves "punk jazz").
However, as Gerhard Kubik points out, whereas the spirituals are homophonic, rural blues and early jazz "was largely based on concepts of heterophony."
The starting point was a collection of 1949 and 1950 singles by a nonet led by Miles Davis, released as the ''Birth of the Cool'' (1957).
And it is also true that Duke Ellington adopted and reinterpreted some harmonic devices in European contemporary music.
Frank Teschemacher, Dave Tough, and Eddie Condon.
This occurred in parallel with developments in Cuba The first Cuban band of this new wave was Irakere.
A more precise term might be Afro-Latin jazz, as the jazz subgenre typically employs rhythms that either have a direct analog in Africa, or exhibit an African rhythmic influence beyond what is ordinarily heard in other jazz.
The original New Orleans style was polyphonic, with theme variation and simultaneous collective improvisation.
It was Mario Bauzá who introduced bebop innovator Dizzy Gillespie to the Cuban conga drummer and composer Chano Pozo.
In Ohio and elsewhere in the midwest the major influence was ragtime, until about 1919.
Jazz-funk musicians such as Roy Ayers and Donald Byrd are often credited as the forerunners of acid jazz.
Several members of the orchestra remained with him for several decades.
That year, numerous other bands made recordings featuring "jazz" in the title or band name, but most were ragtime or novelty records rather than jazz.
In the post-Civil War period (after 1865), African Americans were able to obtain surplus military bass drums, snare drums and fifes, and an original African-American drum and fife music emerged, featuring tresillo and related syncopated rhythmic figures.
Also in 1897, the white composer William H. Krell published his "Mississippi Rag" as the first written piano instrumental ragtime piece, and Tom Turpin published his "Harlem Rag", the first rag published by an African-American.
According to Ted Gioia:
ensemble featured a rotation of young jazz musicians such as Kenny Garrett, Steve Wilson, Kenny Davis, Renee Rosnes, Ralph Peterson, Jr., Billy Drummond and Robert Hurst.
can be thought of as a combination of tresillo and the backbeat.
By the swing era, big bands were coming to rely more on arranged music: arrangements were either written or learned by ear and memorized, while individual soloists would improvise within these arrangements.
Two years later, Vess Ossman recorded a medley of these songs as a banjo solo known as "Rag Time Medley".
By the end of the 1940s, the nervous energy and tension of bebop was replaced with a tendency toward calm and smoothness with the sounds of cool jazz, which favored long, linear melodic lines.
In contrast to the efforts of commentators and enthusiasts of certain types of jazz, who have argued for narrower definitions that exclude other types, the musicians themselves are often reluctant to define the music they play.
by The Tony Williams Lifetime.
New Orleans native Louis Moreau Gottschalk's piano piece "Ojos Criollos (Danse Cubaine)" (1860) was influenced by the composer's studies in Cuba: the habanera rhythm is clearly heard in the left hand.
It emerged in the form of independent traditional and popular musical styles, all linked by the common bonds of African American and European American musical parentage with a performance orientation.
And the next generation of progressive players would be even more accommodating, moving inside and outside the changes without thinking twice.
Many early jazz performers played in venues throughout the city, such as the brothels and bars of the red-light district around Basin Street, known as "Storyville".
In many forms of jazz, a soloist is often supported by a rhythm section consisting of one or more chordal instruments (piano, guitar, etc.
Women began playing instruments in jazz in the early 1920s, with the piano being one of the earliest instruments used which allowed female artists a degree of social acceptance.
Later cool jazz recordings by musicians such as Chet Baker, Dave Brubeck, Bill Evans, Gil Evans, Stan Getz, the Modern Jazz Quartet, and Gerry Mulligan usually had a "lighter" sound that avoided the aggressive tempos and harmonic abstraction of bebop.
In 1918 Paul Whiteman and his orchestra became a hit in San Francisco, California, signing with Victor Talking Machine Company in 1920 and becoming the top bandleader of the 1920s, giving "hot jazz" a white component, hiring white musicians including Bix Beiderbecke, Jimmy Dorsey, Tommy Dorsey, Frankie Trumbauer, and Joe Venuti.
Its composition and style have changed many times throughout the years with each performer's personal interpretation and improvisation, which is also one of the greatest appeals of the genre.
The first major stirrings came in the 1950s with the early work of Ornette Coleman (whose 1960 album ''Free Jazz: A Collective Improvisation'' coined the term) and Cecil Taylor.
(The example approximates Armstrong's solo, as it doesn't convey his use of swing.)
There were two types of musicians involved in the revival: the first group was made up of those who had begun their careers playing in the traditional style and were returning to it (or continuing what they had been playing all along), such as Bob Crosby's Bobcats, Max Kaminsky, Eddie Condon, and Wild Bill Davison.
Some music researchers hold that it was Philadelphia's Eddie Lang and Joe Venuti who pioneered the guitar-violin partnership typical of the genre, which was brought to France after they had been heard live or on Okeh Records in the late 1920s.
Bix Beiderbecke was one of the most prominent white jazz musicians.
The following example shows the V pentatonic scale over a II-V-I progression.
Late bop also moved towards extended forms that represented a departure from pop and show tunes.
The two main categories of Latin jazz are Afro-Cuban jazz and Brazilian jazz.
The bridge gave "Manteca" a typical jazz harmonic structure, setting the piece apart from Bauza's modal "Tanga" of a few years earlier.
In an interview with NPR, musician Eubie Blake offered his recollections of the original slang connotations of the term, saying: "When Broadway picked it up, they called it 'J-A-Z-Z..
Traditional jazz enthusiasts have dismissed bebop, free jazz, the 1970s jazz fusion era and much else as periods of debasement of the music and betrayals of the tradition.
This was driven in large part by record company reissues of early jazz classics by the Oliver, Morton, and Armstrong bands of the 1930s.
To some African Americans, jazz has highlighted their contribution to American society and helped bring attention to black history and culture, but for others, the music and term "jazz" are reminders of "an oppressive and racist society and restrictions on their artistic visions".
By 1930 the New Orleans-style ensemble was a relic, and jazz belonged to the world.
The 1980s saw something of a reaction against the Fusion and Free Jazz that had dominated the 1970s.
As jazz spread around the world, it drew on different national, regional, and local musical cultures, which gave rise to many distinctive styles.
On the contrary, ideologically, bebop was a strong statement of rejection of any kind of eclecticism, propelled by a desire to activate something deeply buried in self.
The origins of the blues are undocumented, though they can be seen as the secular counterpart of the spirituals.
The blues were the key that opened up an entirely new approach to Western harmony, ultimately leading to a high level of harmonic complexity in jazz.
Women jazz performers and composers have contributed throughout jazz history.
In his own words: Now in one of my earliest tunes, "New Orleans Blues," you can notice the Spanish tinge.
Morton considered the tresillo/habanera (which he called the Spanish tinge) to be an essential ingredient of jazz.
During 1974-1976 they were members of one of Eddie Palmieri's most experimental salsa groups: salsa was the medium, but Palmieri was stretching the form in new ways.
This approach can be heard on pre-1980 recordings of "Manteca", "A Night in Tunisia", "Tin Tin Deo", and "On Green Dolphin Street".
Two years later I read that that was 'bop' and the beginning of modern jazz ... but the band never made recordings.
Free jazz quickly found a foothold in Europe, in part because musicians such as Ayler, Taylor, Steve Lacy and Eric Dolphy spent extended periods there, and European musicians Michael Mantler, John Tchicai et al.
In Gottschalk's symphonic work "A Night in the Tropics" (1859), the tresillo variant cinquillo appears extensively.
For example, on a 1959 live Tjader recording of "A Night in Tunisia", pianist Vince Guaraldi soloed through the entire form over an authentic mambo.
This development was stifled by commercialism, Nicholson said, as the genre "mutated into a peculiar species of jazz-inflected pop music that eventually took up residence on FM radio" at the end of the 1970s.
Chick Corea similarly began exploring jazz standards in the 1980s, having neglected them for the 1970s.
This distinct style entered full swing in France with the Quintette du Hot Club de France, which began in 1934.
A number of players who usually perform in largely straight-ahead settings have emerged since the 1990s, including pianists Jason Moran and Vijay Iyer, guitarist Kurt Rosenwinkel, vibraphonist Stefon Harris, trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Terence Blanchard, saxophonists Chris Potter and Joshua Redman, clarinetist Ken Peplowski and bassist Christian McBride.
In jazz, the skilled performer will interpret a tune in very individual ways, never playing the same composition the same way twice; depending on the performer's mood and personal experience, interactions with other musicians, or even members of the audience, a jazz musician may alter melodies, harmonies or time signature at will.
The cornetist Buddy Bolden led a band who are often mentioned as one of the prime originators of the style later to be called "jazz".
Notable performers of jazz fusion included Miles Davis, Eddie Harris, keyboardists Joe Zawinul, Chick Corea and Herbie Hancock, vibraphonist Gary Burton, drummer Tony Williams (drummer), violinist Jean-Luc Ponty, guitarists Larry Coryell, Al Di Meola, John McLaughlin and Frank Zappa, saxophonist Wayne Shorter and bassists Jaco Pastorius and Stanley Clarke.
But despite the initial friction, by the 1950s bebop had become an accepted part of the jazz vocabulary.
"The snare and bass drummers played syncopated cross-rhythms," observed the writer Robert Palmer (writer), speculating that "this tradition must have dated back to the latter half of the nineteenth century, and it could have not have developed in the first place if there hadn't been a reservoir of polyrhythmic sophistication in the culture it nurtured."
The young Jazz Messengers' contemporaries, including Roy Hargrove, Marcus Roberts, Wallace Roney and Mark Whitfield were also influenced by Wynton Marsalis's emphasis toward jazz tradition.
The quintet Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers, fronted by Blakey and featuring pianist Horace Silver and trumpeter Clifford Brown, were leaders in the hard bop movement along with Davis.
Accordingly, John Coltrane's "Giant Steps" (1960), with its 26 chords per 16 bars, can be played using only three pentatonic scales.
Gerhard Kubik postulates that the harmonic development in bebop sprang from the blues and other African-related tonal sensibilities, rather than 20th-century Western art music as some have suggested:
Tresillo is heard prominently in New Orleans second line music and in other forms of popular music from that city from the turn of the 20th century to present.
A contemporary account states that blues could only be heard in jazz in the gut-bucket cabarets, which were generally looked down upon by the Black middle-class.
Music organized around key patterns convey a two-celled (binary) structure, which is a complex level of African cross-rhythm.
Rap duo Pete Rock & CL Smooth incorporated jazz influences on their 1992 debut ''Mecca and the Soul Brother''.
He also recorded songs written by his bandsmen, such as Juan Tizol's "Caravan" and "Perdido", which brought the "Spanish Tinge" to big-band jazz.
Since bebop was meant to be listened to, not danced to, it could use faster tempos.
The leader of New Orleans' Camelia Brass Band, D'Jalma Ganier, taught Louis Armstrong to play trumpet; Armstrong would then popularize the New Orleans style of trumpet playing, and then expand it.
If the progression begins on the "two-side", its in ''2-3 clave''.
Their "Chékere-son" (1976) introduced a style of "Cubanized" bebop-flavored horn lines that departed from the more angular guajeo-based lines which were typical of Cuban popular music and Latin jazz up until that time.
This aspect of swing is far more prevalent in African-American music than in Afro-Caribbean music.
