In 1920, despite a growing tremor in his hands, Sibelius composed the ''Hymn of the Earth'' to a text by the poet Eino Leino for the Suomen Laulu Choir and orchestrated his ''Valse lyrique'', helped along by drinking wine.
Loviisa was freedom."
On 16 February 1893, the first (long) version of ''En saga'' was presented in Helsinki although it was not too well received, the critics suggesting that superfluous sections should be eliminated (as they were in Sibelius's 1902 version).
In 1907, Sibelius underwent a serious operation for suspected throat cancer.
"One of the great experiences of my life!"
The waltz accompanied a sequence in which a woman rises from her deathbed to dance with ghosts.
Sibelius wrote six pieces for the 2 December 1903 production of ''Kuolema'' (meaning death).
It has been described as "completely original in form, subtle in its handling of tempi, individual in its treatment of key and wholly organic in growth".
Eva married an industrial heir, Arvi Paloheimo, and later became the CEO of the Paloheimo Corporation.
Around 1881, he recorded on paper his short pizzicato piece ''Vattendroppar'' (Water Drops) for violin and cello although it might just have been a musical exercise.
He then travelled to Berlin to continue work on his Fourth Symphony, writing the finale after returning to Järvenpää.
In July, he was saddened by the death of his brother Christian.
Despite the music's beauty, many critics have faulted Sibelius for his "over-reliance" on the source material's narrative structure.
When Freemasonry was revived in Finland, having been forbidden during the Russian sovereignty, Sibelius was one of the founding members of Suomi Lodge No.
I hated pen and ink—unfortunately I preferred an elegant violin bow.
Even less successful were three more performances of ''Kullervo'' in March which one critic found was incomprehensible and lacking in vitality.
He ended the year conducting a series of concerts, the most successful being the first public performance of ''Pohjola's Daughter'' at the Mariinsky Theatre in St Petersburg.
The symphony's first performance was given by the Helsinki Philharmonic Society, conducted by the composer, on 25 September 1907.
When the orchestral suite was successfully performed in Helsinki in November 1898, Sibelius commented: "The music sounded excellent and the tempi seem to be right.
In early 1914, Sibelius spent a month in Berlin where he was particularly drawn to Arnold Schönberg.
Nevertheless, in the spring Sibelius went on an international tour with Kajanus and his orchestra, presenting his recent works (including a revised version of his First Symphony) in thirteen cities including Stockholm, Copenhagen, Hamburg, Berlin and Paris.
Based on the character Kullervo from the ''Kalevala'', it was premiered on 28 April 1892 with Emmy Achté and Abraham Ojanperä as soloists and Sibelius conducting the chorus and orchestra of the recently founded Helsinki Orchestra Society.
He went on to compose ''Luonnotar'' (Daughter of Nature) for soprano and orchestra.
The family name stems from the Sibbe Estate in Eastern Uusimaa which was owned by his paternal great grandfather.
In November, visiting Britain for the first time, he went to Liverpool where he met Henry Wood.
Sibelius was honoured with the Knight Commander's Cross of the Order of the Dannebrog.
Sibelius avoided public statements about other composers, but Erik W. Tawaststjerna and Sibelius's secretary Santeri Levas have documented his private conversations in which he admired Richard Strauss and considered Béla Bartók and Dmitri Shostakovich the most talented composers of the younger generation.
The last tableau, ''Finland Awakens'', was particularly popular; after minor revisions, it became the well-known ''Finlandia''.
As for his musical style, hints of Tchaikovsky's music are particularly evident in early works such as his First Symphony and his Violin Concerto.
Nevertheless, he continued to compose, one of his major successes being ''Valse triste'', one of six pieces of incidental music he composed for his brother-in-law Arvid Järnefelt's play ''Kuolema'' (Death).
While in America, Sibelius received an honorary doctorate from Yale University and, almost simultaneously, one from the University of Helsinki where he was represented by Aino.
This was demonstrated above all in St Petersburg where the Third Symphony was performed in November 1907 to dismissive reviews.
To cover the construction costs, he gave concerts in Helsinki, Turku and Vaasa in early 1904 as well as in Tallinn, Estonia, and in Latvia during the summer.
Premiered in April 1895 in Helsinki with Sibelius conducting, it is inspired by the Swedish poet Viktor Rydberg's work of the same name.
The Fourth Symphony was also well received in Birmingham in September.
This self-contained structure stood in stark contrast to the symphonic style of Gustav Mahler, Sibelius's primary rival in symphonic composition.
Sibelius's father died of typhoid in July 1868, leaving substantial debts.
In the latter decades of the twentieth century, Sibelius began to be re-assessed more favourably: Milan Kundera dubbed the composer's approach to be that of "antimodern modernism", standing outside the perpetual progression of the status quo.
Although he was far away from the fighting, his royalties from abroad were interrupted.
Initially titled ''Fantasia sinfonica'', it was first performed in Stockholm in March 1924, conducted by Sibelius.
The year 2015, the 150th anniversary of the composer's birth, featured a number of special concerts and events, especially in the city of Helsinki.
From its soft opening played by the horns, the work develops into rotational repetitions of its various themes with considerable transformations, building up to the trumpeted swan hymn in the final movement.
From the beginning of 1917, Sibelius started drinking again, triggering arguments with Aino.
In Berlin, he had the opportunity to widen his musical experience by going to a variety of concerts and operas, including the premiere of Richard Strauss's ''Don Juan''.
Sibelius was therefore brought up in a decidedly female environment, the only male influence coming from his uncle, Pehr Ferdinand Sibelius, who was interested in music, especially the violin.
It continues to be one of Sibelius's most popular pieces.
First, he is terribly uneven (much of his chamber music, a lot of his songs and most of his piano music might have been churned out by a second-rate salon composer from the 19th century on an off afternoon).
While travelling back from the United States, Sibelius heard about the events in Sarajevo which led to the beginning of the First World War.
The Ministry of Education and the Sibelius Society of Finland opened it as a museum in 1974.
He travelled with his wife to Berlin to have a tumour removed from his throat.
He was able to complete the music for Adolf Paul's play ''King Christian II''.
Another well-known Finnish composer, Heino Kaski, died the same day.
Erik Tawaststjerna also relates an anecdote in connection with Sibelius's death:
Thereafter, although he lived until 1957, he did not publish any further works of note.
By the end of the year, he was already working on the Sixth.
While thematic variation played a major role in the works of both composers, Mahler's style made use of disjunct, abruptly changing and contrasting themes, while Sibelius sought to slowly transform thematic elements.
Several volumes of Sibelius’ correspondence  have also been edited and published in Swedish, Finnish and English.
In May 1925, his Danish publisher Wilhelm Hansen and the Royal Danish Theatre invited him to compose incidental music for a production of Shakespeare's ''The Tempest''.
In later life, he wrote Masonic music and re-edited some earlier works while retaining an active but not always favourable interest in new  developments in music.
While in Vienna, he became particularly interested in the music of Anton Bruckner whom, for a time, he regarded as "the greatest living composer", although he continued to show interest in the established works of Beethoven and Wagner.
One of his teachers was its founder, Martin Wegelius, who did much to support the development of education in Finland.
In the mid-1920s, after his Sixth and Seventh Symphonies, he composed the symphonic poem ''Tapiola'' and incidental music for ''The Tempest''.
Exhilarated, he told his wife Aino that he had seen a flock of cranes approaching.
The similarities to Bruckner can be seen in the brass contributions to his orchestral works and the generally slow tempo of his music.
During his long stays in Helsinki, Sibelius's wife Aino frequently wrote to him, imploring him to return home but to no avail.
Organizationally, it consists of four informal sections, each corresponding to one of the poem's four stanzas and evoking the mood of a particular episode: first, heroic vigour; second, frenetic activity; third, sensual love; and fourth, inconsolable grief.
1 in 1922 and later became the Grand Organist of the Grand Lodge of Finland.
From 1939 he and Aino again had a home in Helsinki but they moved back to Ainola in 1941, only occasionally visiting the city.
In August, he joined the Finnish Freemasons and composed ritual music for them.
Sibelius's first significant composition of 1913 was the tone poem ''The Bard'' which he conducted in March to a respectful audience in Helsinki.
He composed, conducted and socialized actively in the Scandinavian countries, the UK, France and Germany and later travelled to the United States.
In May 1908, Sibelius's health deteriorated further.
The song immediately brought Sibelius the status of a national hero.
(Christian Sibelius was to become an eminent psychiatrist, still remembered for his contributions to modern psychiatry in Finland.)
Since 2011, Finland has celebrated a Flag Day on 8 December, the composer's birthday, also known as the "Day of Finnish Music".
Malcolm Arnold acknowledged his influence, and Arthur Butterworth also saw Sibelius's music as a source of inspiration in his work.
It had been written in support of the staff of the ''Päivälehti'' newspaper which had been suspended for a period after editorially criticizing Russian rule.
After another uneventful trip to Paris, he went to Berlin where he was relieved to learn that his throat operation had been entirely successful.
Even after their fourth daughter, Katarina, was born, he continued to work away from home.
Their relationship improved with the excitement resulting from the start of the Russian Revolution.
Sibelius's music was increasingly presented in Helsinki's concert halls.
It then rejoined the flock to continue its journey.
After the war he returned to Helsinki only a couple of times.
Aino lived there for the next 12 years until she died on 8 June 1969; she is buried alongside her husband.
While the first performance was difficult to appreciate over the background noise of the talkative audience, a second performance on 18 November was more successful.
Before the year was out he had also conducted concerts in Stockholm and Rome, the first to considerable acclaim, the second to mixed reviews.
In 2015, the 150th anniversary of the composer's birth, a number of special concerts and events were held, especially in the city of Helsinki.
My husband collected a number of the manuscripts in a laundry basket and burned them on the open fire in the dining room.
He promised the premiere of this symphony to Serge Koussevitzky in 1931 and 1932, and a London performance in 1933 under Basil Cameron was even advertised to the public.
Its reception in Moscow was rather more positive.
Sibelius composed prolifically until the mid-1920s but after completing his Seventh Symphony (1924), the incidental music for ''The Tempest'' (1926), and the tone poem ''Tapiola'' (1926), he failed to produce any major works in his last thirty years, a stunning and perplexing decline commonly referred to as "The Silence of Järvenpää", the location of his home.
The wedding was held on 10 June 1892 at Maxmo.
Despite having to repeat a year, he succeeded in passing the school-leaving examination in 1885 which allowed him to study at university.
A meeting with Claude Debussy produced further support.
His wife Aino recalled,
In 1990, the composer Thea Musgrave was commissioned by the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra to write a piece in honour of the 125th anniversary of Sibelius's birth: ''Song of the Enchanter'' was premiered on 14 February 1991.
It led to a revised condensed version which was performed in Berlin the following year.
In the 1894–95 season, works such as ''En saga'', ''Karelia'' and ''Vårsång'' (composed in 1894) were included in at least 16 concerts in the capital, not to mention those in Turku.
Early in 1922, after suffering from headaches Sibelius decided to acquire spectacles although he never wore them for photographs.
When the Red Guards had been defeated by Gustaf Mannerheim, Sibelius conducted the march in Helsinki, reinforcing his image as a national hero.
Other works include pieces inspired by the Finnish national epic, the ''Kalevala'', over a hundred songs for voice and piano, incidental music for numerous plays, the opera ''Jungfrun i tornet'' (''The Maiden in the Tower''), chamber music, piano music, Masonic ritual music, and 21 publications of choral music.
The year 1926 saw a sharp and lasting decline in Sibelius's output: after his Seventh Symphony he produced only a few major works during the rest of his life.
His First Symphony was first performed to an enthusiastic audience in 1899 at a time when Finnish nationalism was evolving.
Shortly afterwards Sibelius met Gustav Mahler who was in Helsinki.
Another patriotic work followed on 4 November in the form of eight tableaux depicting episodes from Finnish history known as the ''Press Celebration Music''.
The family were finally able to move into the new property on 24 September 1904, making friends with the local artistic community, including the painters Eero Järnefelt and Pekka Halonen and the novelist Juhani Aho.
It served as an inspiration for Sibelius's tone poem ''En saga'', the Lemminkäinen legends and the ''Karelia Suite''.
Thereafter he became known as Jean Sibelius.
Throughout his career, the composer found inspiration in nature and Nordic mythology, especially the heroic legends of the national epic, the ''Kalevala''.
Beginning with a dreamy theme from the strings, it evolves into the tones of the woodwinds, then the horns and the violas, demonstrating Sibelius's ability to handle an orchestra.
The waning finale is perhaps a premonition of the silence Sibelius would experience twenty years later.
For most of the last thirty years of his life, Sibelius even avoided talking publicly about his music.
After first composing the work in D flat major, Sibelius undertook substantive revisions, presenting a D major version in Norfolk which was well received, as were ''Finlandia'' and the ''Valse triste''.
It is inspired by Tapio, a forest spirit from the ''Kalevala''.
It was even more highly appreciated at a series of concerts in Copenhagen in late September.
The only concrete evidence of the symphony's existence on paper is a 1933 bill for a fair copy of the first movement and short draft fragments first published and played in 2011.
Arguably the two most significant were the incidental music for ''The Tempest'' and the tone poem ''Tapiola''.
"There they come, the birds of my youth," he exclaimed.
In January 1899, Sibelius embarked on his First Symphony at a time when his patriotic feelings were being enhanced by the Russian emperor Nicholas II's attempt to restrict the powers of the Grand Duchy of Finland.
''Tapiola'', Sibelius's last major orchestral work, was commissioned by Walter Damrosch for the New York Philharmonic Society where it was premiered on 26 December 1926.
Sibelius was born on 8 December 1865 in Hämeenlinna in the Grand Duchy of Finland, an autonomous part of the Russian Empire.
The symphony was well received by all when it was premiered in Helsinki on 26 April 1899.
While the strings dominate, there is also a distinctive trombone theme.
"No, a symphony must be like the world.
As Sibelius had barely completed the piece in time for the premiere, Nováček had insufficient time to prepare with the result that the performance was a disaster.
Adapted from material for the opera which was never completed, his ''Lemminkäinen Suite'' consisted of four legends in the form of tone poems.
But after this my husband became calmer and gradually lighter in mood.
He also heard the Finnish composer Robert Kajanus conducting the Berlin Philharmonic in a programme which included his symphonic poem ''Aino'', a patriotic piece which may well have triggered Sibelius's later interest in using the epic poem ''Kalevala'' as a basis for his compositions.
Sibelius conducted his first concerts in Sweden in early 1911 when even his Third Symphony was welcomed by the critics.
In Britain, Vaughan Williams and Arnold Bax both dedicated their fifth symphonies to Sibelius.
The so-called "the Silence of Järvenpää" became something of a myth, as in addition to countless official visitors and colleagues, his grandchildren and great grandchildren also spent their holidays in Ainola.
Sibelius had always been quite self-critical; he remarked to his close friends, "If I cannot write a better symphony than my Seventh, then it shall be my last."
However, during his student years, he adopted the French form Jean, inspired by the business card of his deceased seafaring uncle.
Tawaststjerna comments that "the finale's structure follows no familiar pattern".
Although the work was only performed five times during the composer's lifetime, since the 1990s it has become increasingly popular both for live performances and recordings.
Even by Nordic standards, Sibelius responded with exceptional intensity to the moods of nature and the changes in the seasons: he scanned the skies with his binoculars for the geese flying over the lake ice, listened to the screech of the cranes, and heard the cries of the curlew echo over the marshy grounds just below Ainola.
Sibelius loved nature, and the Finnish landscape often served as material for his music.
To make ends meet, he was forced to compose lots of smaller works for publication in Finland.
Apart from a trip to Paris where he enjoyed a performance of Richard Strauss's ''Salome'', the rest of the year was fairly uneventful.
The ''Lemminkäinen Suite'' was composed in the early 1890s.
Sibelius continued his studies in Berlin (from 1889 to 1890) with Albert Becker and in Vienna (from 1890 to 1891) with Robert Fuchs and the Hungarian Karl Goldmark.
In 1984, the American avant-garde composer Morton Feldman gave a lecture in Darmstadt, Germany, wherein he stated that "the people you think are radicals might really be conservatives&nbsp;– the people you think are conservatives might really be radical," whereupon he began to hum Sibelius's Fifth Symphony.
On the subject of Sibelius's ties to nature, his biographer, Erik Tawaststjerna, wrote:
It was based on an adagio movement which he had sketched down almost ten years earlier.
On his birthday in December 1920, Sibelius received a donation of 63,000 marks, a substantial sum the tenor  had raised from Finnish businesses.
He participated in trios with his elder sister Linda, who played the piano, and his younger brother Christian on the cello.
His Second Symphony, the most popular and most frequently recorded of his symphonies, was first performed by the Helsinki Philharmonic Society on 8 March 1902, with the composer conducting.
Its successful reception encouraged him to write to Aino: "I have been acknowledged as an accomplished 'artist.
The most remarkable of his works during this period was the Violin Sonata in F, rather reminiscent of Grieg.
There he met and immediately fell in love with Aino, the 17-year-old daughter of General Alexander Järnefelt, the governor of Vaasa, and Elisabeth Clodt von Jürgensburg, a Baltic aristocrat.
While she was away, Sibelius resolved to give up drinking, concentrating instead on composing his Third Symphony.
More recently, Sibelius was also one of the composers championed by Robert Simpson.
Short of money, he sold the piece at a low price but it quickly gained considerable popularity not only in Finland but internationally.
Their home, Ainola, was completed on Lake Tuusula, Järvenpää, in 1903.
The grand piano he had received as a present was about to be confiscated by the bailiffs when the singer Ida Ekman paid off a large proportion of his debt after a successful fund-raising campaign.
For several years, he worked on an Eighth Symphony which he later burned, leaving virtually no trace.
Although he used some of the money to reduce his debts, he also spent a week celebrating to excess in Helsinki.
He was also able to continue working on ''Kullervo'', now that he was increasingly developing an interest in all things Finnish.
From an early age, Sibelius showed a strong interest in nature, frequently walking around the countryside when the family moved to Loviisa on the coast for the summer months.
In March 1915, he was able to travel to Gothenburg in Sweden where his ''The Oceanides'' was really appreciated.
With a text from the ''Kalevala'', it was first performed in Finnish in September 1913 by Aino Ackté (to whom it had been dedicated) at the music festival in Gloucester, England.
Sibelius went to her funeral, visiting his Hämeenlinna home one last time before the house was sold.
''Valse triste'' is a short orchestral work which was originally part of the incidental music Sibelius composed for his brother-in-law Arvid Järnefelt's 1903 play ''Kuolema''.
It can also be considered a collection of symphonic poems.
Completed in 1924, it is notable for having only one movement.
He was the son of the Swedish-speaking medical doctor Christian Gustaf Sibelius and Maria Charlotta Sibelius  Borg.
Sibelius exerted considerable influence on symphonic composers and musical life, at least in English-speaking and Nordic countries.
In contrast to Merikanto's enthusiasm for the Finnish quality of the work, the critic Karl Flodin found the cor anglais solo in ''The Swan of Tuonela'' "stupendously long and boring", although he considered the first legend, ''Lemminkäinen and the Maidens of the Island'', represented the peak of Sibelius's achievement to date.
In the 1940s there was a great auto da fé at Ainola.
''En saga'' (meaning a fairy tale) was first presented in February 1893 with Sibelius conducting.
Following the birth of Sibelius's first child Eva, in April the premiere of his choral work ''Väinämöinen's Boat-ride'' was a considerable success, receiving the support of the press.
It was written while Sibelius was undergoing a series of operations to remove a tumour from his throat.
Since the age of 15 I played my violin practically from morning to night.
Later in life, Sibelius was championed by the American critic Olin Downes, who wrote a biography of the composer.
I therefore do not know what he threw on to the fire.
In 1938 Theodor Adorno wrote a critical essay, notoriously charging that "If Sibelius is good, this invalidates the standards of musical quality that have persisted from Bach to Schoenberg: the richness of inter-connectedness, articulation, unity in diversity, the 'multi-faceted' in 'the one'."
His best-known compositions are ''Finlandia'', the ''Karelia Suite'', ''Valse triste'', the Violin Concerto, the choral symphony ''Kullervo'', and ''The Swan of Tuonela'' (from the ''Lemminkäinen Suite'').
The Fifth is Sibelius's only symphony in a major key throughout.
It has also been called "Sibelius's most remarkable compositional achievement".
The second/third section,  ''The Swan of Tuonela'', is often heard separately.
But for his tone poems, he was above all inspired by Liszt.
Although he is reputed to have stopped composing, he attempted to continue writing, including abortive efforts on an eighth symphony.
In March 1913, it was performed in New York but a large section of the audience left the hall between the movements while in October, after a concert conducted by Carl Muck, the ''Boston American'' labelled it "a sad failure".
The influence of Sibelius's compositional procedures is also strongly felt in the First Symphony of William Walton.
The Third Symphony is a good-natured, triumphal, and deceptively simple-sounding piece.
Over their years in Ainola, they had six daughters: Eva, Ruth, Kirsti (who died very young from typhoid), Katarina, Margareta and Heidi.
The two agreed that with each new symphony, they lost those who had been attracted to their earlier works.
The single-movement tone poem was possibly inspired by the Icelandic mythological work ''Edda'' although Sibelius simply described it as "an expression of his state of mind".
The Violin Concerto in D minor was first performed on 8 February 1904 with Victor Nováček as soloist.
The diary was edited by Fabian Dahlström and published in the Swedish language in 2005.
In 1903, Sibelius spent much of his time in Helsinki where he indulged excessively in wining and dining, running up considerable bills in the restaurants.
The impact of this brush with death has been said to have inspired works that he composed in the following years, including ''Luonnotar'' and the Fourth Symphony.
While working on his Fifth Symphony in April, he saw 16 swans flying by, inspiring him to write the finale.
The forests surrounding Ainola are often said to have inspired his composition of Tapiola.
The work (in D major), praised upon its premiere as "the finest evocation of the sea ever produced in music", consists of two subjects Sibelius gradually develops in three informal stages: first, a placid ocean; second, a gathering storm; and third, a thunderous wave-crash climax.
Ruth Snellman was a prominent actress, Katarina Ilves became the wife of a banker, and Heidi Blomstedt was a designer, her husband  being an architect.
The opening bars, with cellos, basses and bassoons, convey a new approach to timing.
Early in 1904, he finished his Violin Concerto but its first public performance on 8 February was not a success.
He is buried in the garden at Ainola.
Composing a few small pieces, he relied increasingly on alcohol.
