Seamen flocked to the island, working on the docks or at the warehouses until they were chosen as crew for one of the privateers.
Lafitte's men identified slave ships and captured them.
In approximately 1784, his mother married Pedro Aubry - a New Orleans merchant - and kept Jean with her.
On September 13, 1814 Commodore Daniel Patterson set sail aboard the ''USS Carolina'' for Barataria.
New Orleans issued six such letters, primarily to smugglers who worked with Lafitte at Barataria.
For several months, the Lafittes would send the ships directly to New Orleans with a legal cargo and would take on outgoing provisions in the city.
Lafitte's continued flouting of the laws angered Governor Claiborne, who, on March 15, issued a proclamation against the Baratarian "banditti ... who act in contravention of the laws of the United States ... to the evident prejudice of the revenue of the federal government".
Lafitte wanted to avoid a Spanish invasion.
The congressional delegation in Louisiana began to demand that the federal government do something to halt the smuggling, and more U.S. Navy ships were sent to the Gulf.
By early 1817, other revolutionaries had begun to congregate at Galveston, hoping to make it their base to wrest Mexico from Spanish control.
Two weeks into his stay, the two leaders of the revolutionaries left the island.
After Lafitte's men kidnapped a Karankawa woman, warriors of her tribe attacked and killed five men of the colony.
Lafitte had copies of the letters sent to Jean Blanque, a member of the state legislature who had invested in the Barataria operation.
The paper and ink were analyzed and confirmed to be of mid-19th-century origin.
Under unknown circumstances, the crew and all the workmen broke camp and left one night after several weeks of work.
Jackson responded, "I ask you, Louisianans, can we place any confidence in the honor of men who have courted an alliance with pirates and robbers?"
Constructed prior to 1732, the structure stands today as possibly the oldest building in the United States housing a bar (Lafitte's Blacksmith Shop Bar).
Within a short period, Lafitte's men abandoned their ships, set several on fire, and fled the area.
Three days later, 40&nbsp;soldiers were sent to ambush the Baratarians; they captured Lafitte, his brother Pierre, and 25 unarmed smugglers on November 16, and confiscated several thousand dollars of contraband.
Lafitte was described as
Dissatisfied with their role as brokers, in October 1812 the Lafitte brothers purchased a schooner and hired a Captain Trey Cook to sail it.
Smugglers would purchase the slaves for a discounted price, march them to Louisiana, and turn them in to customs officials.
His elder brother Pierre became a privateer; he may have operated from Saint-Domingue, which frequently issued letters of marque.
The remainder of the crew rejoined Lafitte, who finally acknowledged that he did not have a valid commission.
He sent a message to the Americans that few of his men favored helping the British, but said he needed 15 days to review their offer.
The work was financed exclusively to search for the treasure of Lafitte.
He said his ships would sail as pirates.
They were held in port under custody of the United States marshal.
On April 18, he sailed for New Orleans to report his activities.
McWilliam brought two letters in his packet for Lafitte: one, under the seal of King George III, offered Lafitte and his forces British citizenship and land grants in the British colonies in the Americas if they promised to assist in the naval fight against the United States and to return any recent property that had been taken from Spanish ships.
In late 1815 and early 1816, the Lafitte brothers agreed to act as spies for Spain, which was embroiled in the Mexican War of Independence.
The ship would sail to the mouth of Bayou Lafourche, load the contraband goods, and sail "legally" back to New Orleans, with goods listed on a certified manifest.
(The British were allied with Spain against the French and the US.)
Although the city kept control of the eight ships taken from Lafitte, it did not have enough sailors to man them for defense.
Given the success of his auctions at the Temple, in January 1814 Lafitte set up a similar auction at a site just outside New Orleans.
By 1805, he operated a warehouse in New Orleans to help disperse the goods smuggled by his brother Pierre Lafitte.
In June 1822, Lafitte approached the officials in Colombia, whose government had begun commissioning former privateers as officers in their new navy.
With Spanish permission, Lafitte returned to Galveston, promising to make weekly reports of his activities.
As the schooner did not have an official commission from a national government, its captain was considered a pirate operating illegally.
If they refused the offer, the British Navy would destroy Barataria.
The law left several loopholes, giving permission to any ship to capture a slave ship, regardless of the country of origin.
Most of his men had believed that Lafitte had a valid privateering commission, although there was confusion on which country had issued it.
Lafitte was unhappy with the time it took to transport goods from the port to the merchants; navigating the swamps could take a full week.
This was problematic for New Orleans merchants, who had relied heavily on trade with Caribbean colonies of other nations.
Because the US Navy did not have enough ships to act against the Baratarian smugglers, the government turned to the courts.
An attorney representing Lafitte argued that the captured ships had flown the flag of Cartagena, an area at peace with the United States.
The building was surrounded by a moat and painted red; it became known as ''Maison Rouge.''
They sail into the city's lake, capture the mayor, and make him "walk the plank."
In 1818, the colony suffered hardships.
Wounded in the battle, Lafitte is believed to have died just after dawn on February 5.
On January 21, Jackson issued a statement praising his troops, especially the cannoneers and "Captains Dominique and Beluche, lately commanding privateers of Barataria, with part of their former crews and many brave citizens of New Orleans, were stationed at Nos.
Based in New Orleans, Pierre Lafitte served as a silent partner, looking after their interests in the city.
Lafitte's men buried some of the cargo on the island and ran the captured vessel aground, but an American patrol spotted the ship and after investigating, discovered the buried cargo.
When the historical society could not authenticate the claim, Laflin approached the Louisiana author Stanley Arthur, who wrote ''Jean Laffitte: Gentleman Rover'' based on the journal.
Portrayals of Lafitte extend to video games, such as ''Sid Meier's Pirates!''
"I am the stray sheep, wishing to return to the sheepfold ...
In 1909, a man was given a six-year prison sentence for fraud after swindling thousands of dollars from people, by claiming that he knew where the Lafitte treasure was buried and taking their money for the promise to find it.
He and his elder brother, Pierre, spelled their last name '''Laffite''', but English-language documents of the time used "Lafitte".
Pierre was raised by extended family elsewhere in Louisiana.
In October, a revenue officer prepared an ambush of a band of Lafitte's smugglers.
Ramsay compares the numerous legends related to the life and death of Lafitte to those about King Arthur and Robin Hood.
Lafitte conducted most business aboard his ship, ''The Pride'', where he also lived.
Held during the first two weeks of May, the festival celebrates Lafitte's exploits and the legend of buried treasure.
They took 80 people captive, but Lafitte escaped safely.
According to his book, Lafitte was born in or near Pauillac, France, the son of Pierre Lafitte and his second wife, Marguerite Desteil.
The government granted them all a full pardon on February 6.
Jean Lafitte spent the majority of his time in Barataria managing the daily hands-on business of outfitting privateers and arranging the smuggling of stolen goods.
He and his brother Pierre alternately claimed to have been born in Bayonne, while other documents of the time place his birthplace as St. Malo or Brest.
Their patrols and interventions reduced the number of active pirates in the region.
Jackson named Jean and Pierre Lafitte for having "exhibited the same courage and fidelity".
Collectively they were known as "Number thirteen".
Lafitte's biographer Jack C. Ramsay says, "this was a convenient time to be a native of France, a claim that provided protection from the enforcement of American law".
Only six houses survived as habitable.
The second item was a personal note to Lafitte from McWilliam's superior, Lieutenant Colonel Edward Nicolls, urging him to accept the offer.
The fleet anchored off Grande Terre and the gunboats attacked.
On September 3, 1814, the British ship HMS ''Sophie'' fired on a pirate ship returning to Barataria.
Lafitte continued to patrol the shipping lanes around Cuba.
On land and sea, the former pirate gunners earned praise as the battle continued.
It had approximately 1,000 unseasoned troops and two ships for its use.
'''Jean Lafitte''' ( – ) was a French-American pirate and privateer in the Gulf of Mexico in the early 19th century.
Although under indictment, in March 1813 Lafitte registered as captain of ''Le Brig Goelette la Diligente'' for a supposed journey to New York.
Lafitte tried to convince the Americans that they had nothing to fear from him.
The British began firing at the American lines on December 28, but were repulsed by an artillery crew manned by two of Lafitte's former lieutenants, Renato Beluche and Dominique Youx.
It destroyed four ships and most buildings.
If you were thoroughly acquainted with the nature of my offenses, I should appear to you much less guilty, and still worthy to discharge the duties of a good citizen.
Over the next few months, the British Navy increased patrols in the Gulf of Mexico, and by August they had established a base at Pensacola.
Lafitte was arrested, tried, convicted and jailed on charges of "having knowingly and wittingly aided and assisted, procured, commanded, counselled, and advised" persons to commit acts of piracy".
Officials released the smugglers after they posted bond, and they disappeared, refusing to return for a trial.
Omoa was the site of the largest Spanish fort in Central America, built to guard the Spanish silver shipments from the mines of Tegucigalpa to overseas destinations.
Many researchers noticed a similarity between John Laflin's handwriting and the writing in the journal.
* Two fishing communities in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana, along Bayou Barataria, were named after him: Jean Lafitte, whose town hall is on Jean Lafitte Boulevard; and a census-designated place (CDP) called Lafitte.
On September 23, Patterson and his fleet, including the eight captured ships, began the return trip to New Orleans.
He refused to allow anyone else to see the original documents until 1969, when he sold them to a professional document dealer.
In the late 18th century, adult children of the French planters in Saint-Domingue often resettled along the Mississippi River in ''La Louisiane'', especially in its largest city of New Orleans.
Following the custom of the times, Patterson filed a legal claim for the profits from the confiscated ships and merchandise.
According to Ramsay, Lafitte, his elder brother Pierre, and his widowed mother migrated from Saint-Domingue to New Orleans in the 1780s.
When they had disembarked and were surrounded by his men, Lafite identified himself to them.
''Dorada'' captured a fourth ship, a schooner they renamed ''Petit Milan''.
By midmorning, 10 armed pirate ships formed a battle line in the bay.
Lafitte agreed to leave the island without a fight, and on May 7, 1821 departed on ''The Pride''.
Though Lafitte warned the other Baratarians of a possible military attack on their base of operations, an American naval force successfully invaded in September 1814 and captured most of Lafitte's fleet.
Handwriting analysis by experts revealed similarities between John Laflin's handwriting and that of the journal.
They sailed three ships, which Davis described as likely "one of the largest privately owned corsair fleets operating on the coast, and the most versatile."
The festival features actors who portray Lafitte and his pirates.
By 1806, several "Captain Lafitte"s operated in New Orleans; Jean Lafitte was likely one of them.
When Patterson's men went ashore, they met no resistance.
A representative of the smuggler would purchase the slaves at the ensuing auction, and the smuggler would be given half of the purchase price.
Britain maintained a powerful navy, while the United States had little naval power.
Later, in return for a legal pardon for the smugglers, Lafitte and his comrades helped General Andrew Jackson defend New Orleans against the British in the final battle of the War of 1812.
They feared that Lafitte and his men might side with the British.
By 1810, the island had become a booming port.
After the United States government passed the Embargo Act of 1807, the Lafittes moved their operations to an island in Barataria Bay, Louisiana.
Speculation about his life and death continues among historians.
The Americans took custody of six schooners, one felucca, and a brig, as well as 20&nbsp;cannon and goods worth $500,000.
In mid-December, Jackson met with Lafitte, who offered to serve if the US would pardon those of his men who agreed to defend the city.
Lafitte likely helped his brother to sell or trade the captured merchandise.
Slaves captured in such actions who were turned over to the customs office would be sold within the United States, with half the profits going to the people who turned them in.
The bay was located beyond a narrow passage between the barrier islands of Grand Terre and Grande Isle.
He brought all captured goods to Barataria.
* Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve was named for him.
The boys were given a basic Catholic education.
They submitted booty from captured British ships to the American authorities at New Orleans, while booty from all other ships was often channeled for sale on the markets through Lafitte's operation.
He has found families with the surname Lafitte in Louisiana documents dating as early as 1765.
The Lafittes became spies for the Spanish during the Mexican War of Independence and moved to Galveston Island, Texas, where they developed a pirate colony they called ''Campeche''.
Most historians now believe the Lafitte journal to be a forgery.
Located on Bourbon Street in New Orleans, it is believed Lafitte may have spent time there in his earlier years as a safe place off of Royal Street to orchestrate the transfer of smuggled goods.
When Andrew Jackson arrived in New Orleans on December 1, 1814, he discovered the city had not created any defenses.
Biographer Jack Ramsay speculates that the voyage was intended to "establish...Lafitte as a privateering captain".
The United States made the Louisiana Purchase in 1803.
Rumors abounded: he changed his name after leaving Galveston and disappeared; he was killed by his own men shortly after leaving Galveston; or, he rescued Napoleon and they both died in Louisiana.
By 1810, their new port was very successful; the Lafittes pursued a successful smuggling operation and also started to engage in piracy.
In 1812, Lafitte and his men began holding auctions at the Temple, a prehistoric memorial earthwork mound halfway between Grande Terre and New Orleans.
He was accompanied by six gunboats and a tender.
Around 1820, Lafitte reportedly married Madeline Regaud, possibly the widow or daughter of a French colonist who had died during an ill-fated expedition to Galveston.
Lafitte attempted to take what appeared to be two Spanish merchant vessels on the night of February 4.
As part of Mexico, it was outside the authority of the United States, and was largely uninhabited, except by Native American Karankawa.
While Pierre was jailed, Jean operated the piracy and smuggling business.
Over the next few months, Lafitte established a base along the coast of Cuba, where he bribed local officials with a share of the profits.
The brothers soon acquired a third ship, ''La Diligent''.
It was cloudy with low visibility.
Within two days of Lafitte's notes, Pierre "escaped" from jail.
Given his legendary reputation, there was much speculation about whether, or how, Lafitte had died.
Claiborne appealed to the new state legislature, citing the lost revenues due to the smuggling.
A grand jury indicted Pierre Lafitte after hearing testimony against him by one of the city's leading merchants.
Following the reward offer, Lafitte wrote Claiborne a note denying the charges of piracy.
In late April 1822, Lafitte was captured again after taking his first American ship.
In February 1823, Lafitte was cruising off the town of Omoa, Honduras on his 43-ton armed Colombian schooner named ''General Santander''.
According to Ramsay, as a young man, Lafitte likely spent much time exploring the wetlands and bayou country south of New Orleans.
Like Barataria, Galveston was a seaward island that protected a large inland bay.
He formally requested clemency for the Lafittes and the men who had served under them.
That night his remaining men reboarded the ''General Victoria'' and destroyed its masts and spars, crippling the ship, but they left the crew unharmed.
Aury returned to Galveston several months later, but he left in July when he realized that the men were unwilling to revolt.
As an arm of the Natalbany River in Springfield, Louisiana, the entire bayou was dyked and drained.
Lafitte is believed to have been born either in Basque-France or the French colony of Saint-Domingue.
The headquarters was a two-story building facing the inland harbor, where landings were made.
The legislature appointed a committee to study the matter but, as most of their constituents benefitted by the smuggling, they never authorized the militia.
The Lafittes gained a reputation for treating captive crew members well, and often returned captured ships to their original crew.
On December 23, advance units of the British fleet reached the Mississippi River.
Ramsay speculates that Lafitte was born in the French colony of Saint-Domingue (now Haiti).
The Baratarians invited the British officers to row to their island.
Lafitte continued attacking merchant ships as a pirate around Central American ports until he died circa 1823, trying to capture Spanish vessels.
Within two days of his offer, handbills were posted all over New Orleans offering a similar award for the arrest of the governor.
He reportedly took immense amounts of treasure with him, and was accompanied by his mulatto mistress and an infant son.
The smugglers often held letters of marque from multiple countries, authorizing them to capture booty from differing nations.
The American warship which captured him turned Lafitte over to the local authorities, who promptly released him.
Uninterested in exports from New Orleans, customs agents rarely checked the accuracy of the manifests.
One of the pirate's captains had attacked an American merchant ship.
For the first time, Lafitte was legally authorized to take Spanish ships.
On February 13, he escaped, likely with outside help.
Several of Lafitte's men were arrested and convicted of piracy.
Lafitte's Blacksmith Shop is named after him.
As the smuggling operations reduced the amount of revenue collected by customs offices, American authorities were determined to halt Barataria's operations.
Lafitte created "letters of marque" from an imaginary nation to "authorize" all the ships sailing from Galveston as privateers.
On December 19, the state legislature passed a resolution recommending a full pardon for all of the former residents at Barataria.
His men burned the Maison Rouge, fortress and settlement.
After first escaping with some crew, he and his men were captured and jailed.
Jean Lafitte was likely born in 1782, although he was not baptized until 1786.
The corsairs aimed the artillery at the Karankawa, killing most of the men in the tribe.
Davis writes that Lafitte's death prevented his becoming obsolete; by 1825 piracy had been essentially eradicated in the Gulf of Mexico, and "the new world of the Gulf simply had no room for his kind".
In 1843, Mirabeau B. Lamar investigated many of the Lafitte stories and concluded that, while there were no authentic records of death, Lafitte was likely dead.
In January 1813 they took their first prize, a Spanish hermaphrodite brig loaded with 77&nbsp;slaves.
Lafitte soon acquired a letter of marque from Cartagena, but never sent any booty there.
The biographer William C. Davis reports a different childhood for Lafitte.
His men tore down the existing houses and built 200 new, sturdier structures.
Lafitte interviewed all newcomers and required them to take a loyalty oath to him.
Claiborne took a leave of absence in September 1810, leaving Thomas B. Robertson as acting governor.
The captured schooner was not considered useful for piracy so, after unloading its cargo, the Lafittes returned the ship to its former captain and crew.
The following month, the governor offered a $500 reward for Lafitte's capture.
Jean Lafitte was a key part of the personal computer game ''Nancy Drew: Legend of the Crystal Skull''.
Other contemporary accounts claim that Lafitte was born in Orduna, Spain or in Westchester, New York.
Davis places Lafitte's brother Pierre in Saint-Domingue in the late 1790s and the early 19th century.
Almost half of the combined crew refused to sail as pirates; Lafitte allowed them to leave aboard his largest ship, the brig ''General Victoria''.
He had also been told in August that American officials were planning an assault on Barataria with forces under the command of Commodore Daniel Patterson.
Two weeks after setting sail, they captured a Spanish ship, which they sent to Galveston, hoping the Longs would smuggle the goods to New Orleans.
Barataria was far from the U.S. naval base, and ships could easily smuggle in goods without being noticed by customs officials.
An archivist for Bexar County, Texas, declared the papers to be authentic.
Sara Whitman is currently Jean Lafitte's youngest living relative.
By this time, Lafitte's only known son, Jean Pierre Lafitte, had died in October 1832 during a yellow fever epidemic in New Orleans.
Jackson agreed to do so.
According to Ramsay, Claiborne next wrote to General Andrew Jackson, "implying Patterson had destroyed a potential first line of defense for Louisiana" by his capture of Lafitte and his ships.
