He largely made the main strategic decisions on his own, though he had special respect for Lee's views.
Davis was allowed no visitors, and no books except the Bible.
(Smith was a former member of the Secret Six who had supported abolitionist John Brown.)
At Vicksburg, the failure to coordinate multiple forces on both sides of the Mississippi River rested primarily on Davis's inability to create a harmonious departmental arrangement or to force such generals as Edmund Kirby Smith, Earl Van Dorn, and Theophilus H. Holmes to work together.
Beauregard was to prepare his forces but avoid an attack on the fort.
Davis stated that men in the Confederacy had successfully fought for their own rights with inferior numbers during the Civil War and that the northern historians ignored this view.
Varina and their young daughter Winnie were allowed to join Davis, and the family was eventually given an apartment in the officers' quarters.
Just when he appeared to be improving, he lost consciousness on the evening of December 5 and died at 12:45&nbsp;a.m. on Friday, December 6, 1889, in the presence of several friends and with his hand in Varina's.
Lincoln dispatched a small fleet of warships, troops, and transports from the navy yard in New York to resupply and re-enforce Fort Pickens and Fort Sumter, although he told Davis they would not fire unless fired upon.
She died on July 18, 1909, at the age of 54.
The meeting took place at the Heard house, the Georgia Branch Bank Building, with 14 officials present.
Beauregard bombarded the fort on April 12.
Davis is widely evaluated as a less effective war leader than Lincoln, even though Davis had extensive military experience and Lincoln had little.
The house and library were damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005; the house reopened in 2008.
After Lee's surrender, a public meeting was held in Shreveport, Louisiana, at which many speakers supported continuation of the war.
Davis was also celebrated on the 6-cent Stone Mountain Memorial Carving commemorative on September 19, 1970, at Stone Mountain, Georgia.
Although Davis wanted such a trial for himself, there were no treason trials against anyone, as it was felt they would probably not succeed and would impede reconciliation.
In 1893, Mrs. Davis decided to have his remains reinterred at Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond.
In 1844, Davis met Varina Banks Howell, then 17 years old, whom his brother Joseph had invited for the Christmas season at Hurricane Plantation.
He attempted strategic offensives when he felt that military success would both shake Northern self-confidence and strengthen the peace movements there.
President Lincoln called up state militia to march south to recapture Federal property.
Cotton was the South's primary export and the basis of its economy, and the system of production the South used was dependent upon slave labor.
He arrived a day early to visit his mother there, only to find that she had died the day before.
Three years later in 1821, he returned to Kentucky, where he studied at Transylvania University in Lexington.
On the Fourth of July, Davis delivered an anti-secessionist speech on board a ship near Boston.
He wanted to serve as commander in chief of the Confederate armies but said he would serve wherever directed.
Having served since February as the provisional president, Davis was elected to a full six-year term on November 6, 1861 and was inaugurated on February 22, 1862.
He had arranged for the letter to be sent to the War Department for him on May 12 when he did not return from leave; he had made no mention to Taylor of his intention to resign.
The Union blockade of the Confederacy led European powers to remain neutral, contrary to the Southern belief that a blockade would cut off the supply of cotton to Britain and other European nations and prompt them to intervene on behalf of the South.
In 1818 Davis returned to Mississippi, studying at Jefferson College at Washington.
In 1862 Randolph resigned from the War Department, and James Seddon of Virginia was appointed to replace him.
He became involved in public works when Pierce gave him responsibility for construction of the Washington Aqueduct and an expansion of the U.S. Capitol, both of which he managed closely.
Only two survived him, and only one married and had children.
On January 31, 1865, Lee assumed this role, but it was far too late.
Some portions of his legacy were created not as memorials, but as contemporary recognition of his service at the time.
Davis did not use his presidential pulpit to rally the people with stirring rhetoric; he called instead for people to be fatalistic and to die for their new country.
The adjoining land was known as Brierfield since it was largely covered with brush and briers.
Zachary Taylor, a future president of the United States, had assumed command shortly before Davis arrived in early 1829.
Robert Hunter of Virginia replaced him as Secretary of State on July 25, 1861.
LeRoy Pope Walker of Alabama was made Secretary of War, after being recommended for this post by Clement Clay and William Yancey (both of whom declined to accept cabinet positions themselves).
Britain had abolished it in the 1830s, and Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 made support for the South even less appealing in Europe.
There was also a concern at the time that such action could result in a judicial decision that would validate the constitutionality of secession (later removed by the Supreme Court ruling in ''Texas v. White'' (1869) declaring secession unconstitutional).
He and his family took up his residence there at the White House of the Confederacy later that month.
The campaigns met defeat at Antietam in Maryland (1862) and Gettysburg in Pennsylvania (1863), as well as in Kentucky during the Confederate Heartland Offensive (1862).
One historian speaks of "the heavy-handed intervention of the Confederate government."
After two years of imprisonment, Davis was released on bail of $100,000, which was posted by prominent citizens including Horace Greeley, Cornelius Vanderbilt and Gerrit Smith.
According to one historian,
He said, "United you are now, and if the Union is ever to be broken, let the other side break it."
After the war, he contributed to reconciliation of the South with the North, but remained a symbol for Southern pride.
Apart from two month-long trips across the country where he met a few hundred people, Davis stayed in Richmond where few people saw him; newspapers had limited circulation, and most Confederates had little favorable information about him.
He became sicker, and the attending physician warned that his life was in danger, but this treatment continued for some months until late autumn when he was finally given better quarters.
Acting on the strong recommendation of the task force, UT's President Gregory Fenves announced on August 13, 2015 that the statue would be relocated to serve as an educational exhibit in the university's Dolph Briscoe Center for American History museum.
In 1842, he attended the Democratic convention, and, in 1843, became a Democratic candidate for the state House of Representatives from the Warren County-Vicksburg district; he lost his first election.
Davis turned down the offer, stating that it was inconsistent with his duty as a senator.
Congress agreed and increased the pay scale, and added four regiments which increased the army's size from about 11,000 to about 15,000.
In the end, not a single foreign nation recognized the Confederate States of America.
Davis was indicted for treason while imprisoned; one of his attorneys was ex-Governor Thomas Pratt of Maryland.
It was reported in the media that Davis put his wife's overcoat over his shoulders while fleeing.
Searching for a military leader for a filibuster expedition, they first offered command of the Cuban forces to General William J.
Most historians sharply criticize Davis for his flawed military strategy, his selection of friends for military commands, and his neglect of homefront crises.
Davis went to Montreal, Canada to join his family which had fled there earlier, and lived in Lennoxville, Quebec until 1868 also visiting Cuba, and Europe in search of work.
On about April 12, Davis received Robert E. Lee's letter announcing surrender.
Davis's term was to end with Pierce's, so he ran for the Senate, was elected, and re-entered it on March 4, 1857.
Robert E. Lee's United States citizenship was posthumously restored in 1975.
In Texas, "Confederate Heroes Day" is celebrated on January 19, the birthday of Robert E. Lee; Jefferson Davis's birthday had been officially celebrated on June 3 but was combined with Lee's birthday in 1973.
He was forced to remain in a darkened room for four weeks.
In numerous stops, he attended Lost Cause ceremonies, where large crowds showered him with affection and local leaders presented emotional speeches honoring his sacrifices to the would-be nation.
He was never tried and was released after two years.
Economic intervention, regulation, and state control of manpower, production and transport were much greater in the Confederacy than in the Union.
They had six children.
On December 29 he was elected to a full six-year term (by the Mississippi legislature, as the constitution mandated at the time).
He won the election.
At the time, he was the only Protestant student at the school.
A group of Cuban revolutionaries led by Venezuelan adventurer Narciso López intended to liberate Cuba from Spanish rule by the sword.
Seward hinted that Fort Sumter would be evacuated, but gave no assurance.
Colonel Davis sought to arm his regiment with the M1841 Mississippi rifle.
On January 21, the day Davis called "the saddest day of my life", he delivered a farewell address to the United States Senate, resigned and returned to Mississippi.
Davis hesitated to leave, but his desire for Sarah overcame this, and he resigned his commission in a letter dated April 20, 1835.
He issued his last official proclamation as president of the Confederacy, and then went south to Greensboro, North Carolina.
Although Davis argued against secession in 1858, he believed that each state was sovereign and had an unquestionable right to secede from the Union.
On June 15, 1865, Union soldiers seized Davis's personal baggage from the agent, together with some of the Confederate government's records.
The Jefferson Davis Presidential Library was established at Beauvoir in 1998.
It depicts a replica of the actual memorial, carved into the side of Stone Mountain at  above ground level, the largest high relief sculpture in the world.
On May 17, President Polk offered Davis a federal commission as a brigadier general and command of a brigade of militia.
This led to the persistent rumor that he attempted to flee in women's clothes, inspiring caricatures that portrayed him as such.
Elected to the U.S. Senate again, he was refused the office in 1875, having been barred from Federal office by Section Three of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
At the outset of the Civil War, Davis realized that intervention from European powers would be vital if the Confederacy was to stand against the Union.
Toombs, who had wished to be president himself, was frustrated as an advisor and resigned within a few months of his appointment to join the army.
Franklin Pierce won the presidential election, and in 1853 made Davis his Secretary of War.
He died of yellow fever at age 21 on October 16, 1878, during an epidemic in the Mississippi River Valley that caused 20,000 deaths.
Davis expressed regret at his death.
By the late 1880s, he began to encourage reconciliation, telling Southerners to be loyal to the Union.
Davis had expected this but waited until he received official notification.
The rest of his ancestry was English.
Anticipating a call for his services since Mississippi had seceded, Davis had sent a telegraph message to Governor John J. Pettus saying, "Judge what Mississippi requires of me and place me accordingly."
Lincoln and Davis led in very different ways.
After Davis was captured in 1865, he was accused of treason.
In May 2016, the transportation commission agreed to rename the road.
In the 1840s, tensions were growing between the North and South over various issues including slavery.
She was a granddaughter of New Jersey Governor Richard Howell; her mother's family was from the South and included successful Scots-Irish planters.
Davis was the first choice because of his strong political and military credentials.
He was accompanied by James Pemberton, his only slave at that time.
Davis was also severely ill, and his family feared for his life.
On November 6, he left Beauvoir to visit his plantation at Brierfield.
Coincidentally, Abraham Lincoln was born eight months later, less than  to the northeast in Hodgenville, Kentucky.
Davis had not served a year when he resigned (in September 1851) to run for the governorship of Mississippi on the issue of the Compromise of 1850, which he opposed.
Wanting to have his youngest brother and his wife nearby, Joseph gave use of Brierfield to Jefferson, who eventually developed Brierfield Plantation there.
In signing the law, President Jimmy Carter referred to this as the last act of reconciliation in the Civil War.
He spent time clearing Brierfield and developing his plantation, studied government and history, and had private political discussions with his brother Joseph.
Varina Davis, who had taken another boat to Brierfield, met him on the river, and he finally received some medical care; two doctors came aboard further south and found he had acute bronchitis complicated by malaria.
Davis, who had widespread support from six of the seven states, easily won.
Nearly all of the munitions facilities were in the North, while critical ingredients for gunpowder were in very short supply in the South.
The body was placed on a Louisville and Nashville Railroad car and transported to Richmond, Virginia.
Alexander Stephens was chosen as Vice President, but he and Davis feuded constantly.
In recognition of Davis's bravery and initiative, Taylor is reputed to have said, "My daughter, sir, was a better judge of men than I was."
Taxes were lower than in the Union and collected with less efficiency; European investment was also insufficient.
Davis was born in Kentucky to a moderately prosperous farmer, and grew up on his older brother Joseph's large cotton plantations in Mississippi and Louisiana.
At the age of 36 Davis married again, to 18-year-old Varina Howell, a native of Natchez who had been educated in Philadelphia and had some family ties in the North.
Their goal was to spend the hot summer months in the countryside away from the river floodplain, for their health, but both of them contracted either malaria or yellow fever.
Davis wrote a memoir entitled ''The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government'', which he completed in 1881.
On April 14, Lincoln was shot, dying the next day.
In 1813, Davis began his education at the Wilkinson Academy in the small town of Woodville, near the family cotton plantation.
On January 23, 1861, Pettus made Davis a major general of the Army of Mississippi.
She was born in 1759 to William Cook and his wife Sarah Simpson in what is now Christian County, Kentucky.
Worth, but he died before making his decision.
At this time, smoothbore muskets were still the primary infantry weapon, and any unit with rifles was considered special and designated as such.
By early 1836, Davis had purchased 16 slaves; he held 40 slaves by 1840, and 74 by 1845.
In late 1863, Watts resigned as Attorney General to take office as the Governor of Alabama, and George Davis of North Carolina took his place.
After graduating, Jefferson Davis served six years as a lieutenant in the U.S. Army.
The Union blockade made imports via blockade runners difficult and expensive.
Davis had poor health for most of his life, including repeated bouts of malaria, battle wounds from fighting in the Mexican–American War and a chronic eye infection that made bright light painful.
They were married on February 26, 1845.
Since the early 1960s, it has published 13 volumes, the first in 1971 and the most recent in 2012; two more volumes are planned.
In September, Davis participated in the Battle of Monterrey, during which he led a successful charge on the La Teneria fort.
In May 2015, the student government at the University of Texas at Austin voted almost unanimously to remove a statue of Jefferson Davis that had been erected on the campus South Mall.
General Winfield Scott objected on the basis that the weapons were insufficiently tested.
The statue was removed on August 30, 2015.
Davis has been faulted for poor coordination and management of his generals.
He served in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War, along with his two older half-brothers.
The Civil War had begun.
Robert Toombs of Georgia was the first Secretary of State and Christopher Memminger of South Carolina became Secretary of the Treasury.
As the war progressed, this dissatisfaction increased and there were frequent changes to the cabinet.
Samuel Emory, born July 30, 1852, was named after his grandfather; he died June 30, 1854, of an undiagnosed disease.
Honoring Davis's war service, Governor Brown of Mississippi appointed him to the vacant position of United States Senator Jesse Speight, who had died on May 1, 1847.
This helped maintain good relations between the executive and legislative branches.
On March 1, 1861, Davis appointed General P. G. T. Beauregard to command all Confederate troops in the vicinity of Charleston, South Carolina, where state officials prepared to take possession of Fort Sumter.
He saw the size of the regular army as insufficient to fulfill its mission, and maintained that salaries would have to be increased, something which had not occurred for 25 years.
Davis declined the appointment, arguing that the Constitution gives the power of appointing militia officers to the states, not the federal government.
Numerous memorials to Jefferson Davis were created.
He offered an immediate payment of $100,000 (worth more than $2,000,000 in 2013), plus the same amount when Cuba was liberated.
During Davis's youth, his family moved twice: in 1811 to St. Mary Parish, Louisiana, and less than a year later to Wilkinson County, Mississippi.
This diluted the limited resources of the South and made it vulnerable to coordinated strategic thrusts by the Union into the vital Western Theater (e.g., the capture of New Orleans in early 1862).
After arriving in Philadelphia, Davis's paternal grandfather Evan settled in the colony of Georgia, which was developed chiefly along the coast.
They were first hidden at Senator David Levy Yulee's plantation in Florida, then placed in the care of a railroad agent in Waldo.
He was still in Mississippi during the Black Hawk War but returned to the fort in August.
He took personal charge of the Confederate war plans but was unable to find a strategy to defeat the more populous and industrialized Union.
Walker requested, and was given, command of the troops in Alabama.
Benjamin moved again, to Secretary of State.
As provisional president in 1861, Davis formed his first cabinet.
Previous messages had included "Davis must fall" and "Liberate U.T."
Pope Pius IX (see Pope Pius IX and the United States), seeing himself a prisoner in the Vatican, after learning that Davis was a prisoner, sent him a portrait inscribed with the Latin words "''Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, et ego reficiam vos, dicit Dominus''", which correspond to , "Come to me, all you that labor, and are burdened, and I will refresh you, sayeth the Lord".
In 1876, Davis promoted a society for the stimulation of US trade with South America.
Mrs. Davis recounted the circumstances of her husband's capture as described below: "Just before day the enemy charged our camp yelling like demons...I pleaded with him to let me throw over him a large waterproof wrap which had often served him in sickness during the summer season for a dressing gown and which I hoped might so cover his person that in the grey of the morning he would not be recognized.
Judah P. Benjamin of Louisiana became Attorney General.
This also led to complaints as more states joined the Confederacy, however, because there were more states than cabinet positions.
In this capacity, Davis began the Pacific Railroad Surveys in order to determine various possible routes for the proposed Transcontinental Railroad.
Varina Anne, known as "Winnie", was born on June 27, 1864, several months after her brother Joseph's death.
Davis made an effort to shield Black Hawk from curiosity seekers, and the chief noted in his autobiography that Davis treated him "with much kindness" and showed empathy for the leader's situation as a prisoner.
As president of the Confederate States of America, he is widely viewed as an ineffective wartime leader; although the task of defending the Confederacy against the much stronger Union would have been a great challenge for any leader, Davis's performance in this role is considered poor.
Davis feuded bitterly with his vice president.
Davis would have preferred to be an army general and tended to manage military matters himself.
That December he made a tour of Confederate armies in the west of the country.
Brief informal discussions did take place with Secretary of State William Seward through Supreme Court Justice John A. Campbell.
The administration sent repeated delegations to European nations, but several factors prevented Southern success in terms of foreign diplomacy.
Davis's paternal grandparents each immigrated separately to North America from the region of Snowdonia in North Wales in the early 18th century.
Having served as secretary of war under President Pierce, he also knew that the South lacked the military and naval resources necessary for defense in a war.
This includes his reluctance to resolve a dispute between Leonidas Polk, a personal friend, and Braxton Bragg, who was defeated in important battles and distrusted by his subordinates.
On February 9, a constitutional convention met at Montgomery, Alabama and considered Davis and Robert Toombs of Georgia as a possible president.
"Stonewall" Jackson on horseback.
General Miles was transferred in mid-1866, and Davis's treatment continued to improve.
A continuous cortège, day and night, accompanied his body from New Orleans to Richmond.
William T. Sutherlin turned over his mansion, which served as Davis's temporary residence from April 3 to April 10, 1865.
On September 17, Walker resigned as Secretary of War due to a conflict with Davis, who had questioned his management of the War Department and had suggested he consider a different position.
Finally, as the war progressed and the South's military prospects dwindled, foreign powers were not convinced that the Confederacy had the strength to become independent.
Davis's renewed service in the Senate was interrupted in early 1858 by an illness that began as a severe cold and which threatened him with the loss of his left eye.
He was seen as the "champion of a slave society and embodied the values of the planter class," and was elected provisional Confederate President by acclamation.
As the Confederate military structure fell into disarray, the search for Davis by Union forces intensified.
Benjamin left the Attorney General position to replace him, and Thomas Bragg of North Carolina (brother of General Braxton Bragg) took Benjamin's place as Attorney General.
While not disgraced, Davis had been displaced in ex-Confederate affection after the war by his leading general, Robert E. Lee.
Southerners wanted to increase territory held in Mexico as an area for the expansion of slavery.
The birthday of Jefferson Davis is commemorated in several states.
For some years, the white-columned Biloxi mansion that was Davis's final home had served as a Confederate Veterans Home.
While in New Orleans, he was caught in a sleety rain, and on the steamboat trip upriver, he had a severe cold; on November 13 he left Brierfield to return to New Orleans.
A hand-woven crown of thorns associated with the portrait is often said to have been made by the Pope but may have been woven by Davis's wife Varina.
William Howell, born on December 6, 1861, was named for Varina's father; he died of diphtheria at age 10 on October 16, 1872.
His funeral was one of the largest in the South.
Upon General Lee's death in 1870, Davis presided over the memorial meeting in Richmond.
Beginning shortly after the Charleston church shooting of 2015 "black lives matter" had been written repeatedly in bold red letters on the base of the Davis statue.
Over 40 years later, an article in the ''Washington Herald'' claimed that Mrs. Davis's heavy shawl had been placed on him to protect him from the "chilly atmosphere of the early hour of the morning" by the slave James H. Johnson, Davis's valet who served Davis during the Civil War.
Margaret Howell was born February 25, 1855, and was the only child to marry and raise a family.
