Even some deep-sea species of hydromedusae and scyphomedusae are usually collected on or near the bottom.
In general however, there are few predators preying on jellyfish and they can be considered top predators in the food chain.
Using "swarm" usually implies some kind of active ability to stay together, which a few species such as ''Aurelia'', the moon jelly, demonstrate.
Polyps asexually produce free-swimming ephyra, which then become a ''medusa.''
The bell can pulsate to aquire locomotion, while the stinging tentacles can be utilized to capture prey by emitting toxins.
Jellyfish have been proven to be the most energy efficient swimmers of all animals.
A thin skin covering such as pantyhose was found to be sufficient protection.
Desalted, ready-to-eat products are also available.
"Bloom" is usually used for a large group of jellyfish that gather in a small area, but may also have a time component, referring to seasonal increases, or numbers beyond what was expected.
Lucernariidae, Kishinouyeidae, Lipkeidae, Kyopodiidae
They have limited control over movement, but can use their hydrostatic skeleton to navigate through contraction-pulsations of the bell-like body; some species actively swim most of the time, while others are mostly passive.
Jellyfish are displayed in many public aquariums.
Rising sea temperatures caused by climate change may also contribute to jellyfish blooms, because many species of jellyfish are relatively better able to survive in warmer waters.
Roger Tsien later chemically manipulated GFP to produce other fluorescent colors to use as markers.
*Salps are transparent, gelatinous marine organisms that form pelagic colonies like siphonophores.
Box jellyfish may be related more closely to scyphozoan jellyfish than either are to the Hydrozoa.
Often the tank's background is blue and the animals are illuminated by side light, increasing the contrast between the animal and the background.
The fluorescence shows where the gene is expressed.
Jellyfish are found in every ocean, from the surface to the deep sea.
They are classified as free-swimming aquatic animals with a gelatinous umbrella-shaped bell and trailing tentacles.
Increased nutrients, ascribed to agricultural runoff, have been cited as contributing to jellyfish proliferation.
They are not considered medusa jellyfish.
Jellyfish are not adapted to closed spaces.
*Scyphozoa are sometimes called true jellyfish, though they are no more truly jellyfish than the others listed here.
The sea wasp, a box jellyfish found in Australian waters, and more recently, Florida, can kill an adult human within a few minutes.
Muscles are used for the contraction of the body, which sheds the first vortex and pushes the animal forward, but the mesoglea is so elastic that the expansion is powered exclusively by relaxing the bell, which releases the energy stored from the contraction.
Graham states, "ecosystems in which there are high levels of nutrients ... provide nourishment for the small organisms on which jellyfish feed.
Jellyfish are "bloomy" by nature of their life cycles, being produced by their benthic polyps usually in the spring when sunshine and plankton increase, so they appear rather suddenly and often in large numbers, even when an ecosystem is in balance.
There are over 200 species of Scyphozoa, about 50 species of Staurozoa, about 20 species of Cubozoa, and the Hydrozoa includes about 1000–1500 species that produce medusae (and many more hydrozoan species that do not produce medusae).
*Staurozoa (stalked jellyfish) are characterized by a medusa form that is generally sessile, oriented upside down and with a stalk emerging from the apex of the "calyx" (bell), which attaches to the substrate.
Cuninidae, Solmarisidae, Aeginidae, Tetraplatiidae
Cassiopeidae, Catostylidae, Cepheidae, Lobonematidae, Lychnorhizidae, Mastigiidae, Rhizostomatidae, Stomolophidae, Thysanostomatidae, Versurigidae
The manubrium is a stalk-like structure hanging down from the centre of the underside, often surrounded by oral arms, which connects with the mouth/anus at the base of the bell.
The tiny creeping jellyfish ''Staurocladia'' and ''Eleutheria'' (see section on Size, above) cannot swim and "walk" around on seaweed fronds or rocky bottoms on their tentacles.
It has traditionally also been applied to other animals sharing a superficial resemblance, for example ctenophores (members from another phylum of common, gelatinous and generally transparent or translucent, free-swimming planktonic carnivores now known as ''comb jellies'') were included as "jellyfishes".
Jellyfish employ a loose network of nerves, located in the epidermis, which is called a "nerve net".
A few species can produce new medusae by budding directly from the medusan stage.
In moon jellies, the eggs lodge in pits on the oral arms, which form a temporary brood chamber for the developing planula larvae.
*Siphonophorae are an order of hydrozoa which generally live as colonies (for example, free-swimming chains of repeated units, some units similar to polyps or to medusa).
Although traditionally thought not to have a central nervous system, nerve net concentration and ganglion-like structures could be considered to constitute one in most species.
Youngbluth states that "jellyfish feed on the same kinds of prey as adult and young fish, so if fish are removed from the equation, jellyfish are likely to move in."
The lion's mane jellyfish, ''Cyanea capillata'', was long-cited as the largest jellyfish, and arguably the longest animal in the world, with fine, thread-like tentacles that may extend up to  long (though most are nowhere near that large).
Nematocysts, which deliver the sting, are located mostly on the tentacles; Scyphozoans also have them around the mouth and stomach.
Invasive populations can expand rapidly because they often face no predators in the new habitat.
They also actively avoid fresh water from mountain snowmelt, diving until they find enough salt.
The dish is often served shredded with a dressing of oil, soy sauce, vinegar and sugar, or as a salad with vegetables.
In most cases, adults release sperm and eggs into the surrounding water, where the (unprotected) eggs are fertilized and mature into new organisms.
Ice or fresh water is not usually applied to stings, since they may cause nematocysts to continue to release toxin.
Most of the harvest takes place in southeast Asia.
They have a moderately painful, but rarely fatal, sting.
Another collective name for a group of jellyfish is a ''smack'', although this term is not commonly used by scientists who study jellyfish.
Jellyfish may also benefit from saltier waters, as saltier waters contain more iodine, which is necessary for polyps to turn into jellyfish.
Once dried, they can be stored for weeks at a time.
The next stage is the ephyra, which is a free-swimming precursor of the final adult stage.
Three decades later, Douglas Prasher sequenced and cloned the gene for GFP.
Physaliidae, Rhizophysidae
Most of the umbrella mass is a gelatinous material — the jelly — called mesoglea which is surrounded by two layers of protective skin.
*Cubozoa (box jellyfish) have a (rounded) box-shaped bell, and their velarium assists them to swim more quickly.
Jellyfish bloom formation is a complex process that depends on ocean currents, nutrients, sunshine, temperature, season, prey availability, reduced predation and oxygen concentrations.
Jellyfish prepared this way retain 7–10% of their original weight, and the processed product contains approximately 94% water and 6% protein.
Jellyfish function as hosts for a wide variety of organisms.
The medusa is the life stage that is typically identified as a jellyfish.
Jellyfish caused a cascading blackout in the Philippines in 1999, as well as damaging the Diablo Canyon Power Plant in California in 2008.
They depend on currents to transport them from place to place.
All of the stauromedusae are found attached to either seaweed or rocky or other firm material on the bottom.
Although what first comes to mind as the common domain of jellyfish is living well up off the ocean floor in the plankton, a few species of jellyfish are closely associated with the bottom for much of their lives (that is, they can be considered benthic).
It may become difficult for fish stocks to reestablish themselves in marine ecosystems once they have become dominated by jellyfish, because jellyfish feed on plankton, which includes fish eggs and larvae.
Geryoniidae, Halicreatidae, Petasidae, Ptychogastriidae, Rhopalonematidae
Their method of propulsion is coordinated movement of thousands of cilia used as paddles, rather than a pulsating bell, although a few species of ctenophores swim by flapping large lobes.
Even some scientists include the phylum ctenophora when they are referring to jellyfish.
The ephyra then develops into a medusa.
Jellyfish kill 20 to 40 people a year in the Philippines alone.
Agalmatidae, Apolemiidae, Erennidae, Forskaliidae, Physophoridae, Pyrostephidae, Rhodaliidae
The three goals of first aid for uncomplicated stings are to prevent injury to rescuers, deactivate the nematocysts, and remove tentacles attached to the patient.
Illuminating the animal or cell reveals what tissues express that protein—or at what stage of development.
Beyond initial first aid, antihistamines such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) may control skin irritation (pruritus).
A recent study tracking swimming jellyfish revealed that these medusae can detect marine currents and swim against the current to congregate in blooms.
Salt water may be used as an alternative if vinegar is unavailable; and may be preferred over vinegar.
They have tetra-radial symmetry.
Map of population trends of native and invasive species of jellyfish
Jellyfish are usually either male or female (with occasional hermaphrodites).
Touching or being touched by a jellyfish can be very uncomfortable, sometimes requiring medical assistance; sting effects range from no effect to extreme pain to death.
The genetic engineering technique fuses the gene of interest to the GFP gene.
Martin Chalfie figured out how to use GFP as a fluorescent marker of genes inserted into other cells or organisms.
The four major classes of medusozoan Cnidaria are:
Depending on the species, the body contains between 95 and 98% water.
Rescuers usually wear barrier clothing, such as pantyhose, wet suits or full-body sting-proof suits while removing jellies or tentacles from injured.
They feed continuously.
Atollidae, Atorellidae, Linuchidae, Nausithoidae, Paraphyllinidae, Periphyllidae
Fresh water is not usually used if the sting occurs in salt water, as changes in tonicity can release additional venom.
In some species, specimens may skip some phases.
When a nematocyst is triggered by contact by predator or prey, pressure builds up rapidly inside it up to  until it bursts.
In most species, spawning is controlled by light, so the entire population spawns at about the same time of day, often at either dusk or dawn.
Some jellyfish populations that have shown clear increases in the past few decades are invasive species, newly arrived from other habitats: examples include the Black Sea, Caspian Sea, Baltic Sea, central and eastern Mediterranean, Hawaii, and tropical and subtropical parts of the West Atlantic (including the Caribbean, Gulf of Mexico and Brazil).
Some sources may use the term "jelly" to refer to organisms in this taxon, as "jellyfish" may be considered inappropriate.
These home aquariums generate this special water flow pattern using an air-lift pump and require special food for the jellyfish, which can be shipped from suppliers to their final destination.
Many scientists who work on relationships between these groups are reluctant to assign ranks, although there is general agreement on the different groups, regardless of their absolute rank.
The term ''medusa'' was coined by Linnaeus in 1752, alluding to the tentacled head of Medusa in Greek mythology.
In waters where there is eutrophication, low oxygen levels often result, favoring jellyfish as they thrive in less oxygen-rich water than fish can tolerate.
The digestive cavity consists of the gastrovascular cavity and radiating canals which extend toward the margin; these canals may be simple or branching, and vary in number from few to many.
Their swimming technique also helps them to capture prey; when their body expands it displaces more water which brings more potential prey within the reach of their tentacles.
A well-known example is the Portuguese man o' war.
Semaeostomae is paraphyletic with Rhizostomeae.
Most have tentacles around the outer margin of the bowl-shaped bell, and long, oral arms around the mouth in the center of the subumbrella.
Until recently, Staurozoa were classified within the Scyphozoa.
The polyp is generally a small stalk with a mouth that is ringed by upward-facing tentacles.
In scientific literature, "jelly" and "jellyfish" are often used interchangeably.
Medusae are carnivorous, feeding on plankton, crustaceans, fish eggs, small fish and other jellyfish, ingesting and voiding through the same hole in the middle of the bell.
In the cell or animal, the artificial gene turns on in the same tissues and the same time as the normal gene, making GFP instead of the normal protein.
Scyphozoan jellyfish stings range from a twinge to tingling to agony.
The mechanism, called passive energy recapture, only works at low speeds and relatively small body sizes, allowing the animal to travel 30 percent farther on each swimming cycle.
At least one professor at the Seto Marine Biological Laboratory at Kyoto University in Japan has concluded that there are three species of jellyfish that are immortal, and says their immortality may hold the key to immortality for human beings, as he says that genetically they are not that much different from humans.
Deactivating the nematocysts (stinging cells) prevents further injection of venom.
The margin of the disk bears sensory organs and tentacles.
Even beached and dying jellyfish can still sting when touched.
Most jellyfish stings are not deadly, but stings of some species of the class ''Cubozoa'' and the Box jellyfish, such as the famous and especially toxic Irukandji jellyfish, can be deadly.
Many of these tiny creeping jellyfish cannot be seen in the field without a hand lens or microscope; they can reproduce asexually by splitting in half (called fission).
Clogging can stop desalination plants, as well as clogging ship engines and infesting fishing nets.
They move through the water by radially expanding and contracting their bell-shaped bodies to push water behind them.
The best known freshwater example is the cosmopolitan hydrozoan jellyfish, Craspedacusta sowerbii.
In 1961, Osamu Shimomura extracted green fluorescent protein (GFP) and another bioluminescent protein, called aequorin, from the large and abundant hydromedusa ''Aequorea victoria'', while studying photoproteins that cause bioluminescence in this species.
Other species of jellyfish are among the most common and important jellyfish predators, some of which specialize in jellies.
Many textbooks and sources refer to only scyphozoans as "true jellyfish".
"Dried jellyfish" has become increasingly popular throughout the world.
This term refers exclusively to the non-polyp life-stage which occurs in many cnidarians, which is typified by a large pulsating gelatinous bell with long trailing tentacles.
The upside-down jellyfish in the genus ''Cassiopea'' typically lie on the bottom of shallow lagoons where they sometimes pulsate gently with their umbrella top facing down.
'''Jellyfish''', or  '''jellies''', are categorized as the carnivorous Medusa form which make up a major part of the phylum Cnidaria.
The phylogenetics of this group are complex and evolving.
Some Staurozoa (all?
Endoparasitic helminths are transmitted from intermediate host jellyfish to definitive host fish via predation.
After a growth interval, the polyp begins reproducing asexually by budding and, in the Scyphozoa, is called a ''segmenting polyp'', or a scyphistoma.
Rubbing wounds, or using alcohol, spirits, ammonia, or urine may have strongly negative effects as these can encourage the release of venom.
Vinegar (3–10% aqueous acetic acid) may be used as a common remedy to help with box jellyfish stings, but not the stings of the Portuguese man o' war (which is not a true jellyfish, but a siphonophore).
A jellyfish detects various stimuli including the touch of other animals via this nerve net, which then transmits impulses both throughout the nerve net and around a circular nerve ring, through the rhopalial lappet, located at the rim of the jellyfish body, to other nerve cells.
The polyps resemble the closely related Cnidaria anthozoan (sea anemones and corals) polyps.
For example, jellyfish reproduce rapidly and have fast growth rates; they predate many species, while few species predate them; and they feed via touch rather than visually, so they can feed effectively at night and in turbid waters.
Man-made GFP became commonly used as a fluorescent tag to show which cells or tissues express specific genes.
The upper or aboral surface is called the ''exumbrella'' and the lower surface is called the ''subumbrella''; the mouth is located on the lower surface, which may be partially closed by a membrane extending inward from the margin (called the ''velum'').
Jellies hunt passively using their tentacles as drift nets.
The top layer is called the epidermis, and the inner layer is referred to as gastrodermis, which lines the gut.
It is joined to the radial canals which extend to the margin of the bell, where tentacles are attached.
So far this reversal has been observed only in the laboratory.
The popular English name ''jellyfish'' has been in use since 1796.
Budding produces more scyphistomae and also ephyrae.
The fused DNA is then put into a cell, to generate either a cell line or (via IVF techniques) an entire animal bearing the gene.
The class Storozoa was the earliest group of Medusozoa to diverge and the Limnomedusae were the earliest Hydrozoa to diverge.
They look upward to navigate from roots in mangrove swamps to the open lagoon and back, watching for the mangrove canopy, where they feed.
In natural conditions, many jellies are so transparent that they are nearly invisible.
The term "jellies" may have become more popular than "jellyfish".
Some polyps can asexually produce a creeping ''frustule'' larval form, which then develops into another polyp.
Salps are chordates, and as such are actually more closely related to humans than they are to cnidarians and comb jellies.
In 2010, at a New Hampshire beach, pieces of a single dead lion's mane jellyfish stung between 125 and 150 people.
The hydromedusae ''Cladonema radiatum'' and ''Cladonema californicum'' are also very small, living for months, yet never growing beyond a few mm in bell height and diameter.
Jellyfish adversely affect humanity by interfering with public systems and harming swimmers.
Professional exhibits feature precise water flows, typically in circular tanks to avoid trapping specimens in corners.
Most large coastal jellyfish live 2 to 6 months, during which they grow from a millimeter or two to many centimeters in diameter.
Jellyfish do not need a respiratory system since their skin is thin enough that the body is oxygenated by diffusion.
When marine ecosystems become disturbed jellyfish can proliferate.
Scyphozoans are exclusively marine, but some hydrozoans live in freshwater.
Medusae vary from bell-shaped to the shape of a thin disk, scarcely convex above and only slightly concave below.
As of 2009, jellyfish were becoming popular in home aquariums.
Stings may cause anaphylaxis, which can be fatal.
Jellyfish lifespans typically range from a few hours (in the case of some very small hydromedusae) to several months; there are some indications that deep sea species may live on the order of years.
The ''planula'' is a small larva covered with cilia.
They remain in still waters until the tide rises, ascending and allowing it to sweep them back into the bay.
In biology, a ''medusa'' (plural: medusae) is a form of cnidarian in which the body is shaped like an umbrella, in contrast with polyps.
German biologist Ernst Haeckel popularized medusae through his vivid illustrations, particularly in ''Kunstformen der Natur''.
nutricula'', might be effectively immortal because of its ability under certain circumstances to transform from medusa back to the polyp stage, thereby escaping the death that typically awaits medusae post-reproduction if they have not otherwise been eaten by some other ocean organism.
Medusivorous fish become infected by trematodes through predation of infected jellyfish and act as definitive hosts.
Jellyfish have roamed the seas for at least 500 million years, and possibly 700 million years or more, making them the oldest multi-organ animal.
Polyp colonies form by strobilation, in which multiple polyps share a common stomach cavity.
Abylidae, Clausophyidae, Diphyidae, Hippopodiidae, Prayidae, Sphaeronectidae
All medusa-producing species belong to the sub-phylum Medusozoa.
The increasingly common giant Nomura's jellyfish, ''Nemopilema nomurai'', found in some, but not all years in the waters of Japan, Korea and China in summer and autumn is another candidate for "largest jellyfish", in terms of diameter and weight, since the largest Nomura's jellyfish in late autumn can reach  in bell (body) diameter and about  in weight, with average specimens frequently reaching  in bell diameter and about  in weight.
This opens into the gastrovascular cavity, where digestion takes place and nutrients are absorbed.
In Israel, a start-up company called Cine'al has developed a super-absorbent substance made from jellyfish known as hydromash which they claim can be used to make diapers, tampons, and paper towels.
The outflow is spread out over a large surface area and the inflow enters as a sheet of water in front of the outflow, so the jellyfish do not get sucked into it.
*Hydrozoa medusae also have tetra-radial symmetry, nearly always have a velum attached just inside the bell margin, do not have oral arms, but a much smaller central manubrium with terminal mouth opening, and are distinguished by the absence of cells in the mesoglea.
It settles onto a firm surface and develops into a polyp.
The smallest jellyfish are the peculiar creeping jellyfish in the genera ''Staurocladia'' and ''Eleutheria'', which have bell disks from 0.5&nbsp;mm to a few millimeters in diameter, with short tentacles that extend out beyond this, which these jellyfish use to move across the surface of seaweed or the bottoms of rocky pools.
Other predators include tuna, shark, swordfish, sea turtles, and at least one species of Pacific salmon.
Most polyps are only millimeters in size.
Jellies destroy fish nets, poison or crush captured fish, and consume fish eggs and young fish.
Large, often colorful, jellyfish are common in coastal zones worldwide.
That research also proposes coronate Scyphozoa and Cubozoa as a sister clade to Hydrozoa and discomedusan Scyphozoa, which are themselves sister groups.
Some other animals are frequently associated with or mistaken for medusa jellyfish.
As jellyfish are not true fish (which are vertebrates, unlike jellyfish), the word ''jellyfish'' is considered by some to be a misnomer.
New specimens (usually only a millimeter or two across) swim away from the polyp and then grow.
It is less than an inch (2.5&nbsp;cm) in diameter, colorless and it does not sting.
Jellyfish achieved a 48 percent lower cost of transport (the amount of food and oxygen consumed, versus energy spent in movement) than other animals in similar studies.
Freshly processed jellyfish has a white, creamy color and turns yellow or brown during prolonged storage.
Some species explicitly adapt to tidal flux.
Scraping the affected skin with a knife edge, safety razor, or credit card may remove remaining nematocysts.
Rhizostomes, especially ''Rhopilema esculentum'' in China ( ''hǎizhé'', "sea stingers") and ''Stomolophus meleagris'' (cannonball jellyfish) in the United States, are favored because of their larger and more rigid bodies and because their toxins are harmless to humans.
Clearing the area of jelly, tentacles, and wetness further reduces nematocyst firing.
Processing reduces liquefaction, odor, the growth of spoilage organisms, and makes the jellyfish drier and more acidic, producing a "crunchy and crispy texture."
Medusa jellyfish may be classified as scyphomedusae ("true" jellyfish), stauromedusae (stalked jellyfish), cubomedusae (box jellyfish), or hydromedusae, according to which clade their species belongs.
In Roscoe Bay, jellyfish ride the current at ebb tide until they hit a gravel bar, and then descend below the current.
Some digenean trematodes, especially species of the family Lepocreadiidae, are known to use jellyfish as their second intermediate hosts and/or paratenic hosts.
Most jellyfish do not have specialized digestive, osmoregulatory, central nervous, respiratory, or circulatory systems.
