At the time of Kern's birth, his father ran a stable; later he became a successful merchant.
The second played elsewhere during the long run of ''Oh Boy!''
''Stepping Stones'' (1923, with Caldwell) was a success, and in 1924 the Princess Theatre team of Bolton, Wodehouse and Kern reunited to write ''Sitting Pretty'', but it did not recapture the popularity of the earlier collaborations.
*''The Bunch and Judy'' (1922) – Kern's first show with Fred Astaire
Rodgers and Hammerstein then assigned the task of writing the score for ''Annie Get Your Gun'' to the veteran Broadway composer Irving Berlin.
Kern, however, failed miserably in one of his earliest tasks: he was supposed to purchase two pianos for the store, but instead he ordered 200.
Other songs in ''Swing Time'' include "A Fine Romance", "Pick Yourself Up" and "Never Gonna Dance".
It was a period piece, set in the Gay 90s, about a girl from Hoboken, New Jersey (near Kern's childhood home), who becomes a Broadway star.
This show, staged by Florenz Ziegfeld, ran for 570 performances, one of the longest runs of any Broadway show in the decade, and popularized the song "Look for the Silver Lining" (which had been written for an earlier show), performed by the rising star Marilyn Miller.
Theatrical agent Elisabeth Marbury asked Kern and librettist Guy Bolton to create a series of intimate and low-budget, yet smart, musicals.
Among the more than 700 songs by Kern are such classics as "All the Things You Are", "Bill", "Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man", "A Fine Romance", "The Folks Who Live On the Hill",  "I'll Be Hard to Handle", "I'm Old Fashioned", "I've Told Ev'ry Little Star", "The Last Time I Saw Paris", "Let's Begin", "Long Ago (and Far Away)", "Look for the Silver Lining", "Lovely to Look At", "Ol' Man River", "Pick Yourself Up", "She Didn't Say Yes", "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes", "The Song Is You", "They Didn't Believe Me", "The Way You Look Tonight", "Why Was I Born?
The following year, he was there a second time to work on ''Men of the Sky'', released in 1931 without his songs, and a 1930 film version of ''Sunny''.
*''Jerome Kern: All the Things You Are'' (2008) – K T Sullivan's revue biography of Kern featuring Kern's songs
There was a public reaction against the early glut of film musicals after the advent of film sound; Hollywood released more than 100 musical films in 1930, but only 14 in 1931.
(1999) – dance revue; includes "I Won't Dance"
''High, Wide, and Handsome'' (1937) was intentionally similar in plot and style to ''Show Boat'', but it was a box-office failure.
It was the first musical to enter a major opera company's repertory (New York City Opera, 1954), and the rediscovery of the 1927 score with Robert Russell Bennett's original orchestrations led to a large-scale EMI recording in 1987 and several opera-house productions.
"These shows built and polished the mold from which almost all later major musical comedies evolved.
With Johnny Mercer for ''You Were Never Lovelier'' (1942), he contributed "a set of memorable songs to entertain audiences until the plot came to its inevitable conclusion".
*''Love O' Mike'' (1917)
In response to the commission, Kern oversaw an arrangement by Charles Miller and Emil Gerstenberger of numbers from the show into the orchestral work ''Scenario for Orchestra: Themes from Show Boat'', premiered in 1941 by the Cleveland Orchestra conducted by Rodziński.
*''The Dollar Princess (1909) – contributor of songs for American production
Marilyn Miller played the title role, as she had in ''Sally''.
*''Sweet Adeline'' (1929) – with Hammerstein
Kern's second and last symphonic work was his 'Mark Twain Suite'' (1942).
'''Jerome David Kern''' (January 27, 1885 – November 11, 1945) was an American composer of musical theatre and popular music.
*''Jerome Kern Goes to Hollywood'' (1986) – Broadway revue consisting solely of Kern songs with lyrics by twelve different writers
*''The Cat and the Fiddle'' (1931) – Kern collaborated with Harbach the music, book and lyrics
*''Music in the Air'' (1932; revived in 1951) – composer and co-director with Hammerstein
Their first show, written together with Harbach, was ''Sunny'', which featured the song "Who (Stole My Heart Away)?"
*''Leave It to Jane'' (1917; revived in 1958 Off-Broadway)
*''Our Miss Gibbs'' (1910) – contributor of four songs and some lyrics to this Caryll and Monckton musical's New York production
In 1935, when musical films had become popular once again, thanks to Busby Berkeley, Kern returned to Hollywood, where he composed the scores to a dozen more films, although he also continued working on Broadway productions.
Kern's wife eventually remarried, to a singer named George Byron.
It was filmed in 1934 with Jeanette MacDonald.
*''Show Boat'' (1927; revived frequently) – with Hammerstein
Kern's ''Three Sisters'' (1934), was his last West End show, with a libretto by Hammerstein.
It is a staple of stock productions and has been revived numerous times on Broadway and in London.
He was pleasantly surprised when the next morning brought ecstatic reviews and long lines at the box office.
Identifiable only by his ASCAP card, Kern was initially taken to the indigent ward at City Hospital, later being transferred to Doctors Hospital in Manhattan.
In addition to revivals of his most popular shows, Kern's music has been posthumously featured in a variety of revues, musicals and concerts on and off Broadway.
Kern and Bolton next created an original piece, ''Very Good Eddie'', which was a surprise hit, running for 341 performances, with additional touring productions that went on into the 1918-19 season.
*''The Little Cherub'' (1906) – contributor to this Caryll and Owen Hall musical's New York production
Kern's last Broadway show in the 1920s was ''Sweet Adeline'' (1929), with a libretto by Hammerstein.
He collaborated with Harbach on the Broadway musical ''The Cat and the Fiddle'' (1931), about a composer and an opera singer, featuring the songs "She Didn't Say Yes" and "The Night Was Made for Love".
He was survived by his wife and their daughter, Betty Jane (1913–1996; she married Artie Shaw in 1942 and later Jack Cummings).
Seven nominations were for Best Original Song; these included a posthumous nomination in each of 1945 and 1946.
The film is now considered lost, but Kern's music survives.
It opened in New York and went on to become a hit in London.
However, it did little to fulfill the new team's mission to innovate, except that Kern's song, "The Magic Melody", was the first Broadway showtune with a basic jazz progression.
*''Blue Eyes'' (1928; London)
*''La Belle Paree'' (1911) – revue – co-composer for seven songs; the Broadway debut of Al Jolson
*''The Red Petticoat'' (1912) – Kern's first complete score
*''Sunny'' (1925) – a follow-up to ''Sally'' and almost as big a hit; first collaboration with Hammerstein and Harbach
During the last phase of his theatrical composing career, Kern continued to work with his previous collaborators but also met Oscar Hammerstein II and Otto Harbach, with whom Kern wrote his most lasting, memorable, and well-known works.
'' (1918) – the last Princess Theatre hit
Receiving no response, Hammerstein knew Kern had died.
Kern's exquisitely flowing melodies were employed to further the action or develop characterization."
*"Oh, My Dear" (1918) – contributed one song to this last "Princess Theatre show"
*''The Orchid'' (1907) – contributor to this Caryll and Lionel Monckton musical's New York production
In 1909 during one of his stays in England, Kern took a boat trip on the River Thames with some friends, and when the boat stopped at Walton-on-Thames, they went to an inn called the Swan for a drink.
Kern's last Broadway show (other than revivals) was ''Very Warm for May'' (1939), another show-biz story and another disappointment, although the score included the Kern and Hammerstein classic "All The Things You Are".
The collection, rich in inscribed first editions and manuscript material of eighteenth and nineteenth century authors, sold for a total of $1,729,462.50 – a record for a single-owner sale that stood for over fifty years.
By World War I, more than a hundred of Kern’s songs had been used in about thirty productions, mostly Broadway adaptations of West End and European shows.
During his first phase of work (1904–1911), Kern wrote songs for 22 Broadway productions, including songs interpolated into British musicals or featured in revues (sometimes writing lyrics as well as music), and he occasionally co-wrote musicals with one or two other composers.
With Hammerstein, however, he remained on close terms for the rest of his life.
*''Dream'' (1997) – revue – includes "You Were Never Lovelier", "I'm Old Fashioned", and "Dearly Beloved"
"More and More" was nominated for an Oscar.
*''Never Gonna Dance'' (2003) – musical consisting solely of songs composed by Kern, with lyrics by nine different writers
Kern composed his last film score, ''Centennial Summer'' (1946) in which "the songs were as resplendent as the story and characters were mediocre.
Frohman died in the sinking of the ship.
'' was the last successful "Princess Theatre show".
In 1897, the family moved to Newark, New Jersey, where Kern attended Newark High School (which became Barringer High School in 1907).
The score is, arguably, Kern's greatest and includes the well-known songs "Ol' Man River" and "Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man" as well as "Make Believe", "You Are Love", "Life Upon the Wicked Stage", "Why Do I Love You", all with lyrics by Hammerstein, and "Bill", originally written for ''Oh, Lady!
In May 1915, Kern was due to sail with Charles Frohman from New York to London on board the RMS ''Lusitania'', but Kern missed the boat, having overslept after staying up late playing poker.
'', with lyrics by P. G. Wodehouse.
Kern was much taken with the proprietor's daughter, Eva Leale (1891–1959), who was working behind the bar.
During visits to London beginning in 1905, he also composed songs that were first performed in several London shows.
*''The Cabaret Girl'' (London 1922)
In 1985, the U.S. Post Office issued a postage stamp (Scott #2110, 22¢), with an illustration of Kern holding sheet music.
Although Kern detested jazz arrangements of his songs, many have been adopted by jazz musicians to become standard tunes.
'', featuring Kern's "I Won't Dance" was nominated for the Tony for Best Musical, among others.
In fact, ''Show Boat'' proved to be the most lasting accomplishment of Ziegfeld's career – the only one of his shows that is regularly performed today."
*''Elaine Stritch at Liberty'' (2002) – one-woman show; included "All In Fun"
With Hammerstein, he wrote songs for the film versions of his recent Broadway shows ''Music in the Air'' (1934), which starred Gloria Swanson in a rare singing role, and ''Sweet Adeline'' (1935).
Songs from his other shows, however, are still frequently performed and adapted.
Kern and Wodehouse disagreed over money, and the composer decided to move on to other projects.
*''The Catch of the Season'' (1905) – contributor to this Seymour Hicks musical's New York production
A 1946 revival integrated choreography into the show, in the manner of a Rodgers and Hammerstein production, as did the 1994 Harold Prince–Susan Stroman revival, which was nominated for ten Tony Awards, winning five, including best revival.
He sold at auction, at New York's Anderson Galleries, the collection of English and American literature that he had been building up for more than a decade.
Hammerstein was at his side when Kern's breathing stopped.
*''Sally'' (1920; revived in 1923 and 1948) – one of Kern's biggest hits
His parents were Henry Kern (1842–1908), a Jewish German immigrant, and Fannie Kern ''née'' Kakeles (1852–1907), who was an American Jew of Bohemian parentage.
In response, Kern's father insisted that his son work with him in business, instead of composing.
Kern was one of the founding members of ASCAP.
Kern contributed two songs to ''To-Night's the Night'' (1914), another Rubens musical.
At the time of Kern's death, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was filming a fictionalized version of his life, ''Till the Clouds Roll By'', which was released in 1946 starring Robert Walker as Kern.
With Dorothy Fields, he composed the new music for ''I Dream Too Much'' (1935), a musical melodrama about the opera world, starring the Metropolitan Opera diva Lily Pons.
In 2002, ''Elaine Stritch at Liberty'', featuring Kern's "All in Fun", won the Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event.
Later in the same year, Kern wrote the score for ''Sally'', with a book by Bolton and lyrics by Otto Harbach.
For the Deanna Durbin Western musical, ''Can't Help Singing'' (1944), with lyrics by Harburg, Kern "provided the best original score of Durbin's career, mixing operetta and Broadway sounds in such songs as 'Any Moment Now,' 'Swing Your Partner,' 'More and More,' and the lilting title number."
*''The Girl from Utah'' (1914) – added five songs to the American production of this Rubens musical
It ran for 395 performances, a remarkable success for the Depression years, and transferred to London the following year.
The characters and situations were, within the limitations of musical comedy license, believable and the humor came from the situations or the nature of the characters.
He settled permanently in Hollywood in 1937.
At the same time, in some ways his music came full circle: having in his youth helped to end the reigns of the waltz and operetta, he now composed three of his finest waltzes ("Can't Help Singing", "Californ-i-ay" and "Up With the Lark"), the last having a distinctly operetta-like character.
He wrote songs for the school's first musical, a minstrel show, in 1901, and for an amateur musical adaptation of ''Uncle Tom's Cabin'' put on at the Newark Yacht Club in January 1902.
:This is the trio of musical fame,
*''Have a Heart'' (1917) – composer and contributor of some lyrics
He showed an early aptitude for music and was taught to play the piano and organ by his mother, an accomplished player and teacher.
This was given a 1952 remake called ''Lovely to Look At''.
Kern grew up on East 56th Street in Manhattan, where he attended public schools.
*''Mamba's Daughters'' (1939; revived in 1940) – play – featured songwriter
Kern is believed to have composed music for silent films as early as 1912, but the earliest documented film music which he is known to have written was for a twenty-part serial, ''Gloria's Romance'' in 1916.
According to the theatre historian John Kenrick: "After the opening night audience filed out of the Ziegfeld Theatre in near silence, Ziegfeld thought his worst fears had been confirmed.
(1917) – the most successful Princess Theatre show
In January 1929, at the height of the Jazz Age, and with ''Show Boat'' still playing on Broadway, Kern made news on both sides of the Atlantic for reasons wholly unconnected with music.
On November 5, 1945, at 60 years of age, he suffered a cerebral hemorrhage while walking at the corner of Park Avenue and 57th Street.
Kern's importance to the partnership was illustrated by the fate of the last musical of the series, ''Oh, My Dear!''
*''The Earl and the Girl'' (1905) – contributor of music and lyrics to this Hicks and Ivan Caryll musical's American productions
This second phase of Kern's Hollywood career had considerably greater artistic and commercial success than the first.
''The Oxford Companion to the American Musical'' calls ''Swing Time'' "a strong candidate for the best of the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musicals" and says that, although the screenplay is contrived, it "left plenty of room for dance and all of it was superb.
In 1986, ''Big Deal'' was nominated for the Tony for best musical, among other awards, and Bob Fosse won as best choreographer.
Kern and his wife, Eva, often vacationed on their yacht ''Show Boat''.
The shows featured modern American settings and simple scene changes to suit the small theatre.
His father relented, and later in 1902, Kern became a student at the New York College of Music, studying the piano under Alexander Lambert and Paolo Gallico, and harmony under Dr. Austin Pierce.
The 1920s were an extremely productive period in American musical theatre, and Kern created at least one show every year for the entire decade.
*''Very Good Eddie'' (1915; revived in 1975)
Popple (of Ippleton)'', called ''Nobody Home'' (1915).
Another score for the silent movies, ''Jubilo'', followed in 1919.
This was one of the first starring vehicles for Billie Burke, for whom Kern had earlier written the song "Mind the Paint", with lyrics by A. W. Pinero.
Earlier musical comedy had often been thinly plotted, gaudy pieces, marked by the insertion of songs into their scores with little regard to the plot.
Although Ferber's novel was filmed unsuccessfully as a part-talkie in 1929 (using some songs from the Kern score), the musical itself was filmed twice, in 1936, and, with Technicolor, in 1951.
*''Nobody Home'' (1915) – the first "Princess Theatre show"
''Roberta'' (1933) by Kern and Harbach included the songs "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes", "Let's Begin and "Yesterdays" and featured, among others, Bob Hope, Fred MacMurray, George Murphy and Sydney Greenstreet all in the early stages of their careers.
Although dozens of Kern's musicals and musical films were hits, only ''Show Boat'' is now regularly revived.
The film starred Astaire and Rita Hayworth and included the song "I'm Old Fashioned".
Kern's song, with four beats to a bar, departed from the customary waltz-rhythms of European influence and fitted the new American passion for modern dances such as the fox-trot.
*''Stepping Stones'' (1923)
One of the most important American theatre composers of the early 20th century, he wrote more than 700 songs, used in over 100 stage works, including such classics as "Ol' Man River", "Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man", "A Fine Romance", "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes", "All the Things You Are", "The Way You Look Tonight", "Long Ago (and Far Away)" and "Who?".
He wooed her, and they were married at the Anglican church of St. Mary's in Walton on October 25, 1910.
Kern and Fields interspersed the opera numbers with their songs, including "the swinging 'I Got Love,' the lullaby 'The Jockey on the Carousel,' and the entrancing title song."
Kern songs were also used in the Cary Grant film, ''When You're in Love'' (1937), and the first Abbott and Costello feature, ''One Night in the Tropics'' (1940).
A native New Yorker, Kern created dozens of Broadway musicals and Hollywood films in a career that lasted for more than four decades.
Theatre historian John Kenrick writes that the song put Kern in great demand on Broadway and established a pattern for musical comedy love songs that lasted through the 1960s.
*''Something Wonderful'' (1995) – concert celebrating Oscar Hammerstein II's 100th birthday – featured composer
The "Princess Theatre shows" were unique on Broadway not only for their small size, but their clever, coherent plots, integrated scores and naturalistic acting, which presented "a sharp contrast to the large-scale Ruritanian operettas then in vogue" or the star-studded revues and extravaganzas of producers like Florenz Ziegfeld.
Warner Bros. bought out Kern's contract, and he returned to the stage.
*''To-Night's the Night'' (1914) – contributor of two songs to this Rubens musical
The most successful of these are as follows:
The story, dealing with racism, marital strife and alcoholism, was unheard of in the escapist world of musical comedy.
*''Miss Springtime'' (1917) – contributor of two songs to this Emmerich Kalman success
It was "undoubtedly an operetta", set in the German countryside, but without the Ruritanian trimmings of the operettas of Kern's youth.
"All Through the Day" was another Oscar nominee.
In 1929 Kern made his first trip to Hollywood to supervise the 1929 film version of ''Sally'', one of the first "all-talking" Technicolor films.
He persuaded Hammerstein to adapt it and Ziegfeld to produce it.
*''Very Warm for May'' (1939) – with Hammerstein; Kern's last stage musical, and a failure
Its relative failure may have been partly due to Kern's growing aversion to having individual songs from his shows performed out of context on radio, in cabaret, or on record, although his chief objection was to jazz interpretations of his songs.
While most Kern musicals have largely been forgotten, except for their songs, ''Show Boat'' remains well-remembered and frequently seen.
Kern set it, the only time he set a pre-written lyric, and his only hit song not written as part of a musical.
Some of his most notable shows during this very productive period were as follows:
*''The "Mind-the-Paint" Girl'' (1912 play; starring Billie Burke) – incidental music
For the 1936 film version of ''Show Boat'', Kern and Hammerstein wrote three new songs, including "I Have The Room Above Her" and  "Ah Still Suits Me".
The music of Kern's last two films is notable in the way it developed from his earlier work.
His musical innovations, such as 4/4 dance rhythms and the employment of syncopation and jazz progressions, built on, rather than rejected, earlier musical theatre tradition.
The couple then lived at the Swan when Kern was in England.
The show ran for 572 performances on Broadway and was also a success in London.
The most notable of his scores were those for a series of shows written for the Princess Theatre, a small (299-seat) house built by Ray Comstock.
Jerome Kern was nominated eight times for an Academy Award, and won twice.
He and his collaborators also employed his melodies to further the action or develop characterization to a greater extent than in the other musicals of his day, creating the model for later musicals.
''Music in the Air'' (1932) was another Kern-Hammerstein collaboration and another show-biz plot, best remembered today for "The Song Is You" and "I've Told Ev'ry Little Star".
Kern was born in New York City, on Sutton Place, in what was then the city's brewery district.
After suffering a heart attack in 1939, he was told by his doctors to concentrate on film scores, a less stressful task, as Hollywood songwriters were not as deeply involved with the production of their works as Broadway songwriters.
The team's first Princess Theatre show was an adaptation of Paul Rubens' 1905 London show, ''Mr.
The show ran for 517 performances on Broadway, and the following year ran for 363 performances in the West End, starring Binnie Hale and Jack Buchanan.
:Bolton and Wodehouse and Kern.
In the film, Kern's songs are sung by Judy Garland, Kathryn Grayson, June Allyson, Lena Horne, Dinah Shore, Frank Sinatra and Angela Lansbury, among others, and Gower Champion and Cyd Charisse appear as dancers.
Some of it was too advanced for the film companies; Kern's biographer, Stephen Banfield, refers to "tonal experimentation ... outlandish enharmonics" that the studios insisted on cutting.
", "Yesterdays", "You Are Love" and "Who?
In 1976, ''Very Good Eddie'' was nominated for a Drama Desk Award as Outstanding Revival, and the director and actors received various Tony, Drama Desk and other awards and nominations.
to Ivan Caryll's hit musical ''The Earl and the Girl'' when the show transferred to Chicago and New York in 1905.
The show also included the song "I'll Be Hard to Handle".
Their next film, ''Swing Time'' (1936) included the song "The Way You Look Tonight", which won the Academy Award in 1936 for the best song.
From 1905 on, he spent large blocks of time in London, contributing songs to West End shows like ''The Beauty of Bath'' (1906; with lyricist P. G. Wodehouse) and making valuable contacts, including George Grossmith Jr. and Seymour Hicks, who were the first to introduce Kern's songs to the London stage.
His regular lyricist collaborators for his more than 30 shows during this period were Bolton, Wodehouse, Caldwell, Harry B. Smith and Howard Dietz.
… Oscar Hammerstein, Leo Robin, and E. Y. Harburg contributed lyrics for Kern's lovely music, resulting in the soulful ballad 'All Through the Day,' the rustic 'Cinderella Sue,' the cheerful 'Up With the Lark,' and the torchy 'In Love in Vain.'"
In his last Hollywood musicals, Kern worked with several new and distinguished partners.
Wix of Wickham'' (1904) – contributed most of the songs for this musical's New York production
Kern left high school before graduation in the spring of his senior year in 1902.
Among the books he sold were first or early editions of poems by Robert Burns and Percy Bysshe Shelley, and works by Jonathan Swift, Henry Fielding and Charles Dickens, as well as manuscripts by Alexander Pope, John Keats, Shelley, Lord Byron, Thomas Hardy and others.
Kern is interred at Ferncliff Cemetery in Westchester County, New York.
*''Three Sisters'' (1934; London)
For a time, Kern worked as a rehearsal pianist in Broadway theatres and as a song-plugger for Tin Pan Alley music publishers.
He began to provide these additions in 1904 to British scores for ''An English Daisy'', by Seymour Hicks and Walter Slaughter, and ''Mr.
In February 1918, Dorothy Parker wrote in ''Vanity Fair'':
Despite his doubts, Ziegfeld spared no expense in staging the piece to give it its full epic grandeur.
Kern had been impressed by Edna Ferber's novel ''Show Boat'' and wished to present a musical stage version.
He also contributed to the New York production of ''The Catch of the Season'' (1905), ''The Little Cherub'' (1906) and ''The Orchid'' (1907), among other shows.
His first published composition, a piano piece, ''At the Casino'', appeared in the same year.
Originally a hit for Tony Martin and later for Noël Coward, the song was used in the film ''Lady Be Good'' (1941) and won Kern another Oscar for best song.
