Unfortunately, due to legal constraints, the album was not released in the United States.
The songs still featured Lewis's inimitable piano flourishes, but critics were most taken aback by the rock and roll pioneer's effortlessly soulful vocals, which possessed an emotional resonance on par with the most respected country singers of the time, such as George Jones and Merle Haggard.
Only Alan Freed stayed true to Lewis, playing his records until Freed was removed from the air because of payola allegations.
Another recording of Lewis playing an instrumental boogie arrangement of the Glenn Miller Orchestra favorite "In the Mood" was issued on the Phillips International label under the pseudonym "The Hawk", but disc jockeys quickly figured out the distinctive piano style, and this gambit failed.
In August 2009, in advance of his new album, a single entitled "Mean old man" was released for download.
Gospel music was a staple of his performing repertoire.
The Memphis police found the gun in the car and put Jerry Lee, protesting, hollering, threatening ''them'', away in handcuffs."
During the famous Million Dollar Quartet jam involving Lewis, Elvis Presley, Carl Perkins, and Johnny Cash, they performed several gospel songs.
1 country hits included "To Make Love Sweeter for You", "There Must Be More to Love Than This", "Would You Take Another Chance on Me" and "Me and Bobby McGee".
According to several first-hand sources, including Johnny Cash, Lewis, a devout Christian, was troubled by the sinful nature of his own material, which he believed was leading him and his audience to hell.
The couple had two children: Jerry Lee Lewis Jr. (1954–1973) and Ronnie Guy Lewis (b.
'', brought him back into the public eye, especially when he decided to re-record all his songs for the movie soundtrack.
Lewis's successes continued throughout the decade and he embraced his rock and roll past with songs such as a cover of the Big Bopper's "Chantilly Lace" and Mack Vickery's "Rockin' My Life Away".
The public downfall of his cousin, television evangelist Jimmy Swaggart, resulted in more adverse publicity to a troubled family.
In Rick Bragg's 2014 authorized biography ''Jerry Lee Lewis: His Own Story'', Lewis explains that the reclusive Presley had been trying to reach him and finally did on November 23, imploring that he "come out to the house."
Lewis also endured years of condemnation from his cousin, evangelist Jimmy Lee Swaggart, who never passed up an opportunity to criticize Lewis's lifestyle.
2009 marked the sixtieth year since Lewis's first public performance when he performed "Drinking Wine Spo-Dee-O-Dee" at a car dealership on November 19, 1949, in Ferriday, Louisiana..
Lewis family values weren't necessarily worse, but they were different."
On the live album ''By Request, More of the Greatest Live Show on Earth'', Lewis is heard naming Moon Mullican as an artist who inspired him.
His fifth marriage, to Shawn Stephens, lasted 77 days, from June to August 1983, ending with her death.
Lewis's Sun recording contract ended in 1963 and he joined Smash Records, where he made a number of rock recordings that did not further his career.
On February 12, 2005, Lewis received the Recording Academy's Lifetime Achievement Award the day before the Recording Academy's main Grammy Awards ceremony, which he also attended.
Lewis is primarily known for his "boogie woogie" style, which is characterized by a regular left hand bass figure and dancing beat, but his command of the instrument and highly individualistic style set him apart.
Later that night, Lewis was at a Memphis nightclub called Vapors drinking champagne when he was given a gun.
As Colin Escott observes in the sleeve to the 1995 compilation ''Killer Country'', the conversion to country music in 1968 "looked at the time like a radical shift, but it was neither as abrupt nor as unexpected as it seemed.
In May 2013, Lewis opened a new club on Beale Street in Memphis.
In 1989, a major motion picture based on his early life in rock & roll, ''Great Balls of Fire!
Up until his arrival, the music had been primarily associated with guitars, but his early Sun recordings and television appearances pushed the instrument to the forefront.
Lewis was charged with carrying a pistol and public drunkenness.
He has had ten official gold discs, the latest being for the 2006 album ''Last Man Standing'', plus unofficial ones issued by his record company Mercury for albums which sold over a quarter of a million copies.
In October 2008, as part of a very successful European tour, Lewis returned to the UK, almost exactly 50 years after his ill-fated first tour.
It was at the latter studio that Lewis recorded his only major hit during this period, a rendition of Ray Charles' "What'd I Say" in 1961.
His seventh marriage, to Judith Brown, began March 9, 2012.
On November 10, the week culminated with a tribute concert compered by Kris Kristofferson.
In 1998, he toured Europe with Chuck Berry and Little Richard.
Formerly, rockabilly had rarely featured piano, but it proved an influential addition, and rockabilly artists on other labels also started working with pianists.
The original Sun cut of "Great Balls of Fire" was elected to the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1998, and Lewis's Sun recording of "Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin On" received this honor in 1999.
King, Howlin' Wolf, Elvis Presley, Roy Orbison, Carl Perkins, Lewis, Johnny Cash and others, and also opened a studio in Nashville.
", meaning a take, to which Lewis replies "If you got enough fuckin' sense to cut it."
But Lewis daringly played a boogie-woogie rendition of "My God Is Real" at a church assembly, which ended his association with the school the same night.
And Elvis told 'em, 'Lock him up.'
In the early 1960s, he did not have much chart success, with few exceptions, such as a cover of Ray Charles's "What'd I Say".
"Charles Feron, he owned Vapors, he give it to me," Lewis explained to Bragg.
His lesson was worth a billion dollars to me...He taught me.
Lewis said that Green should not be expelled because "he didn't know what I was going to do."
In 2004, they ranked him number 24 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time.
Even Little Richard, as primitive as he plays, wasn't doing that shuffle...There was something in Jerry Lee that didn't want to play that seventh, and that's the church.
None of them were doing that.
In the 1990 documentary ''The Jerry Lee Lewis Story'', Lewis explains to the interviewer, "The Bible don't even speak of religion.
The four then started an impromptu jam session, and Phillips left the tape running.
To be scared of me – knowin' me the way he did – was ridiculous."
I felt something different."
Lewis was born to the poor family of Elmo and Mamie Lewis in Ferriday, in Concordia Parish, in eastern Louisiana, and began playing piano in his youth with two cousins, Mickey Gilley (later a popular country music singer) and Jimmy Swaggart (later a popular TV evangelist).
His last big hit with Mercury was "Middle Age Crazy," which made it to number 4 in 1977.
On December 4, 1956, Elvis Presley dropped in on Phillips to pay a social visit while Perkins was in the studio cutting new tracks with Lewis backing him on piano.
Mercury didn't really know what to do with Lewis after that."
The team at Smash (a division of Mercury Records) came up "I'm on Fire", a song that they felt would be perfect for Lewis and, as Colin Escott writes in the sleeve to the retrospective ''A Half Century of Hits'', "Mercury held the presses, thinking they had found Lewis's comeback hit, and it might have happened if the Beatles hadn't arrived in America, changing radio playlists almost overnight.
An EP featuring this song and four more was also released on November 11.
In a 2013 interview with Leah Harper, Elton John recalls that up until "Great Balls of Fire," "the piano playing that I had heard had been more sedate.
He didn't move there and didn't schmooze there.
It was only through Kay Martin, the president of Lewis's fan club, T. L. Meade (aka Franz Douskey), an occasional Memphis musician and friend of Sam Phillips, and Gary Skala, that Lewis went back to record at Sun Records.
At the time of the release, Lewis had been playing Iago in a rock and roll adaptation of ''Othello'' called ''Catch My Soul'' in Los Angeles but was soon rushed back to Nashville to record another batch of songs with producer Jerry Kennedy.
His sixth marriage, to Kerrie McCarver, lasted 20 years, from 1984 to 2004.
In November 1956, Lewis traveled to Memphis, Tennessee, to audition for Sun Records.
Lewis wrote or co-wrote the following songs: "End of the Road" (1956), "Lewis Boogie" (1956), "Pumpin' Piano Rock" (1957), "High School Confidential" (1958), "Memory of You" (1958), "Baby Baby Bye Bye" (1960), "Lewis Workout" (1960), "He Took It Like a Man" (1963, from the 1967 album ''Soul My Way''), "Baby, Hold Me Close" (1965) from the 1965 album ''The Return of Rock'', "What a Heck of a Mess" (1966), "Lincoln Limousine" (1966), "Alvin" (1970), "Rockin' Jerry Lee" (1980, the B side of "Honky Tonk Stuff", from the album ''When Two Worlds Collide''), "Pilot Baby" (1983), and "Crown Victoria Custom '51" (1995).
This reignited his career, and throughout the late 1960s and 1970s he regularly topped the country-western charts; throughout his seven-decade career, Lewis has had 30 songs reach the top 10 on the "Billboard Country and Western Chart".
Lewis was still under contract with Sun Records, and kept recording, regularly releasing singles.
The movie focuses on Lewis's early career and his relationship with Myra, and ends with the scandal of the late 1950s.
On February 12, 2005, he was given a Lifetime Achievement Award by The Recording Academy (which also grants the Grammy Awards).
Jerry had always recorded country music, and his country breakthrough 'Another Place, Another Time' had been preceded by many, many country records starting with his first, 'Crazy Arms', in 1956."
''Sanctification''!
No word of religion is even in the Bible.
In Joe Bonomo's book ''Lost and Found'', producer Siggi Loch stated that the recording setup was uncomplicated, with microphones placed as close to the instruments as possible and a stereo mike placed in the audience to capture the ambience.
Lewis is widely hailed as one of the most influential pianists in the history of rock and roll.
Only recordings which are at least 25 years old and have left a lasting impression can receive this honor.
''Last Man Standing'' is Lewis's biggest selling album of all time.
Although almost entirely self-taught, Lewis conceded to biographer Rich Bragg in 2014 that Paul Whitehead, a blind pianist from Meadville, Mississippi, was another key influence on him in his earliest days playing clubs, confiding, "Paul Whitehead done a lot.
It was written by Kris Kristofferson.
Label owner Sam Phillips was in Florida, but producer and engineer Jack Clement recorded Lewis's rendition of Ray Price's "Crazy Arms" and his own composition "End of the Road".
The film was based on the book by Lewis's ex-wife, Myra Gale Lewis, and starred Dennis Quaid as Lewis, Winona Ryder as Myra, and Alec Baldwin as Jimmy Swaggart.
Have you been ''saved''?
Lewis: "The cops asked Elvis, 'What do you want us to do?
Lewis now lives on a ranch in Nesbit, Mississippi, with his family.
Lewis even felt that Sam Phillips had sold him out when the Sun Records boss released "The Return of Jerry Lee", a bogus "interview" cut together by Jack Clement from excerpts of Lewis's songs that "answered" the interview questions, which made light of his marital and publicity problems.
Rock and roll piano up to that point had been defined by Roscoe Jordan, Ike Turner, and to an extent, Ray Charles.
In his book ''Jerry Lee Lewis: His Own Story'', biographer Rick Bragg notes that the songs Lewis was recording "were of the kind they were starting to call 'hard country', not because it had a rock beat or crossed over into rock in a real way, but because it was more substantial than the cloying, overproduced mess out there on country radio".
His third marriage, to his cousin Myra Gale Brown, lasted for 13 years, from December 1957 to December 1970 (although the couple went through a second marriage ceremony because his divorce from Jane Mitchum was not complete before the first ceremony took place).
Although looking frail after several hospitalizations due to stomach problems, Lewis was responsible for beginning an unplanned jam at the end of the evening, which was immediately incorporated into the event.
This aspect of Lewis's character was depicted in Waylon Payne's portrayal of Lewis in the 2005 film ''Walk the Line'', based on Cash's autobiographies.
In 2005, "Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin' On" was selected for permanent preservation in the National Recording Registry of the Library of Congress.
See, I was a good preacher, I know my Bible...
Classical composer Michael Nyman has also cited Lewis's style as the progenitor of his own aesthetic.
When I saw Little Richard at the Harrow Granada, he played it standing up, but Jerry Lee Lewis actually jumped on the piano!
On popular EPs, "Hang Up My Rock and Roll Shoes", "I've Been Twistin'", "Money" and "Hello Josephine" also became turntable hits, especially in nascent discothèques.
All three listened to the same music in their youth, and frequented Haney's Big House, the Ferriday club that featured black blues acts.
His dynamic performance style can be seen in films such as ''High School Confidential'' (he sang the title song from the back of a flatbed truck), and ''Jamboree''.
However, Lewis's rock and roll career faltered in the wake of his marriage to his 13-year-old cousin when he was 22 years old.
Lewis was 22 years old.
In 2003, ''Rolling Stone'' listed his box set ''All Killer, No Filler: The Anthology'' number 242 on their list of "500 Greatest Albums of All Time".
Lewis returned to the USA in 1997 after his tax issues had been resolved by Irish promoter Kieran Cavanagh.
One of his latter unreleased Sun recordings, "One Minute Past Eternity," was issued as a single and soared to number 2 on the country chart, following Lewis's recent Mercury hit "She Even Woke Me Up To Say Goodbye."
He didn't fit in with the family values crowd.
His newest album, ''Mean Old Man'', was released in September 2010 and reached No.
I miss Carl very much."
Appearing on ''Memphis Sounds with George Klein'' in 2011, Lewis credited his older piano-playing cousin Carl McVoy as being a crucial influence, stating, "He was a great piano player, a great singer, and a nice looking man, carried himself real well.
The production on his early country albums, such as ''Another Place, Another Time'' and ''She Even Woke Me Up To Say Goodbye'', was sparse, quite different from the slick "Nashville sound" that was predominant on country radio at the time, and also expressed a full commitment by Lewis to a country audience.
One major success during these lost years was the concert album ''Live at the Star Club, Hamburg'', recorded with the Nashville Teens in 1964, which is considered one of the greatest live rock-and-roll albums ever.
Later that same year, he went to Memphis and recorded ''Southern Roots: Back Home to Memphis'', a soul-infused rock album produced by Huey Meaux.
Lewis's biographer Rick Bragg explains that part of the reason the recording only features Lewis and Elvis singing is because "only Elvis and Jerry Lee were raised in the Assembly of God", and Johnny and Carl didn't really know the words … they was Baptists', Lewis said, and therefore deprived."
Lewis is the last surviving member of Sun Records' Million Dollar Quartet and the ''Class of '55'' album, which also included Johnny Cash, Carl Perkins, Roy Orbison and Elvis Presley.
Lewis was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1986, and his pioneering contribution to the genre has been recognized by the Rockabilly Hall of Fame.
After a string of hit country albums, he decided to record a proper gospel album for the first time in 1970.
This was followed by ''Mean Old Man'', which has received some of the best sales of Lewis's career.
His second marriage, to Jane Mitchum, was of dubious validity because it occurred 23 days before his divorce from Barton was final.
Lewis's turbulent personal life was hidden from the public until a May 1958 British tour where Ray Berry, a news agency reporter at London's Heathrow Airport (the only journalist present), learned about Lewis's third wife, Myra Gale Brown.
On October 10, 2007, Lewis received the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's American Music Masters Award.
Lewis was present to accept the American Music Masters Award and closed his own tribute show with a rendition of "Somewhere Over the Rainbow"  On February 10, 2008, he appeared with John Fogerty and Little Richard on the 50th Grammy Awards Show, performing "Great Balls of Fire" in a medley with "Good Golly Miss Molly".
His parents mortgaged their farm to buy him a piano.
During one exchange that can be heard on the 2013 reissue ''Southern Roots: The Original Sessions'', Meaux asks Lewis, "Do you wanna try one?
Hits include "What's Made Milwaukee Famous (Has Made A Loser Out of Me)", "To Make Love Sweeter For You", "She Still Comes Around (To Love What's Left of Me)", "Since I Met You Baby", "Once More With Feeling", "One Has My Name (The Other Has My Heart)", and "Sometimes A Memory Ain't Enough".
In 1979, Lewis switched to Elektra and produced the critically acclaimed ''Jerry Lee Lewis'', although sales were disappointing.
Lewis's pivotal role in popularizing the piano in rock and roll is indisputable.
Between 1957 and 2006, the date of ''Last Man Standing''s release, 47 singles and 22 albums (''The Session'' counted as 2 albums) made the Top Twenty Pop, Jukebox, Rock, Indie and/or Country charts in the US or the UK.
Are you sanctified?
In December 1956, Lewis began recording prolifically, as a solo artist and as a session musician for other Sun artists, including Carl Perkins and Johnny Cash.
Lewis was still pumping out country albums, although the hits were beginning to dry up.
A pioneer of rock and roll and rockabilly music, Lewis made his first recordings in 1956 at Sun Records in Memphis.
His first TV appearance, in which he demonstrated some of these moves, was on ''The Steve Allen Show'' on July 28, 1957, where he played "Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin On".
This was astonishing to me, that people could do that.
Lewis suddenly remembered that Elvis wanted to see him and, climbing aboard his new Lincoln Continental with the loaded pistol on the dash and a bottle of champagne under his arm, tore off for Graceland.
Lewis is also among the Top 50 all-time Billboard Country artists.
Singleton would milk these unreleased recordings for years, following ''The Golden Cream of the Country'' with ''A Taste of Country'' later in 1970.
It did far better on the country albums chart, rising to number 4.
Receiving positive reviews, the album charted in four different Billboard charts, including a two-week stay at number one on the Indie charts.
In 1960, Phillips opened a new state-of-the-art studio at 639 Madison Avenue in Memphis, abandoning the old Union Avenue studio where Phillips had recorded B.B.
Lewis played the Grand Ole Opry for the first time on January 20, 1973.
He appeared at two London shows: a special private show at the 100 Club on October 25 and at the London Forum on October 28 with Wanda Jackson and his sister, Linda Gail Lewis.
He has been called "rock & roll's first great wild man" and also "rock & roll's first great eclectic".
He has two surviving sons, Ronnie Guy Lewis and Jerry Lee Lewis III, and two daughters, Phoebe Allen Lewis and Lori Lee Lewis.
Ignoring his allotted time constraints – and, thus, commercial breaks – Lewis played for 40 minutes (the average Opry performance is two songs, for about eight maximum minutes of stage time) and invited Del Wood – the one member of the Opry who had been kind to him when he had been there as a teenager – out on stage to sing with him.
The remake of Lewis's old Sun cut "Drinking Wine Spo-Dee-O-Dee" would be the album's hit single, reaching number 20 on the ''Billboard'' country chart and peaking at number 41 on the pop chart.
His distinctive piano playing can be heard on many tracks recorded at Sun in late 1956 and early 1957, including Carl Perkins's "Matchbox", "Your True Love", " and "Put Your Cat Clothes On" and Billy Lee Riley's "Flyin' Saucers Rock'n'Roll".
Between 1968 and 1977, Lewis had 17 Top 10 hit singles on the Billboard country chart, including four chart toppers.
His fourth marriage, to Jaren Elizabeth Gunn Pate, lasted from October 1971 to June 8, 1982, and they had a daughter, Lori Lee Lewis (b.
Johnny Cash was also there watching Perkins.
In the 21st century Lewis continues to tour around the world and still releases new albums.
Although Lewis's piano playing is commonly labelled boogie woogie, gospel music was another major influence in the formation of his technique.
Lewis has had six children during his marriages.
Lewis had already nearly killed his bass player Butch Owens on September 29 (his forty-first birthday) when a .357 accidentally went off in his hand.
Me, pretty well drunk, with that derringer – it ain't somethin' ''strange''."
I'd sit beside him, and say, 'Mr.
Tracks also include Elvis Presley's "Don't Be Cruel" and "Paralyzed", Chuck Berry's "Brown Eyed Handsome Man", Pat Boone's "Don't Forbid Me" and Presley doing an impersonation of Jackie Wilson (who was then with Billy Ward and the Dominoes) on "Don't Be Cruel".
In June 1989, Lewis was honored for his contribution to the recording industry with a star along Hollywood Boulevard on the Hollywood Walk of Fame .
These recordings, almost half of which were gospel songs, have been released on CD as ''Million Dollar Quartet''.
The next morning, the dean of the school called Lewis and Green into his office to expel them.
Paul, can you show me exactly how you do that?'
Just before three o'clock in the morning, Lewis accidentally smashed into the famous Graceland gates because "the nose of that Lincoln was a mile long."
What are you ''talkin' about''?"
In 1986, Lewis was one of the inaugural inductees into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
In Europe, other updated versions of "Sweet Little Sixteen" (September 1962 UK) and "Good Golly Miss Molly" (March 1963) entered the Hit Parade.
His 2006 duets CD ''Last Man Standing'' has sold over half a million worldwide, his biggest selling album ever.
Maybe Ella Mae Morse, maybe Moon Mullican had done it, but not in a way that became the propelling force of the song.
Lewis has a dozen gold records in both rock and country.
In 1962, his son Steve Allen Lewis drowned in a swimming pool accident when he was three, and in 1973, Jerry Lee Lewis, Jr. died at the age of 19 when he overturned the Jeep he was driving.
In an often quoted tribute, Elvis Presley once said that if he could play the piano like Lewis he would quit singing.
In 1976, Lewis was infamously arrested outside Elvis Presley's Graceland home for allegedly intending to shoot him.
As part of his stage act, Lewis pounded the keys with his heel, kicked the piano bench aside and played standing, raking his hands up and down the keyboard for dramatic effect, sat on the keyboard and even stood on top of the instrument.
On October 29, 2009, Lewis opened the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 25th Anniversary concert at Madison Square Garden in New York.
A year later, in 1990, Lewis made minor news when a new song he co-wrote called "It Was the Whiskey Talkin' (Not Me)" was included in the soundtrack to the hit movie ''Dick Tracy''.
He had few friends at the time whom he felt he could trust.
(Brown, Lewis, and his management all insisted that she was 15.)
Lewis has been married seven times: His first marriage, to Dorothy Barton, lasted for 20 months, from February 1952 to October 1953.
One of Smash's first decisions was to record a retread of his Sun hits, ''Golden Hits of Jerry Lee Lewis'', which may have been inspired by the continuing enthusiasm European audiences had shown for Lewis's brand of rock and roll.
Lewis had a recorded argument with Sam Phillips during the recording session for "Great Balls of Fire", a song he initially refused to record because he considered it blasphemous ("How can...How can the devil save souls?
My dad collected George Shearing records, but this was the first time I heard someone beat the shit out of a piano.
Recording executives in Nashville suggested he switch to playing the guitar.
Dick Clark dropped him from his shows.
His album ''Last Man Standing'' is his best selling to date, with over a million copies sold worldwide.
The scandal followed Lewis home to the U.S. and, as a result, he was blacklisted from radio and almost vanished from the music scene.
Fourteen reached the number-1 position.
He had minimal success in the charts following the scandal, and his popularity quickly eroded.
On September 26, 2006, a new album titled ''Last Man Standing'' was released, featuring many of rock and roll's elite as guest stars.
In the meantime he was determined to gain back some of his popularity.
The song is also heard in the movie, playing on a radio.
''The Session'' would be Lewis's highest pop charting album since 1964's ''Golden Hits of Jerry Lee Lewis'', hitting number 37.
On November 5, 2007, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio, honored Lewis with six days of conferences, interviews, a DVD premiere and film clips, dedicated to him and entitled ''The Life And Music of Jerry Lee Lewis''.
Lewis told ''the Pop Chronicles'' that kicking over the bench originally happened by accident, but when it got a favorable response, he kept it in the act.
He had gone from $10,000 a night concerts to $250 a night spots in beer joints and small clubs.
He lived in a rented house in Westminster Road, Foxrock, Dublin and during his time there was sued by the German company Neue Constantin Film Production GmbH for failure to appear at a concert in Munich in 1993.
He traveled to Nashville about 1955, where he played in clubs and attempted to build interest, but was turned down by the Grand Ole Opry, as he had been at the Louisiana Hayride country stage and radio show in Shreveport.
Those records had such a huge effect on me, and they were just so great.
He followed this with "Great Balls of Fire", "Breathless" and "High School Confidential".
His mother enrolled him in Southwest Bible Institute, in Waxahachie, Texas, so that he would be exclusively singing evangelical songs.
I find myself falling short of the glory of God."
As of early 2016, Jerry Lee is still actively performing in concert.
Presley would die at Graceland of a heart attack eight months later.
Pearry Green, then president of the student body, related how during a talent show, Lewis played some "worldly" music.
When Lewis finally took the stage, he broke just about every rule the Opry had.
A DVD entitled ''Last Man Standing Live'', featuring concert footage with many guest artists, was released in March 2007, and the CD achieved Lewis's 10th official gold disk for selling over half-a-million copies in the US alone.
As recounted in a 2015 online ''Rolling Stone'' article by Beville Dunkerly, Lewis opened with his comeback single "Another Place, Another Time" and then announced to the audience, "Let me tell ya something about Jerry Lee Lewis, ladies and gentlemen: I am a rock and rollin', country-and-western, rhythm and blues-singin' ''motherfucker''!"
