Economic growth spurred immigration and a rise in population, which is now (2013) about 100,000.
The island is therefore within the scope of the Treaties to a limited extent, as a European Territory.
However, this is not indicative of each individual resident's purchasing power, and the actual standard of living in Jersey is comparable to that in the United Kingdom outside central London.
The European Commission has confirmed that the Code is not a legal instrument, and therefore is not legally binding, only becoming of limited "political" authority once a unanimous report has been adopted by the Group at the end of the Presidency concerned.
United Kingdom immigration legislation may be extended to Jersey by order in council (subject to exceptions and adaptations) following consultation with Jersey and with Jersey's consent.
Jersey was occupied by Germany from 1 July 1940 until 9 May 1945, when Germany surrendered.
The Code of Conduct Group, at least in theory, keeps most of its documentation and discussion confidential.
West established the first cinema in the Royal Hall in St. Helier, which became known as West's Cinema in 1923 (demolished 1977).
The species is the subject of an ongoing programme to save it from extinction in Jersey via a collaboration between States of Jersey, Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and Jersey Amphibian and Reptile Group (JARG), with support and sponsorship from several other organisations.
Anglicisation of the place names increased apace with the migration of English people to the island.
It is now a state in the United States of America.
Those rights are primary citizenship rights, not a mere freedom.
Jersey is a self-governing parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy, with its own financial, legal and judicial systems, and the power of self-determination.
In 2009 57% of the Island's area was agricultural land (an increase on 2008).
Jersey has one of the lowest voter turnouts internationally, with just 33% of the electorate voting in 2005, putting it well below the 77% European average for that year.
The plateau is cut by valleys running generally north-south.
The highest temperature recorded was 36.0&nbsp;°C (96.8&nbsp;°F) on 9 August 2003, and the lowest temperature recorded was −10.3&nbsp;°C (13.5&nbsp;°F) on 5 January 1894.
Jèrriais nonetheless survives; around 2,600 islanders (three percent) are reckoned to be habitual speakers, and some 10,000 (12 percent) in all claim some knowledge of the language, particularly amongst the elderly in rural parishes.
Proposals for Jersey independence continue to be discussed outside the States.
''Andium'', ''Agna'' and ''Augia'' were used in antiquity.
EU rules on freedom of movement for workers do not apply in Jersey.
In recognition for help given to him during his exile in Jersey in the 1640s, Charles II gave George Carteret, bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies in between the Hudson and Delaware rivers, which he promptly named New Jersey.
Jersey and Guernsey jointly opened an office in Brussels in 2010 to promote their common interests with European Union institutions.
Censuses have been undertaken in Jersey since 1821.
Many place names are in Jèrriais, and French and English place names are also to be found.
The name ''Caesarea'' has been used as the Latin name for Jersey (also in its French version ''Césarée'') since William Camden's ''Britannia'', and is used in titles of associations and institutions today.
After decline and near-disappearance in the late 20th century, apple production is being increased and promoted.
Under Protocol 3, Jersey is part of the European Union Customs Union of the European Community.
It also houses the Consulate of France.
Queen Elizabeth II reigns in Jersey as Queen of the United Kingdom and her other Realms and Territories; the dukedom of Normandy was surrendered to France by the Treaty of Paris in 1259.
Printing arrived in Jersey only in the 1780s, but the island supported a multitude of regular publications in French (and Jèrriais) and English throughout the 19th century, in which poetry, most usually topical and satirical, flourished (see Jèrriais literature).The first Jèrriais book to be published was ''Rimes et Poésies Jersiaises de divers auteurs réunies et mises en ordre'', edited by Abraham Mourant in 1865.
The hoard may be worth up to £10 M. People had been searching for this treasure for 30 years.
The island is recognised as one of the leading offshore financial centres.
Each minister may appoint up to two assistant ministers.
The herd total in 2009 was 5,090 animals.
Although Jersey does not have VAT, the States of Jersey introduced a goods and services tax (GST) on 6 May 2008, at a standard rate of 3%.
From the 1960s Portuguese workers arrived, mostly working initially in seasonal industries in agriculture and tourism.
The common customs tariff, levies and other agricultural import measures apply to trade between the island and non-Member States.
The Royal Channel Island Yacht Club is based in Jersey.
The 2011 festival was held in Howard Davis Park, St Saviour, on the 13–19 August 2011.
All border on the sea.
The motto around the milled edge of Jersey pound coins is '''' (''Island of Jersey'').
In the aftermath of 1848, Polish, Russian, Hungarian, Italian and French political refugees came to Jersey.
A round-island swim is a major challenge that a select number of swimmers have achieved.
Other festivals include ''La Fête dé Noué''  (Christmas festival), ''La Faîs'sie d'Cidre'' (cidermaking festival), the Battle of Britain air display, Jersey Live Music Festival, Branchage Film Festival, food festivals, and parish events.
The Connétable is the head of each parish, elected at a public election for a four-year term to run the parish and to represent the municipality in the Assembly of the States of Jersey.
Other production of alcohol drinks includes wine,  and in 2013 the first commercial vodkas made from Jersey Royal potatoes were marketed.
Most of the surviving traditional songs are in French, with a minority in Jèrriais.
Jersey is a member of the British-Irish Council, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie.
Jersey Reds compete in the English rugby union system; after four promotions in five seasons, the last three of which were consecutive, they competed in the second-level RFU Championship in 2012–13.
The Jersey cricket team competed in the World Division 4, held in Tanzania in October 2008, after recently finishing as runners-up and therefore being promoted from the World Division 5 held in Jersey.
In October 2012, the Council of Ministers issued a "Common policy for external relations" that noted "that it is not Government policy to seek independence from the United Kingdom, but rather to ensure that Jersey is prepared if it were in the best interests of islanders to do so".
However, the island's close proximity (135&nbsp;km south) and its close association with the financial sector of the U.K. has come under increasing scrutiny in recent years, with several mainline publications (e.g., ''The Wall Street Journal'') labelling the island a tax haven.
Formerly, the senior Centenier of each parish (entitled the ''Chef de Police'') deputised for the Connétable in the States of Jersey when the Connétable was unable to attend a sitting of the States.
The States of Jersey provides education through state schools (including a fee-paying option at secondary level) and also supports private schools.
The Jersey curriculum generally follows that of England.
It is the largest and southernmost of the Channel Islands, with a maximum land elevation of 143&nbsp;m (469&nbsp;ft) above sea level at WA 57795 06708 (current UTM30 grid).
In the countryside, Methodism found its traditional stronghold.
The Queen's representative and adviser in the island is the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey.
Four species of small mammal are considered native: the wood mouse (''Apodemus sylvaticus''), the Jersey bank vole (''Myodes glareolus caesarius''), the Lesser white-toothed shrew (''Crocidura suaveolens'') and the French shrew (''Sorex coronatus'').
Until the 1960s, the population had been relatively stable for decades at around 60,000 (excluding the Occupation years).
'''Jersey''' (, ; Jèrriais: ''Jèrri'' ʒɛri), officially the '''Bailiwick of Jersey''' (; Jèrriais: ''Bailliage dé Jèrri''), is a Crown dependency of the United Kingdom, ruled by the Crown in right of Jersey, off the coast of Normandy, France.
''(See Channel Island milk)'' However, there is no indigenous tradition of cheese making, contrary to the custom of mainland Normandy, but some cheese is produced commercially.
The Open University supports students in Jersey (but they pay higher fees than UK students).
This competition law was based on that of other jurisdictions.
Jersey is an associate member of the International Cricket Council (ICC).
In 2005, the States of Jersey announced limits on licences granted to non-resident companies trading in this way.
The government is a Council of Ministers, consisting of a Chief Minister and nine ministers.
Jersey was invaded by Vikings in the 9th century.
Swimming in the sea, windsurfing and other marine sports are practised.
Jersey wants to become a full member of the Commonwealth in its own right.
The rate was amended to 5% on 1 June 2011.
Jersey is an island measuring 118.2 square kilometres  (66,436 vergée &nbsp;/ 44.87&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi), including reclaimed land and intertidal zone.
In the 21st century, diversification of agriculture and amendments in planning strategy have led to farm shops replacing many of the roadside stalls.
The Odeon Cinema was opened 2 June 1952 and, was later rebranded in the early 21st century as the Forum cinema.
Jersey currency is not legal tender outside Jersey: However, in the United Kingdom it is ''acceptable tender'' and can be surrendered at banks within that country in exchange for Bank of England-issued currency on a like-for-like basis.
The SS ''Vega'' was sent to the island carrying Red Cross supplies and news of the success of the Allied advance in Europe.
The French blacklisting of the island had to be hastily revoked when this was pointed out.
Besides cider, apple brandy is produced.
Tourism supports not only hotels, but also retail and services: in 2009 there were 685,200 visitors spending £230 million.
Centeniers are elected at a public election within each parish for a term of three years to undertake policing within the parish.
However, it is not yet clear whether the citizenship rights in articles 18 and 21 TFEU are partly available to them as British Citizens, given the limited restriction of their rights under article 2 of the Protocol.
''Bourdélots'' are apple dumplings, but the most typical speciality is black butter (''lé nièr beurre''), a dark spicy spread prepared from apples, cider and spices.
First held in 2008, the Branchage Jersey International Film Festival attracts filmmakers from all over the world.
There have been efforts to revive Jèrriais in schools, and the highest number of declared Jèrriais speakers is in the capital.
In the Treaty of Paris (1259), the English king formally surrendered his claim to the duchy and ducal title, and since then the islands have been internally self-governing territories of the English crown and latterly the British crown.
The Jersey Football Association supervises football in Jersey.
The Channel Islands are mentioned in the Antonine Itinerary as the following: ''Sarnia'', ''Caesarea'', ''Barsa'', ''Silia'' and ''Andium'', but Jersey cannot be identified specifically because none corresponds directly to the present names.
Jersey Royal potatoes are the local variety of new potato, and the island is famous for its early crop of Chats (small potatoes) from the south-facing côtils (steeply sloping fields).
Jersey has adopted the 112 emergency number alongside its existing 999 emergency number.
Jersey has one un-roofed skateboarding park.
The Jersey Film Society was founded on 11 December 1947 at the Café Bleu, West's Cinema.
In contemporary music, Nerina Pallot has enjoyed international success.
Jersey was a centre of Neolithic activity, as demonstrated by the concentration of dolmens.
In Pereira, the ECJ held that the scope of this article included any matter governed by the Treaties in a territory where the Treaties are fully applicable.
and medlar (''Mespilus germanica'').
It might not need a Treaty change to perfect this, merely a preliminary ruling from the CJEU, and supplementary implementation measures from the Council, given the effective right of entrance and residence granted to EU nationals via Article 4 of the Protocol.
The Jersey cricket team plays in the Inter-insular match among others.
During the Second World War, some citizens were evacuated to the UK but most remained.
The impact of the Atlantic Ocean and coastal winds ensure that Jersey is slightly cooler than the southern and central parts of England during the summer months.
Among other traditional dishes are cabbage loaf, Jersey wonders (''les mèrvelles''), fliottes, bean crock (''les pais au fou''), nettle (''ortchie'') soup, vraic buns.
Channel Islands Live is a local digital television channel will operate in January 2016.
The established church is the Church of England, from 2015 under the See of Canterbury (previously under the Winchester diocese).
Pound coins are issued, but are much less widely used than pound notes.
Fisheries and aquaculture make use of Jersey's marine resources to a total value of over £6 million in 2009.
The programme includes captive breeding and release, public awareness and habitat restoration activities.
Gross national income in 2009 was £3.7 billion (approximately £40,000 per head of population).
Jersey is the only place in the British Isles where the agile frog ''Rana dalmatina'' is found.
Although GST is at 5%, shopping in Jersey is still far more expensive than in the UK.
Jersey is the home of Durrell Wildlife Park (formerly known as the Jersey Zoological Park) founded by the naturalist, zookeeper and author Gerald Durrell.
To infer, as the French Ambassador and finance minister have attempted to argue, namely that the island is outside the European Union and Communities without qualification is therefore simplistic, in law false.
Thanks to specialisation in a few high-return sectors, at purchasing power parity Jersey has high economic output per capita, substantially ahead of all of the world's large developed economies.
Jersey Swimming Club have organised an annual swim from Elizabeth Castle to Saint Helier Harbour for over 50 years.
It also provides teaching for students enrolled on the University of London LLB degree programme, via the International Programmes.
Each parish elects its own force of Honorary Police consisting of ''Centeniers'', ''Vingteniers'' and Constable's Officers.
Jersey maintains its own immigration and border controls.
During this time the Germans constructed many fortifications using Soviet slave labour.
Administratively, Jersey is divided into twelve parishes.
Snow falls rarely in Jersey; some years will pass with no snow fall at all.
The parishes of Jersey are further divided into ''vingtaines'' (or, in St. Ouen, ''cueillettes''), divisions that are historic.
Apples historically were an important crop.
Jersey cattle are a small breed of cow widely known for its rich milk and cream; although the quality of its meat is also appreciated on a small scale.
On 7 October 1406, 1,000 French men at arms led by Pero Nino  invaded Jersey, landing at St Aubin’s Bay and defeated the 3,000 defenders but failed to capture the island.
In July 2009, a Channel Islands Tunnel was proposed to connect Jersey with Lower Normandy.
A Catholic order of Sisters has a presence in school life.
The Centenier is the only officer authorised to charge and bail offenders.
Jersey milk being very rich, cream and butter have played a large part in insular cooking.
The Bailiff is head of the judiciary; the Bailiff and the Deputy Bailiff are appointed by the Crown.
The principal court is the Royal Court, with appeals to the Jersey Court of Appeal and, ultimately, to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
The Commission have confirmed in a written reply to the European Parliament in 2003 that Jersey is within the Union as a European Territory for whose external relationships the United Kingdom is responsible.
The terrain consists of a plateau sloping from long sandy bays in the south to rugged cliffs in the north.
In the late 16th century, islanders travelled across the North Atlantic to participate in the Newfoundland fisheries.
In 2012 the same two men had found 60 Iron Age coins in the same area.
Jersey is ranked as a tax haven by many organisations with the Financial Secrecy Index ranking Jersey as 16th, one rank behind the United Kingdom .
Among notable introduced species, the cabbage palm (''Cordyline australis'') has been planted in coastal areas and may be seen in many gardens.
The ending ''-ey'' denotes an island (as in Guernsey or Surtsey).
The following table contains the official Met Office station averages for 1981-2010 for Jersey, being located  from St. Helier.
Some government functions are carried out in the island's twelve parishes.
As a result, Jersey is not part of the single market in financial services.
In June 2012 it was announced what could be Europe's largest hoard of Iron Age coins had been found in Grouville by two persons using metal detectors.
The Parish Assembly is the decision-making body of local government in each parish; it consists of all entitled voters of the parish.
Although Jersey citizens are full British citizens, an endorsement restricting the right of establishment in European Union states other than the UK is placed in the passports of British citizens connected solely with the Channel Islands and Isle of Man.
By comparison, higher temperatures are found in mainland United Kingdom, which achieved 38.5&nbsp;°C (101.3&nbsp;°F) in Faversham, Kent on 10 August 2003.
This is a result of the manner of implementation of the Treaty arrangements under the Act of Accession in 1972.
Trade laid the foundations of prosperity, aided by neutrality between England and France.
It does, however, have a relationship with the EU governed by article 335(5)(c) TFEU giving effect to Protocol 3 to the UK’s Treaty of Accession in 1972.
There is free movement of goods and trade between the island and Member States.
The youth cricket teams have been promoted to play in the European Division 1 alongside Ireland, Scotland, Denmark, the Netherlands and Guernsey.
However, Article 4 of the Protocol requires the island's authorities to give the same treatment to all natural and legal persons of the Communities.
without change to existing international law.
The Jersey way of life involved agriculture, milling, fishing, shipbuilding and production of woollen goods.
He is a point of contact between Jersey ministers and the United Kingdom government and carries out executive functions in relation to immigration control, deportation, naturalisation and the issue of passports.
Historically the island has given its name to a variety of overly-large cabbage, the Jersey cabbage, also known as Jersey kale or cow cabbage.
As one of the Crown dependencies, Jersey is autonomous and self-governing, with its own independent legal, administrative and fiscal systems.
The traditional folk music of Jersey was common in country areas until the mid-20th century.
Jersey would have been fully within the European Communities like Gibraltar, being a European territory for whose external relations the United Kingdom was responsible, but that that is limited to the Protocol 3 arrangements under article 355 TFEU to reflect the then existing relationship with the United Kingdom.
A Procureur du Bien Public is elected for three years as a public trustee for the funds and property of the parish and may contract when authorised by a Parish Assembly.
Food is not exempt, unlike with VAT.
The Procureur du Bien Public (two in each parish) is the legal and financial representative of the parish (elected at a public election since 2003 in accordance with the ''Public Elections (Amendment) (Jersey) Law 2003''; formerly an Assembly of Electors of each parish elected the Procureurs in accordance with the ''Loi (1804) au sujet des assemblées paroissiales'').
Since September 2011, the incumbent Lieutenant Governor has been General Sir John McColl.
In 933 it was annexed to the future Duchy of Normandy, together with the other Channel Islands, Cotentin and Avranchin, by William Longsword, count of Rouen and it became one of the Norman Islands.
There are also five non-voting members appointed by the Crown: the Bailiff, the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey, the Dean of Jersey, the Attorney General and Solicitor General.
Jersey's unicameral legislature is the Assembly of the States of Jersey.
By the end of the 19th century, well-to-do British families, attracted by the lack of income tax, were settling in Jersey in increasing numbers, establishing St Helier as a predominantly English-speaking town.
Originally grown using vraic as a natural fertiliser giving them their own individual taste, only a small portion of those grown in the island still use this method.
The growth of tourism attracted staff from the United Kingdom.
The Jersey Football Combination has 9 teams in its top division.
British citizens who have only a connection to Jersey, and not with the United Kingdom or another member state of the European Union, are not considered by the Jersey States to be European Union citizens.
In particular students can study at Highlands for the two-year Foundation Degree in Financial Services and for BSc Social Sciences, both validated by the University of Plymouth.
Rugby union in Jersey comes under the auspices of the Jersey Rugby Association (JRA), which is a member of the Rugby Football Union of England.
Jersey is not subject to European Union fiscal legislation and its Zero-Ten legislation will be compliant with the Code of Conduct in business taxation as from the removal of the deemed distribution and attribution anti-avoidance legislation as of 31 December 2011, which was apparently criticised by certain unnamed members of the Code of Conduct Group, a subsidiary body of ECOFIN.
Japanese Knotweed ''Fallopia japonica'' is an invasive species that threatens Jersey's biodiversity.
Cider used to be an important export.
Both commanders were slain.
Additional archaeological evidence of Roman influence has been found, in particular at Les Landes, the coastal headland site at Le Pinacle, where remains of a primitive structure are attributed to Gallo-Roman temple worship (''fanum'').
There were about thirty casualties on each side, and 600 French prisoners were taken.
The levying of ''impôts'' (duties) different from those of the United Kingdom was granted by Charles II and remained in the hands of the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and Jurats until 1921 when that body's tax raising powers were transferred to the Assembly of the States, leaving the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and Jurats to serve simply as licensing bench for the sale of alcohol (this fiscal reform also stripped the Lieutenant-Governor of most of his effective remaining administrative functions).
In July 2014, the Jersey Financial Services Commission approved the establishment of the world's first regulated Bitcoin fund, at a time when the digital currency was being accepted by some local businesses.
There are two Catholic private secondary schools: De La Salle College in Saint Saviour is an all-boys school, and Beaulieu Convent School in Saint Helier is an all-girls school; and FCJ primary school in St. Saviour.
Scholars variously surmise that ''Jersey'' and ''Jèrri'' derive from ''jarð'' (Old Norse for "earth") or ''jarl'' (earl), or perhaps a personal name, ''Geirr'' ("Geirr's Island").
Following liberation in 1945, agricultural workers were mostly recruited from the United Kingdom – the demands of reconstruction in mainland Normandy and Brittany employed domestic labour.
Until the 19th century, indigenous Jèrriais – a variety of Norman – was the language of the island, though French was used for official business.
The Dukes of Normandy owned considerable estates in the island, and Norman families living on their estates established many of the historical Norman-French Jersey family names.
The freedom of movement under the prior EC régime was and remains a separate set of rights from the Citizen rights under article 20 and 21 TFEU which include the right to move and reside.
There is one facility for extreme sports and some facilities for youth sports.
The Income Tax Law of 1928 introducing income tax was the first law drafted entirely in English.
player (Channel Islands Open Division).
A similar office, the ''Maison de Normandie'' in St. Helier, represents the ''Conseil général'' of Manche and the ''Regional Council'' of Normandy.
Writers born in Jersey include Elinor Glyn, John Lemprière, Philippe Le Sueur Mourant, Robert Pipon Marett and Augustus Asplet Le Gros.
Crick, a bachelor, is also one of the 'top 20 catches in the island' as verified in a recent poll.
They also competed in the European Division 2, held in Guernsey during August 2008.
Although the Bailiwicks of Jersey and Guernsey are often referred to collectively as the Channel Islands, the "Channel Islands" are not a constitutional or political unit.
La Cotte de St Brelade is a Palaeolithic site inhabited before rising sea levels transformed Jersey into an island.
The Battle of Jersey lasted about half an hour, with 9,000 men defending the island.
Jersey has only one newspaper, the ''Jersey Evening Post'', which is printed six days a week, and has been in publication since 1890.
Jersey maintains the ''Bureau des Iles Anglo-Normandes'' in Caen, France, a permanent non-diplomatic representation.
That restriction on the exercise of certain freedoms does not apply to all Community or Union rights.
Jersey national football team plays in the annual Muratti competition among others.
19th century improvements in transport links brought tourism to the island.
The question of an independent Jersey has been discussed from time to time in the Assembly of the States of Jersey.
