For approximately a year, before it was permanently switched to the Kaaba in Mecca, the ''qibla'' (direction of prayer) for Muslims was Jerusalem.
Jerusalem has traditionally had a low-rise skyline.
The war led to displacement of Arab and Jewish populations in the city.
Many main streets in Jerusalem were not built to accommodate such a large volume of traffic, leading to traffic congestion and more carbon monoxide released into the air.
With the annexation of Jerusalem by Muhammad Ali of Egypt in 1831, foreign missions and consulates began to establish a foothold in the city.
In 1187, the city was wrested from the Crusaders by Saladin who permitted Jews and Muslims to return and settle in the city.
The administrative inclusion of several outlying towns and villages after 1967, which are not fully and organically included in the social, economic, and political fabric of Jerusalem proper, creates confusion regarding any definition of the city of Jerusalem.
Of the Jewish population, 200,000 live in East Jerusalem settlements which are considered illegal under international law.
Other early Hebrew sources, early Christian renderings of the verse and ''targumim'', however, put Salem in Northern Israel near Shechem (or Sichem), now Nablus, a city of some importance in early sacred Hebrew writing.
The two most popular sports are football (soccer) and basketball.
The national cemetery of Israel is located at the city's western edge, near the Jerusalem Forest on Mount Herzl.
The archaeologists describe the discovery as the oldest of its kind in the region.
Sometime soon after 485 BCE Jerusalem was besieged, conquered and largely destroyed by a coalition of neighbouring states.
When the Muslims went to ''Bayt Al-Maqdes'' for the first time, they searched for the site of the Al-Aqsa Mosque ("The Farthest Mosque") that was mentioned in Quran and Hadith according to Islamic beliefs.
Israeli authorities neglected to protect the tombs in the Muslim Mamilla Cemetery in West Jerusalem, which contains the remains of figures from the early Islamic period, facilitating the creation of a parking lot and public lavatories in 1964.
President Mahmoud Abbas has said that any agreement that did not include East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine would be unacceptable.
The western extension of Mount Herzl is the Mount of Remembrance, where the main Holocaust museum of Israel is located.
Arab residents of Jerusalem who choose not to have Israeli citizenship are granted an Israeli identity card that allows them to pass through checkpoints with relative ease and to travel throughout Israel, making it easier to find work.
Under the Ayyubid dynasty of Saladin, a period of huge investment began in the construction of houses, markets, public baths, and pilgrim hostels as well as the establishment of religious endowments.
Palestinians regard Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine, and the city's borders have been the subject of bilateral talks.
Today those walls define the Old City, which has been traditionally divided into four quarters—known since the early 19th century as the Armenian, Christian, Jewish, and Muslim Quarters.
Jordan formally annexed East Jerusalem in 1950, subjecting it to Jordanian law, and in 1953 declared it the "second capital" of Jordan.
A planned World Kabbalah Center is to be located on the nearby promenade, overlooking the Old City.
The government, centered in Jerusalem, generates a large number of jobs, and offers subsidies and incentives for new business initiatives and start-ups.
On 18 April 1968, an expropriation order by the Israeli Ministry of Finance more than doubled the size of the Jewish Quarter, evicting its Arab residents and seizing over 700 buildings of which 105 belonged to Jewish inhabitants prior to the Jordanian occupation of the city.
The Jerusalem College of Technology, founded in 1969, combines training in engineering and other high-tech industries with a Jewish studies program.
Today, this valley is hidden by debris that has accumulated over the centuries.
Within the city council, religious political parties form an especially powerful faction, accounting for the majority of its seats.
In 1966 the Jordanian authorities relocated 500 of them to the Shua'fat refugee camp as part of plans to turn the Jewish quarter into a public park.
The unemployment rate in Jerusalem (8.3%) is slightly better than the national average (9.0%), although the civilian labor force accounted for less than half of all persons fifteen years or older—lower in comparison to that of Tel Aviv (58.0%) and Haifa (52.4%).
The Aramaic Apocryphon of Genesis of the Dead Sea Scrolls  (1QapGen 22:13) equates Jerusalem with the earlier "Salem" (שלם), said to be the kingdom of Melchizedek in Genesis 14:18.
The Jewish population grew by 155%, while the Arab population grew by 314%.
Arabs in Jerusalem can send their children to Israeli-run schools, although not every neighborhood has one, and universities.
The law prioritized construction throughout the city, and offered grants and tax benefits to residents to make housing, infrastructure, education, employment, business, tourism, and cultural events more affordable.
Schools in Ras el-Amud and Umm Lison opened in 2008.
While the international community regards East Jerusalem, including the entire ''Old City'', as part of the occupied Palestinian territories, neither part, West or East Jerusalem, is recognized as part of the territory of Israel or the State of Palestine.
Member states were called upon to withdraw their diplomatic representation from Jerusalem.
The Dead Sea scrolls, discovered in the mid-20th century in the Qumran Caves near the Dead Sea, are housed in the Museum's Shrine of the Book.
This spreads to any related issue, such as defining the age of the city.
While Israel approves and financially supports some Arab cultural activities, Arab Capital of Culture events were banned because they were sponsored by the Palestine National Authority.
The Old City became a World Heritage Site in 1981, and is on the List of World Heritage in Danger.
and Muhammad made his Night Journey there ten years later, ascending to heaven where he speaks to God, according to the Quran.
The Abraham Fund and the Jerusalem Intercultural Center (JICC) promote joint Jewish-Palestinian cultural projects.
Communications Minister Moshe Kahlon said that the bill sent "a clear, unequivocal political message that Jerusalem will not be divided", and that "all those within the Palestinian and international community who expect the current Israeli government to accept any demands regarding Israel's sovereignty over its capital are mistaken and misleading".
Jerusalem resumed its role as capital of Judah and center of Jewish worship.
Contemporary Arabic and Hebrew sources say the site was full of rubbish, and that Arabs and Jews cleaned it.
Israeli doctors and highly regarded hospitals such as Hadassah Medical Center are available to residents.
Other institutions of higher learning in Jerusalem are the Jerusalem Academy of Music and Dance and Bezalel Academy of Art and Design, whose buildings are located on the campuses of the Hebrew University.
One of the proposed towers along King George Street, the Migdal Merkaz HaYekum, is planned as a 65-story building, which would make it one of the tallest buildings in Israel.
The full 42-kilometer race begins at the Knesset, passes through Mount Scopus and the Old City's Armenian Quarter, and concludes at Sacher Park.
In recent years, private Jewish foundations have received permission from the government to develop projects on disputed lands, such as the City of David archaeological park in the 60% Arab neighborhood of Silwan (adjacent to the Old City), and the Museum of Tolerance on Mamilla Cemetery (adjacent to Zion Square).
In May 2012, it was reported that the Jewish birthrate had overtaken the Arab birthrate.
The Ticho House in downtown Jerusalem houses the paintings of Anna Ticho and the Judaica collections of her husband, an ophthalmologist who opened Jerusalem's first eye clinic in this building in 1912.
Currently, the city's birthrate stands about 4.2 children per Jewish family and 3.9 children per Arab family.
Some scholars argue that the view that Pakistan recognized Jordan's annexation is dubious.
The Gospel of John describes it as being located outside Jerusalem, but recent archaeological evidence suggests Golgotha is a short distance from the Old City walls, within the present-day confines of the city.
According to the Gaullic bishop Arculf, who lived in Jerusalem from 679 to 688, the Mosque of Umar was a rectangular wooden structure built over ruins which could accommodate 3,000 worshipers.
Jerusalem reached a peak in size and population at the end of the Second Temple Period, when the city covered  and had a population of 200,000.
The building reopened in 1992 as a Palestinian guesthouse.
However, it has stated that it would be willing to consider alternative solutions, such as making Jerusalem an open city.
Some government buildings are located in Kiryat Menachem Begin.
Solomon's Temple (later known as the ''First Temple''), went on to play a pivotal role in Jewish religion as the repository of the Ark of the Covenant.
In addition, increasing numbers of Jewish immigrants chose to settle in Jerusalem.
In 1881 the Diskin Orphanage was founded in Jerusalem with the arrival of Jewish children orphaned by a Russian pogrom.
While Muslim holy sites were maintained and renovated, contrary to the terms of the armistice agreement, Jews were denied access to Jewish holy sites, many of which were destroyed or desecrated.
The name thus offered itself to etymologizations such as "The City of Peace", "Abode of Peace", "dwelling of peace" ("founded in safety"), alternately "Vision of Peace" in some Christian authors.
These foundational events, straddling the dawn of the 1st millennium BCE, assumed central symbolic importance for the Jewish people.
In 2008, Jewish British philanthropists donated $3 million for the construction of schools for Arabs in East Jerusalem.
Unlike public schools, many Haredi schools do not prepare students to take standardized tests.
According to a World Bank report, the number of recorded building violations between 1996 and 2000 was four and half times higher in Jewish neighborhoods but four times fewer demolition orders were issued in West Jerusalem than in East Jerusalem; Arabs in Jerusalem were less likely to receive construction permits than Jews, and "the authorities are much more likely to take action against Palestinian violators" than Jewish violators of the permit process.
A team of experts assembled by the then Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak in 2000 concluded that the city must be divided, since Israel had failed to achieve any of its national aims there.
Demographics and the Jewish-Arab population divide play a major role in the dispute over Jerusalem.
Opinion is divided over whether a Large Stone Structure and a nearby Stepped Stone Structure may be identified with King David's palace, or dates to a later period.
The headquarters of the Jerusalem Municipality and the mayor's office are at Safra Square (''Kikar Safra'') on Jaffa Road.
Neighboring cities and towns include Bethlehem and Beit Jala to the south, Abu Dis and Ma'ale Adumim to the east, Mevaseret Zion to the west, and Ramallah and Giv'at Ze'ev to the north.
Palestinians are attracted to the access to jobs, healthcare, social security, other benefits, and quality of life Israel provides to Jerusalem residents.
Israel captured East Jerusalem from Jordan during the 1967 Six-Day War and subsequently annexed it into Jerusalem, together with additional surrounding territory.
The average size of Jerusalem's 180,000 households is 3.8 people.
However, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said in 2014 that "Jerusalem will never be divided".
Among Muslims of Islam's earliest era it was referred to as ''Madinat bayt al-Maqdis'' ("City of the Temple") which was restricted to the Temple Mount.
As a result, despite having an area of only ,
In 1967, Jews accounted for 74 percent of the population, while the figure for 2006 is down nine percent.
Numerous religious educational institutions and ''Yeshivot'', including some of the most prestigious yeshivas, among them the Brisk, Chevron, Midrash Shmuel and Mir, are based in the city, with the Mir Yeshiva claiming to be the largest.
See  ''2003 Amended Basic Law'', retrieved 02-06-2013;  Arafat Signs Law Making Jerusalem Palestinian Capital, People's Daily, published 6 October 2002;  Arafat names Jerusalem as capital, BBC News, published 6 October 2002.
On Solomon's death, ten of the northern Tribes of Israel broke with the United Monarchy to form their own nation, with its kings, prophets, priests, traditions relating to religion, capitals and temples in northern Israel.
38,000 graves in the Jewish Cemetery were destroyed, and Jews were forbidden from being buried there.
The study also found that about nine percent of the Old City's 32,488 people were Jews.
The percentage of secular Jews, or those who 'wear their faith lightly' is dropping, with some 20,000 leaving the city over the past seven years (2012).
After 13 years, the direction of prayer was changed to Mecca.
In the last few years, thousands of Palestinians have moved to previously fully Jewish neighborhoods of East Jerusalem, built after the 1967 Six-Day War.
It is served by Egged Bus Cooperative, which is the second-largest bus company in the world, The Dan serves the Bnei Brak-Jerusalem route along with Egged, and Superbus serves the routes between Jerusalem, Modi'in Illit, and Modi'in-Maccabim-Re'ut.
the south-eastern hill at whose foot the Gihon Spring gushes forth.
The International Convention Center (''Binyanei HaUma'') near the entrance to city houses the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra.
Under the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1947, Jerusalem was envisaged to become a corpus separatum administered by the United Nations.
In 2008, the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics reported the number of Palestinians living in East Jerusalem was 208,000 according to a recently completed census.
Many Jewish tombs from the Second Temple period have been rediscovered in Jerusalem.
Beitar has won the top league six times, while Hapoel has never succeeded.
Israel has not incorporated Abu Dis within its security wall around Jerusalem.
Today, the status of Jerusalem remains one of the core issues in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.
The Israel Broadcasting Authority's main office is located in Jerusalem, as well as the TV and radio studios for Israel Radio, Channel 2, Channel 10, and part of the radio studios of BBC News.
:'''City of David and Jerusalem proper'''
In 2011, Jerusalem had a population of 801,000, of which Jews comprised 497,000 (62%), Muslims 281,000 (35%), Christians 14,000 (around 2%) and 9,000 (1%) were not classified by religion.
The English reference book ''Modern history or the present state of all nations'', written in 1744, stated that "Jerusalem is still reckoned the capital city of Palestine, though much fallen from its ancient grandeaur".
Only the United Kingdom and Pakistan formally recognized such annexation, which, in regard to Jerusalem, was on a ''de facto'' basis.
In the ancient cuneiform, Jerusalem was called ''"Urusalima"'', meaning "City of Peace", during the early Canaanite period (approximately 2400 BCE).
Today it is both the central library of the university and the national library of Israel.
The Umayyad caliph Abd al-Malik commissioned the construction of the Dome of the Rock in the late 7th century.
In 1967, despite Israeli pleas that Jordan remain neutral during the Six-Day War, Jordan, which had concluded a defense agreement with Egypt on May 30, 1967, attacked Israeli-held West Jerusalem on the war's second day.
The 10th-century historian al-Muqaddasi writes that Abd al-Malik built the shrine in order to compete in grandeur with Jerusalem's monumental churches.
The library opened in 1892, over three decades before the university was established, and is one of the world's largest repositories of books on Jewish subjects.
Jerusalem enjoyed a prosperous period of renewal and peace under Suleiman the Magnificent – including the rebuilding of magnificent walls around the Old City.
Areas of discord have included whether the Palestinian flag can be raised over areas of Palestinian custodianship and the specificity of Israeli and Palestinian territorial borders.
The choice was perhaps dictated by the fact that Jerusalem did not form part of Israel's tribal system, and was thus suited to serve as the centre of its federation.
Work under these concessions had not begun and, by the end of the war the British occupying forces refused to recognize their validity.
The Jerusalem Marathon, established in 2011, is an international marathon race held annually in Jerusalem in the month of March.
The 1,500 residents of the Jewish Quarter of the Old City were expelled and a few hundred taken prisoner when the Arab Legion captured the quarter on 28 May.
It houses an estimated 100,000 books and articles.
Roman rule was again challenged during the Bar Kokhba revolt, beginning in 132 CE and suppressed by the Romans in 135 CE.
Jerusalem is served by Ben Gurion Airport, some 50&nbsp;km northwest of the Jerusalem, on the route to Tel Aviv.
The Israeli government has approved building plans in the Muslim Quarter of the Old City in order to expand the Jewish presence in East Jerusalem, while some Islamic leaders have made claims that Jews have no historical connection to Jerusalem, alleging that the 2,500-year-old Western Wall was constructed as part of a mosque.
The college gives Master of Arts in Teaching degrees.
Military skirmishes frequently threatened the ceasefire.
One of the university's major assets is the Jewish National and University Library, which houses over five million books.
In 2005, 2,850 new immigrants settled in Jerusalem, mostly from the United States, France and the former Soviet Union.
Local newspapers include Kol Ha'Ir and The Jerusalem Times.
Beitar plays in the more prestigious Ligat HaAl, while Hapoel is in the second division Liga Leumit.
They now number 31% of the population, the same percentage as the rising ultra-orthodox population.
On 2 October 1977, the Israeli cabinet approved the plan, and seven neighborhoods were subsequently built on the city's eastern edges.
to make way for a plaza for those visiting the wall.
The Board of Governors has included such prominent Jewish intellectuals as Albert Einstein and Sigmund Freud.
Shuafat is a historically separate town and since 1967 a neighborhood some 6&nbsp;km north of the City of David area and 5&nbsp;km north of Jerusalem's Old City.
In East Jerusalem, 52% of the land is excluded from development, 35% designated for Jewish settlements, and 13% for Palestinian use, almost all of which is already built on.
The Hebrew University operates three campuses in Jerusalem, on Mount Scopus, on Giv'at Ram and a medical campus at the Hadassah Ein Kerem hospital.
The eastern half of the project was conceptualized decades ago, but reaction to the proposed highway is still mixed.
In 1995, the United States Congress passed the Jerusalem Embassy Act, which required, subject to conditions, that its embassy be moved from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
, out of 150, 100 schoolchildren, 59,900 or 40% are in state-run secular and National Religious schools, while 90,200 or 60% are in Haredi schools.
Jerusalem was declared the Capital of Arab Culture in 2009.
Shuafat's history is distinct of that of its neighbour, Jerusalem, from its prehistoric beginnings through the biblical period, and throughout its later history until 1967.
The north-eastern quarter was repopulated with Eastern Christians from the Transjordan.
The rest of the city "...&nbsp;was called Iliya, reflecting the Roman name given the city following the destruction of
Under the British, new garden suburbs were built in the western and northern parts of the city and institutions of higher learning such as the Hebrew University were founded.
The first verse in the Qur'an's ''Surat al-Isra'' notes the destination of Muhammad's journey as ''al-Aqsa'' (the farthest) mosque, in reference to the location in Jerusalem.
As Rome became stronger, it installed Herod as a Jewish client king.
The Jerusalem Symphony Orchestra, established in the 1940s, has appeared around the world.
Northern Jerusalem's Har Hotzvim industrial park and the Jerusalem Technology Park in south Jerusalem are home to large Research and Development centers of international tech companies, among them Intel, Cisco, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, IBM, Mobileye, Johnson & Johnson, Medtronic and more .
Both sides claim the history of the city has been politicized by the other in order to strengthen their relative claims to the city, and that this is borne out by the different focuses the different writers place on the various events and eras in the city's history.
Another prominent Christian site in Jerusalem is Golgotha, the site of the crucifixion.
Its terminus will be a new underground station ( deep) serving the International Convention Center and the Central Bus Station, and is planned to be extended eventually to Malha station.
The order designated these areas for public use, but they were intended for Jews alone.
Consequently, the total fertility rate in Jerusalem (4.02) is higher than in Tel Aviv (1.98) and well above the national average of 2.90.
The Islamic Museum on the Temple Mount, established in 1923, houses many Islamic artifacts, from tiny kohl flasks and rare manuscripts to giant marble columns.
A poll conducted in June 2013 found that 74% of Israeli Jews reject the idea of a Palestinian capital in any portion of Jerusalem, though 72% of the public regarded it as a divided city.
Whereas Beitar has been Israel State Cup champion seven times, Hapoel has won the Cup only once.
During this period of time many clashes occurred between the Mamluks on one side and the crusaders and the Mongols on the other side.
However, the pronunciation of the last syllable as ''-ayim'' appears to be a late development, which had not yet appeared at the time of the Septuagint.
Prior to the creation of the State of Israel, Jerusalem served as the administrative capital of Mandatory Palestine, which included present-day Israel and Jordan.
Jewish and Christian access to the holy sites inside the old walled city was restored.
Agreements for the supply of water, electricity, and the construction of a tramway system — all under concessions granted by the Ottoman authorities — had been signed by the city of Jerusalem and a Greek citizen by the name of Euripides Mavromatis on 27 January 1914.
The Jerusalem Film Festival is held annually, screening Israeli and international films.
The hadith, the recorded sayings of the Prophet Mohammad, name Jerusalem as the location of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
When the Assyrians conquered the Kingdom of Israel in 722 BCE, Jerusalem was strengthened by a great influx of refugees from the northern kingdom.
The annexation of East Jerusalem was met with international criticism.
Shuafat lies about 6&nbsp;kilometres north of Jerusalem's oldest historical part, the so-called City of David, and about 5&nbsp;kilometres north of the walled Old City.
In contradiction to the Partition Plan, which envisioned a city separated from the Arab state and the Jewish state, Israel conquered the area which later would become West Jerusalem, along with major parts of the Arab territory allotted to the future Arab State; Jordan took control of East Jerusalem, along with the West Bank.
In a phenomenon seen rarely around the world, the percentage of Jewish men who work, 47%, is exceeded by the percentage of Jewish women who work, 50%.
In the Siege of Jerusalem of 614, after 21 days of relentless siege warfare, Jerusalem was captured.
Synagogues around the world are traditionally built with the Holy Ark facing Jerusalem, and Arks within Jerusalem face the Holy of Holies.
Route 60 runs through the center of the city near the Green Line between East and West Jerusalem.
Jordan allowed Arab Palestinian refugees from the war to settle in the vacated Jewish Quarter, which became known as ''Harat al-Sharaf''.
The ending ''-ayim'' indicates the dual, thus leading to the suggestion that the name ''Yerushalayim'' refers to the fact that the city sits on two hills.
In April 2015, Time Magazine picked Jerusalem as one of the five emerging tech hubs in the world, proclaiming that "The city has become a flourishing center for biomed, cleantech, Internet/mobile startups, accelerators, investors and supporting service providers."
Jerusalem is also home to some non-governmental Israeli institutions of national importance, such as the Hebrew University and the Israel Museum with its Shrine of the Book.
In the November 2008 city elections, Nir Barkat came out as the winner and is now the mayor.
Following the resolution, 22 of the 24 countries that previously had their embassy in (West) Jerusalem relocated them in Tel Aviv, where many embassies already resided prior to Resolution 478.
The Israel Antiquities Authority asserts that the stone houses and artifacts confirm "the existence of a well-established settlement in the Jerusalem area as long ago as the fifth millennium BCE."
Jerusalem is the state broadcasting center of Israel.
According to the Bible, King David reigned for 40 years  and was succeeded by his son Solomon, who built
Once one disregards this distinct history of Shuafat, one can treat the age of Jerusalem as being defined by the oldest archaeological finding in Shuafat, as is being done in this article by stating an age of 7,000 years, not for Shuafat, but for Jerusalem.
He prayed outside the church, where the Mosque of Umar (Omar) stands to this day, opposite the entrance to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
When Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire, Jerusalem and Judea came under Macedonian control, eventually falling to the Ptolemaic dynasty under Ptolemy I.
Israel Railways operates train services to Malha train station from Tel Aviv via Beit Shemesh.
While the ACRI attributes the increase to the lack of employment opportunities, infrastructure and a worsening educational system, Ir Amim blames the legal status of Palestinians in Jerusalem.
Al-Quds University resides southeast of the city proper on a  Abu Dis campus.
The Edward Said National Conservatory of Music sponsors the Palestine Youth Orchestra
The area also suffered from many earthquakes and black plague.
The 2000 Statistical Yearbook of Jerusalem lists 1204 synagogues, 158 churches, and 73 mosques within the city.
In the 1840s and 1850s, the international powers began a tug-of-war in Palestine as they sought to extend their protection over the region's religious minorities, a struggle carried out mainly through consular representatives in Jerusalem.
Although Jerusalem is known primarily for its religious significance, the city is also home to many artistic and cultural venues.
The holiness of Jerusalem in Christianity, conserved in the Septuagint which Christians adopted as their own authority, was reinforced by the New Testament account of Jesus's crucifixion there.
Other orphanages founded in Jerusalem at the beginning of the 20th century were Zion Blumenthal Orphanage (1900) and General Israel Orphan's Home for Girls (1902).
The city was renamed Aelia Capitolina, and rebuilt it in the style of a typical Roman town.
Palestinian officials have encouraged Arabs over the years to stay in the city to maintain their claim.
Mavromatis claimed that his concessions overlapped with the Auja Concession that the government had awarded to Rutenberg in 1921 and that he had been deprived of his legal rights.
In Islamic tradition in 610 CE it became the first qibla, the focal point for Muslim prayer (salat),
Of these, 195,500 (43%) are Jews, (comprising 40% of the Jewish population of Jerusalem as a whole), 260,800 (57%) are Muslim (comprising 98% of the Muslim population of Jerusalem).
From 1949 until 1967, West Jerusalem served as Israel's capital, but was not recognized as such internationally because UN General Assembly Resolution 194 envisaged Jerusalem as an international city.
In 1974 the Jerusalem Cinematheque was founded.
In 1988, Israel ordered the closure of Orient House, home of the Arab Studies Society, but also the headquarters of the Palestine Liberation Organization, for security reasons.
However that may be, later Rabbinic sources also equate Salem with Jerusalem, mainly to link Melchizedek to later Temple traditions.
It was built in 1938 during the British Mandate.
