It is held annually in September during the weekend after Labor Day.
In the case, Daniel Smoote asked for $223.50 from Frank and Jesse James to replace a horse, saddle, and bridle stolen as they fled the robbery of the Daviess County Savings Bank.
The gang absconded with $2,000 cash in the second robbery and took shelter in abandoned cabins on the Kemp Plantation south of St. Joseph, Louisiana.
The robbery was the first of a spree of crimes, including the holdup of the federal paymaster of a canal project in Killen, Alabama, and two more train robberies.
Scholars usually place his actions in the context of regional insurgencies of ex-Confederates following the Civil War rather than a manifestation of alleged economic justice or of frontier lawlessness.
James has often been used as a fictional character in many Western novels, including some published while he was alive.
It remains unclear whether Jesse and Frank took part.
Because the gang received support by many former Confederate soldiers in Missouri, they eluded the Pinkertons.
This is a reference to a short time James supposedly spent near this area.
A bitter conflict ensued, resulting in an escalating cycle of atrocities committed by both sides.
On May 23, 1867, for example, they robbed a bank in Richmond, Missouri, in which they killed the mayor and two others.
James' mother Zerelda Samuel wrote the following epitaph for him: ''In Loving Memory of my Beloved Son, Murdered by a Traitor and Coward Whose Name is not Worthy to Appear Here.''
Frank and Jesse failed to appear in court, however, and Smoote won his case against them.
The Chicago-based agency worked primarily against urban professional criminals, as well as providing industrial security, such as strike breaking.
Children's activities are a mainstay of the festival.
But the new gang did not consist of battle-hardened guerrillas; they soon turned against each other or were captured, while James grew paranoid to the point where he scared away one of his gang, and it is believed by some that he killed another.
None of James's biographers accepted them as plausible.
Some filmmakers portrayed the former outlaw as a revenger, replacing "social with exclusively personal motives."
In addition, the annual Tobacco and Heritage Festival in Russellville features a reenactment of the James-Younger Gang's robbery of the Southern Bank.
This bank was owned by Republican former militia officers who had recently conducted the first Republican Party rally in Clay County's history.
The report, prepared by Anne C. Stone, Ph.D., James E. Starrs, L.L.M., and Mark Stoneking, Ph.D., stated the mtDNA recovered from the remains was consistent with the mtDNA of one of James's relatives in the female line.
The militia soon discovered the Youngers and one other bandit, Charlie Pitts.
The governor pardoned him on October 3, 1902.
The James brothers eventually split from the others and escaped to Missouri.
On July 21, 1873, they turned to train robbery, derailing the Rock Island train in Adair, Iowa, and stealing approximately $3,000 ($51,000 in 2007).
They killed two innocent victims, Heywood and Nicholas Gustafson, a Swedish immigrant from the Millersburg community west of Northfield.
Some had fled the gang in fear of prosecution, and many of the original members were either dead or in prison.
The implication that the chief executive of Missouri conspired to kill a private citizen startled the public and added to James' notoriety.
A law enforcement posse subsequently attacked and killed two of the outlaws but failed to capture the entire gang.
Frank Triplett wrote about James as a "progressive neo-aristocrat" with "purity of race."
Despite popular portrayals of James as an embodiment of Robin Hood, robbing from the rich and giving to the poor, there is no evidence that he and his gang shared their loot from the robberies they committed.
Twins Gould and Montgomery James (b.
They continued in crime for several years, recruiting new members, but were under increasing pressure from law enforcement.
As a result of the James brothers' activities, the Union military authorities made their family leave Clay County.
By 1881, with authorities growing suspicious, the brothers returned to Missouri where they felt safer.
Crowds pressed into the little house in St. Joseph to see the dead bandit.
The raid on the family home outraged many.
The only known civil case involving Frank and Jesse James was filed in the Common Pleas Court of Daviess County in 1870.
According to Robert Ford, it became clear to him that James had realized they were there to betray him.
On June 13, 1866 in Jackson County, Missouri, two jailed members of Quantril's gang were freed by a gang and the jailer killed.
Allowed to vote and hold office again, former Confederates in the legislature voted to limit reward offers that the governor could make for fugitives.
It is believed that the gang burned 14 Rice County mills shortly after the robbery.
Such techniques reinforced the Robin Hood image that Edwards created in his newspapers, but there's no evidence that the James gang shared any of the robbery money outside their circle.
Confederate guerrillas murdered civilian Unionists, executed prisoners, and scalped the dead.
Over time, the letters gradually became more political in tone, denouncing the Republicans and voicing James' pride in his Confederate loyalties.
Already a celebrity when he was alive, James became a legendary figure of the Wild West after his death.
No concrete evidence has surfaced to connect either brother to the crime, or to rule them out.
This extended a measure of protection over the James-Younger gang.
Senators from the state, former Confederate military commander Francis Cockrell and former Confederate Congressman George Graham Vest, were identified with the Confederate cause.
Russellville, Kentucky, the site of the robbery of the Southern Bank in 1868, holds the Jesse James International Arts and Film Festival.
Jesse James would live another three years until his demise in, coincidentally, another St. Joseph, in northwestern Missouri.
Each year a recreational fair, the Jesse James Festival, is held during the third weekend in September.
Shortly afterward, the state militia shot Clement dead, an event James wrote about with bitterness a decade later.
The James brothers became a staple in dime novels of the era, peaking in the 1880s following Jesse's death.
At the end of the Civil War, Missouri was deeply divided.
The governor's quick pardon suggested he knew the brothers intended to kill James rather than capture him.
James had often stayed with their sister Martha Bolton and, according to rumor, he was "smitten" with her.
Aside from slavery, the culture of Little Dixie was Southern in other ways as well.
Jesse James' boyhood home in Kearney, Missouri, is operated as a museum dedicated to the town's most famous resident.
He is known to have returned to Missouri in the spring.
From the newspaper, James had just learned of gang member Dick Liddil's confession for participating in Hite's murder, and grew increasingly suspicious of the Fords for never reporting this matter to him.
Frank seemed to settle down, but Jesse remained restless.
Inside, the outlaws turned to flee.
After they arrived in Clay County, 16-year-old Jesse James joined his brother in Taylor's group.
To carry out the robbery, the gang divided into two groups.
The atmosphere was volatile, with widespread clashes between individuals, and between armed gangs of veterans from both sides of the war.
In the 1880s, after James's death, the James Gang became the subject of dime novels that represented the bandits as pre-industrial models of resistance.
Much of the tension that led up to the Civil War centered on the violence that erupted in Kansas between pro- and anti-slavery militias.
In the summer of 1864, Taylor was severely wounded, losing his right arm to a shotgun blast.
This area of Missouri was settled by many Southerners and became known as Little Dixie.
During his travel to the "Wilde West," Oscar Wilde visited Jesse James' hometown in Missouri.
He was prosperous, acquiring six slaves and more than  of farmland.
Jesse's mother and Reuben Samuel had four children together: Sarah Louisa, John Thomas, Fannie Quantrell, and Archie Peyton Samuel.
Thousands of visitors watch reenactments of the robbery, a championship rodeo, a carnival, performances of a 19th-century style melodrama musical, and a parade during the five-day event.
James' original grave was on his family property, but he was later moved to a cemetery in Kearney.
The Missouri state legislature narrowly defeated a bill that praised the James and Younger brothers and offered them amnesty.
The musical melodrama "Jesse," written by Bob and Marion Moulton with lyrics by Prairie Home Companion writer/performer Vern Sutton and music by William Huckaby and Donna Paulsen, has since 1976 (the centennial of the James-Younger gang's Northfield bank raid) traditionally been performed in Northfield, Minnesota during the town's annual '' The Defeat of Jesse James Days''.
For instance, in Willa Cather's ''My Antonia'', the narrator reads a book entitled 'Life of Jesse James' - probably referring to a dime novel.
Over the three-day event, thousands of spectators learn of the documented James Gang's stopover at Hazel Dell and of their connection with ex-Confederate Fulkerson.
Jesse and his brother Frank James were Confederate guerrillas or bushwhackers during the Civil War.
As they left, one shot the unarmed cashier Heywood in the head.
One innocent bystander, a student of William Jewell College (which James's father had helped to found), was shot dead on the street during the gang's escape.
The five bandits outside fired in the air to clear the streets, driving the townspeople to take cover and fire back from protected positions.
Barred by law from offering a sufficiently large reward, he had turned to the railroad and express corporations to put up a $5,000 bounty for each of them.
The county counted more slaveholders, who held more slaves, than other regions of the state.
In the spring he returned in a squad commanded by Fletch Taylor.
Cole and Bob Younger later stated that they selected the bank because they believed it was associated with the Republican politician Adelbert Ames, the governor of Mississippi during Reconstruction, and Union general Benjamin Butler, Ames' father-in-law and the Union commander of occupied New Orleans.
Two bandits were shot dead and the rest were wounded in the barrage.
Jesse and his cousin Zee married on April 24, 1874, and had two children who survived to adulthood: Jesse Edward James (b.
The festival has featured a bluegrass band from San Francisco and experimental bands from southern Kentucky as well as painters, sculptors, photographers and comic artists.
An 1882 history of Daviess County said, "The history of Daviess County has no blacker crime in its pages than the murder of John W.
Cox had earlier been a partner of the firm Ballinger, Cox & Kemper with Gallatin businessman J.M.
One critic has likened this version of the James brothers as "intellectuals bandits, who won't stop theorising their outlaw activities and hear themselves talk."
Some said that Robert Ford killed someone other than James, in an elaborate plot to allow him to escape justice.
Assistant cashier Alonzo Enos Bunker was wounded in the shoulder as he fled out the back door of the bank.
The Adams Express Company turned to the Pinkerton National Detective Agency in 1874 to stop the James-Younger gang.
The robbery netted little money, but it appears that Jesse shot and killed the cashier, Captain John Sheets, mistakenly believing him to be Samuel P. Cox, the militia officer who had killed "Bloody Bill" Anderson during the Civil War.
He is suspected to have been killed by James or his gang on April 12, 1875.
The James gang had been greatly reduced in numbers by that time.
Historians have speculated about the identity of the shooter but have not reached consensus.
Edwards, a former Confederate cavalryman, was campaigning to return former secessionists to power in Missouri.
The robbers inside the bank were thwarted when acting cashier Joseph Lee Heywood refused to open the safe, falsely claiming that it was secured by a time lock even as they held a bowie knife to his throat and cracked his skull with a pistol butt.
According to legend, they lashed young Jesse.
The Republican Reconstruction administration passed a new state constitution that freed Missouri's slaves.
Displaced by Reconstruction, the antebellum political leadership mythologized the James Gang exploits.
Except for Frank and Jesse James, the James-Younger Gang was destroyed.
In Charles Portis's 1968 novel, ''True Grit'', the U.S.
Although Charley had been out on raids with James, Bob was an eager new recruit.
In 1879, the James gang robbed two stores in far western Mississippi, at Washington in Adams County and Fayette in Jefferson County.
They tortured Reuben Samuel by briefly hanging him from a tree.
Johnson's Union troops, killing all who tried to surrender (more than 100).
This influenced how the population acted during and for a period of time after the American Civil War.
Jesse and his cousin began a nine-year courtship, culminating in marriage.
On June 8, 1892,  Edward O'Kelley went to Creede, loaded a double-barrel shotgun, entered Ford's saloon and said "Hello, Bob" before shooting Bob Ford in the throat, killing him instantly.
Some of the neo-Confederate movement regard him as a hero.
A deputy sheriff named Edwin Daniels also died in the skirmish.
They robbed banks, stagecoaches and a fair in Kansas City, often in front of crowds, even hamming it up for the bystanders.
Farmers raised the same crops and livestock as in the areas they migrated from.
Bob Ford operated a tent saloon in Creede, Colorado.
For protection, James asked the Ford brothers to move in with him and his family.
The annual Victorian Festival in Jersey County, Illinois is held on Labor Day weekend at the 1866 Col. William H. Fulkerson estate Hazel Dell.
In 1863, he was identified as a member of a guerrilla squad that operated in Clay County.
Marshal Rooster Cogburn describes fighting with Cole Younger and Frank James for the Confederacy during the Civil War.
After a series of campaigns and battles between conventional armies in 1861, guerrilla warfare gripped Missouri, waged between secessionist "bushwhackers" and Union forces which largely consisted of local militia organizations, known as "jayhawkers".
Robert Ford wired the governor to claim his reward.
Rumors of Jesse James's survival proliferated almost as soon as the newspapers announced his death.
Numerous people from Missouri migrated to Kansas to try to influence its future.
It temporarily excluded former Confederates from voting, serving on juries, becoming corporate officers, or preaching from church pulpits.
After 1873 he was covered by the national media as part of social banditry.
The guerrillas ambushed and defeated a pursuing regiment of Major A.V.E.
The Defeat of Jesse James Days in Northfield, Minnesota, is among the largest outdoor celebrations in the state.
On the night of January 25, 1875, he staged a raid on the homestead.
Frank, however, decided to move to safer territory and headed east to Virginia.
They suspected Askew of cooperating with the Pinkertons in the January 1875 arson of the James house.
1875) and Mary Susan James (later Barr) (b.
After their later robberies took place and they became legends, there were those who credited them with being the leaders of the Clay County robbery.
Jesse James had two full siblings: his older brother, Alexander Franklin "Frank" James, and a younger sister, Susan Lavenia James.
In the 1880s, both U.S.
James's widow Zerelda Mimms James died alone and in poverty.
This was the beginning of an alliance between James and John Newman Edwards, editor and founder of the ''Kansas City Times''.
The death of Jesse James became a national sensation.
Robert James traveled to California during the Gold Rush to minister to those searching for gold; he died there when Jesse was three years old.
But renewed cultural battles over the place of the Civil War in American history have replaced the long-standing interpretation of James as a Western frontier hero.
Jesse James's initiative in creating his rising public profile is debated by historians and biographers, though the tense politics certainly surrounded his outlaw career and enhanced his notoriety.
However, instead of scolding the Fords, James walked across the living room to lay his revolvers on a sofa.
Ames was a stockholder in the bank, but Butler had no direct connection to it.
The documentary was dismissed as pseudo-history and pseudo-science by historian Nancy Samuelson in a review she wrote for the Winter 2009-2010 edition of ''The James-Younger Gang Journal''.
The James' gang's later train robberies had a lighter touch.
The Fords made no attempt to hide their role.
In May of that year, a Union militia company raided the James-Samuel farm, looking for Frank's group.
Later in 1876, Jesse and Frank James surfaced in the Nashville, Tennessee, area, where they went by the names of Thomas Howard and B. J. Woodson, respectively.
Robert Ford drew his weapon, and shot the unarmed Jesse James in the back of the head.
But there is no evidence that he shared the loot of his robberies with anyone other than his gang members; they enjoyed the riches with him.
After receiving a small portion of the reward, the Fords fled Missouri.
Jesse James suffered the second of two life-threatening chest wounds.
With Jesse James as the most public face of the gang (though with operational leadership likely shared among the group), the gang carried out a string of robberies from Iowa to Texas, and from Kansas to West Virginia.
It was the first time he was publicly labeled an "outlaw," as Missouri Governor Thomas T. Crittenden set a reward for his capture.
Long after his adventure with Mattie Ross, Cogburn ends his days in a traveling road show with the aged Cole Younger and Frank James.
This was a time of increasing local violence; Governor Fletcher had recently ordered a company of militia into Johnson County to suppress guerrilla activity.
After Anderson was killed in an ambush in October, the James brothers separated.
Among the deputies was Jefferson B. Snyder, later a long-serving district attorney in northeastern Louisiana.
While they later tried to justify robbing the banks, these were small, local banks with local capital.
The gang attempted to rob the bank in Northfield about 2 p.m. on September 7, 1876.
Missouri was a border state, sharing characteristics of both North and South, but 75% of the population was from the South or other border states.
The 1869 robbery marked the emergence of Jesse James as the most famous survivor of the former guerrillas.
In a gunfight, Pitts died and the Youngers were taken prisoner.
Across a creek and up a hill from the James house was the home of Daniel Askew.
It has been argued in rebuttal that James was at the time still bedridden with his wound.
Joseph Whicher, an agent dispatched to infiltrate Zerelda Samuel's farm, shortly afterwards was found killed.
James' two previous bullet wounds and partially missing middle finger served to positively identify the body.
Meanwhile, the James brothers joined with Cole Younger and his brothers John, Jim and Bob, as well as Clell Miller and other former Confederates to form what came to be known as the James-Younger Gang.
Six months after the Gallatin robbery, Edwards published the first of many letters from Jesse James to the public, asserting his innocence.
Archie Clement continued his career of crime and harassment of the Republican government, to the extent of occupying the town of Lexington, Missouri, on election day in 1866.
The survivors of Clement's gang continued to conduct bank robberies over the next two years, though their numbers dwindled through arrests, gunfights and lynchings.
The JJIAFF completed its second annual event in April 2008 and the third annual was planned for April 25, 2009.
Past entrants have included films from Norway and northwestern Kentucky, modern silent film projects, nature studies, and fan films.
Zerelda and Reuben Samuel acquired a total of seven slaves, who served mainly as farmhands in tobacco cultivation.
Festivities include telling Jesse James' history in stories and by reenactments of stagecoach holdups.
The gang barely escaped Northfield, leaving two dead companions behind.
Suffering from tuberculosis (then incurable) and a morphine addiction, Charley Ford committed suicide on May 6, 1884, in Richmond, Missouri.
Two others, Captain Louis J. Lull and John Boyle, were sent after the Youngers; Lull was killed by two of the Youngers in a roadside gunfight on March 17, 1874.
Kemper whose son William Thornton Kemper, Sr. went on to found two of the largest banks headquartered in Missouri (Commerce Bancshares and UMB Financial Corporation) but the business relationship had dissolved by the time of the robbery.
Clay County was in a region of Missouri later dubbed "Little Dixie," as it was a center of migration from the Upper South.
Learning that James had been assassinated by his own gang member, "...an event that sent the town into mourning and scrambling to buy Jesse's artifacts," and heightened the "romantic appeal of the social outcast" in his mind, Wilde wrote in a letter home that: "Americans are certainly great hero-worshippers, and always take their heroes from the criminal classes."
In November 1881, James moved his family to St. Joseph, Missouri, not far from where he had been born and reared.
In the end, the at-first-cowed people of a town fight back against the James gang and send them packing in tar and feathers.
Jesse Woodson James was born in Clay County, Missouri, near the site of present-day Kearney, on September 5, 1847.
These men were the likely culprits in the first daylight armed bank robbery in the United States during peacetime, the robbery of the Clay County Savings Association in the town of Liberty, Missouri, on February 13, 1866.
Some historians credit James' myth as contributing to the rise of former Confederates to dominance in Missouri politics.
He began to work with former Unionists who lived near the James family farm.
Former rebels attacked the railroads as symbols of threatening centralization.
His story did not hold up to questioning from James' surviving relatives.
He recruited a new gang in 1879 and returned to crime, holding up a train at Glendale, Missouri (now part of Independence, Missouri), on October 8, 1879.
The killing of Jesse James was depicted on the CBS radio show Crime Classics on July 20, 1953 in the episode entitled "The Death of a Picture Hanger."
Although he passes himself off as such and does indeed steal from the rich (who are, logically, the only ones worth stealing from), he and his gang take turns being "poor," thus keeping the loot for themselves.
The James brothers were most active as members of their own gang from about 1866 until 1876, when as a result of their attempted robbery of a bank in Northfield, Minnesota, several members of the gang were captured or killed.
The Clay County provost marshal reported that both Frank and Jesse James took part in the Centralia Massacre in September, in which guerrillas killed or wounded some 22 unarmed Union troops; the guerrillas scalped and dismembered some of the dead.
After this robbery and a manhunt, only Frank and Jesse James were left alive and uncaptured.
Three men entered the bank, two guarded the door outside, and three remained near a bridge across an adjacent square.
Allan Pinkerton, the agency's founder and leader, took on the case as a personal vendetta.
