The use of the word "king" is central to the discussion between Jesus and Pilate.
Notably, Jesus forbids those who recognize him as the Messiah to speak of it, including people he heals and demons he exorcises (see Messianic Secret).
This gospel includes Jesus' most beloved parables, such as the Good Samaritan and the Prodigal Son.
Jesus is not only greater than any past human prophet but greater than any prophet could be.
* In Mark, Salome and a second Mary are with her (Mark 16:1).
In this Gospel, John denies that he is Elijah ).
Matthew and Luke also share some content not found in Mark.
", going on to say that the majority of their generation have grown "dull hearts" and thus are unable to understand (Matthew 13:10-17).
After the discovery of the empty tomb, Jesus makes a series of appearances to the disciples.
In the Transfiguration (Matthew 17:1–9, Mark 9:2–8, and Luke 9:28–36), Jesus takes Peter and two other apostles up an unnamed mountain, where "he was transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became dazzling white."
John depicts Jesus' ministry as largely taking place in and around Jerusalem rather than in Galilee; and Jesus' divine identity is openly proclaimed and immediately recognized.
In John 7:16 Jesus says, "My teaching is not mine but his who sent me."
Persuaded by the elders (Matthew 27:20), the mob chooses to release Barabbas and crucify Jesus.
Genre "is a key convention guiding both the composition and the interpretation of writings".
Speaks up for the poor and oppressed.
In Mark, the disciples are notably obtuse.
Despite each Apostle's assertion that he would not betray him, Jesus reiterates that the betrayer would be one of those present.
Public ministry lasts one year.
The Last Supper is the final meal that Jesus shares with his 12 apostles in Jerusalem before his crucifixion.
The widely used calendar era "AD", from the Latin "Anno Domini" ("in the year of our Lord"), and the alternative "CE", are based on the birth of Jesus.
Often referred to as "rabbi", Jesus preached his message orally, was baptized by John the Baptist, was arrested and tried by the Jewish authorities and was crucified by the order of the Roman Prefect Pontius Pilate.
Does not exorcise demons.
Often referred to as "rabbi", Jesus preaches his message orally.
Virtually all modern scholars of antiquity agree that Jesus existed historically, and they consider the Synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke) to be the best sources for investigating the historical Jesus, although not everything in the New Testament gospels is considered to be historically reliable.
In addition to the Twelve Apostles, the opening of the passage of the Sermon on the Plain identifies a much larger group of people as disciples (Luke 6:17).
Judaism rejects the belief that Jesus was the awaited Messiah, arguing that his death on the cross signifies that he was rejected by God and that his resurrection is a Christian legend.
In Luke 23:7–15 Pilate realizes that Jesus is a Galilean, and thus comes under the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas.
A bright cloud appears around them, and a voice from the cloud says, "This is my Son, the Beloved; with him I am well pleased; listen to him" (Matthew 17:1–9).
Modern biblical scholars such as Marcus J. Borg and John Dominic Crossan see both genealogies as inventions, conforming to Jewish literary convention.
Three of them, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, are known as the Synoptic Gospels, from the Greek σύν (''syn'' "together") and ὄψις (''opsis'' "view").
Most Christians believe Jesus enables humans to be reconciled to God.
Galilee was evidently prosperous, and poverty was limited enough that it did not threaten the social order.
Jesus then makes his Messianic entry into Jerusalem.
In John, Mary follows Jesus to his crucifixion, and he expresses concern over her well-being ().
Jesus instructs him to carry on with the baptism "to fulfill all righteousness" ().
Furthermore, most scholars agree, following what is known as the "Marcan hypothesis", that the authors of Matthew and Luke used Mark as a source when writing their gospels.
It is the last conversation with Jesus reported in the Bible until the Book of Revelation, in which John of Patmos receives a revelation from Jesus concerning the last days, when Jesus is predicted to return victoriously (Revelation 19:11–21).
Despite Jesus' teaching, the disciples had not understood that Jesus would rise again.
This short gospel records few of Jesus' words or teachings.
The Greek form is a rendering of the Hebrew  (''Yeshua''), a variant of the earlier name  (''Yehoshua''), in English "Joshua".
Baptism presupposed but not mentioned.
A young man in a white robe (an angel) tells them that Jesus will meet his disciples in Galilee, as he had told them (referring to Mark 14:28).
Some early Christian groups had separate descriptions of the life and teachings of Jesus that are not included in the New Testament.
In Matthew and Luke, Jesus' answer is more ambiguous: in Matthew 26:64 he responds, "You have said so", and in Luke 22:70 he says, "You say that I am".
The Jewish elders ask the Roman governor Pontius Pilate to judge and condemn Jesus, accusing him of claiming to be the King of the Jews.
The Nicene Creed asserts that Jesus will judge the dead either before or after their bodily resurrection, an event tied to the Second Coming of Jesus in Christian eschatology; though some believe Jesus's role as savior has more existential or societal concerns than the afterlife, and a few notable theologians have suggested that Jesus will bring about a universal reconciliation.
They often differ in content and in the ordering of events.
Luke's account emphasizes events before the birth of Jesus and centers on Mary, while Matthew's mostly covers those after the birth and centers on Joseph.
They fail to understand Jesus' miracles (, ), his parables (), or what "rising from the dead" would mean ().
The name ''Jesus'' is derived from the Latin ''Iesus'', a transliteration of the Greek  ('''').
The Acts of the Apostles describes several appearances of Jesus in visions after his Ascension.
In John, Jesus' first two apostles were disciples of John the Baptist.
Then the secret thoughts of many will come to light.
Since the 18th century, three separate scholarly quests for the historical Jesus have taken place, each with distinct characteristics and based on different research criteria, which were often developed during the quest that applied them.
Jesus then prophesies about the coming destruction, including false prophets, wars, earthquakes, celestial disorders, persecution of the faithful, the appearance of an "abomination of desolation," and unendurable tribulations ().
When Jesus is presented in the temple per Jewish Law, a man named Simeon says to Mary and Joseph that Jesus "shall stand as a sign of contradiction, while a sword will pierce your own soul.
As an exception, the prefect came to Jerusalem during religious festivals, when religious and patriotic enthusiasm sometimes inspired unrest or uprisings.
Believers can accept the Nativity Jesus, the details of the trial, Crucifixion, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus, or the claim that he walked on water and performed miracles such as exorcisms and healings.
John's Gospel presents the teachings of Jesus not merely as his own preaching, but as divine revelation.
The first century works of historian Flavius Josephus, who wrote in Koine Greek, the same language as that of the New Testament, refer to at least twenty different people with the name Jesus (i.e.
The Galilean ministry begins when Jesus returns to Galilee from the Judaean Desert after rebuffing the temptation of Satan.
In all four gospels, Mary Magdalene goes to Jesus' tomb on Sunday morning and is surprised to find it empty.
In postbiblical usage, ''Christ'' became viewed as a name—one part of "Jesus Christ"—but originally it was a title.
Above Jesus' head on the cross is Pilate's inscription, "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews"; soldiers and passersby mock him about it.
Although he appears and vanishes mysteriously, he also eats and lets them touch him to prove that he is not a spirit.
As the Word, Jesus was eternally present with God, active in all creation, and the source of humanity's moral and spiritual nature.
Thus, in the New Testament, Jesus is commonly referred to as "Jesus of Nazareth" (e.g., Mark 10:47).
Cleansing the Temple occurs late.
Although Joseph appears in descriptions of Jesus' childhood, no mention is made of him thereafter.
In , Mary learns from the angel Gabriel that she will conceive and bear a child called Jesus through the action of the Holy Spirit.
Whether the gospel authors set out to write novels, myths, histories, or biographies has a tremendous impact on how they ought to be interpreted.
In the Gospel of John, Jesus reveals his divine role publicly.
Jesus' baptism and temptation serve as preparation for his public ministry.
In Luke and John, the prediction is made during the Supper (Luke 22:34, John 22:34).
He is the friend of sinners and outcasts, come to seek and save the lost.
They are similar in content, narrative arrangement, language and paragraph structure.
In John, Jesus has already cleansed the Temple during an earlier Passover visit to Jerusalem.
Other parts of the New Testament, such as the Pauline epistles, written decades before the gospels, also include references to key episodes in his life, such as the Last Supper in 1 Corinthians 11:23.
In John's Gospel, Jesus is presented as unpressured by the crowds, who often respond to his miracles with trust and faith.
As stated in John 21:25, the gospels do not claim to provide an exhaustive list of the events in the life of Jesus.
Jesus is crucified between two convicted thieves, and according to Luke (but not Mark) one of them rebukes Jesus, while the other defends him.
Matthew and Luke each describe Jesus' nativity (or birth), especially that Jesus was born by a virgin Mary in Bethlehem in fulfillment of prophecy.
Jesus then begins his ministry after John's arrest ().
Both accounts state that Jesus was born to Joseph and Mary, his betrothed, in Bethlehem, and both support the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus, according to which Jesus was miraculously conceived by the Holy Spirit in Mary's womb when she was still a virgin.
Modern scholarly research on the historical Jesus thus focuses on identifying the most probable elements.
According to Matthew and Mark, he refuses it.
Says little to nothing about the poor or oppressed.
His other family members—his mother, Mary, his brothers James, Joses (or Joseph), Judas and Simon and his unnamed sisters—are mentioned in the gospels and other sources.
The Baptist sees Jesus and calls him the Lamb of God; the two hear this and follow Jesus.
Jesus washes the disciples' feet.
Terrified by the events, a Roman centurion states that Jesus was the Son of God.
When asked what the greatest commandment is, Jesus replies: "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind&nbsp;... And a second is like it: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Matthew 22:37–39).
In Acts, forty days after the Resurrection, as the disciples look on, "he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of their sight".
The catch of 153 fish is a miracle by the Sea of Galilee, after which Jesus encourages Peter to serve his followers.
In this respect, it is noteworthy that the Gospels devote about one third of their text to the last week of the life of Jesus in Jerusalem, referred to as the Passion.
Jesus' crucifixion is described in all four canonical gospels.
In all four gospels, Jesus predicts that Peter will deny knowledge of him three times before the rooster crows the next morning.
The parables appear within longer sermons and at other places in the narrative.
In Matthew 26:62 Jesus' unresponsiveness leads Caiaphas to ask him, "Have you no answer?"
He not only speaks God's Word; he is God's Word.
Jesus calls people to repent their sins and to devote themselves completely to God.
Some of his parables, such as the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:11–32), are relatively simple, while others, such as the Growing Seed (Mark 4:26–29), are sophisticated, profound and abstruse.
The gospel accounts differ on the details of the trials.
The three prominent religious parties were Pharisees, Essenes, and Sadducees.
In the Synoptic Gospels, during that week Jesus drives the money changers from the Temple and Judas bargains to betray him.
Gentile lands surrounded the Jewish territories of Judea and Galilee, but Roman law and practice allowed Jews to remain separate legally and culturally.
These events mark the beginnings of the gradual disclosure of the identity of Jesus to his disciples and his prediction of his own suffering and death.
Historians hold a range of interpretations regarding such miraculous claims, many are skeptical their factual validity and often, instead, choose to focus on the historical significance of Christian ideas and religious beliefs.
To most Muslims, Jesus was not crucified but was physically raised into Heaven by God.
Views range from their being inerrant descriptions of the life of Jesus to their providing little historical information about his life beyond the basics.
The soldiers place a Crown of Thorns on Jesus' head and ridicule him as the King of the Jews.
The canonical gospels are four accounts, each written by a different author.
Chapters 14–17 of the Gospel of John are known as the Farewell Discourse and are a significant source of Christological content.
Here, John the Baptist testifies that he saw the Spirit descend on Jesus ).
* In Matthew, there's an earthquake when the women discover the tomb, and an angel of the Lord descends from heaven, terrifying the guards.
* In John, Mary is alone at first, but Peter and the beloved disciple come and see the tomb as well.
Also, in Luke 10:1–16 Jesus sends seventy or seventy-two of his followers in pairs to prepare towns for his prospective visit.
1 Peter 3:22 states that Jesus has "gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God".
This period culminates in the Last Supper and the Farewell Discourse.
He asserts the same thing in John 14:10: "Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me?
Muslims believe Jesus was a bringer of scripture and was born of a virgin but was not the Son of God.
Christian scholars (starting with the bishop Eusebius) have put forward various theories to explain why the lineages are so different, such as that Matthew's account follows the lineage of Joseph, while Luke's follows the lineage of Mary, but such explanations are untenable.
Begins with creation, with no birth story.
In , wise men or Magi from the East bring gifts to the young Jesus as the King of the Jews.
Jesus tells his followers to adhere to Jewish law, although he is perceived by some to have broken the law himself, for example regarding the Sabbath.
Jesus ushers in a new covenant with a last supper.
Other ethical teachings of Jesus include loving one's enemies, refraining from hatred and lust, and turning the other cheek (Matthew 5:21–44).
Prior to the Enlightenment, the gospels were usually regarded as accurate historical accounts, but since then scholars have emerged who question the reliability of the gospels and draw a distinction between the Jesus described in the gospels and the Jesus of history.
One important aspect of the study of the gospels is the literary genre under which they fall.
Here he is the Bread of Life, the Light of the World, the True Vine and more.
Many of the miracles teach the importance of faith.
Jesus in the Synoptic Gospels
In the Synoptics, Jesus teaches extensively, often in parables, about the Kingdom of God (or, in Matthew, the Kingdom of Heaven).
Early the next morning, the chief priests and scribes lead Jesus away into their council.
In the closing lines of the New Testament, Jesus promises that he is coming soon (Revelation 22:12-21).
In Mark 14:61 the high priest then asks Jesus, "Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed One?"
When Mary is due to give birth, she and Joseph travel from Nazareth to Joseph's ancestral home in Bethlehem to register in the census ordered by Caesar Augustus.
A Roman prefect, rather than a client king, ruled the land.
This potent sign increases the tension with authorities, who conspire to kill him (John 11).
John publicly proclaims Jesus as the sacrificial Lamb of God, and some of John's followers become disciples of Jesus.
Jesus replies, "I am", and then predicts the coming of the Son of Man.
The first takes place north of Judea in Galilee, where Jesus conducts a successful ministry; and the second shows Jesus rejected and killed when he travels to Jerusalem.
Matthew traces Jesus' ancestry to Abraham through David.
The Roman soldiers break the two thieves' legs (a procedure designed to hasten death in a crucifixion), but they do not break those of Jesus, as he is already dead.
In the gospel accounts, Jesus devotes a large portion of his ministry performing miracles, especially healings.
When Jesus' opponents suddenly accuse him of performing exorcisms by the power of Beelzebul, the prince of demons, Jesus counters that he performs them by the "Spirit of God" (Matthew 12:28) or "finger of God", arguing that all logic suggests that Satan would not let his demons assist the Children of God because it would divide Satan's house and bring his kingdom to desolation; furthermore, he asks his opponents that if he exorcises by Beel'zebub, "by whom do your sons cast them out?
Scholars generally agree that it is impossible to find any direct literary relationship between the Synoptic Gospels and the Gospel of John.
One characteristic shared among all miracles of Jesus in the gospel accounts is that he performed them freely and never requested or accepted any form of payment.
According to the Marcan priority, the first to be written was the Gospel of Mark (written AD 60–75), followed by the Gospel of Matthew (AD 65–85), the Gospel of Luke (AD 65–95), and the Gospel of John (AD 75–100).
Jesus appears that same day to his disciples in Jerusalem (Luke 24:13–43).
Some recent studies suggest that the genre of the gospels ought to be situated within the realm of ancient biography.
They often contain symbolism, and usually relate the physical world to the spiritual.
A minority of Christian denominations reject Trinitarianism, wholly or partly, as non-scriptural.
The Synoptics emphasize different aspects of Jesus.
Together these parties represented only a small fraction of the population.
While there Mary gives birth to Jesus, and as they have found no room in the inn, she places the newborn in a manger ().
After the trials, Jesus is led to Calvary carrying his cross; the route traditionally thought to have been taken is known as the Via Dolorosa.
He is a tireless wonder worker, the servant of both God and man.
In Matthew and Mark, despite Jesus only briefly requesting that they join him, Jesus' first four apostles, who were fishermen, are described as immediately consenting, and abandoning their nets and boats to do so (Matthew 4:18–22, Mark 1:16–20).
In Mark, John baptizes Jesus, and as he comes out of the water he sees the Holy Spirit descending to him like a dove and he hears a voice from heaven declaring him to be God's Son ().
Since early Christianity, Christians have commonly referred to Jesus as "Jesus Christ".
These two events are not mentioned in the Gospel of John.
It ends with the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration.
Jesus next expels the money changers from the Temple, accusing them of turning it into a den of thieves through their commercial activities.
Christians designate Jesus as Christ because they believe he is the awaited Messiah prophesied in the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament.
Although a belief in the inerrancy of the gospels cannot be supported historically, many scholars since the 1980s have held that, beyond the few facts considered to be historically certain, certain other elements of Jesus' life are "historically probable".
The Last Supper is mentioned in all four canonical gospels; Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (11:23–26) also refers to it.
In Bethany, a village near Jerusalem, Jesus raises Lazarus from the dead.
The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own; but the Father who dwells in me does his works."
The term "Christian" (meaning a follower of Christ) has been in use since the first century.
Jesus promises inclusion in the Kingdom for those who accept his message ().
During the trials Jesus speaks very little, mounts no defense, and gives very infrequent and indirect answers to the priests' questions, prompting an officer to slap him.
In the Synoptics, Jesus takes bread, breaks it, and gives it to the disciples, saying, "This is my body, which is given for you".
While the flow of some events (such as Jesus' baptism, transfiguration, crucifixion and interactions with the apostles) are shared among the Synoptic Gospels, incidents such as the transfiguration do not appear in John, which also differs on other matters, such as the Cleansing of the Temple.
He then has them all drink from a cup, saying, "This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood" (Luke 22:19–20).
The cheering crowds greeting Jesus as he enters Jerusalem add to the animosity between him and the establishment.
Christians believe that Jesus has a "unique significance" in the world.
Public ministry lasts three years.
The Gospel of John provides the only account of Jesus washing his disciples' feet after the meal.
While there is widespread scholarly agreement on the existence of Jesus, and a basic consensus on the general outline of his life, the portraits of Jesus constructed in the quests have often differed from each other, and from the image portrayed in the gospel accounts.
Jesus' neighbors in Nazareth refer to him as "the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon" (Mark 6:3), "the carpenter's son" (Matthew 13:55), or "Joseph's son" (Luke 4:22).
Jesus comes into conflict with the Jewish elders, such as when they question his authority and when he criticizes them and calls them hypocrites.
Pilate writes a sign in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek that reads "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews" (abbreviated as INRI in depictions) to be affixed to Jesus' cross (John 19:19–20), then scourges Jesus and sends him to be crucified.
John next recounts Jesus' Last Supper with his disciples.
* In Luke, Mary and the other women meet two angels, and the eleven disciples do not believe their story (Luke 25:1–12).
Jesus in the Gospel of John
In his Confession, Peter tells Jesus, "You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God."
In Luke, the Holy Spirit descends as a dove after everyone has been baptized and Jesus is praying ().
Jesus warns that these wonders will occur in the lifetimes of the hearers  ().
They are instructed to accept hospitality, heal the sick and spread the word that the Kingdom of God is coming.
This period includes the Sermon on the Mount, one of Jesus' major discourses, as well as the calming of the storm, the feeding of the 5,000, walking on water and a number of other miracles and parables.
This is one of two events described in the gospels where a voice from Heaven calls Jesus "Son", the other being the Transfiguration.
The Gospel of Mark says that Jesus comes into conflict with his neighbors and family.
Augustine of Hippo says that Pilate was not free from blame, since he exercised his power to execute Jesus.
The name ''Yeshua'' appears to have been in use in Judea at the time of the birth of Jesus.
The etymology of Jesus' name in the context of the New Testament is generally given as "Yahweh is salvation".
Jews based their faith and religious practice on the Torah, five books said to have been given by God to Moses.
In John 18:36 Jesus states, "My kingdom is not from this world", but he does not unequivocally deny being the King of the Jews.
Begins with Jesus' baptism or birth to a virgin.
When asked by his disciples about why he speaks in parables to the people, Jesus replies that the chosen disciples have been given to "know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven", unlike the rest of their people, "For the one who has will be given more and he will have in abundance.
