The now-legendary story claims that Manzarek was lying on the beach at Venice one day, where he accidentally encountered Morrison.
Petersburg Times'' where she said Morrison spoke to her before a photo shoot for the Doors' fourth album and told her the first three albums were about her.
This was a far cry from the Doors playing warm up for Simon and Garfunkel and playing at a high school as they did in Connecticut that same year.
He was also well known for improvising spoken word poetry passages while the band played live.
Morrison was sometimes referred to by other monikers, such as "Lizard King" and "King of Orgasmic Rock".
Layne Staley, the vocalist of Alice in Chains, Eddie Vedder, the vocalist of Pearl Jam, Scott Weiland, the vocalist of Stone Temple Pilots and Velvet Revolver, Julian Casablancas of the Strokes, James LaBrie of Dream Theater, as well as Scott Stapp of Creed and Ville Valo of H.I.M., have all said that Morrison was their biggest influence and inspiration.
The animated television show The Simpsons has made numerous references to Morrison, including Krusty the Klown singing Break On Through ("I Love Lisa", Season 4); Otto Mann telling Homer that "me and the admiral do not get along" (a reference to Morrison and his estranged father, Rear Admiral George Stephen Morrison ("The Otto Show", Season 3)); mention of Morrison's grave ("The Devil Wears Nada", Season 21).
In late 1967 at an infamous concert in New Haven, Connecticut, he was arrested on stage, an incident that further added to his mystique and emphasized his rebellious image.
/ Just a blink and it's gone / So baby pour some fame in my glass."
Céline's book, ''Voyage au Bout de la Nuit'' (''Journey to the End of the Night'') and Blake's ''Auguries of Innocence'' both echo through one of Morrison's early songs, "End of the Night".
The Doors achieved national recognition after signing with Elektra Records in 1967.
I suspected he was making them up, as they were English books on sixteenth- and seventeenth-century demonology.
Wallace Fowlie, professor emeritus of French literature at Duke University, wrote ''Rimbaud and Jim Morrison'', subtitled ''"The Rebel as Poet&nbsp;– A Memoir"''.
The concluding stanzas of this poem end with conveying a disappointment for someone who he had an intimate relationship with and a further invocation of ''Billy''/the killer  Hitchhiker, a common character in Morrison's body of work.
Jim Morrison's vocal influences included Elvis Presley and Frank Sinatra, which is evident in his own baritone crooning style used in several of the Doors' songs and in the 1981 documentary ''The Doors: A Tribute to Jim Morrison'', producer Paul Rothchild refers his first impression of Morrison as being a "Rock and Roll Bing Crosby".
The grave was listed in the cemetery directory with Morrison's name incorrectly rearranged as "Douglas James Morrison."
According to a Madame Colinette, who was at Père Lachaise Cemetery mourning the recent loss of her husband, she witnessed Morrison's funeral.
He continued at St. John's Methodist School in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and then Longfellow School Sixth Grade Graduation Program from San Diego, California.
His father was stationed at NAS Kingsville in 1952, he attended Charles H. Flato Elementary School in Kingsville, Texas.
James Frazer's ''The Golden Bough'' also became a source of inspiration and is reflected in the title and lyrics of the song "Not to Touch the Earth".
He was also frequently late for live performances.
The book ''The Doors'', written by the remaining members of the Doors, explains how different Morrison's account of the incident was from that of his father.
Morrison, who attended the sentencing "in a wool jacket adorned with Indian designs", silently listened as he was sentenced for six months in prison and had to pay a $500 fine.
We just 'did' the Sullivan Show!"
He was similarly drawn to the work of French writer Louis-Ferdinand Céline.
Morrison later met and befriended Michael McClure, a well known beat poet.
Weiland also filled in for Morrison to perform "Break On Through (To The Other Side)" with the rest of the Doors.
Morrison financed the venture and formed his own production company in order to maintain complete control of the project.
These two books were later combined into a single volume titled ''The Lords and The New Creatures.''
Morrison began writing in earnest during his adolescence.
However, he did play the grand piano on "Orange County Suite" and a Moog synthesizer on "Strange Days".
Morrison spoke fondly of his Irish and Scottish ancestry and was inspired by Celtic mythology in his poetry and songs.
The grave had no official marker until French officials placed a shield over it, which was stolen in 1973.
Morrison spoke to Courson through his lyrics and his poetry and dedicated his published poetry book ''The New Creatures'' to her.
After giving assurances of compliance to the producer in the dressing room, the band agreed, "we're not changing a word," and proceeded to sing the song with the original lyrics.
He made several short films while attending UCLA.
Upon hearing the record, Morrison's father wrote him a letter telling him "to give up any idea of singing or any connection with a music group because of what I consider to be a complete lack of talent in this direction."
In the same book, his sister is quoted as saying, "He enjoyed telling that story and exaggerating it.
He always thought about that crying Indian."
This book quotes his father as saying, "We went by several Indians.
Morrison and the Doors continued to make short music films, including "The Unknown Soldier", "Moonlight Drive", and "People Are Strange".
One of Pop's most popular songs, "The Passenger", is said to be based on one of Morrison's poems.
In ''Wonderland Avenue'', Danny Sugerman discussed his encounter with Courson after she returned to the United States.
Sullivan had a show producer tell the band that they would never appear on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' again.
He spent part of his childhood in San Diego.
Morrison's early life was the semi-nomadic existence typical of military families.
Morrison recorded his own poetry in a professional sound studio on two separate occasions.
Subsequently, guitarist Robby Krieger and drummer John Densmore joined.
At UCLA, Morrison enrolled in Jack Hirschman's class on Antonin Artaud in the Comparative Literature program within the UCLA English Department.
Sullivan's censors insisted that the Doors change the lyrics of the song "Light My Fire" from "Girl we couldn't get much higher" to "Girl we couldn't get much better" for the television viewers; this was reportedly due to what was perceived as a reference to drugs in the original lyrics.
He read the works of the French Symbolist poet Arthur Rimbaud, whose style would later influence the form of Morrison’s short prose poems.
He completed third grade at a Fairfax County Elementary School Fairfax County, Virginia.
On September 6 and 7, 1968, the Doors played four performances at the Roundhouse, London, England with Jefferson Airplane which were filmed by Granada for a television documentary ''The Doors are Open'' directed by John Sheppard.
Beat Generation writers such as Jack Kerouac also had a strong influence on Morrison's outlook and manner of expression; Morrison was eager to experience the life described in Kerouac's ''On the Road''.
After Morrison's death, Pop was considered as a replacement lead singer for the Doors; the surviving Doors gave him some of Morrison's belongings and hired him as a vocalist for a series of shows.
''The Lords'' consists primarily of brief descriptions of places, people, events and Morrison's thoughts on cinema.
Morrison did not play an instrument live (except for maracas and tambourine for most shows, and harmonica on a few occasions) or in the studio (excluding maracas, tambourine, handclaps, and whistling).
Morrison had been coughing badly, had gone to take a bath, and vomited blood."
According to the Morrison biography ''No One Here Gets Out Alive'', Morrison's family did drive past a car accident on an Indian reservation when he was a child, and he was very upset by it.
Nico said, "We exchanged blood.
It did make an impression on him the young James.
Songs like “Love Street”, “Queen of the Highway”, “Blue Sunday", and "Indian Summer" as well as many of his poems were said to be written about her.
While still in his teens Morrison discovered the work of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche.
One persistent claim of paternity came from Cliff Morrison.
This box of personal belongings similarly contained a home movie of Pamela Courson, the only film so far recovered, to be shot by Morrison.
Consequently, Morrison's early education was routinely disrupted as he moved from school to school.
This misinformation was published as part of the materials distributed with the Doors' self-titled debut album.
According to Sugerman's account, Courson stated that Morrison had died of an accidental heroin overdose, having snorted what he believed to be cocaine.
In 2012 electronic music producer Skrillex released "Breakn' a Sweat" which contained vocals from an interview with Jim Morrison.
She reportedly hit him over the head with a bottle of whiskey in retaliation during a fight in front of witnesses.
Shortly after the recording sessions for the album began, producer Paul A. Rothchild—who had overseen all of their previous recordings—left the project.
In June 1966, Morrison and the Doors were the opening act at the Whisky a Go Go in the last week of the residency of Van Morrison's band Them.
He was also drawn to the poetry of William Blake, Charles Baudelaire and Arthur Rimbaud.
McClure had enjoyed Morrison's lyrics but was even more impressed by his poetry and encouraged him to further develop his craft.
In the summer of 1965, after graduating with a degree from the UCLA film school, Morrison led a bohemian lifestyle in Venice Beach.
The ceremony was "pitiful," with several of the attendants muttering a few words, throwing a few flowers over the casket, then leaving quickly and hastily within minutes as if their lives depended upon it.
In the later part of the 20th century, he was one of the popular culture's most rebellious and oft-displayed icons, representing the generation gap and youth counterculture.
''This is my poem for you, Great flowing funky flower'd beast, Great perfumed wreck of hell...Someone new in your knickers & who would that be?
In 1995, a new epilogue was added to Sugerman's and Hopkins's book, giving new facts about Morrison's death and discounting the fake death theory saying “As time passed, some of Jim and Pamela Courson's friends began to talk about what they knew, and although everything they said pointed irrefutably to Jim's demise, there remained and probably always will be those who refuse to believe that Jim is dead and those who will not allow him to rest in peace.”
Creed performed their version of "Roadhouse Blues" with Robby Krieger for the 1999 Woodstock Festival.
Their blend of blues and dark psychedelic rock included a number of original songs and distinctive cover versions, such as their rendition of "Alabama Song", from Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill's opera, ''Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny''.
Morrison was buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris, one of the city's most visited tourist attractions.
In 2014, Marianne Faithfull claimed instead that her boyfriend, de Breiteuil, visited Morrison around the time of his death at his apartment.
In 1981, Croatian sculptor Mladen Mikulin voluntarily placed a bust of his own design and a new gravestone with Morrison's name at the grave to commemorate the 10th anniversary of his death; the bust was defaced through the years by cemetery vandals and later stolen in 1988.
One day, an acquaintance brought over a record thought to have Jim on the cover.
In the first version of ''No One Here Gets Out Alive'', published in 1980, Sugerman and Hopkins gave some credence to the rumor that Morrison may not have died at all, calling the fake death theory “not as far-fetched as it might seem”.
Morrison died on July 3, 1971 at age 27.
In 1970, Morrison participated in a Celtic Pagan handfasting ceremony with rock critic author Patricia Kennealy.
In January 1964, Morrison moved to Los Angeles to attend the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).
Van's influence on Jim's developing stage performance was later noted by John Densmore in his book ''Riders On The Storm'': "Jim Morrison learned quickly from his near-namesake's stagecraft, his apparent recklessness, his air of subdued menace, the way he would improvise poetry to a rock beat, even his habit of crouching down by the bass drum during instrumental breaks."
He said he could not blame his son for being reluctant to initiate contact and that he was proud of him nonetheless.
Shortly thereafter on August 2, 1964, Morrison's father, George Stephen Morrison, commanded a carrier division of the United States fleet during the Gulf of Tonkin Incident, which resulted in the United States' rapid escalation of the Vietnam War.
In letters he described going for long walks through the city, alone.
Alice Cooper in the liner notes of the album ''Killer'' stated that the song "Desperado" is about Jim Morrison.
In November 1966, Morrison and the Doors produced a promotional film for "Break on Through (To the Other Side)", which was their first single release.
Later, the Doors appeared on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'', a popular Sunday night variety series that had introduced the Beatles and Elvis Presley to the United States.
His ancestors were Scottish, Irish, and English.
The single "Light My Fire" spent three weeks at number one on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100 chart in July/August 1967.
As a naval family the Morrisons relocated frequently.
In 2007 Florida Governor Charlie Crist suggested the possibility of a posthumous pardon for Morrison, which was announced as successful on December 9, 2010.
Morrison played the main character, a hitchhiker turned killer/car thief.
In this he recounts his surprise at receiving a fan letter from Morrison who, in 1968, thanked him for his latest translation of Arthur Rimbaud's verse into English.
I carry his blood inside me."
Courson's story of Morrison's unintentional ingestion of heroin, resulting in an accidental overdose, is supported by the confession of Alain Ronay, who has written that Morrison died of a hemorrhage after snorting Courson's heroin, and that Courson nodded off instead of phoning for medical help, leaving Morrison alone and bleeding to death.
Admiral Morrison was not supportive of his son's career choice in music.
His family does not recall this incident happening in the way he told it.
Huxley's own title was a quotation from William Blake's ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell'', in which Blake wrote: "If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to man as it is, infinite."
Morrison completed his undergraduate degree at UCLA's film school within the Theater Arts department of the College of Fine Arts in 1965.
The band performed on July 5 at the Hollywood Bowl, this performance became famous with the DVD: ''Live at the Hollywood Bowl''.
His senior-year English teacher said, "Jim read as much and probably more than any student in class, but everything he read was so offbeat I had another teacher (who was going to the Library of Congress) check to see if the books Jim was reporting on actually existed.
Rock band Bon Jovi featured Morrison's grave in their "I'll Sleep When I'm Dead" video clip.
Morrison's will lists him as "an unmarried person" but listed Courson as the sole heir.
The young man played the record for Morrison's father and family.
By the time Morrison's music ascended to the top of the charts (in 1967) he had not been in communication with his family for more than a year and falsely claimed that his parents and siblings were dead (or claiming, as it has been widely misreported, that he was an only child).
His interpretation and imagination of the practices of Native American ceremonial people (which, based on his readings, he referred to by the anthropological but inaccurate term "shamans") influenced his stage routine, notably in seeking trance states and vision through dancing to the point of exhaustion.
In 2007, Sam Bernett, a former manager of the Rock 'n' Roll Circus nightclub, released a (French) book titled "The End: Jim Morrison", alleging that Morrison overdosed on heroin in his nightclub.
Morrison and fellow UCLA student, Ray Manzarek, were the first two members of the Doors, forming the group during that summer.
The Doors took their name from the title of Aldous Huxley's book ''The Doors of Perception'' (a reference to the unlocking of doors of perception through psychedelic drug use).
Because of his songwriting, wild personality, performances, and the dramatic circumstances surrounding his life and death, he is regarded by critics and fans as one of the most iconic and influential frontmen in rock music history.
Werbelow has remained out of view to rock historians with one exception, a 2005 interview in the ''St.
Is bellowed by Lisa Simpson at the end of her encounter with psychedelic theme-ride river water at Duff Gardens ("Selma's Choice", Season 4).
"I don't read French easily", he wrote, "...your book travels around with me."
They met  before he gained fame or fortune  and she encouraged him to develop his poetry.
Morrison's best-known but seldom seen cinematic endeavor is ''HWY: An American Pastoral'', a project he started in 1969.
By the release of their second album, ''Strange Days'', the Doors had become one of the most popular rock bands in the United States.
He failed, but a warrant for his arrest was issued by the Dade County Police department three days later for indecent exposure.
He claims that Morrison went to the club to buy heroin for Courson, used some himself and died in the bathroom, and that his body was then moved by Patrick Chauvel, who corroborates the move, along with two unidentified drug dealers, nicknamed ‘Le Chinois’ and ‘Le Petit Robert’ out the back of the Nightclub so as to prevent a scandal and then bundled into a taxi with the two dealers, which then drove to Morrison's rue Beautrellis apartment.
Morrison read widely and voraciously—being particularly inspired by the writings of philosophers and poets.
Ed Sullivan requested two songs from the Doors for the show, "People Are Strange" and "Light My Fire".
The film featured the four members of the group playing the song on a darkened set with alternating views and close-ups of the performers while Morrison lip-synched the lyrics.
After his death, a further two volumes of Morrison's poetry were published.
In 2011, a ''Rolling Stone'' readers' pick placed Jim Morrison in fifth place of the magazine's "Best Lead Singers of All Time".
He was impressed with Morrison's poetic lyrics, claiming that they were "rock group" material.
This consisted of yelling at and berating the children until they were reduced to tears and acknowledged their failings.
''First Love'', the first of these films, made with Morrison's classmate and roommate Max Schwartz, was released to the public when it appeared in a documentary about the film ''Obscura''.
During these years, while living in Venice Beach, he became friends with writers at the ''Los Angeles Free Press'',  for which he advocated until his death in 1971.
Morrison is interred at Père Lachaise Cemetery in eastern Paris.
The couple signed a document declaring themselves wed, but none of the necessary paperwork for a legal marriage was filed with the state.
In June 2013, a new fossil analysis revealed a lizard, one of the largest ever known that lived on Myanmar, was given the moniker ''Barbaturex morrisoni'' in honor of Morrison.
On their 2008 album ''The Hawk Is Howling'' Scottish post-rock band Mogwai titled the opening track "I'm Jim Morrison, I'm Dead".
All three musicians shared a common interest in the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi's meditation practices at the time, attending scheduled classes, but Morrison was not involved in this series of classes, claiming later that he "did not meditate."
Following ''The Soft Parade'', the Doors released ''Morrison Hotel''.
The Frank Sinatra influence is mentioned in the pages of ''The Doors, The Illustrated History'' also by Sugerman, where Frank Sinatra is listed on Morrison's Band Bio as being his favorite singer.
Jim Morrison's first major love affair was with Mary Werbelow, whom he met on the beach in Florida.
Morrison asked his friend, composer/pianist Fred Myrow, to select the soundtrack for the film.
To this day Morrison is widely regarded as the prototypical rock-star: surly, sexy, scandalous, and mysterious.
The relationship lasted several years inspiring many of the songs on the first two Doors albums including the 11-minute ballad "The End" which Ray Manzarek said was originally "a short goodbye love song to Mary" calling her "Jim's first love".
Courson said that he appeared to recover and that she then went to sleep.
These photographs are considered among the most iconic images of Jim Morrison and are frequently used as covers for compilation albums, books, and other memorabilia of the Doors and Morrison.
Previously, each song on their albums had been credited simply to "the Doors".
At UCLA he studied the related fields of theater, film, and cinematography.
Paul Ferrara, Frank Lisciandro and Babe Hill assisted with the project.
The song "The Irony of Dying on Your Birthday" by the band Senses Fail features the lyrics: "I wanna die like Jim Morrison /  A f*****g rock star / I wanna die like God on the cover of Time.
Christian rock musician Steve Taylor wrote "Jim Morrison's Grave" about Morrison and the tragedy of his short life; the song appeared on the album "I Predict 1990" (Myrrh Records, 1987).
The music video featured HIM member Ville Valo posing at a snowy cemetery as the ghost of Jim Morrison.
He self-published two separate volumes of his poetry in 1969, titled ''The Lords / Notes on Vision'' and ''The New Creatures''.
He referred to this incident in the Doors' song "Peace Frog" on the 1970 album ''Morrison Hotel,'' as well as in the spoken word performances "Dawn's Highway" and "Ghost Song" on the posthumous 1978 album ''An American Prayer''.
At times, Courson used the surname "Morrison" with his apparent consent, or at least lack of concern.
Once Morrison graduated from UCLA, he broke off most contact with his family.
According to Bernett, the heroin was supplied by Jean de Breiteuil.
The official cause of death was listed as "heart failure", although no autopsy was performed.
Nonetheless he was drawn to the study of literature, poetry, religion, philosophy and psychology, among other fields.
He said he saw a dead Indian by the side of the road, and I don't even know if that's true."
She was buried as Pamela Susan Morrison.
Other works relating to religion, mysticism, ancient myth and symbolism were of lasting interest, particularly Joseph Campbell's ''The Hero with a Thousand Faces''.
Some poetry recorded from the December 1970 session remains unreleased to this day and is in the possession of the Courson family.
By early 1969, the formerly svelte singer had gained weight, grown a beard and mustache, and had begun dressing more casually—abandoning the leather pants and concho belts for slacks, jeans and T-shirts.
Iggy and the Stooges are said to have formed after lead singer Iggy Pop was inspired by Morrison while attending a Doors concert in Ann Arbor, Michigan.
In an interview reported in the book ''Rock Wives'', Kennealy reveals that she and Jim Morrison were wed, sort of, in a witch ceremony in 1970, but that he turned "really cold" when Kennealy became pregnant—maybe, she speculates, because he had "20 paternity suits pending against him."
In 2013 another of Morrison's notebooks from Paris, found alongside the ''Paris Journal'' in the same box, known as the ''127 Fascination'' box, sold for $250,000.
Singer-songwriter Lana Del Rey mentions Jim Morrison in the song "Gods & Monsters" from the album ''Born To Die: The Paradise Edition''.
The band Radiohead mentions Jim Morrison in their song "Anyone Can Play Guitar", stating "I wanna be wanna be wanna be Jim Morrison".
You know, You know more, than you let on...Tell them you came & saw & look'd into my eyes & saw the shadow of the guard receding, Thoughts in time & out of season The Hitchiker stood by the side of the road & levelled his thumb in the calm calculus of reason.''
In September 1970, Morrison was convicted of indecent exposure and profanity.
At the time of graduation ceremony, he went to Venice, and his diploma was mailed to his mother at Coronado.
Krieger auditioned at Densmore's recommendation and was then added to the lineup.
Volume II, ''The American Night'', released in 1990, was also a success.
In July 1971, Janet Erwin documented in her journal dating Morrison during this last few weeks before he left to Paris and wrote the essay "Your Ballroom Days Are Over".
Morrison believed this incident to be the most formative event of his life, and made repeated references to it in the imagery in his songs, poems, and interviews.
Around this time, Morrison—who had long been a heavy drinker—started showing up for recording sessions visibly inebriated.
He graduated from George Washington High School, now George Washington Middle School, in Alexandria, Virginia in June 1961.
Morrison spent nearly the entirety of his adult life with a woman named Pamela Courson after meeting while both attended university.
He conducted a lengthy and in-depth interview with Bob Chorush and Andy Kent, both working for the Free Press at the time (approximately December 6–8, 1970), and was planning on visiting the headquarters of the busy newspaper shortly before leaving for Paris.
At the sentencing, Judge Murray Goodman told Morrison that he was a "person graced with a talent" admired by many of his peers.
After a lengthy break the group reconvened in October 1970 to record what would become their final album with Morrison, titled ''L.A.
Hopkins and Sugerman also claim that Morrison had asthma and was suffering from a respiratory condition involving a chronic cough and vomiting blood on the night of his death.
He was influenced by Friedrich Nietzsche, whose views on aesthetics, morality, and the Apollonian and Dionysian duality would appear in his conversation, poetry and songs.
Sugerman added that Courson had given numerous contradictory versions of Morrison's death, saying at times that she had killed Morrison, or that his death was her fault.
In 1965, Judy Huddleston met Morrison and claimed she had a four-year on-and-off relationship with him which she chronicled in her book ''Love Him Madly: An Intimate Memoir of Jim Morrison''  and an out-of-print book called ''This is the End My Only Friend: Living & Dying with Jim Morrison'',  which was updated as ''Like He Was God''.
Morrison developed an alcohol dependency during the 1960s, which affected his performances on stage.
The absence of an autopsy left many questions regarding the cause of Morrison's death.
Mikulin made another bust of Morrison in 1989, and a bronze portrait of him in 2001; neither piece is at the gravesite.
Finnish rock band The 69 Eyes' 1999 song "Wasting the Dawn" paid tribute to Jim Morrison.
In the epilogue of ''No One Here Gets Out Alive,'' Hopkins and Sugerman write that Ronay and Agnès Varda say Courson lied to the police who responded to the death scene, and later in her deposition, telling them Morrison never took drugs.
Nico also wanted to marry Morrison and they cut their thumbs in the desert with a knife and let their blood mingle.
Their fourth album, ''The Soft Parade'', was released in 1969.
The first was in March 1969 in Los Angeles and the second was on December 8, 1970.
Morrison's vision of performance was colored by the works of 20th-century French playwright Antonin Artaud (author of ''Theater and its Double'') and by Julian Beck's Living Theater.
Sullivan was not happy and he refused to shake hands with Morrison or any other band member after their performance.
Hardly anyone noticed that Jim was paraphrasing Rimbaud and the Surrealist poets.”
