On October 23, 2014, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed Judge Caputo's ruling.
The anecdote appeared in newspapers as early as 1948, 36&nbsp;years after his appearance in the Olympics, and in books as early as 1952.
There his athletic ability was recognized and he was coached by Glenn Scobey "Pop" Warner, one of the most influential coaches of early American football history.
During the Great Depression in particular, he had various jobs, among others as an extra for several movies, usually playing an American Indian chief in Westerns.
The only positive element of this affair for Thorpe was that, as soon as the news was reported that he had been declared a professional, he received offers from professional sports clubs.
Thorpe grew up in the Sac and Fox Nation in Oklahoma.
He was briefly revived by artificial respiration and spoke to those around him, but lost consciousness shortly afterward and died on March&nbsp;28 at the age of 65.
When hospitalized for lip cancer in 1950, he was admitted as a charity case.
Thorpe had indeed played professional baseball in the Eastern Carolina League for Rocky Mount, North Carolina, in 1909 and 1910, receiving meager pay; reportedly as little as US$2 ($ today) per game and as much as US$35 ($ today) per week.
Thorpe began his athletic career at Carlisle in 1907 when he walked past the track and beat all the school's high jumpers with an impromptu 5-ft 9-in jump still in street clothes.
A photograph of Thorpe and the 1911 football team emphasized racial differences among the competing athletes; the inscription on the most important game ball of that season reads, "1911, Indians&nbsp;18, Harvard&nbsp;15."
"Here and there, there are some people who are supremely endowed.
Overall, Thorpe won eight of the 15 individual events comprising the pentathlon and decathlon.
He was baptized "Jacobus Franciscus Thorpe" in the Catholic Church.
Additionally, the school and journalists often categorized sporting competitions as conflicts of Indians against whites; newspaper headings such as "Indians Scalp Army 27–6" or "Jim Thorpe on Rampage" made stereotypical journalistic play of the Indian background of Carlisle's football team.
He was awarded All-American honors in both 1911 and 1912.
Thorpe's presence increased the publicity, attendance and gate receipts for the tour.
I never expect to look upon a finer athlete."
His earliest recorded track and field results come from 1907.
Even more remarkably, because someone had stolen his shoes just before he was due to compete, he found some discarded ones in a rubbish bin and won his medals wearing them.
While Thorpe attended Carlisle, students' ethnicity was used for marketing purposes.
As was the custom for Sac and Fox, he was named for something occurring around the time of his birth, in this case the light brightening the path to the cabin where he was born.
Considered one of the most versatile athletes of modern sports, he won Olympic gold medals in the 1912 pentathlon and decathlon, played American football (collegiate and professional), and also played professional baseball and basketball.
Although the team's record was 3–6 in 1922, and 1–10 in 1923, he played well and was selected for the ''Green Bay Press-Gazette's'' first All-NFL team in 1923, which would later be formally recognized by the NFL as the league's official All-NFL team in 1931).
The Sac and Fox agency is in Stroud, Lincoln County, which could cause some of the confusion.
Miller filed for divorce from Thorpe in 1925, claiming desertion.
At the time Thorpe won his gold medals, not all Native Americans were recognized as U.S.&nbsp;citizens.
Most persistent were the author Robert Wheeler and his wife, Florence Ridlon.
Jack Thorpe died at 73 on February 22, 2011.
The United States Postal Service issued a 32¢ stamp on 3 February 1998 as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.
As a running back, defensive back, placekicker and punter, Thorpe scored all his team's points—four field goals and a touchdown—in an 18–15 upset of Harvard, a top ranked team in those early days of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
In June 2010, Jack Thorpe filed a federal lawsuit against the borough of Jim Thorpe, seeking to have his father's remains returned to his homeland and re-interred near other family members in Oklahoma.
The appeals court said Pennsylvania law allows the plaintiffs to ask a state court to order reburial of Thorpe's remains, but noted, "once a body is interred there is great reluctance in permitting same to be moved, absent clear and compelling reasons for such a move."
Future President Dwight Eisenhower, who played against him that season, recalled of Thorpe in a 1961 speech:
Until 2005, most of Thorpe's biographers were unaware of his basketball career until a ticket discovered in an old book that year documented his career in basketball.
(The U.S.&nbsp;government had wanted them to make concessions to adopt European-American ways to receive such recognition.)
After Thorpe's funeral was held at St. Benedict's Catholic Church in Shawnee, Oklahoma, his body was lying in state at Fairview Cemetery after citizens had paid to have it moved to Shawnee by train from California.
Thorpe is memorialized in the Pro Football Hall of Fame rotunda with a larger-than-life statue.
After playing in the minor leagues with the Milwaukee Brewers in 1916, he returned to the Giants in 1917 but was sold to the Cincinnati Reds early in the season.
Along with the decathlon and pentathlon, he competed in the long jump and high jump.
Thorpe himself said in an article in ''The Shawnee News-Star'' in 1949 that he was born May 28, 1888, on his mother's allotment "near and south of Bellemont – Pottawatomie County – along the banks of the North Fork River&nbsp;... hope this will clear up the inquiries as to my birthplace."
* ''Buffalo Courier'' columnist Billy Kelly quoted in Miller.
"), still stands near the town named for him, Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania.
The events of the new decathlon differed slightly from the American version.
He was generally considered to have been born on May 22, 1887, near the town of Prague, Oklahoma.
"Jim Thorpe and His World-Famous Indians" barnstormed for at least two years (1927–28) in parts of New York and Pennsylvania as well as Marion, Ohio.
Kirkpatrick divorced Thorpe in 1941 after 15&nbsp;years of marriage.
In 1904 the sixteen-year-old Thorpe returned to his father and decided to attend Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Carlisle, Pennsylvania.
From 1920 to 1921, Thorpe was nominally the first president of the American Professional Football Association (APFA), which would become the National Football League (NFL) in 1922.
All his personal references were either Shawnee (the county seat of Pottawatomie County and about ten&nbsp;miles (16&nbsp;km) southwest of his birthplace) or "Pott County".
The grave rests on mounds of soil from Thorpe's native Oklahoma and from the stadium in which he won his Olympic medals.
In April 2013,  U.S. District Judge Richard Caputo ruled that Jim Thorpe borough in northeastern Pennsylvania amounts to a museum under the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act ("NAGPRA").
The team won titles in 1916, 1917, and 1919.
He claimed that the agreement between his stepmother and Jim Thorpe, Pa., borough officials was made against the wishes of other family members who want him buried in Native American land.
Although the public didn't seem to care much about Thorpe's past, the Amateur Athletic Union (AAU), and especially its secretary James Edward Sullivan, took the case very seriously.
He is referenced by O'Brien earlier in the film, as a player you could build a team around.
Several sources recount that, when awarding Thorpe his prize, King Gustav said, "You, sir, are the greatest athlete in the world", to which Thorpe replied, "Thanks, King".
Barnstorming across the United States and then around the world, Thorpe was the celebrity of the tour.
In 1917 Iva and Thorpe bought a house now known as the Jim Thorpe House in Yale, Oklahoma, and lived there until 1923.
According to his obituary in ''The New York Times'' he could run the 100-yard dash in 10&nbsp;seconds flat, the 220 in 21.8&nbsp;seconds, the 440 in 51.8&nbsp;seconds, the 880 in 1:57, the mile in 4:35, the 120-yard high hurdles in 15&nbsp;seconds, and the 220-yard low hurdles in 24&nbsp;seconds.
In that game, Thorpe's 92-yard touchdown was nullified by a teammate's penalty, but on the next play Thorpe rushed for a 97-yard touchdown.
There is also some evidence that Thorpe's amateur status had been questioned long before the Olympics, but the AAU had ignored the issue until being confronted with it in 1913.
Thorpe signed with the New York Giants baseball club in 1913 and played sporadically with them as an outfielder for three seasons.
He could long jump 23&nbsp;ft 6&nbsp;in and high-jump 6&nbsp;ft 5&nbsp;in.
In the "double no-hitter" between Fred Toney of the Reds and Hippo Vaughn of the Chicago Cubs, Thorpe drove in the winning run in the 10th inning.
He played as part of several all American Indian teams throughout his career, and barnstormed as a professional basketball player with a team composed entirely of American Indians.
In 1926 Thorpe married Freeda Verona Kirkpatrick (September 19, 1905 – March 2, 2007).
Thorpe was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1963, one of seventeen players in the charter class.
Thorpe is featured as a ghost figure in the 1994 film ''WindRunner: A Spirited Journey'', where he is portrayed by Russell Means.
Bellemont was a small community, now disappeared, on the line between Pottawatomie and Lincoln Counties.
His team finished the season 11–1.
The 1912 version consisted of the long jump, javelin throw, 200-meter dash, discus throw and 1500-meter run.
*  Jim Thorpe Dies of Heart Attack at 64 ''Chicago Tribune'', March 29, 1953, Retrieved May 12, 2007.
Again, he played sporadically for them in 1918 before being traded to the Boston Braves on May 21, 1919, for Pat Ragan.
Thorpe was nominally the APFA's first president, but spent most of the year playing for Canton and a year later was replaced as president by Joseph Carr.
He also competed in football, baseball, lacrosse and even ballroom dancing, winning the 1912 intercollegiate ballroom dancing championship.
In early 1953, Thorpe went into heart failure for the third time while dining with Patricia in their home in Lomita, California.
The appeals court held that Jim Thorpe borough is not a "museum", as that term is used in NAGPRA, and that the plaintiffs therefore could not invoke that federal statute to seek reinterment of Thorpe's remains.
There were only a few candidates for the decathlon team, however, and the trials were cancelled.
Thorpe was seen in some long shots in the film; and one scene showed him as a coaching assistant.
It was also distributed in the United Kingdom, where it was called ''Man of Bronze''.
He continued to play for Canton, coaching the team as well.
A pentathlon, based on the ancient Greek event, had been introduced at the 1906 Summer Olympics.
He reportedly ended the 1919 championship game by kicking a wind-assisted 95-yard punt from his team's own 5-yard line, effectively putting the game out of reach.
He had confined his efforts to jumps, hurdles and shot-puts, but now added pole vaulting, javelin, discus, hammer and 56&nbsp;lb weight.
His father, Hiram Thorpe, had an Irish father and a Sac and Fox Indian mother.
He has often been exploited."
It has often been suggested that his medals were stripped because of his ethnicity.
Later that year he became orphaned after Hiram Thorpe died from gangrene poisoning after being wounded in a hunting accident, and Jim again dropped out of school.
He played professional sports until age&nbsp;41, the end of his sports career coinciding with the start of the Great Depression.
Thorpe's successes had not gone unnoticed at home, and he was honored with a ticker-tape parade on Broadway.
Thorpe attended the Sac and Fox Indian Agency school in Stroud, Oklahoma, with his twin brother, Charlie.
While the town of Prague, Lincoln County, now claims to be the birthplace of Thorpe, there is no evidence that Thorpe himself called Prague his hometown.
Thorpe's achievements received great acclaim from sports journalists, both during his lifetime and since his death.
The first competition was the pentathlon.
Both seemed appropriate for Thorpe, who was so versatile that he served as Carlisle's one-man team in several track meets.
Usually, his roles were cameo appearances as an Indian, although in the 1932 comedy, ''Always Kickin'', Thorpe was prominently cast in a speaking part as himself, a kicking coach teaching young football players to drop-kick.
College players, in fact, regularly spent summers playing professionally but most used aliases, unlike Thorpe.
Thorpe's parents were both of mixed-race ancestry.
In the Olympic trials held at Celtic Park in New York, his all-round ability stood out in all these events and so he riveted a claim to a place on the team that went to Sweden.
Although Thorpe is listed as a gold medalist by the IOC, his results from 1912 have not been restored to the official Olympic records.
His letter didn't help.
He never practiced in his life, and he could do anything better than any other football player I ever saw."
In a ceremony on January 18, 1983, the IOC presented two of Thorpe's children, Gale and Bill, with commemorative medals.
Thorpe never played for an NFL championship team.
My memory goes back to Jim Thorpe.
A member of the Sac and Fox Nation, Thorpe became the first Native American to win a gold medal for his home country.
As was the custom of the day, the medals were presented to the athletes during the closing ceremonies of the games.
The film was directed by Michael Curtiz.
After his victories at the Olympic Games in Sweden, on September 2, 1912, he returned to Celtic Park, the home of the Irish American Athletic Club, in Queens, New York (where he had qualified four months earlier for the Olympic Games), to compete in the Amateur Athletic Union's All-Around Championship.
He won the gold medal.
US Olympic officials, including former teammate and later president of the IOC Avery Brundage, rebuffed several attempts, with Brundage once saying, "Ignorance is no excuse."
The town of Shawnee, disappointed that they were unable to honor the man who considered Shawnee his hometown, named their football field in his honor.
His accomplishments occurred during a period of severe racial inequality in the United States.
Pop Warner was hesitant to allow Thorpe, his best track and field athlete, to compete in a physical game such as football.
In 1912 Carlisle won the national collegiate championship largely as a result of his efforts – he scored 25 touchdowns and 198&nbsp;points during the season.
The people were in a fund raising effort to erect a permanent monument and burial place for Thorpe at the town's Athletic Park.
He first played professional football in 1913 as a member of the Indiana-based Pine Village Pros, a team that had a several-season winning streak against local teams during the 1910s.
In his career, he amassed 91&nbsp;runs scored, 82&nbsp;runs batted in and a .252&nbsp;batting average over 289&nbsp;games.
He ran away from school several times.
They succeeded in having the AAU and United States Olympic Committee overturn its decision and restore Thorpe's amateur status before 1913.
Thorpe suffered from alcoholism, and lived his last years in failing health and poverty.
He lost his Olympic titles after it was found he had been paid for playing two seasons of semi-professional baseball before competing in the Olympics, thus violating the amateurism rules that were then in place.
The football team was called the Indians.
Thorpe, whose parents were both half Caucasian, was raised as an American Indian.
In 2015 proposed designs for the 2018 Native American dollar coin featuring Thorpe were released.
For the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm, Sweden, two new multi-event disciplines were included, the pentathlon and the decathlon.
Strong competition from local favorite Hugo Wieslander was expected.
He placed in the top four in all ten events, and his Olympic record of 8,413 points would stand for nearly two decades.
In 1913 Thorpe married Iva M. Miller, whom he had met at Carlisle.
Charlie helped him through school until he succumbed to a bout of pneumonia when they were nine years old.
In January&nbsp;1913, he turned down a starting position with the American League cellar-dwelling St. Louis Browns, choosing instead to join the 1912&nbsp;National League champion New York Giants, who, with Thorpe playing in 19 of their 151&nbsp;games, would repeat as the 1913&nbsp;National League champions.
His father then sent him to the Haskell Institute, an Indian boarding school in Lawrence, Kansas, so that he would not run away again.
In 1950 an Associated Press poll of almost 400&nbsp;sportswriters and broadcasters voted Thorpe the "greatest athlete" of the first half of the 20th&nbsp;century.
In 1931, during the Great Depression, he sold the film rights to his life story to MGM for $1,500 ($ today).
His accomplishments were described in a similar racial context by other newspapers and sportswriters throughout his life.
He won the awards easily, winning three events, and was named to the pentathlon team, which also included future International Olympic Committee president Avery Brundage.
The decathlon was a relatively new event in modern athletics, although it had been part of American track meets since the 1880s and a version had been featured on the program of the 1904 St.&nbsp;Louis Olympics.
Although pictures of Thorpe in his WFI basketball uniform were printed on postcards and published in newspapers, this period of his life was not well documented.
The AAU decided to withdraw Thorpe's amateur status retroactively and asked the International Olympic Commission (IOC) to do the same.
Thorpe gained nationwide attention for the first time in 1911.
In 1999, the Associated Press placed him third on its list of the top athletes of the century, following Babe Ruth and Michael Jordan.
Thorpe, however, convinced Warner to let him try some rushing plays in practice against the school team's defense; Warner assumed he would be tackled easily and give up the idea.
But Thorpe had not abandoned football either.
Armed with this support and evidence from 1912 proving that Thorpe's disqualification had occurred after the 30-day time period allowed by Olympics rules, they succeeded in making the case to the IOC.
He remembered later, "I heard people yelling my name, and I couldn't realize how one fellow could have so many friends."
They had four children: Gail Margaret (October 31, 1917 – June 3, 2005), James F. (May 8, 1918 – September 28, 1919), Charlotte Marie (September 16, 1919 – December 8, 1998) and Grace Frances (December 10, 1921 – April 1, 2008).
Thorpe struggled to earn a living after that, working several odd jobs.
In 1986, the Jim Thorpe Association established an award with Thorpe's name.
In an unusual ruling, they declared that Thorpe was co-champion with Ferdinand Bie and Wieslander, although both of these athletes had always said they considered Thorpe to be the only champion.
In the 1930s, Thorpe appeared in several short films and features.
She made a deal with officials which, according to Thorpe's son Jack, was done by Patricia for monetary considerations.
Before signing him Canton was averaging 1,200&nbsp;fans a game, but 8,000 showed up for his debut against the Massillon Tigers.
Late in the season, he was sold back to the Giants.
In 1983, 30 years after his death, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) restored his Olympic medals.
Lastly, Thorpe married Patricia Gladys Evelyn "Patsy" Askew (née Woodbury) on June 2, 1945; she was with him when he died.
'''James Francis''' "'''Jim'''" '''Thorpe''' (Sac and Fox (Sauk): ''Wa-Tho-Huk'', translated as "Bright Path"; May 22, 1887March 28, 1953) was an American athlete and Olympic gold medalist.
He continued to play minor league baseball until 1922.
Even when I was in my prime, I could not do what he did today."
Over the years, supporters of Thorpe attempted to have his Olympic titles reinstated.
The Jim Thorpe Award is given annually to the best defensive back in college football.
Because the minor league team that last held Jim Thorpe's contract had disbanded in 1910, he found himself in the rare position of being a sought after free agent at the major league level during the era of the reserve clause, and thus had a choice of baseball teams for which to play.
Competing against Bruno Brodd of the Irish American Athletic Club and J. Bredemus of Princeton University, he won seven of the ten events contested and came in second in the remaining three.
He told a reporter from ''New York World'', "Thorpe is the greatest athlete that ever lived.
Thorpe's parents were both Roman Catholic, a faith which Thorpe observed throughout his adult life.
Thorpe's monument, featuring the quote from Gustav&nbsp;V ("You, sir, are the greatest athlete in the world.
Sheridan, a five-time Olympic gold medalist, was present to watch his record broken, approached Thorpe after the event and shook his hand saying, "Jim, my boy, you're a great man.
He retired from professional football at age&nbsp;41, having played 52&nbsp;NFL games for six teams from 1920 to 1928.
Thorpe was a chronic alcoholic during his later life.
Although the pentathlon was primarily decided on place points, points were also earned for the marks achieved in the individual events.
He could pole vault 11&nbsp;feet, put the shot 47&nbsp;ft 9&nbsp;in, throw the javelin 163&nbsp;feet, and throw the discus 136&nbsp;feet.
Thorpe "ran around past and through them not once, but twice".
The annual Thorpe Cup athletics meeting is named in his honor.
Local officials had asked the state legislature for funding but were turned down so they doubled their efforts to raise the money on their own.
He competed only sporadically in track and field, even though this turned out to be the sport in which he gained his greatest fame.
He ran out of money sometime in the early&nbsp;1950s.
The monument site contains his tomb, two statues of him in athletic poses, and historical markers describing his life story.
A lawyer for Bill and Richard Thorpe said the men would pursue the legal process to have their father returned to Sac and Fox land in central Oklahoma.
Information about Thorpe's birth, name and ethnic background varies widely.
President Richard Nixon, as authorized by U.S.&nbsp;Senate Joint Resolution&nbsp;73, proclaimed Monday, April&nbsp;16,&nbsp;1973, as "Jim Thorpe Day" to promote the nationwide recognition of Thorpe.
He is shown in the 1912 photo wearing two different shoes and extra socks because one shoe was too big.
That same year, the Associated Press named Thorpe the "greatest American football player" of the first half of the century.
He won four of the five events and placed third in the javelin, an event he had not competed in before 1912.
In the spring of 1912, he started training for the Olympics.
*  Jim Thorpe, profootballhalloffame.com, Retrieved April 23, 2007.
Thorpe was born in Indian Territory, but no birth certificate has been found.
He met with Pope Pius X and Abbas II Hilmi Bey (the last Khedive of Egypt), and played before 20,000 people in London including King George V. While in Rome, he was filmed wrestling with another baseball player on the floor of the Colosseum, although no known copy of that film has survived.
He then signed with the Canton Bulldogs in 1915.
The first notice of Thorpe in ''The New York Times'' was headlined "Indian Thorpe in Olympiad; Redskin from Carlisle Will Strive for Place on American Team."
Thorpe's original medals had been held in museums, but they had been stolen and have never been recovered.
Late in the film, he tells Pat O'Brien (playing Knute Rockne) at the halftime of a game, "Two minutes, Rock!"
Thorpe's final event was the decathlon, his first — and as it turned out, his only — Olympic decathlon.
His mother, Charlotte Vieux, had a French father and a Potawatomi mother, a descendant of Chief Louis Vieux.
Citing the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, Jack was arguing to bring his father's remains to the reservation in Oklahoma, where they would be buried near those of his father, sisters and brother, a mile from the place he was born.
After his athletic career, Thorpe struggled to provide for his family.
Football was – and would remain – Thorpe's favorite sport.
The first newspaper reports did not appear until January&nbsp;1913, about six months after the Stockholm Games had concluded.
His schedule in the Olympics was busy.
In 1982, Wheeler and Ridlon established the Jim Thorpe Foundation and gained support from the U.S.&nbsp;Congress.
Between 1921 and 1923, he helped organize and played for the Oorang Indians (LaRue, Ohio), an all-Native American team.
