He took pride in his program for the appointment of judges and state government officials.
On the other hand, Carter felt restricted by the rigidity of the military and yearned to assume a path more like his father's.
Carter addressed the Democratic National Convention in North Carolina by videotape, and did not attend the convention in person.
Callaway was a very strong candidate, and state Democrats panicked over the prospect of losing the governorship they had held since Reconstruction.
For a year, Jimmy, Rosalynn, and their three sons lived in public housing in Plains; Carter is the only U.S. president to have lived in housing subsidized for the poor.
On August 12, however, Carter announced he had been diagnosed with cancer that had metastasized, without specifying where the cancer had originated.
The Souther Field Airport in Americus was renamed Jimmy Carter Regional Airport in 2009.
Abedi also traveled with Carter to at least seven countries in connection with Carter's charitable activities.
In 2002, President Carter received the Nobel Peace Prize for his work "to find peaceful solutions to international conflicts, to advance democracy and human rights, and to promote economic and social development" through The Carter Center.
Carter saw Callaway, a Republican, as a rival who represented the inherited wealth and selfishness he despised in politics.
Carter spoke to Mashaal on several matters, including "formulas for prisoner exchange to obtain the release of Corporal Shalit."
California voters will have the opportunity to do this on election day."
The Civil Aeronautics Board's powers of regulation were to be phased out, eventually allowing market forces to determine routes and fares.
Lester Maddox, Carter's predecessor as governor, became lieutenant governor.
Moreover, the failure to accurately predict Soviet intentions caused American officials to reappraise the Soviet threat to both Iran and Pakistan, although it is now known that those fears were overblown.
In July 2013, Carter expressed his criticism of current federal surveillance programs as disclosed by Edward Snowden indicating that "America has no functioning democracy at this moment."
He set up the Carter Center in 1982 as his base for advancing human rights.
Carter and the Center support human rights defenders around the world and have intervened with heads of state on their behalf.
In October 2007, Carter toured Darfur with several of the Elders, including Desmond Tutu.
Two days after the quote was published, Carter told NBC's Today that the "worst in history" comment was "careless or misinterpreted," and that he "wasn't comparing this administration with other administrations back through history, but just with President Nixon's."
On December 6, 2015, Carter issued a statement that his medical scans no longer showed any cancer.
His presidential library, Jimmy Carter Library and Museum was opened in 1986.
Two successive nominees, Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis, also opposed the death penalty.
Carter is also a descendant of Thomas Cornell, ancestor of the founder of Cornell University, as well as the ancestor of Richard Nixon and Bill Gates.
Carter serves as Honorary Chair for the Continuity of Government Commission (he was co-chair with Gerald Ford until the latter's death).
Carter was defeated by Ronald Reagan in a landslide, and the Senate went Republican for the first time since 1952.
His reaction to mentioning Barack Obama was: honesty, intelligence, and politically adept.
Carter's father, James Earl Carter Sr., was a successful local businessman who ran a general store and had begun to invest in farmland.
Carter successfully secured the release.
His December 31, 1977 – January 1, 1978 visit to Iran took place less than a year before the overthrow of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.
A popular anecdote holds that he was passed over for valedictorian after he and his friends skipped school to venture downtown in a hot rod.
Carter described Blair's actions as "abominable" and stated that the British Prime Minister's "almost undeviating support for the ill-advised policies of President Bush in Iraq have been a major tragedy for the world."
Carter wrote: "As you know, the United States is one of the few countries, along with nations such as Saudi Arabia, China, and Cuba, which still carry out the death penalty despite the ongoing tragedy of wrongful conviction and gross racial and class-based disparities that make impossible the fair implementation of this ultimate punishment."
Less than four months later, on December 6, 2015, Carter, then 91, said that his medical scans no longer showed any cancer, and on March 7, 2016, he concluded his cancer treatment.
He canceled military pay raises during a time of high inflation and government deficits.
In March 2004, Carter condemned George W. Bush and Tony Blair for waging an unnecessary war "based upon lies and misinterpretations" to oust Saddam Hussein.
He also rented out a section of tenant housing he had purchased.
Carter later regretted endorsing the death penalty, saying, "I didn't see the injustice of it as I do now."
He accused Sanders of corruption, but when pressed by the media, could come up with no evidence.
The Carters settled on a dirt road in nearby Archery, which was almost entirely populated by impoverished African American families.
He is a supporter of President Obama but has been critical of aspects of his foreign policy, particularly with regard to the use of drones and Obama's failure to close Guantanamo Bay detention camp.
He has vigorously opposed the Supreme Court's decision in ''Citizens United v. FEC'' to strike down McCain-Feingold limits on campaign spending by corporations and unions, saying that the U.S. is "no longer a functioning democracy" and now has a system of "unlimited political bribery."
The organization's priority issue areas include the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Korean Peninsula, Sudan, and South Sudan, sustainable development, and equality for girls and women.
He stated that the next President should make the promise that the United States will "never again torture a prisoner."
Carter and Rosalynn Smith were married in July 1946.
Carter's hobbies include painting, fly-fishing, woodworking, cycling, tennis, and skiing.
In 1982, he established the Carter Center in Atlanta to advance human rights and alleviate human suffering.
Carter had long dreamed of attending the U.S.
The congressional race was shaken up in mid-May when Callaway dropped out and decided to run for Governor of Georgia instead.
He expanded the number of black state employees, judges, and board members.
He tried unsuccessfully to become chairman of the National Governors Association to boost his visibility.
I don't believe you can win this state without being a racist."
I believe I am a more complicated person than that."
The campaign grew even more bitter; Carter's campaign criticized Sanders for supporting Martin Luther King Jr. Carter won the runoff election with 60 percent of the vote—winning 7 percent of the black vote—and went on to win the general election easily over the Republican Hal Suit, a local news anchor.
File:FORPRES.jpg| Carter (right), walks with, from left, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, and Bill Clinton during the dedication of the William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park in Little Rock, Arkansas on November 18, 2004
U.S. support for the mujahideen accelerated under Carter's successor, Ronald Reagan, at a final cost to U.S. taxpayers of some $3 billion.
With Carter's reluctance to engage in back-slapping and political favors, the legislature found him frustrating to work with.
Carter won the 1980 primary with 51.13% of the vote (all incumbent candidates since have won at least 72.8% of their party's primary votes) but lost the general election in an electoral landslide to Republican nominee Ronald Reagan, who won 44 of 50 states.
This period was a spiritual turning point for Carter; he grew increasingly evangelical, undertaking several religious missions in other states.
Beginning in 1962, the town of Americus was the site of mass beatings and incarcerations of black protesters, echoing similar unrest throughout the country.
In November 2008, President Carter, former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, and Graça Machel, wife of Nelson Mandela, were stopped from entering Zimbabwe, to inspect the human rights situation, by President Robert Mugabe's government.
On the economic front he confronted  persistent "stagflation", a combination of high inflation, high unemployment and slow growth.
''Time'' magazine ran a story on the progressive "New South" governors elected that year in a May 1971 issue, featuring a cover illustration of Carter.
Despite this, Carter has expressed no regrets over his decision to support what he still considers the "freedom fighters" in Afghanistan.
While he met with black figures such as Martin Luther King Sr. and Andrew Young, and visited many black-owned businesses, he also praised Wallace and promised to invite him to give a speech in Georgia.
Carter told the BBC that Blair was "apparently subservient" to Bush and criticized him for his "blind support" for the Iraq war.
In May 1994, Carter, along with former presidents Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan, wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives in support of banning "semi-automatic assault guns."
On November 18, 2009, Carter visited Vietnam to build houses for the poor.
File:Presidents Obama, Clinton, and Carter.jpg|thumb|right|Carter (right) with President Barack Obama (center) and Bill Clinton (left) on August 28, 2013, the 50th anniversary of the March on Washington
Young Carter was a diligent student with a fondness for reading.
The two had previously clashed over which two-year college would be expanded to a four-year college program by the state; Carter wanted it to go to Georgia Southwestern College in Americus, but Callaway wanted the funding to go to downtown Columbus.
Carter challenged the results; when fraud was confirmed, a new election was held, which he won.
He implemented zero-based budgeting within state departments and added a Judicial Selection Commission to verify the credentials of judges appointed by the governor.
The exit poll and the Venezuela government's control of election machines became the basis of claims of election fraud.
A diligent legislator, Carter took speed-reading courses to keep up with the workload.
A state Senate seat was opened by the dissolution of Georgia's County Unit System in 1962; Carter announced his run for the seat 15 days before the election.
He hired Rita Jackson Samuels, a black woman, to advise him on potential appointments.
Carter graduated 60th out of 820 midshipmen in the class of 1946 with a  Bachelor of Science degree and was commissioned as an ensign.
Rickover's demands on his men and machines were legendary, and Carter later said that, next to his parents, Rickover was the greatest influence on his life.
In 1979, Carter deregulated the American beer industry by making it legal to sell malt, hops, and yeast to American home brewers for the first time since the effective 1920 beginning of Prohibition in the United States.
Meanwhile, he also took classes and read up on agriculture while Rosalynn learned accounting to manage the business's books.
Carter was the first president to make a state visit to Sub-Saharan Africa when he went to Nigeria in 1978.
He had quietly decided to begin putting a presidential bid together.
When Carter entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries in 1976, he was considered to have little chance against nationally better-known politicians; his name recognition was two percent.
The Civil Rights Movement was well underway as Carter took office.
In 2000, Carter severed his membership with the Southern Baptist Convention, saying the group's doctrines did not align with his Christian beliefs.
He won the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize, which was partially a response to President George W. Bush's threats of war against Iraq and Carter's criticism of the Bush administration.
Carter suggested during a state visit to the UK in 1977 that Thomas should have a memorial in Poets' Corner at Westminster Abbey, an idea which came to fruition in 1982.
The end of his presidential tenure was marked by the 1979–1981 Iran hostage crisis, the 1979 energy crisis, the Three Mile Island nuclear accident, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Carter's teacher, Julia Coleman, was an especially strong influence.
Carter states that "one of the defenses of the Bush administration&nbsp;... has been, okay, we must be more correct in our actions than the world thinks because Great Britain is backing us.
Carter soon decided to follow Callaway and run for governor himself.
While at the academy, Carter fell in love with his sister Ruth's friend Rosalynn Smith, whom he would marry shortly after his graduation in 1946.
Communists under the leadership of Nur Muhammad Taraki seized power in Afghanistan on April 27, 1978.
The reorganization plan was submitted in January 1972, but had a cool reception in the legislature.
The previous record holder for longest retired president was Herbert Hoover.
The new regime—which was divided between Taraki's extremist Khalq faction and the more moderate Parcham—signed a treaty of friendship with the Soviet Union in December of that year.
In April 2008, the London-based Arabic newspaper ''Al-Hayat'' reported that Carter met with exiled Hamas leader Khaled Mashaal on his visit to Syria.
The main purpose of the act was to remove government control over fares, routes and market entry (of new airlines) from commercial aviation.
Carter remained relatively quiet on the issue at first, even as it polarized much of the county, to avoid alienating his segregationist colleagues.
In a televised speech, he announced sanctions on the Soviet Union, promised renewed aid to Pakistan, and committed the U.S. to the Persian Gulf's defense.
Numerous generations of Carters lived as cotton farmers in Georgia.
He was named to several southern planning commissions and was a delegate to the 1972 Democratic National Convention, where the liberal U.S.
From a young age, Carter showed a deep commitment to Christianity.
Carter later wrote that the most intense and mounting opposition to his policies came from the liberal wing of the Democratic Party, which he attributed to Ted Kennedy's ambition to replace him as president.
As the Watergate scandal of President Nixon was still fresh in the voters' minds, Carter's position as an outsider, distant from Washington, D.C., became an asset.
This was the first time that such a process had been undertaken.
Amin was considered a "brutal psychopath" by foreign observers; even the Soviets were alarmed by the brutality of the Afghan communists, and suspected Amin of being an agent of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), although that was not the case.
Carter had endorsed Maddox, although the two did not campaign as a ticket.
The Elders instead made their assessment from South Africa, meeting with Zimbabwe– and South Africa-based leaders from politics, business, international organisations and civil society in Johannesburg.
The main purpose of Abedi's association with Carter was not charitable activities, but to enhance BCCI's influence, in order to open more offices and develop more business.
Reagan used the economic problems, Iran hostage crisis, and lack of Washington cooperation to portray Carter as a weak and ineffectual leader.
The initial results showed Carter losing, but this was the result of fraudulent voting orchestrated by Joe Hurst, the Democratic Party chairman in Quitman County, with the aid of the Quitman County sheriff.
Carter observed the Venezuela recall elections on August 15, 2004.
In the Democratic primary he ran as a moderate alternative to both the liberal former governor Ellis Arnall and the conservative Lester Maddox.
This statement followed a position of the Convention two years previously advocating the submission of wives to their husbands.
He did speak up on a few divisive issues, giving speeches against literacy tests and against a change to the Georgia Constitution which, he felt, implied a compulsion to practice religion.
Before his term ended he contributed to a bill expanding statewide education funding and getting Georgia Southwestern a four-year program.
That year he also received the United Nations Human Rights Prize, given in honor of human rights achievements, and the Hoover Medal, recognizing engineers who have contributed to global causes.
He said that the view that women are inferior is not confined to one faith, "nor, tragically does its influence stop at the walls of the church, mosque, synagogue or temple."
(Eagleton was later replaced on the ticket by Sargent Shriver.)
In 1977, Carter appointed Alfred E. Kahn, a professor of economics at Cornell University, to be chair of the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB).
He endorsed Senator Henry "Scoop" Jackson, in part to distance himself from George Wallace.
In his Nobel Prize lecture, Carter urged "prohibition of the death penalty".
On CNN Obama stated, "Are there people out there who don't like me because of race?
Carter attended the Plains High School from 1930 to 1941.
In a 2003 op-ed in ''The New York Times'', Carter warned against the consequences of a war in Iraq and urged restraint in use of military force.
Ultimately he merged about 300 state agencies into 22—a fact he would emphasize in his presidential run—although it is disputed that there were any overall cost savings from doing so.
Leroy Johnson, a black state Senator, voiced his support for Carter, saying, "I understand why he ran that kind of ultra-conservative campaign.&nbsp;...
Under this program, all such appointments were based on merit, rather than political influence.
Returning to small-town life in Plains seemed "a monumental step backward," she said later.
Carter has planned to be buried in front of his home in Plains, Georgia.
By December, Amin's government had lost control of much of the country, prompting the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan, execute Amin, and install Parcham leader Babrak Karmal as president.
Administered by the non-governmental and non-profit Habitat for Humanity International (HFHI), the annual program of 2009 would build and repair 166 homes in Vietnam and some other Asian countries with the support of nearly 3,000 volunteers around the world, the organization said on its website.
When Lieutenant William Calley was convicted in a military trial and sentenced to life for his role in the My Lai Massacre in South Vietnam, a politically polarizing issue, Carter avoided paying direct tribute to Calley.
On August 20, he disclosed that melanoma had been found in his brain and liver, and that he had begun treatment with the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab and was about to start radiation therapy.
File:DIG13605-028.jpg|Carter during a Google Hangout session held during the LBJ Presidential Library Civil Rights Summit in 2014
Zia's ties with the U.S. had been strained during Carter's presidency due to Pakistan's nuclear program and the execution of Ali Bhutto in April 1979, but Carter told Brzezinski and secretary of state Cyrus Vance as early as January 1979 that it was vital to "repair our relationships with Pakistan" in light of the unrest in Iran.
Like his immediate predecessor, Gerald Ford, Carter did not serve a second term as president.
The two found little common ground during their four years of service, often publicly feuding with each other.
Carter carried fewer states than Ford—23 states to the defeated Ford's 27—yet Carter won with the largest percentage of the popular vote (50.1 percent) of any non-incumbent since Dwight Eisenhower.
Though they barely broke even the first year, the Carters grew the business and became quite successful.
He was criticized by the American Civil Liberties Union for not doing enough to find alternatives.
The Soviets were unable to quell the insurgency and withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, precipitating the dissolution of the Soviet Union itself.
By comparison Carter was a sincere, honest, and well-meaning Southerner.
He promoted government reorganization.
In response to the Soviet move he ended détente, escalated the Cold War, and led the international boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow.
In a March 29, 2012 interview with Laura Ingraham, Carter expressed his current view of abortion and his wish to see the Democratic Party becoming more pro-life:
He made several trips to the Middle East to broker peace negotiations.
Israel believes that these three Hamas legislators had a role in the 2006 kidnapping of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, and has a deportation order set for them.
''The Independent'' wrote, "Carter is widely considered a better man than he was a president."
On January 7, 1980, Carter signed  Law H.R.
Just prior to the seizure, Carter began to disassociate himself from Abedi and the bank.
He met with political dissidents; visited the AIDS sanitarium, a medical school, a biotech facility, an agricultural production cooperative, and a school for disabled children; and threw a pitch for an all-star baseball game in Havana.
Carter was interviewed by Robert Scheer of ''Playboy'' for the November 1976 issue, which hit the newsstands a couple of weeks before the election.
What led Carter to take this action was a doctrinal statement by the Convention, adopted in June 2000, advocating a literal interpretation of the Bible.
An agreement between Irish Aid and The Carter Center was also signed on this day.
Carter announced his endorsement of Senator (now president) Barack Obama.
Following a general uprising in April 1979, Taraki was deposed by Khalq rival Hafizullah Amin in September.
The former President has an extensive family history of cancer, including both of his parents and all three of his siblings.
For example, U.S. intelligence closely followed Soviet exercises for an invasion of Iran throughout 1980, while an earlier warning from Carter's national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski that "if the Soviets came to dominate Afghanistan, they could promote a separate Baluchistan&nbsp;... thus dismembering Pakistan and Iran" took on new urgency.
Carter has stated that he supports same-sex marriage and that he believes that Jesus would also support it, saying "I believe Jesus would.
He initially started undergraduate coursework in engineering at Georgia Southwestern College in nearby Americus in 1941, transferred to Georgia Tech in Atlanta in 1942, and achieved admission to the Naval Academy in 1943.
During Carter's term as President, two new cabinet-level departments, the Department of Energy and the Department of Education were established.
He implied support or dislike of private schools depending on the audience.
''US News & World Report'' offered an analysis of the polls, indicating "very good reason to believe that the Penn, Schoen & Berland exit poll had the result right, and that Chávez's election officialsand Carter and the American mediagot it wrong."
He also has an interest in poetry, particularly the works of Dylan Thomas.
He won several Northern states by building the largest single bloc.
President Jimmy Carter serves as an Honorary Chair for the World Justice Project.
Carter has been actively involved in the work of The Elders, participating in visits to Cyprus, the Korean Peninsula, and the Middle East, among others
Carter attempted to calm various conflicts around the world, most visibly in the Middle East with the signing of the Camp David Accords; giving back the Panama Canal; and signing the SALT II nuclear arms reduction treaty with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev.
It also works to diminish the stigma of mental illnesses and improve nutrition through increased crop production in Africa.
On November 4, 1979 a group of Iranian students, belonging to the Muslim Student Followers of the Imam's Line, who were supporting the Iranian Revolution, took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran.
His answer was: the end of a very disappointing administration.
On July 18, 2007, Carter joined Nelson Mandela in Johannesburg, South Africa, to announce his participation in The Elders, a group of independent global leaders who work together on peace and human rights issues.
His presidency has drawn medium-low responses from historians, with many considering him to have accomplished more with his post-presidency work.
Carter was in favor of racial tolerance and integration—at one point, the local White Citizens' Council boycotted his peanut warehouse when he refused to join them—but he often kept those feelings to himself to avoid making enemies.
Carter's grandson Jason Carter is a former Georgia State Senator and in 2014 was the Democratic candidate for governor of Georgia, losing to the Republican incumbent, Nathan Deal.
The following year he was named chairman of the Democratic National Committee's congressional, as well as gubernatorial, campaigns.
In 1998, the US Navy named the third and last ''Seawolf''-class submarine honoring former President Carter and his service as a submariner officer.
The day after the "worst in history" comment was published, White House spokesman Tony Fratto said that Carter had become "increasingly irrelevant with these kinds of comments."
He was sent to the Naval Reactors Branch of the then Atomic Energy Commission in Washington, D.C. for three month temporary duty, while Rosalynn moved with their children to Schenectady, New York.
In 1978, Carter declared a federal emergency in the neighborhood of Love Canal in the city of Niagara Falls, New York.
After Carter left the presidency, his interest in the developing countries led him to having a close relationship with Agha Hasan Abedi, the founder of Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI).
His last child Amy was born around this time.
The broadly inclusive movement seeks to unite Baptists of all races, cultures and convention affiliations.
In 1973 he appeared on the game show ''What's My Line'', where a group of celebrity panelists would try to guess his occupation.
His final year was marred by the Iran hostage crisis, which contributed to his losing the 1980 election to Ronald Reagan.
On David Rockefeller's endorsement he was named to the Trilateral Commission in April 1973.
He had traveled over 50,000 miles, visited 37 states, and delivered over 200 speeches before any other candidates announced that they were in the race.
As an adolescent, Carter played on the Plains High School basketball team; he also joined the Future Farmers of America and developed a lifelong interest in woodworking.
After two weeks of negotiations it was passed at midnight on the last day of the session.
Carter and Robinson called on the UN Security Council to act on what they described as the inhumane conditions in Gaza, and mandate an end to the siege.
He used a two-prong strategy: In the South, which most had tacitly conceded to Alabama's George Wallace, Carter ran as a moderate favorite son.
The appeal to racism became more blatant over time; Carter's senior campaign aides handed out a photograph of his opponent Sanders celebrating with black basketball players.
A major accomplishment of The Carter Center has been the elimination of more than 99&nbsp;percent of cases of Guinea worm disease, from an estimated 3.5&nbsp;million cases in 1986 to 148 reported cases in 2013 to 23 in 2015 The Carter Center has monitored 96 elections in 38 countries since 1989.
New Mexico abolished the death penalty in 2009.
Carter ran a more modern campaign this time around, employing printed graphics and statistical analysis.
On August 3, 2015, Carter underwent elective surgery to remove "a small mass" on his liver, and his prognosis for a full recovery was initially said to be "excellent".
He had been a reserve second lieutenant in the U.S. Army's Quartermaster Corps during World War I. Carter's mother, Bessie Lillian Gordy, was a nurse at the Wise hospital.
