Investigations started with an inquest by Guillaume Bouillé, a theologian and former rector of the University of Paris (Sorbonne).
Cultural depictions of her have continued in films, theater, television, video games, music, and performances to this day.
The English army withdrew from the Loire Valley and headed north on 18 June, joining with an expected unit of reinforcements under the command of Sir John Fastolf.
She remained astute to the end of her life and the rehabilitation trial testimony frequently marvels at her astuteness:
Henry V's brother, John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford, acted as regent.
The Hundred Years' War had begun in 1337 as an inheritance dispute over the French throne, interspersed with occasional periods of relative peace.
Prior to the appearance of Joan of Arc, the English had nearly achieved their goal of a dual monarchy under English control and the French army had not achieved any major victories for a generation.
In the words of Stephen Richey, "She turned what had been a dry dynastic squabble that left the common people unmoved except for their own suffering into a passionately popular war of national liberation."
The coronation took place the following morning.
After she died, the English raked back the coals to expose her charred body so that no one could claim she had escaped alive.
In 2006, Philippe Charlier, a forensic scientist at Raymond Poincaré Hospital (Garches) was authorized to study the relics.
(various psychiatric definitions)
Other towns in the army's path returned to French allegiance without resistance.
The young Charles of Orléans succeeded his father as duke and was placed in the custody of his father-in-law, the Count of Armagnac.
At the age of sixteen, she asked a relative named Durand Lassois to take her to the nearby town of Vaucouleurs, where she petitioned the garrison commander, Robert de Baudricourt, for permission to visit the French Royal Court at Chinon.
Joan of Arc was born to Jacques d'Arc and Isabelle Romée, a peasant family, at Domrémy in north-east France.
In terms of doctrine, she had been justified in disguising herself as a pageboy during her journey through enemy territory, and she was justified in wearing armor during battle and protective clothing in camp and then in prison.
The illiterate defendant signed an abjuration document that she did not understand under threat of immediate execution.
At her trial, Joan stated that she was about nineteen years old, which implies she thought she was born around 1412.
No one was optimistic that the city could long withstand the siege.
Joan of Arc is one of the nine secondary patron saints of France, along with St. Denis, St. Martin of Tours, St. Louis, St. Michael, St. Rémi, St. Petronilla, St. Radegund and Ste.
Jean d'Orléans, the acting head of the ducal family of Orléans on behalf of his captive half-brother, initially excluded her from war councils and failed to inform her when the army engaged the enemy.
This party's opponents sometimes satirize its appropriation of her image.
Alençon credited her with saving his life at Jargeau, where she warned him that a cannon on the walls was about to fire at him.
Kelly DeVries argues that Joan of Arc's aggressive use of artillery and frontal assaults influenced French tactics for the rest of the war.
These attempts were beaten back.
Pope Callixtus III authorized this proceeding, also known as the "nullification trial", at the request of Inquisitor-General Jean Bréhal and Joan's mother Isabelle Romée.
Although I would rather have remained spinning wool at my mother's side&nbsp;... yet must I go and must I do this thing, for my Lord wills that I do so."
She was later handed over to the English and put on trial by the pro-English Bishop of Beauvais Pierre Cauchon on a variety of charges.
'''Joan of Arc''' (, ; 6 January c. 1412&nbsp;– 30 May 1431), nicknamed "'''The Maid of Orléans'''" (), is considered a heroine of France for her role during the Lancastrian phase of the Hundred Years' War, and was canonized as a Roman Catholic saint.
On 4 May, however, the Armagnacs attacked and captured the outlying fortress of  Saint Loup (''bastille de Saint-Loup''), followed on 5 May by a march to a second fortress called Saint-Jean-le-Blanc, which was found deserted.
In addition, stacking the tribunal entirely with pro-English clergy violated the medieval Church's requirement that heresy trials be judged by an impartial or balanced group of clerics.
His weak leadership was probably the most important factor in ending the conflict.
Claims made by such authors include: that Joan of Arc was not actually burned at the stake; that she was secretly the half sister of King Charles VII; that she was not a true Christian but a member of a pagan cult; and that most of the story of Joan of Arc is actually a myth.
This stigma was so persistent that contemporaries of the next generation would attribute to inherited madness the breakdown that England's King Henry VI was to suffer in 1453: Henry VI was nephew to Charles VII and grandson to Charles VI.
Robert de Baudricourt granted Joan an escort to visit Chinon after news from Orleans confirmed her assertion of the defeat.
Burgundian troops surrounded the rear guard, and she was pulled off her horse by an archer.
File:Joan of Arc on horseback.png|Joan of Arc depicted on horseback in an illustration from a 1505 manuscript.
Upon her arrival, Joan effectively turned the longstanding Anglo-French conflict into a religious war, a course of action that was not without risk.
Church doctrine held that no one could be certain of being in God's grace.
Joan asked for permission to travel with the army and wear protective armor, which was provided by the Royal government.
In October, Joan was with the royal army when it took Saint-Pierre-le-Moûtier, followed by an unsuccessful attempt to take La-Charité-sur-Loire in November and December.
Under ecclesiastical law, Bishop Cauchon lacked jurisdiction over the case.
Baudricourt's sarcastic response did not deter her.
The allied forces conquered large sections of France.
Pope Benedict XV canonized Joan on 16 May 1920.
According to the later descriptions of some of the tribunal members, she had previously been wearing male (i.e.
After arriving at the Royal Court she impressed Charles VII during a private conference.
In 1456, an inquisitorial court authorized by Pope Callixtus III examined the trial, debunked the charges against her, pronounced her innocent, and declared her a martyr.
This request was denied.
The standard accounts of the life of Joan of Arc have been challenged by revisionist authors.
None of these claims is widely accepted by historians.
Joan agreed to wear feminine clothing when she abjured, which created a problem.
She agreed to surrender to a pro-Burgundian nobleman named Lionel of Wandomme, a member of Jean de Luxembourg's unit.
In March 2016 a ring believed to have been worn by Joan, which has passed through the hands of a cardinal, a king, an aristocrat and the daughter of a British physician, was sold at auction to the Puy du Fou, a historical theme park, for £300,000.
File:Vigiles du roi Charles VII 02.jpg|Miniature from ''Vigiles du roi Charles VII''.
Henry V of England took advantage of these internal divisions when he invaded the kingdom in 1415, winning a dramatic victory at Agincourt on 25 October and subsequently capturing many northern French towns.
The future French king, Charles VII, assumed the title of Dauphin—the heir to the throne—at the age of fourteen, after all four of his older brothers had died in succession.
On 23 May 1430, she was captured at Compiègne by the Burgundian faction, which was allied with the English.
The French vanguard attacked a unit of English archers who had been placed to block the road.
The conflict had been a legalistic feud between two related royal families, but Joan transformed it along religious lines and gave meaning to appeals such as that of squire Jean de Metz when he asked, "Must the king be driven from the kingdom; and are we to be English?"
Before England could rebuild its military leadership and force of longbowmen lost in 1429, the country lost its alliance with Burgundy when the Treaty of Arras was signed in 1435.
Large amounts of pine pollen were also found, consistent with the presence of resin used in mummification and some unburned linen was found and was determined to be similar to that used to wrap mummies.
The following morning the army received a royal order to withdraw.
The British later demanded the ring back until the purchasers successfully appealed to the queen of England; the ring was reportedly first passed to Cardinal Henry Beaufort who attended Joan's trail and execution in 1431.
When her soldiers' clothing wasn't needed while on campaign, she was said to have gone back to wearing a dress.
Eyewitnesses described the scene of the execution by burning on 30 May 1431.
This would include the use of clothing as protection against rape if the clothing would offer protection.
They recommended that her claims should be put to the test by seeing if she could lift the siege of Orléans as she had predicted.
She operated within a religious tradition that believed an exceptional person from any level of society might receive a divine calling.
Clergy who later testified at the posthumous appellate trial affirmed that she continued to wear male clothing in prison to deter molestation and rape.
Some psychiatrists have also urged that a distinction should be made between different types of experiences.
Richey also expresses the breadth of her subsequent appeal:
Heresy was a capital crime only for a repeat offense, therefore a repeat offense of "cross-dressing" was now arranged by the court, according to the eyewitnesses.
The French civic holiday in her honour is the second Sunday of May.
Analysis of her visions is problematic since the main source of information on this topic is the condemnation trial transcript in which she defied customary courtroom procedure about a witness' oath and specifically refused to answer every question about her visions.
Soon, historians also located the complete records of her rehabilitation trial, which contained sworn testimony from 115 witnesses, and the original French notes for the Latin condemnation trial transcript.
The procedure was suspect on a number of points, which would later provoke criticism of the tribunal by the chief inquisitor who investigated the trial after the war.
The low standard of evidence used in the trial also violated inquisitorial rules.
The nullification trial reversed the conviction in part because the condemnation proceeding had failed to consider the doctrinal exceptions to that stricture.
Joan of Arc has remained a popular figure in literature, painting, sculpture, and other cultural works since the time of her death, and many famous writers, filmmakers and composers have created works about her.
Her supporters, such as the theologian Jean Gerson, defended her hairstyle for practical reasons, as did Inquisitor Brehal later during the appellate trial.
If she had answered yes, then she would have been charged with heresy.
The court notary Boisguillaume later testified that at the moment the court heard her reply, "Those who were interrogating her were stupefied."
In the words of DeVries, "The kingdom of France was not even a shadow of its thirteenth-century prototype."
A posthumous retrial opened after the war ended.
In the 16th century she became a symbol of the Catholic League, and in 1803 she was declared a national symbol of France by the decision of Napoleon Bonaparte.
Contemporaries acknowledged Joan as the heroine of the engagement.
Under the auspices of Metz and Poulengy, she was given a second meeting, where she made a prediction about a military reversal at the Battle of Rouvray near Orléans several days before messengers arrived to report it.
She made the journey through hostile Burgundian territory disguised as a male soldier, a fact which would later lead to charges of "cross-dressing" against her, although her escort viewed it as a normal precaution.
The structure had additional spires prior to a 1481 fire.
Champion also quotes 15th-century sources that say Charles VII threatened to "exact vengeance" upon Burgundian troops whom his forces had captured and upon "the English and women of England" in retaliation for their treatment of Joan.
Apparently the mummy was part of the ingredients of medieval pharmacopoeia and it was relabeled in a time of French nationalism.
The English moved Joan to the city of Rouen, which served as their main headquarters in France.
The trial record contains statements from Joan that the eyewitnesses later said astonished the court, since she was an illiterate peasant and yet was able to evade the theological pitfalls the tribunal had set up to entrap her.
The tribunal was composed entirely of pro-English and Burgundian clerics, and overseen by English commanders including the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Warwick.
By the time Joan of Arc began to influence events in 1429, nearly all of northern France and some parts of the southwest were under Anglo-Burgundian control.
On 29 December, Joan and her family were ennobled by Charles VII as a reward for her actions.
This dispute included accusations that Louis was having an extramarital affair with the queen, Isabeau of Bavaria, and allegations that John the Fearless kidnapped the royal children.
The conflict climaxed with the assassination of the Duke of Orléans in 1407 on the orders of the Duke of Burgundy.
The appellate court declared her innocent on 7 July 1456.
She was evidently afraid to give up this outfit even temporarily because it was likely to be confiscated by the judge and she would thereby be left without protection.
The new duke of Burgundy, Philip the Good, blamed Charles for the murder and entered into an alliance with the English.
The theologians at Poitiers did not render a decision on the issue of divine inspiration; rather, they informed the Dauphin that there was a "favorable presumption" to be made on the divine nature of her mission.
When the Dauphin Charles granted Joan's urgent request to be equipped for war and placed at the head of his army, his decision must have been based in large part on the knowledge that every orthodox, every rational option had been tried and had failed.
A truce with England during the following few months left Joan with little to do.
File:Chateau Beaugency ballon.jpg|The inner keep at Beaugency is one of the few surviving fortifications from Joan's campaigns.
(schizophrenia) None of the putative diagnoses have gained consensus support, and many scholars have argued that she didn't display any of the objective symptoms that can accompany the mental illnesses which have been suggested, such as schizophrenia.
The duke violated the purpose of the agreement by using it as a stalling tactic to reinforce the defense of Paris.
At Chinon and Poitiers, Joan had declared that she would provide a sign at Orléans.
She resumed male attire either as a defense against molestation or, in the testimony of Jean Massieu, because her dress had been taken by the guards and she was left with nothing else to wear.
Reims opened its gates to the army on 16 July 1429.
Joan's parents owned about 50 acres (20 hectares) of land and her father supplemented his farming work with a minor position as a village official, collecting taxes and heading the local watch.
Under Inquisitorial guidelines, Joan should have been confined in an ecclesiastical prison under the supervision of female guards (i.e., nuns).
To circumvent this possibility, the Dauphin ordered background inquiries and a theological examination at Poitiers to verify her morality.
"To doubt or abandon her without suspicion of evil would be to repudiate the Holy Spirit and to become unworthy of God's aid", they declared.
Nearly all the fighting had taken place in France, and the English army's use of ''chevauchée'' tactics (destructive "scorched earth" raids) had devastated the economy.
The Vice-Inquisitor of Northern France (Jean Lemaitre) objected to the trial at its outset, and several eyewitnesses later said he was forced to cooperate after the English threatened his life.
Dr. John Hughes rejected the idea that Joan of Arc suffered from epilepsy in an article in the academic journal 'Epilepsy & Behavior'.
She said she cried when they left, as they were so beautiful.
Two experts who analysed the hypothesis of temporal lobe tuberculoma in the medical journal ''Neuropsychobiology'' expressed their misgivings about this claim in the following statement:
Joan urged the Armagnacs to pursue, and the two armies clashed southwest of the village of Patay.
The uncrowned King Charles VII sent Joan to the siege of Orléans as part of a relief mission.
This ended in disaster when Armagnac partisans assassinated John the Fearless during a meeting under Charles's guarantee of protection.
Charles' advisers were worried that unless Joan's orthodoxy could be established beyond doubt—that she was not a heretic or a sorceress—Charles' enemies could easily make the allegation that his crown was a gift from the devil.
Various contemporary letters also emerged, three of which carry the signature ''Jehanne'' in the unsteady hand of a person learning to write.
File:Vigiles du roi Charles VII 10.jpg|Miniature from ''Vigiles du roi Charles VII''.
When Félix Dupanloup was made bishop of Orléans in 1849, he pronounced a fervid panegyric on Joan of Arc, which attracted attention in England as well as France, and he led the efforts which culminated in Joan of Arc's beatification in 1909.
The English retreated from Orléans the next day, and the siege was over.
Bréhal conducted an investigation in 1452.
That night, Armagnac troops maintained positions on the south bank of the river before attacking the main English stronghold, called ''"les Tourelles"'', on the morning of 7 May.
The French army marched through towns near Paris during the interim and accepted several peaceful surrenders.
In 1420 the queen of France, Isabeau of Bavaria, signed the Treaty of Troyes, which granted the succession of the French throne to Henry V and his heirs instead of her son Charles.
A panel of theologians analyzed testimony from 115 witnesses.
An English soldier also constructed a small cross that she put in the front of her dress.
The main sources of information about her were chronicles.
They are now in the Museum of Art and History in Chinon.
During this time Charles' mother-in-law Yolande of Aragon was planning to finance a relief expedition to Orléans.
Joan traveled to Compiègne the following May to help defend the city against an English and Burgundian siege.
Although Joan and the Duke of Alençon urged a prompt march on Paris, the royal court preferred to negotiate a truce with Duke Philip of Burgundy.
File:The Maid of Orléans.PNG|Entrance of Joan of Arc into Reims in 1429, painting by Jan Matejko
Joan of Arc gained favor in the court of King Charles VII, who accepted her as sane.
However, his decision to exclude her did not prevent her presence at most councils and battles.
The lifting of the siege was interpreted by many people to be that sign, and it gained her the support of prominent clergy such as the Archbishop of Embrun and the theologian Jean Gerson, both of whom wrote supportive treatises immediately following this event.
On 23 May 1430 she was with a force that attempted to attack the Burgundian camp at Margny north of Compiègne, but was ambushed and captured.
The castle's only remaining intact tower, now known as the 'Joan of Arc Tower', has been turned into a museum dedicated to her.
The truce with England quickly came to an end.
The ''Chronique de la Pucelle'' states that it deterred molestation while she was camped in the field.
The Poitiers record no longer survives, but circumstances indicate the Poitiers clerics had approved her practice.
The noted perfumers Guerlain and Jean Patou said that they could smell vanilla in the remains, also consistent with mummification.
This was a bold proposal because Reims was roughly twice as far away as Paris and deep within enemy territory.
At present, the  French far-right political party ''Front National'' holds rallies at her statues, reproduces her image in the party's publications, and uses a tricolor flame partly symbolic of her martyrdom as its emblem.
A rout ensued that decimated the main body of the English army and killed or captured most of its commanders.
A few days after her abjuration, when she was forced to wear a dress, she told a tribunal member that "a great English lord had entered her prison and tried to take her by force."
She gained prominence after the siege was lifted only nine days later.
Several local raids occurred during her childhood and on one occasion her village was burned.
Most historians blame French Grand Chamberlain Georges de la Trémoille for the political blunders that followed the coronation.
But the army was in luck: a wandering friar named Brother Richard had been preaching about the end of the world at Troyes and convinced local residents to plant beans, a crop with an early harvest.
Joan of Arc became a semi-legendary figure for the four centuries after her death.
She arrived at the besieged city of Orléans on 29 April 1429.
Historian Pierre Champion notes that the Armagnacs attempted to rescue her several times by launching military campaigns toward Rouen while she was held there.
Troyes, the site of the treaty that tried to disinherit Charles VII, was the only one to put up even brief opposition.
When the troops began to withdraw toward the nearby fortifications of Compiègne after the advance of an additional force of 6,000 Burgundians, Joan stayed with the rear guard.
It remains unknown to what extent the surviving record may represent the fabrications of corrupt court officials or her own possible fabrications to protect state secrets.
The French population had not recovered to its size previous to the Black Death of the mid-14th century, and its merchants were isolated from foreign markets.
The Duke of Bedford died the same year and Henry VI became the youngest king of England to rule without a regent.
Joan was imprisoned by the Burgundians at Beaurevoir Castle.
Upon the opening of the first public examination, Joan complained that those present were all partisans against her and asked for "ecclesiastics of the French side" to be invited in order to provide balance.
A formal appeal followed in November 1455.
Despite a wound to the leg from a crossbow bolt, Joan remained in the inner trench of Paris until she was carried back to safety by one of the commanders.
Troyes capitulated after a bloodless four-day siege.
The king's brother Louis, Duke of Orléans, and the king's cousin John the Fearless, Duke of Burgundy, quarreled over the regency of France and the guardianship of the royal children.
The army took Jargeau on 12 June, Meung-sur-Loire on 15 June, and Beaugency on 17 June.
The Armagnacs then attacked and captured an English fortress built around a monastery called Les Augustins.
Ralph Hoffman, professor of psychology at Yale University, argues that visionary and creative states, including "hearing voices", are not necessarily signs of mental illness.
The executioner, Geoffroy Thérage, later stated that he "greatly feared to be damned."
Charles VI was popularly known as "Charles the Mad", and much of France's political and military decline during his reign could be attributed to the power vacuum that his episodes of insanity had produced.
The sudden victory at Orléans also led to many proposals for further offensive action.
The French king at the time of Joan's birth, Charles VI, suffered from bouts of  and was often unable to rule.
The final agreement called for the English to pay the sum of 10,000 livres tournois to obtain her from Jean de Luxembourg, a member of the Council of Duke Philip of Burgundy.
Historian Stephen W. Richey explains her attraction to the royal court by pointing out that they may have viewed her as the only source of hope for a regime that was near collapse:
The English negotiated with their Burgundian allies to transfer her to their custody, with Bishop Pierre Cauchon of Beauvais, an English partisan, assuming a prominent role in these negotiations and her later trial.
The assault on Paris.
The twelve articles of accusation which summarized the court's findings contradicted the already doctored court record.
Joan being tied at the stake.
Without such evidence the court lacked grounds to initiate a trial.
King Charles VII's mother-in-law, Yolande of Aragon, confirmed Joan's virginity and financed her departure to Orléans.
A number of more recent scholars attempted to explain her visions in psychiatric or neurological terms.
The question is a scholarly trap.
The French and English kings had justified the ongoing war through competing interpretations of inheritance law, first concerning Edward III's claim to the French throne and then Henry VI's.
Joan referred the court to the Poitiers inquiry when questioned on the matter.
The previous king had believed he was made of glass, a delusion no courtier had mistaken for a religious awakening.
Charles VII retained legitimacy as the king of France in spite of a rival coronation held for Henry VI at Notre-Dame cathedral in Paris on 16 December 1431, the boy's tenth birthday.
From Christine de Pizan to the present, women have looked to Joan as a positive example of a brave and active woman.
She also kept her hair cut short through her military campaigns and while in prison.
She was wounded by an arrow between the neck and shoulder while holding her banner in the trench outside les Tourelles, but later returned to encourage a final assault that succeeded in taking the fortress.
Joan of Arc came from an obscure village and rose to prominence when she was a teenager, and she did so as an uneducated peasant.
According to Jean de Metz, she told him that "I must be at the King's side&nbsp;... there will be no help (for the kingdom) if not from me.
The English expected an attempt to recapture Paris or an attack on Normandy.
The French army left Gien on 29 June on the march toward Reims and accepted the conditional surrender of the Burgundian-held city of Auxerre on 3 July.
