''Possessed'', their third film together, released in October, was directed by Clarence Brown.
Crawford left money to her favorite charities: the U.S.O.
Her only other notable film of 1931, ''This Modern Age'', was released in August, and despite unfavorable reviews, was a moderate success.
While appearing in ''Innocent Eyes'' Crawford met a saxophone player named James Welton.
Alfred Steele would later be named Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Pepsi Cola.
The list was submitted by Harry Brandt, president of the Independent Theatre Owners Association of America.
Crawford was also  voted the tenth greatest female star of the classic American cinema by the American Film Institute.
After the completion of ''This Woman Is Dangerous'' (1952), a film Crawford called her "worst", she asked to be released from her Warner Brothers contract.
She adopted five children, one of whom was reclaimed by his birth mother.
Crawford became one of Hollywood's most prominent movie stars and one of the highest paid women in the United States, but her films began losing money, and, by the end of the 1930s, she was labelled "Box Office Poison".
Her strategy worked, and MGM cast her in the film where she first made an impression on audiences, Edmund Goulding's ''Sally, Irene and Mary'' (1925).
It was awarded to the employee making the most significant contribution to company sales.
The episode, "Lucy and the Lost Star", first aired on February 26, 1968.
This marriage is listed in census records as Crawford's mother's first marriage, calling into question whether Thomas LeSueur and Anna Bell Johnson were ever legally wed.
Many studios and stars avoided making the transition as long as possible, especially MGM, which was the last studio to switch over to sound.
She stated that she learned more about acting from watching Chaney work than from anyone else in her career.
For $500,000, Crawford signed with Warner Brothers for a three movie deal and was placed on the payroll on July 1, 1943.
Actress Jeanne Eagels played the role on stage and Gloria Swanson had originated the part on screen in the 1928 film version.
The instability of her family life affected her education and her schooling never formally progressed beyond elementary school.
During World War II she was a member of American Women's Voluntary Services.
She attended Stephens for only a few months before withdrawing after she realized she was not prepared for college.
After the film's release, Crawford guest-starred as herself on ''The Lucy Show''.
Growing increasingly frustrated over the size and quality of the parts she was given, Crawford embarked on a campaign of self-promotion.
While on antibiotics for this problem in October 1974, her drinking caused her to pass out, slip and strike her face.
Crawford had long pleaded with MGM's head Louis B. Mayer to cast her in more dramatic roles, and although he was reluctant, he cast her in the sophisticated comedy-drama ''I Live My Life'' (1935), directed by W.S.
Warners went against Curtiz, however, and cast Crawford in the film.
Following that first invitation, Crawford and Fairbanks, Jr. became more frequent guests, which was hard on Crawford.
In 1922, she registered at Stephens College in Columbia, Missouri, giving her year of birth as 1906.
While attending Rockingham she began dating and had her first serious relationship, with a trumpet player named Ray Sterling, who reportedly inspired her to begin challenging herself academically.
She next starred in ''The Gorgeous Hussy'' (1936), opposite Robert Taylor and Lionel Barrymore as well as Tone, a critical and box office success, become one of Crawford's biggest hits of the decade.
These films were immensely popular with audiences, and were generally well received by critics, stapling Crawford's position as one of MGM's top female stars of the decade, along with Norma Shearer, Greta Garbo, and Jean Harlow.
She made a cameo appearance in ''It's a Great Feeling'' (1949), poking fun at her own screen image.
Thomas LeSueur abandoned the family a few months before Crawford's birth but reappeared in Abilene, Texas, in 1930 as a reportedly 62-year-old construction laborer.
Those expecting a racy tell-all were disappointed, although Crawford's meticulous ways were revealed in her advice on grooming, wardrobe, exercise, and even food storage.
A memorial service was held for Crawford at All Souls' Unitarian Church on Lexington Avenue in New York on May 16, 1977, and was attended by, among others, her old Hollywood friend Myrna Loy.
Crawford's mother subsequently married Henry J. Cassin (died October 25, 1922).
It was well received by critics and made a larger profit than the studio had expected.
Crawford received the sixth annual "Pally Award", which was in the shape of a bronze Pepsi bottle.
She died two days later at her New York apartment from a heart attack.
''Mannequin'' did, as the ''New York Times'' stated, "restore Crawford to her throne as queen of the working girls".
Brandt stated that while these stars had "unquestioned" dramatic abilities, their high salaries did not reflect in their ticket sales, thus hurting the movie exhibitors involved.
Receiving third billing, she played the middle-class stenographer to Beery's controlling general director.
Her first starring role in an all-sound feature-length film was in ''Untamed'' in 1929, co-starring Robert Montgomery.
Steele died of a heart attack in April 1959.
In 1937, Crawford was proclaimed the first "Queen of the Movies" by ''Life'' magazine.
The child was temporarily called Joan until Crawford changed her name to Christina.
The transition from silent to sound panicked many—if not all—involved with the film industry; many silent film stars found themselves unemployable because of their undesirable voices and hard-to-understand accents or simply because of their refusal to make the transition to talkies.
Crawford's appearance in the 1969 television film ''Night Gallery'' (which served as pilot to the series that followed), marked one of Steven Spielberg's earliest directing jobs.
Cassin was accused of embezzlement and although acquitted in court, was blacklisted in Lawton, and the family moved to Kansas City, Missouri, around 1916.
The film was generally unfavorably reviewed by the majority of critics, with one critic calling it the "same ole rags-to-riches story" Crawford had been making for years.
In lieu of the last film remaining under her contract, MGM bought her out for $100,000.
Throughout the entire production of the movie, Curtiz criticized Crawford.
''Grand Hotel'' was released in April 1932 to critical and commercial success.
Granlund secured a position for her with producer Harry Richmond's act and arranged for her to do a screen test which he sent to producer Harry Rapf in Hollywood.
Although Crawford did well in rehearsal, she lost her composure while taping and the director and producer were left to struggle to piece together the necessary footage.
Within a few years, she became the romantic female lead to many of MGM's top male stars, including Ramón Novarro, John Gilbert, William Haines, and Tim McCoy.
Crawford worked in the radio series ''The Screen Guild Theater'' on January 8, 1939; ''Good News''; ''Baby'', broadcast March 2, 1940 on Arch Oboler's ''Lights Out''; ''The Word'' on ''Everyman's Theater'' (1941); ''Chained'' on the ''Lux Radio Theater'' and Norman Corwin's ''Document A/777'' (1948).
Crawford was initially advised that her services were no longer required.
Upon her death there were found in her apartment photographs of John F. Kennedy, for whom she had reportedly voted in the 1960 presidential election.
After a prolonged absence, during which Crawford was accused of feigning illness, Aldrich was forced to replace her with Olivia de Havilland.
The success of ''Mildred Pierce'' revived Crawford's movie career.
Because she was single, California law prevented her from adopting within the state so she arranged the adoption through an agency in Las Vegas.
She sleeps with the boss!"
She starred as Monica Rivers in Herman Cohen's horror thriller film ''Berserk!''
It was the highest-grossing movie of the year, and won the Academy Award for Best Picture.
Steele by that time had become President of Pepsi Cola.
It was, at the time of its release, called "a lot of happy nonsense" by critics, but a financial success nonetheless.
On a loan out to United Artists, she played prostitute Sadie Thompson in ''Rain'' (1932), a film version of John Colton's 1923 play.
They renewed their acquaintance at a New Year's Eve party in 1954.
He has been quoted as having told Jack Warner, "She comes over here with her high-hat airs and her goddamn shoulder pads... why should I waste my time directing a has-been?"
Crawford's films of this era were some of the most-popular and highest-grossing films of the mid-1930s.
She appeared in episodes of anthology television series in the 1950s and, in 1959, made a pilot for her series, ''The Joan Crawford Show''.
From the beginning of her career, Crawford considered Norma Shearer—the studio's most-popular actress—her professional nemesis.
This was soon followed by equally small and unbilled roles in two other 1925 successes, ''The Only Thing'' and ''The Merry Widow''.
Her next film was ''Humoresque'' (1946), co-starring John Garfield, a romantic drama about a love affair between an older woman and a younger man.
During the early sound era, MGM began to place Crawford in more sophisticated roles, rather than continuing to promote her flapper-inspired persona of the silent era.
Cassin was first listed in the City Directory in 1917, living at 403 East Ninth Street.
Crawford's performance was panned and the film was not a success.
"It was then," she said, "I became aware for the first time of the difference between standing in front of a camera, and acting."
Fairbanks Sr. and Pickford were opposed to the marriage and did not invite the couple to their home, Pickfair, for eight months after the marriage.
After the release of ''The Jazz Singer'' in 1927—the first major Hollywood movie with synchronized sound—sound films, or talkies as they became nicknamed, were all the rage.
She wanted to play the title role in ''Mildred Pierce'' (1945), but Bette Davis was the studio's first choice.
In September 1973, Crawford moved from apartment 22-G to a smaller apartment next door (22-H) at the Imperial House.
These stories were well received by Depression-era audiences and were popular with women.
The family lived in Lawton, Oklahoma, where Cassin, a minor impresario, ran the Ramsey Opera House.
In ''Daisy Kenyon'' (1947), she appeared opposite Dana Andrews and Henry Fonda, and in ''Flamingo Road'' (1949) she played a carnival dancer opposite Zachary Scott and David Brian.
After his death in 1959, Crawford was elected to fill his vacancy on the board of directors but was forcibly retired in 1973.
Crawford was quoted to have said, "How can I compete with Norma?
Her elder siblings were Daisy LeSueur (ƒ 1902) and Hal LeSueur.
It epitomized the lush visual style and the hard-boiled film noir sensibility that defined Warner Bros. movies of the late forties, earning Crawford the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role.
Davis claimed for the rest of her life that Crawford had campaigned against her, a charge Crawford denied.
Crawford secretly contacted each of the other Oscar nominees in the category (Katharine Hepburn, Lee Remick Geraldine Page and Anne Bancroft, all East Coast-based actresses), to let them know that if they could not attend the ceremony, she would be happy to accept the Oscar on their behalf; all agreed.
Fairbanks was the son of Douglas Fairbanks and the stepson of Mary Pickford, who were considered Hollywood royalty.
Curtiz demanded Crawford prove her suitability by taking a screen test.
By this time she felt Warners was losing interest in her and she decided it was time to move on.
In 1954, she starred in ''Johnny Guitar'', a camp western film, co-starring Sterling Hayden and Mercedes McCambridge.
She later starred as a facially disfigured blackmailer in ''A Woman's Face'' (1941), a remake of the Swedish film ''En kvinnas ansikte'' which had starred Ingrid Bergman in the lead role three years earlier.
For several years, she starred in what were called "a series of first-rate melodramas".
In 1928, Crawford starred opposite Ramón Novarro in ''Across to Singapore'', but it was her role as Diana Medford in ''Our Dancing Daughters'' (1928) that catapulted her to stardom.
Another memorial service, organized by George Cukor, was held on June 24 in the Samuel Goldwyn Theater at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Beverly Hills.
She starred on the big screen one final time, playing Dr. Brockton in Herman Cohen's science fiction horror film ''Trog'' (1970), rounding out a career spanning 45 years and more than eighty motion pictures.
Davis was nominated for an Academy Award for her performance as Jane Hudson.
Their second movie together, ''Laughing Sinners'', released in May 1931, was directed by Harry Beaumont and also co-starred Neil Hamilton.
In 1926, Crawford was named one of the WAMPAS Baby Stars along with Mary Astor, Dolores del Río, Janet Gaynor, and Fay Wray among others.
On May 3, 1938, Crawford — along with Greta Garbo, Norma Shearer, Luise Rainer, and John Barrymore, Katharine Hepburn, Fred Astaire, Dolores del Río and others — was dubbed "Box Office Poison" in an open letter in the ''Independent Film Journal''.
Crawford married her fourth and final husband, Alfred Steele, at the Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas on May 10, 1955.
Crawford, who had been left near-penniless following Alfred Steele's death accepted a small role in ''The Best of Everything'' (1959).
Lucille preferred the nickname "Billie" as a child and she loved watching vaudeville acts perform on the stage of her stepfather's theatre.
Crawford and Steele met at a party in 1950 when Steele was an executive at PepsiCo.
As the studio's first all-star production, Crawford co-starred opposite Greta Garbo, John and Lionel Barrymore, and Wallace Beery among others.
(Stories have persisted that Crawford further supplemented her income by appearing in one or more stag, or soft-core pornographic, films, although this has been disputed.)
Her ambition was to be a dancer.
It also ran a financial loss, becoming one of MGM's biggest failures of the year.
Granlund immediately wired LeSueur – who had returned to her mother's home in Kansas City – with the news; she borrowed $400 for travel expenses.
She co-starred opposite Franchot Tone for the seventh and final time in ''The Bride Wore Red'' (1937).
In October 1968, Crawford's 29-year-old daughter, Christina (who was then acting in New York on the CBS soap opera ''The Secret Storm''), needed immediate medical attention for a ruptured ovarian tumor.
Under the name Lucille LeSueur, Crawford began dancing in the choruses of traveling revues and was spotted dancing in Detroit by producer Jacob J. Shubert.
Crawford starred as Blanche Hudson, an old, wheelchair-bound former A-list movie star in conflict with her psychotic sister, in the highly successful psychological thriller ''What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?''
Joan Crawford became a star because Joan Crawford decided to become a star."
A Catholic, Cassin placed Crawford at St. Agnes Academy in Kansas City.
As MGM screenwriter Frederica Sagor Maas recalled, "No one decided to make Joan Crawford a star.
Crawford and Tone much later rekindled their friendship and Tone even proposed in 1964 that they remarry.
But others, including Betty Hutton, Helen Hayes, James MacArthur (Hayes' son), June Allyson, Liz Smith, Rex Reed, and Vincent Sherman stated they had witnessed some form of abusive behavior.
''Mommie Dearest'' became a bestseller and was made into the 1981 biography film ''Mommie Dearest'', starring Faye Dunaway as Crawford.
''Love on the Run'' (1936), a romantic comedy directed by W.S.
'', and starred in ''Harriet Craig''.
Most other reviews were positive, and the film managed to generate a minor profit, but it did not resurrect Crawford's popularity.
Director Michael Curtiz did not want Crawford to play the part, and he instead lobbied for the casting of Barbara Stanwyck.
In November 1978, Christina Crawford published ''Mommie Dearest'', which contained allegations that her late adoptive mother was emotionally and physically abusive to Christina and her brother Christopher because she was only interested in her career instead of being a mother.
She next played the title role in ''Sadie McKee'' (1934) opposite Tone and Gene Raymond.
Her last public appearance was September 23, 1974, at a party honoring her old friend Rosalind Russell at New York's Rainbow Room.
She eventually fully recovered and returned to dancing.
The gown with large ruffled sleeves, designed by Adrian, which Crawford wore in the movie, became a popular style that same year, and was even copied by Macy's.
Smith organized a contest called "Name the Star" in ''Movie Weekly'' to allow readers to select her new stage name.
''Dance, Fools, Dance'', released in February 1931, was the first pairing of Crawford and Gable.
On June 3, 1929, Crawford married Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. at Saint Malachy's Roman Catholic Church (known as "The Actors' Chapel" due to its proximity to Broadway theatres) in Manhattan, although neither was Catholic.
She also appeared in ''The Circle'' and ''Pretty Ladies'' (both 1925), starring comedian ZaSu Pitts.
Despite the success of the film at the box office, it received mixed reviews from critics, who noted that while Crawford seemed nervous at making the transition to sound, also noted that she had become one of the most popular actresses in the world.
That same year, she starred in ''Paris'', co-starring Charles Ray.
In 1955, she became involved with the Pepsi-Cola Company through her marriage to company Chairman Alfred Steele.
After her mother and stepfather broke up, she stayed on at St. Agnes as a work student, where she spent far more time working, primarily cooking and cleaning, than studying.
However, after his death on January 1, 1938, his age was given as 71.
Following her divorce, she was again teamed with Clark Gable, along with Franchot Tone and Fred Astaire, in the hit ''Dancing Lady'' (1933), in which she received top billing.
Despite his own relatively minor status as an impresario, Cassin managed to get such diverse and noted performers as Anna Pavlova and Eva Tanguay during his career.
Following a public appearance in 1974, after which unflattering photographs were published, Crawford withdrew from public life and became increasingly reclusive until her death in 1977.
Crawford published her autobiography, ''A Portrait of Joan'', co-written with Jane Kesner Ardmore, in 1962 through Doubleday.
A stream of hits followed ''Our Dancing Daughters'', including two more flapper-themed movies, in which Crawford embodied for her legion of fans (many of whom were women) an idealized vision of the free-spirited, all-American girl.
Despite the fact that Christina's character was a 28-year-old and Crawford was in her sixties, Crawford offered to play her role until Christina was well enough to return, to which producer Gloria Monty readily agreed.
Crawford was cremated and her ashes were placed in a crypt with her fourth and final husband, Alfred Steele, in Ferncliff Cemetery, Hartsdale, New York.
The movie received favorable reviews and moderate success at the box office.
''Our Blushing Brides'' (1930), co-starring Robert Montgomery and Anita Page, was the final installment in the so-called ''Our Dancing Daughters'' franchise.
In 1950, she starred in the film noir, ''The Damned Don't Cry!
Her first three marriages ended in divorce; the last ended with the death of husband Alfred Steele.
Rapf notified Granlund on December 24, 1924 that Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (or MGM for short) had offered Crawford a contract at $75 a week.
I cried for 9 hours."
That same year, Crawford starred as Lucy Harbin in William Castle's horror mystery ''Strait-Jacket'' (1964).
The film was a huge success, recouping its costs within 11 days of its nationwide release, and temporarily revived Crawford's career.
When he died in 1968, Crawford arranged for him to be cremated and his ashes scattered at Muskoka Lakes, Canada.
Crawford married four times.
Crawford continued her reign as a popular movie actress well into the mid-1930s.
She made a comeback in 1939 with her role as home-wrecker Crystal Allen in ''The Women'' opposite her professional nemesis, Norma Shearer.
Crawford claimed to be devastated, saying "I heard the news of my replacement over the radio, lying in my hospital bed ...
Crawford cancelled all public appearances, began declining interviews and left her apartment less and less.
The incident scared her enough to give up drinking, although she insisted it was because of her return to Christian Science.
The relationship between Crawford and Fairbanks, Sr. eventually warmed; she called him "Uncle Doug" and he called her "Billie", her old childhood nickname.
Shubert put her in the chorus line for his 1924 show, ''Innocent Eyes'', at the Winter Garden Theatre on Broadway in New York City.
Her follow-up movie, ''The Shining Hour'' (1938), co-starring Margaret Sullavan and Melvyn Douglas, was well received by critics, but a box office flop.
Later, she went to Rockingham Academy, also as a work student.
She married actor Phillip Terry on July 21, 1942 after a six-month courtship.
Also in 1927, she appeared alongside her close friend, William Haines, in ''Spring Fever'', which was the first of three movies the duo made together.
Crawford adopted two more children in 1947, identical twins whom she named Cindy and Cathy.
The film was also Crawford's last box-office success before the onset of her "Box-Office Poison" period.
When Crawford saw the unflattering photos that appeared in the papers the next day, she said, "If that's how I look, then they won't see me anymore."
However, one day, in an attempt to escape piano lessons to play with friends, she leaped from the front porch of her home and cut her foot deeply on a broken milk bottle.
Van Dyke, was her seventh film co-starring Clark Gable.
Russell was suffering from breast cancer and arthritis at the time.
She explicitly disinherited the two eldest, Christina and Christopher, writing, "It is my intention to make no provision herein for my son, Christopher, or my daughter, Christina, for reasons which are well known to them."
Tone and Crawford had first appeared together in ''Today We Live'' (1933) but Crawford was hesitant about entering into another romance so soon after her split from Fairbanks.
Crawford achieved continued success in ''Letty Lynton'' (1932).
Crawford said one of the main reasons she signed with Warner Brothers was because she wanted to play the character "Mattie" in a proposed 1944 film version of Edith Wharton's novel ''Ethan Frome'' (1911).
''The Hollywood Revue of 1929'' (1929) was one of the studio's first all-sound films, and their first attempt to showcase their stars' ability to make the transition from silent to sound.
She departed Kansas City on December 26 and arrived in Culver City, California on January 1, 1925.
''Montana Moon'' (1930), an uneasy mix of Western clichés and music, teamed her with John Mack Brown and Ricardo Cortez.
She estimated that she traveled over 100,000 miles for the company.
Later that same year, she received her third and final Academy Award nomination for ''Sudden Fear'' for RKO Radio Pictures.
After eighteen years, Crawford's contract with MGM was terminated by mutual consent on June 29, 1943.
However, by the early 1960s, Crawford's status in motion pictures had declined considerably.
Even though Crawford remained a respected MGM actress and her films still earned profits, her popularity declined in the late 1930s.
The role established her as a symbol of modern 1920s-style femininity which rivaled Clara Bow, the original It girl, then Hollywood's foremost flapper.
She would go on to receive Best Actress nominations for ''Possessed'' (1947) and ''Sudden Fear'' (1952).
''Mildred Pierce'' was a resounding critical and commercial success.
She began attending dances in the afternoons and evenings at hotels around Hollywood, where she often won dance competitions with her performances of the Charleston and the Black Bottom.
She starred alongside Van Heflin in ''Possessed'' (1947), for which she received a second Academy Award nomination, although she did not win.
Together the couple adopted a son whom they named Christopher, but his birth mother reclaimed the child.
A funeral was held at Campbell Funeral Home, New York, on May 13, 1977.
The director, Robert Aldrich, explained that Davis and Crawford were each aware of how important the film was to their respective careers and commented, "It's proper to say that they really detested each other, but they behaved absolutely perfectly."
Crawford often played hard-working young women who find romance and success.
Crawford made three more television appearances, as Stephanie White in a 1970 episode ("The Nightmare") of ''The Virginian'' and as Joan Fairchild (her final performance) in a 1972 episode ("Dear Joan: We're Going to Scare You to Death") of ''The Sixth Sense''.
She continued acting in film and television regularly through the 1960s, when her performances became fewer; after the release of the British horror film ''Trog'' in 1970, Crawford retired from the screen.
Crawford's relationships with her two older children, Christina and Christopher, were acrimonious.
