* Don’t allow any discussion about the applicants between interviewers
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 prohibits discriminatory practice directed against individuals who are 40 years of age and older.
The interview phase entails the actual conduct of the interview, the interaction between the interviewer and the applicant.
For example, people who think another is physically attractive tend to have positive initial impressions of that person (even before formally meeting them), perceive the person to be smart, socially competent, and have good social skills and general mental health.
That is, impressions interviewers form early on may affect how they view the person in a later phase.
* Did the candidate demonstrate leadership, integrity, effective communications, teamwork, and persuasion skills (among others)?
For example, this type of coaching might teach an interviewee to use the STAR approach for answering behavioral interview questions.
It may not only be what you say in an interview that matters, but also how you say it (e.g., how fast you speak) and how you behave during the interview (e.g., hand gestures, eye contact).
'''Experiential factors:'''
* Ask the same questions of all interviewees
In this way, interviewers typically have an impression of you even before the actual face-to-face interview interaction.
Yet this is exactly what occurs in an unstructured interview; thus, a structured interview attempts to standardize this popular selection tool.
Google, Bing, Yahoo), blogs, and even social networks (e.g.
As interviews are typically conducted face-to-face, over the phone, or through video conferencing (e.g.
* Do I like this person, and will he or she get along with others?
An increasingly common initial interview approach is the telephone interview.
The second aspect of faking is inventing or completely fabricating one’s image by piecing distinct work experiences together to create better answers, inventing untrue experiences or skills, and portraying others’ experiences or accomplishments as one's own.
Although separate, these three phases are related.
Structure in an interview can be compared to a typical paper and pencil test: we would not think it was fair if every test taker was given different questions and a different number of questions on an exam, or if their answers were each graded differently.
Being accomplished liars helps psychopaths obtain the jobs they want.
Research suggests that interviews capture a wide variety of applicant attributes.
The interviewer most likely takes into consideration all the information, even from the preinterview phase, and integrates it to form a postinterview evaluation of the applicant.
* Use anchored rating scales (for an example, see BARS )
Some researchers maintain that nonverbal behaviors affect interview ratings a great deal, while others have found that they have a relatively small impact on interview outcomes,  especially when considered with applicant qualifications presented in résumés.
The Pregnancy Discrimination Act was added as an amendment and protects women if they are pregnant or have a pregnancy-related condition.
* Skeet shoot format – The candidate is given questions from a series of panelists in rapid succession to test his or her ability to handle stress filled situations.
Prospective candidates are asked preset questions using computer software then their immediate responses are recorded.
Faking behavior is less prevalent, for instance, in past behavioral interviews than in situational interviews, although follow-up questions increased faking behaviors in both types of interviews.
Video interviews are a modern variation of telephone interviews.
This kind of interview focuses on problem solving and creativity.
For example, in the majority of situations it is illegal to ask the following questions in an interview as a condition of employment:
The second category refers to job knowledge that the applicant has acquired over time.
Employers are using social networking sites like Facebook and LinkedIn to obtain additional information about job applicants.
Researching the company itself is also a good way for interviewees to impress lots of people during an interview.
While some of this information may be job-related, some of it may not be.
This type of coaching is focused on improving aspects of the interview that are not necessarily related to the specific elements of performing the job tasks.
Questions about handling work overload, dealing with multiple projects, and handling conflict are typical.
Content structure includes elements that refer to the actual content of the interview:
Within the business domain, physically attractive individuals have been shown to have an advantage over unattractive individuals in numerous ways, that include, but are not limited to, perceived job qualifications, hiring recommendations, predicted job success, and compensation levels.
.75 or above), when a structured panel interview is used.
Thirdly, faking might also be aimed at protecting the applicant’s image.
Unless the disability poses an "undue hardship," reasonable accommodations must be made by the organization.
In addition, the personality traits of agreeableness and conscientiousness predict performance more strongly for people with more attractive voices compared to those with less attractive voices.
Interviews are one of the few social situations where narcissistic behaviours such as boasting actually create a positive impression.
Example formats include;
* Sticky situation: "If you caught a colleague cheating on his expenses, what would you do?"
* Gender: Females tend to receive slightly higher interview scores than their male counterparts; gender similarity does not seem to influence interview ratings
Although some states (e.g.
Knowing this information can actually affect how the applicant behaves, resulting in a self-fulfilling prophecy effect.
* What is your date of birth?
It is important because what interviewers think about you before they meet you, can have an effect on how they might treat you in the interview and what they remember about you.
Applicants should consider if they are comfortable with talking about and answering questions about their disability before deciding how to approach the interview.
Job applicants who are underweight (to the point of emaciation), overweight or obese may face discrimination in the interview.
For example, some research has found a leniency effect (i.e., applicants with disabilities receive higher ratings than equally qualified non-disabled applicants) in ratings of applicants with disabilities  Other research, however, has found there is a disconnect between the interview score and the hiring recommendation for applicants with disabilities.
In rare circumstances, it is lawful for employers to base hiring decisions on protected class information if it is considered a Bona Fide Occupational Qualification, that is, if it is a "qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the particular business."
* Attractiveness: Applicant physical attractiveness can influence interviewer's evaluation of one's interview performance
* Similarities in background and attitudes: Interviewers perceived interpersonal attraction was found to influence interview ratings
If an applicant has a non-visible disability, however, then that applicant has more of a choice in disclosing and discussing.
In essence, this law prohibits the discrimination of employees or applicants due to an individual’s genetic information and family medical history information.
The idea is that past behavior is the best predictor of future performance in similar situations.
* How many days were you sick last year?
Applicants’ verbal responses and their nonverbal behavior may convey some of the same information about the applicant.
The third category refers to the knowledge, skills, and abilities associated with the job.
* Do you have any future plans for marriage and children?
An interview is often the first time an interviewer looks at the interviewee first hand, so it is important to make a good first impression.
Multiple rounds of job interviews and/or other candidate selection methods may be used where there are many candidates or the job is particularly challenging or desirable.
The interviewer is acting a role, deliberately and calculatedly trying to "rattle the cage".
Companies often rely on interview performance alone and do not conduct other checks such as taking references.
The interview is usually preceded by the evaluation of submitted résumés from interested candidates, possibly by examining job applications or reading many resumes.
Once individuals are categorized as attractive or unattractive, interviewers may have expectations about physically attractive and physically unattractive individuals and then judge applicants based on how well they fit those expectations.
* Self-monitoring: Applicants' regulation of behaviors to control the image presented to the interviewer
Technology has transformed the Case-based and Technical interview process from a purely private in-person experience to an online exchange of job skills and endorsements.
* Does this person have the skills I need to get the job done?
'''Vocal Attractiveness'''
Alternatively, interviewees who perceive an interviewer believes they are qualified for the job may feel more at ease and comfortable during the exchange, and consequently actually perform better in the interview.
Applicants without realizing it may engage in a number of behaviors that influence ratings of their performance.
'''General traits:'''
Since 2003, interviews have been held through video conferencing software, such as Skype.
This technique was also used in research protocols studying stress and type A (coronary-prone) behavior because it would evoke hostility and even changes in blood pressure and heart rate in study subjects.
Though the applicant's perception of the interview process may not influence the interviewer(s) ability to distinguish between individuals' suitability, applicants reactions are important as those who react negatively to the selection process are more likely to withdraw from the selection process.
A couple of reasons why job candidates feel a heightened sense of anxiety and nervousness about the employment interview is because they feel they have little to no control over the interview process  or because they have to speak with a stranger.
You may want to be careful of what you may be communicating through the nonverbal behaviors you display.
Linkedin, Facebook, Twitter).
Some practical implications for job interviews for applicants with disabilities include research findings that show there are no differences in interviewer responses to a brief, shorter discussion or a detailed, longer discussion about the disability during the interview.
A person is a cripple if he has a disability that substantially limits a major life activity, has a history of a disability, is regarded by others as being disabled, or has a physical or mental impairment that is not transitory (lasting or expected to last six months or less) and minor.
* Interview motivation: Applicants' motivation to succeed in an interview
'''Job-irrelevant interviewer biases'''
These factors are typically not relevant to whether the individual can do the job (that is, not related to job performance), thus, their influence on interview ratings should be minimized or excluded.
Interviewer evaluations of applicant responses also tend to be colored by how an applicant behaves in the interview.
One study found that over 80% of participants lied about job-related skills in the interview, presumably to compensate for a lack of job-required skills/traits and further their chances for employment.
Research has also demonstrated that different types of disabilities have different effects on interview outcomes.
This coaching, therefore, focuses on improving the interviewee’s understanding of the skills, abilities, and traits the interviewer is attempting to assess, and responding with relevant experience that demonstrates these skills.
Technical interviews are being conducted online at progressive companies before in-person talks as a way to screen job applicants.
Applicants’ nonverbal behaviors may sway interview ratings through the inferences interviewers make about the applicant based on their behavior.
Researchers have attempted to identify which interview strategies or "constructs" can help interviewers choose the best candidate.
* Will he or she focus on tasks and stick to the job until it is done?
* How did the candidate handle problems that came up?
'''Personal/contextual factors:'''
A job interview typically precedes the hiring decision.
* Did the candidate grow in his or her job and take on more responsibilities over time or merely do the same thing repeatedly?
* Did the candidate prepare for this interview?
* Impression management: Applicants' attempt to make sure the interviewer forms a positive impression of them
* Will he or she fit in with the department or team?
Research has shown that how well an applicant does in the interview can be enhanced with coaching.
* Does the candidate stay focused on the question asked or ramble along?
An interview also allows the candidate to assess the corporate culture and demands of the job.
Faking in the employment interview, then, can be defined as "deceptive impression management or the conscious distortion of answers to the interview questions in order to obtain a better score on the interview and/or otherwise create favorable perceptions".
Skype), they are a social interaction between at least two individuals.
As noted by several researchers, attractiveness may not be the most influential determinant of personnel decisions, but may be a deciding factor when applicants possess similar levels of qualifications.
Two core aspects of the SI are the development of situational dilemmas that employees encounter on the job, and a scoring guide to evaluate responses to each dilemma.
Oftentimes physical attractiveness is included as part of nonverbal behavior as well.
* What are your spiritual beliefs?
One type of coaching is designed to teach interviewees how to perform better in the interview by focusing on how to behave and present oneself.
* Base questions on attributes that are representative of the job, as indicated by a job analysis
The preinterview phase encompasses the information available to the interviewer beforehand (e.g., resumes, test scores, social networking site information) and the perceptions interviewers form about applicants from this information prior to the actual face-to-face interaction between the two individuals.
* Give me an example of a time when you set a goal and were able to meet or achieve it.
As a result, it typically turns out that interviewers will judge attractive individuals more favorably on job-related factors than they judge unattractive individuals.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 1991 (Title VII)  were passed into law to prevent the discrimination of individuals due to race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
In actual interview settings it is not likely that the sole use of just one type of interview question (situational or behavioral) is asked.
Evaluation structure includes aspects that refer to the actual rating of the interviewee:
Strong caution needs to be taken with applying results from studies about specific disabilities, as these results may not apply to other types of disabilities.
The job interview is considered one of the most useful tools for evaluating potential employees.
* Motivation: Applicants' willingness to exert the effort required to do the job
In addition, applicants who were aware that the recruiting employer already had employed people with disabilities felt they had a more positive interview experience.
Organizations who wish to reduce potential discrimination against pregnant applicants should consider implementing structured interviews, although some theoretical work suggests interviewers may still show biases even in these types of interviews.
To hire the best applicants for the job, interviewers form judgments, sometimes using applicants’ physical attractiveness.
Therefore, applicants should make their own conclusions about how to proceed in the interview after comparing their situations with those examined in the research discussed here.
Another type of job interview found throughout the professional and academic ranks is the ''panel interview''.
Using structured interviews with multiple interviewers coupled with training may help reduce the effect of the following characteristics on interview ratings.
The extent to which ratings of interviewee performance reflect certain constructs varies widely depending on the level of structure of the interview, the kind of questions asked, interviewer or applicant biases, applicant professional dress or nonverbal behavior, and a host of other factors.
And, why is all this important?
Their responses were compiled to create a factual definition or "critical requirements" of what an effective combat leader is.
Essentially, the process model illustrates that the interview is not an isolated interaction, but rather a complex process that begins with two parties forming judgments and gathering information, and ends with a final interviewer decision.
The question posed to veterans was "Describe the officer’s actions.
Stress interviews might involve testing an applicant's behavior in a busy environment.
* Describe a situation in which you were able to use persuasion to successfully convince someone to see things your way.
This is especially common when the candidates do not live near the employer and has the advantage of keeping costs low for both sides.
have panel interviews)
Vocal attractiveness, defined as an appealing mix of speech rate, loudness, pitch, and variability, has been found to be favorably related to interview ratings and job performance.
In addition, if the disability is disclosed after being hired, employers may feel deceived by the new hire and reactions could be less positive than would have been in the interview.
Nowadays with recent technological advancements, we must be aware that interviewers have an even larger amount of information available on some candidates.
It could also include a section designed to provide feedback to help the interviewee to improve their performance in the interview, as well as a section involving practice answering example interview questions.
* Interview self-efficacy: Applicants' perceived ability to do well in the interview
Have you ever been treated for mental health problems?
In terms of reliability, meta-analytic results provided evidence that interviews can have acceptable levels of interrater reliability, or consistent ratings across interviewers interrater reliability (i.e.
Research has also shown that coaching can increase the likelihood that interviewers using a structured interview will accurately choose those individuals who will ultimately be most successful on the job (i.e., increase reliability and validity of the structured interview).
The key to success for the candidate is to de-personalize the process.
The positive effects, however, are preceded by the interviewers perception of the applicants’ psychological well-being.
Such anxiety may hamper how well they actually perform and present themselves during the interview, fulfilling the original thoughts of the interviewer.
A range of questions can add variety for both the interviewer and applicant.
One advantage of situational questions is that all interviewees respond to the same hypothetical situation rather than describe experiences unique to them from their past.
One way to think about the interview process is as three separate, albeit related, phases: (1) the preinterview phase which occurs before the interviewer and candidate meet, (2) the interview phase where the interview is conducted, and (3) the postinterview phase where the interviewer forms judgments of candidate qualifications and makes final decisions.
In other words, although applicants’ responses to interview questions influence interview ratings,  their nonverbal behaviors may also affect interviewer judgments.
'''Interviewee performance'''
Interviewers then often integrate information that they have on an applicant with their ideas about the ideal employee to form a preinterview evaluation of the candidate.
That is, even though applicants with disabilities may have received a high interview score, they are still not recommended for employment.
Interviewee knowledge refers to knowledge about the interview, such as the types of questions that will be asked, and the content that the interviewer is attempting to assess.
In order to be covered under this Act, the individual must be qualified for the job.
Interviews may be 'structured', 'unstructured' and composite: i.e.
* How much influence did the candidate exert on the outcomes of projects?
Therefore, if practitioners are interested in decreasing faking behaviors among job candidates in employment interview settings, they should utilize structured, past behavioral interviews and avoid the use of probes or follow-up questions.
The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 protects qualified individuals who currently have or in the past have had a physical or mental disability (current users of illegal drugs are not covered under this Act).
Different interview characteristics also seem to impact the likelihood of faking.
These responses are then viewed and evaluated by recruiters to form a shortlist of suitable candidates for face-to-face interviews.
An additional section providing general interview tips about how to behave and present oneself could also be included.
Information used by interviewees comes from a variety of sources ranging from popular how-to books to formal coaching programs, sometimes even provided by the hiring organization.
Moreover, of practical importance is whether the interview is a better measure of some constructs in comparison to paper and pencil tests of the same constructs.
The type of questions asked can affect applicant reactions.
* Is he or she bright and likable?
* Did the candidate exhibit good judgment in the career moves he or she made?
Examples include the STAR and SOARA techniques.
As important as it is to understand how physical attractiveness can influence the judgments, behaviors, and final decisions of interviewers, it is equally important to find ways to decrease potential bias in the job interview.
Another type of stress interview may involve only a single interviewer who behaves in an uninterested or hostile manner.
Two major types are situational questions and behavioral questions (also known as patterned behavioral description interviews).
Research shows that pregnant applicants compared to non-pregnant applicants are less likely to be recommended for hire.
While these sites may be useful to verify resume information, profiles with pictures also may reveal much more information about the applicant, including issues pertaining to applicant weight and pregnancy.
In some cases, a review of Facebook may reveal undesirable behaviors such as drunkenness or drug use.
Behavioral interview questions include:
'''Core job elements:'''
Oftentimes, applicants will receive a score based on their performance during the interview.
The most recent law to be passed is Title II of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008.
Interviews are one of the most popularly used devices for employee selection.
Interview anxiety refers to experiencing unpleasant or distressing feelings before or during a job interview.
* Is the candidate being forthright with information?
Situational interview questions ask job applicants to imagine a set of circumstances and then indicate how they would respond in that situation; hence, the questions are future oriented.
That is, you can sometimes tell during the interview whether the interviewer thinks positively or negatively about you.
* Control ancillary information available to the interviewees, such as resumes
However, despite any shared information between content and nonverbal behavior, it is clear that nonverbal behaviors do predict interview ratings to an extent beyond the content of what was said, and thus it is essential that applicants and interviewers alike are aware of their impact.
Whether anxieties come from how someone is as a person or from the interview situation itself, these anxious feelings have important consequences for job candidates, such as; limiting an applicant from effectively showing their ability to communicate and their future potential,  reducing interview performance and consequent assessment despite potential suitability for the job, reducing likelihood of a second interview compared to less anxious individuals.
Other researchers confirm that psychopaths can present themselves as likeable and personally attractive.
By asking questions about how job applicants have handled situations in the past that are similar to those they will face on the job, employers can gauge how they might perform in future situations.
The goal is to assess how the interviewee handles pressure or to purposely evoke emotional responses.
* Doubting one's veracity: "I don't feel like we're getting to the heart of the matter here.
In video conferencing interviews the perception of the interviewer may be viewed as less personable, trustworthy, and competent.
* Tell me about a time when you had to use your presentation skills to influence someone's opinion.
The questions aim at the interviewee's problem-solving skills and likely show their ability in solving the challenges faced in the job through creativity.
Some employers are also asking potential job candidates for their social media logins which has alarmed many privacy watch dogs and regulators.
Just as physical attractiveness is a visual cue, vocal attractiveness is an auditory cue and can lead to differing interviewer evaluations in the interview as well.
Employees are responsible for asking for accommodations to be made by their employer.
* Train the interviewers
