It was feared, particularly among those who had witnessed Marciano's punching power first hand, that Louis's unwillingness to quit would result in serious injury.
Louis attended Bronson Vocational School for a time to learn cabinet-making and his mother attempted to get him interested in playing the violin.
If Louis were to rise to national prominence among such cultural attitudes, a change in management would be necessary.
He had surgery to correct an aortic aneurysm in 1977 and thereafter used an POV/scooter for a mobility aid.
The man who had been called the Brown Bomber was finished.
Louis died of cardiac arrest in Desert Springs Hospital near Las Vegas on April 12, 1981, just hours after his last public appearance viewing the Larry Holmes&ndash;Trevor Berbick Heavyweight Championship.
Despite Louis's lucrative purses over the years, most of the proceeds went to his handlers.
Meanwhile, Gould trumped up anti-Nazi sentiment against Schmeling, and Jacobs defended a lawsuit by MSG to halt the Braddock-Louis fight.
Conn, whose skills had deteriorated during the long layoff, largely avoided contact until being dispatched by knockout in the eighth round.
Louis fought one of the hardest battles of his life.
It represents the power of his punch both inside and outside the ring.
"We ain't moving", said Louis.
Ronald Reagan waived the eligibility rules for burial at Arlington National Cemetery and Louis was buried there with full military honors on April 21, 1981.
During an era of severe anti-black repression, Jack Johnson's unrepentant masculinity and marriage to a white woman engendered an enormous backlash that greatly limited opportunities of black fighters in the heavyweight division; Louis and his handlers would counter the legacy of Johnson by emphasizing the Brown Bomber's modesty and sportsmanship.
Munroe Barrow was committed to a mental institution in 1916 and, as a result, Joe knew very little of his biological father.
Louis would not defend his title again before announcing his retirement from boxing on March 1, 1949.
By this time, Louis was ranked as the No.
Noted author and member of the Harlem Renaissance Langston Hughes described Louis's effect in these terms:
The popular local challenger dodged his way around Louis before being unable to respond to the sixth-round bell.
On the night of June 22, 1938, Louis and Schmeling met for the second time in the boxing ring.
Gould's demands were therefore onerous: Jacobs would have to pay 10% of all future boxing promotion profits (including any future profits from Louis's future bouts) for ten years.
Since the retirement of Jack Dempsey in 1929, the sport had devolved into a sordid mixture of poor athletes, gambling, fixed fights, thrown matches, and control of the sport by organized crime.
Schmeling's hotel was picketed by anti-Nazi protesters in the days before the fight.
Around 1920, Louis's mother married Pat Brooks, a local construction contractor, having received word that Munroe Barrow had died while institutionalized (in reality, Munroe Barrow lived until 1938, unaware of his son's fame).
Later that year, Louis also knocked out Paolino Uzcudun, who had never been knocked down before.
During his travels, he often experienced blatant racism.
He appears as himself in a musical number, "The Well-Dressed Man in Harlem", which emphasizes the importance of African-American soldiers and promotes their enlistment.
After the Louis-Schmeling fight, Jack Dempsey expressed the opinion that he was glad he never had to face Joe Louis in the ring.
Detroit's Joe Louis Arena, home of the Detroit Red Wings of the National Hockey League, and the Forest Preserve District of Cook County's Joe Louis "The Champ" Golf Course, situated south of Chicago in Riverdale, Illinois, are named in his honor.
After returning from retirement, Louis failed to regain the championship in 1950, and his career ended after he was knocked out by Rocky Marciano in 1951.
In the dressing room after the fight, Louis's Army touring companion, Sugar Ray Robinson, wept.
Mr. Roxborough was talking about Black Power before it became popular.
Louis battered Schmeling with a series of swift attacks, forcing Schmeling against the ropes and giving him a paralyzing body blow (Schmeling later claimed it was an illegal kidney punch).
He suffered from a speech impediment and spoke very little until about the age of six.
He appeared on various quiz shows, and an old Army buddy, Ash Resnick, gave Louis a job greeting tourists to the Caesars Palace hotel in Las Vegas, where Resnick was an executive.
Roxborough refused and continued advancing Louis's career with bouts against heavyweight contenders Art Sykesand and Stanley Poreda.
He weighed  at birth,  and both Louis's parents were the children of former slaves, alternating between sharecropping and rental farming.
Receipt of the honor qualified him for immediate release from military service on October 1, 1945.
No one else in the United States has ever had such an effect on Negro emotions—or on mine.
Foreshadowing the Louis-Schmeling rivalry to come, the Carnera bout featured a political dimension.
In 2005 Louis was named the #1 heavyweight of all time by the International Boxing Research Organization.
The rematch had to be abruptly canceled, however, after Conn broke his hand in a much-publicized fight with his father-in-law, major league ballplayer "Greenfield" Jimmy Smith.
I had my own personal reasons and the whole damned country was depending on me."
Louis won the Sugar Ray Robinson Award in 1941.
For income, Louis even became a professional wrestler.
In 2002 ''The Ring'' ranked Louis #4 on their 80 best fighters of the last 80 years list.
Realizing Louis's potential for elevating ''esprit de corps'' among the troops, the Army placed him in its Special Services Division rather than deploying him into combat.
Nevertheless, after the score was announced, Louis had won a controversial unanimous decision.
Louis' string of lightly regarded competition ended with his bout against Billy Conn, the Light Heavyweight Champion and a highly regarded contender.
In 1943, Louis made an appearance in the wartime Hollywood musical ''This Is the Army'', directed by Michael Curtiz.
Notables of this lambasted pantheon include:
Born in rural Chambers County, Alabama (in a ramshackle dwelling on Bell Chapel Road, located about a mile off state route 50 and roughly six miles (10&nbsp;km) north of Lafayette), Louis was the son of Munroe Barrow and Lillie (Reese) Barrow, the seventh of eight children.
When Louis fell on hard financial times, Dempsey served as honorary chairman of a fund to assist Louis.
Roxborough told me about the fate of most black fighters, ones with white managers, who wound up burned-out and broke before they reached their prime.
Nevertheless, Walcott knocked down Louis twice in the first four rounds.
Although Louis' management was finding him bouts against legitimate heavyweight contenders, no path to the title was forthcoming.
As a result, Louis was generally portrayed in the white media as a modest, clean-living person, which facilitated his burgeoning celebrity status.
Seven years later, in his published account of the fight, Donovan spoke of the "mistake" that may have led to this confusion.
* Abe Simon, who endured thirteen rounds of punishment before 18,908 at Olympia Stadium in Detroit on March 21 before referee Sam Hennessy declared a TKO.
Both are still records in the heavyweight division, the former in any division.
They divorced in March 1945 only to remarry a year later, but were again divorced in February 1949.
Louis' training retreat was located at Lakewood, New Jersey, where Louis was first able to practice the game of golf, which later became a lifelong passion.
1 contender in the heavyweight division and had won the Associated Press' "Athlete of the Year" award for 1935.
Initially, the PGA of America was reluctant to allow Louis to enter the event, having a bylaw at the time limiting PGA membership to Caucasians.
When training for a fight against Lee Ramage, Louis noticed a young female secretary for the black newspaper at the gym.
Completed in 1979 at a cost of $4 million, Joe Louis Arena, nicknamed The Joe, is a hockey arena located in downtown Detroit, Michigan, Louis's home town.
and Louis replied, "Fighting and let us at them Japs."
By the end of his amateur career, Louis's record was 50-4, with 43 knockouts.
After the war, the IRS pursued the issue.
Accordingly, Louis used this personal connection to help the cause of various black soldiers with whom he came into contact.
Louis's celebrity power was not, however, merely directed toward African Americans.
One of Louis's other passions was the game of golf, in which he also played a historic role.
Likewise, biographer Bill Libby asserted that "The sports world was hungry for a great champion when Louis arrived in New York in 1935."
Louis was victorious in 25 title defenses, a world record second only to Julio César Chávez with 27.
realising how I had raised his hopes for a few seconds only to dash them to the ground... That's the last time my emotions will get the better of me in a prize fight!
Strokes and heart ailments caused Louis's condition to deteriorate further later in the decade.
Each of the parties involved worked to facilitate the controversial Braddock-Louis matchup.
In a 1971 book, ''Brown Bomber'', by Barney Nagler, Louis disclosed the truth about these incidents, stating that his collapse in 1969 had been caused by cocaine, and that his subsequent hospitalization had been prompted by his fear of a plot to destroy him.
In 1933, Louis won the Detroit-area Golden Gloves Novice Division championship against Joe Biskey for the light heavyweight classification.
Of the twelve fighters Louis faced during this period, five were rated by ''The Ring'' as top-ten heavyweights in the year they fought Louis: Galento (overall #2 heavyweight in 1939), Bob Pastor (#3, 1939), Godoy (#3, 1940), Simon (#6, 1941) and Baer (#8, 1941); four others (Musto, Dorazio, Burman and Johnny Paychek) were ranked in the top ten in a different year.
The offer was too lucrative for Farr to turn down.
Louis fought a charity bout for the Navy Relief Society against his former opponent Buddy Baer on January 9, 1942, which generated $47,000 for the fund.
Despite a unique crouching style, Musto was slowly worn down over eight and a half rounds in St. Louis on April 8 and the fight was called because of a severe cut over Musto's eye and Louis was awarded the title on a TKO.
He had started to raise his arm.
Madison Square Garden (MSG) had a contract with Braddock for the title defense and also sought a Braddock-Schmeling title bout.
Trotter later became Louis's first wife in 1935.
Marciano himself was reluctant to participate in the bout, but was understanding of Louis's position: "This is the last guy on earth I want to fight."
In 2007 he was ranked #4 on ESPN.com's 50 Greatest Boxers of all-time list.
Starting in the 1960s, Louis was frequently mocked by segments of the African-American community (including Muhammad Ali) for being an "Uncle Tom."
In April 1934, he followed up his Chicago performance by winning the United States Amateur Champion National AAU tournament in St. Louis, Missouri.
Shortly after winning the title, he was quoted as saying, "I don't want to be called champ until I whip Max Schmeling."
As he had done earlier in his career, however, Louis would continue to appear in numerous exhibition matches worldwide.
Before the fight, Louis had spoken at a Relief Fund dinner, saying of the war effort: "We'll win, 'cause we're on God's side."
He is widely regarded as the first African American to achieve the status of a nationwide hero within the United States, and was also a focal point of anti-Nazi sentiment leading up to and during World War II.
In the 29 months from January 1939 through May 1941, Louis defended his title thirteen times, a frequency unmatched by any Heavyweight Champion since the end of the bare-knuckle era.
Helping the white press to overcome its reluctance to feature a black contender was the fact that in the mid-1930s boxing desperately needed a marketable hero.
On August 30, 1937, after a postponement of four days due to rain, Louis and Farr finally touched gloves at New York's Yankee Stadium before a crowd of approximately 32,000.
As a young associate at a law firm hired by Julian Black, Gibson was charged with personally entertaining Louis during the pendency of business deals.
After Louis' narrow defeat of Natie Brown on March 29, 1935, Jacobs and the Louis team met at the Frog Club, a black nightclub, and negotiated a three-year exclusive boxing promotion deal.
Despite its derogatory nickname, most of the group were top-ten heavyweights.
Of the over $4.6 million earned during his boxing career, Louis himself received only about $800,000.
His son, Joe Louis Barrow, Jr., currently oversees the organization.
I knew Conn was kinda small and I didn't want them to say in the papers that I beat up on some little guy so the day before the fight I did a little roadwork to break a sweat and drank as little water as possible so I could weigh in under 200&nbsp;pounds.
Referee Arthur Donovan was even seen shaking Farr's hand after the bout, in apparent congratulation.
His friends included former rival Max Schmeling—who provided Louis with financial assistance during his retirement—and mobster Frank Lucas, who, disgusted with the government's treatment of Louis, once paid off a $50,000 tax lien held against him.
I gave Tommy two rounds and one even—and both his winning rounds were close.
The fight was held in Yankee Stadium before a crowd of 70,043.
In 1936, Vince Leah, then a writer for the ''Winnipeg Tribune'' used Joe Louis's nickname to refer to the Winnipeg Football Club after a game.
After defeating Louis, Schmeling expected a title shot against James J. Braddock, who had unexpectedly defeated Max Baer for the Heavyweight title the previous June.
Conn would not gain weight for the challenge against Louis, saying instead that he would rely on a "hit and run" strategy.
It paved the way for the first generation of African-American professional golfers such as Calvin Peete.
He invested in a number of businesses, all of which eventually failed, including the Joe Louis Restaurant, the Joe Louis Insurance Company, a softball team called the Brown Bombers, Joe Louis Milk Company, Joe Louis pomade (hair product), Joe Louis Punch (a drink), the Louis-Rower P.R.
Noted entertainer Ed Sullivan had initially sparked Louis' interest in the sport by giving an instructional book to Joe's wife, Marva.
They didn't take the proper time to see that their fighters had a proper training, that they lived comfortably, or ate well, or had some pocket change.
His recognition also transcends the sporting world.
Louis did his part by knocking out former champion Jack Sharkey on August 18, 1936.
firm, a horse farm and the Rhumboogie Café in Chicago.
While the incident was at first credited to "physical breakdown," underlying problems would soon surface.
Unknowingly, Baer suffered from a unique disadvantage in the fight; earlier that evening, Louis had married Marva Trotter at a friend's apartment and was eager to end the fight in order to consummate the relationship.
Roxborough knew a Chicago area boxing promoter named Julian Black who already had a stable of mediocre boxers against which Louis could hone his craft, this time in the heavyweight division.
''Time'' described the scene thus: "After collecting the judges' votes, referee Arthur Donovan announced that Louis had won the fight on points.
In 1953, Robert Gordon directed a movie about Louis's life, ''The Joe Louis Story''.
The MP tried to arrest them, but Louis forcefully argued the pair out of the situation.
Congress stated that he "did so much to bolster the spirit of the American people during one of the most crucial times in American history and which have endured throughout the years as a symbol of strength for the nation".
After this debut – a loss to future Olympian Johnny Miller – Louis compiled numerous amateur victories, eventually winning the club championship of his Brewster Street recreation centre, the home of many aspiring Golden Gloves fighters.
The crowd of 50,000...amazed that Farr had not been knocked out or even knocked down, booed the decision.
Joe's brother worked for Ford Motor Company (where Joe would himself work for a time at the River Rouge Plant) and the family settled into a home at 2700 Catherine (now Madison) Street in Detroit's Black Bottom neighborhood.
The statue, by sculptor Casey Downing, Jr., sits on a base of red granite outside the Chambers County Courthouse.
The next year, competing in the Golden Gloves' Open Division, he won the light heavyweight classification, this time also winning the Chicago Tournament of Champions.
The white managers were not interested in the men they were handling but in the money they could make from them.
Although he saw none of the roughly $90,000 raised by these and other charitable fights, the IRS later credited these amounts as taxable income paid to Louis.
It was the first and only time that Braddock was knocked out (the one other stoppage of Braddock's career was a TKO on a cut).
Louis' cultural impact was felt well outside the ring.
By the eighth round, Louis began suffering from dehydration.
* Al McCoy, putative New England Heavyweight Champion, whose fight against Louis is probably best known for being the first Heavyweight title bout held in Boston, Massachusetts (at the Boston Garden on December 16, 1940).
"The better man won.
By exploiting Louis's habit of dropping his left hand low after a jab, Schmeling handed Louis his first professional loss by knocking him out in Round 12 at Yankee Stadium on June 19, 1936.
In 1940 Louis endorsed and campaigned for Republican Wendell Willkie for president.
By the time Conn was ready for the rematch, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor had taken place, detouring Louis's heavyweight career.
To bring in money, Louis engaged in numerous activities outside the ring.
'''Joseph Louis Barrow''' (May 13, 1914 – April 12, 1981), best known as '''Joe Louis''', was an American professional boxer.
A match with Ezzard Charles—who had acquired the vacant Heavyweight title in June 1949 by outpointing Walcott—was set for September 27, 1950.
When he was asked about his decision to enter the racially segregated U.S. Army, his explanation was simple: "Lots of things wrong with America, but Hitler ain't going to fix them."
Figuring that the New York State Athletic Commission would not sanction the fight in deference to MSG and Schmeling, Jacobs scheduled the fight for Chicago.
The rematch between Louis and Schmeling would become one of the most famous boxing matches of all time and is remembered as one of the major sports events of the 20th century.
On the night of the fight, June 22, 1937, Braddock was able to knock Louis down in round one, but afterward could accomplish little.
Louis made the most of the opportunity, knocking Conn out with two seconds left in the thirteenth round.
Louis went on a celebrity tour with other notables including fellow boxer Sugar Ray Robinson.
When Schmeling instead attempted to arrange for a fight against British Empire Champion Tommy Farr, known as the "Tonypandy Terror",—ostensibly for a world championship to rival the claims of American boxing authorities—Jacobs outmaneuvered him, offering Farr a guaranteed $60,000 to fight Louis instead.
In another incident, he allegedly had to resort to bribery to persuade a commanding officer to drop charges against Jackie Robinson for punching a captain who had called Robinson a "nigger."
The assignment was at the suggestion of his friend and lawyer Truman Gibson, who knew of Louis's love for horsemanship.
Referee Arthur Donovan disqualified Baer before the beginning of the seventh round as a result of stalling by Baer's manager.
''New York Times'' Columnist Edward Van Ness wrote, "Louis...is a boon to boxing.
* Buddy Baer (brother of former champion Max), who was leading the May 23, 1941, bout in Washington, D.C., until an eventual barrage by Louis, capped by a hit at the sixth round bell.
Slowly, the press began to eliminate its stereotypical racial references when covering Louis and instead treated him as an unqualified sports hero.
A glass ceiling kept black boxers out of championship bouts, and there were few heavyweight black contenders at the time, though there were African Americans who fought for titles in other weight divisions, and a few notable black champions such as Tiger Flowers.
When Louis was declared the winner in a split decision, the crowd booed.
In preparation for the inevitable rematch with Schmeling, Louis tuned up with bouts against Nathan Mann and Harry Thomas.
Louis made his debut in early 1932 at age 17.
After inflicting constant punishment, Louis defeated Braddock in round eight, knocking him out cold with a strong right hand that bust James' teeth through his gum shield and lip and paralyzed him to the ground for a few minutes.
Despite his being a 6-to-5 favorite, few boxing insiders believed Louis had a chance.
In all, Louis made 25 defenses of his Heavyweight title from 1937 to 1948, and was a world champion for 11 years and 10 months.
The publicity of the campaign made Louis widely popular stateside, even outside the world of sports.
After becoming part of the management team, Black hired fellow Chicago native Jack "Chappy" Blackburn as Louis's trainer.
In an interview with Arsenio Hall in the late 1980s, Muhammad Ali stated that his two biggest influences in boxing were Sugar Ray Robinson and Joe Louis.
The fighters met on June 18, 1941, in front of a crowd of 54,487 fans at the Polo Grounds in New York City.
In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Joe Louis on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.
He was going to take a vicious, savage beating.
Conversely, Schmeling prepared intently for the bout.
These payments, along with an eventual agreement in the early 1960s by the IRS to limit its collections to an amount based on Louis's current income, allowed Louis to live comfortably toward the end of his life.
* Tony Musto, who, at 5'7½" and 198&nbsp;pounds, was known as "Baby Tank."
As Tommy walked back to his corner after shaking Louis' hand, I followed him and seized his glove.
The stage was set for Louis's title shot.
But against the advice of his corner, Conn continued to closely engage Louis in the later stages of the fight.
They had four children: another son named Joseph Louis Barrow Jr, John Louis Barrow, Joyce Louis Barrow, and Janet Louis Barrow.
Another military charity bout on March 27, 1942, (against another former opponent, Abe Simon) netted $36,146.
In 1952, Louis was invited to play as an amateur in the San Diego Open on a sponsor's exemption, becoming the first African American to play a PGA Tour event.
Although the attendance did not meet expectations, the fight was still the most profitable of Louis's career to date.
The younger Joe Louis Barrow Jr. lives in New York City and is involved in boxing.
Louis's victory was a seminal moment in African American history.
The bout was closely contested and went the entire 15 rounds, with Louis being unable to knock Farr down.
In 1926, shaken by a gang of white men in the Ku Klux Klan, Louis's family moved to Detroit, Michigan, forming part of the post-World&nbsp;War&nbsp;I Great Migration.
Louis was dropped in the eighth round by a Marciano left and knocked through the ropes and out of the ring less than thirty seconds later.
In a famous wartime recruitment slogan, he echoed his prior comments of 1942: "We'll win, because we're on God's side."
By then, Louis was 36 years old and had been away from competitive boxing for two years.
American Legion Post 375 in Detroit is also named after Joe Louis.
Determined to win and retire with his title intact, Louis signed on for a rematch.
After trouble finding another suitable opponent, on December 5, 1947, Louis met Jersey Joe Walcott, a 33-year-old veteran with a 44–11–2 record.
Munroe was predominantly African American with some white ancestry, while Lillie was half Cherokee.
Louis earned $59 for knocking out Kracken in the first round.
In September 1934, while promoting a Detroit-area "coming home" bout for Louis against Canadian Alex Borchuk, Roxborough was pressured by members of the Michigan State Boxing Commission to have Louis sign with white management.
Despite now being Heavyweight Champion, Louis was haunted by the earlier defeat to Schmeling.
The contract, however, did not keep Roxborough and Black from attempting to cash in as Louis' managers; when Louis turned 21 on May 13, 1935, Roxborough and Black each signed Louis to an onerous long-term contract that collectively dedicated half of Louis' future income to the pair.
* "Two Ton" Tony Galento, who was able to knock Louis to the canvas with a left hook in the third round of their bout on June 28, 1939, before letting his guard down and being knocked out in the fourth.
Louis himself financially supported the careers of several other early black professional golfers, such as Bill Spiller, Ted Rhodes, Howard Wheeler, James Black, Clyde Martin and Charlie Sifford.
Joe Louis had 70 professional fights with only three losses.
Walcott entered the fight as a 10-to-1 underdog.
Louis was eventually promoted to the rank of technical sergeant on April 9, 1945.
* World Light Heavyweight Champion John Henry Lewis who, attempting to move up a weight class, was knocked out in the first round by Louis on January 25, 1939.
Schmeling's victory over an African American was touted by Nazi officials as proof of their doctrine of Aryan superiority.
