He also took on the difficult Constitution ministerial portfolio after the failure of the Meech Lake Accord, and vigorously pursued his task.
During the same tour, while inspecting a military honour guard, Clark turned too soon and nearly bumped into a soldier's bayonet; one of the first major media reports on the incident claimed, with some exaggeration, that he had nearly been beheaded.
However, the Progressive Conservatives had misjudged the electorate, since they had not commissioned any polls since August.
This was also considering that the governing Liberals under Pierre Trudeau were slipping in polls, and although the PCs had built up a substantial lead in popularity, Trudeau was expected to retire before the election and a new Liberal leader could have been able to pull off a victory.
Indeed, Chrétien and Clark had been fellow parliamentarians since the 1970s and they shared a mutual respect despite sitting on opposite benches.
Their advertisements declared "This is no time for on-the-job training", and "We need tough leadership to keep Canada growing.
Mulroney, a Quebec businessman with no elected political experience, was unable to expand his base of support significantly.
After leading the party to a modest resurgence in the 1997 election, winning 20 seats, Charest bowed to tremendous public pressure and left federal politics to become leader of the Quebec Liberal Party (unaffiliated with the federal Liberals).
At the January 1983 convention in Winnipeg, 33.1% supported a review.
It does so by making available, discreetly and in confidence, the experience of former leaders to today’s national leaders.
Clark was the first recipient of the Vimy Award.
Other party members felt that the federal Liberal Party's stranglehold on Quebec seats (they held all but one of the province's 75 seats) could only be broken by a native from that province, which gave Mulroney considerable support.
Clark endorsed former NDP leader Ed Broadbent and other Liberals and Conservatives as individuals, saying that the most important thing was to have "the strongest possible Canadian House of Commons" since neither large party offered much hope.
Large budget deficits, high inflation, and high unemployment made the Liberal government unpopular.
Canada's sixteenth and youngest Prime Minister, he served with distinction as Secretary of State for External Affairs, President of the Privy Council and Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs.
Clark's refusal to work with the Socreds, combined with the 18 cents per gallon, led to the defeat of the government in the House of Commons in December 1979.
Clark served as leader of the joint PC-DRC caucus.
The Liberal Party had regained national prominence by leading the "No" side to victory in the 1980 Quebec referendum and the Constitution patriation.
Clark was bilingual but the PC party was also unable to make much headway in Quebec, which continued to be federally dominated by the Liberals.
A leader must be a leader."
Charles Joseph Clark was born in High River, Alberta, the son of Grace Roselyn (née Welch) and local newspaper publisher Charles A. Clark.
When Clark undertook a tour of the Middle East in order to show his ability to handle foreign affairs issues, his luggage was lost, and Clark appeared to be uncomfortable with the issues being discussed.
Many political observers and analysts have questioned Clark's rationale for the decision.
He serves with the Jimmy Carter Center, routinely travelling overseas as part of the centre's international observing activities.
With many veteran Tories having been defeated in the 1968 election, the party effectively skipped a generation by selecting Clark as its new leader.
Clark's campaign countered this by trying to polarize the election between right wingers and a centrist who had been able to win before.
The party had no obvious candidate to fill Charest's shoes, and turned to Clark once again in 1998.
His vision for the party was one that was to the left of the Alliance, but to the right of the Liberals.
He benefited when live television came to the House of Commons in 1977, allowing viewers to see that he was evolving into a real rival for Trudeau.
He is Honorary Chief Bald Eagle of the Samson Cree Nation.
Clark encountered another future rival when he met Brian Mulroney at a national Young PCs meeting in 1958.
The PC Party's membership had also dropped from 100,000 in 1998 to 45,000 card carrying PCs in May 2003.
While in high school, he gained journalism experience with the ''High River Times'' and the ''Calgary Albertan''.
However, once in office he proposed a budget designed to curb inflation by slowing economic activity, and also proposed an 18 cent per gallon (4 cent per litre) tax on gasoline in order to reduce the budgetary deficit.
He served as Distinguished Statesman in Residence, School of International Service, and Senior Fellow, Center for North American Studies, both at the American University, Washington, D.C.
Clark was attacked while walking down the street in Montreal in mid-November 2007.
In 1973, Clark married law student Maureen McTeer.
Clark was widely trusted by Canadians, but this, in his own words, did not translate into more votes and additional seats.
He published the book ''How We Lead: Canada in a Century of Change'' in 2013.
Later, Clark openly criticized the new Conservative Party in the run-up to the 2004 election.
His talent for negotiation and consensus diplomacy has served him well in politics and as Representative of the Secretary General of the United Nations in Cyprus.
As other Red Tory candidates were eliminated during the first four ballots, Clark gradually overtook Mulroney and then Wagner to emerge as the victor on the fourth ballot, by 1,187 votes to 1,122.
The public now has the legal right of access to government records in some 150 federal departments and agencies.
Clark was appointed as Special Representative to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for Cyprus from 1993–1996.
Clark's wife, Maureen McTeer, elaborated on Clark's decision in her 2003 autobiography, ''In My Own Name''.
Clark was the first Canadian politician to take a strong stand for decriminalization of marijuana in Canada, and for a guaranteed minimum income for everyone; both positions were characteristic of the Red Tories.
For the general election held two months later, Clark yielded Kings-Hants back to Brison and was elected as the MP for Calgary Centre, by then deep in the heart of Canadian Alliance territory.
At Trudeau's funeral in 2000, his son Justin Trudeau related a story in which he had told a joke about one of his father's chief rivals, and his father had corrected him, lectured him sternly on how it was wrong to insult someone just because they disagreed, and then introduced him to the rival.
Davis' criticism of the gas tax was used in the Liberals' Ontario television ads.
He was elected for Kings—Hants, Nova Scotia, in a by-election on September 11, 2000, after the incumbent MP, Scott Brison, stood down in his favour.
It was widely seen as being the failure of the Charlottetown and prior Meech Lake accords that had caused it to be so close.
He was elected by a teleconference of PC members from around the country in which each of the party's riding associations was allocated 100 points.
They met when Clark hired her to work in his parliamentary office; McTeer had been a political organizer herself since her early teens.
In the latter half of the campaign, the Liberals focused their attacks on Clark's perceived inexperience.
He came to power in the 1979 election, defeating the Liberal government of Pierre Trudeau and ending 16 years of continuous Liberal rule.
When Mulroney took over the reins of the Progressive Conservatives, Trudeau's Liberals attacked them with the slogan "Bring back Joe!
Fellow Tory MP Stanley Schumacher had much of his old riding of Palliser merged into Bow River as well.
One of his most famous quips was: "A recession is when your neighbour loses his job.
Clark was also a member of the University of Alberta Debate Society (UADS).
He later worked one summer at the ''Edmonton Journal'' where he met his future biographer, David L. Humphreys.
However, he spent more time with the Dalhousie Student Union, Progressive Conservative politics and the ''Dalhousie Gazette'', than on his courses.
After the government fell, Clark's party was caught off guard when Pierre Trudeau quickly rescinded his resignation from the Liberal leadership to lead his party into the subsequent election.
When the Prince met Clark in the receiving line at the function, he asked to Clark: "why wasn't two thirds enough?"
The Mulroney campaign responded by continuing their pro-business line.
The gas tax in the budget soured Clark's relationship with Ontario Premier Bill Davis, even though both were Red Tories.
Clark was made a Companion of the Order of Canada.
In his final mandate, Jean Chrétien repeatedly referred to Clark as the Leader of the Opposition (Clark was not), much to the chagrin of the Canadian Alliance politicians who occupied the Opposition Leader's chair during the same period.
Clark campaigned on the slogans, "Let's get Canada working again", and "It's time for a change—give the future a chance!"
Overall, Clark's efforts to rebuild the PC party had mixed results.
In a rematch of the 1976 convention, Mulroney emerged as the main challenger, gaining the support of the party's right wing, which viewed Clark as too progressive and opposed his continued leadership.
Clark, despite being perceived by many people as something of a square, showed biting wit at times while in Opposition.
The five Socred MPs had demanded the tax revenues be allocated to Quebec and when that was turned down, they abstained, which ensured the subamendment's passage on a 139–133 margin.
However, the publication of ''The Secret Mulroney Tapes'' shows that Mulroney continued to hold negative feelings towards Clark during the 1980s and 1990s.
He eventually became comfortable speaking and answering questions in French, which helped his political standing in Quebec.
That feminist practice was not common at the time, but was later taken up by other political wives, such as Hillary Clinton.
However, Clark was unable to stay on as Progressive Conservative leader long enough to regain the Prime Ministership.
However, Trudeau also complimented Clark as a respectable leader and a better choice over Brian Mulroney, who had defeated Clark at the leadership convention 1983.
It also did not help that the Progressive Conservatives lost a string of by-elections on May 24, 1977.
One of the two, Inky Mark, eventually joined the PCs.
Others attacked Clark's goal of the PC party regaining its former power as unrealistic.
Citing this, Clark announced his intention to step down as PC leader on August 6, 2002, at the PC Party's Edmonton policy convention.
The points for each riding were then assigned on the basis of each candidate's share of votes within each riding association.
Clark became politically active while at university, although he had been aware from a young age of politics in Canada and was an admirer of Prime Minister John Diefenbaker.
One of the two PC candidates to survive the 1993 wipe-out, Jean Charest, became leader of the PC party following Campbell's resignation.
Two by-election victories later in 2002 increased the PC caucus to 15 members and fourth place in the Commons.
Clark has also served on the boards of directors or advisory boards of several Canadian companies.
Clark ran on his previous experience as Prime Minister and External Affairs Minister.
His tenure was brief as he only won a minority government, and it was defeated on a motion of non-confidence.
Clark was criticized by some for dismissing the new Conservative Party outright rather than helping to steer it towards a moderate path.
Clark managed to lure Socred MP Richard Janelle to the government caucus, but this still left the Tories five seats short of a majority.
With Quebec's constitutional status within Canada a rising issue, he shifted to become the minister responsible for constitutional affairs.
Canada was the only G7 nation to take such a resolute stance against the apartheid regime during the 1980s.
In contrast to Clark, Trudeau and Mulroney had become bitter enemies over the Meech Lake Accord, despite never having fought an election.
During his term as External Affairs minister, Clark championed Canada's unabashed disapproval of the apartheid regime in South Africa.
Clark however decided that he would govern as if he had a majority, and refused to grant the small Socred official party status, form a coalition, or co-operate with the party in any way.
In addition to teaching classes at the American University in Washington, Clark has written several op-ed pieces for several of Canada's national newspapers since his retirement.
A public inquiry on these matters, and on other business dealings between Mulroney and Schreiber, was called for early 2008 by Prime Minister Stephen Harper.
Clark's government would last a total of nine months less a day.
It is a not-for-profit organization composed of former heads of government, senior governmental and international organization officials who work closely with heads of government on governance-related issues of concern to them.
A November Gallup poll published eight days before the December 11 budget reported that their popularity was down from 36% during the summer to 28%, with the party 19 points behind the Liberals, giving the latter the popular support to initiate the non-confidence motion.
École Joe Clark School in High River, Alberta, is named in honour of Clark.
The PC party lost ground in Quebec (due in part to the departure of Jean Charest to provincial politics), which resulted in three members of the PC caucus defecting to join the Liberal Party prior to the election.
Media coverage emphasized the pro-business and neo-liberal bent of most of the candidates as a "Changing of the Guard" within the PC party from their more classical conservative and moderate elements.
Social Credit was below the 12 seats needed for official party status in the House of Commons.
At the time of his retirement, polls showed that he was in fact the single most trusted political personality in Canada.
In his first year at the University of Alberta, Clark joined the staff of the campus newspaper ''Gateway'' and eventually became editor-in-chief.
Orchard unsuccessfully tried to block the merger and later joined the Liberal Party.
Clark today is recognized as a distinguished scholar and statesman, and serves as a university professor and as president of his own consulting firm.
Clark's personal popularity grew as, once again, scandal enveloped Chrétien's Liberal government.
However, Mulroney and John Crosbie had been laying the groundwork for a campaign for some time, with Crosbie expecting Clark to lose or resign soon, and Mulroney supportive of the anti-Clark movement.
Clark again became active in student politics, serving as president of the Progressive Conservative Youth wing for two terms.
He criticized the new Conservative Party as an 'Alliance take-over', and speculated that eastern Canada would not accept the new party or its more socially conservative policies against gay marriage and abortion.
In October 2006, Clark took a position at McGill University as a Professor of Practice for Public-Private Sector Partnerships at the McGill Institute for the Study of International Development.
Clark sparred with future political rival Preston Manning in debate forums on campus between the Young PCs and the Youth League of the Alberta Social Credit Party.
This led further to the 2009 Oliphant Commission.)
The fact that Clark had been able to increase his support among party members by only 0.4% was likely a contributing factor to his decision to resign as leader and seek a renewed mandate from the membership through a leadership convention.
In 1993, he founded his own consulting firm, Joe Clark and Associates, Ltd., which he still heads.
The re-elected Trudeau government subsequently based its Access to Information Act on the Clark government's Bill C-15.
In many ways his social liberalism was as bold in the 1970s as Trudeau's was in the 1960s.
Recovery is when Pierre Trudeau loses his job."
These positions put Clark at odds with the right-wing members of his caucus, several members of which were not afraid to confront him.
Clark then attended Dalhousie Law School.
That incident was widely lampooned by Toronto Sun cartoonist Andy Donato.
It took two years for Clark to return to Parliament.
Also in 1994, he wrote the book ''A Nation Too Good to Lose: Renewing the Purpose of Canada''.
Clark continually promoted the idea that the PCs would eventually retake Ontario and form a federal government again.
He improved his party's standing in national opinion polls.
In 2004, Clark's lifetime achievements were recognized with the Award for Excellence in the Cause of Parliamentary Democracy by Canada's Churchill Society for the Advancement of Parliamentary Democracy.
He then worked full-time for the Progressive Conservative Party.
Many delegates were offended by his expensive leadership campaign.
Nonetheless, Clark's Progressive Conservatives won 136 seats to end sixteen continuous years of Liberal rule.
One famous incident involved a 1987 official dinner held for Prince Charles at Rideau Hall.
While Trudeau's National Energy Program was hugely unpopular in Western Canada, especially Alberta, it was able to shore up Liberal support in the voter-rich Eastern Canada, particularly Ontario and Quebec, generally having the opposite effect of Clark's proposed gas tax.
In a 1999 survey of Canadian historians Clark was ranked No.&nbsp;15 out of the first 20 prime ministers through Jean Chrétien.
The Liberals lost 27 seats, including several high-profile cabinet ministers, and Trudeau announced his intention to step down as party leader.
The Progressive Conservatives won the popular vote in seven provinces.
At the same time, the party was still $10 million in debt from the 2000 election.
Within days the minority Conservative government was unseated; the legislation died on the order paper.
Much joking was made of Clark's clumsiness and awkward mannerisms.
In May 2003, the party finally overtook the New Democratic Party as the fourth-largest party in the House of Commons, after by-election wins in Newfoundland and Labrador and Ontario.
The dissidents felt that Alliance leader Stockwell Day had not learned from mistakes made in the last election.
The survey was used in the book ''Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders'' by J.&nbsp;L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer.
During the 1979 election campaign, Clark had promised to cut taxes to stimulate the economy.
Many of his supporters have suggested his actions helped sustain the relevance of the weakened Progressive Conservative Party during some of its toughest years when its national alternative status was seriously challenged by the prairie populism of Preston Manning and the Reform Party of Canada and the social conservatism of Stockwell Day and the Canadian Alliance.
Some critics accused Clark of being more interested in helping the interests of his own party and own career than the Canadian conservative movement in general.
The Liberals by contrast had assembled their entire caucus, save one, for the occasion.
He was honoured as Commandeur de l'Ordre de la Pleiade from La Francophonie.
At the party's 1981 convention, 33.5% of the delegates supported a leadership review; they felt that Clark would not be able to lead the party to victory again.
He served as president of the University of Alberta Young Progressive Conservatives, and eventually served as national president for the Young PCs group.
This book was also published in a French translation.
However, Clark was judged by audiences to be the best speaker during the 2000 election debates.
McTeer has developed her own career as a well-known author and lawyer, and caused something of a fuss by keeping her maiden name after marriage.
Even before the budget, the government was criticized for its perceived inexperience, such as in its handling of its campaign commitment to move Canada's embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
This lasted until 2002, when Stephen Harper ousted Day as Alliance leader.
Compared to his predecessor as Prime Minister, Clark reportedly had a better relationship with US President Jimmy Carter, who phoned Clark to wish him luck in the upcoming 1980 election.
He competed with the University of Alberta Debate Society.
Trudeau told his friends that the Tories had chosen the wrong man.
On Tuesday, May 27, 2008, Clark's official parliamentary portrait was unveiled during a reception ceremony to be hung in Centre Block alongside Canada's past prime ministers.
During delegate voting, Clark won the first ballot, but only won 36.5% of the vote, well short of the 50% required.
The Tories lost 19 seats in that province, which ultimately proved to be decisive in the campaign.
Though the election had been held in May, Parliament did not resume sitting until October, one of the longest break periods in Confederation.
Clark served as Public Policy Scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
He gave a tepid endorsement to the Liberal Party in the 2004 election, calling Paul Martin "the devil we know".
The party's right-wing rallied behind Wagner.
Trudeau commented in his memoirs, published in 1993, that Clark was much more tough and aggressive than past Tory leader Robert Stanfield, noting that those qualities served Clark well in his party winning the 1979 election victory.
Initially, the favourite among Red Tories was Flora MacDonald; however she did worse than expected while Clark placed a surprising third in a field of eleven on the first ballot of convention delegates, behind only Claude Wagner and Brian Mulroney.
Finance Minister John Crosbie touted the budget as "short term pain for long term gain."
He maintained Canada's independent voice politically and socially at a time of increasing economic integration with the US and the rise of more socially conservative right-wing politics there.
MacDonald dropped off after the second ballot, encouraging her supporters to support Clark, who quickly became the compromise Red Tory candidate.
Clark was selected by the media and many parliamentarians for three years in a row to be Canada's most effective opposition leader between 2000 and 2002, pursuing the Liberal government on issues such as Shawinigate and the Groupaction scandal.
The 1995 Quebec referendum saw the federal side win by less than one percent of the vote.
He got his chance in 2001, when several dissident Alliance MPs, the most prominent one being Alliance deputy leader and party matriarch Deborah Grey, left the Alliance caucus.
Several candidates agreed to a "ABC" (Anybody But Clark) strategy for the convention and when news of that back-room deal broke out, support was expected to rally around the party's embattled leader.
The legislation was debated at second reading at the end of November 1979 and was referred to the Standing Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs.
As a former prime minister, Clark is entitled to carry "The Right Honourable" designation for life.
Clark had always encouraged MacKay to keep Orchard and his followers within the PC camp.
Aside from Clark's Calgary seat (one of only three Alberta seats that did not go to the Canadian Alliance), and one each in Manitoba and Quebec, the party's seats were concentrated in Tory bastions in the Atlantic provinces.
In 1983, after declaring that an endorsement by 66.9% of delegates at the party's biennial convention was not enough, Clark called a leadership convention to decide the issue.
Clark, who won the Tory leadership at age 36, remains the youngest-ever leader of a major federal party in the history of Canadian politics.
He hired experienced staffers such as Lowell Murray, Duncan Edmonds, and William Neville, who shaped his policies and ran his office efficiently.
The no-confidence vote loss was partially welcomed by Clark and the Tories.
Skinny and tall, he became a frequent target for editorial cartoonists, who delighted in portraying him as a sort of walking candy apple, with an enormous head and floppy dog-like ears; cartoonist Andy Donato typically drew Clark with mittens on strings hanging from his suit sleeves.
''The Toronto Star'' announced Clark's victory with a headline that read "Joe Who?
He made a political comeback in 1998 to lead the Progressive Conservatives before its dissolution, serving his final term in Parliament from 2000 to 2004.
The attacker first asked him if he was the former prime minister, and when Clark answered that he was, the man struck him and fled.
When a new election was called, Clark expected his party would be able to defeat the demoralized and leaderless Liberals easily, since Trudeau had announced his intention to step aside and the Liberals had yet to hold a leadership convention.
Trudeau had put off asking the Canadian Governor General to call an election as long as possible, in the hope that his party could recover popular support but it backfired, as there was growing public antipathy towards his perceived arrogance.
Harper wanted a closer union with the PCs, but Clark turned the offer down in April 2002, and all but two of the DRC members rejoined the Alliance.
However, Clark remained belligerent in his attacks on the Trudeau government, angrily clashing with the prime minister in Parliament.
He soon realized that there was no chance of dislodging the Liberals as long as the centre-right remained split.
", giving Clark a nickname that stuck for years.
Clark already had most of a campaign team up and running by the time he called the leadership convention, as he had mobilized support to help gain in the convention's leadership review.
Despite his relative inexperience, Clark rose quickly in federal politics, entering the House of Commons in the 1972 election and winning the leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party in 1976.
He returned to prominence in 1984 as a senior cabinet minister in Brian Mulroney's cabinet, retiring from politics after not standing for re-election for the House of Commons in 1993.
Their daughter, Catherine has pursued a career in public relations and broadcasting.
At this point in the ceremony, the CBC cut to an image of a teary-eyed Clark.
Clark was convinced that he could win another leadership race and gain a clear level of support, once his qualities were compared against the handful of politically inexperienced challengers who coveted his position and who were covertly undermining his leadership.
It was expected that a pro-Alliance merger candidate would succeed Clark, but Clark was instead replaced by Peter MacKay on May 31, 2003.
While some of them rejoined the Alliance later, seven of them, led by Chuck Strahl of British Columbia and including Grey, refused and formed the Democratic Representative Caucus.
Clark missed being elected to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta in the 1971 provincial election.
