The Johannesburg City Library is located in the Central Business District of Johannesburg.
''The Times'' is a national newspaper that covers current issues.
But, by far, the biggest financial drain was the failure to collect revenues for services, which ranged from rent (rates) to utilities.
The city was named and established in 1886 following the discovery of gold on what had been a farm.
Incidentally, Bantjes had since 1881 been operating the Kromdraai Gold Mine in the Cradle of Humankind together with his partner Johannes Stephanus Minnaar where they first discovered gold in 1881, and which also offered another kind of discovery - the early ancestors of all mankind.
This is the first new railway system that has been laid in South Africa since 1977.
The city's manufacturing industries extend across a range of areas and there is still a reliance on heavy industries including steel and cement plants.
29% of Johannesburg residents stay in informal dwellings.
Johannesburg is also the headquarters of state-owned broadcaster South African Broadcasting Corporation and pay-broadcast network Multichoice which distributes M-Net and DStv a digital satellite service, while eTV also has a presence in the city.
Precise records for the choice of name were lost.
The Lion Park nature reserve, near Lanseria, is home to over 80 lions and various other game, while the Krugersdorp Nature Reserve, a 1500 ha game reserve, is a forty-minute drive from the city centre.
Sandton City was opened in 1973, followed by Rosebank Mall in 1976, and Eastgate in 1979.
The suburbs to the west have in recent years floundered with the decline of the mining industry but have in some cases experienced some revival with properties being bought up by the local African middle class.
Johannesburg is a young and sprawling city, with its public transportation built in its infancy, geared towards private motorists, and lacks a convenient public transportation system.
In 2011, the population of the city of Johannesburg was 4,434,827, making it the largest city in South Africa.
66% of households are headed by one person.
Johannesburg and environs offer various options to visitors wishing to view wildlife.
From the 2001 Census, the people live in 1,006,930 formal households, of which 86% have a flush or chemical toilet, and 91% have refuse removed by the municipality at least once a week.
a green shield displaying a golden horizontal stripe between three battery stamps).
More specifically, the stone-walled ruins of Sotho–Tswana towns and villages are scattered around the parts of the former Transvaal in which Johannesburg is situated.
Johannesburg is part of a larger urban region.
The lowest nighttime minimum temperature ever recorded in Johannesburg is , on 13 June 1979.
Johannesburg's largest shopping centres, measured by gross leasable area (GLA, the uniform measure of centre size as determined by the International Council of Shopping Centers) are Sandton City, Eastgate, Mall of Africa, Westgate and Cresta.
Drastic measures have been taken to reduce crime in the city.
Lanseria Airport, located to the north-west of the city and closer to the business hub of Sandton, is used for commercial flights to Cape Town, Durban, Port Elizabeth, Botswana, and Sun City.
The suburbs of Melville, Newtown, Parkhurst, Norwood, Rosebank and Greenside are popular for their bohemian atmosphere, street life, and many restaurants and bars.
* AECI Dynamite Factory Museum
The museum's role was to collect and preserve for posterity all material that would illustrate the history of medicine in general and of South Africa in particular.
'''Johannesburg''' (; ; also known as '''Jozi''', '''Joburg''', '''eGoli''', and abbreviated as '''JHB''') is the largest city in South Africa and is one of the 50 largest urban areas in the world.
By the mid-18th century, the broader region was largely settled by various Sotho–Tswana communities (one linguistic branch of Bantu-speakers), whose villages, towns, chiefdoms and kingdoms stretched from what is now Botswana in the west, to present day Lesotho in the south, to the present day Pedi areas of the northern Transvaal.
It is the provincial capital of Gauteng, which is the wealthiest province in South Africa.
The service and other industries include banking, IT, real estate, transport, broadcast and print media, private health care, transport and a vibrant leisure and consumer retail market.
In 2010 in order to create an efficient public transport system the Rea Vaya bus rapid system was developed/built.
Part of this failure was a result of the anti-apartheid boycott of paying the government.
Women comprise 43% of the working population.
The full achievement of arms was registered with the Transvaal Provincial Administration in November 1951 and at the Bureau of Heraldry in November 1966.
Major building developments took place in the 1930s, after South Africa went off the gold standard.
Many corporations and institutions, including the stock exchange, moved their headquarters away from the city centre, to suburbs like Sandton.
Joubert had a park in the city named after him and Rissik Street is today a main street where the historically important and dilapidated Post Office, since burnt out, and the City Hall are located.
The Rhino & Lion Nature Reserve, situated in the "Cradle of Humankind" on 1200 ha of "the typical highveld of Gauteng" also runs a breeding programme for endangered species including Bengal tigers, Siberian tigers and the extremely rare white lion.
34% use public transportation to commute to work or school.
As of 11 December 2008, every street corner in Johannesburg central is under high-tech CCTV surveillance.
Other attractions in this area include the Lesedi Cultural Village, while Magaliesburg and the Hartbeespoort Dam are popular weekend (and holiday) destinations for Johannesburg residents.
Crime levels in Johannesburg have dropped as the economy has stabilised and begun to grow.
First Division teams are Jomo Cosmos and FC AK.
::The AECI Dynamite Factory Museum, housed in the 1895 residence of a mining official, records the history of explosives, with particular emphasis on their use in the mining industry.
Johannesburg's suburbs are the product of urban sprawl and are regionalised into north, south, east and west, and they generally have different personalities.
The railways transport huge numbers of commuters everyday.
The De Wildt Cheetah Centre in the Magaliesberg runs a successful breeding program for cheetah, wild dog and other endangered species.
Blacks account for 73% of the population, followed by whites at 16%, coloureds at 6% and Asians at 4%.
The biggest sprawl lies to the east and north.
The CCTV system, operated by the Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department (JMPD), is also able to detect stolen or hijacked vehicles by scanning the number plates of every vehicle travelling through the Central business district (CBD), then comparing them to the eNaTIS database.
Also a complex named Greenstone in Modderfontein has been opened.
The country's electronic media is also headquartered in the greater metropolitan region.
* Madiba Freedom Museum
The manager, together with the Municipal Council, drew up a blueprint called "iGoli 2002".
This total includes 200 modern buses (150 double-deckers and 50 single-deckers), made by Volvo, Scania AB and Marcopolo/Brasa in 2002.
To this end, revenue from wealthy, traditionally white areas would pay for services needed in poorer, black areas.
One would find DA wards more in the northern suburbs of Johannesburg, but surprisingly the DA won a ward in Soweto.
Vodacom's global headquarters is located in Midrand.
The lowest daytime maximum temperature recorded is , on 19 June 1964.
It consists of a number of underground stations, as well as above-ground stations.
Many pieces are developed through community workshops, such as the Vilakazi Street sculptures.
Only 0.7% work in mining.
File:Johannesburg CBD From M2 Highway.jpg|thumb|Johannesburg CBD From M2 Highway, photos by  Paul Saad
In the newly combined metropole services were unnecessarily duplicated.
The northern suburbs have been the recipient of most of the flight from the inner city with the city starting to sprawl northwards and multiple secondary CBDs forming in the north towards Pretoria, an interesting fact is that the area/suburb of Centurion is much closer to the CBD of Pretoria and yet it was recently demarcated as part of the City Of Johannsesburg municipality.
Due to its many different central districts Johannesburg would fall under the multiple nuclei model in human geography terms.
The JMPD claims that the average response time by police for crimes committed in the CBD is 60 seconds.
On 12 May 2008, a series of riots started in the township of Alexandra, in the north-eastern part of Johannesburg, when locals attacked migrants from Mozambique, Malawi and Zimbabwe, killing two people and injuring 40 others.
As of August 2013, the ruling political party, African National Congress, had an overwhelming majority and administered the City of Johannesburg.
The land area of the municipal city  is large in comparison with those of other major cities, resulting in a moderate population density of .
34% use private transportation to travel to work or school.
32% walk to work or school.
As to population density, Johannesburg-East Rand ranks 807th among more than 1,000 urban areas (many ties in this list).
Johannesburg Botanical Garden, located in the suburb of Emmarentia, is a popular recreational park.
The most prominent site within Johannesburg is Melville Koppies, which contains an iron smelting furnace.
Johannesburg has 4 major cellular telecommunications operators: Vodacom, MTN, Cell C, and Telkom Mobile.
Traditionally the northern and north-western suburbs have been the centre for the wealthy, containing the high-end retail shops as well as several upper-class residential areas such as Hyde Park, Sandhurst, Northcliff, Hurlingham, Bryanston and Houghton, where Nelson Mandela made his home.
The east-west line from the airport to Sandton opened in June 2010 in time for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, while the north–south line opened on 2 August 2011, except for Park Station, which opened in 2012.
The Cradle of Humankind a UNESCO World Heritage Site is  to the northwest of the city.
At 223 metres (731&nbsp;ft), it is the highest office building in Africa and affords sweeping vistas of the city and surrounds.
The Market Theatre complex attained notoriety in the 1970s and 1980s by staging anti-apartheid plays, and has now become a centre for modern South African playwriting.
File:Southern Life Center, Johannesburg, South Africa.jpg|The Southern Life Centre
The Central Business District covers an area of .
The container terminal at City Deep is known to be the largest "dry port" in the world, with some 50% of cargo that arrives through the ports of Durban and Cape Town arriving in Johannesburg.
An interesting contrast is that Johannesburg-East Rand ranks higher in density than the New York, NY-NJ-CT urban area, which ranks 914 on the same list.
The buses also have a large feeder routes that run on ordinary roads.
Tambo International Airport (above-ground and raised) travelling to Sandton via Rhodesfield (raised) and Marlboro.
The suburbs to the south of the city are mainly blue collar neighbourhoods and situated closer to some townships.
The Sterkfontein fossil site is famous for being the world's richest hominid site and produced the first adult ''Australopithecus africanus'' and the first near-complete skeleton of an early ''Australopithecine''.
It is the hub of South Africa's commercial, financial, industrial, and mining undertakings.
However, the Metrorail infrastructure was built in Johannesburg's infancy and covers only the older areas in the city's south.
Northwest of the CBD is Braamfontein, a secondary CBD housing many offices and business premises.
Within ten years, the city of Johannesburg included 100,000 people.
The city is home to an extensive portfolio of public art.
Grand Central is located in Midrand and also caters to small, private aircraft.
The Civic Theatre complex hosts drama, opera and ballet.
These riots sparked the xenophobic attacks of 2008.
Due to its commercial role, the city is the seat of the provincial government and the site of a number of government branch offices, as well as consular offices and other institutions.
The fact that Johannesburg is not near a large navigable body of water has meant that ground transportation has been the most important method of transporting people and goods in and out of the city.
In 2010, a high-speed rail link was proposed between Johannesburg and Durban.
Thousands of poor, who had been forbidden to live in the city proper, moved into the city from surrounding black townships like Soweto and many immigrants from economically beleaguered and war torn African nations flooded into South Africa.
The white authorities were 90% self-sufficient from property tax and other local taxes, and produced and spent R 600 (US$93) per person in municipal services, while the black authorities were only 10% self-sufficient, spending R 100 (US$15) per person in municipal services.
It was dedicated in 1985 and is located in the historic suburb of Parktown.
Since the 1980s The minibus taxi industry has been severely affected by turf wars.
::Bernberg Fashion Museum is a primarily a museum collection, consisting of objects, and explains why and how clothing has changed and how the fashions of the past influence those of today.
Gold was earlier discovered some  to the east of present-day Johannesburg, in Barberton.
The Economic Freedom Fighters and Democratic Alliance both agreed to vote for the DA mayoral candidate, Herman Mashaba, who was sworn into power as the first Democratic Alliance mayor of Johannesburg on 22 August 2016.
Regular cold fronts pass over in winter bringing very cold southerly winds but usually clear skies.
However, the new post-apartheid City Council ran into problems in part due to inexperienced management and political pressure, which contributed to over-ambitious revenue projections, over-spending, wasted expenditures and out-right fraud.
Johannesburg also hosted matches from and the final of the 2007 ICC World Twenty20, in which India beat Pakistan in the final.
North of the CBD is Hillbrow, the most densely populated residential area in southern Africa.
An extensive bus feeder system has also been implemented, which allows access to the main stations from the outer suburbs, but is limited to a five-kilometre radius, which neglects the rest of the suburbs.
Nonetheless, according to the opposition party, fraud, theft and non-payment still remained problems .
Urban renewal has taken place in once no go zones such as Braamfontein, Newtown, and the CBD.
File:Johannesburg.jpg|The skyline of Johannesburg's Central Business District as seen from the observatory of the Carlton Centre
* Johannesburg Art Gallery.
It has a fleet consisting of approximately 550 single and double-decker buses, plying 84 different routes in the city.
The city is located in the mineral-rich Witwatersrand range of hills and is the center of large-scale gold and diamond trade.
It is closely linked with several other satellite towns.
The number of radio stations has increased in recent years as the government sold off frequencies to private companies.
In the metropolitan area, it is 7,860,781.
They are based at the city's FNB, Orlando, Dobsonville and Bidvest stadiums.
The original miners' camp, under the informal leadership of Col Ignatius Ferreira, was located in the Fordsburg dip, possibly because water was available there, and because of the site's proximity to the diggings.
In 2013, the city admitted that it would be unable to collect two-thirds of the R 18 billion in outstanding billings.
The name is attributed to one or all of three men involved in the establishment of the city.
42% of the population is under the age of 24, while 6% of the population is over 60 years of age.
::Named after the former President Mandela's clan, the museums theme is Mzabalazo and charts South Africa's journey to democracy.
Many pieces are developed through community workshops, such as the Vilakazi Street sculptures.
To the south of Johannesburg is Lenasia, a predominantly Asian neighbourhood which was constructed during apartheid specifically to house Asians.
In spite of being up to 12 lanes wide in some areas, the Johannesburg Ring Road is frequently clogged with traffic.
Johannes Meyer, the first government official in the area is another possibility.
The plan took the city from near insolvency to an operating surplus of R 153 million (US$23.6&nbsp;million).
The Lions, formerly the Cats, represent Johannesburg, North West and Mpumalanga in the Southern Hemisphere's Super Rugby competition, which includes teams from South Africa, Australia, Argentina, Japan and New Zealand.
The former Central Business District is located on the south side of the prominent ridge called the Witwatersrand (Afrikaans: White Water's Ridge) and the terrain falls to the north and south.
Originally an acronym for "'''So'''uth-'''We'''stern '''To'''wnships", Soweto originated as a collection of settlements on the outskirts of Johannesburg, populated mostly by native African workers from the gold mining industry.
This has been accompanied by a growth in black editorship and journalism.
The temperature occasionally drops to below freezing at night, causing frost.
53% belong to mainstream Christian churches, 24% are not affiliated with any organised religion, 14% are members of African Independent Churches, 3% are Muslim, 1% are Jewish and 1% are Hindu.
During the war, many African mineworkers left Johannesburg creating a labour shortage, which the mines ameliorated by bringing in labourers from China, especially southern China.
Some report Australian George Harrison as the first to make a claim for gold in the area that became Johannesburg, as he found gold on a farm in July 1886.
::The Zoology Museum is the only natural history museum in Johannesburg which is unusual because all the other major cities in South Africa have large public natural history museums.
Johannesburg's most popular sports by participation are association football, cricket, rugby union, and running.
Wanderers Stadium hosted what many cricket fans consider the greatest ever ODI match in which South Africa successfully chased down 434 runs.
Many buildings were abandoned by landlords, especially in high-density areas, such as Hillbrow.
It has retained a unique character as the display specimens are exhibited in finely crafted teak cabinets which allow the viewer to engage directly with scores of objects at close range.
Precise records for the choice of name were lost.
In 2015, Johannesburg-East Rand was ranked 42nd by population among 992 urban areas of the world.
Gold prospectors soon discovered the richer gold reefs of the Witwatersrand offered by Bantjes.
::Located on the campus of the University of the Witwatersrand in Braamfontein, this museum contains some excellent examples of southern African rock art and the origins of humankind.
Its continued economic and population growth has depended on schemes to divert water from other regions of South Africa and from the highlands of Lesotho, the biggest of which is the Lesotho Highlands Water Project, but additional sources will be needed early in the 21st century.
The Democratic Alliance is the official opposition in the Johannesburg municipality and has won many Wards in the city.
37% of city residents are unemployed.
Other centres include Hyde Park Corner (shopping centre), Rosebank, Southgate, The Glen Shopping Centre, Johannesburg South, and Clearwater Mall.
Although Johannesburg was divided into eleven administrative regions, these new divisions did not correspond to the areas governed by the former local authorities.
Moreover, from the early 1960s until his retirement, Professor Revil Mason, of the University of the Witwatersrand, explored and documented many Late Iron Age archaeological sites throughout the Johannesburg area, dating from between the 12th century and 18th century, and many of these sites contained the ruins of Sotho–Tswana mines and iron smelting furnaces, suggesting that the area was being exploited for its mineral wealth before the arrival of Europeans or the discovery of gold.
The road is composed of three freeways that converge on the city, forming an  loop around it: the N3 Eastern Bypass, which links Johannesburg with Durban; the N1 Western Bypass, which links Johannesburg with Pretoria and Cape Town; and the N12 Southern Bypass, which links Johannesburg with Witbank and Kimberley.
The routes cover both the southern and northern suburbs with the main trunk route running from Soweto Sandton and rosbank and the feeder and complementary routes covering most of Johannsesburg with the notable exceptions of Midrand and Centurion another expansion (phase 1-C;1-D) will cover these areas.
The N3 was built exclusively with asphalt, while the N12 and N1 sections were made with concrete, hence the nickname given to the N1 Western Bypass, "The Concrete Highway".
In fiscal year 2011, the city's audit had R 45,796 million chalked up to fraudulent activities.
The north and west of the city has undulating hills while the eastern parts are flatter.
In September 1884 the Struben brothers discovered the Confidence Reef on the farm Wilgespruit near present-day Roodepoort, which further boosted excitement over gold prospects.
In an effort to prepare Johannesburg for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, local government enlisted the help of Rudy Giuliani, former Mayor of New York City, to help bring down the crime rate, as the opening and closing matches of the tournament were played in the city.
There are numerous kindergartens, primary schools and high schools in the region.
This excludes development directly associated with the 2010 FIFA World Cup.
Most of the springs from which many of these streams emanate are now covered in concrete and canalised, accounting for the fact that the names of early farms in the area often end with "fontein", meaning "spring" in Afrikaans.
In the 2016 municipal elections, the ruling party, the ANC, lost their majority in Johannesburg for the first time since taking power in 1994, claiming only 44.12% of the vote.
15% have primary education.
The city is commonly interpreted as the modern day El Dorado due to the extremely large gold deposit found along the Witwatersrand.
True Love is the most widely read women's magazine, catering primarily to the up-and-coming middle class black female market, published by Media 24.
Shopping is often popular with tourists, as the city offers a range of venues and experiences, from numerous upmarket shopping malls such as Sandton City and Nelson Mandela Square, to various markets and flea markets, such as the Oriental Plaza and the Rosebank Flea Market; the latter are popular for souvenirs and African Art.
The eastern suburbs are relatively prosperous and close to various industrial zones.
The Market Theatre stages plays, comedy shows, and musical performances.
Johannesburg has an active art scene and a variety of works that range from sculptures to murals to pieces by internationally renowned artists including William Kentridge and Gerhard Marx’s Fire Walker.
The Metrorail Gauteng commuter rail system connects central Johannesburg to Soweto, Pretoria, and most of the satellite towns along the Witwatersrand.
The M1 and M2 freeways were built to direct traffic towards the city centre.
While Johannesburg is not one of South Africa's three capital cities, it is the seat of the Constitutional Court.
The city is home to several media groups which own a number of newspaper and magazine titles.
Between 2001 and 2006, R9-billion (US$1.2&nbsp;billion) has been invested in the city centre.
These measures include closed-circuit television on street corners.
The city's main bus terminus is situated in Gandhi Square, where passengers can also obtain information regarding the Metrobus service from the walk-in customer information desk.
There were also plans to build a large shopping centre, known as the Zonk'Izizwe Shopping Resort, in Midrand, but these have been indefinitely delayed due to the opening of Mall of Africa.
As part of the Johannesburg Development Agency’s (JDA) policy to make city areas desirable to potential investors, the organisation has identified public art as a way to improve the urban experience of the city and support South African.
The minibus "taxis" are the ''de facto'' standard and essential form of transport for the majority of the population.
Also, news of the discovery soon reached Kimberley and directors Cecil Rhodes with Sir Joseph Robinson rode up to investigate rumors for themselves.
After the war, they were replaced by black workers, but many Chinese stayed on, creating Johannesburg's Chinese community, which during the apartheid era, was not legally classified as "Asian", but as "Coloured".
Johannesburg is home to some of Africa's tallest structures, such as the Sentech Tower, Hillbrow Tower, the Carlton Centre and Ponte City Apartments.
There is also a large industry around visiting former townships, such as Soweto and Alexandra.
Specialist museums cover subjects such as Africana, costume, design, fossils, geology, military history, medical, pharmacy, photography and transportation networks such as railways.
A diverse and evolving city, Johannesburg boasts a vibrant art scene and a variety of works that range from sculptures to murals to pieces by internationally renowned artists like William Kentridge and Gerhard Marx's Fire Walker.
Parks and gardens in Johannesburg are maintained by Johannesburg City Parks and Zoo.
By and large the Witwatersrand marks the watershed between the Limpopo and Vaal rivers as the northern part of the city is drained by the Jukskei River while the southern part of the city, including most of the Central Business District, is drained by the Klip River.
While strongly opposed by unions who feared a loss of jobs, the plan went into effect and returned some sectors into "cash cows" that helped support the city in general.
Consequently, most international visitors to South Africa pass through Johannesburg at least once, which has led to the development of several attractions for tourists.
Reviving the city centre is one of the main aims of the municipal government of Johannesburg.
The north-western area in particular is vibrant and lively, with the mostly black suburb of Sophiatown once centre of political activity and the Bohemian-flavoured Melville featuring restaurants and nightlife.
Although other political parties have seats in the Johannesburg municipality, they have very little influence.
The central area of the city underwent something of a decline in the 1980s and 1990s, due to the high crime rate and when property speculators directed large amounts of capital into suburban shopping malls, decentralised office parks, and entertainment centres.
Cricket is one of the more popular sports.
