''Italian Journey'' only covers the first year of Goethe's visit.
Novalis, himself a geologist and mining engineer, expressed the opinion that Goethe was the first physicist of his time and 'epoch-making in the history of physics', writing that Goethe's studies of light, of the metamorphosis of plants and of insects were indications and proofs 'that the perfect educational lecture belongs in the artist's sphere of work'; and that Goethe would be surpassed 'but only in the way in which the ancients can be surpassed, in inner content and force, in variety and depth – as an artist actually not, or only very little, for his rightness and intensity are perhaps already more exemplary than it would seem'.
In 1779, Goethe took on the War Commission of the Grand Duchy of Saxe-Weimar, in addition to the Mines and Highways commissions.
The intimate bond with Frau von Stein lasted for ten years, after which Goethe abruptly left for Italy without giving his companion any notice.
The first operatic version, by Spohr, appeared in 1814, and was subsequently the inspiration for operas and oratorios by Schumann, Berlioz, Gounod, Boito, Busoni, and Schnittke as well as symphonic works by Liszt, Wagner, and Mahler.
Faust became the ur-myth of many figures in the 19th century.
Although his literary work has attracted the greatest amount of interest, Goethe was also keenly involved in studies of natural science.
Goethe's influence was dramatic because he understood that there was a transition in European sensibilities, an increasing focus on sense, the indescribable, and the emotional.
In 1919, the Goetheanum staged the world premiere of a complete production of Faust.
While not the only one in his time to question the prevailing view that this bone did not exist in humans, Goethe, who believed ancient anatomists had known about this bone, was the first to prove its peculiarity to all mammals.
Goethe was, however, the first to systematically study the physiological effects of colour, and his observations on the effect of opposed colours led him to a symmetric arrangement of his colour wheel, 'for the colours diametrically opposed to each other... are those which reciprocally evoke each other in the eye.
The restaurant Auerbachs Keller and its legend of Faust's 1525 barrel ride impressed him so much that Auerbachs Keller became the only real place in his closet drama ''Faust Part One''.
At this time, Goethe was acquainted with the court of Darmstadt, where his inventiveness was praised.
In Leipzig, Goethe fell in love with Anna Katharina Schönkopf and wrote cheerful verses about her in the Rococo genre.
Suicide is considered sinful by Christian doctrine: suicides were denied Christian burial with the bodies often mistreated and dishonoured in various ways; in corollary, the deceased's property and possessions were often confiscated by the Church.
This is not to say that he was emotionalistic or excessive; on the contrary, he lauded personal restraint and felt that excess was a disease: "There is nothing worse than imagination without taste".
Several of his poems, like "", "" and "", originate from this time.
Goethe had a great effect on the nineteenth century.
In addition, numerous literary and scientific fragments, more than 10,000 letters, and nearly 3,000 drawings by him exist.
This stood in sharp contrast to the prevailing Enlightenment view that reason was sufficient to create well-ordered societies and good laws.
He claims to deduce from it that the barometric level varies in the same propoportion not only in each zone but that it has the same variation, too, at different altitudes above sea-level".
His last words, according to his doctor Carl Vogel, were, ''"Mehr Licht!"''
In the last period, between Schiller's death, in 1805, and his own, appeared ''Faust Part One'', ''Elective Affinities'', the ''West-Eastern Divan'' (a collection of poems in the Persian style, influenced by the work of Hafez), his autobiographical ''Aus meinem Leben: Dichtung und Wahrheit'' (''From My Life: Poetry and Truth'') which covers his early life and ends with his departure for Weimar, his ''Italian Journey'', and a series of treatises on art.
In 1823, having recovered from a near fatal heart illness, Goethe fell in love with Ulrike von Levetzow whom he wanted to marry, but because of the opposition of her mother he never proposed.
Goethe was ennobled in 1782 (this being indicated by the "von" in his name).
The Faust tragedy/drama, often called '''' ('''the''' drama of the Germans), written in two parts published decades apart, would stand as his most characteristic and famous artistic creation.
Goethe could not subsist on being one of the editors of a literary periodical (published by Schlosser and Merck).
Along with Schiller, he was one of the leading figures of Weimar Classicism.
He adored Caritas Meixner (27 July 1750&nbsp;– 31 December 1773), a wealthy Worms trader's daughter and friend of his sister, who would later marry the merchant G.&nbsp;F.&nbsp;Schuler.
The literary estate of Goethe in the Goethe and Schiller Archives was inscribed on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2001 in recognition of its historical significance.
In 1806, Goethe was living in Weimar with his mistress Christiane Vulpius, the sister of Christian A Vulpius, and their son Julius August Walter von Goethe.
Goethe also received lessons in dancing, riding and fencing.
Goethe was vehemently opposed to Newton's analytic treatment of colour, engaging instead in compiling a comprehensive ''rational description'' of a wide variety of colour phenomena.
''Faust Part Two'' was only finished in the year of his death, and was published posthumously.
In 1770, he anonymously released ''Annette'', his first collection of poems.
Born into a Lutheran family, Goethe's early faith was shaken by news of such events as the 1755 Lisbon earthquake and the Seven Years' War.
Although the accuracy of Goethe's observations does not admit a great deal of criticism, his theory's failure to demonstrate significant predictive validity eventually rendered it scientifically irrelevant.
Goethe's poetic work served as a model for an entire movement in German poetry termed ''Innerlichkeit'' ("introversion") and represented by, for example, Heine.
Goethe, aside from official duties, was also a friend and confidant to the Duke, and participated fully in the activities of the court.
Beethoven declared that a "Faust" Symphony would be the greatest thing for art.
Goethe thus went to live in Weimar, where he remained for the rest of his life and where, over the course of many years, he held a succession of offices, becoming the Duke's chief adviser.
Again during the Siege of Mainz he assisted Carl August as a military observer.
The statue is on a stone pedestal, which has a plaque that reads "Dem Dichterpaar/Goethe und Schiller/das Vaterland".
Many of Goethe's works, especially ''Faust'', the ''Roman Elegies'', and the ''Venetian Epigrams'', depict erotic passions and acts.
Entitled ''Götz von Berlichingen,'' the work went directly to the heart of Goethe's contemporaries.
Followers of the twentieth century esotericist Rudolf Steiner built a theatre named the Goetheanum after him—where festival performances of Faust are still performed.
Lines from ''Faust'', such as "", "", or "" have entered everyday German usage.
From this milieu came Johann Georg Schlosser (who was later to become his brother-in-law) and Johann Heinrich Merck.
According to Hegel, "Goethe has occupied himself a good deal with meteorology; barometer readings interested him particularly... What he says is important: the main thing is that he gives a comparative table of barometric readings during the whole month of December 1822, at Weimar, Jena, London, Boston, Vienna, Töpel...
During his first ten years in Weimar, Goethe was a member of the Duke's privy council, sat on the war and highway commissions, oversaw the reopening of silver mines in nearby Ilmenau, and implemented a series of administrative reforms at the University of Jena.
He argued that laws could not be created by pure rationalism, since geography and history shaped habits and patterns.
Goethe studied law at Leipzig University from 1765 to 1768.
As his studies did not progress, Goethe was forced to return to Frankfurt at the close of August 1768.
In the Kurschner edition of Goethe's works, the science editor, Rudolf Steiner, presents Goethe's approach to science as phenomenological.
All their children, except for Goethe and his sister, Cornelia Friederike Christiana, who was born in 1750, died at early ages.
Despite the immense success of ''Werther'', it did not bring Goethe much financial gain because copyright laws at the time were essentially nonexistent.
His great passion was drawing.
Goethe's journey to the Italian peninsula and Sicily from 1786 to 1788 was of great significance in his aesthetic and philosophical development.
The outer shape of the work's plot is widely taken over from what Goethe experienced during his Wetzlar time with Charlotte Buff (1753–1828) and her fiancé, Johann Christian Kestner (1741–1800), as well as from the suicide of the author's friend Karl Wilhelm Jerusalem (1747–1772); in it, Goethe made a desperate passion of what was in reality a hearty and relaxed friendship.
He is also widely quoted.
"The ever-changing display of plant forms, which I have followed for so many years, awakens increasingly within me the notion: The plant forms which surround us were not all created at some given point in time and then locked into the given form, they have been given... a felicitous mobility and plasticity that allows them to grow and adapt themselves to many different conditions in many different places."
In 1832, Goethe died in Weimar of apparent heart failure.
Thus Goethe's journey had something of the nature of a pilgrimage to it.
In old age, he explained why this was so to Eckermann:
Liszt and Mahler both created symphonies in whole or in large part inspired by this seminal work, which would give the 19th century one of its most paradigmatic figures: Doctor Faustus.
He wrote several works on morphology, and colour theory.
Although in his academic work he had expressed the ambition to make jurisprudence progressively more humane, his inexperience led him to proceed too vigorously in his first cases, and he was reprimanded and lost further ones.
Instead, his view was that the world as a whole grows through continual, external, and internal strife.
The Federal Republic of Germany's cultural institution, the Goethe-Institut is named after him, and promotes the study of German abroad and fosters knowledge about Germany by providing information on its culture, society and politics.
What set Goethe's book apart from other such novels was its expression of unbridled longing for a joy beyond possibility, its sense of defiant rebellion against authority, and of principal importance, its total subjectivity: qualities that trailblazed the Romantic movement.
His writings were immediately influential in literary and artistic circles.
In 1776, Goethe formed a close relationship to Charlotte von Stein, an older, married woman.
By the time of his death, in order to gain a comprehensive view in geology, he had collected 17,800 rock samples.
Goethe also popularized the Goethe barometer using a principle established by Torricelli.
Their last meeting in Carlsbad on 5 September 1823 inspired him to the famous ''Marienbad Elegy'' which he considered one of his finest works.
His uncritical admiration for many contemporary poets vanished as he became interested in Gotthold Ephraim Lessing and Christoph Martin Wieland.
Later, a facet of its plot, i.e., of selling one's soul to the devil for power over the physical world, took on increasing literary importance and became a view of the victory of technology and of industrialism, along with its dubious human expenses.
They had already had several children together by this time, including their son, Julius August Walter von Goethe (25 December 1789 – 28 October 1830), whose wife, Ottilie von Pogwisch (31 October 1796 – 26 October 1872), cared for the elder Goethe until his death in 1832.
Johann Caspar, feeling frustrated in his own ambitions, was determined that his children should have all those advantages that he had not.
The remaining year is largely undocumented, aside from the fact that he spent much of it in Venice.
He would argue that Classicism was the means of controlling art, and that Romanticism was a sickness, even as he penned poetry rich in memorable images, and rewrote the formal rules of German poetry.
As head of the Saxe-Weimar War Commission, Goethe engaged in human trafficking, negotiating the forced sale of vagabonds, criminals, and political dissidents into both the Prussian and British military during the American Revolution.
Epistolary novels were common during this time, letter-writing being a primary mode of communication.
'''Johann Wolfgang''' ('''von''') '''Goethe''' (; ; 28 August 1749 – 22 March 1832) was a German writer and statesman.
Goethe also pursued literary plans again; this time, his father did not have anything against it, and even helped.
Goethe embodied many of the contending strands in art over the next century: his work could be lushly emotional, and rigorously formal, brief and epigrammatic, and epic.
Goethe's studies (notably with an elephant's skull lent to him by Samuel Thomas von Soemmerring) led him to independently discover the human intermaxillary bone in 1784, which Broussonet (1779) and Vicq d'Azyr (1780) had (using different methods) identified several years earlier.
Goethe's diaries of this period form the basis of the non-fiction ''Italian Journey''.
His written account of these events can be found within his ''Complete Works.''
Schopenhauer cited Goethe's novel ''Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship'' as one of the four greatest novels ever written, along with ''Tristram Shandy'', ''La Nouvelle Héloïse'' and ''Don Quixote''.
Moreover, Goethe did not embrace the mechanistic views that contemporaneous science subsumed during his time, and therewith he denied rationality's superiority as the sole interpreter of reality.
In 1816, Schopenhauer went on to develop his own theory in ''On Vision and Colours'' based on the observations supplied in Goethe's book.
(Goethe, '' Theory of Colours'', 1810).
The first part was published in 1808 and created a sensation.
In April 1770, Goethe left Frankfurt in order to finish his studies at the University of Strasbourg.
He also took great pleasure in reading from the great works about history and religion.
To the period of his friendship with Schiller belong the conception of ''Wilhelm Meister's Journeyman Years'' (the continuation of ''Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship''), the idyll of ''Hermann and Dorothea'', the ''Roman Elegies '' and the verse drama ''The Natural Daughter''.
Goethe became acquainted with Frankfurt actors.
The novel remains in print in dozens of languages and its influence is undeniable; its central hero, an obsessive figure driven to despair and destruction by his unrequited love for the young Lotte, has become a pervasive literary archetype.
The two became close friends, and crucially to Goethe's intellectual development, Herder kindled his interest in Shakespeare, Ossian and in the notion of ''Volkspoesie'' (folk poetry).
(In later years Goethe would bypass this problem by periodically authorizing "new, revised" editions of his ''Complete Works''.)
However, Goethe explained his use of ''Werther'' in his autobiography.
The most important of Goethe's works produced before he went to Weimar were ''Götz von Berlichingen'' (1773), a tragedy that was the first work to bring him recognition, and the novel ''The Sorrows of Young Werther'' (German: ''Die Leiden des jungen Werthers'') (1774), which gained him enormous fame as a writer in the ''Sturm und Drang'' period which marked the early phase of Romanticism.
A quotation from Goethe's ''Scientific Studies'' will suffice:
In Strasbourg, Goethe met Johann Gottfried Herder.
Goethe admitted that he "shot his hero to save himself": a reference to Goethe's own near-suicidal obsession with a young woman during this period, an obsession he quelled through the writing process.
During convalescence, Goethe was nursed by his mother and sister.
At the end of August 1771, Goethe acquired the academic degree of the ''Lizenziat'' (Licentia docendi) in Frankfurt and established a small legal practice.
Goethe's words inspired a number of compositions by, among others, Mozart, Beethoven (who idolised Goethe), Schubert, Berlioz and Wolf.
Goethe's comments and observations form the basis of several biographical works, most notably Johann Peter Eckermann's ''Conversations with Goethe''.
Christiane von Goethe died in 1816.
Goethe also defended pederasty: "Pederasty is as old as humanity itself, and one can therefore say that it is natural, that it resides in nature, even if it proceeds against nature.
On 14 October 1772 Goethe held a gathering in his parental home in honour of the first German "Shakespeare Day".
His non-fiction writings, most of which are philosophic and aphoristic in nature, spurred the development of many philosophers, including Georg Wilhelm Friedrich&nbsp;Hegel, Schopenhauer, Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Ernst Cassirer, Carl Jung, and Ludwig Wittgenstein.
His first acquaintance with Shakespeare's works is described as his personal awakening in literature.
Though some other German principalities also engaged in such practices, Goethe's active participation in both a mercenary slave trade, and one that sent subjects to fight against the American War of Independence, contradicted the writer's humanist literary reputation, a stance criticized by various German intellectual contemporaries.
Arthur Schopenhauer cited ''Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship'' as one of the four greatest novels ever written, along with ''Tristram Shandy'', ''La Nouvelle Héloïse'', and ''Don Quixote'', and Ralph Waldo Emerson selected Goethe as one of six "representative men" in his work of the same name, along with Plato, Napoleon, and William Shakespeare.
Some of the ''Venetian Epigrams'' were held back from publication due to their sexual content.
His poetry was set to music by almost every major Austrian and German composer from Mozart to Mahler, and his influence would spread to French drama and opera as well.
This collaborative friendship lasted until Schiller's death in 1805.
Goethe's poems were set to music throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by a number of composers, including Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, Franz Schubert, Robert Schumann, Johannes Brahms, Charles Gounod, Richard Wagner, Hugo Wolf, Felix Mendelssohn, Hector Berlioz, Gustav Mahler, and Jules Massenet.
In many respects, he was the originator of many ideas which later became widespread.
While in Southern Italy and Sicily, Goethe encountered, for the first time genuine Greek (as opposed to Roman) architecture, and was quite startled by its relative simplicity.
Goethe's work also inspired the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, to write his ''Remarks on Colour''.
After being translated into English by Charles Eastlake in 1840, his theory became widely adopted by the art world, most notably J.&nbsp;M.&nbsp;W. Turner.
A literary celebrity by the age of 25, Goethe was ennobled by the Duke of Saxe-Weimar, Karl August in 1782 after taking up residence there in November 1775 following the success of his first novel, ''The Sorrows of Young Werther''.
She was emotionally distraught at the time, but they were eventually reconciled.
He detested learning age-old judicial rules by heart, preferring instead to attend the poetry lessons of Christian Fürchtegott Gellert.
That change later became the basis for 19th-century thought: organic rather than geometrical, evolving rather than created, and based on sensibility and intuition rather than on imposed order, culminating in, as Goethe said, a "living quality", wherein the subject and object are dissolved together in a poise of inquiry.
He is buried in the Ducal Vault at Weimar's Historical Cemetery.
On occasion, the play is still staged in Germany and other parts around the world.
Johann Caspar married Goethe's mother, Catharina Elizabeth Textor at Frankfurt on 20 August 1748, when he was 38 and she was 17.
During this period, Goethe published his second novel, ''Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship'', the verse epic ''Hermann and Dorothea'', and, in 1808, the first part of his most celebrated drama, ''Faust''.
Goethe's father, Johann Caspar Goethe, lived with his family in a large house in Frankfurt, then an Imperial Free City of the Holy Roman Empire.
During that time he also developed a deep emotional bond with the Polish pianist Maria Agata Szymanowska.
What culture has won from nature will not be surrendered or given up at any price."
In 1774 he wrote the book which would bring him worldwide fame, ''The Sorrows of Young Werther''.
During the year and a half that followed, because of several relapses, the relationship with his father worsened.
Goethe clearly saw human sexuality as a topic worthy of poetic and artistic depiction, an idea that was uncommon in a time when the private nature of sexuality was rigorously normative.
He also contributed to the planning of Weimar's botanical park and the rebuilding of its Ducal Palace, which in 1998 were together designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
During the course of his trip Goethe met and befriended the artists Angelica Kauffman and Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Tischbein, as well as encountering such notable characters as Lady Hamilton and Alessandro Cagliostro (see Affair of the Diamond Necklace).
(The Duke at the time was 18 years of age, to Goethe's&nbsp;26.)
He argued in his scientific works that a "formative impulse", which he said is operative in every organism, causes an organism to form itself according to its own distinct laws, and therefore rational laws or fiats could not be imposed at all from a higher, transcendent sphere; this placed him in direct opposition to those who attempted to form "enlightened" monarchies based on "rational" laws by, for example, Joseph&nbsp;II of Austria or the subsequent Emperor of the French, Napoleon&nbsp;I.
In 1782, when the chancellor of the Duchy's Exchequer left his office, Goethe agreed to act in his place for two and a half years; this post virtually made him prime minister and the principal representative of the Duchy.
The younger couple had three children: Walther, Freiherr von Goethe (9 April 1818 – 15 April 1885), Wolfgang, Freiherr von Goethe (18 September 1820 – 20 January 1883) and Alma von Goethe (29 October 1827 – 29 September 1844).
'), but this is disputed as Vogel was not in the room at the moment Goethe died.
Goethe also had the largest private collection of minerals in all of Europe.
Perhaps the single most influential piece is "Mignon's Song" which opens with one of the most famous lines in German poetry, an allusion to Italy: "''''?"
Already at this time, Goethe wrote a good deal, but he threw away nearly all of these works, except for the comedy ''Die Mitschuldigen''.
He was against this reading of poetry.
During his Italian journey, Goethe formulated a theory of plant metamorphosis in which the archetypal form of the plant is to be found in the ''leaf'' – he writes, "from top to bottom a plant is all leaf, united so inseparably with the future bud that one cannot be imagined without the other".
Around early literary attempts, he was infatuated with ''Gretchen'', who would later reappear in his ''Faust'' and the adventures with whom he would concisely describe in ''Dichtung und Wahrheit''.
His body of work includes epic and lyric poetry written in a variety of metres and styles; prose and verse dramas; memoirs; an autobiography; literary and aesthetic criticism; treatises on botany, anatomy, and colour; and four novels.
In this, he anticipated Ewald Hering's opponent colour theory (1872).
Goethe's ideas on evolution would frame the question that Darwin and Wallace would approach within the scientific paradigm.
and ''Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship''.
Goethe was fascinated by Kalidasa's ''Abhijñānaśākuntalam'', which was one of the first works of Sanskrit literature that became known in Europe, after being translated from English to German.
He said he "turned reality into poetry but his friends thought poetry should be turned into reality and the poem imitated."
In a couple of weeks the biography was reworked into a colourful drama.
Though he had studied law in Leipzig and had been appointed Imperial Councillor, he was not involved in the city's official affairs.
In late 1792, Goethe took part in the battle of Valmy against revolutionary France, assisting Duke Carl August of Saxe-Weimar during the failed invasion of France.
No other landscape has he described as affectionately as the warm, wide Rhine area.
In 1775, Goethe was invited, on the strength of his fame as the author of ''The Sorrows of Young Werther'', to the court of Carl August, Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, who would become Grand Duke in 1815.
Consequently, Goethe embraced neither teleological nor deterministic views of growth within every organism.
In the decades which immediately followed its publication in 1816 ''Italian Journey'' inspired countless German youths to follow Goethe's example.
Goethe was also a cultural force, who argued that the organic nature of the land moulded the people and their customs—an argument that has recurred ever since.
He also journeyed to Sicily during this time, and wrote intriguingly that "To have seen Italy without having seen Sicily is to not have seen Italy at all, for Sicily is the clue to everything."
His focus on morphology and what was later called homology influenced 19th century naturalists, although his ideas of transformation were about the continuous metamorphosis of living things and did not relate to contemporary ideas of "transformisme" or transmutation of species.
This prematurely terminated his career as a lawyer after only a few months.
More importantly, however, the work of Johann Joachim Winckelmann had provoked a general renewed interest in the classical art of ancient Greece and Rome.
It was to a considerable degree due to Goethe's reputation that the city of Weimar was chosen in 1919 as the venue for the national assembly, convened to draft a new constitution for what would become known as Germany's Weimar Republic.
Also published after his death was the so-called ''Urfaust'', the first sketches, made probably in 1773–74.
During the years at Weimar before he met Schiller he began ''Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship'', wrote the dramas ''Iphigenie auf Tauris'' (''Iphigenia in Tauris''), ''Egmont'', ''Torquato Tasso'', and the fable ''Reineke Fuchs''.
He was an early participant in the ''Sturm und Drang'' literary movement.
Steiner elaborated on that in the books ''The Theory of Knowledge Implicit in Goethe's World-Conception'' and ''Goethe's World View'', in which he characterizes intuition as the instrument by which one grasps Goethe's biological archetype—''The Typus''.
A year before his death, in a letter to Sulpiz Boisserée, Goethe wrote that he had the feeling that all his life he had been aspiring to qualify as one of the Hypsistarians, an ancient Jewish-pagan sect of the Black Sea region who, in his understanding, sought to reverence, as being close to the Godhead, what came to their knowledge of the best and most perfect.
Homology, or as Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire called it "analogie", was used by Charles Darwin as strong evidence of common descent and of laws of variation.
Even in contemporary culture, he stands in the background as the author of the ballad that formed the basis for Walt Disney Pictures' ''The Sorcerer's Apprentice'', produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and directed by Jon Turteltaub.
In 1791, he was made managing director of the theatre at Weimar, and in 1794 he began a friendship with the dramatist, historian, and philosopher Friedrich Schiller, whose plays he premiered until Schiller's death in 1805.
In it, he contentiously characterized colour as arising from the dynamic interplay of light and darkness through the mediation of a turbid medium.
His father had made a similar journey during his own youth, and his example was a major motivating factor for Goethe to make the trip.
Goethe quickly became interested in literature; Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock and Homer were among his early favourites.
Although often requested to write poems arousing nationalist passions, Goethe would always decline.
The next work, his epic closet drama ''Faust'', was to be completed in stages, and only published in its entirety after his death.
There are frequent references to Goethe's writings throughout the works of Georg Friedrich Wilhelm Hegel, Arthur Schopenhauer, Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Oswald Spengler, Hermann Hesse, Thomas Mann, Sigmund Freud, and Carl Jung.
It was while reciting a certain verse that he was struck with the epiphany that would lead to the idea of the rotating magnetic field and ultimately, alternating current.
Epigrams such as "Against criticism a man can neither protest nor defend himself; he must act in spite of it, and then it will gradually yield to him", "Divide and rule, a sound motto; unite and lead, a better one", and "Enjoy when you can, and endure when you must", are still in usage or are often paraphrased.
As one of the many precursors in the history of evolutionary thought, Goethe wrote in ''Story of My Botanical Studies'' (1831):
Eckermann closes his famous work, ''Conversations with Goethe'', with this passage:
He writes about this period:
For instance, in ''Faust'', the first use of Faust's power after literally signing a contract with the devil is to fall in love with and impregnate a teenage girl.
According to Nietzsche, Goethe had "a kind of almost ''joyous'' and ''trusting fatalism''" that has "faith that only in the totality everything redeems itself and appears good and justified."
Goethe wrote of both boys and girls: “I like boys a lot, but the girls are even nicer.
Goethe outlines his method in the essay ''The experiment as mediator between subject and object'' (1772).
In 1810, Goethe published his ''Theory of Colours'', which he considered his most important work.
The short epistolary novel, ''Die Leiden des jungen Werthers'', or ''The Sorrows of Young Werther'', published in 1774, recounts an unhappy romantic infatuation that ends in suicide.
The fact that ''Werther'' ends with the protagonist's suicide and funeral—a funeral which "no clergyman attended"—made the book deeply controversial upon its (anonymous) publication, for on the face of it, it appeared to condone and glorify suicide.
In 1790, he published his ''Metamorphosis of Plants''.
The film was based on the relevant section of Disney's animated film ''Fantasia'' (1940), which was set to a short scherzo for orchestra by Paul Dukas, ''L'apprenti sorcier'' (''The Sorcerer's Apprentice'', published in 1897, and by far, the best known of Dukas' compositions).
All of which were inspired by Goethe's poem, The Sorcerer's Apprentice.
