Brahms's First Symphony bears strongly the influence of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, as the two works are both in C&nbsp;minor and end in the struggle towards a C&nbsp;major triumph.
Features of the "Brahms style" were absorbed in a more complex synthesis with other contemporary (chiefly Wagnerian) trends by Hans Rott, Wilhelm Berger, Max Reger and Franz Schmidt, whereas the British composers Hubert Parry and Edward Elgar and the Swede Wilhelm Stenhammar all testified to learning much from Brahms's example.
To adults Brahms was often brusque and sarcastic, and he often alienated other people.
It may have increased Brahms's self-critical need to perfect his works.
The work was composed in three major periods of his life.
In a concert in Leipzig in October 1854, Clara played the Andante and Scherzo from Brahms's Sonata in F minor, Op.
Marxsen began giving young Brahms lessons in piano and composition himself, not requesting any payment.
Many of his works have become staples of the modern concert repertoire.
Jan Swafford has contributed to the discussion.
His family had there an inn and other small businesses, inherited by Johann Jakob's older brother Peter.
Brahms aimed to honour the "purity" of these venerable "German" structures and advance them into a Romantic idiom, in the process creating bold new approaches to harmony and melody.
Brahms also recommended Dvořák to his publisher, Simrock, who commissioned the highly successful ''Slavonic Dances''.
Brahms was an extreme perfectionist.
Initially, the family lived near the city docks, in the Gängeviertel quarter of Hamburg's Neustadt, for six months, before moving to a small house on the Dammtorwall, a small street near the Inner Alster.
I must see you again, but I am incapable of bearing fetters.
As Elgar said, "I look at the Third Symphony of Brahms, and I feel like a pygmy."
He often brought penny candy with him to hand out to children.
After playing the piano often "late at night" and in a "smoke-laden atmosphere" young Brahms is said to have become "anemic and nervous."
Brahms was able to visit him several times and so could act as a go-between.
Brahms later excused himself, saying that he could not help it, having been exhausted by his travels.
On the other hand, I have chosen one thing or another because I am a musician, because I needed it, and because with my venerable authors I can't delete or dispute anything.
1 or the same composer's Cantata No.
In 1862, Clara bought a house in Lichtental, then adjoining, but since 1909 included in Baden-Baden, and lived there with her remaining family from 1863 to 1873.
Within a few years, Dvořák gained world renown, and in 1892 he was appointed Director of the newly established National Conservatory in New York.
Brahms admired some of Wagner's music and admired Liszt as a great pianist, but the conflict between the two schools, known as the War of the Romantics, soon embroiled all of musical Europe.
From 1881, he was able to try out his new orchestral works with the Meiningen Court Orchestra of the Duke of Meiningen, whose conductor was Hans von Bülow.
'''Johannes Brahms''' (; 7 May 1833 – 3 April 1897) was a German composer and pianist.
Clara wrote in her diary
7 in D minor and the F minor Piano Trio.
His chamber works include three string quartets, two string quintets, two string sextets, a clarinet quintet, a clarinet trio, a horn trio, a piano quintet, three piano quartets, and four piano trios (the fourth being published posthumously).
An impresario proposed an American concert tour for the prodigy Brahms, but Cossel enlisted Marxsen to argue against a tour for one so young.
He and/or Joachim, Dietrich, and Julius Otto Grimm visited Clara often in March 1854, to divert her mind from Robert's tragedy by playing music for or with her.
This prediction hardly added to the composer's self-confidence, and may have contributed to the delay in producing the First Symphony.
Selected letters or excerpts from them, some to or from Brahms, and diary entries of Clara's have been translated into English.
Yet Brahms's final vocal and instrumental works, dating from 1896, are, respectively, ''Vier ernste Gesänge'' (Four Serious Songs), for voice and piano, Op.
Johann Jakob's musical career culminated when he  became a member of the Hamburg Philharmonic Orchestra.
Even after its first few performances, Brahms destroyed the original slow movement and substituted another before the score was published.
Brahms composed for piano, organ, chamber ensembles, symphony orchestra, and for voice and chorus.
(In later life, he frequently took part in the performance of his own works, whether as soloist, accompanist, or participant in chamber music.)
In 1889, one Theo Wangemann, a representative of American inventor Thomas Edison, visited the composer in Vienna and invited him to make an experimental recording.
Johann Jakob, against the family's will, pursued a career in music, taking lessons from "a local musician" until 1825.
He also had predictable habits, which were noted by the Viennese press, such as his daily visit to his favourite "Red Hedgehog" tavern in Vienna, and his habit of walking with his hands firmly behind his back, which led to a caricature of him in this pose walking alongside a red hedgehog.
The early Romantic composers had a major influence on Brahms, particularly Schumann, who encouraged Brahms as a young composer.
The first movement of this abandoned symphony was re-worked as the first movement of the First Piano Concerto.
The fifth movement was added after the official premiere in 1868, and the work was published in 1869.
Between 1906 and 1922, the Deutsche Brahms-Gesellschaft (German Brahms Society) published 16 numbered volumes of Brahms's correspondence, at least 7 of which were edited by Kalbeck.
Brahms's works in variation form include, among others, the ''Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel'' and the ''Paganini Variations'', both for solo piano, and the ''Variations on a Theme by Haydn'' (now sometimes called the ''Saint Anthony Variations'') in versions for two pianos and for orchestra.
"There was no composition by Brahms that was not shown to Clara the moment it was in shape to be communicated.
Among the most cherished of these lighter works by Brahms are his sets of popular dances, the ''Hungarian Dances'', the ''Waltzes'' for piano duet (Op.&nbsp;39), and the ''Liebeslieder Waltzes'' for vocal quartet and piano, and some of his many songs, notably the ''Wiegenlied'' (Op.&nbsp;49, No.&nbsp;4, published in 1868).
At age 10, Brahms played in a concert including a Beethoven piano quintet and a Mozart piano quartet.
The other three symphonies then followed in 1877, 1883, and 1885.
Although the spoken introduction to the short piece of music is quite clear, the piano playing is largely inaudible due to heavy surface noise.
You are so infinitely dear to me that I can hardly express it.
There was also a hired cook, in Berlin "Josephine."
5, "the first time his music was played in public."
After a walking tour in the Rhineland, Brahms took the train to Düsseldorf, and was welcomed into the Schumann family on Oct.&nbsp;1, 1853.
Brahms felt a strong conflict between love of Clara and respect for her and Robert, leading him to allude at one point to suicidal thoughts.
However, the similarity of Brahms's music to that of late Beethoven had first been noted as early as November 1853 in a letter from Albert Dietrich to Ernst Naumann.
Some of Brahms's earliest letters to Clara show him deeply in love with her.
Though he resigned the position the following year, and entertained the idea of taking up conducting posts elsewhere, he based himself increasingly in Vienna and soon made his home there.
At some time before 1853 when Robert Schumann had been in Hamburg, Brahms sent to him a packet of scores of his compositions, but at that point the name Brahms was unfamiliar to Schumann, and he had returned the packet unopened.
Not long after Robert died, Brahms decided he had to break away from the Schumann household.
Brahms' point of view looked both backward and forward; his output was often bold in its exploration of harmony and rhythm.
He worked with some of the leading performers of his time, including the pianist Clara Schumann and the violinist Joseph Joachim (the three were close friends).
Brahms urged in 1887 that all his and Clara's letters to each other should be destroyed.
This interview is viewed as fraudulent by Brahms biographer Jan Swafford.
This pronouncement impressed people who were admirers of Robert or Clara Schumann; for example, in Hamburg, a music publisher and the conductor of the Philharmonic, but it was received with some skepticism by others.
Owing to the family's poverty, at age 13, Brahms had to begin contributing to the family's income by playing the piano in "taverns, restaurants, and other places of amusement.".
The influence of Chopin and Mendelssohn on Brahms is less obvious, although occasionally one can find in his works what seems to be an allusion to one of theirs (for example, Brahms's Scherzo, Op.&nbsp;4, alludes to Chopin's Scherzo in B-flat minor; the scherzo movement in Brahms's Piano Sonata in F minor, Op.&nbsp;5, alludes to the finale of Mendelssohn's Piano Trio in C minor).
Brahms was a significant Lieder composer, who wrote over 200 of them.
Analysts and scholars remain divided, however, as to whether the voice that introduces the piece is that of Wangemann or of Brahms.
Early biographers found this shocking, perhaps not realising that Johann Jakob had performed in such places himself, and played down this portion of his life.
He looked to older music for inspiration in the art of counterpoint; the themes of some of his works are modelled on Baroque sources such as Bach's ''The Art of Fugue'' in the fugal finale of Cello Sonata No.
His first symphony, as yet unpublished, had had its English premiere, conducted by Joachim, in Cambridge 8 March 1877,  in Brahms's absence, possibly occasioned by aversion to seasickness.
Antonín Dvořák, who received substantial assistance from Brahms, deeply admired his music and was influenced by it in several works, such as the Symphony No.
In 1889, Brahms was named an honorary citizen of Hamburg, until 1948 the only one born in Hamburg.
Brahms wrote a number of major works for orchestra, including two serenades, four symphonies, two piano concertos (No.
He was a master of counterpoint, the complex and highly disciplined art for which Johann Sebastian Bach is famous, and of development, a compositional ethos pioneered by Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, and other composers.
Brahms venerated Beethoven; in the composer's home, a marble bust of Beethoven looked down on the spot where he composed, and some passages in his works are reminiscent of Beethoven's style.
Brahms hurried to Düsseldorf.
Marxsen had studied in Vienna with Ignaz von Seyfried (a pupil of Mozart) and Carl Maria von Bocklet (a close friend of Schubert).
Brahms much valued Clara's opinions as a composer.
His admiration for Richard Mühlfeld, clarinetist with the Meiningen orchestra, moved him to compose the Clarinet Trio, Op.&nbsp;114, Clarinet Quintet, Op.&nbsp;115 (1891), and the two Clarinet Sonatas, Op.&nbsp;120 (1894).
It was the premiere of ''A German Requiem'', his largest choral work, in Bremen in 1868 that confirmed Brahms's European reputation and led many to accept that he had conquered Beethoven and the symphony.
When asked by conductor Karl Reinthaler to add additional sectarian text to his German Requiem, Brahms is reported to have responded, "As far as the text is concerned, I confess that I would gladly omit even the word German and instead use Human; also with my best knowledge and will I would dispense with passages like John 3:16.
Brahms had earlier heard Joachim playing the solo part in Beethoven's violin concerto and been deeply impressed.
Abell's book contains reminiscences of his conversations with Brahms, Joseph Joachim, and several other composers he knew in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Another factor that contributed to Brahms's perfectionism was that Schumann had announced early on that Brahms was "destined to give ideal expression to the times", a prediction that Brahms was determined to live up to.
Brahms was a lifelong friend of Johann Strauss II, though they were very different as composers.
From 1878 onwards, he often visited Italy in the springtime and he usually sought out a pleasant rural location in which to compose during the summer.
Hans Gál cautions that the preserved correspondence may have "passed through Clara's censorship."
In 1830, he had married Johanna Henrika Christiane Nissen (1789–1865), a seamstress never previously married, who was seventeen years older than he was.
While many contemporaries found his music too academic, his contribution and craftsmanship have been admired by subsequent figures as diverse as Arnold Schoenberg and Edward Elgar.
He was the soloist at the premiere of his Piano Concerto No.
This took the form of a manifesto, written by Brahms and Joachim jointly.
Clara agreed that they call one another "Du," writing in her diary "I could not refuse, for indeed I love him like a son".
He was a great walker and especially enjoyed spending time in the open air, where he felt that he could think more clearly.
But I had better stop before I say too much."
Brahms is buried in the Zentralfriedhof in Vienna, under a monument by Victor Horta and the sculptor Ilse von Twardowski-Conrat.
Brahms was on the jury which awarded the Vienna State Prize for composition to Dvořák three times, first in February 1875, and later in 1876 and 1877.
The manifesto, which was published prematurely with only three supporting signatures, was a failure, and he never engaged in public polemics again.
Brahms, an uncompromising perfectionist, destroyed some of his works and left others unpublished.
These efforts paved the way for a re-evaluation of Brahms's reputation in the 20th century.
He conducted choirs from his early teens, and became a proficient choral and orchestral conductor.
In late May the two visited the violinist and composer Joseph Joachim at Hanover.
1, his first orchestral composition to be performed publicly, in 1859.
Clara was not allowed to visit Robert until two days before his death.
His works were labelled old-fashioned by the 'New German School' whose principal figures included Franz Liszt, Richard Wagner, and Hector Berlioz.
In another instance of devotion to detail, he laboured over the official First Symphony for almost fifteen years, from about 1861 to 1876.
One example is the 1955 volume ''Talks With Great Composers,'' by journalist and music critic Arthur Abell (Berlin correspondent for the ''Musical Courier'' from 1893 to 1918).
Brahms frequently travelled, both for business (concert tours) and pleasure.
Perhaps the greatest tribute that Brahms paid to Strauss was his remark that he would have given anything to have written ''The Blue Danube'' waltz.
He composed several instrumental sonatas with piano, including three for violin, two for cello, and two for clarinet (which were subsequently arranged for viola by the composer).
Clara was 14 years older than Brahms.
Brahms gave away large sums of money to friends and to aid various musical students, often with the term of strict secrecy.
In 1876, when the work was premiered in Vienna, it was immediately hailed as "Beethoven's Tenth".
Brahms was honoured in the German hall of fame, the Walhalla memorial.
Brahms' domicile was hit during World War II, destroying his piano and other possessions that were still kept there for posterity by the Viennese.
He destroyed many early works – including a violin sonata he had performed with Reményi and violinist Ferdinand David – and once claimed to have destroyed 20 string quartets before he issued his official First in 1873.
Brahms had amassed a small fortune in the second half of his career, when his works sold widely, but despite his wealth, he lived very simply, with a modest apartment, a mess of music papers and books, and a single housekeeper who cleaned and cooked for him.
Brahms strongly preferred writing absolute music that does not refer to an explicit scene or narrative, and he never wrote an opera or a symphonic poem.
He first visited Vienna in 1862, staying there over the winter, and, in 1863, was appointed conductor of the Vienna Singakademie.
After Clara moved from Lichtental to Berlin in 1873, the two saw each other less often, as Brahms had his home in Vienna since 1863.
The recording was later issued on an LP of early piano performances (compiled by Gregor Benko).
In a letter to Joachim in 1859, three years after Robert's death, Brahms wrote about Clara:
Brahms from 1865 to 1874 spent parts of some summers living in an apartment nearby in a house which is now a museum, the "Brahmshaus" (Brahms house).
Nevertheless, this remains the earliest recording made by a major composer.
Although Wagner became fiercely critical of Brahms as the latter grew in stature and popularity, he was enthusiastically receptive of the early ''Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel''; Brahms himself, according to many sources, deeply admired Wagner's music, confining his ambivalence only to the dramaturgical precepts of Wagner's theory.
The earliest excerpted and translated letter from Brahms to Clara was in October 1854.
His compositions did not receive public acclaim until he went on a concert tour as accompanist to the Hungarian violinist Eduard Reményi in April and May 1853.
There was an ovation after each of the four movements.
Over the course of several years, he changed an original project for a symphony in D minor into his first piano concerto.
He was proficient on several instruments, but chose the double bass as it was "indispensable in an ensemble of any size."
He took leave rather brusquely, leaving Clara feeling hurt.
An old anecdote recounts that when Strauss's wife Adele asked Brahms to autograph her fan, he wrote the first few notes of the "Blue Danube" waltz, and then wrote the words "Unfortunately not by Johannes Brahms!"
From 1904 to 1914, Brahms's friend, the music critic Max Kalbeck published an eight-volume biography of Brahms, but this has never been translated into English.
He studied the music of pre-classical composers, including Giovanni Gabrieli, Johann Adolph Hasse, Heinrich Schütz, Domenico Scarlatti, George Frideric Handel, and, especially, Johann Sebastian Bach.
Brahms and Clara had a very close and lifelong but unusual relationship.
Brahms considered giving up composition when it seemed that other composers' innovations in extended tonality would result in the rule of tonality being broken altogether.
An early version of the second movement was first composed in 1854, not long after Robert Schumann's attempted suicide, and this was later used in his first piano concerto.
Composer Walter Niemann declared "The fact that Brahms began his creative activity with the German folk song and closed with the Bible reveals... the true religious creed of this great man of the people."
"I wish I could write to you as tenderly as I love you, and do as many good things for you, as you would like.
A virtuoso pianist, he premiered many of his own works.
After Robert Schumann's attempted suicide and subsequent confinement in a mental sanatorium near Bonn in February 1854, Clara was "in despair," expecting the Schumanns' eighth child.
The rest of that letter, and most later preserved letters, are about music and musical people, updating one another about their travels and experiences.
Zemlinsky, moreover, was in turn the teacher of Arnold Schoenberg, and Brahms was apparently impressed by two movements of Schoenberg's early Quartet in D major which Zemlinsky showed him.
Despite his reputation as a serious composer of large, complex musical structures, some of Brahms's most widely known and most commercially successful compositions during his life were small-scale works of popular intent aimed at the thriving contemporary market for domestic music-making.
150 in the passacaglia theme of the Fourth Symphony's finale.
The question of Brahms and religiosity has been controversial and elicited accusations of fraud.
His pupil Gustav Jenner wrote, "Brahms has acquired, not without reason, the reputation for being a grump, even though few could also be as lovable as he."
The majority of the Requiem was composed after his mother's death in 1865.
Clara much appreciated Brahms's support as a kindred musical spirit.
But Brahms and Clara kept up correspondence.
They had great affection but also respect for one another.
Brahms is often considered both a traditionalist and an innovator.
Brahms wrote settings for piano and voice of 144 German folk songs, and many of his lieder reflect folk themes or depict scenes of rural life.
Please write me whether I may come again to clasp you in my arms, to kiss you, and tell you that I love you."
Some modern writers have suggested that this early experience warped Brahms's later relations with women, but Brahms scholars Styra Avins and Kurt Hoffmann have questioned the possibility.
Brahms appears in later years as a rather avuncular figure in Eugenie Schumann's account.
Later, to help Clara and her many children, Brahms lodged above the Schumann apartment in a three-storey house, setting his musical career aside temporarily.
He was often the butt of jokes for his long beard, his cheap clothes and often not wearing socks.
However, as it turned out, he was unable to abide by his decision, and in the years before his death he produced a number of acknowledged masterpieces.
2 in 1881, in Pest.
Several attempts have been made to improve the quality of this historic recording; a "denoised" version was produced at Stanford University which claims to solve the mystery.
Some present-day biographers and critics view Brahms's appreciation of Lutheran tradition more as cultural than existential.
Brahms never married, despite strong feelings for several women and despite entering into an engagement, soon broken off, with Agathe von Siebold in Göttingen in 1859.
His condition gradually worsened and he died a month later, on 3 April 1897, aged 63.
On his religious views, Brahms has been described as an agnostic and a humanist.
Clara's preserved letters to Brahms, except for one, begin much later, in 1858.
Brahms was fond of nature and often went walking in the woods around Vienna.
For a time, Brahms also learned the cello.
His ''Hungarian Dances'' were among his most profitable compositions.
Brahms also edited works by C.&nbsp;P.&nbsp;E. Bach and W.&nbsp;F. Bach.
Actually Clara kept quite a number of letters Brahms had sent her, and at Marie's urging, refrained from destroying many of the letters Brahms had returned.
Brahms even struggled to get to the Theater an der Wien in Vienna for the premiere of Strauss's operetta ''Die Göttin der Vernunft'' in March 1897 before his death.
As a result, he was an influence on composers of both conservative and modernist tendencies.
Brahms wrote on 31 May:
Schumann, amazed by the 20-year-old's talent, published an article entitled "" (New Paths) in the 28 October 1853 issue of the journal ''Neue Zeitschrift für Musik'' alerting the public to the young man, who, he claimed, was "destined to give ideal expression to the times."
Johann Jakob gave his son his first musical training.
Within his meticulous structures is embedded, however, a highly romantic nature.
Schoenberg went so far as to orchestrate one of Brahms's piano quartets.
He departed for the city of Hamburg, where he found work playing dance music, at first in taverns in the dockside district.
During the 20th century, the influential American critic B. H. Haggin, rejecting more mainstream views, argued in his various guides to recorded music that Brahms was at his best in such works and much less successful in larger forms.
Their early chamber works (and those of Béla Bartók, who was friendly with Dohnányi) show a thoroughgoing absorption of the Brahmsian idiom.
But they never saw one another again.
In 1853 Joachim had given Brahms a letter of introduction to Schumann, and/or had directly written to Schumann praising Brahms as a composer.
He began to compose quite early in life, but later destroyed most copies of his first works; for instance, Louise Japha, a fellow-pupil of Marxsen, reported a piano sonata, that Brahms had played or improvised at the age of 11, had been destroyed.
The Schumanns employed a housekeeper, "Bertha" in Düsseldorf, later Elisabeth Werner in Berlin.
In a letter to her 24 May 1856, two and a half years after meeting her, and after two years either together or corresponding, Brahms wrote that he continued to call her the German polite form "Sie" of "you" and hesitated to use the familiar form "Du."
I should like to call you darling and lots of other names, without ever getting enough of adoring you."
This appeared in 1876, though it had been begun (and a version of the first movement seen by some of his friends) in the early 1860s.
In 1933, Schoenberg wrote an essay "Brahms the Progressive" (re-written 1947), which drew attention to Brahms's fondness for motivic saturation and irregularities of rhythm and phrase; in his last book (''Structural Functions of Harmony'', 1948), he analysed Brahms's "enriched harmony" and exploration of remote tonal regions.
He believes in nothing!"
This may have given him the confidence finally to complete a number of works that he had wrestled with over many years such as the cantata ''Rinaldo'', his first string quartet, third piano quartet, and most notably his first symphony.
Clara was often away on concert tours, some lasting months, or sometimes in the summer for cures, and in 1854–1856 Brahms also was away part of the time, leaving the staff to manage the household.
The main theme of the finale of the First Symphony is also reminiscent of the main theme of the finale of Beethoven's Ninth, and when this resemblance was pointed out to Brahms he replied that any dunce could see that.
In 1875, the composer Antonín Dvořák (1841–1904) was still virtually unknown outside the Prague region.
Brahms played an abbreviated version of his first Hungarian dance and ''Die Libelle'' on the piano.
After Robert Schumann's death at the sanatorium in 1856, Brahms divided his time between Hamburg, where he formed and conducted a ladies' choir, and Detmold in the Principality of Lippe, where he was court music-teacher and conductor.
His friends included leading musicologists, and, with Friedrich Chrysander, he edited an edition of the works of François Couperin.
