183), and closer to home various German masters, including Telemann (e.g.
Bach was born in Eisenach, in the duchy of Saxe-Eisenach, into a great musical family.
In 1818 Hans Georg Nägeli called the ''Mass in B Minor'' the greatest composition ever.
Among these were the Swingle Singers' versions of Bach pieces (for instance, the "" from Orchestral Suite No.&nbsp;3, or the '''' chorale prelude) and Wendy Carlos' 1968 ''Switched-On Bach'', which used the Moog electronic synthesiser.
In 1950 the setup of the Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis was to keep such works out of the main catalogue: if there was a strong association with Bach they could be listed in its appendix (in German: Anhang, abbreviated as Anh.
Bach's influence was felt in the next generation of early Romantic composers.
In the 21st century Bach's compositions became available on-line, for instance at the International Music Score Library Project.
In 1713, Bach was offered a post in Halle when he advised the authorities during a renovation by Christoph Cuntzius of the main organ in the west gallery of the Market Church of Our Dear Lady.
In the 21st century the complete extant output of the composer became available on-line with several websites exclusively dedicated to him.
Bach exploited the capabilities of an instrument to the fullest, while keeping the core of such music independent of the instrument on which it is performed.
Bach's last large work was the ''Mass in B minor'' (1748–49) which Stauffer describes as "Bach's most universal church work.
Many of the secular cantatas went lost, but for some of these the text and the occasion are known, for instance when Picander later published their libretto (e.g.
He is now generally regarded as one of the greatest composers of all time.
BWV 1065), Pergolesi (BWV 1083) and Palestrina (Missa Sine nomine), French masters such as François Couperin (BWV Anh.
Websites dedicated exclusively to the composer or parts of his music include jsbach.org, BachOnBach, and the Bach Cantatas Website.
In his early youth Bach copied pieces by other composers to learn from them.
Bach's surviving family members, who inherited a large part of his manuscripts, were not all equally concerned with preserving them, leading to considerable losses.
The collection has a complex and unconventional structure: the variations build on the bass line of the aria, rather than its melody, and musical canons are interpolated according to a grand plan.
Bach absorbed these stylistic aspects in part by transcribing Vivaldi's string and wind concertos for harpsichord and organ; many of these transcribed works are still regularly performed.
He received valuable teaching from his brother, who instructed him on the clavichord.
This was one of the dozens of private societies in the major German-speaking cities that was established by musically active university students; these societies had become increasingly important in public musical life and were typically led by the most prominent professionals in a city.
In this sense it is no surprise that Bach's music is easily and often performed on instruments it was not necessarily written for, that it is transcribed so often, and that his melodies turn up in unexpected places such as jazz music.
By the end of the century, Bach was firmly established as one of the greatest composers, recognised for both his instrumental and his vocal music.
The early devotees weren't all musicians, for example in Berlin, Daniel Itzig, a high official of Frederick the Great's court, venerated Bach.
* The ''Inventions and Sinfonias'' (BWV 772–801).
On the occasion of his entry into the Society, Bach composed the ''Canonic Variations on "Vom Himmel hoch da komm' ich her"'' (BWV 769).
Bach church music in Latin includes his Magnificat, four Kyrie–Gloria Masses, and his Mass in B minor.
Bach's earliest cantatas date from his years in Arnstadt and Mühlhausen.
The principles of four-part harmony cannot only be found in Bach's four-part choral music, but he also prescribes it for instance for the figured bass accompaniment.
In January 1703, shortly after graduating from St. Michael's and being turned down for the post of organist at Sangerhausen, Bach was appointed court musician in the chapel of Duke Johann Ernst&nbsp;III in Weimar.
Among Bach's lesser known keyboard works are seven toccatas (BWV 910–916), four duets (BWV 802–805), sonatas for keyboard (BWV 963–967), the Six Little Preludes (BWV 933–938), and the '''' (BWV 989).
Besides these and other public performances and an increased coverage on the composer and his compositions in printed media, the 1830s and 40s also saw the first publication of more vocal works by Bach: six cantatas, the ''St Matthew Passion'' and the ''Mass in B minor''.
On 28 July 1750, Bach died at the age of 65.
For instance Kuhnau, Bach's predecessor in Leipzig, had notoriously written against opera and Italianate virtuoso vocal music.
The prefects also aided with musical instruction.
Also in this century, overviews of what is best in classical music typically include a lot of Bach.
Some of these arrangements, like the late 19th-century "Air on the G string" helped in popularising Bach's music.
Bach collected his cantatas in annual cycles.
Prince Leopold, himself a musician, appreciated Bach's talents, paid him well, and gave him considerable latitude in composing and performing.
In 1950 Wolfgang Schmieder published a thematic catalogue called '''' (Bach Works Catalogue).
* Three collections of dance suites: the English Suites (BWV 806–811), the French Suites (BWV 812–817), and the Partitas for keyboard ('''', BWV 825–830).
Apart from that, Bach left a number of compositions without specified instrumentation: the Canons BWV 1072–1078 fall in that category, as well as the bulk of ''The Musical Offering'' and ''The Art of Fugue''.
Bach composed Passions for Good Friday services and oratorios such as the ''Christmas Oratorio'', which is a set of six cantatas for use in the liturgical season of Christmas.
Religious music was at the centre of Bach's output for much of his life.
Forkel, Bach's first biographer, gives this description of this feature of Bach's music, that sets it apart from most other music:
After taking up his office as  late May 1723, Bach performed a cantata each Sunday and feast day that corresponded to the lectionary readings of the week.
Chopin started composing his 24 Preludes, Op.
He was the eighth and youngest child of Johann Ambrosius, who probably taught him violin and the basics of music theory.
One such connoisseur was Gottfried van Swieten, a high-ranked Austrian official who was instrumental in passing Bach's legacy to the composers of the Viennese school.
Bach was able to convince the church and town government at Mühlhausen to fund an expensive renovation of the organ at the Blasius Church.
Bach festivals were held in several continents, and competitions and prizes such as the International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition and the Royal Academy of Music Bach Prize were named after the composer.
Although the complete mass was never performed during the composer's lifetime, it is considered to be among the greatest choral works of all time.
The visit to Buxtehude involved a  journey each way, reportedly on foot.
Bach putting his foot down on the tonal system, and contributing to its shaping, did not imply he was less at ease with the older modal system, and the genres associated with it: more than his contemporaries (who had "moved on" to the tonal system without much exception) Bach often returned to the then antiquated modi and genres.
By the end of the century local Bach societies were initiated in several cities, and Bach's music had been performed in all major musical centres.
Of the more than three hundred cantatas which Bach composed in Leipzig, over one hundred have been lost to posterity.
Later research has called into question whether the remains in the grave are actually those of Bach.
J.C.&nbsp;Bach exposed him to the works of great composers of the day, including South German composers such as Johann Pachelbel (under whom Johann Christoph had studied) and Johann Jakob Froberger; North German composers; Frenchmen, such as Jean-Baptiste Lully, Louis Marchand, and Marin Marais; and the Italian clavierist Girolamo Frescobaldi.
According to his obituary Bach would have composed five year cycles of sacred cantatas, and additional church cantatas for instance for weddings and funerals.
Beethoven played the entire ''Well-Tempered Clavier'' by the time he was eleven, and described Bach as "''''" (progenitor of harmony).
Felix Mendelssohn significantly contributed to the renewed interest in Bach's work with his 1829 Berlin performance of the ''St&nbsp;Matthew Passion'', instrumental in setting off what has been called the Bach Revival.
The BACH motif, used by the composer in his own compositions, was used in dozens of tributes to the composer from the 19th century to the 21st.
Bach's motets (BWV 225–231) are pieces on sacred themes for choir and continuo, with instruments playing colla parte.
Also a multitude of musical ensembles such as the Bach Aria Group, the Deutsche Bachsolisten, the Bachchor Stuttgart, and the Bach Collegium Japan adopted the composer's name.
Also in the contemporary press Bach had his detractors such as Johann Adolf Scheibe, suggesting he write less complex music, and his supporters such as Johann Mattheson and Lorenz Christoph Mizler.
Five are mentioned in obituaries, three are extant.
But when Bach was installed as Cantor in 1723, he was put in charge only of music for "festal" (church holiday) services at the ; his petition to provide music also for regular Sunday services there (for a corresponding salary increase) went all the way up to the Elector but was denied.
Bach also composed secular cantatas for the court such as .
This can be seen in minor adjustments he made when adopting someone else's composition, for example his earliest version of the "Keiser" ''St Mark Passion'', where he enhances scene transitions, and in the architecture of his own compositions such as his Magnificat, and his Leipzig ''Passions''.
Bach was required to instruct the students of the  in singing and to provide church music for the main churches in Leipzig.
Bach pushed the limits: he added "strange tones" in his organ playing, confusing the singing, according to an indictment he had to face in Arnstadt, and Louis Marchand, another early experimenter with modulation, seems to have avoided confrontation with Bach because the latter went further than anyone had done before.
A significant development in the later part of the 20th century was the momentum gained by the historically informed performance practice, with forerunners such as Nikolaus Harnoncourt acquiring prominence by their performances of Bach's music.
At a young age, he established a reputation for his great creativity and ability to integrate foreign styles into his organ works.
In 1717, Bach eventually fell out of favour in Weimar and was, according to a translation of the court secretary's report, jailed for almost a month before being unfavourably dismissed: "On November&nbsp;6, 1717, the quondam concertmaster and organist Bach was confined to the County Judge's place of detention for too stubbornly forcing the issue of his dismissal and finally on December&nbsp;2 was freed from arrest with notice of his unfavourable discharge."
Baroque instruments vastly limited modulation possibilities: keyboard instruments, prior to a workable system of temperament, limited the keys that could be modulated to, and wind instruments, especially brass instruments such as trumpets and horns, about a century before they were fitted with valves, were tied to the key of their tuning.
After his death, Bach's reputation as a composer at first declined: his work was regarded as old-fashioned compared to the emerging galant style.
Bach's cantatas vary greatly in form and instrumentation, including those for solo singers, single choruses, small instrumental groups, and grand orchestras.
In this sense Bach played a key role in the development of genres such as the keyboard concerto.
''Peasant Cantata'') or in Italian (e.g.
The prince was Calvinist and did not use elaborate music in his worship; accordingly, most of Bach's work from this period was secular, including the orchestral suites, the cello suites, the sonatas and partitas for solo violin, and the ''Brandenburg Concertos''.
Apparently at his own initiative, Bach attended St. Michael's School in Lüneburg for two years.
With its double choir and orchestra the ''St Matthew Passion'' is one of Bach's most extended works.
Shorter oratorios are the ''Easter Oratorio'' and the ''Ascension Oratorio''.
In 1733, Bach composed a mass for the Dresden court (''Kyrie'' and ''Gloria'') which he later incorporated in his ''Mass in B Minor''.
(31 March 1685 N.S.).
Thus his reputation as a composer was initially mostly limited to his keyboard music, and that even fairly limited to its value in music education.
His ''Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue'', re-emulating the chromatic fantasia genre, as used by earlier composers such as Dowland and Sweelinck, in D dorian mode (comparable to D minor in the tonal system), is an example of this.
as soloist) with the orchestra in instrumental cantata movements, a decade before Handel published his first organ concertos.
His son Carl Philipp Emanuel and his pupil Johann Friedrich Agricola co-authored Bach's obituary, which was published in 1754 in Mizler's ''''.
160), other parts of which may be based on work by Telemann.
He also began to write the preludes and fugues which were later assembled into his monumental work ''The Well-Tempered Clavier'' (''''—''"Klavier"'' meaning clavichord or harpsichord), consisting of two books, compiled in 1722 and 1744, each containing 24 preludes and fugues in every major and minor key.
In the words of Christoph Wolff, assuming the directorship was a shrewd move that "consolidated Bach's firm grip on Leipzig's principal musical institutions".
A significant influence upon Bach's musical development during his years with the Prince is recorded by Stauffer as Bach's "complete embrace of dance music, perhaps the most important influence on his mature style other than his adoption of Vivaldi's music in Weimar".
The bulk of the music that had been printed during the composer's lifetime, at least the part that was remembered, was music for organ and harpsichord.
Many of his keyboard works are anthologies that encompass whole theoretical systems in an encyclopaedic fashion.
A Bach Revival had started from Mendelssohn's performance of the ''St.
By that time Bach was known as the first of the three Bs in music.
For example, in ''The Telegraph'''s list of the 168 best classical music recordings, Bach's music is featured in more recordings than that of any other composer.
Bach's time in Weimar was the start of a sustained period of composing keyboard and orchestral works.
She remained to help run the household until her death in 1729.
The 10-year-old Bach moved in with his eldest brother, Johann Christoph Bach (1671–1721), the organist at St.&nbsp;Michael's Church in Ohrdruf, Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg.
The ''St John Passion'' was the first Passion Bach composed during his tenure as Thomaskantor in Leipzig.
When his contemporaries, such as Handel, Telemann and Vivaldi wrote concertos he did so too.
Bach had been consulted officially about the 1716 organ after its completion, came from Köthen, and submitted a report.
A contemporary newspaper reported "the unhappy consequences of the very unsuccessful eye operation" as the cause of death.
Haydn owned manuscript copies of the ''Well-Tempered Clavier'' and the Mass in B minor, and was influenced by Bach's music.
Several 20th century composers referred to Bach or his music, for instance Eugène Ysaÿe in his Six Sonatas for solo violin, Dmitri Shostakovich in his 24 Preludes and Fugues and Heitor Villa-Lobos in his ''Bachianas Brasileiras''.
The king played a theme for Bach and challenged him to improvise a fugue based on his theme.
''Trauer-Ode''), or other public or private occasions (e.g.
Modulations, changing key in the course of a piece, is another style characteristic where Bach goes beyond what was usual in his time.
He wrote sonatas for a solo instrument such as the viola de gamba accompanied by harpsichord or continuo, as well as trio sonatas (two instruments and continuo).
In this system a piece of music progresses from one chord to the next according to certain rules, each chord being characterised by four notes.
Bach's mother died in 1694, and his father died eight months later.
* ''The Well-Tempered Clavier'', Books 1 and 2 (BWV 846–893).
After leaving Weimar, Bach wrote less for organ, although some of his best-known works (the six trio sonatas, the German Organ Mass in '''' from 1739, and the Great Eighteen chorales, revised late in his life) were composed after his leaving Weimar.
He presented the manuscript to the Elector in an eventually successful bid to persuade the prince to give him the title of Court Composer.
Apart from his own work, Bach also performed cantatas by Telemann and by his distant relative Johann Ludwig Bach.
In 1850, the  (Bach Society) was founded to promote Bach's music.
Bach broadened his composing and performing beyond the liturgy by taking over, in March 1729, the directorship of the Collegium Musicum, a secular performance ensemble started by Telemann.
Only the first three Leipzig cycles are more or less completely extant.
In the original catalogue BWV 1–224 are cantatas, BWV 225–231 are motets, BWV 232–243 are liturgical compositions in Latin, BWV 232–243 are Passions and Oratorios, BWV 250–438 are four-part chorales, BWV 439–524 are small vocal works, BWV 525–771 are organ compositions, BWV 772–994 are other keyboard works, BWV 995–1000 are lute compositions, BWV 1001–1040 is other chamber music, BWV 1041–1071 is orchestral music, BWV 1072–1078 are canons and BWV 1079–1080 are late contrapuntal works.
Already his ''Capriccio on the departure of a beloved brother'', a very early work, showed a gusto for modulation incomparable to any contemporary work this composition has been compared to, but the full expansion came with ''The Well-Tempered Clavier'', using all keys, which Bach seems to have been developing from around 1720, with the ''Klavierbüchlein für Wilhelm Friedemann Bach'' as one of its earliest witnesses.
For example, the ''The Well-Tempered Clavier'' comprises two books, each of which presents a prelude and fugue in every major and minor key, displaying a dizzying variety of structural, contrapuntal and fugal techniques.
Although Bach did not write any opera, he was not averse to the genre, nor to its ornamented vocal style.
28, inspired by the ''Well-Tempered Clavier'', in 1835, and Schumann published his ''Sechs Fugen über den Namen B-A-C-H'' in 1845.
Where by the end of the 19th century Bach had been inscribed in nationalism and religious revival, the late 20th century saw Bach as the subject of a secularised Art-as-religion ('''').
Bach wrote many works for harpsichord, some of which may have been played on the clavichord.
In the "Suscepit Israel" of his 1723 Magnificat he had the trumpets in E-flat play a melody in the enharmonic scale of C minor.
The English Suites closely follow the traditional model, adding a prelude before the  and including a single movement between the  and the .
Despite strong family connections and a musically enthusiastic employer, tension built up between Bach and the authorities after several years in the post.
All kinds of publications involved Bach: not only were there the ''Bach Jahrbuch'' publications of the Neue Bachgesellschaft, various other studies and biographies, by among others Albert Schweitzer, Charles Sanford Terry, John Butt, Christoph Wolff, and the 1950 first edition of the Bach Werke Verzeichnis, but also books such as ''Gödel, Escher, Bach'' put the composer's art in a wider perspective.
A month later Bach's application was accepted and he took up the post in July.
* Miscellaneous pieces such as the ''Overture in the French Style'' (''French Overture'', BWV 831) and the ''Italian Concerto'' (BWV 971) (published together as ''''), and the ''Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue'' (BWV 903).
The liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church remembers Bach annually with a feast day on 28 July, together with George Frideric Handel and Henry Purcell; the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church, on the same day remembers Bach and Handel with Heinrich Schütz.
Bach's music was extensively listened to, performed, broadcast, arranged, adapted, and commented upon in the 1990s.
The cantata cycle of his second year in Leipzig is called the chorale cantata cycle as it is mainly consisting of works in the chorale cantata format.
Such high placed appreciation contrasted with the humiliations he had to cope with for instance in his hometown Leipzig.
BWV 1081–1126 were added to the catalogue in the second half of the 20th century and BWV 1127 and higher were still later additions.
Bach and his wife moved into a house close to the ducal palace.
Bach was generally quite specific on ornamentation in his compositions (where in his time much of the ornamentation was not written out by composers, rather being considered a liberty of the performer), and his ornamentation was often quite elaborate.
Most of these concerted works expound on the Gospel readings prescribed for every Sunday and feast day in the Lutheran year.
Stauffer reports the discovery in 2005 of the organ tablatures that Bach wrote out when still in his teens of works by Reincken and Dieterich Buxtehude, showing "a disciplined, methodical, well-trained teenager deeply committed to learning his craft".
The major development taking place in Bach's time, and to which he contributed in no small way, was the development of a temperament for keyboard instruments that allowed to use these in all available keys (12 major and 12 minor), and which allowed modulating without retuning.
''Amore traditore'').
Johann Sebastian and Maria Barbara had three more children who however did not live to their first birthday, including twins born in 1713.
Tributes to Bach in the 20th century include statues erected in his honour, and a variety of things, such as streets and space objects, being named after him.
In the 20th century Bach's music was widely performed and recorded, while, among others, the Neue Bachgesellschaft published its research on the composer.
Matthew Passion'' in 1829.
His uncles were all professional musicians, whose posts included church organists, court chamber musicians, and composers.
Bach's best-known orchestral works are the ''Brandenburg Concertos'', so named because he submitted them in the hope of gaining employment from Margrave Christian Ludwig of Brandenburg-Schwedt in 1721; his application was unsuccessful.
One uncle, Johann Christoph Bach (1645–93), introduced him to the organ, and an older second cousin, Johann Ludwig Bach (1677–1731), was a well-known composer and violinist.
The second page of the ''Klavierbüchlein für Wilhelm Friedemann Bach'' is an ornament notation and performance guide that Bach wrote for his eldest son, who was nine years old at the time.
Many of Bach's works during the 1730s and 1740s were written for and performed by the ''Collegium Musicum''; among these were parts of his '''' (''Keyboard Practice'') and many of his violin and keyboard concertos.
'''Johann Sebastian Bach''' (28 July 1750) was a German composer and musician of the Baroque period.
The librettos, that is the lyrics, for his vocal compositions played an important role for Bach: he sought collaboration with various text authors for his cantatas and major vocal compositions, eventually writing or adapting such texts himself to make them fit in the structure of the composition he was designing, when he could not lean on the talents of other text authors.
''The Art of Fugue'' was only published posthumously in 1751.
The Canonic Variations on "Vom Himmel hoch da komm' ich her" and the ''Schübler Chorales'' are organ works Bach published in the last years of his life.
Between 1737 and 1739, Bach's former pupil Carl Gotthelf Gerlach held the directorship of the ''Collegium Musicum''.
After graduating he held several musical posts across Germany: he served as  (director of music) to Leopold, Prince of Anhalt-Köthen, and as Thomaskantor in Leipzig, a position of music director at the main Lutheran churches and educator at the .
He was originally buried at Old St. John's Cemetery in Leipzig.
Performing at weddings and funerals provided extra income for these groups; it was probably for this purpose, and for in-school training, that he wrote at least six motets.
His grave went unmarked for nearly 150 years, but in 1894, his remains were located and moved to a vault in St. John's Church.
These variations move in order from canon at the unison to canon at the ninth.
Bach's first Christmas cantata  was premiered in 1714 or 1715.
Later the same year, their first child, Catharina Dorothea, was born, and Maria Barbara's elder, unmarried sister joined them.
Soon after the 1829 performance Bach started to become regarded as one of the greatest composers of all times, if not the greatest, a reputation he kept ever since.
Throughout the 18th century the appreciation of Bach's music was mostly limited to distinguished connoisseurs.
In the same year, Bach joined the Corresponding Society of the Musical Sciences ('''') of Lorenz Christoph Mizler.
Many consist of a large opening chorus followed by one or more recitative-aria pairs for soloists (or duets) and a concluding chorale.
From the late 1720s Bach had the organ play concertante (i.e.
In 1802 Johann Nikolaus Forkel published ''Ueber Johann Sebastian Bachs Leben, Kunst und Kunstwerke'', the first biography of the composer, which contributed to the composer becoming known to a wider public.
Around this time, Bach copied the works of numerous French and Italian composers to gain insights into their compositional languages, and later arranged violin concertos by Vivaldi and others for organ and harpsichord.
* The ''Goldberg Variations'' (BWV 988), an aria with thirty variations.
His music is revered for its technical command, artistic beauty, and intellectual depth.
Other late works by Bach may also have a connection with the music theory based Society.
Bach wrote for single instruments, duets, and small ensembles.
Bach was extensively engaged later in his life in consulting on organ projects, testing newly built organs, and dedicating organs in afternoon recitals.
On 7 July 1720, while Bach was away in Carlsbad with Prince Leopold, Bach's wife suddenly died.
The large-scale structure of every major Bach sacred vocal work is evidence of subtle, elaborate planning to create a religiously and musically powerful expression.
Spitta gives some details.
Bach frequently disagreed with his employer, Leipzig's city council, who he thought were "penny-pinching".
Bach's music features three times—more than that of any other composer—on the Voyager Golden Record, a gramophone record containing a broad sample of the images, common sounds, languages, and music of Earth, sent into outer space with the two Voyager probes.
The final variation, instead of being the expected canon at the tenth, is a quodlibet.
Bach's Canons and, most of all, his Fugues are most characteristic of this style: also here Bach did not invent the style, but his contribution to it was so fundamental that he defined it to a large extent.
Each collection contains six suites built on the standard model (–––(optional movement)–).
The text of these cantatas was occasionally in dialect (e.g.
The French Suites omit preludes, but have multiple movements between the  and the .
In addition to concertos, Bach wrote four orchestral suites, each suite being a series of stylised dances for orchestra, preceded by a French overture.
Initially he was remembered more as a virtuoso player of the organ and as a teacher.
''The Musical Offering'' and ''The Art of Fugue'' are late contrapuntal works containing pieces for unspecified (combinations of) instruments.
During his most productive period (1708–14) he composed about a dozen pairs of preludes and fugues, five toccatas and fugues, and the ''Little Organ Book'', an unfinished collection of forty-six short chorale preludes that demonstrates compositional techniques in the setting of chorale tunes.
Bach usually led performances of his cantatas, most of which were composed within three years of his relocation to Leipzig.
Around 2000, the 250th anniversary of Bach's death, three record companies issued box sets with complete recordings of Bach's music.
BWV 233–236), as likewise his music was copied and arranged by others.
Around 20 church cantatas are extant from his later years in Weimar, for instance .
After this, in 1725, Bach "lost interest" in working even for festal services at the  and appeared there only on "special occasions".
Many of the harpsichord concertos were not original works, but arrangements of his concertos for other instruments now lost.
In 1708, Bach left Mühlhausen, returning to Weimar this time as organist and from 1714 '''' (director of music) at the ducal court, where he had an opportunity to work with a large, well-funded contingent of professional musicians.
When they wrote suites, he did so too.
Also in Weimar Bach started work on the ''Little Organ Book'', containing traditional Lutheran chorales (hymn tunes) set in complex textures.
