He entered Harvard College and graduated in 1787 with a Bachelor of Arts degree, Phi Beta Kappa.
File:Charles Francis Adams.jpg|Center|Charles Francis Adams
He also reduced the national debt from $16 million to $5 million, the remainder of which was paid off by his immediate successor, Andrew Jackson.
When he was younger and the American Revolution was going on, his mother told her children what their father was doing, and what he was risking, and because of this Adams grew to greatly respect his father.
Settlers on the frontier, who were constantly seeking to move westward, cried for a more expansionist policy.
Adams in fact spent many nights at the Observatory, with celebrated national astronomer and oceanographer Matthew Fontaine Maury, watching and charting the stars, which had always been one of Adams' avocations.
During the censure debate, Adams said that he took delight in the fact that southerners would forever remember him as "the acutest, the astutest, the archest enemy of southern slavery that ever existed".
His biographer, Nagel, concludes that this disapproval motivated him to marry Johnson in 1797, despite Adams' reservations that Johnson, like his mother, had a strong personality.
He had witnessed the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War against the Arab pirates of North Africa, and the Greek War of Independence from the Ottoman Turks.
Monroe sent in General Andrew Jackson who pushed the Seminole south, executed two British merchants who were supplying weapons, deposed one governor and named another, and left an American garrison in occupation.
Adams proposed an elaborate program of internal improvements (roads, ports and canals), a national university, and federal support for the arts and sciences.
In November 1802 he ran as a Federalist for the United States House of Representatives and lost.
Adams' devotion to classical rhetoric shaped his response to public issues.
Thus, it has been suggested that Adams is the only major figure in American history who knew both the Founding Fathers and Abraham Lincoln; however, this is not so, as Martin Van Buren met Founding Fathers Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, knew Founder Aaron Burr (Van Buren's mentor), and met the young Lincoln while on a campaign trip through Illinois.
In 1812, Adams witnessed and reported the news of Napoleon's invasion of Russia and Napoleon's disastrous retreat.
The U.S. accepted the offer and in July 1813, two associates of Adams, Albert Gallatin and James A. Bayard arrived in St. Petersburg to begin negotiations under mediation by Alexander.
He also formulated the Monroe Doctrine, which is invoked to the present day.
His opposition to slavery made him, along with Henry Clay, one of the leading opponents of Texas annexation and the Mexican–American War.
In Smithson's will, he stated that should his nephew, Henry James Hungerford, die without heirs, the Smithson estate would go to the government of the United States to create an "Establishment for the increase & diffusion of Knowledge among men."
Those places were either directly or indirectly named for John Quincy Adams (for example, Quincy, Illinois, was named in honor of Adams while Quincy, California, was named for Quincy, Illinois).
The speech was directed not only at the justices of this Supreme Court hearing the case, but also to the broad national audience he instructed in the evils of slavery.
But she the United States of America goes not abroad, in search of monsters to destroy.
Adams won their freedom, with the chance to stay in the United States or return to Africa.
John Quincy Adams was born on July 11, 1767, to John Adams and his wife Abigail Adams (née Smith) in a part of Braintree, Massachusetts that is now Quincy.
As for efforts to found the Smithsonian Institution, the money was invested in shaky state bonds, which quickly defaulted.
After the nephew died without heirs in 1835, President Andrew Jackson informed Congress of the bequest, which amounted to about US$500,000 ($75,000,000 in 2008 U.S. dollars after inflation).
Adams also predicted the Union's dissolution over the slavery issue, but said that if the South became independent there would be a series of bloody slave revolts.
Adams and his father were the only U.S. presidents to serve a single term during the first 48 years of the Presidency (1789–1837).
Typically, his views concurred with those espoused by Monroe.
The Stone Library includes over 14,000 books written in twelve languages.
Adams thought his depression was due to the high expectations demanded of him by his father and mother.
Adams authored an alteration to the tariff, which weakened it and diffused the crisis.
He did not want the position, preferring to maintain his quiet life of reading in Massachusetts, and probably would have rejected it if his father had not persuaded him to take it.
Adams was well liked by the Russian Court and often would be met on walks by Alexander.
The United States, Adams warned, might "become the dictatress of the world but she would be no longer the ruler of her own spirit."
President Monroe and all his cabinet, except Adams, believed Jackson had exceeded his instructions.
In contrast, Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren instigated the policy of Indian removal to the west (i.e.
The library is located in the "Old House" at Adams National Historical Park in Quincy, Massachusetts.
Adams was key to ensuring that the money was instead used to build the Smithsonian Institution.
Nagel argues that Adams' political problems were the result of an unusually hostile Jacksonian faction, and Adams' own dislike of the office.
Adams enacted a part of his agenda and paid off much of the national debt.
Paul Nagel argues that his political acumen was not any less developed than others were in his day, and notes that Henry Clay, one of the era's most astute politicians, was a principal adviser to Adams and supporter throughout his presidency.
"The formalities of these court presentations," Mr. Adams remarked, "are so trifling and insignificant in themselves, and so important in the eyes of princes and courtiers, that they are much more embarrassing to an American than business of greater importance.
After this debate, the gag rule was ultimately retained.
Adams thus became Congress' primary supporter of what would become the Smithsonian Institution.
One of the issues which divided the administration was protective tariffs, of which Henry Clay was a leading advocate.
He delighted in the misery he was inflicting on the slaveholders he so hated, and prided himself on being "obnoxious to the slave faction."
the Trail of Tears).
The Tsar ordered the Chancellor to request the release of the American property as soon as possible, which the Danish government complied with.
In 1843, Adams sat for the earliest confirmed photograph still in existence of a U.S. president, although other sources contend that William Henry Harrison had posed even earlier for his portrait, in 1841.
However, thanks to the successes of Adams' diplomacy during his previous eight years as secretary of state, most of the foreign policy issues he would have faced had been resolved by the time he became president.
As Abigail Adams had feared, John Quincy's brother, Charles, would eventually follow this fate.
Adams went before the Supreme Court on behalf of African slaves who had revolted and seized the Spanish ship ''Amistad''.
John Quincy Adams left office on March 4, 1829, after losing the election of 1828 to Andrew Jackson.
Immediately thereafter, Adams collapsed, having suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage.
Adams defended his domestic agenda as continuing Monroe's policies.
Some of his proposals were adopted, specifically the extension of the Cumberland Road into Ohio with surveys for its continuation west to St. Louis; the beginning of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, the construction of the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal and the Louisville and Portland Canal around the falls of the Ohio; the connection of the Great Lakes to the Ohio River system in Ohio and Indiana; and the enlargement and rebuilding of the Dismal Swamp Canal in North Carolina.
Under the terms of the Twelfth Amendment, the presidential election fell to the House of Representatives, which was to choose from the top three candidates: Jackson, Adams, and Crawford.
Adams acquired an education at institutions such as Leiden University.
Incumbent National Republican Governor Levi Lincoln, Jr. was retiring and Adams faced National Republican John Davis, Democrat Marcus Morton and Samuel L. Allen of the Working Men's Party.
Adams lost the election by a decisive margin.
Adams so ably justified Jackson's conduct that he silenced protests from either Spain or Britain; Congress refused to punish Jackson.
In 1841, Adams had the case of a lifetime, representing the defendants in ''United States v. The Amistad Africans'' in the Supreme Court of the United States.
Many historians regard him as one of the greatest Secretaries of State in American history.
Adams strongly opposed any entanglement in European affairs.
In Congress, he was chair of the Committee on Commerce and Manufactures, the Committee on Indian Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
This went against the generally held opinion that former Presidents should not run for public office.
Historians agree he was one of the greatest diplomats and secretaries of state in American history.
The name Quincy has been used for at least nineteen other places in the United States.
Because of the many delays, the Adamses did not arrive in St. Petersburg until October 23, 1809.
Marquis de Lafayette once gave Adams an alligator as a gift, which he lodged for months in the unfinished East Room of the White House, before building it its own lodge.
Adams was elected as U.S. Representative from Massachusetts after leaving office, serving for the last 17 years of his life with far greater acclaim than he had achieved as president.
In his biography, Samuel Flagg Bemis argues that Adams was able to "gather together, formulate, and practice the fundamentals of American foreign-policy – self-determination, independence, noncolonization, nonintervention, nonentanglement in European politics, Freedom of the Seas, and freedom of commerce."
After two weeks, a vote was held, and he was not censured.
He vehemently attacked the annexation of Texas (1845) and the Mexican War (1846–48) as part of a "conspiracy" to extend slavery.
On his return to the United States, Adams was appointed a Commissioner of Monetary Affairs in Boston by a Federal District Judge; however, Thomas Jefferson rescinded this appointment.
Also in 1812, Rumyantsev asked if he should request Alexander to mediate a pacification of hostilities between the United States and Great Britain.
He was admitted to the bar in 1791 and began practicing in Boston.
Though Congress wanted to use the money for other purposes, Adams successfully persuaded Congress to preserve the money for an institution of science and learning.
Instead he ran for and won a seat in the United States House of Representatives in the 1830 elections.
He was key to the negotiation of several important treaties, such as the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the War of 1812, and the Florida Treaty, which resulted in the annexation of Florida.
If the two nations went to war, Adams predicted the president of the United States would use his war powers to abolish slavery.
On February 21, 1848, the House of Representatives was discussing the matter of honoring U.S. Army officers who served in the Mexican–American War.
While serving abroad, in 1797 Adams also married Louisa Catherine Johnson, the daughter of a poor American merchant, in a ceremony at the church of All Hallows-by-the-Tower, London.
It is not safe or prudent to despise them, nor practicable for a person of rational understanding to value them."
Though he certainly did not support it and made that clear at the time, his intent was to antagonize the pro-slavery faction of Congress into an open fight on the matter.
Historians have often included Adams among the leading conservatives of his day.
It consisted of a high tariff to fund internal improvements such as road-building, and a national bank to encourage productive enterprise and form a national currency.
He was not an abolitionist, say biographers Nagel and Parsons.
They moved for his censure over the matter, enabling Adams to  discuss slavery openly during his subsequent defense.
Adams served as the sixth President of the United States from March 4, 1825, to March 4, 1829.
Early in his life he sought some form of treatment.
His argument succeeded; the Court ruled in favor of the Africans, who were declared free and returned to their homes.
While a member of the Senate, Adams also served as a professor of logic at Brown University.
Animated by his growing revulsion against slavery, Adams became a leading opponent of the Slave Power.
The Federalist-controlled Massachusetts Legislature chose a replacement for Adams on June 3, 1808, several months early.
While going back and forth between The Hague and London, he met and proposed to his future wife, Louisa Catherine Johnson.
A reason for this was the opposition he faced in Congress, where his rivals prevented him from succeeding.
He was the first President to serve in Congress after his term of office, and one of only two former presidents to do so (Andrew Johnson later served in the Senate).
During Adams' lifetime, technological innovations and new means of communication spread messages of religious revival, social reform, and party politics.
Although the censure of Adams over the slavery petition was ultimately abandoned, the House did address the issue of petitions from enslaved persons at a later time.
Their youngest son was with them during the long and tedious voyage to St. Petersburg.
In 1811, Adams received a commission from the Secretary of State as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
Many of Adams' idiosyncratic positions were rooted in his abiding devotion to the Ciceronian ideal of the citizen-orator "speaking well" to promote the welfare of the polis.
His relationship with his mother was rocky; she had high expectations of him and was afraid her children might end up a dead alcoholic like her brother.
Adams did not retire after leaving office.
He decided that if he were censured, he would merely resign, run for the office again, and probably win easily.
Adams also called into question the actions of a House that would limit its own ability to debate and resolve questions internally.
Alexander replied, that, "in everything depending on him, he should be happy to contribute to the increase of their friendly relations; that it was his wish to establish a just system of maritime rights, and that he should adhere invariably to those he had declared."
In authoring a change to the Tariff of 1828, he was instrumental to the compromise that ended the Nullification Crisis.
When Election Day arrived, Andrew Jackson won, although narrowly, pluralities of the popular and electoral votes, but not the necessary majority of electoral votes.
Clay's personal dislike for Jackson and the similarity of his American System to Adams' position on tariffs and internal improvements caused him to throw his support to Adams, who was elected by the House on February 9, 1825, on the first ballot.
Adams is best known as a diplomat who shaped U.S. foreign policy in line with his ardently nationalist commitment to U.S. republican values.
Gallatin was at that time Secretary of Treasury and the Senate rejected his appointment to the diplomatic mission as incompatible under the Constitution.
Adams immediately declined and remained in St. Petersburg.
The petition infuriated his Congressional enemies, many of whom were agitating for disunion themselves.
The massive fifty volumes are one of the most extensive collections of first-hand information from the period of the early republic and are widely cited by modern historians.
Historian Thomas Bailey observed, "Seldom has the public mind been so successfully poisoned against an honest and high-minded man."
The United States, reflecting concerns raised by the United Kingdom, ultimately hoped to avoid having any European power take over Spain's colonies.
He lost his 1828 bid for re-election to Andrew Jackson.
Likewise, Adams' project on a national University would not be realized in his lifetime; the American University would be chartered in 1893.
He matriculated in Leiden January 10, 1781.
Upon entering Harvard he had already translated Virgil, Horace, Plutarch, and Aristotle and within six months memorized his Greek grammar and translated the New Testament.
Along with the Rush–Bagot Treaty of 1817, this marked the beginning of improved relations between the British Empire and its former colonies, and paved the way for better relations between the U.S. and Canada.
Among his diplomatic achievements were treaties of reciprocity with a number of nations, including Denmark, Mexico, the Hanseatic League, the Scandinavian countries, Prussia and Austria.
Adams foresaw what would befall the United States if it sacrificed its republican spirit on the altar of empire.
More recently, he has been portrayed as the exemplar and moral leader in an era of modernization.
John Quincy Adams and Louisa Catherine Adams had three sons and a daughter.
After heated debate in Congress, Adams successfully argued to restore the lost funds with interest.
From this, Adams authored what came to be known as the Monroe Doctrine, which was introduced on December 2, 1823.
Adams again argued that the right to petition was a universal right, granted by God, so that those in the weakest positions might always have recourse to those in the most powerful.
In 1825 Adams signed a bill for the creation of a national observatory just before leaving presidential office.
Reports indicate he enjoyed showing it to visitors.
He was one of only four presidents who chose not to attend their respective successor's inauguration; the others were his father, Andrew Johnson, and Richard Nixon.
Besides his opposition to slavery and the gag rule (discussed above), his congressional career is remembered for several other key accomplishments.
He favored a high tariff to encourage the building of factories, and restricted land sales to slow the movement west.
John Quincy fell in love shortly after he finished school, but his mother did not approve of his considering marriage when he was still dependent on his parents for support, and the relationship ended.
Count Nikolay Rumyantsev, Chancellor of the empire, formally received Adams, and requested a copy of his credential letter.
During his term as president, however, Adams achieved little of long-term consequence in foreign affairs.
Adams was also given private audiences with the empress and the dowager empress, who also received Louisa Adams.
Adams did not attend the inauguration of his successor, Andrew Jackson, who had openly snubbed him by refusing to pay the traditional "courtesy call" to the outgoing president during the weeks before his own inauguration.
The Floridas, still a Spanish territory but with no Spanish presence to speak of, became a refuge for runaway slaves and Native Americans.
Their daughter, Louisa, was born in 1811 but died in 1812 while the family was in Russia.
He was elected to nine terms, serving as a Representative for 17 years, from 1831 until his death.
The compromise actually did not alter the tariff as much as the southern states had hoped, though they agreed not to continue pursuing the issue for fear of civil war.
Adams used the events that had unfolded in Florida to negotiate the Florida Treaty with Spain in 1819 that turned Florida over to the U.S. and resolved border issues regarding the Louisiana Purchase.
When the elder Adams became president, he appointed his son in 1797 as Minister to Prussia at Washington's urging.
When his opponents realized that they played into his political strategy, they tried to bury the censure.
This reached a low point when the press accused Jackson's wife Rachel of bigamy.
When Adams appointed Clay as Secretary of State—the position that Adams and his three predecessors had held before becoming president—Jacksonian Democrats were outraged, and claimed that Adams and Clay had struck a "corrupt bargain".
Often these events would last until 4 a.m., so Adams stopped attending those he was able to avoid.
In 1844, he chaired a committee for reform of the rules of Congress, and he used this opportunity to try once again to repeal the gag rule.
This would become the Treaty of 1818.
She died a few weeks after the elections.
Adams was influenced by the classical republican ideal of civic eloquence espoused by British philosopher David Hume.
For nearly three years, beginning at the age of 14, he accompanied Francis Dana as a secretary on a mission to Saint Petersburg, Russia, to obtain recognition of the new United States.
File:George Washington Adams.jpg|center|George Washington Adams by Charles King
John Adams and John Quincy Adams were the only father and son to serve as presidents until George H. W. Bush (1989–1993) and George W. Bush (2001–2009).
In 1779, Adams began a diary that he kept until just before he died in 1848.
Adams' generous policy toward Native Americans caused him trouble.
Thus ended President Madison's hope that Alexander could end the war.
John Quincy Adams Birthplace is now part of Adams National Historical Park and open to the public.
In 1814, Adams was recalled from Russia to serve as chief negotiator of the U.S. commission for the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the War of 1812 between the United States and United Kingdom.
He is probably best known as a diplomat who shaped America's foreign policy in accordance with his ardently nationalist views, and is widely considered by historians to have been one of the greatest diplomats in American history.
During his term, Adams worked on transforming America into a world power through "internal improvements," as a part of the "American System".
He died at 7:20&nbsp;p.m. First term Representative Abraham Lincoln of Illinois was assigned to the committee making the funeral arrangements.
The numerous diplomatic visits also annoyed Adams who wrote "I have been engaged the whole forenoon; and though I rise at six o'clock, I am sometimes unable to find time to write only part of a private letter in the course of the day.
That earlier treaty had used the Mississippi River to determine the border, but assumed that the river extended further north than it did, and so that earlier settlement was unworkable.
Historian Paul Nagel has noted that this letter reached Washington, and that parts of it were used by Washington when drafting his farewell address.
He never billed for his services in the ''Amistad'' case.
Among his opponents was US President Martin Van Buren who had carried the fight over the Amistad slaves to the US Supreme Court.
His original interment was temporary, in the public vault at the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C. Later, he was interred in the family burial ground in Quincy, Massachusetts, across from the First Parish Church, called Hancock Cemetery.
Adams predicted that if the South formed a new nation, it would be torn apart by an extremely violent slave insurrection.
After one of his reelection victories, he said that he must "bring about a day prophesied when slavery and war shall be banished from the face of the earth."
With the ongoing Oregon boundary dispute, Adams sought to negotiate a settlement with England to decide the border between the western United States and Canada.
Adams was elected president in a close and controversial four-way contest in 1824.
After these official diplomatic greetings, Alexander and Adams discussed several other issues such as the policies of the different European powers, trade and commerce, and other mutually beneficial prospects, and that Russia and U.S. could be very useful to each other.
When he fell in love with his future wife, Louisa Johnson, his mother disapproved of this relationship as well.
This settled a boundary dispute caused by ignorance of actual geography in the boundary agreed to in the 1783 Treaty of Paris that ended the American Revolutionary War.
Adams' youngest son, Charles Francis Adams (who named his own son John Quincy), also pursued a career in diplomacy and politics.
Adams remains the only president to have married a First Lady born outside of the United States.
Throughout his life, he always preferred reading in seclusion to attending social engagements, and several times had to be pressured by others to remain in public service.
John Quincy Adams did not attend school, but was tutored by his cousin James Thax and his father's law clerk, Nathan Rice.
When Adams entered the House chamber, everyone "stood up and applauded."
Jackson said he would forgive those who insulted him, but he would never forgive the ones who had attacked his wife.
Though he was always quite hostile to slavery, nearly to be point of being an abolitionist (although he doubted the abolitionists could successfully end slavery), he grew even more hostile to it later in life.
He became a forceful opponent of this rule and conceived a way around it, attacking slavery in the House for two weeks.
In 1846, the 78-year-old former president suffered a stroke that left him partially paralyzed.
As the 1824 election drew near people began looking for candidates.
of any U.S. President.
The usage of nations is common laws of nations founded on custom.
She is the champion and vindicator only of her own.
Their voyage was temporarily interrupted outside the southern coast of Norway due to the Gunboat War.
On June 8, Adams broke with the Federalists, resigned his Senate seat, and became a Republican.
He stated that America "goes not abroad in search of monsters to destroy" lest she "involve herself beyond power of extrication, in all wars of interest and intrigue, of individual avarice, envy, and ambition, which assume the colors and usurp the standard of freedom.
Adams also became a leading force for the advancement of science.
in favor of the measure, he instead yelled, "No!"
As president, he had proposed a national observatory, which did not win much support.
In 1829 British scientist James Smithson died, and left his fortune for the "increase and diffusion of knowledge."
These visits take up so much of my time, that I sometimes think of taking a resolution not to receive them; but, on the other hand, so much information important to be possessed, and particularly relative to current political events, is to be collected from them, that they are rather to be encouraged than discountenanced."
