On inquiry, I found those scraps, four or five in number, contained his poetic feelings on the song of our nightingale."
The house was close to Hunt and others from his circle in Hampstead, as well as to Coleridge, respected elder of the first wave of Romantic poets, at that time living in Highgate.
The largest collection of the letters, manuscripts, and other papers of Keats is in the Houghton Library at Harvard University.
He had written his first extant poem, "An Imitation of Spenser," in 1814, when he was 19.
John Keats was born in Moorgate, London, on 31 October 1795 to Thomas Keats and his wife, born Frances Jennings.
Keats endured great conflict knowing his expectations as a struggling poet in increasingly hard straits would preclude marriage to Brawne.
:"Sed mulier cupido quod dicit amanti / in vento et rapida scribere oportet aqua" (What a woman says to a passionate lover / should be written in the wind and the running water).
I have a sensation at the present moment as though I was dissolving&nbsp;– I should be exquisitely miserable without the hope of soon seeing you&nbsp;...
However, at 13 he began focusing his energy on reading and study, winning his first academic prize in midsummer 1809.
Writing to his brother George, Keats explored the idea of the world as "the vale of Soul-making",  anticipating the great odes that he would write some months later.
In September, very short of money and in despair considering taking up journalism or a post as a ship's surgeon, he approached his publishers with a new book of poems.
Keats began to lend Brawne books, such as Dante's ''Inferno'', and they would read together.
Clark eventually diagnosed consumption (tuberculosis) and placed Keats on a starvation diet of an anchovy and a piece of bread a day intended to reduce the blood flow to his stomach.
This passage would eventually be transmuted into the concluding lines of "Ode on a Grecian Urn": Beauty is truth, truth beauty' – that is all / Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know".
She is described as beautiful, talented and widely read, not of the top flight of society yet financially secure, an enigmatic figure who would become a part of Keats's circle.
Later, ''To Autumn'' became one of the most highly regarded poems in the English language.
I have an habitual feeling of my real life having past, and that I am leading a posthumous existence".
Describing the site today, Marsh wrote, "In the old part of the graveyard, barely a field when Keats was buried here, there are now umbrella pines, myrtle shrubs, roses, and carpets of wild violets".
Most of the surviving portraits of Keats were painted after his death, and those who knew him held that they did not succeed in capturing his unique quality and intensity.
They lived in Ohio and Louisville, Kentucky, until 1841, when George's investments failed.
On 11 April 1818, Keats and Coleridge had a long walk together on Hampstead Heath.
During the 19th century, critics deemed them unworthy of attention, distractions from his poetic works.
The book was a critical failure, arousing little interest, although Reynolds reviewed it favourably in ''The Champion''.
Died on the promise of the fruit.
A temperate sharpness about it &nbsp;...
He also bled the poet; a standard treatment of the day, but was likely a significant contributor to Keats's weakness.
There are areas of his life and daily routine that Keats does not describe.
Where are the songs of Spring?
My stomach continues so bad, that I feel it worse on opening any book – yet I am much better than I was in Quarantine.
The small school had a liberal outlook and a progressive curriculum more modern than the larger, more prestigious schools.
Constance Naden was a great admirer of his poems, arguing that his genius lay in his 'exquisite sensitiveness to all the elements of beauty'.
With biting sarcasm, Lockhart advised, "It is a better and a wiser thing to be a starved apothecary than a starved poet; so back to the shop Mr John, back to plasters, pills, and ointment boxes".
From this point there is no further documented mention of Isabella Jones.
There he began "Calidore" and initiated the era of his great letter writing.
The bloom, whose petals nipped before they blew
Although he continued his work and training at Guy's, Keats devoted more and more time to the study of literature, experimenting with verse forms, particularly the sonnet.
Today his poems and letters are some of the most popular and most analysed in English literature.
By the time of his death, Keats had therefore been associated with the taints of both old and new schools: the obscurity of the first wave Romantics and the uneducated affectation of Hunt's "Cockney School".
His first attempts at verse were often vague, languorously narcotic and lacking a clear eye.
Unlike the Olliers, Keats's new publishers were enthusiastic about his work.
Given that he was becoming a significant figure within artistic circles, a succession of other publications followed, including anthologies of his many notes, chapters and letters.
Although Keats wrote that "if poetry comes not as naturally as the Leaves to a tree it had better not come at all", poetry did not come easily to him; his work was the fruit of a deliberate and prolonged classical self-education.
Shelley often corresponded with Keats in Rome and loudly declared that Keats's death had been brought on by bad reviews in the ''Quarterly Review''.
He wrote later: "I am certain of nothing but the holiness of the Heart's affections and the truth of Imagination – What the imagination seizes as Beauty must be truth – whether it existed before or not – for I have the same Idea of all our Passions as of Love they are all in their sublime, creative of essential Beauty" again and again turning to the question of what it means to be a poet.
And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue;
In 1833, more than 12 years after his death, she married and went on to have three children; she outlived Keats by more than 40 years.
Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,-
The money would have made a critical difference to the poet's expectations.
By lending so much, Keats could no longer cover the interest of his own debts.
He lost large amounts of blood and was bled further by the attending physician.
That autumn, Keats left Clarke's school to apprentice with Thomas Hammond, a surgeon and apothecary who was a neighbour and the doctor of the Jennings family.
Keats was convinced that he had made no mark in his lifetime.
Among his poems of 1816 was ''To My Brothers''.
Indeed, during Keats's few years as a published poet, the reputation of the older Romantic school was at its lowest ebb.
Jones inspired and was a steward of Keats's writing.
His last request was to be placed under a tombstone bearing no name or date, only the words, "Here lies One whose Name was writ in Water."
Although his poems were not generally well received by critics during his lifetime, his reputation grew after his death, and by the end of the 19th century, he had become one of the most beloved of all English poets.
Clark saw to the planting of daisies on the grave, saying that Keats would have wished it.
Keats may have seemed to his friends to be living on comfortable means, but in reality he was borrowing regularly from Abbey and his friends.
None of Brawne's letters to Keats survive.
Thomas Keats died intestate.
His friends Brown, Severn, Dilke, Shelley and his guardian Richard Abbey, his publisher Taylor, Fanny Brawne and many others issued posthumous commentary on Keats's life.
The headmaster's son, Charles Cowden Clarke, also became an important mentor and friend, introducing Keats to Renaissance literature, including Tasso, Spenser, and Chapman's translations.
Money was always a great concern and difficulty for him, as he struggled to stay out of debt and make his way in the world independently.
There is a discrepancy of one day between the official date of death and that on the gravestone.
The medical attention Keats received may have hastened his death.
Seven weeks after the funeral Shelley memorialised Keats in his poem ''Adonaïs''.
Darkness, disease and depression surrounded him, reflected in poems such as "The Eve of St. Agnes" and "La Belle Dame sans Merci" where love and death both stalk.
'Tis strange the mind, that very fiery particle
During November 1818 she developed an intimacy with Keats, but it was shadowed by the illness of Tom Keats, whom John was nursing through this period.
"Ode on a Grecian Urn" and "Ode on Melancholy" were inspired by sonnet forms and probably written after "Ode to a Nightingale".
Both John and George nursed their brother Tom, who was suffering from tuberculosis.
The cause of death was a skull fracture, suffered when he fell from his horse while returning from a visit to Keats and his brother George at school.
It was a work in progress which he continued at until the last months of his life, and the poem came to be associated with their relationship.
"My Imagination is a Monastery and I am its Monk", Keats notes to Shelley.
Jorge Luis Borges stated that his first encounter with Keats's work was the most significant literary experience of his life.
He repeatedly demanded "how long is this posthumous existence of mine to go on?
Shelley promoted Keats as someone whose achievement could not be separated from agony, who was 'spiritualised' by his decline and too fine-tuned to endure the harshness of life; the consumptive, suffering image popularly held today.
The young Keats was described by his friend Edward Holmes as a volatile character, "always in extremes", given to indolence and fighting.
As a result Keats went through dreadful agonies with nothing to ease the pain at all."
It is likely that the 18-year-old Brawne visited the Dilke family at Wentworth Place before she lived there.
Landmark Keats biographers since include Sidney Colvin, Robert Gittings, Walter Jackson Bate and Andrew Motion.
When Keats died at 25, he had been writing poetry seriously for only about six years, from 1814 until the summer of 1820; and publishing for only four.
I cannot exist without you&nbsp;– I am forgetful of every thing but seeing you again&nbsp;– my Life seems to stop there&nbsp;– I see no further.
Then in Rome he tried again... Severn was in such a quandary he didn't know what to do, so in the end he went to the doctor who took it away.
However, early accounts often gave contradictory or heavily biased versions of events and were subject to dispute.
In 1816, Keats received his apothecary's licence, which made him eligible to practise as an apothecary, physician, and surgeon, but before the end of the year he announced to his guardian that he was resolved to be a poet, not a surgeon.
The final stanza of his last great ode: "To Autumn" runs:
During 1820 Keats displayed increasingly serious symptoms of tuberculosis, suffering two lung haemorrhages in the first few days of February.
In September 1820 Keats left for Rome knowing he would probably never see Brawne again.
He may have possessed an innate poetic sensibility, but his early works were clearly those of a young man learning his craft.
At this time Keats wrote to his friend Bailey: "I am certain of nothing but the holiness of the Heart's affections and the truth of the imagination.
A Poet is the most unpoetical of any thing in existence; because he has no Identity – he is continually in for – and filling some other Body – The Sun, the Moon, the Sea and Men and Women who are creatures of impulse are poetical and have about them an unchangeable attribute – the poet has none; no identity – he is certainly the most unpoetical of all God's Creatures.
According to Brown, "Ode to a Nightingale" was composed under a plum tree in the garden.
What imagination seizes as Beauty must be truth."
In the family atmosphere at Clarke's, Keats developed an interest in classics and history, which would stay with him throughout his short life.
His poetic sense was based on the conventional tastes of his friend Charles Cowden Clarke, who first introduced him to the classics, and also came from the predilections of Hunt's ''Examiner'', which Keats read as a boy.
The compression of his poetic apprenticeship and maturity in so short a time is just one remarkable aspect of Keats's work.
Severn's biographer Sue Brown writes: "They could have used opium in small doses, and Keats had asked Severn to buy a bottle of opium when they were setting off on their voyage.
Around this time he was introduced to Charles Wentworth Dilke and James Rice.
John Gibson Lockhart writing in ''Blackwood's Magazine'', described ''Endymion'' as "imperturbable drivelling idiocy".
Keats was angry with both Severn and Clark when they would not give him laudanum (opium).
He mentions little about his childhood or his financial straits and is seemingly embarrassed to discuss them.
Historically, blame has often been laid on Abbey as legal guardian, but he may also have been unaware.
In June 1818, Keats began a walking tour of Scotland, Ireland, and the Lake District with his friend Charles Armitage Brown.
In March 1810 when Keats was 14, his mother died of tuberculosis, leaving the children in the custody of their grandmother.
Keats came to echo these sentiments in his work, identifying himself with a 'new school' for a time, somewhat alienating him from Wordsworth, Coleridge and Byron and providing the basis from the scathing attacks from ''Blackwoods'' and ''The Quarterly''.
In July, while on the Isle of Mull, Keats caught a bad cold and "was too thin and fevered to proceed on the journey."
What Severn didn't realise was that Keats saw it as a possible resource if he wanted to commit suicide.
"All his desires were concentrated on Fanny".
Ay, where are they?
Keats felt a tranquil and continual joy in her song; and one morning he took his chair from the breakfast-table to the grass-plot under a plum-tree, where he sat for two or three hours.
From 1814, Keats had two bequests, held in trust for him until his 21st birthday: £800 willed by his grandfather John Jennings (about £34,000 in today's money) and a portion of his mother's legacy, £8000 (about £340,000 today), to be equally divided between her living children.
Since 1998 the British Keats-Shelley Memorial Association have annually awarded a prize for romantic poetry.
It does no harm from its relish of the dark side of things any more than from its taste for the bright one; because they both end in speculation.
The phlegm seem'd boiling in his throat, and increased until eleven, when he gradually sank into death, so quiet, that I still thought he slept."
In September 1819, Keats wrote to Reynolds "How beautiful the season is now – How fine the air.
:"Keats raves till I am in a complete tremble for him...about four, the approaches of death came on.
Aware that he was dying, he wrote to Fanny Brawne in February 1820, "I have left no immortal work behind me – nothing to make my friends proud of my memory – but I have lov'd the principle of beauty in all things, and if I had had time I would have made myself remember'd. "
Letters and drafts of poems suggest that Keats first met Frances (Fanny) Brawne between September and November 1818.
Sometime before the end of June, he arrived at some sort of understanding with Brawne, far from a formal engagement as he still had too little to offer, with no prospects and financial stricture.
He felt that he faced a stark choice.
Leigh Hunt's ''Lord Byron and some of his Contemporaries'' (1828) gives the first biographical account, strongly emphasising Keats's supposedly humble origins, a misconception which still continues.
Keats's posthumous reputation mixed the reviewers' caricature of the simplistic bumbler with the image of the hyper-sensitive genius killed by high feeling, which Shelley later portrayed.
Shortly after his death, his publishers announced they would speedily publish ''The memoirs and remains of John Keats'' but his friends refused to cooperate and argued with each other to the extent that the project was abandoned.
The first months of 1821 marked a slow and steady decline into the final stage of tuberculosis.
On 13 September, they left for Gravesend and four days later boarded the sailing brig "Maria Crowther", where he made the final revisions of "Bright Star".
In early December 1816, under the heady influence of his artistic friends, Keats told Abbey that he had decided to give up medicine in favour of poetry, to Abbey's fury.
He was also regularly meeting William Hazlitt, a powerful literary figure of the day.
Keats's publishers, Charles and James Ollier, felt ashamed of the book.
Keats's ability and talent was acknowledged by several influential contemporary allies such as Shelley and Hunt.
It was the first appearance in print of Keats's poetry, and Charles Cowden Clarke described it as his friend's red letter day, the first proof that Keats's ambitions were valid.
William Walton, solicitor for Keats's mother and grandmother, definitely did know and had a duty of care to relay the information to Keats.
Keats immediately changed publishers to Taylor and Hessey on Fleet Street.
During the 20th century they became almost as admired and studied as his poetry, and are highly regarded within the canon of English literary correspondence.
Hunt scorned the Augustan or 'French' school, dominated by Pope, and attacked the earlier Romantic poets Wordsworth and Coleridge, now in their forties, as unsophisticated, obscure and crude writers.
There is a total absence of any reference to his parents.
The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, including Millais and Rossetti, were inspired by Keats and painted scenes from his poems including "The Eve of St. Agnes", "Isabella" and "La Belle Dame sans Merci", lush, arresting and popular images which remain closely associated with Keats's work.
In spite of the bad reviews of ''Poems'', Hunt published the essay "Three Young Poets" (Shelley, Keats, and Reynolds) and the sonnet "On First Looking into Chapman's Homer," foreseeing great things to come.
His first poem, the sonnet ''O Solitude'' appeared in ''the Examiner'' in May 1816, while his collection ''Lamia, Isabella, The Eve of St. Agnes and other poems'' was published in July 1820 before his last visit to Rome.
The idealised image of the heroic romantic poet who battled poverty and died young was inflated by the late arrival of an authoritative biography and the lack of an accurate likeness.
When they finally docked in Naples, the ship was held in quarantine for ten days due to a suspected outbreak of cholera in Britain.
It was a decisive turning point for Keats, establishing him in the public eye as a figure in what Hunt termed "a new school of poetry."
He used the term negative capability to discuss the state in which we are "capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts without any irritable reaching after fact & reason&nbsp;...Being content with half knowledge" where one trusts in the heart's perceptions.
Keats' brother George and his wife Georgina accompanied them as far as Lancaster and then continued to Liverpool, from where the couple emigrated to America.
In 1848, twenty-seven years after Keats's death, Richard Monckton Milnes published the first full biography, which helped place Keats within the canon of English literature.
Severn and Brown added their lines to the stone in protest at the critical reception of Keats's work.
"Consumption" was not identified as a disease with a single infectious origin until 1820, and there was considerable stigma attached to the condition, as it was often associated with weakness, repressed sexual passion, or masturbation.
In Tim Powers' book ''The Stress of Her Regard'', John Keats, along with Percy Shelley and Lord Byron, is the victim of a vampire and his gift with language and poetry is a direct consequence of the vampire breed's attention.
The Victorian sense of poetry as the work of indulgence and luxuriant fancy offered a schema into which Keats was posthumously fitted.
In the twentieth century, Keats remained the muse of poets such as Wilfred Owen, who kept his death date as a day of mourning, Yeats and T. S. Eliot.
She shared her first name with both Keats's sister and mother, and had a talent for dress-making and languages as well as a natural theatrical bent.
He composed five of his six great odes at Wentworth Place in April and May and, although it is debated in which order they were written, "Ode to Psyche" opened the published series.
Wentworth Place now houses the Keats House museum.
John Keats died in Rome on 23 February 1821 and was buried in the Protestant Cemetery, Rome.
Keats reached Rome on 14 November, by which time any hope of the warmer climate he sought had disappeared.
Keats spent a great deal of time considering poetry itself, its constructs and impacts, displaying a deep interest unusual amongst his milieu who were more easily distracted by metaphysics or politics, fashions or science.
The journey was a minor catastrophe: storms broke out followed by a dead calm that slowed the ship's progress.
A Royal Society of Arts blue plaque was unveiled in 1896 to commemorate Keats at Keats House.
It was damned by the critics, giving rise to Byron's quip that Keats was ultimately "snuffed out by an article", suggesting that he never truly got over it.
Like Keats' other brother, they both died penniless and racked by tuberculosis, for which there was no effective treatment until the next century.
After leaving he felt unable to write to her or read her letters, although he did correspond with her mother.
None of Keats' biographies were written by people who had known him.
Frances remarried two months later, but left her new husband soon afterwards, and the four children went to live with their grandmother, Alice Jennings, in the village of Edmonton.
Marked as the standard bearer of sensory writing, his reputation grew steadily and remarkably.
Keats believed that he was born at the inn, a birthplace of humble origins, but there is no evidence to support his belief.
Tom Keats died on 1 December 1818.
(canto 11, stanza 60)
T. S. Eliot described them as "certainly the most notable and most important ever written by any English poet."
Throughout their friendship Keats never hesitates to own his sexual attraction to her, although they seem to enjoy circling each other rather than offering commitment.
He writes that he "frequented her rooms" in the winter of 1818–19, and in his letters to George says that he "warmed with her" and "kissed her".
It would come to be recognised as one of the most important poetic works ever published.
In a letter to his brother George, Keats wrote that they talked about "a thousand things,... nightingales, poetry, poetical sensation, metaphysics."
Within a month of the publication of ''Poems'' they were planning a new Keats volume and had paid him an advance.
The first full biography was published in 1848 by Richard Monckton Milnes.
However, Keats's training took up increasing amounts of his writing time, and he was increasingly ambivalent about his medical career.
Having finished his apprenticeship with Hammond, Keats registered as a medical student at Guy's Hospital (now part of King's College London) and began studying there in October 1815.
Another son was lost in infancy.
Dilke, co-owner of the house, strenuously denied the story, printed in Richard Monckton Milnes' 1848 biography of Keats, dismissing it as 'pure delusion'.
On arrival in Italy, he moved into a villa on the Spanish Steps in Rome, today the Keats-Shelley Memorial House museum.
Gittings describes them as akin to a "spiritual journal" not written for a specific other, so much as for synthesis.
The dismissal was as much political as literary, aimed at upstart young writers deemed uncouth for their lack of education, non-formal rhyming and "low diction".
It received greater acclaim than had ''Endymion'' or ''Poems'', finding favourable notices in both ''The Examiner'' and ''Edinburgh Review''.
The Globe pub now occupies the site (2012), a few yards from the modern-day Moorgate station.
He lodged near the hospital, at 28 St Thomas's Street in Southwark, with other medical students, including Henry Stephens who became a famous inventor and ink magnate.
The ashes of Shelley, one of Keats's most fervent champions, are buried in the cemetery and Joseph Severn is buried next to Keats.
Keats's new and progressive publishers Taylor and Hessey issued ''Endymion'', which Keats dedicated to Thomas Chatterton, a work that he termed "a trial of my Powers of Imagination".
Keats and his friends, poets, critics, novelists, and editors wrote to each other daily, and Keats' ideas are bound up in the ordinary, his day-to-day missives sharing news, parody and social commentary.
In November 1820, Clark declared that the source of his illness was "mental exertion" and that the source was largely situated in his stomach.
In 1821, Jones was one of the first in England to be notified of Keats's death.
His father first worked as a hostler at the stables attached to the Swan and Hoop Inn, an establishment he later managed, and where the growing family lived for some years.
In February to May 1819 he produced many of his finest letters".
Keats befriended Isabella Jones in May 1817, while on holiday in the village of Bo Peep, near Hastings.
As Byron quipped in his narrative poem ''Don Juan'';
Keats said 'Severn—I—lift me up—I am dying—I shall die easy; don't be frightened—be firm, and thank God it has come.'
On 3 April 1819, Brawne and her widowed mother moved into the other half of Dilke's Wentworth Place, and Keats and Brawne were able to see each other every day.
Keats was coughing up blood and covered in sweat.
In the summer of that year, Keats went with Clarke to the seaside town of Margate to write.
The poems "Fancy" and "Bards of passion and of mirth" were inspired by the garden of Wentworth Place.
Although Keats and his family seem to have marked his birthday on 29&nbsp;October, baptism records give the date as the 31st.
