The three houses of English sovereigns that succeeded the rule of Richard II in 1399 — the Houses of Lancaster, York and Tudor — were all descended from John's children Henry IV, Joan Beaufort and John Beaufort, respectively.
An adjacent chantry chapel was added between 1399 and 1403.
It is customary for the Loyal Toast to be given by residents as "The Queen, the Duke of Lancaster".
The adulterous relationship endured until 1381, when it was broken out of political necessity.
John received the title "Duke of Lancaster" from his father on 13 November 1362.
Through John II of Castile's great-granddaughter Joanna the Mad, John of Gaunt is also an ancestor of the Habsburg rulers who would reign in Spain and much of central Europe.
John sailed from England on 9 July 1386 with a huge Anglo-Portuguese fleet carrying an army of about 5,000 men plus an extensive 'royal' household and his wife and daughters.
John of Gaunt was Blanche Swynford's godfather.
The romance novel ''Almost Innocent'' by Jane Feather tells the story of a possibly fictitious illegitimate daughter of John of Gaunt, and contains much history and vivid description of John and of royal life.
Nominally friendly lords and even his own fortresses closed their gates to him, and John was forced to flee into Scotland with a handful of retainers and throw himself on the charity of King Robert II of Scotland until the crisis was over.
The Savoy Palace was systematically destroyed by the mob and burned to the ground.
During his marriage to Constance, John of Gaunt fathered four children by a mistress, the widow Katherine Swynford (whose sister Philippa de Roet was married to Chaucer).
The phrase "long castel" is a reference to Lancaster (also called "Loncastel" and "Longcastell"), "walles white" is thought to likely be an oblique reference to Blanche, "Seynt Johan" was John of Gaunt's name-saint, and "ryche hil" is a reference to Richmond; these thinly veiled references reveal the identity of the grieving black knight of the poem as John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster and Earl of Richmond.
''John O'Gaunt'' is a piece of music written for brass band by Gilbert Vinter in 1965.
* In 1371, John married Infanta Constance of Castile, daughter of King Peter of Castile, thus giving him a claim to the Crown of Castile, which he would pursue.
During the 1390s, John's reputation of devotion to the well-being of the kingdom was largely restored.
This was moved and now adorns the entrance through the east bail of Lincoln Castle.
In 1394–95, he was forced to spend nearly a year in Gascony to shore up his position in the face of threats of secession by the Gascon nobles.
In addition to his royal arms, Gaunt bore an alternative coat of ''Sable, three ostrich feathers ermine''.
His other legitimate descendants include his daughters Queen Philippa of Portugal and Elizabeth, Duchess of Exeter (by his first wife Blanche of Lancaster), and Queen Catherine of Castile (by his second wife Constance of Castile).
He was one of England's principal negotiators in the diplomatic exchanges with France that led to the Truce of Leulingham in 1396, and he initially agreed to join the French-led Crusade that ended in the disastrous Battle of Nicopolis, but withdrew due to ill-health and the political problems in Gascony and England.
This was the counterpart to his brother, the Black Prince's, "shield for peace" (on which the ostrich feathers were white), and may have been used in jousting.
Marching in winter across the Limousin plateau, with stragglers being picked off by the French, huge numbers of the army, and even larger numbers of horses, died of cold, disease or starvation.
Believed to have been written in the 1390s, Chaucer's short poem ''Fortune'', is also inferred to directly reference Lancaster.
In the summer of 1370, John was sent with a small army to Aquitaine to reinforce his ailing elder brother, the Black Prince, and his younger brother Edmund of Langley, Earl of Cambridge.
From then until 1377, he was effectively the head of the English government due to the illness of his father and elder brother, who were unable to exercise authority.
Though it seemed an inglorious conclusion to the campaign, John had forced the French king, Charles V, to abandon his plans to invade England that autumn.
During the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, John of Gaunt was far from the centre of events, on the March of Scotland, but he was among those named by the rebels as a traitor to be beheaded as soon as he could be found.
''Fortune'' turns her attention to three princes whom she implores to relieve Chaucer of his pain and "Preyeth his beste frend of his noblesse/That to som beter estat he may atteyne" (78–79).
However, mistrust remained, and some suspected him of wanting to seize the throne himself.
But even after the government acceded to virtually all their demands, the Commons then refused to authorise any funds for the war, losing the sympathy of the Lords as a result.
As ''de facto'' ruler during Richard's minority, he made unwise decisions on taxation that led to the Peasants' Revolt in 1381, when the rebels destroyed his home in London, the Savoy Palace.
Many hundreds of English, including close friends and retainers of John of Gaunt, died of disease or exhaustion.
Unable to attack any strongly fortified forts and cities, the raiders plundered the countryside, which weakened the French infrastructure, but the military value of the damage was only temporary.
John of Gaunt's legitimate male heirs, the Lancasters, include Kings Henry IV, Henry V, and Henry VI.
Prior to her widowhood, Katherine had borne at least two, possibly three, children to Lancastrian knight Sir Hugh Swynford.
He took charge of the siege operations and at one point engaging in hand-to-hand fighting in the undermining tunnels.
During this retreat, the army had to fight its way across the Somme at the ford of Blanchetaque against a French army led by Hugh de Châtillon, who was captured and sold to Edward III.
A modern monument in the crypt lists John of Gaunt's grave as among the important ones lost.
Their daughter Philippa became Queen of Portugal by marrying King John I of Portugal in 1387.
The English destroyed the shipping in St. Malo harbour and began to assault the town by land on 14 August, but John was soon hampered by the size of his army, which was unable to forage because French armies under Olivier de Clisson and Bertrand du Guesclin occupied the surrounding countryside, harrying the edges of his force.
The armour is believed by experts to have been made c.1540 in Germany, and did not enter the Tower's collection until the early 17th century.
They married in 1359 at Reading Abbey as a part of the efforts of Edward III to arrange matches for his sons with wealthy heiresses.
When he became unpopular later in life, scurrilous rumours and lampoons circulated that he was actually the son of a Ghent butcher, perhaps because Edward III was not present at the birth.
He owned land in almost every county in England, a patrimony that produced a net income of between £8,000 and £10,000 a year.
Chaucer retorts that "My frend maystow nat reven, blind goddesse" (50) and orders her to take away those who merely pretend to be his friends.
The links are visible today in the Town & Manor-owned John O'Gaunt Inn on Bridge Street, the John O'Gaunt School on Priory Road, as well as various street names.
The following year he took part with his father, Edward III, in an abortive attempt to invade France with a large army, which was frustrated by three months of unfavourable winds.
The treaty was sealed by the marriage of John's eldest daughter Philippa to the Portuguese king.
Only John, on his return to England in 1389, succeeded in persuading the Lords Appellant and King Richard to compromise to usher in a period of relative stability.
However, John's ascendancy to political power coincided with widespread resentment of his influence.
John died of natural causes on 3 February 1399 at Leicester Castle, with his third wife Katherine by his side.
At a time when English forces encountered setbacks in the Hundred Years' War against France, and Edward III's rule was becoming unpopular due to high taxation and his affair with Alice Perrers, political opinion closely associated the Duke of Lancaster with the failing government of the 1370s.
The ostrich feather arms appeared in stained glass above Gaunt's chantry chapel in St Paul's Cathedral.
Although Philippa died c. 1387, the men were bound as brothers and Lancaster's children by Katherine – John, Henry, Thomas and Joan Beaufort – were Chaucer's nephews and niece.
His vast estates made him the richest man in England, and his great wealth, ostentatious display of it, autocratic manner and attitudes, enormous London mansion (the Savoy Palace on the Strand) and association with the failed peace process at Bruges combined to make him the most visible target of social resentments.
Although he fought in the Battle of Nájera (1367), for example, his later military projects proved unsuccessful.
Chaucer's ''Book of the Duchess'', also known as the ''Deeth of Blaunche the Duchesse'', was written in commemoration of Blanche of Lancaster, John of Gaunt's first wife.
The three princes are believed to represent the dukes of Lancaster, York, and Gloucester, and a portion of line 76, "as three of you or tweyne," to refer to the ordinance of 1390 which specified that no royal gift could be authorised without the consent of at least two of the three dukes.
It was only in 1386, after Portugal under its new King John I had entered into full alliance with England, that he was actually able to land with an army in Spain and mount a campaign for the throne of Castile (that ultimately failed).
By 1660 it was described in an inventory as "‘a large white armour cap-a-pe, said to be John of Gaunt’s", and this erroneous description has remained with the armour.
Through his daughter Philippa, he was grandfather of King Edward of Portugal and an ancestor of all subsequent Portuguese monarchs as well.
Sick, demoralised and mutinous, the army was in no shape to defend Aquitaine, and soldiers began to desert.
The two alabaster effigies were notable for having their right hands joined.
Bolingbroke then reigned as King Henry IV of England (1399–1413), the first of the descendants of John of Gaunt to hold the throne of England.
A fifth reference is made by "Chaucer as narrator" who rails at ''Fortune'' that she shall not take his friend from him.
His time at the head of government was marked by the so-called Good Parliament of 1376 and the Bad Parliament of 1377.
By this time, too, some of his possessions were taken from him by the Crown.
The death of the Black Prince on 8 June 1376 and the onset of Edward III's last illness at the closing of Parliament on 10 July left John with all the reins of power.
Just before leaving Aquitaine, he married the Infanta Constance of Castile on September 1371 at Roquefort, near Bordeaux, Guyenne.
John impeached William of Wykeham and other leaders of the reform movement, and secured their conviction on old or trumped-up charges.
The grave and monument were destroyed with the cathedral in the Great Fire of London in 1666.
On the resumption of war with France in 1369, John was sent to Calais with the Earl of Hereford and a small English army with which he raided into northern France.
He thus continued to signal his alliance with the Castilian royal house, while abandoning any claim to the throne.
While the envoy playfully hints to Lancaster that Chaucer would certainly appreciate a boost to his status or income, the poem ''Fortune'' distinctively shows his deep appreciation and affection for John of Gaunt.
The children of Katherine Swynford, surnamed "Beaufort,"  were legitimised by royal and papal decrees after John and Katherine married in 1396.
John was left isolated (even the Black Prince supported the need for reform) and the Commons refused to grant money for the war unless most of the great officers of state were dismissed and the king's mistress Alice Perrers, another focus of popular resentment, was barred from any further association with him.
As a younger brother of Edward, Prince of Wales (Edward, the Black Prince), John exercised great influence over the English throne during the minority of Edward's son, who became King Richard II, and the ensuing periods of political strife.
Descendants of this marriage include Joan Beaufort, Countess of Westmorland, a grandmother of Kings Edward IV and Richard III; John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset, a great-grandfather of King Henry VII; and Joan Beaufort, Queen of Scots, from whom are descended all subsequent sovereigns of Scotland beginning in 1437 and all sovereigns of England, Great Britain and the United Kingdom from 1603 to the present day.
Probably John's most notable feat of arms occurred in August–December 1373, when he attempted to relieve Aquitaine by the landward route, leading an army of some 9,000 mounted men from Calais on a great chevauchée from north-eastern to south-western France on a 900 kilometre raid.
They were harried mainly by French mercenaries of the Castilian king.
A later proviso that they were specifically barred from inheriting the throne, the phrase '''' ("except royal status"), was inserted with dubious authority by their half-brother Henry IV.
Near the end of their lives, Lancaster and Chaucer became brothers-in-law.
Exercising his first command, John dared not attack such a superior force and the two armies faced each other across a marsh for several weeks until the English were reinforced by the Earl of Warwick, at which the French withdrew without offering battle.
He made an abortive attempt to enforce a claim to the Crown of Castile that came courtesy of his second wife Constance, who was an heir to the Castillian Kingdom, and for a time styled himself as such.
After the death in 1376 of his older brother Edward of Woodstock (also known as the "Black Prince"), John of Gaunt contrived to protect the religious reformer John Wycliffe, possibly to counteract the growing secular power of the church.
Chaucer married Philippa (Pan) de Roet in 1366, and Lancaster took his mistress of nearly 30 years, Katherine Swynford (de Roet), who was Philippa Chaucer's sister, as his third wife in 1396.
In William Shakespeare's play ''Richard II'', the famous "scepter'd isle"  speech about England is spoken by the character of John of Gaunt shortly before he dies.
On 13 January 1396, two years after the death of Constance of Castile, Katherine and John of Gaunt married in Lincoln Cathedral.
The campaign of April–June 1387 was an ignominious failure.
This effectively kept him off the scene while England endured the major political crisis of the conflict between Richard II and the Lords Appellant, who were led by John of Gaunt's younger brother Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester.
With them, he participated in the Siege of Limoges (September 1370).
Though John was never able to make good his claim, his daughter by Constance, Catherine of Lancaster, became Queen of Castile by marrying Henry III of Castile.
Upon arrival in Bordeaux, many more succumbed to the bubonic plague that was raging in the city.
Fakenham in Norfolk has the full name of Fakenham Lancaster as a tribute to him as Duke of Lancaster.
Queen Elizabeth II and her predecessors since Henry IV are descended from John of Gaunt (with the exception of Edward IV, Edward V and Richard III, descended from John's younger brother Edmund of Langley, Duke of York).
'''John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster''', KG (6 March 1340 – 3 February 1399) was a member of the House of Plantagenet, the third of four surviving sons of King Edward III of England and Philippa of Hainault.
The wealth she brought to the marriage was the foundation of John's fortune.
(There may have been a second Swynford daughter.)
He also succeeded in forcing the Commons to agree to the imposition of the first Poll Tax in English history — a viciously regressive measure that bore hardest on the poorest members of society.
His first wife, Blanche of Lancaster, was also his third cousin; both were great-great-grandchildren of King Henry III.
John of Gaunt received most of the blame for the debâcle.
Upon the death of his father-in-law, the 1st Duke of Lancaster, in 1361, John received half his lands, the title "Earl of Lancaster", and distinction as the greatest landowner in the north of England as heir of the Palatinate of Lancaster.
John had no funds with which to pay them, and despite his entreaties, none were sent from England, so in April 1374, he abandoned the enterprise and sailed for home.
* John married Katherine in 1396, and their children, the Beauforts, were legitimised by King Richard II and the Church, but barred from inheriting the throne.
He began to advocate peace negotiations; indeed, as early as 1373, during his great raid through France, he made contact with Guillaume Roger, brother and political adviser of Pope Gregory XI, to let the pope know he would be interested in a diplomatic conference under papal auspices.
Pausing on the journey to use his army to drive off the French forces who were then besieging Brest, he landed at Corunna in northern Spain on 29 July.
His administration of the province was a disappointment, and his appointment as duke was much resented by the Gascons, since Aquitaine had previously always been held directly by the king of England or his heir; it was not felt to be a fief that a king could bestow on a subordinate.
Anya Seton's best-selling 1954 novel ''Katherine'' depicts John's long-term affair with and eventual marriage to Katherine Swynford.
All subsequent kings of Portugal were thus descended from John of Gaunt.
From August to October, John of Gaunt set up a rudimentary court and chancery at Ourense and received the submission of the Galician nobility and most of the towns of Galicia, though they made their homage to him conditional on his being recognised as king by the rest of Castile.
A suit of armour alleged to have been John of Gaunt's is on display in the Tower of London, and is of exceptional size (6'9"), but its ownership is now disputed.
The arms of Castile and León appeared on the dexter side of the shield (the left hand side as viewed), and the differenced English royal arms on the sinister; but in 1388, when he surrendered his claim, he reversed this marshalling, placing his own arms on the dexter, and those of Castile and León on the sinister.
It documents John O'Gaunt's life in a musical tone poem.
This approach led indirectly to the Anglo-French Congress of Bruges in 1374–77, which resulted in the short-lived Truce of Bruges between the two sides.
John's final campaign in France took place in 1378.
For the remainder of his life, John of Gaunt occupied the role of valued counsellor of the king and loyal supporter of the Crown.
Further reinforced by German mercenaries, they marched on Harfleur, but were delayed by French guerilla operations while the town prepared for a siege.
The John of Gaunt Stakes is a British race for Thoroughbred horses run annually in June.
This four-month ride through enemy territory, evading French armies on the way, was a bold stroke that impressed contemporaries but achieved virtually nothing.
It may be that he felt he had to maintain this posture of loyalty to protect his son Henry Bolingbroke (the future Henry IV), who had also been one of the Lords Appellant, from Richard's wrath; but in 1398 Richard had Bolingbroke exiled, and on John of Gaunt's death the next year he disinherited Bolingbroke completely, seizing John's vast estates for the Crown.
Beset on all sides by French ambushes and plagued by disease and starvation, John of Gaunt and his raiders battled their way through Champagne, east of Paris, into Burgundy, across the Massif Central, and finally down into Dordogne.
The poem refers to John and Blanche in allegory as the narrator relates the tale of "A long castel with walles white/Be Seynt Johan, on a ryche hil" (1318–1319) who is mourning grievously after the death of his love, "And goode faire White she het/That was my lady name ryght" (948–949).
John left Portugal for Aquitaine, and he remained in that province until he returned to England in November 1389.
Many deserted or abandoned the army to ride north under French safe-conducts.
A finial window, complete, was found between two walls in the then "West's Garage".
He was called "John of Gaunt" because he was born in Ghent, then rendered in English as ''Gaunt''.
As claimant to the throne of Castile and León from 1372, he impaled the arms of that kingdom (''Gules, a castle or, quartering Argent, a lion rampant purpure'') with his own.
"Chaucer as narrator" openly defies ''Fortune'', proclaiming he has learned who his enemies are through her tyranny and deceit, and declares "my suffisaunce" (15) and that "over himself hath the maystrye" (14).
However he did not immediately return to the province, but remained in England and mainly ruled through seneschals as an absentee duke.
The army reached English-occupied Bordeaux on 24 December 1373, severely weakened in numbers with the loss of least one-third of their force in action and another third to disease.
Their magnificent tomb had been designed and executed between 1374 and 1380 by Henry Yevele with the assistance of Thomas Wrek, at a total cost of £592.
John fathered five children outside marriage, one early in life by a lady-in-waiting to his mother, and four by Katherine Swynford, Gaunt's long-term mistress and third wife.
The fact that he became identified with the attempts to make peace added to his unpopularity at a period when the majority of Englishmen believed victory would be in their grasp if only the French could be defeated decisively as they had been in the 1350s.
John held large tracts of land in Lincolnshire and the City of Lincoln.
On his return from France in 1374, John took a more decisive and persistent role in the direction of English foreign policy.
John invested the town for four days in October, but he was losing so many men to dysentery and bubonic plague that he decided to abandon the siege and return to Calais.
''Fortune'' states three times in her response to the plaintiff, "And also, you still have your best friend alive" (32, 40, 48); she also references his "beste frend" in the envoy when appealing to his "noblesse" to help Chaucer to a higher estate.
The John of Gaunt School on Wingfield Road in Trowbridge, Wiltshire, is built upon land that he once owned.
''Fortune'', in turn, does not understand Chaucer's harsh words to her for she believes she has been kind to him, claims that he does not know what she has in store for him in the future, but most importantly, "And eek thou hast thy beste frend alyve" (32, 40, 48).
John was himself a delegate to the various conferences that eventually resulted in the Truce of Leulinghem in 1389.
Henry Bolingbroke returned from exile to reclaim his inheritance and depose Richard.
At the appropriately named site of Gaunt Street, he maintained a palace, remains of which were found in the late 1960s.
Sometime after the death of Blanche of Lancaster in 1368 and the birth of their first son, John Beaufort, in 1373, John of Gaunt and Katherine Swynford, the daughter of an ordinary knight, entered into an extra-marital love affair that would produce four children for the couple.
Hungerford in Berkshire has ancient links to the Duchy, the manor becoming part of John of Gaunt's estate in 1362 before James I passed ownership to two local men in 1612 (which subsequently became Town & Manor of Hungerford Charity).
In 1386 John left England to seek the throne of Castile, claimed in Jure uxoris by right of his second wife, Constance of Castile, whom he had married in 1371.
When Edward III died in 1377 and John's ten-year-old nephew succeeded as Richard II of England, John's influence strengthened.
The Beaufort children, three sons and a daughter, were legitimised by royal and papal decrees after John and Katherine married.
The parliament of 1377 was John's counter-coup: crucially, the Lords no longer supported the Commons and John was able to have most of the acts of 1376 annulled.
Their son Henry Bolingbroke became Henry IV of England, after the duchy of Lancaster was taken by Richard II upon John's death while Henry was in exile.
By the middle of November, the survivors of the sickly army returned to Calais, where the Earl of Warwick died of plague.
He did not even protest, it seems, when his younger brother Thomas was murdered at Richard's behest.
Opposite the Palace site stands St Mary's Guildhall, locally known as John O'Gaunt's stables.
The Castilian king, John of Trastámara, had expected John would land in Portugal and had concentrated his forces on the Portuguese border.
Due to some generous land grants, John was one of the richest men in his era.
John inherited the rest of the Lancaster property when Blanche's sister Maud, Countess of Leicester (married to William V, Count of Hainaut), died without issue on 10 April 1362.
The first, called to grant massive war taxation to the Crown, turned into a parliamentary revolution, with the Commons (supported to some extent by the Lords) venting their grievances at decades of crippling taxation, misgovernment, and suspected endemic corruption among the ruling classes.
However, crisis ensued almost immediately in his absence, and in 1387 King Richard's misrule brought England to the brink of civil war.
He hatched several schemes to make good his claim with an army, but for many years these were still-born due to lack of finance or the conflicting claims of war in France or with Scotland.
Not enough ships could be found to transport the horses, and the expedition was tasked with the more limited objective of capturing St. Malo.
Constance died in 1394.
Most conspicuous in this short poem is the number of references to Chaucer's "beste frend".
Upon his marriage to the Infanta Constance of Castile in 1371, John assumed (officially from 29 January 1372) the title of King of Castile and León in right of his wife, and insisted his fellow English nobles henceforth address him as 'my lord of Spain'.
The known names of these children are Blanche and Thomas.
It was rumoured (and believed by many people in England and France) that he intended to seize the throne for himself and supplant the rightful heir, his nephew Richard, the son of the Black Prince, but there seems to have been no truth in this and on the death of Edward III and the accession of the child Richard II, John sought no position of regency for himself and withdrew to his estates.
He also became the 14th Baron of Halton and 11th Lord of Bowland.
Catherine of Aragon is descended from this line.
This large medieval building once formed the entrance to the John O'Gaunts football ground, home to Lincoln City until they moved to their present Sincil Bank ground.
* On 19 May 1359 at Reading Abbey, John married his third cousin, Blanche of Lancaster, daughter of Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster.
Though he attempted to defend the duchy against French encroachment for nearly a year, lack of resources and money meant he could do little but husband what small territory the English still controlled, and he resigned the command in September 1371 and returned to England.
The children bore the surname "Beaufort" after a former French possession of the duke.
John's personal unpopularity persisted, however, and the failure of his expedition to Saint-Malo in 1378 did nothing for his reputation.
Partly as a result of these failures, and those of other English commanders at this period, John was one of the first important figures in England to conclude that the war with France was unwinnable because of France's greater resources of wealth and manpower.
John was the fourth son of King Edward III of England.
John of Gaunt is a major character in Garry O'Connor's ''Chaucer's Triumph: Including the Case of Cecilia Chaumpaigne, the Seduction of Katherine Swynford, the Murder of Her Husband, the Interment of John of Gaunt and Other Offices of the Flesh in the Year 1399'' (2007).
By then well established, he owned at least thirty castles and estates across England and France and maintained a household comparable in scale and organisation to that of a monarch.
All of them were born out of wedlock, but legitimized upon their parents' eventual marriage.
Unlike some of Richard's unpopular advisors, John was away from London at the time of the uprising and thus avoided the direct wrath of the rebels.
After this event, the Black Prince surrendered his lordship of Aquitaine and sailed for England, leaving John in charge.
There was organised opposition to his measures and rioting in London; John of Gaunt's arms were reversed or defaced wherever they were displayed, and protestors pasted up lampoons on his supposedly dubious birth.
In addition, John's daughter Catherine of Lancaster was married to King Henry III of Castile, which made him the grandfather of King John II of Castile and the ancestor of all subsequent monarchs of the Crown of Castile and united Spain.
This story always drove him to fury.
From 1372, John gathered around himself a small court of refugee Castilian knights and ladies and set up a Castilian chancery that prepared documents in his name according to the style of Peter of Castile, dated by the Castilian era and signed by himself with the Spanish formula 'Yo El Rey' ("I, the King").
"White" is the English translation of the French word "blanche", implying that the white lady was Blanche of Lancaster.
He was wrong-footed by John's decision to invade Galicia, the most distant and disaffected of Castile's kingdoms.
From the eldest son, John, descended a granddaughter, Margaret Beaufort, whose son, later King Henry VII of England, would nevertheless claim the throne.
John of Gaunt's eldest son and heir, Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Hereford, the son of his first wife Blanche of Lancaster, was exiled for ten years by King Richard II in 1398 as resolution to a dispute between Henry and Thomas de Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
At one point he was forced to take refuge across the Thames, while his Savoy Palace only just escaped looting.
Another motive was John's conviction that it was only by making peace with France would it be possible to release sufficient manpower to enforce his claim to the throne of Castile.
A large part of John's army had succumbed to sickness, however, and when the invasion was mounted, they were far outnumbered by their Portuguese allies.
For example, his ship, the ''Dieulagarde'', was seized and bundled with other royal ships to be sold (to pay off the debts of Sir Robert de Crull, who during the latter part of King Edward III's reign had been the ''Clerk of the King's Ships'', and had advanced monies to pay for the king's ships .
In November, he met King John I of Portugal at Ponte do Mouro on the south side of the Minho River and concluded an agreement with him to make a joint Anglo-Portuguese invasion of central Castile early in 1387.
When John of Gaunt died in 1399, his estates and titles were declared forfeit to the crown, since King Richard II had named Henry a traitor and changed his sentence to exile for life.
Only four months after his return to England, in March 1390, Richard II formally invested Gaunt with the Duchy of Aquitaine, thus providing him with the overseas territory he had long desired.
The Castilians refused to offer battle and the Galician-Anglo-Portuguese troops, apart from time-wasting sieges of fortified towns, were reduced to foraging for food in the arid Spanish landscape.
There is, however, evidence that he may occasionally have used this second marshalling at earlier dates.
John of Gaunt was a patron and close friend of the poet Geoffrey Chaucer, most famously known for his work ''The Canterbury Tales''.
John took pains to ensure that he never became associated with the opposition to Richard's kingship.
Furthermore, while King Edward and the Prince of Wales were popular heroes due to their successes on the battlefield, John of Gaunt had not won equivalent military renown that could have bolstered his reputation.
On 23 August, he was confronted by a much larger French army under Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy.
