The liturgy required worshippers to kneel during communion.
The next day she issued a proclamation that there would be no alteration in the current state of religion and that her servants should not be molested or troubled.
On 16 October 1551, John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland, overthrew the Duke of Somerset to become the new regent of the young King.
When Dudley visited Newcastle and listened to his preaching in June 1552, he had mixed feelings about the fire-brand preacher, but he saw Knox as a potential asset.
The regent, Lord Morton, asked the General Assembly to continue paying his stipend to his widow for one year after his death, and the regent ensured that Knox's dependents were decently supported.
He returned to Scotland in 1544, but the timing of his return was unfortunate.
The church in which he preached, the ''Église de Notre Dame la Neuve''—now known as the Auditoire de Calvin—had been granted by the municipal authorities, at Calvin's request, for the use of the English and Italian congregations.
Rather than taking up parochial duties in a parish, he became tutor to two sons of Hugh Douglas of Longniddry.
Knox's powers as a preacher came to the attention of the chaplain of the garrison, John Rough.
Wishart travelled throughout Scotland preaching in favour of the reformation and when he arrived in East Lothian, Knox became one of his closest associates.
On 19 July, Knox held a National Thanksgiving Service at St Giles'.
A week later, the Parliament passed three acts in one day: the first abolished the jurisdiction of the Pope in Scotland, the second condemned all doctrine and practice contrary to the reformed faith, and the third forbade the celebration of Mass in Scotland.
But for Knox, his former friend and fellow galley-slave, he made an exception.
Several letters reveal a close friendship between them.
The mob then attacked two friaries in the town, looting their gold and silver and smashing images.
From then on, Maitland took over the political tasks, freeing Knox for the role of religious leader.
He continued to serve as the religious leader of the Protestants throughout Mary's reign.
The first set of refugees to arrive in Frankfurt had subscribed to a reformed liturgy and used a modified version of the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
He exerted a reforming influence on the text of the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
He was caught up in the ecclesiastical and political events that involved the murder of Cardinal Beaton in 1546 and the intervention of the regent of Scotland Mary of Guise.
As a result, just two weeks after her return, Mary summoned Knox.
The paltry sum of money Knox bequeathed to his family, which would have left them in dire poverty, showed that he had not profited from his work in the Kirk.
She charged that Knox spoke irreverently of the Queen in order to make her appear contemptible to her subjects.
He first moved to England, where in Bristol he preached against the veneration of the Virgin Mary.
He continued to preach until his final days.
In Geneva, he met John Calvin, from whom he gained experience and knowledge of Reformed theology and Presbyterian polity.
He accepted the call with Calvin's blessing.
Douglas and Cockburn suggested to Knox to take their sons to the relative safety of the castle to continue their instruction in reformed doctrine.
While Knox remained a fugitive, Cardinal Beaton was murdered on 29 May 1546, within his residence, the Castle of St Andrews, by a gang of five persons in revenge for Wishart's execution.
In that regard, Knox is considered the notional founder of the Presbyterian denomination, whose members number millions worldwide.
While Hamilton was willing to negotiate with England to stop their support of the rebels and bring the castle back under his control, Mary of Guise decided that it could only be taken by force and requested the king of France, Henry II to intervene.
When Mary asked him whether subjects had a right to resist their ruler, he replied that if monarchs exceeded their lawful limits, they might be resisted, even by force.
It is not recorded when Knox married Margery Bowes.
A few days later, a debate was staged that allowed him to lay down additional theses including the rejection of the Mass, Purgatory, and prayers for the dead.
Lord Darnley had been murdered and the Queen almost immediately married the chief suspect, the Earl of Bothwell.
The indictment of murder thus upon her, she had been forced to abdicate and was imprisoned in Loch Leven Castle.
In one letter he wrote:
It triggered a debate where Archbishop Cranmer was called upon to defend the practice.
The Protestants agreed, but when the Queen Regent entered Perth, she garrisoned it with Scottish soldiers on the French pay roll.
He refused and when the picture was pushed up to his face, the prisoner seized the picture and threw it into the sea, saying, "Let our Lady now save herself: she is light enough: let her learn to swim."
After his return to Geneva, Knox was chosen to be the minister at a new place of worship petitioned from Calvin.
Knox's two sons, Nathaniel and Eleazar, were born in Geneva, with Whittingham and Myles Coverdale their respective godfathers.
When Knox and a supporting colleague, William Whittingham, wrote to Calvin for advice, they were told to avoid contention.
While the ships were lying offshore between St Andrews and Dundee, the spires of the parish church where he preached appeared in view.
Knox was indiscreet and news of his mission soon reached Mary of Guise.
Nathaniel became a Fellow of St John's but died early in 1580.
On 2 February 1553 Cranmer was ordered to appoint Knox as vicar of Allhallows Church in London placing him under the authority of the Bishop of London, Nicholas Ridley.
He also taught the son of John Cockburn of Ormiston.
On 1 March 1546, he was burnt at the stake in the presence of Cardinal Beaton.
The regent who succeeded him, the Earl of Lennox, was also a victim of violence.
On 26 March 1564 Knox stirred controversy again, when he married Margaret Stewart, the daughter of an old friend, Andrew Stewart, 2nd Lord Ochiltree, a member of the Stuart family and a distant relative of the Queen, Mary Stuart.
His first commission was in Berwick-upon-Tweed.
He was forced to make a public recantation and was burned in effigy at the Church of St Nicholas as a sign of his abjuration.
Knox's three daughters also married: Martha to Alexander Fairlie; Margaret to Zachary Pont, son of Robert Pont and brother of Timothy Pont; and Elizabeth to John Welsh, a minister of the Kirk.
Knox did not record when or how he was converted to the Protestant faith, but perhaps the key formative influences on Knox were Patrick Hamilton and George Wishart.
Knox and the other galley slaves continued to Nantes and stayed on the Loire throughout the winter.
He was taken prisoner by French forces the following year and exiled to England on his release in 1549.
Knox therefore agreed on a temporary order of service based on a compromise between the two sides.
He left Geneva to head the English refugee church in Frankfurt but he was forced to leave over differences concerning the liturgy, thus ending his association with the Church of England.
The services used a liturgy that was derived by Knox and other ministers from Calvin's ''Formes des Prières Ecclésiastiques''.
But even before their arrival, the mob had already sacked the churches and the friaries.
John Calvin, who had lost his own wife in 1549, wrote a letter of condolence.
Knox's health was now at its lowest point due to the severity of his confinement.
He is believed to have been educated at the University of St Andrews and worked as a notary-priest.
In order to defend these men, Knox sent out letters calling the nobles to convene.
At the church of St John the Baptist, Knox preached a fiery sermon and a small incident precipitated into a riot.
In other places I confess Christ to be truly preached; but manners and religion so sincerely reformed, I have not yet seen in any other place&nbsp;...
Elizabeth Bowes presumably met Knox when he was employed in Berwick.
I neither fear nor eschame to say, is the most perfect school of Christ that ever was in the earth since the days of the apostles.
He responded that she should not to be troubled by what had never harmed her.
Other old friends of Knox's, Lord Argyll and William Kirkcaldy, stood by Mary.
Within a week, however, he was giving his first sermon to a congregation that included his old teacher, John Major.
When Mary started to cry again, he said, "Madam, in God's presence I speak: I never delighted in the weeping of any of God's creatures; yea I can scarcely well abide the tears of my own boys whom my own hand corrects, much less can I rejoice in your Majesty's weeping."
On his return to Scotland, Knox led the Protestant Reformation in Scotland, in partnership with the Scottish Protestant nobility.
While Mary was absent from Edinburgh on her summer progress in 1563, a crowd forced its way into her private chapel as Mass was being celebrated.
Lord Moray was assassinated on 23 January 1570.
Within four days, the Scots Confession was presented to Parliament, voted upon, and approved.
The Kirk was to be run on democratic lines.
He was a ruthless and successful revolutionary and it was this revolutionary philosophy that had a great impact on the English Puritans.
They would work for several months on the ''Book of Discipline'', the document describing the organisation of the new church.
Before the dissolution of Parliament, Knox and the other ministers were given the task of organising the newly reformed church or the Kirk.
While Rough was preaching in the parish church on the Protestant principle of the popular election of a pastor, he proposed Knox to the congregation for that office.
After Knox gave an explanation of the sermon, Mary stated that she did not blame Knox for the differences of opinion and asked that in the future he come to her directly if he heard anything about her that he disliked.
Knox chose to leave, and on 5 May he left for St Andrews.
While in exile, Knox was licensed to work in the Church of England, where he rose in the ranks to serve King Edward VI of England as a royal chaplain.
When the General Assembly convened in June 1564, an argument broke out between Knox and Maitland over the authority of the civil government.
Mary escaped from Edinburgh to Dunbar and by 18 March returned with a formidable force.
His father, William Knox, was a merchant.
Knox was notable not so much for the overthrow of Roman Catholicism in Scotland, but for assuring the replacement of the established Christian religion with Presbyterianism rather than Anglicanism.
In this time, the priesthood was the only path for those whose inclinations were academic rather than mercantile or agricultural.
In the summer of 1558, Knox published his best known pamphlet, ''The first blast of the trumpet against the monstruous regiment of women''.
This prompted Mary to summon Knox for the third time.
Sometime I have thought that impossible it had been, so to have removed my affection from the realm of Scotland, that any realm or nation could have been equal dear to me.
However, what the rulers feared were Knox's ideas more than Knox himself.
Knox was probably educated at the grammar school in Haddington.
Her secretary, William Maitland of Lethington, defected to the Protestant side, bringing his administrative skills.
Parliament reconvened on 15 January 1561 to consider the ''Book of Discipline''.
He recommended Geneva to his friends in England as the best place of asylum for Protestants.
John Knox was born sometime between 1505 and 1515 in or near Haddington, the county town of East Lothian.
Calvin gave cautious replies and referred him to the Swiss reformer Heinrich Bullinger in Zürich.
Knox returned to London in order to deliver a sermon before the King and the Court during Lent and he again refused to take the assigned post.
She dispatched the Earl of Argyll and Lord Moray to offer terms and avert a war.
The movement may be seen as a revolution, since it led to the ousting of Mary of Guise, who governed the country in the name of her young daughter Mary, Queen of Scots.
Fearing the possibility of a summary trial and execution, the Protestants proceeded instead to Perth, a walled town that could be defended in case of a siege.
Many nobles accepted this, but not Knox.
Knox's return to St Andrews fulfilled the prophecy he made in the galleys that he would one day preach again in its church.
Their eldest son, William, carried on his father's business, which helped in Knox's international communications.
Knox was now free to preach openly in Edinburgh.
In his first sermon, he advocated a change for the second edition of the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
He proceeded to further studies at the University of St Andrews or possibly at the University of Glasgow.
They sailed to France and navigated up the Seine to Rouen.
On 1 July, Knox preached from the pulpit of St Giles', the most influential in the capital.
The French besieged the castle and forced the surrender of the garrison on 31 July.
Knox's unusually respectful letter urged her to support the Reformation and overthrow the church hierarchy.
Knox was summoned and prohibited from preaching while the court was in Edinburgh.
A testimony to Knox was pronounced at his grave in the churchyard of St Giles' by James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton and newly elected regent of Scotland: "Here lies one who never feared any flesh".
Knox did not relish the idea.
Knox retorted that the Bible notes that Israel was punished when it followed an unfaithful king and that the Continental reformers were refuting arguments made by the Anabaptists who rejected all forms of government.
He also died young, and was buried in the chapel of St John's College in 1591.
Before his departure, various honours were conferred on him, including the freedom of the city of Geneva.
On the eve of his flight, he wrote:
He had recently prosecuted the execution of the scholar Michael Servetus for heresy.
This delicate balance was disturbed when a new batch of refugees arrived that included Richard Cox, one of the principal authors of the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
A final decision on the plan was delayed because of the impending return of Mary, Queen of Scots.
On 7 April 1549, Knox was licensed to work in the Church of England.
The women rulers that Knox had in mind were Queen Mary I of England and Mary of Guise, the Dowager Queen of Scotland and regent on behalf of her daughter, Mary, Queen of Scots.
At this, Mary ordered him out of the room.
Knox was present on the night of Wishart's arrest and was prepared to follow him into captivity, but Wishart persuaded him against this course saying, "Nay, return to your bairns children and God bless you.
The prisoner was told to give it a kiss of veneration.
During this period Knox thundered against her in his sermons, even to the point of calling for her death.
Knox acted as his bodyguard, bearing a two-handed sword in order to defend him.
Knox revealed his own objection while preaching in the presence of the new King Consort on 19 August 1565.
He made passing allusions on ungodly rulers which caused Darnley to walk out.
Knox and the other chaplains considered this to be idolatry.
The Lords of the Congregation negotiated their withdrawal from Edinburgh by the Articles of Leith signed 25 July 1559, and Mary of Guise promised freedom of conscience.
He took shelter with Douglas in Longniddry.
He then took refuge in Germany and Switzerland.
In February 1549, after spending a total of 19 months in the galley-prison, Knox was released.
Knox knew that the Queen Regent would ask for help from France.
He arrived in Geneva on 13 September 1556.
The marriage was unusual because he was a widower of fifty, while the bride was only seventeen.
James Balfour, a fellow prisoner, asked Knox whether he recognised the landmark.
This time, on 24 October 1559, the Scottish nobility formally deposed Mary of Guise from the regency.
However, much work remained to bring reformed ideas to the clergy and to the people.
She accused him of inciting a rebellion against her mother and of writing a book against her own authority.
When he returned to Edinburgh, he found the Protestant nobles divided over what to do with Mary.
The fighting in Scotland continued as a civil war.
He created a new order of service, which was eventually adopted by the reformed church in Scotland.
After that, according to Knox, the Scottish prisoners were no longer forced to perform such devotions.
He wrote a final letter of advice to his supporters and left Scotland with his wife and mother-in-law.
He replied that he knew it well, recognising the steeple of the place where he first preached and he declared that he would not die until he had preached there again.
Knox, however, modified its use to accord with the doctrinal emphases of the Continental reformers.
In summer 1548, the galleys returned to Scotland to scout for English ships.
Maitland told Knox to refrain from stirring up emotions over Mary's insistence on having mass celebrated and he quoted from Martin Luther and John Calvin about obedience to earthly rulers.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, and the regent of King Edward VI, the Duke of Somerset, were decidedly Protestant-minded.
The end result was a compromise in which the famous Black Rubric, which declared that no adoration is intended while kneeling, was included in the second edition.
One is sufficient for a sacrifice."
Despite her friendly gesture, Knox replied that he would continue to voice his convictions in his sermons and would not wait upon her.
For the next two years, he lived a happy life in Geneva.
The Protestant nobles and others, including Knox, were taken prisoner and forced to row in the French galleys.
On 20 July 1554, he published a pamphlet attacking Mary Tudor and the bishops who had brought her to the throne.
Mary summoned Knox to Holyrood after hearing that he had been preaching against her proposed marriage to Don Carlos, the son of Philip II of Spain.
The debate revealed his waning influence on political events as the nobility continued to support Mary.
Although by this time exceedingly feeble and his voice faint, he continued to preach at St Giles'.
During this period, in December 1560, Knox's wife, Margery, died, leaving Knox to care for their two sons, aged three and a half and two years old.
In England, the pamphlet was officially condemned by royal proclamation.
Mary of Guise gathered those nobles loyal to her and a small French army.
The following year he was appointed one of the six royal chaplains serving the King.
In the previous year on 1 November 1555, the congregation in Geneva had elected Knox as their minister and he decided to take up the post.
"A subject born within the same, Madam," Knox replied.
Knox first appears in public records as a priest and a notary in 1540.
Knox moved to Geneva and then to Frankfurt.
The sudden death of Mary of Guise in Edinburgh Castle on 10 June 1560 paved the way for an end to hostilities, the signing of the Treaty of Edinburgh, and the withdrawal of French and English troops from Scotland.
Towards the end of 1550, Knox was appointed a preacher of St Nicholas' Church in Newcastle upon Tyne.
Although Knox had not targeted Elizabeth, he had deeply offended her, and she never forgave him.
Shortly after Knox sent the letter to the Queen Regent, he suddenly announced that he felt his duty was to return to Geneva.
Knox attempted to obtain the consent of the Bowes family, but her father and her brother Robert Bowes were opposed to the marriage.
Although his funeral was attended by the nobles of Scotland, no major politician or diplomat mentioned his death in their letters that survive.
The following Sunday, he protested from the pulpit of St Giles'.
Knox was asked to come to London to preach before the Court.
On 29 June 1547, 21 French galleys approached St Andrews under the command of Leone Strozzi, prior of Capua.
The impact of the document was complicated later that year, when Elizabeth Tudor became Queen of England.
Stewart and Maitland, wanting to keep good relations with both the Kirk and the Queen, asked Knox to admit he was wrong and to settle the matter quietly.
When she was imprisoned for her alleged role in the murder of her husband Lord Darnley and King James VI was enthroned in her stead, he openly called for her execution.
The Kirk was to be financed out of the patrimony of the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland.
On 13 December 1562, Mary sent for Knox again after he gave a sermon denouncing certain celebrations which Knox had interpreted as rejoicing at the expense of the Reformation.
But no sooner had he arrived than he found himself in a conflict.
Knox left in January 1559, but he did not arrive in Scotland until 2 May 1559, owing to Elizabeth's refusal to issue him a passport through England.
Two days after Knox arrived in Edinburgh, he proceeded to Dundee where a large number of Protestant sympathisers had gathered.
Her father, Richard Bowes (d.1558), was a descendant of an old Durham family and her mother, Elizabeth Aske, was an heiress of a Yorkshire family, the Askes of Richmondshire.
In the meantime, Elizabeth Bowes wrote to Knox, asking him to return to Margery in Scotland, which he did at the end of August.
Soon afterwards, Dudley, who saw Knox as a useful political tool, offered him the bishopric of Rochester.
Later in the year, Henry II arranged with Edward VI of England the release of all remaining Castilian prisoners.
File:John Knox Church in Brighton.jpg|John Knox church (built 1876) in Brighton, Victoria
Queen Mary took the letter as a joke and ignored it.
When he did give a sermon, the effect was the same as in Perth.
"What have ye to do with my marriage?"
In the pulpit he preached Protestant doctrines with great effect as his congregation grew.
Nathaniel and Eleazar, his two sons by his first wife, attended St John's College, Cambridge.
Cox brought Knox's pamphlet attacking the emperor to the attention of the Frankfurt authorities, who advised that Knox leave.
