After a year of Beatlemania in the UK, the group's historic February 1964 US debut appearance on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' marked their breakthrough to international stardom.
One story, "Good Dog Nigel", tells the tale of "a happy dog, urinating on a lamp post, barking, wagging his tail—until he suddenly hears a message that he will be killed at three o'clock".
He formally announced his break from music in Tokyo in 1977, saying, "we have basically decided, without any great decision, to be with our baby as much as we can until we feel we can take time off to indulge ourselves in creating things outside of the family."
Biographer Bill Harry records that following Bloody Sunday, Lennon and Ono financially supported the production of the film ''The Irish Tapes'', a political documentary with a Republican slant.
McCartney suggested his friend George Harrison as the lead guitarist.
Almost as soon as Julian was born, Lennon went on holiday to Spain with Epstein, leading to speculation about their relationship.
expressed his own feelings in 1965: "I ''meant'' it...
Lennon revealed a rebellious nature and acerbic wit in his music, writing, drawings, on film and in interviews.
She went on to suggest that Pang should begin a physical relationship with Lennon, telling her, "He likes you a lot."
On 28 November, Lennon made a surprise guest appearance at Elton John's Thanksgiving concert at Madison Square Garden, in fulfilment of his promise to join the singer in a live show if "Whatever Gets You thru the Night"—a song whose commercial potential Lennon had doubted—reached number one.
Pang supplied the recording for its eventual inclusion on ''The Very Best of Mick Jagger'' (2007).
In addition to attacking him through the lyrics of "How Do You Sleep?
to Len Richmond's ''The Gay Liberation Book''.
The second version, told by McCartney, is that in late 1965, Ono was in London compiling original musical scores for a book John Cage was working on, ''Notations'', but McCartney declined to give her any of his own manuscripts for the book, suggesting that Lennon might oblige.
His marriage began just as Beatlemania took hold across the UK.
I always thought it was about me and Yoko but he said it wasn't."
Julian's birth, like his mother Cynthia's marriage to Lennon, was kept secret because Epstein was convinced public knowledge of such things would threaten the Beatles' commercial success.
It kept cropping up", and in Lennon's story ''A Carrot in a Potato Mine'', "the mine was at the end of Wigan Pier."
His mother bought him his first guitar in 1956, an inexpensive Gallotone Champion acoustic for which she "lent" her son five pounds and ten shillings on the condition that the guitar be delivered to her own house, and not Mimi's, knowing well that her sister was not supportive of her son's musical aspirations.
He was always saying to me: 'DO something with my voice!...
Chapman pleaded guilty to second-degree murder and was sentenced to 20-years-to-life.
According to FBI surveillance reports (and confirmed by Tariq Ali in 2006) Lennon was sympathetic to the International Marxist Group, a Trotskyist group formed in Britain in 1968.
Released jointly by Lennon and Ono, ''Double Fantasy'' was not well received, drawing comments such as ''Melody Maker'''s "indulgent sterility... a godawful yawn".
Recorded as a collaboration with Ono and with backing from the New York band Elephant's Memory, ''Some Time in New York City'' was released in 1972.
In protest at Britain's involvement in the Nigerian Civil War, its support of America in the Vietnam war and (perhaps jokingly) against "Cold Turkey" slipping down the charts, Lennon returned his MBE medal to the Queen, though this had no effect on his MBE status, which could not be renounced.
Lennon and Ono, backed by David Peel and Rubin, performed an acoustic set of four songs from their forthcoming ''Some Time in New York City'' album including "John Sinclair", whose lyrics called for his release.
In 1973, Lennon contributed a limerick called "Why Make It Sad To Be Gay?"
At age 15, Lennon formed the skiffle group, the Quarrymen.
McCartney engineered an audition on the upper deck of a Liverpool bus, where Harrison played "Raunchy" for Lennon and was asked to join.
"I knew we were in trouble then", Lennon said later.
According to biographer Ian MacDonald, Lennon's continuous experience with LSD during the year brought him "close to erasing his identity".
Beatles biographer Bill Harry writes that Lennon began drawing and writing creatively at an early age with the encouragement of his uncle.
I'm not in the book."
By this time, however, Lennon had also quietly renounced the counterculture views which he had helped promote during the 1960s and 1970s and became more aligned with conservatism, though whether he had actually aligned to a more conservative world view is disputed.
The Beatles song "Getting Better", he said, told his own story, "I used to be cruel to my woman, and physically—any woman.
''Double Fantasy'' producer Jack Douglas claimed that since his Beatle days Lennon habitually tuned his D-string slightly flat, so his Aunt Mimi could tell which guitar was his on recordings.
The story is told in the documentary ''The US vs. John Lennon''.
Turner said that Lennon "had an obsession for Wigan Pier.
He was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987, and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice, as a member of the Beatles in 1988 and as a solo artist in 1994.
At a second Bed-In three months later at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal Lennon wrote and recorded "Give Peace a Chance".
The couple were married on 23 August at the Mount Pleasant Register Office in Liverpool.
Lennon spent the next three and a half years in and out of deportation hearings until 8 October 1975, when a court of appeals barred the deportation attempt, stating "...&nbsp;the courts will not condone selective deportation based upon secret political grounds."
Although being scared of Lennon's attitude and appearance, she heard that he was obsessed with French actress Brigitte Bardot, so she dyed her hair blonde.
When McCartney released "Coming Up", in 1980, the year Lennon returned to the studio and the last year of his life, he took notice.
Ono began visiting and telephoning Lennon's home and, when his wife asked for an explanation, Lennon explained that Ono was only trying to obtain money for her "avant-garde bullshit".
He collected his stories, poetry, cartoons and caricatures in a Quarry Bank High School exercise book that he called the ''Daily Howl''.
A two-year period of constant touring, moviemaking, and songwriting followed, during which Lennon wrote two books, ''In His Own Write'' and ''A Spaniard in the Works''.
Lennon later proudly declared, "He didn't come out of my belly but, by God, I made his bones, because I've attended to every meal, and to how he sleeps, and to the fact that he swims like a fish."
Lennon released ''Rock 'n' Roll'' (1975), an album of cover songs, in February.
Lennon's emotional debut solo album, ''John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band'' (1970), was received with high praise.
As Mimi was sceptical of his claim that he would be famous one day, she hoped he would grow bored with music, often telling him, "The guitar's all very well, John, but you'll never make a living out of it".
Once at the college, he started wearing Teddy Boy clothes and acquired a reputation for disrupting classes and ridiculing teachers.
Although he and Starr remained consistently friendly during the years following the Beatles' break-up in 1970, Lennon's relationships with McCartney and Harrison varied.
Lennon and Ono showed their solidarity with the Clydeside UCS workers' work-in of 1971 by sending a bouquet of red roses and a cheque for £5,000.
The couple settled at Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill in Berkshire.
At 16, he played rhythm guitar with the Quarrymen.
In London, Lennon and Ono staged a "Britain Murdered Hanratty" banner march and a "Silent Protest For James Hanratty", and produced a 40-minute documentary on the case.
He gets all the credit for it!"
While some of his homonyms are gratuitous word play, many others have not only double meaning but a double edge."
Biographer Chris Gregory writes of Lennon "tentatively beginning to expose his insecurities in a number of acoustic-led 'confessional' ballads, so beginning the process of 'public therapy' that will eventually culminate in the primal screams of "Cold Turkey" and the cathartic ''John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band''."
The anti-war, black comedy ''How I Won the War'', featuring Lennon's only appearance in a non–Beatles full-length film, was shown in cinemas in October 1967.
Lennon changed his name by deed poll on 22 April 1969, adding "Ono" as a middle name.
Asked the same year whether the group were dreaded enemies or the best of friends, he replied that they were neither, and that he had not seen any of them in a long time.
In August, after having been introduced to the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, the group attended a weekend of personal instruction at his Transcendental Meditation seminar in Bangor, Wales, and were informed of Epstein's death during the seminar.
The professional instrument quickly replaced Lennon's toy.
Since his involuntary introduction to LSD, he had made increasing use of the drug, and was almost constantly under its influence for much of 1967.
After the first Hamburg residency, the band accepted another in April 1961, and a third in April 1962.
Containing songs about women's rights, race relations, Britain's role in Northern Ireland and Lennon's problems obtaining a green card, the album was poorly received—unlistenable, according to one critic.
He's a millionaire!
Led primarily by Harrison and Lennon's interest in Eastern religion, the Beatles later travelled to Maharishi's ashram in India for further guidance.
When Epstein invited suggestions for the title of his autobiography, Lennon offered ''Queer Jew''; on learning of the eventual title, ''A Cellarful of Noise'', he parodied, "More like ''A Cellarful of Boys''".
They spent the night recording what would become the ''Two Virgins'' album, after which, he said, they "made love at dawn."
Lennon disengaged himself from the music business in 1975 to raise his infant son Sean, but re-emerged with Ono in 1980 with the new album ''Double Fantasy''.
Lennon's love of wordplay and nonsense with a twist found a wider audience when he was 24.
In August that year, the Beatles engaged for a 48-night residency in Hamburg, Germany, and desperately in need of a drummer, asked Pete Best to join them.
The FBI admitted it had 281 pages of files on Lennon, but refused to release most of them on the grounds that they contained national security information.
Stuart Sutcliffe, Lennon's friend from art school, later joined as bassist.
They were married in Gibraltar on 20 March 1969, and spent their honeymoon at the Hilton Amsterdam campaigning with a week-long Bed-In for Peace.
Lennon was touring with the Beatles when Julian was born on 8 April 1963.
Lennon was intrigued by Ono's "Hammer A Nail": patrons hammered a nail into a wooden board, creating the art piece.
It just began as a laugh for me".
He also rekindled friendships with Starr, McCartney, Beatles roadie Mal Evans, and Harry Nilsson.
Sean was born on 9 October 1975, Lennon's 35th birthday, delivered by Caesarean section.
''Rolling Stone'' reported that "it contains a substantial portion of good music" but warned of the possibility that "his posturings will soon seem not merely dull but irrelevant".
17 on the British charts.
The same year, Tariq Ali's revolutionary political views, expressed when he interviewed Lennon, inspired the singer to write "Power to the People".
His jamming on a piano with McCartney in 1963 led to the creation of the Beatles' first US number one, "I Want to Hold Your Hand".
He devoted himself to Sean, rising at 6am daily to plan and prepare his meals and to spend time with him.
After his death it was revealed that he had left Julian very little in his will.
His mother taught him how to play the banjo, later buying him an acoustic guitar.
Lennon used it as the title of a Beatles song, and though it was later reported to have been derived from the initials LSD, Lennon insisted, "It's not an acid song."
Wiener published the results of his 14-year campaign in January 2000.
Lennon grew concerned that fans attending Beatles concerts were unable to hear the music above the screaming of fans, and that the band's musicianship was beginning to suffer as a result.
He later wrote, "I started the band.
According to biographer Philip Norman, one of his reasons for wanting to manage the group was that he was physically attracted to Lennon.
Lennon's last act of political activism was a statement in support of the striking minority sanitation workers in San Francisco on 5 December 1980.
By the summer of 1957, the Quarrymen played a "spirited set of songs" made up of half skiffle and half rock and roll.
With Lennon's next album, ''Imagine'' (1971), critical response was more guarded.
Within the month, he fulfilled his contractual obligation to EMI/Capitol for one more album by releasing ''Shaved Fish'', a compilation album of previously recorded tracks.
Lennon summarised his feelings towards McCartney in an interview three days before his death: "Throughout my career, I've selected to work with... only two people: Paul McCartney and Yoko Ono... That ain't bad picking."
Lennon was now 19, and his aunt, horrified when he told her about the trip, pleaded with him to continue his art studies instead.
His other instrument of choice was the piano, on which he composed many songs, including "Imagine", described as his best-known solo work.
The Lennon–McCartney songwriting partnership yielded eight of its fourteen tracks.
To Lennon, who was intoxicated with alcohol at the time, the matter was simple: "He called me a queer so I battered his bloody ribs in".
When Pang telephoned the next day, Ono told her Lennon was unavailable, being exhausted after a hypnotherapy session.
Ono had supposedly not heard of the Beatles, but relented on condition that Lennon pay her five shillings, to which Lennon replied, "I'll give you an imaginary five shillings and hammer an imaginary nail in."
It was never consummated.
Lennon's reaction was, "Jesus Christ!
Depressed, Lennon got intoxicated and had sex with a female guest, leaving Ono embarrassed.
It took 14 years of litigation to force the FBI to release the withheld pages.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'', which revealed Lennon's lyrics contrasting strongly with the simple love songs of the Lennon–McCartney's early years.
According to Paul's brother Mike, McCartney's father was also disapproving, declaring Lennon would get his son "into trouble", although he later allowed the fledgling band to rehearse in the McCartneys' front room at 20Forthlin Road.
After a robbery, they relocated to the more secure Dakota at 1West72nd Street, in 1973.
He spoke too of the hostility he perceived the other members had towards Ono, and of how he, Harrison, and Starr "got fed up with being sidemen for Paul&nbsp;... After Brian Epstein died we collapsed.
Whilst drinking with Nilsson, after misunderstanding something Pang said, Lennon attempted to strangle her, relenting only when physically restrained by Nilsson.
In a 2006 ''Guardian'' article, Jon Wiener wrote: "For young people in 1972, it was thrilling to see Lennon's courage in standing up to US President Nixon.
Lennon and Ono co-hosted ''The Mike Douglas Show'' for a week in February 1972, introducing guests such as Jerry Rubin and Bobby Seale to mid-America.
He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) with the other Beatles in 1965 (returned in 1969).
Lennon continues to be mourned throughout the world and has been the subject of numerous memorials and tributes.
He made what would be his final stage appearance in the ATV special ''A Salute to Lew Grade'', recorded on 18 April and televised in June.
With few exceptions—one being the album title itself—Lennon had yet to bring his love of wordplay to bear on his song lyrics, saying: "We were just writing songs... pop songs with no more thought of them than that—to create a sound.
In 1969, Lennon wrote "Four in Hand"a skit based on his teenaged experiences of group masturbationfor Kenneth Tynan's play ''Oh!
In July 1946 Lennon's father visited Smith and took his son to Blackpool, secretly intending to emigrate to New Zealand with him.
Epstein was homosexual.
The same month, Elton John topped the charts with his cover of "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds", featuring Lennon on guitar and back-up vocals (Lennon is credited on the single under the moniker of "Dr. Winston O'Boogie").
After she had been working with the couple for three years, Ono confided that she and Lennon were becoming estranged from one another.
Episode: "Episode #1.1 (1965) & Christmas Special (1966)"
That is why I am always on about peace".
Deprived of the routine of live performances after their final commercial concert on 29 August 1966, Lennon felt lost and considered leaving the band.
Another political activist, John Sinclair, poet and co-founder of the White Panther Party, was serving ten years in prison for selling two joints of marijuana after previous convictions for possession of the drug.
The country's got plenty of room and space.
With Epstein gone, the band members became increasingly involved in business activities, and in February 1968 they formed Apple Corps, a multimedia corporation composed of Apple Records and several other subsidiary companies.
Impressed, the driver told Lennon of a harmonica he could have if he came to Edinburgh the following day, where one had been stored in the bus depot since a passenger left it on a bus.
Do you like this one?'
The performance was recorded and two of the tracks later appeared on ''John Lennon Anthology'' (1998).
In 1972, Bob Dylan wrote a letter to the INS defending Lennon, stating:
In September 1980, Lennon commented about his family and his rebellious nature:
In January 1975, he agreed to meet Ono who claimed to have found a cure for smoking.
I don't really go 'round with those thoughts in my head all the time."
Embroiled in a continuing legal battle with the immigration authorities, Lennon was denied permanent residency in the US (which wouldn't be resolved until 1976).
Lennon asked Lord Beeching to take on the role, but he declined, advising Lennon to go back to making records.
Dunbar asked her, "Don't you know who this is?
Sufficient additional material was recorded for a planned follow-up album ''Milk and Honey'' (released posthumously in 1984).
Later that year, Lennon and Ono supported efforts by the family of James Hanratty, hanged for murder in 1962, to prove his innocence.
Lennon also contributed "I'm the Greatest" to Starr's album ''Ringo'' (1973), released the same month (an alternate take, from the same 1973 ''Ringo'' sessions, with Lennon providing a guide vocal, appears on ''John Lennon Anthology'').
That willingness to take risks with his career, and his life, is one reason why people still admire him today."
(Lennon eventually signed the papers while holidaying in Florida with Pang and Julian.)
Those who had condemned Hanratty were, according to Lennon, "the same people who are running guns to South Africa and killing blacks in the streets.&nbsp;...
While the legal battle continued, Lennon attended rallies and made television appearances.
Lennon approached Allen Klein, who had managed The Rolling Stones and other bands during the British Invasion.
After arriving home at Kenwood, and finding Lennon with Ono, Cynthia left the house to stay with friends.
He often drew comical cartoons which appeared in his own self-made school magazine called ''The Daily Howl'', but despite his artistic talent, his school reports were damning: "Certainly on the road to failure&nbsp;... hopeless&nbsp;... rather a clown in class&nbsp;... wasting other pupils' time."
"I didn't have any misconceptions about our ability to do anything other than play music, and I was scared".
Lennon was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987 and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1994.
Lennon described the venture as an attempt to achieve, "artistic freedom within a business structure", but his increased drug experimentation and growing preoccupation with Yoko Ono, and McCartney's own marriage plans, left Apple in need of professional management.
Released as a single, it was quickly taken up as an anti-war anthem and sung by a quarter of a million demonstrators against the Vietnam War in Washington,&nbsp;DC, on 15 November, the second Vietnam Moratorium Day.
Julian started to see his father regularly, and Lennon gave him a drumming part on a ''Walls and Bridges'' track.
It would be 20 years before he had contact with his father again.
When Lennon and Ono were reunited, she became pregnant, but having previously suffered three miscarriages in her attempt to have a child with Lennon, she said she wanted an abortion.
In 2013, Downtown Music Publishing signed a publishing administration agreement for the US with Lenono Music and Ono Music, home to the song catalogues of John Lennon and Yoko Ono respectively.
The comment went virtually unnoticed in England but caused great offence in the US when quoted by a magazine there five months later.
he jokingly complained, because he could not get the tune out of his head.
''Gimme Some Truth: The John Lennon FBI Files'' contained facsimiles of the documents, including "lengthy reports by confidential informants detailing the daily lives of anti-war activists, memos to the White House, transcripts of TV shows on which Lennon appeared, and a proposal that Lennon be arrested by local police on drug charges".
During their Royal Variety Show performance, attended by the Queen Mother and other British royalty, Lennon poked fun at his audience: "For our next song, I'd like to ask for your help.
Julian recalls how some four years later, as a small child in Weybridge, "I was trundled home from school and came walking up with one of my watercolour paintings.
Lennon thought Harrison (then 14 years old) was too young.
After negotiations between Lennon, Spinetti and the artistic director of the National Theatre, Sir Laurence Olivier, the play opened at The Old Vic in 1968.
Lennon later said that until he met Ono, he had never questioned his chauvinistic attitude to women.
The drawings were often of crippled people, and the writings satirical, and throughout the book was an abundance of wordplay.
The Beatles are over, but John, Paul, George and Ringo go on."
After his marriage to Yoko Ono in 1969, he changed his name to John Ono Lennon.
When Lennon's wife returned home she found Ono wearing her bathrobe and drinking tea with Lennon who simply said, "Oh, hi."
They often combined advocacy with performance art, as in their "Bagism", first introduced during a Vienna press conference.
Above was a flying pancake, and below, "a blind man wearing glasses leading along a blind dog—also wearing glasses".
By glaring omission... my influence on his life is absolutely zilch... he remembers every two-bit sax player or guitarist he met in subsequent years.
Lennon told ''Playboy'', "I was hurt by it.
The pair considered going to the studio to make a joke appearance, attempting to claim their share of the money, but were too tired.
Lennon was distant from Julian, who felt closer to McCartney than to his father.
Named after Quarry Bank High School, the group was established by him in September 1956.
Occasionally he played a six-string bass guitar, the Fender Bass VI, providing bass on some Beatles numbers ("Back in the U.S.S.R.", "The Long and Winding Road", "Helter Skelter") that occupied McCartney with another instrument.
The next month the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) began deportation proceedings, arguing that his 1968 misdemeanor conviction for cannabis possession in London had made him ineligible for admission to the United States.
The pair soon moved to California, beginning an 18-month period he later called his "lost weekend".
When asked, Lennon gave Ono the original handwritten lyrics to "The Word".
The MC, known for his wordplay and affectionate but cutting remarks, was making a joke, but ten months had passed since Lennon's marriage, and the honeymoon, deferred, was still two months in the future.
It was my first experience with a homosexual that I was conscious was homosexual.
''Double Fantasy'' was his best-selling solo album, at three million shipments in the US; Released shortly before his death, it won the 1981 Grammy Award for Album of the Year.
ABKCO Industries, formed in 1968 by Allen Klein as an umbrella company to ABKCO Records, recruited May Pang as a receptionist in 1969.
At the end of 1968, Lennon was featured in the film ''The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus'' (not released until 1996) in the role of a Dirty Mac band member.
The ACLU, representing Wiener, won a favourable decision in their suit against the FBI in the Ninth Circuit in 1991.
Later, in an elevator at a nightclub, they all believed it was on fire: "We were all screaming... hot and hysterical."
Lennon also became involved with Ali during a protest against ''Oz'' magazine's prosecution for alleged obscenity.
The band, known as Etc., wore masks behind their heads, a dig by Lennon who thought Grade was two-faced.
During this time, the 18-year-old Lennon wrote his first song, "Hello Little Girl", a UK top 10 hit for The Fourmost nearly five years later.
She became their personal assistant.
He was 14 years old when his uncle George died of a liver haemorrhage on 5 June 1955 (aged 52).
Throughout the rest of his childhood and adolescence he lived with his aunt and uncle, Mimi and George Smith, who had no children of their own, at Mendips, 251Menlove Avenue, Woolton.
From September 1952 to 1957, after passing his eleven-plus exam, he attended Quarry Bank High School in Liverpool, and was described by Harvey at the time as, "A happy-go-lucky, good-humoured, easy going, lively lad."
At an appeal hearing years later, Hanratty's conviction was upheld after DNA evidence matched.
While Lennon was recording ''Mind Games'' (1973), he and Ono decided to separate.
Critic Greil Marcus remarked, "John's singing in the last verse of 'God' may be the finest in all of rock."
