A few months later Ami Perrin, the man who had brought Calvin to Geneva, moved into open opposition.
He completely rejected the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and the treatment of the Supper as a sacrifice.
Calvin writes, "For anyone to arrive at God the Creator he needs Scripture as his Guide and Teacher."
Ameaux was punished by the council and forced to make expiation by parading through the city and begging God for forgiveness.
The group consisted of wealthy, politically powerful, and interrelated families of Geneva.
Calvin encountered bitter opposition to his work in Geneva.
In the same year, Calvin's front man, Guillaume de Trie, sent letters trying to address the French Inquisition to Servetus.
For the first time, the lawyer-theologian took up pastoral duties such as baptisms, weddings, and church services.
Calvin was a tireless polemic and apologetic writer who generated much controversy.
These efforts were funded by the church in Geneva, as the city council had refused to become involved in missionary activities at the time.
The ''collège'' eventually became the Collège Calvin, one of the college preparatory schools of Geneva, while the ''académie'' became the University of Geneva.
After religious tensions provoked a violent uprising against Protestantism in France, Calvin fled to Basel, Switzerland, where he published the first edition of the ''Institutes'' in 1536.
Although Calvin respected the work of the ecumenical councils, he considered them to be subject to God's Word found in scripture.
The first version was arranged pedagogically, describing Law, Faith, and Prayer.
Within five years there were 1,200 students in the grammar school and 300 in the advanced school.
Calling him a "Spanish-Portuguese", suspecting and accusing him of his recently proved Jewish converso origin.
In supporting Calvin's proposals for reforms, the council of Geneva passed the ''Ordonnances ecclésiastiques'' (Ecclesiastical Ordinances) on 20 November 1541.
Calvin sheltered Marian exiles (those who fled the reign of Catholic Mary Tudor in England) in Geneva starting in 1555.
The council straddled both sides of the conflict, alternately admonishing and upholding Calvin.
Perrin seized the baton and waved it over the crowd, which gave the appearance that he was taking power and initiating a ''coup d'état''.
If I take a wife it will be because, being better freed from numerous worries, I can devote myself to the Lord.
They condemned auricular confession, but they enjoined a public one; and in Switzerland, Scotland, and Geneva it was performed the same as penance."
The aim of Calvin's political theory was to safeguard the rights and freedoms of ordinary people.
From her I never experienced the slightest hindrance.
During his ministry in Geneva, Calvin preached over two thousand sermons.
Calvin recognised the power of music and he intended that it be used to support scripture readings.
The immediate effects of faith are repentance and the remission of sin.
The council decided to re-examine the ''Ordonnances'' and on 18 September it voted in support of Calvin—excommunication was within the jurisdiction of the Consistory.
In that year, professional scribe Denis Raguenier, who had learned or developed a system of shorthand, was assigned to record all of Calvin's sermons.
By September 1538 Calvin had taken up his new position in Strasbourg, fully expecting that this time it would be permanent; a few months later, he applied for and was granted citizenship of the city.
However, the government contested this power and on 19 March 1543 the council decided that all sentencing would be carried out by the government.
Originally, the court had the power to mete out sentences, with excommunication as its most severe penalty.
On 21 September 1540 the council commissioned one of its members, Ami Perrin, to find a way to recall Calvin.
However, Calvin was most interested in reforming his homeland, France.
He managed to escape from prison, and the Catholic authorities sentenced him ''in absentia'' to death by slow burning.
However, in October 1549, he was again required to preach twice on Sundays and, in addition, every weekday of alternate weeks.
Increasing secularisation was accompanied by the decline of the church.
The Inquisition in Spain ordered his arrest.
Hence, the Old Covenant was not in opposition to Christ, but was rather a continuation of God's promise.
Following an influx of supportive refugees and new elections to the city council, Calvin's opponents were forced out.
He also worked on the second edition of the ''Institutes''.
On 1 November 1533 he devoted his inaugural address to the need for reform and renewal in the Catholic Church.
In the third book, Calvin describes how the spiritual union of Christ and humanity is achieved.
Following his return, Calvin introduced new forms of church government and liturgy, despite opposition from several powerful families in the city who tried to curb his authority.
Some have argued that Calvin was the least anti-semitic among all the major reformers of his time, especially in comparison to Martin Luther.
Among his extant writings, Calvin only dealt explicitly with issues of contemporary Jews and Judaism in one treatise, ''Response to Questions and Objections of a Certain Jew''.
Between 1555 and 1562, more than 100 ministers were sent to France.
Gérard intended his three sons—Charles, Jean, and Antoine—for the priesthood.
His first theological work, the ''Psychopannychia'', attempted to refute the doctrine of soul sleep as promulgated by the Anabaptists.
At the end of 1542, Marot became a refugee in Geneva and contributed nineteen more psalms.
Through their assistance, Calvin was able to attend the , Paris, where he learned Latin from one of its greatest teachers, Mathurin Cordier.
Around 1546, the uncoordinated forces coalesced into an identifiable group whom he referred to as the libertines, but who preferred to be called either Spirituels or Patriots.
(All of these churches still exist, but none are in the architectural state of Calvin's days.)
He had always insisted that the Consistory retain the power of excommunication, despite the council's past decision to take it away.
Calvin ministered to 400–500 members in his church.
Calvinism was adopted in the Electorate of the Palatinate under Frederick III, which led to the formulation of the Heidelberg Catechism in 1563.
She died in Calvin's childhood, from an unknown cause, after bearing four more children.
In January 1535, Calvin joined Cop in Basel, a city under the influence of the reformer Johannes Oecolampadius.
God made a covenant with Abraham, promising the coming of Christ.
He encouraged people to adapt to the environments in which they found themselves.
By 1532, Calvin received his licentiate in law and published his first book, a commentary on Seneca's ''De Clementia''.
This proved to be too heavy a burden and late in 1542 the council allowed him to preach only once on Sunday.
On 20 October the replies from Zurich, Basel, Bern, and Schaffhausen were read and the council condemned Servetus as a heretic.
Perrin had married Françoise Favre, daughter of François Favre, a well-established Genevan merchant.
In his second account he speaks of a long process of inner turmoil, followed by spiritual and psychological anguish.
He continued to support the reform movement in Geneva, and was eventually invited back to lead its church in 1541.
On 16 May the libertines took to the streets in a drunken protest and attempted to burn down a house that was supposedly full of Frenchmen.
Christian magistrates have to make sure that the church can fulfill its duties in freedom.
One of the reformers, Nicolas Cop, was rector of the university.
And when he realized that I was determined to study in privacy in some obscure place, and saw that he gained nothing by entreaty, he descended to cursing, and said that God would surely curse my peace if I held back from giving help at a time of such great need.
De Trie wrote down  that "his proper name is Michael Servetus, but he currently calls himself Villeneuve, practising medicine.
Near the end of the book, Calvin describes and defends the doctrine of predestination, a doctrine advanced by Augustine in opposition to the teachings of Pelagius.
The city government retained the power to summon persons before the court, and the Consistory could judge only ecclesiastical matters having no civil jurisdiction.
His reaction to the suggestion was one of horror in which he wrote, "Rather would I submit to death a hundred times than to that cross on which I had to perish daily a thousand times over."
The council accepted the document on the same day.
In the dedicatory letter, Calvin praised the work of his predecessors Philipp Melanchthon, Heinrich Bullinger, and Martin Bucer, but he also took care to distinguish his own work from theirs and to criticise some of their shortcomings.
This body reversed the council's decision and stated that the final arbiter concerning excommunication should be the council.
The latter two offices were established in the church in Geneva.
In 1553 Servetus published ''Christianismi Restitutio'' (English: The Restoration of Christianity), in which he rejected the Christian doctrine of the Trinity and the concept of predestination.
John Calvin was born as Jehan Cauvin on 10 July 1509, in the town of Noyon in the Picardy region of France.
They also called for the creation of the ''Consistoire'' (Consistory), an ecclesiastical court composed of the lay elders and the ministers.
In Calvin's view, sin began with the fall of Adam and propagated to all of humanity.
Calvin accepted his new role without any preconditions on his tasks or duties.
Others have argued that Calvin was firmly within the anti-semitic camp.
This was followed by an open letter to the pope (''Admonitio paterna Pauli III'') in 1544, in which Calvin admonished Paul III for depriving the reformers of any prospect of rapprochement.
He first defines faith as the firm and certain knowledge of God in Christ.
He also intended it to serve as an elementary instruction book for anyone interested in the Christian religion.
The resulting synod in Zurich placed most of the blame on Calvin for not being sympathetic enough toward the people of Geneva.
In this respect, he differed little from other Protestant and Catholic theologians of his day.
The syndic Henri Aulbert tried to intervene, carrying with him the baton of office that symbolised his power.
Some scholars claim that Calvin and other ministers asked that he be beheaded instead of burnt, knowing that burning at the stake was the only legal recourse.
In Castellio's ''Treatise on Heretics'' (1554), he argued for a focus on Christ's moral teachings in place of the vanity of theology, and he afterward developed a theory of tolerance based on biblical principles.
Calvin actively participated in the polemics that were exchanged between the Lutheran and Reformed branches of the Reformation movement.
A few days later, the ministers of the church came to visit him, and he bade his final farewell, which was recorded in ''Discours d'adieu aux ministres''.
Despite his differences with the Lutherans, he did not deny that they were members of the true Church.
With the approval of Calvin, the other plotters who remained in the city were found and executed.
Scholars have debated Calvin's view of the Jews and Judaism.
In that year, Calvin was recruited by another Frenchman William Farel to help reform the church in Geneva, where he regularly preached sermons throughout the week.
'''John Calvin''' (; , ; born '''''': 10 July 150927 May 1564) was an influential French theologian and pastor during the Protestant Reformation.
Even during his polemical exchange with Westphal, he advised a group of French-speaking refugees, who had settled in Wesel, Germany, to integrate with the local Lutheran churches.
Calvin took a prosaic view, writing to one correspondent:I, who have the air of being so hostile to celibacy, I am still not married and do not know whether I will ever be.
In it, he argued that Jews misread their own scriptures because they miss the unity of the Old and New Testaments.
At the invitation of Martin Bucer, Calvin proceeded to Strasbourg, where he became the minister of a church of French refugees.
According to contemporary biographers Theodore Beza and Nicolas Colladon, Gérard believed that Calvin would earn more money as a lawyer than as a priest.
Initially he preached twice on Sunday and three times during the week.
In 1542, Calvin adapted a service book used in Strasbourg, publishing ''La Forme des Prières et Chants Ecclésiastiques'' (The Form of Prayers and Church Hymns).
He was eventually given the title of "reader", which most likely meant that he could give expository lectures on the Bible.
I experience it rather than understand it."
Initially, Perrin ignored the court when he was summoned, but after receiving a letter from Calvin, he appeared before the Consistory.
The following day he was sentenced to burning at the stake, the same sentence as in Vienne.
The opposition realised that they could curb Calvin's authority, but they did not have enough power to banish him.
Various Congregational, Reformed and Presbyterian churches, which look to Calvin as the chief expositor of their beliefs, have spread throughout the world.
To further minimize the misuse of political power, Calvin proposed to divide it among several political institutions like the aristocracy, lower estates, or magistrates in a system of checks and balances (separation of powers).
He burst a blood-vessel in his lungs, and his health steadily declined.
I have been bereaved of the best friend of my life, of one who, if it has been so ordained, would willingly have shared not only my poverty but also my death.
In 1525 or 1526, Gérard withdrew his son from the Collège de Montaigu and enrolled him in the University of Orléans to study law.
A site for the school was selected on 25 March 1558 and it opened the following year on 5 June 1559.
He intended that the book be used as a summary of his views on Christian theology and that it be read in conjunction with his commentaries.
Although a wedding date was planned for March 1540, he remained reluctant and the wedding never took place.
After the deaths of Calvin and his successor, Beza, the Geneva city council gradually gained control over areas of life that were previously in the ecclesiastical domain.
Voltaire wrote about Calvin, Luther and Zwingli, "If they condemned celibacy in the priests, and opened the gates of the convents, it was only to turn all society into a convent.
Calvin protested that the council did not have the legal authority to overturn Berthelier's excommunication.
Calvin's friends urged him to marry.
His first commentary on Romans was published in 1540, and he planned to write commentaries on the entire New Testament.
But nobody can be forced to become a Protestant.
Humanism was a European intellectual movement which stressed classical studies.
The prosecutor was Philibert Berthelier, a member of a libertine family and son of a famous Geneva patriot, and the sessions were led by Pierre Tissot, Perrin's brother-in-law.
Initially, Calvin refused because Farel was not included in the invitation, but relented when Bucer appealed to him.
He was a principal figure in the development of the system of Christian theology later called Calvinism, aspects of which include the doctrine of predestination and the absolute sovereignty of God in salvation of the human soul from death and eternal damnation.
Terrified by his words, and conscious of my own timidity and cowardice, I gave up my journey and attempted to apply whatever gift I had in defense of my faith.
Calvin tried to recruit two professors for the institute, Mathurin Cordier, his old friend and Latin scholar who was now based in Lausanne, and Emmanuel Tremellius, the Regius professor of Hebrew in Cambridge.
Once he completed the course, he entered the Collège de Montaigu as a philosophy student.
During the fall of 1536, Farel drafted a confession of faith while Calvin wrote separate articles on reorganizing the church in Geneva.
He defends the trinitarian view of God and, in a strong polemical stand against the Catholic Church, argues that images of God lead to idolatry.
Other historians have stressed the enormous political power wielded on a daily basis by the clerics.
Then Farel, who was working with incredible zeal to promote the gospel, bent all his efforts to keep me in the city.
An occasional secretary tried to record his sermons, but very little of his preaching was preserved before 1549.
Hence, he argued that the reformers "had to leave them in order that we might come to Christ."
Since he was afraid that he might die before completing the final revision of the ''Institutes'', he forced himself to work.
This and the Belgic Confession were adopted as confessional standards in the first synod of the Dutch Reformed Church in 1571.
The council was reluctant to enforce the subscription requirement, as only a few citizens had subscribed to their confession of faith.
He also produced several confessions of faith in order to unite the churches.
In August he set off for Strasbourg, a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire and a refuge for reformers.
He died in 1531, after suffering for two years with testicular cancer.
Both Perrin's wife and father-in-law had previous conflicts with the Consistory.
He recounted his life in Geneva, sometimes recalling bitterly some of the hardships he had suffered.
Unsure of how the council would rule, he hinted in a sermon on 3 September 1553 that he might be dismissed by the authorities.
However, from 1557 onwards, he could not find the time to continue this method, and he gave permission for his lectures to be published from stenographers' notes.
Calvin defined a sacrament as an earthly sign associated with a promise from God.
In the first account he portrays his conversion as a sudden change of mind, brought about by God.
However, complete perfection is unattainable in this life, and the believer should expect a continual struggle against sin.
Calvin thought that agriculture and the traditional crafts were normal human activities.
In these areas Calvin was influenced by the Augustinian tradition.
In the autumn of 1558, Calvin became ill with a fever.
In protest, they refused to administer communion during the Easter service.
An embassy reached Calvin while he was at a colloquy, a conference to settle religious disputes, in Worms.
Calvin's authority was practically uncontested during his final years, and he enjoyed an international reputation as a reformer distinct from Martin Luther.
The final edition of the ''Institutes'' appeared in 1559.
His letters to Calvin were presented as evidence of heresy, but he denied having written them, and later said he was not sure it was his handwriting.
On his way to Italy, Servetus stopped in Geneva to visit "''d'Espeville''", where he was recognized and arrested.
Calvin developed his theology in his biblical commentaries as well as his sermons and treatises, but the most concise expression of his views is found in his magnum opus, the ''Institutes of the Christian Religion''.
His own view was close to Zwingli's symbolic view, but it was not identical.
After some losses before the council, Calvin believed he was defeated; on 24 July 1553 he asked the council to allow him to resign.
Idelette fell ill in 1545 and died on 29 March 1549.
The second book includes several essays on the original sin and the fall of man, which directly refer to Augustine, who developed these doctrines.
For the Old Testament, he wrote commentaries on Isaiah, the books of the Pentateuch, the Psalms, and Joshua.
In the same year of 1542, Calvin published ''Catéchisme de l'Eglise de Genève'' (Catechism of the Church of Geneva), which was inspired by Bucer's ''Kurze Schrifftliche Erklärung'' of 1534.
Calvin was particularly outraged when Servetus sent him a copy of the ''Institutes of the Christian Religion'' heavily annotated with arguments pointing to errors in the book.
The material for the commentaries often originated from lectures to students and ministers that he reworked for publication.
Servetus was a Spanish physician and Protestant theologian who boldly criticised the doctrine of the Trinity and paedobaptism (infant baptism).
Calvin regarded the first three offices as temporary, limited in their existence to the time of the New Testament.
In 1551 Jérôme-Hermès Bolsec, a physician in Geneva, attacked Calvin's doctrine of predestination and accused him of making God the author of sin.
Calvin refuted the decrees by producing the ''Acta synodi Tridentinae cum Antidoto'' in 1547.
Subsequently, Farel received an invitation to lead the church in Neuchâtel.
In 1543, he again added new material and expanded a chapter on the Apostles' Creed.
On 26 November, the two ministers hotly debated the council over the issue.
Calvin's opinion on the issue forced Luther to place him in Zwingli's camp.
The affair dragged on through 1554.
He was finally forced to flee France during the Affair of the Placards in mid-October 1534.
By 1555 he had completed his work on the New Testament, finishing with the Acts and the Gospels (he omitted only the brief second and third Epistles of John and the Book of Revelation).
Louis Bourgeois, also a refugee, lived and taught music in Geneva for sixteen years and Calvin took the opportunity to add his hymns, the most famous being the Old Hundredth.
The turning point in Calvin's fortunes occurred when Michael Servetus, a fugitive from ecclesiastical authorities, appeared in Geneva on 13 August 1553.
It became more important in later, partly secularized forms of Calvinism and became the starting-point of Max Weber's theory about the rise of capitalism.
Shortly after its publication, he left Basel for Ferrara, Italy, where he briefly served as secretary to Princess Renée of France.
Finally, on 22 January 1555, the council announced the decision of the Swiss churches: the original ''Ordonnances'' were to be kept and the Consistory was to regain its official powers.
The difficulty in using Servetus as a weapon against Calvin was that the heretical reputation of Servetus was widespread and most of the cities in Europe were observing and awaiting the outcome of the trial.
He does not try to prove the authority of scripture but rather describes it as ''autopiston'' or self-authenticating.
Very little is known about Calvin's personal life in Geneva.
Calvin also wrote many letters and treatises.
By definition, there was only one "catholic" or "universal" Church.
After the death of Servetus, Calvin was acclaimed a defender of Christianity, but his ultimate triumph over the libertines was still two years away.
Church attendance had dwindled and the political climate had changed; as Bern and Geneva quarrelled over land, their alliance frayed.
Eventually, Calvin lost patience and refused to respond; by this time Servetus had written around thirty letters to Calvin.
Furthermore, France was taking an interest in forming an alliance with Geneva and as the two ministers were Frenchmen, councillors had begun to question their loyalty.
Historians debate the extent to which Geneva was a theocracy.
He concurrently worked on another book, the ''Commentary on Romans'', which was published in March 1540.
On 16 January 1537, Farel and Calvin presented their ''Articles concernant l'organisation de l'église et du culte à Genève'' (Articles on the Organization of the Church and its Worship at Geneva) to the city council.
Calvin probably wrote it during the period following Cop's speech, but it was not published until 1542 in Strasbourg.
Having established itself in Europe, the movement continued to spread to other parts of the world including North America, South Africa, and Korea.
Calvin never married again.
