In his two-hour speech at Columbus, Tyler entirely avoided the issue of the Bank of the United States, one of the major questions of the day.
Northern states welcomed tariffs, which protected their infant industries.
In the 1820s the nation's only political party, the Democratic-Republicans, split into factions.
Tyler announced in his annual message to Congress that "a controlling majority of the people and a large majority of the states have declared in favor of immediate annexation."
Tyler's successor in the Senate was William Cabell Rives, a conservative Democrat.
This was the first time that an American political party included women in campaign activities on a widespread scale, and women in Tyler's Virginia were active on his behalf.
Author Ivan Eland, in an update of his 2008 book ''Recarving Rushmore'', rated all 44 US presidents by the criteria of peace, prosperity, and liberty; with the finished ratings, John Tyler was ranked the best president of all time.
Wise, wrote that following the ''Princeton'' disaster, Wise went on his own to extend Calhoun the position through a colleague, who assumed that the offer came from the president.
Many Northern Whigs opposed Clay, and some, including Pennsylvania's Thaddeus Stevens, showed the Virginians a letter written by Scott in which he apparently displayed abolitionist sentiments.
The nationalists of the Democratic-Republican Party, who supported Adams and Clay, were a sizable minority in the Virginia legislature.
A chain of pro-Tyler newspapers across the country put out editorials promoting his candidacy throughout the early months of 1844.
The Whigs wanted to deny Van Buren a majority in the Electoral College, throwing the election into the House of Representatives, where deals could be made.
Although the second bill supposedly had been tailored to meet his stated objections in the first veto, its final version did not.
A firm believer in manifest destiny, President Tyler sought to strengthen and preserve the Union through territorial expansion, most notably the annexation of the independent Republic of Texas in his last days in office.
Finally, in February 1845, with less than a month remaining in his term, Tyler's nomination of Samuel Nelson to Thompson's seat was confirmed by the Senate.
It was difficult to practice law while away in Washington part of the year, and his plantation was more profitable when Tyler was available to manage it himself.
In September 1833, Jackson issued an executive order directing Treasury Secretary Roger B. Taney to transfer federal funds from the Bank to state-chartered banks without delay.
On the eve of the Civil War, Tyler re-entered public life as a participant in the Virginia Peace Conference held in Washington, D.C., in February 1861 as an effort to devise means to prevent a war.
Tyler attended the convention and was with the Virginia delegation, although he had no official status.
Tyler was lambasted by Whig newspapers and received hundreds of letters threatening his assassination.
As he aged, he suffered more frequently from colds during the winter.
Immediately after his inauguration, Tyler called the Cabinet into session, having decided to retain its members.
He was focused on his Senate career, which required a broad base of support, and gave speeches during the convention promoting compromise and unity.
Tyler's action of assuming both the title of the presidency and its full powers would be legally recognized in 1967, when it was codified in the Twenty-fifth Amendment.
Tyler proposed an alternative fiscal plan to be known as the "Exchequer", but Clay's friends, who controlled the Congress, would have none of it.
He knew that, with little chance of election, the only way to salvage his presidency and legacy was to move public opinion in favor of the Texas issue.
The elder Tyler served four years as Speaker of the House of Delegates before becoming a state court judge.
Clay, though embittered by another of his many defeats for the presidency, was appeased by Tyler's withdrawal from the still-unresolved Senate race, which would permit the election of Rives, and campaigned in Virginia for the Harrison/Tyler ticket.
Upon taking his seat in December, he found the chamber thrust into debate over the impending presidential election of 1824.
Tyler attempted to remain on good terms with Jackson, only opposing him on principle rather than partisanship.
Seager later wrote, "Had William Henry Harrison lived, John Tyler would undoubtedly have been as obscure as any vice-president in American history."
He made it clear that federal assistance would be given, not to prevent, but only to put down insurrection, and would not be available until violence had been committed.
A decade earlier, when the economy was strong, Congress had promised Southern states that there would be a reduction in hated federal tariffs.
Despite these measures, by March 1842 it had become clear that the federal government was still in dire fiscal straits.
He was a president without a party."
In late February 1845, the House by a substantial margin and the Senate by a bare 27–25 majority approved a joint resolution offering terms of annexation to Texas.
Tyler's difficulties in domestic policy contrasted with notable accomplishments in foreign policy.
Tyler was particularly offended by Jackson's use of the recess appointment power to name three treaty commissioners to meet with emissaries from the  Ottoman Empire; Tyler introduced a bill chastising the president for this.
Tyler served alongside his Virginia colleague and close friend Littleton Waller Tazewell, who shared his strict constructionist views and uneasy support of Jackson.
Lyon Gardiner Tyler, Jr. was born in 1924, and Harrison Ruffin Tyler was born in 1928; Lyon Tyler Jr. resides in Franklin, Tennessee, and Harrison Tyler maintains the family home, Sherwood Forest Plantation in Charles City County, Virginia.
On the day of the vote, it was argued by one assemblyman that there was no political difference between the two candidates—Tyler was simply a more agreeable character than Randolph.
Restless and bored after two years at home practicing law, Tyler sought election to the House of Delegates in 1823.
He was asked to give an occasional public speech, but was not sought out as an adviser.
He also advocated the establishment of a chain of American forts from Council Bluffs, Iowa, to the Pacific.
His wife, Mary Marot (Armistead), was the daughter of a prominent plantation owner, Robert Booth Armistead.
He believed each state should construct necessary projects within its borders using locally generated funds.
Among the books that informed his economic views was Adam Smith's ''The Wealth of Nations'', and he acquired a lifelong love of Shakespeare.
By the time of Tyler's election to the Senate, campaigning for the 1828 presidential election was in progress.
Randolph was a contentious figure: although he shared the staunch states' rights views held by most of the Virginia legislature, he had a reputation for fiery rhetoric and erratic behavior on the Senate floor, which put his allies in an awkward position.
And I shall be pleased to avail myself of your counsel and advice.
The convention deadlocked among the three main candidates, with Virginia's votes going to Clay.
Chitwood pointed out that Tyler was a logical candidate: as a Southern slaveowner, he both balanced the ticket and assuaged the fears of Southerners who felt Harrison might have abolitionist leanings.
By January 1844 Upshur told the Texas government that he had found a large majority of senators in favor of an annexation treaty.
Virginia was not "in so poor a condition as to require a ''charitable'' donation from Congress," he contended.
In both houses, unsuccessful amendments were offered to strike the word "president" in favor of language including the term "vice president" to refer to Tyler.
After the 1836 election, Tyler thought his political career was at an end, and planned to return to private law practice.
When the text of the treaty was leaked to the public, it met political opposition from the Whigs, who would oppose anything that might enhance Tyler's status, as well as from foes of slavery and those who feared a confrontation with Mexico, which had announced that it would view annexation as a hostile act by the United States.
The Whigs were unable to pursue further impeachment proceedings in the subsequent 28th Congress, as in the elections of 1842 they retained a majority in the Senate but lost control of the House.
The legislature selected Tyler in a vote of 115–110, and he resigned his governorship on March 4, 1827, as his Senate term began.
Tyler, a slaveowner from eastern Virginia, supported the existing system.
He took his seat in 1838.
Congress voted to recharter the bank in July 1832, and Jackson vetoed the bill for a mixture of constitutional and practical reasons.
This raised the constitutional question of whether states could nullify federal laws.
His policies were largely in line with Jackson's earlier efforts to promote American commerce across the Pacific.
To forestall constitutional uncertainty, Tyler immediately took the oath of office, moved into the White House, and assumed full presidential powers, a precedent that would govern future successions and eventually become codified in the Twenty-fifth Amendment.
On April 17, after the attack on Fort Sumter and Lincoln's call for troops, Tyler voted with the majority for secession.
As a Southern gentleman, duty was important to Tyler, including his duties to his family.
Under the previous deal, this would suspend the distribution program, with all revenues going to the federal government.
To win the election, Whig leaders decided they had to mobilize people across the country, including women, who could not then vote.
Adams, an ardent abolitionist, disliked the fact that Tyler was a slaveholder.
'''John Tyler''' (March 29, 1790 – January 18, 1862) was the tenth President of the United States (1841–45).
Norma Lois Peterson, in her book on Tyler's presidency, suggested that Tyler's general lack of success as president was due to external factors, that would have rebounded upon whoever was in the White House.
When the American Civil War began in 1861, Tyler sided with the Confederate government, and won election to the Confederate House of Representatives shortly before his death.
Tyler was unfazed when the Whig-controlled Senate rejected his treaty by a vote of 16–35 in June 1844, as he felt that annexation was now within reach.
In January 1827, the General Assembly considered whether to elect U.S.
Just after midnight, Tyler took a last sip of brandy, and told his doctor, "I am going.
After listening to reports from his confidential agents, Tyler decided that the 'lawless assemblages' had dispersed and expressed his confidence in a "temper of conciliation as well as of energy and decision."
Tyler has since been the namesake of several U.S. locations, including the city of Tyler, Texas, named for him because of his role in the annexation of Texas.
The office of governor was powerless under the original Virginia Constitution (1776–1830), lacking even veto authority.
In campaign materials, Tyler was praised for integrity in resigning over the legislature's instructions.
It also forbade slavery in states formed from the northern part of the territories.
He received little support from Democrats and, without much support from either major party in Congress, a number of his nominations were rejected without regard for the qualifications of the nominee.
He voted against many of the President's nominations when they appeared to be based on patronage or did not follow constitutional procedure.
Perhaps it is best."
His political opinions were shaped by Bishop James Madison, the college's president and a cousin to the future president of the same name; the bishop served as a second father and mentor to Tyler.
He privately expressed hopes that Harrison would prove decisive and not allow intrigue in the Cabinet, especially in the first days of the administration.
A proposal was made to expand the state's poorly funded public school system, but no significant action was taken.
He was also, briefly, the tenth Vice President (1841), elected to that office on the 1840 Whig ticket with William Henry Harrison.
In an 1842 special message to Congress, the president also applied the Monroe Doctrine to Hawaii (dubbed the "Tyler Doctrine"), told Britain not to interfere there, and began a process that led to the eventual annexation of Hawaii by the United States.
Baldwin's seat remained vacant until James K. Polk's nominee, Robert Grier, was confirmed in 1846.
A survey of 65 historians, conducted by C-SPAN in 2009, ranked Tyler as 35th of 42 men to hold the office.
Before such acts, Rhode Island had been following the same constitutional structure that was established in 1663.
In 1811, at the age of 21, Tyler was elected by his fellow Charles City County residents to the House of Delegates.
Conditions got even worse in early 1842 because a deadline was looming.
With the Democratic Party torn into factions, the head of the Whig ticket would likely be the next president.
In considering Jackson he wrote, "Turning to him I may at least indulge in hope; looking on Adams I must despair."
His first clash with General Andrew Jackson followed Jackson's 1818 invasion of Florida during the First Seminole War.
That issue had caused tension between the United States and Britain for decades and had brought the two countries to the brink of war on several occasions.
For his military service, Tyler received a land grant near what later became Sioux City, Iowa.
The country became deeply divided over the best response to the crisis.
His biographer, Robert Seager II, held that Tyler was selected because of a dearth of alternative candidates.
Tyler held fast to his strict constructionist beliefs, rejecting such proposals on both constitutional and personal grounds.
Seager concluded, "He was put on the ticket to draw the South to Harrison.
Tyler retired to a Virginia plantation, originally named Walnut Grove (or "the Grove"), located on the James River in Charles City County.
He is the only U.S. president to have held this office.
Tyler himself did nothing to aid his chances.
In the last days of his term, Congress passed the resolution authorizing the Texas annexation, which was carried out by Tyler's successor, James K. Polk.
Tyler was astounded and immediately corrected them:
The Tyler supporters, holding signs reading "Tyler and Texas!
Tyler was seated in the Confederate Congress on August 1, 1861, and he served until just before his death in 1862.
In December 1841, Tyler was attacked by abolitionist publisher Joshua Leavitt, who alleged that Tyler had fathered several sons with his slaves, and later sold his offspring.
Secrecy was necessary, as the Constitution required congressional approval for such military commitments.
The Tylers' forty slaves grew various crops, including wheat, corn and tobacco.
She died of a stroke when her son John was seven years old.
The battles between Tyler and the Whigs in Congress resulted in a number of his nominees being rejected.
The influential Virginia delegation then announced that Harrison was its second choice, causing most Scott supporters to abandon him in favor of Harrison, who gained the presidential nomination.
Tyler received only 47 electoral votes, from Georgia, South Carolina and Tennessee, in the November 1836 election, trailing both Granger and the Democratic candidate, Richard Mentor Johnson of Kentucky.
He died shortly thereafter, most likely due to a stroke.
On September 13, when the president did not resign or give in, the Whigs in Congress expelled Tyler from the party.
Now lacking a party base, he saw annexation of the republic as his only pathway to independent re-election in 1844.
Although he regarded slavery as an evil, and did not attempt to justify it, he never freed any of his slaves.
Crapol argues that Tyler's allegiance to the Confederacy overshadows much of the good he did as president, "John Tyler's historical reputation has yet to fully recover from that tragic decision to betray his loyalty and commitment to what he had once defined as 'the first great American interest'—the preservation of the Union."
Despite of his leadership role in the Peace Conference, Tyler opposed the convention's final resolutions.
Tyler did not participate in selecting the Cabinet, and did not recommend anyone for federal office in the new Whig administration.
In November 1861, he was elected to the Confederate House of Representatives but he died in his room at the Ballard House hotel in Richmond before the first session could open in February 1862.
The Whigs initially hoped to muzzle Harrison and Tyler, lest they make policy statements that alienated parts of the party.
He was treated, but his health did not improve, and he made plans to return to Sherwood Forest by the 18th.
Still, his confirmation came as a surprise.
By this time his father was serving as Governor of Virginia (1808–1811), and the young Tyler started a practice in Richmond, the state capital.
Though Tyler was not the first president to veto bills, he was the first to see his veto overridden by Congress.
Harrison was the leading Whig candidate for president, but he lost to Van Buren.
He was put on the ticket to attract states' rights Southerners to what was then a Whig coalition to defeat Van Buren's re-election bid.
A majority in Congress wanted to see the federal government help to fund internal improvements such as ports and roadways.
As of 2016, Tyler has two living grandsons through his son Lyon Gardiner Tyler; he is the earliest former president with living grandchildren.
He joined fellow legislator Benjamin W. Leigh in pushing for the censure of U.S. senators William Branch Giles and Richard Brent of Virginia, who had voted for the recharter of the First Bank of the United States against the legislature's instructions.
As Seager remarked, "His countrymen generally remember him, if they have heard of him at all, as the rhyming end of a catchy campaign slogan."
Rives had drifted away from his party, signalling a possible alliance with the Whigs.
Tyler remained a strong supporter of states' rights, stating "they may strike the Federal Government out of existence by a word; demolish the Constitution and scatter its fragments to the winds."
Tyler was a slaveholder for his entire life, at one point keeping forty slaves at Greenway.
These were Caleb Cushing (Treasury), David Henshaw (Navy) James Porter (War), and James S. Green (Treasury).
Four of Tyler's Cabinet nominees were rejected, the most of any president.
He argued for the revocation of the bank charter, although Congress rejected any such proposal.
Satisfied by these developments, Tyler dropped out of the race in August and endorsed Polk for the presidency.
The rebels fled the state when the state militia marched against them, but the incident led to broader suffrage in Rhode Island.
Tyler called for calm on both sides, and recommended that the governor enlarge the franchise to let most men vote.
Tyler promised that in case an actual insurrection should break out in Rhode Island he would employ force to aid the regular, or Charter, government.
The United States was then facing hostilities with Britain in the War of 1812.
Harrison had been expected to adhere closely to Whig Party policies and to defer to party congressional leaders, particularly Clay.
Tyler served as a Virginia state legislator, governor, U.S. representative, and U.S. senator before his election as vice president in the presidential election of 1840.
Tyler recognized the need for higher tariffs, but wished to stay within the 20 percent rate created by the 1833 Compromise Tariff.
Tyler's father died in 1813, and Tyler inherited thirteen slaves along with his father's plantation.
Monroe credits him with "achievements like the Webster–Ashburton treaty which heralded the prospect of improved relations with Great Britain, and the annexation of Texas, which added millions of acres to the national domain."
Harrison, beset by office seekers and the demands of Senator Clay, twice sent letters to Tyler asking his advice as to whether a Van Buren appointee should be dismissed.
The positive reception of the public at these events contrasted with his ostracism back in Washington.
As vice president-elect, Tyler remained quietly at his home in Williamsburg.
Texas had declared independence from Mexico in the Texas Revolution of 1836, although Mexico still refused to acknowledge it as a sovereign state.
When you think otherwise, your resignations will be accepted.
Because of bitterness over the unresolved Senate election, the Virginia delegation refused to make Tyler its favorite son candidate for vice president.
The interest in the campaign was unprecedented, with many public events.
By resolution of the Democratic-controlled legislature, Tyler could be instructed to vote for the bill.
Accordingly, at his funeral, the coffin of the tenth president of the United States was draped with a Confederate flag, the only former president ever to be buried and honored ceremoniously under a foreign non-US flag.
As he lay in bed the night before, he began suffocating, and Julia summoned his doctor.
This led to the question of whether the actual office of president "devolved" upon Vice President Tyler, or merely its powers and duties.
Tyler understood what was to come: he would soon be forced by the legislature to cast a vote that went against his constitutional beliefs.
The new Whig Party was not organized enough to hold a national convention and name a single ticket against Van Buren, Jackson's chosen successor.
A strict constructionist, Tyler found much of the Whig platform unconstitutional, and vetoed several of his party's bills.
Both Clay and Van Buren, the respective frontrunners for the Whig and Democratic nominations, decided in a private meeting at Van Buren's home to come out against annexation.
The same year, he sent Henry Wheaton as a minister to Berlin, where he negotiated and signed a trade agreement with the ''Zollverein'', a coalition of German states that managed tariffs.
Tyler's opponents never fully accepted him as president.
In 1816, he resigned his legislative seat to serve on the Governor's Council of State, a group of eight advisers elected by the General Assembly.
He left office on March 3, 1821, endorsing his former opponent Stevenson for the seat, and returned to private law practice full-time.
Instead, Whigs in various regions each put forth their own preferred ticket, reflecting the party's tenuous coalition: the Massachusetts Whigs nominated Daniel Webster and Francis Granger, the Anti-Masons of the Northern and border states backed William Henry Harrison and Granger, and the states' rights advocates of the middle and lower South nominated Hugh Lawson White and John Tyler.
In February 1839, the General Assembly considered who should fill the seat that was to expire the following month.
If he disregarded the instructions, he would be violating his own principles: "the first act of my political life was a censure on Messrs. Giles and Brent for opposition to instructions," he noted.
A House select committee, headed by John Quincy Adams, condemned the president's use of the veto and assailed his character.
He was referred to by many mocking nicknames, including "His Accidency".
This strategy was supported by Whig leader Henry Clay, who nevertheless admired Tyler at that time.
Former President Andrew Jackson, a staunch supporter of annexation, persuaded Polk to welcome Tyler back into the Democratic party and ordered Democratic editors to cease their attacks on him.
He called for Congress to annex Texas by joint resolution rather than by treaty.
The living conditions of his slaves are not well documented, but historians agree that he cared for their well-being and abstained from physical violence against them.
Nelson, a Democrat, had a reputation as a careful and noncontroversial jurist.
After graduation Tyler studied law with his father, who was a state judge at the time, and later with former United States Attorney General Edmund Randolph.
He did not take farming lightly and worked hard to maintain large yields.
Tyler suggested that the Tariff's only positive outcome would be a national political backlash, restoring a respect for states' rights.
The republic remained skeptical, and finalization of the treaty took until the end of February.
Democrats complained that the Harrison/Tyler campaign's liberal provision of hard cider at rallies was encouraging drunkenness.
After some debate, Texas accepted the terms and entered the union on December 29, 1845, as the 28th state.
Shortly after the tariff vetoes, Whigs in the House of Representatives initiated American history's first impeachment proceedings against a president.
The insurgents under Thomas Dorr had armed themselves and proposed to install a new state constitution.
But when it came to the great banking question, Tyler was soon at odds with the Congressional Whigs.
They hoped to unseat Randolph by capturing the vote of states' rights supporters who were uncomfortable with the senator's reputation.
Tyler considered his work vindicated, and implied in an acceptance letter that annexation was his true priority rather than election.
Shortly after the dedication, Tyler learned of Legaré's sudden death, which dampened the festivities and caused him to cancel the rest of the tour.
He promoted states' rights and adamantly opposed any concentration of federal power.
Historian William W. Freehling, however, wrote that Tyler's official motivation in annexing Texas was to outmaneuver suspected efforts by Great Britain to promote an emancipation of slaves in Texas that would weaken the institution in the United States.
While the Democratic-Republicans had supported states' rights, in the wake of the War of 1812, many members urged a stronger central government.
If his favored candidate for the presidential nomination, Clay, was successful, he would likely not be chosen for the second place on the ticket, which would probably go to a Northerner to assure geographic balance.
Tyler saw this as "a flagrant assumption of power", a breach of contract, and a threat to the economy.
Jackson was elected, and Tyler soon came to disagree with him politically.
John Tyler was born on March 29, 1790.
