It is said that he met John and Jesus in the second heaven, where Muhammad greeted his two brothers before ascending with archangel Gabriel to the third heaven.
17:11–13); many Christian theologians have taken this to mean that John was Elijah's successor.
In her ''Treatise of Prayer'', St. Catherine of Siena includes a brief altercation with the Devil regarding her fight due to the Devil attempting to lure her with vanity and flattery.
So his answer to the question was: "Go and report to John what you have witnessed and heard — the blind recover their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are made clean, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised to life, the good news is told to the poor.
The person who believes in the Son has eternal life, while a person who rejects the Son will not even see that life, but remains under ‘God’s displeasure.’
Matthew's approach is to shift the focus away from Herod and onto John as a prototype of Jesus.
Here John and the Theotokos (Mary) flank a Christ Pantocrator and intercede for humanity; in many ways this is the equivalent of Western Crucifixions on roods and elsewhere, where John the Evangelist takes the place of John the Baptist (except in the idiosyncratic ''Isenheim Altarpiece'').
The Italian Renaissance poet Lucrezia Tornabuoni chose John the Baptist as one of biblical figures on which she wrote poetry.
Why, those who are accustomed to fine clothes and luxury live in royal palaces.
Who has visited his people and wrought their deliverance,
According to the New Testament, John anticipated a messianic figure greater than himself, and Jesus was the one whose coming John foretold.
Bear fruit in keeping with repentance.
In Orthodox icons, he often has angel's wings, since Mark 1:2 describes him as a messenger.
John would have prevented him, saying, "I need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?"
And now, you will conceive and give birth to a son, and you will give him the name Jesus.
By 1746, the city's name ("''Puerto Rico''") had become that of the entire island, while the name for the island ("''San Juan Bautista''") had become that of the city.
The earliest known reference to this passage can be found in the early third century when it is quoted by Origen in ''Contra Celsum''.
The Baptistines are the name given to a number of religious orders dedicated to the memory of John the Baptist.
In Byzantine art the composition of the ''Deesis'' came to be included in every Eastern Orthodox church, as remains the case to this day.
His birth, which unlike the Nativity of Jesus allowed a relatively wealthy domestic interior to be shown, became increasingly popular as a subject in the late Middle Ages, with depictions by Jan van Eyck in the Turin-Milan Hours and Ghirlandaio in the Tornabuoni Chapel being among the best known.
Make his paths straight.
John's disciples take the body away and bury it in a tomb.
Other traditions assume that it was in Residenz Museum in Munich, Germany (official residence of the Wittelsbach rulers of Bavaria from 1385 to 1918).
Calamba City, Laguna, Calumpit, Bulacan, Balayan and Lian in Batangas, and San Juan, Metro Manila are among several places in the Philippines that venerate John as the town or city patron.
Soon after this Mary set out, and made her way quickly into the hill-country, to a town in Judah; and there she went into Zechariah’s house and greeted Elizabeth.
It is introduced by an incident where the Tetrarch Herod Antipas, hearing stories about Jesus, imagines that this is John the Baptist raised from the dead.
The account then describes how Herod's daughter Herodias (NRSV; other translations refer to the girl as the ''daughter of Herodias'') dances before Herod, who is pleased and offers her anything she asks for in return.
John 12:28-30, John 1:32
make his paths straight,’"
"Make ready the way of the Lord,
In his presence all our days.
As such Bahá'u'lláh refers to the  Báb as ‘My Forerunner’, the Forerunner being a title that Christians reserve for John the Baptist.
The Unification Church teaches that God intended John to help Jesus during his public ministry in Judea.
O followers of the Gospel!
According to the Qur'an, John was one on whom God sent peace on the day that he was born and the day that he died.
to give his people the knowledge of salvation
Nicephorus and Symeon Metaphrastes say that Herodias had it buried in the fortress of Machaerus (in accordance with Josephus).
A common practise of many Filipino fiestas in his honour is bathing and the dousing of people in memory of John's iconic act.
This joy I have felt to the full.
and the rich he sends empty away.
As predicted by the Old Testament prophet Malachi, Elijah must "come first" to herald the coming of Jesus Christ.
In those days John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Judea, "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."
This is why the disciples ask Jesus in Matthew 17:10, 'Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come?.'
Mary was much disturbed at his words, and was wondering to herself what such a greeting could mean, when the angel spoke again: "Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
It is also the only time this word is used in the Quran.
One day, when Zechariah was officiating as priest before God, during the turn of his division, it fell to him by lot, in accordance with the practice among the priests, to go into the Temple of the Lord and burn incense; and, as it was the Hour of Incense, the people were all praying outside.
In Mark and Luke, Jesus himself sees the heavens open and hears a voice address him personally, saying, "You are my dearly loved son; you bring me great joy".
When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the child moved within her, and Elizabeth herself was filled with the Holy Spirit, and cried aloud: "Blessed are you among women, and blessed is your unborn child!
"How can I be sure of this?"
Géza Vermes has called it "artificial and undoubtedly Luke's creation".
Along with John the Evangelist, John the Baptist is claimed as a patron saint by the fraternal society of Free and Accepted Masons (better known as the Freemasons).
who will prepare your way before you.’
He will be to you a joy and a delight; and many will rejoice over his birth.
The description of John is taken directly from Mark ("clothing of camel’s hair with a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey"), along with the proclamation that one was coming who would baptise with the Holy Spirit "and fire".
Sufis have frequently applied commentaries on the passages on John in the Qur'an, primarily concerning the God-given gift of "Wisdom" which he acquired in youth as well as his parallels with Jesus.
Cyril and Methodius Cathedral in Sozopol.
Asking for a writing-tablet, he wrote the words — ‘His name is John.’ Everyone was surprised; and immediately Zechariah recovered his voice and the use of his tongue, and began to bless God.
Salome bearing John's head on a platter equally became a subject for the Northern Renaissance taste for images of glamorous but dangerous women (Delilah, Judith and others), and was often painted by Lucas Cranach the Elder and engraved by the Little Masters.
He is called a prophet by all of these traditions, and is honoured as a saint in many Christian traditions.
my spirit delights in God my Savior;
Later, the Gospel relates that Jesus regarded John as "a burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light".
Unfortunately John didn't follow Jesus and continued his own way of baptizing people.
John's failure to follow Jesus became the chief obstacle to the fulfillment of Jesus' mission.
And holy is his name.
(see also 11:14: "...if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who was to come.")
; Death of John (Mark 6)
John is also identified with the prophet Elijah.
And do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father,’ for I tell you, God is able from these stones to raise up children for Abraham.
Unique to the Gospel of Luke, John the Baptist explicitly teaches charity, baptizes tax-collectors, and advises soldiers.
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon.’ The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look at him!
; John questions Jesus (Luke 7)
Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses.
According to this belief, John was "ordained by the angel of God" when he was eight days old "to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews" and to prepare a people for the Lord.
These are to be found in a monastery in Lower Egypt between Cairo and Alexandria.
"I am the servant of the Lord," exclaimed Mary; "let it be with me as you have said."
and the humble he uplifts,
All these events were reported to John by his disciples.
The historians Rufinus and Theodoretus record that the shrine was desecrated under Julian the Apostate around 362, the bones being partly burned.
; John's disciples and fast (Luke 5:33)
Islamic tradition maintains that John was one of the prophets whom Muhammad met on the night of the Mi'raj, his ascension through the Seven Heavens.
The many similarities between the Gospel of Luke story of the birth of John and the Old Testament account of the birth of Samuel suggest that Luke's account of the annunciation and birth of Jesus are modeled on that of Samuel.
But others said, "He is Elijah."
John the Baptist is mentioned in all four canonical Gospels and the non-canonical Gospel of the Nazarenes.
We will commence with John the Baptist.
And she came in immediately with haste to the king and asked, saying, "I want you to give me at once the head of John the Baptist on a platter."
The child will be great and will be called ‘Son of the Most High,’ and the Lord God will give him the throne of his ancestor David, and he will reign over the descendants of Jacob for ever; And to his kingdom there will be no end."
But Zechariah kept making signs to them, and remained dumb.
Herodias demands his execution, but Herod, who 'liked to listen' to John, is reluctant to do so because he fears him, knowing he is a 'righteous and holy man'.
He is regarded by Bahá'ís as a lesser Prophet.
From age to age his mercy rests
A portion of the rescued relics were carried to Jerusalem, then to Alexandria, where on 27 May 395, they were laid in the basilica newly dedicated to the Forerunner on the former site of the temple of Serapis.
Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
for he has remembered his humble servant girl;
But the angel said to him: "Do not be afraid, Zechariah; your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, whom you will call by the name John.
At that time Herod the tetrarch heard about the fame of Jesus, and he said to his servants, "This is John the Baptist.
"Let anyone who has two coats," answered John, "share with the person who has none; and anyone who has food do the same."
* June 24 — Nativity of St. John the Forerunner
The Gospel of John then points out that Jesus' disciples were baptizing more people than John.
In Gnosticism, John the Baptist was a "personification" of the Old Testament prophet Elijah.
; Nativity of John (Luke 1)
And blessed is the person who finds no hindrance in me."
For you will go before the Lord to make ready his way,
Biblical scholar John Dominic Crossan differentiates between Josephus's account of John and Jesus, saying, "John had a monopoly, but Jesus had a franchise."
they continued; "tell us so that we have an answer to give to those who have sent us.
"Behold, I send my messenger before your face,
Caravaggio painted an especially large number of works including John, from at least five largely nude youths attributed to him, to three late works on his death – the great ''Execution'' in Malta, and two sombre Salomes with his head, one in Madrid, and one in London.
Joseph Smith said: "Let us come into New Testament times—so many are ever praising the Lord and His apostles.
In both Matthew and Luke, John later dispatches disciples to question Jesus about his status, asking "Are you he who is to come, or shall we look for another?"
John's knowledge of Jesus varies across gospels.
As the Qur'an says:
Scholars have speculated about the origins of the story.
He is also patron of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Charleston, which covers the whole of South Carolina in the United States.
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.
Where Mark has Herod killing John reluctantly and at Herodias' insistence, Matthew describes him as wanting John dead.
This is the man of whom scripture says —
We have once again sent John unto you, and He, verily, hath cried out in the wilderness of the Bayán: O peoples of the world!
However, the decapitation cloth of St. John is kept at the Aachen Cathedral.
This stresses the execution and the disposal of the saint's remains.
I was taking about him when I said ‘After me there is coming a man who ranks ahead of me, because before I was born he already was.’ I did not know who he was, but I have come baptizing with water to make him known to Israel."
And when he came up out of the water, immediately he saw the heavens being torn open and the Spirit descending on him like a dove.
The place was visited by Pope John Paul II in 2001 who "paused for a minute's silent meditation at the tomb of St John the Baptist".
They who did accept his statement confirm the fact that God is true.
They view John as the only true Messiah, and are opposed to Jesus.
The Day of the advent of the Glorious Lord is at hand!
"The voice of one crying in the wilderness:
As they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John: "What did you go out into the wilderness to see?
And mindful of his sacred covenant.
In accordance with Zechariah's prayer, God made John and Jesus, who according to exegesis was born six months later, renew the message of God, which had been corrupted and lost by the Israelites.
In the Qur'an, God frequently mentions Zechariah's continuous praying for the birth of a son.
And John said to the crowds that went to be baptized by him: "You children of snakes!
When Elizabeth’s time came, she gave birth to a son; and her neighbors and relations, hearing of the great goodness of the Lord to her, came to share her joy.
An article from June 2004 in ''The Guardian'' remarked that "Porto's Festa de São João is one of Europe's liveliest street festivals, yet it is relatively unknown outside the country".
Zechariah asked the angel.
And he vowed to her, "Whatever you ask me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom."
Although other incidents where the "voice came out of heaven" are recorded in which, for the sake of the crowds, it was heard audibly, John did say in his witness that he did see the spirit coming down "out of heaven".
Matthew shortens the account of the beheading of John, and adds two elements: that Herod Antipas wants John dead, and that the death is reported to Jesus by his disciples.
John is patron saint of Xewkija, Gozo, Malta, which remember him with a great feast on the Sunday nearest to June 24.
His wife, whose name was Elizabeth, was also a descendant of Aaron.
From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and the violent take it by force.
through the tender mercy of our God,
A crypt and relics said to be John's and mentioned in 11th- and 16th-century manuscripts, were discovered in 1969 during restoration of the Church of St. Macarius at the Monastery of Saint Macarius the Great in Scetes, Egypt; Additional relics are claimed to reside in Gandzasar Monastery's ''Cathedral of St. John the Baptist'', in Nagorno Karabakh.
In the Gospel of Mark, John preaches of a coming leader, but shows no signs of recognizing that Jesus is this leader.
The Gospel of Matthew account begins with the same modified quotation from Isaiah, moving the Malachi and Exodus material to later in the text, where it is quoted by Jesus.
Christians commonly refer to John as the precursor or forerunner of Jesus, since John announces Jesus' coming.
The next day John saw Jesus coming towards him, and exclaimed: "Here is the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
A voice from heaven then says, "You are my Son, the Beloved; with you I am well pleased."
The saint's left hand is allegedly preserved in the Armenian Apostolic Church of St. John at Chinsurah, West Bengal, where each year on "Chinsurah Day" in January it blesses the Armenians of Calcutta.
Later in the gospel there is an account of John's death.
; John questions Jesus (Matthew 11)
So he summoned two of them, and sent them to the Master to ask — "Are you ‘the coming one,’ or are we to look for some one else?"
", he told them clearly and simply: "I am not the Christ."
make his paths straight.’"
The burial-place of John the Baptist was traditionally said to be at the Nabi Yahya Mosque ''(Saint John the Baptiste Mosque)'' in Sebaste in current Palestinian territories, and mention is made of his relics being honored there around the middle of the 4th century.
John is believed to have had the specific role of foretelling and preparing the way for Jesus.
And guide our feet into the way of peace."
"Who then are you?"
Even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees.
Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
Among the early Judaistic (or Gnostic, according to Epiphanius in Panarion, part 30) Christian groups the Ebionites held that John, along with Jesus and James the Just—all of whom they revered—were vegetarians.
The LDS Church teaches that John the Baptist appeared on the banks of the Susquehanna River near Harmony Township, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania as a resurrected being to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on May 15, 1829, and ordained them to the Aaronic Priesthood.
They also teach that, following his death, John descended into Hades and there once more preached that Jesus the Messiah was coming, so he was the Forerunner of Christ in death as he had been in life.
The Synoptic Gospels (Mark, Matthew, and Luke) describe John baptising Jesus; in the Gospel of John it is implied in .
The Jews of Jesus' day expected Elijah to come before the Messiah; indeed, some present day Jews continue to await Elijah's coming as well, as in the Cup of Elijah the Prophet in the Passover Seder.
While famed for the Black Nazarene it enshrines, Quiapo Church in Manila is actually dedicated to Saint John.
The text briefly mentions that John is imprisoned and later beheaded by Herod, but the Gospel of Luke lacks the story of a step-daughter dancing for Herod and requesting John's head.
(For John had not yet been imprisoned).
A glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ Yet wisdom is justified by her deeds."
And though he wanted to put him to death, he feared the people, because they held him to be a prophet.
they exclaimed; and they made signs to the child’s father, to find out what he wished the child to be called.
The usage of the name Yuḥanna is well attested in the western Arabian peninsula.
Who has prompted you to seek refuge from the coming judgment?
The Gospels vary in their depiction of John's relationship to Elijah.
These include the typical scenes: the ''Annunciation to Zechariah'', John's birth, his naming by his father, the ''Visitation'', John's departure for the desert, his preaching in the desert, the ''Baptism of Christ'', John before Herod, the dance of Salome, and his beheading.
Make ready to enter the Kingdom.
The custom is similar in form to Songkran and Holi, and serves as a playful respite from the intense tropical heat.
For Abraham and his race for ever."
All their neighbors were awe-struck at this; and throughout the hill-country of Judea the whole story was much talked about; and all who heard it kept it in mind, asking one another — "What can this child be destined to become?"
* Several different locations claim to possess the severed head of John the Baptist.
"What are we to do then?"
In Luke, John is a familial relative of Jesus whose birth was foretold by Gabriel.
And now you will be silent and unable to speak until the day when this takes place, because you did not believe what I said, though my words will be fulfilled in due course."
For when Herodias’s daughter came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his guests.
However, the Quran also mentions a root used in the Hebrew version of the name, 'Yohanan'  (Yahweh is gracious).
Mormons also believe that "he was baptized while yet in his childhood."
John was also often shown by himself as an older child or adolescent, usually already wearing his distinctive dress and carrying a long thin wooden cross – another theme influenced by Leonardo, whose equivocal composition, reintroducing the camel-skin dress, was developed by Raphael Titian and Guido Reni among many others.
Truly, I say to you, among those born of women there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist.
"The Lord has done this for me," she said, "he has shown me kindness and taken away the public disgrace of childlessness under which I have been living."
‘I am sending my messenger ahead of you,
Since these texts are early and significant and the reading is 'difficult', many scholars see this as the original version, corrected in later versions and in Matthew and Luke.
we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn.’
Christians believe that John the Baptist had a specific role ordained by God as forerunner or precursor of Jesus, who was the foretold Messiah.
And immediately the king sent an executioner with orders to bring John’s head.
11:14 – see also Matt.
A number of narrative scenes from his life were often shown on the predella of altarpieces dedicated to John, and other settings, notably the large series in grisaille fresco in the , which was Andrea del Sarto's largest work, and the frescoed ''Life'' by Domenico Ghirlandaio in the Tornabuoni Chapel, both in Florence.
Mighty are the deeds of his arm;
the voice of one crying in the wilderness:
Reluctantly, Herod orders the beheading of John, and his head is delivered to her, at her request, on a plate.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
In Matthew, the voice from heaven does not address Jesus personally, saying instead "This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased."
(All the people, when they heard this, and even the tax-gatherers, having accepted John’s baptism, acknowledged the justice of God.
