There is probably not another actor on our stage who has a temperament so fine and spiritual, an art so flexible and sure."
''The Washington Post'' was in agreement, and considered the performance to be "a masterpiece", and "a remarkable piece of work".
Costello's father was angered by the relationship, but his complaints were ignored by both Costello and her mother: Costello's parents separated and were divorced as a result.
Charles Darnton, a critic for ''The Evening World'', observed that "Barrymore takes delight in 'kidding' his part not only to the limit, but perhaps beyond".
In September, Barrymore and Oelrichs went to Europe on holiday; cracks were appearing in their relationship, and she fell in love with a poet during their extended stay in Venice.
Why doesn't young Barrymore imitate a real actor if he must copy someone."
Shortly after the ceremony, ''The Dictator'' went on tour, and Harris was given a small role in the play.
His siblings were Lionel (1878-1954), and Ethel (1879-1959).
Filming was postponed until the following day, but the result was the same.
Except for ''The Incorrigible Dukane'', all of these early films are presumed lost.
Costello confirmed that his drinking over the previous two years had worsened, and she described him as a "hopeless alcoholic".
Barrymore purchased and converted an estate in the Hollywood Hills into 16 different buildings with 55 rooms, gardens, skeet ranges, swimming pools, fountains and a totem pole.
He later said: "The right side of my face looks like a fried egg.
He returned from Italy and accepted another serious stage role, that of an ex-convict in ''Kick In'', at New York's Longacre Theatre.
Barrymore was buried at Calvary Cemetery in Los Angeles on June 2.
Sometimes he is tight.
Actors with trained voices were in demand by the studios, and Barrymore was offered a five-film deal with Warner Bros. at $150,000 per picture, and a share of the profits.
Barrymore became involved in the pre-production work for the film and provided designs for Moriarty's lair.
The divorce was granted in April, but the couple reconciled before it was finalized.
Instead, Barrymore signed a non-exclusive contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) and took a $25,000 salary cut per film.
In 1918, Barrymore starred in the romantic comedy film ''On the Quiet''; the ''Iowa City Press-Citizen'' considered the film superior to the original Broadway performance.
Shortly before his death, Barrymore returned to the faith of the Catholic Church.
He then signed with Universal Studios to portray a troubled Jewish lawyer in ''Counsellor at Law''.
Their appeal is cheap, cynical and specious".
A newspaper editor chartered a plane and flew Barrie to Chicago, to meet Barrymore's train; she broadcast a plea for him to return, and her pursuit became national news.
In 1991, Paul Rudnick's comedy ''I Hate Hamlet'', performed at the Walter Kerr Theatre, was set in Barrymore's former apartment.
Much of Barrymore's early life was unsettled.
In November and December that year, a three-week run of the play was staged at the Manhattan Opera House, followed by a brief tour that closed at the end of January 1924.
Peters notes the "dissipation of the once ascetic face, a dissipation only underlined by the studio's attempt to reconstruct with lights, filters and make-up a spiritual beauty that had been corrupted."
He later said that "I fell in love with her instantly.
The same year, in celebration of the centenary of the Actors Fund of America, the US Postal Service issued a postage stamp featuring Barrymore and his siblings.
Alma Power-Waters produced a 1941 study, authorized by the subject, ''John Barrymore: The Legend and the Man''; Fowler, wrote ''Good Night, Sweet Prince: The Life and Times of John Barrymore'' (1943); Alpert published ''The Barrymores'' (1964); and John Kobler wrote ''Damned in Paradise: The Life of John Barrymore'' (1977), although Norden noted in 2000 that many of these earlier works are less than reliable.
After a success as ''Hamlet'' in London in 1925, Barrymore left the stage for 14 years and instead focused entirely on films.
When he returned to America, she remained in Paris, and the couple drew up a separation agreement that provided Oelrichs with $18,000 a year and stated that neither could sue for divorce on the grounds of adultery.
In February 1928, Barrymore obtained a quiet divorce from Oelrichs; she eagerly agreed to the separation, as she was in a relationship with a lawyer, Harrison Tweed, whom she later married.
Although Barrymore wanted to play opposite Costello again, Jack L. Warner, the film's producer, signed Astor.
Ethel was angry with her brother and had the producers fire him from the show, but re-hire him the following day, to teach him a lesson.
Barrymore began to contact his family's theatrical connections to find work and approached Charles Frohman, who had been the producer of ''Captain Jinks'' and had also been an employer of Barrymore's mother Georgie a decade earlier.
He returned to New York in October, where he took the lead role in 72 performances of the comedy ''The Affairs of Anatol'' at the Little Theatre.
In his final film of the year, ''Rasputin and the Empress'', Barrymore, Ethel and Lionel co-starred.
Looking back in the 1970s, he said: "The handsome middle-aged stars of the Edwardian theatre romanticised the part.
A member of the Drew and Barrymore theatrical families, he initially tried to avoid the stage, and briefly attempted a career as an artist, but appeared on stage together with his father Maurice in 1900, and then his sister Ethel the following year.
Usually he forgets his lines.
As filming finished on ''The Sea Beast'', work began on ''Don Juan'', the first feature-length film with synchronized Vitaphone sound effects and a musical soundtrack.
Collier taught Barrymore much about acting, including coaching him in comic timing, but "at times regretted his sponsorship" of his apprentice.
Barrymore was honored on few occasions by the entertainment industry and its members.
At the end of this run of ''Hamlet'', Barrymore traveled to Paris, where Oelrichs had stayed during his residence in London, but the reunion was not a happy one and the couple argued frequently.
On January 15, 1937, he was served with divorce papers, and a month later he filed for bankruptcy protection, with debts of $160,000.
Modjeska was influential in the family, and she insisted that all three children be baptized into the Catholic Church.
The reviews were positive, and "although none of the London critics found Barrymore superior to Henry Irving|Henry Irving and Johnston Forbes-Robertson|Johnston Forbes-Robertson, many were favorable in their comparisons".
A 19-year-old fan, Elaine Jacobs, visited him, and the two became good friends.
By the time the divorce was finalized in December 1917, he had taken the lead role in the film ''Raffles, the Amateur Cracksman''.
In May 1902, Barrymore was fired from his newspaper position after producing a poor illustration for the paper while hung over.
Barrymore was born John Sidney Blyth in Philadelphia, and was known by family and friends as "Jack".
''Grand Hotel'' won the Academy Award for Best Picture and was one of the highest-grossing films of the year.
It is only in the scenes of his savage disintegration, as the horrified girl hangs on, that the picture approaches real tragedy."
The critic for ''The New York Times'' felt that, although Barrymore's performance was "marred by vocal monotony", overall the performance was "a distinct step forward in Mr. Barrymore's artistic development&nbsp;...
Barrymore's friend, Errol Flynn, played him in a 1958 film ''Too Much, Too Soon'', an adaptation of the autobiography of Diana Barrymore, with Dorothy Malone playing the female lead.
The four films were ''Dream of a Motion Picture Director'', ''The Widow Casey's Return'', ''A Prize Package'' (all 1912) and ''One on Romance'' (1913).
In four short films, a cast member is listed as "Jack Barrymore"; this is probably John Barrymore, although Norden notes that "we may never know for certain if these are in fact Barrymore movies."
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde'', playing the dual leading role, and the film was released in theaters the following year.
The same year, Barrymore starred as jewel thief Baron Felix von Geigern together with Greta Garbo in the 1932 film ''Grand Hotel'', in which Lionel also appeared.
Nevertheless, the show was a success.
A year later he joined the Slade School of Fine Art, to study literature and art.
The success of the picture led to further film work, including ''The Man from Mexico'' (1914), ''Are You a Mason?
Those he identified as being more thoroughly researched are Peters' 1990 history, ''The House of Barrymore'', and his own study of the actor's work in ''John Barrymore: A Bio-Bibliography'' (1995).
Unhappy in his marriage, Barrymore&nbsp;– aged 40 at the time&nbsp;– sought solace elsewhere and had an affair with his 17-year-old co-star Mary Astor during filming.
A year later Barrymore appeared in his first Broadway production, in a small role in the comedy ''Glad of It'', which only had a short run.
Among the audience members was the 20-year-old actor John Gielgud, who wrote in his program "Barrymore is romantic in appearance and naturally gifted with grace, looks and a capacity to wear period clothes, which makes his brilliantly intellectual performance classical without being unduly severe, and he has tenderness, remoteness, and neurosis all placed with great delicacy and used with immense effectiveness and admirable judgment".
In March 1905, while ''The Dictator'' was playing in Buffalo, Barrymore's father died in Amityville and was buried at Glenwood Cemetery in Philadelphia.
After completing his Warner Bros. contract with ''When a Man Loves'', with Costello, Barrymore joined United Artists (UA) under a three-film deal.
'', ''The Dictator'' and ''The Incorrigible Dukane'' (all 1915).
The loss of their mother's income prompted both Ethel and Lionel to seek work as professional actors.
Conscious of the criticism of his vocal range, he underwent training with Margaret Carrington, the voice and diction trainer, to ensure he sounded right for the part, and the pair worked together daily for up to six hours a day for six weeks.
This was a blow to his self-respect, but he faced his troubles "with aplomb and a sense of humor", according to Morrison.
Three years later, a London production, ''Jack: A Night on the Town with John Barrymore'', ran for 60 performances at the Criterion Theatre, and Williamson again played the lead.
'''John Barrymore''' (born '''John Sidney Blyth'''; February 14 or 15, 1882 – May 29, 1942) was an American actor on stage, screen and radio.
Although both his brother and sister won Academy Awards, the only award Barrymore ever received for his screen work was from Rudolph Valentino in 1925 for ''Beau Brummel''.
In 1895, Barrymore entered Georgetown Preparatory School, then located on Georgetown University Campus, but he was expelled in November 1897, probably after being caught waiting in a brothel.
This was one of the biggest money-makers of the year for Warner Bros.
Nesbit's mother did not think that, as a struggling artist, Barrymore was a good match for her daughter.
Although the film was not an unqualified success, the cast, including Barrymore, was generally praised.
When Barrymore attended his ceremony at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in 1940, he left more than the customary hand and footprints in the theater's forecourt: aided by the owner, Sid Grauman, Barrymore left a cement imprint of his facial profile.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde''.
Barrymore's relationship with Costello was deeply troubled and, believing she was going to declare him mentally incompetent, he left their home in Los Angeles and traveled first to London and then to India.
The left side has features that are to be found in almost any normal anthropological specimen, and those are the apples I try to keep on top of the barrel."
When he filmed his last serious role, Gregory Vance in the 1939 film ''The Great Man Votes'', the director, Garson Kanin, ensured that the cast and crew addressed him as "Mr. Barrymore" as a mark of respect.
The critic for ''The New York Times'' thought the play was, "acted with fine comedy spirit by John Barrymore&nbsp;... who gave indisputable signs last night of grown and growing powers."
Although the Barrymore family bible puts his date of birth as February 15, 1882, his birth certificate shows February 14.
", which led the cast to improvise the remainder of the scene.
After he took a break for a few days, he returned to the set, but he still could not remember any of the script, and RKO replaced him with Ricardo Cortez.
According to Morrison, Barrymore's stage portrayals of ''Richard III'' and ''Hamlet'' were a model for modern performances of these roles.
After planning for over a year&nbsp;– largely in secret&nbsp;– Barrymore played his first Shakespeare part, the title role in ''Richard III''.
Many of the obituaries made the point that Barrymore fell short of his potential.
The following year his parents toured again with Modjeska but left the children behind.
He appeared in five films during the year, including as a meek schoolteacher-turned-businessman in ''Topaze'', opposite Myrna Loy, and ''Dinner at Eight'', with Lionel.
Valentino created an award in his own name and felt that his fellow actors should receive accolades for their screen work.
By the late 1920s, sound films had become common, following the 1927 sensation, ''The Jazz Singer''.
Barrymore's father was mostly absent from the family home while on tour, and when he returned he would spend time at The Lambs, a New York actors' club.
Since appearing in ''Redemption'' he had worked ceaselessly, appearing on stage in the evenings, while planning or rehearsing the next production during the day, and by the time he appeared as Richard, he was spending his daytimes filming ''Dr.
On May 19, 1942, while recording a line from ''Romeo and Juliet'' for the show, Barrymore collapsed.
Barrymore later described his Hamlet as a "normal, healthy, lusty young fellow who simply got into a mess that was too thick for him&nbsp;... he was a great fencer, an athlete, a man who led an active, healthy life.
''The Washington Post'' observed that "with the passing of the years&nbsp;– and as his private life became more public&nbsp;– he became, despite his genius in the theater, a tabloid character."
He spent six weeks recuperating under the ministrations of his father's friend, wrestler William Muldoon, who ran a sanitarium.
In June 1937, he signed up with NBC Radio to produce a series of six episodes under the name ''Streamlined Shakespeare'', which also featured Barrie.
Barrymore continued drinking and lacked discipline, which affected his performances.
while John Corbin, the drama critic for ''The New York Times'', agreed, writing that "in all likelihood we have a new and a lasting Hamlet".
The couple had a heated argument in public shortly afterwards, and he again spent time in Kelley's Rest Home and hospital, which cost him an average of $800 daily, draining his finances.
In October 1940, Barrymore returned to the NBC Radio network to work on Rudy Vallée's show, now called the ''Sealtest Show''.
The play was a critical flop, although the presence of the siblings ensured that it ran for over 60 performances.
They attempted a reconciliation when the production reached New York, but the couple divorced in late 1940.
After the debut in March 1920, the critics were effusive in their praise.
For over a year beginning in April 1917, he appeared together with Lionel in a stage version of George du Maurier's 1891 novel ''Peter Ibbetson''.
The critic went on to say that Barrymore gave "an extraordinary performance in every detail of appearance and manner, in every note of deep feeling&nbsp;... a superb performance."
After a year of formal study, he left and "devoted much of his subsequent stay in London to bohemianism and nocturnal adventures", according to his biographer Margot Peters.
In 1884 the family traveled to London as part of Augustin Daly's theatrical company, returning to the US two years later.
Barrymore was unhappy at Seton and was soon withdrawn, after which he attended several public schools in New York, including the Mount Pleasant Military Academy.
Barrymore and Costello married in November that year; their daughter, Dolores, was born in April 1930  and a son, John Drew Barrymore, followed in June 1932.
Fields and Me'', Barrymore was played by Jack Cassidy.
He briefly appeared in ''The Candy Shop'' in mid-1909, before he played the lead role in Winchell Smith's play ''The Fortune Hunter'' at the Gaiety Theatre in September the same year.
His interpretation along psychological lines was innovative, and his "dynamic portrayals&nbsp;... changed the direction of subsequent revivals."
When the film was released in January 1914, Barrymore "delighted movie audiences with an inimitable light touch that made a conventional romance 'joyous'," writes Peters.
The play was a critical success, and ''The New York Times'' thought the audience saw "Barrymore play as he had never played before, and so, by his work as the wretched prisoner in ''Justice'', step forward into a new position on the American stage."
In 1940, Barrymore appeared in ''The Great Profile'', a spoof of his life in the months prior to ''My Dear Children''.
Barrymore traveled with his father to England in 1898, where he joined King's College School, Wimbledon.
He struggled with alcohol abuse from the age of 14, was married and divorced four times, and declared bankruptcy later in life.
In July 1912, Barrymore went to Los Angeles, where he appeared in three short-running plays at the Belasco Theatre.
In 1932, Barrymore appeared in three films.
To break off their relationship her mother sent Nesbit away to school in New Jersey.
While he had been in London, Warner Bros and Barrymore entered into a contact for three further films at a salary of $76,250 per picture.
During the summer of 1920, Oelrichs became pregnant with Barrymore's child, and a quick divorce was arranged with her husband, which left her and Barrymore free to marry in August that year; a daughter, Diana Barrymore, followed in March 1921.
He then returned to New York to work on the film's interior scenes in January 1922.
The strategy was not always successful, and he attended elementary schools in four states.
The play and the two Barrymores were warmly regarded by the critics.
An incident in 1901 had a major impact on Barrymore.
According to Peters, Barrymore "began to think of his marriage as a 'bus accident.
He played the lead role, Allan Manville, an ageing hammy Shakespearean has-been.
Alexander Woollcott, writing in ''The New York Times'', thought that "John and Lionel Barrymore hold spellbound each breathless audience", and he commented that Barrymore "contributes to that appeal by every step, every hand, every posture of a body grown unexpectedly eloquent in recent years".
It was sad to see him in such a state."
When he came out, he collapsed on the ''Maytime'' set.
His first two films under contract were ''General Crack'' and ''The Man from Blankley's'', each of which were modestly successful.
Critic and essayist Stark Young wrote in ''The New Republic'' that Barrymore's films were "rotten, vulgar, empty, in bad taste, dishonest, noisome with a silly and unwholesome exhibitionism, and odious with a kind of stale and degenerate studio adolescence.
The ''Washington Herald'' observed that the audience were "held by the sheer power of Barrymore's performance", which was "remarkable for&nbsp;... the actor's unexpected vocal richness", while Woollcott, in ''The New York Times'', thought the performance "marked a measurable advance in the gradual process of bringing Barrymore's technical fluency abreast with his winged imagination and his real genius for the theatre".
Later that year, when Barrymore again appeared on stage with Lionel in Sem Benelli's historical drama ''The Jest'', audience members "agreed that the American stage had never witnessed finer acting", according to Peters.
Barrymore's maternal grandparents were Louisa Lane Drew, a well-known 19th-century American actress and the manager of the Arch Street Theatre, and John Drew, also an actor whose specialty was comedy.
Barrymore had always professed a dislike of the acting profession, but in 1900 he was persuaded by his father to join him on stage for a few performances of a short play, "A Man of the World".
Barrymore and his wife both appeared in supporting roles in the 1939 screwball comedy ''Midnight'', her only film role.
Some critics, such as Welford Beaton of the ''Hollywood Spectator'', thought "Barrymore is an acting gem", although Gielgud was uncomplimentary, writing to Peggy Ashcroft that "Barrymore, who is like a monstrous old male impersonator jumping through a hoop, should really have been shot."
Shortly after his return, he was hospitalized for a month with bronchitis and influenza.
Around this time, Barrymore began a relationship with a married mother of two, Blanche Oelrichs, a suffragist from an elite Rhode Island family with what Peters calls "anarchistic self-confidence".
She changed her name to Elaine Barrie, which she explained was to get "as near to Barrymore as I dared", and they began a relationship.
The reviewer for ''Brooklyn Life'' stated that Barrymore had "doubtless won the right to be called the greatest living American tragedian".
Barrymore recorded 74 episodes of the program, continuing in the vein of self-parody, with jokes about his drinking, declining career and marital issues.
It was later added to the National Film Registry.
The latter film marked his first straight dramatic role on screen after years of performing in comedy dramas.
In 1927, Barrymore planned to revive ''Hamlet'' at the Hollywood Bowl, but in August he canceled the production, without explanation, and began filming the third of the UA pictures, ''Eternal Love'', for which he was paid $150,000.
His memory was still problematic, and he used cue cards as an aid; his fellow actors and the directors of the films were sympathetic to his condition.
Barrymore had been a friend and drinking companion of Fields.
''The Washington Post'' agreed, noting that during his stage triumphs and early years in film, "he was the great profile, the darling of the 'royal family' of the stage."
Barrymore decided to work on more Shakespeare roles.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and the Museum of Modern Art jointly hosted a commemorative program of his work, which included numerous excepts from his films and interviews with some who knew him, including Barrie and his one-time co-star Myrna Loy.
Barrymore's natural acting style reversed the stage conventions of the time; his "'colloquial' verse speaking introduced to the stage the vocal manner of a postwar gentleman."
In 1927 the Barrymore family was parodied in ''The Royal Family'' in which a character based on him was portrayed by Fredric March, whose performance Barrymore admired.
In January 1912, Barrymore appeared together with his sister in ''A Slice of Life'' at the Empire Theatre on Broadway, which ran for 48 performances.
He was the youngest of three children.
Barrymore returned to New York in the summer of 1900, and by November he found work as an illustrator on ''The New York Evening Journal'', at a salary of $50 a week.
Because of his failing memory, Barrymore ad-libbed constantly throughout the show.
He was later transferred to a private institution in Amityville, Long Island, where he suffered a "rapid descent into madness".
It was a mood of careless abdication".
Although film historians have opined that Barrymore's "contribution to the art of cinematic acting began to fade" after the mid-1930s, Barrymore's biographer, Martin Norden, considers him to be "perhaps the most influential and idolized actor of his day".
Around this time, Barrymore acquired the nickname "the Great Profile", as posters and photographs of him tended to favor the left-hand side.
Barrymore persuaded Ethel to play the role of the Queen&nbsp;– it was the first time the two had appeared on stage together in over a decade.
In the silent film era, he was well received in such pictures as ''Dr.
Barrymore expected to testify at Thaw's murder trial on the issue of Nesbit's morality; he worried that he might be asked whether he had arranged for Nesbit to have an abortion, disguised as an appendectomy, even though Nesbit had undergone two previous "appendectomies".
In 1980, Barrymore's son had his father's body reinterred at Philadelphia's Mount Vernon Cemetery.
There were several celebratory events in 1982, on the centenary of Barrymore's birth.
In February 1960, for his contribution to the motion picture industry, Barrymore was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame, with a star at 6667 Hollywood Boulevard; Barrymore, along with his two siblings, is included in the American Theater Hall of Fame.
Barrymore's first film under the contract was ''The Sea Beast'' (1926), loosely based on the 1851 novel ''Moby-Dick'', in which he played Captain Ahab Ceeley.
He returned to the US in early 1935 and settled in New York, leaving his wife in Los Angeles.
He began his career in 1903 and first gained attention as a stage actor in light comedy, then high drama, culminating in productions of ''Justice'' (1916), ''Richard III'' (1920) and ''Hamlet'' (1922); his portrayal of Hamlet led to him being called the "greatest living American tragedian".
In October 1882, the family toured in the US for a season with Polish actress Helena Modjeska.
His father was Maurice Barrymore, an Indian-born British actor who had been born Herbert Blyth, and had adopted Barrymore as a stage name after seeing it on a poster in the Haymarket Theatre in London.
Yet Barrymore&nbsp;... had a wonderful edge and a demonic sense of humour."
''Barrymore'', a two-person play by William Luce, premiered in 1996 and depicts Barrymore shortly before his death in 1942 as he is rehearsing a revival of his Richard III.
The intersection marked the spot of the former Buckheister's Hotel, where Barrymore had his 1900 stage debut in "A Man of the World".
Barrymore has been used as the inspiration for characters on stage and film.
At the close of the US tour, ''The Dictator'' visited Britain from April 1905, where it played at the Comedy Theatre.
He was offered predominantly supporting roles, but he worked conscientiously on the films and as a consequence was able to honor his debts.
In December 1933, Barrymore agreed with RKO to film ''Hamlet''.
Film scholar Daniel Bernardi later noted the humanism demonstrated between Barrymore's character and his family, particularly the "close bond" between father and daughter.
For RKO Pictures he played a borderline-alcoholic lawyer in ''State's Attorney'', before he returned to MGM to play an escaped lunatic in ''A Bill of Divorcement'', opposite Katharine Hepburn in her screen debut.
Barrymore gained his first leading role in early 1907, in the comedy ''The Boys of Company B'' at the Lyceum Theatre.
Nicol Williamson played the Barrymore role.
His divorce from Costello was finalized in October 1936, and he married Barrie in November the same year.
Barrymore and Hopkins decided to end the run at 101 performances, just breaking the record of one hundred by Edwin Booth, before the play closed in February 1923.
Nevertheless, he received some harsh reviews.
By the time he left Georgetown he was, according to Martin Norden in his biography of Barrymore, "already in the early stages of a chronic drinking problem".
''The Manchester Guardian'' thought that he "might with some self-discipline have added his name to the list of truly great actors&nbsp;... yet he dissipated his energies".
Frohman thought that Barrymore had comedic potential but needed more experience before making a Broadway debut.
''The New York Times'' thought the film was "one of the liveliest, gayest, wittiest and naughtiest comedies of a long hard season" and that Barrymore, "the Lou Gehrig|Lou Gehrig of eye-brow batting, rolls his phrases with his usual richly humorous effect".
